Baron and Feme.

A TREATISE OF THE COMMON LAW CONCERNING Husbands and Wives.

Wherein is contained The Nature of a Feme Covert, and of Marriages, Bastardy,
the Privileges of Feme Coverts: What Alterations are made by Marriage as to
Estates, Leases, Goods and Actions. What Things of the Wife accrue to the
Husband by the Intermarriage, or not. What Acts, Charges, Forfeitures by the
Husband, shall bind the Wife after his Death, or not. Of Jointures and
Pleadings, Fines and Recovery, Conveyances, and other Law Titles relating to
Baron and Feme. Of Wills, and Feme Covert being Executrix. Of the Wief's
Separate Disposition and Maintenance. What amounts to the Disposition of the
Wife's Term by the Husband. Of Actions brought by or against Baron and Feme.
What Actions done, or Contracts made by the Wife, shall bind her Husband. Of
Indictments and Informations against them. Of Baron and Feme's Joinder in
Action. Of a Feme Sole Merchant. Declarations and Pleas, etc. of Divorces, etc.
with many other Matters relating to the said Subject; and some useful
Precedents.


LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of Richard and Edward Atkyns Esquires, for John
Walthoe, and are to be sold at his Shop in Vine-Court, Middle Temple. 1700.

TO THE READER.
HAVING Methodized and Explained the Law concerning Infants, by a natural Chain
of Thought, I was prompted to reflect upon the Law as it respects the Parents:
And I had some reason to conceive and hope, that a Treatise of this nature
(having been never hitherto designedly perused) might meet with an
Entertainment agreeable. It is a Subject so copious that we shall find
something or other relating to Baron and Feme in almost every Folio of our
Law Books, either in respect of Conveyances, Acts Judicial, Acts in Pais,
Testaments, Actions or Pleadings, etc. All which I have here Methothodized,
Explained or Corrected, as occasion lead me to it.

I have herein, considered Baron and Feme in all the Circumstances of Life,
from the Solemnization of Marriage to the Divorce, and have not omitted those
Collateral By-blows, (the Title of Bastardy making a considerable figure in our
Books*) and the Variety of the Matter made me some Atonement for the Labor.

I have been something tedious in considering what Alterations are made by the
Intermarriage as to Estates, Leases, Chattels and Actions, and what Things of
the Wife accrue to the Husband by the Intermarriage, or not; and what Acts,
Charges or Forfeitures made or committed by the Husband, shall bind the Wife
after his Death, as well knowing that they are of frequent use, and
consequently carefully to be examined.

But I have not been over-solicitous in Attornments, Disseisins, Remitters and
Warranties, and such like, which have a respect to real Actions concerning Feme
Coverts; our Law having been much abridged and altered in such Cases, and our
Settlements and Deeds of Trust as they are now framed, will strike off, and
abate many of the Moot Cases; and whoever has a mind to be curious about them,
may with great Satisfaction consult the first Institutes, where they are
largely and most excellently handled. However, I have not totally omitted them,
but have touched on some Cases which may be obvious in Practice, and by which
an ingenious and well-disposed Student may improve his Notions, without heaping
up other Cases or Points, one whereof perhaps may not be started in his
Practice once in an Age. Only in the Section where and in what Cases Baron and
Feme shall take by Interest or Moyeties, I have been more exact for that it is
a curious and useful Learning.

As to what Acts or Contracts made by the Wife shall bind the Husband, the
Resolutions of our Books have not been very consistent till that great Case (in
point of Consequence I mean) of Scott and Manby, which was solemnly debated and
settled in the Exchequer-Chamber by as Learned Judges as ever sat at one time in
Westminster Hall. Which long Arguments I have abridged and reduced to certain
Propositions.

We likewise find our Books have been very wavering about Baron and Feme's
Joinder in Action; but I have brought them into seven or eight Rules, by which
a Studious Mind may easily be directed how to advise in such Cases.

And under every several Action brought by or against Husband and Wife, I have
showed the manner of Declaring and Pleading under each Action, which makes the
Chapters of Declarations and Pleadings much shorter than they would have been.

As for the Faults herein committed, I have no way but (me ipsum tegere) to
shelter my self under the Coverture of your Candor and Ingenuity.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. The Consideration of Marriage in the Eye of the Law. Of Affiances,
and where the Breach thereof is punishable. When the Solemnization of Marriage
in the Church began; and how the ancient manner of Espousals was. If Marriage
be once done by one in Orders, not to be dissolved for a defect of Ceremony, as
to Time, Place or License. CHAP. II. The Nature of a Feme Covert. Wherein a
Feme Covert and an Infant differ as to Privilege. What Acts the Husband may do
to the Wife, and what the Wife to the Husband; and the Explication of the Rule
that they are one Person in Law. And in what respects she is said to be sub
potestate viri. Of the Change of her Name and Dignity. CHAP. III. Of Bastardy.
Of the Writ de Ventre inspiciendo. The Form of the Petition for such a Writ.
The exact time for the Birth of an Infant. Of the Sheriff's Proceedings in this
Writ in the Case of a Widow, and in the Case of a Wife. In what Case the Child
may choose his Father. Who shall be said to be a Bastard or not. Who shall be
accounted a Bastard though born within Marriage. The Signification of Mulier in
our Law. Bastardy in what Court to be proved, and why the Ecclesiastical Court
cannot proceed to the Trial of Bastardy before they receive Commandment out of
the King's Court. The Credit of the Bishop's Certificate in such Case. Where
the Trial of Bastardy shall be per Pais, and where by the Ordinary. The
Difference between general Bastardy and special Bastardy, and where each is to
be tried. Bastard by our Law and Mulier by the Civil Law. Bastard by the
Spiritual Law and Mulier by the Common Law. What Divorce shall Bastardize the
Issue. Who only may write to the Bishop to certify Bastardy. Of Bastard eigne
and Mulier puisne in case of descent. How Estates may be limited to a Bastard
by a reputed Name. CHAP. IV. Queen. How the Queen in an exempt Person from the
King in our Law. She it not to find Sureties, nor to be amerced. She is to be
sued by a Praecipe, not by Petition. She may inform by her Attorney in
Chancery. Queen Consort or Queen Dowager in case of Treason, how to be tried.
The Penalty for any to marry the Queen Dowager without the King's License. She
is not restrained by the Statute of 1 H. 4. c. 6. She and her Tenants not to
pay Toll. CHAP. V. Privileges of a Feme Covert. No Mortuary to be paid at her
Death. She is not within the Statute of W. 2. cap. 25. What Conditions in Law
shall bind the Wife, or not. She may not be a Constable, though the Custom be
to elect by Houses. Laps shall incur against her. Latchess not to be accounted
against her for not Entry or Claim to avoid Descent. What Privilege the Wife
shall have in Suits by reason of the Husband's Privilege. CHAP. VI. Who shall
be said to be Baron and Feme, or in what Cases Marriage shall be said to be
valid or not. 1. In respect of Age: Of the time of Agreement or Disagreement to
the Marriage: What shall amount to such Agreement or Disgreement. 2. In respect
of Affinity or Consanguinity. What Marriages are within the Levetical Degrees
or not; with several Modern Cases of Precontracts. CHAP. VII. Trial of
Marriage. Where and in what Cases Trial of Marriage shall be by the Bishop's
Certificate, and where in Pais. Of the Issue n'unque accouple en loyal
Matrimony where to be tried. If the Issue be, whether she be a Feme Covert or
Feme Sole, where to be tried, and the reason of the Difference. The Diversity
between a Marriage in Right and a Marriage in Possession, or de Facto; and the
consequence of the Diversity. The Day and Place is omitted in the Bishop's
Certificate, if good. The Form of the Bishop's Certificate. The Credit the Law
gives to it. CHAP. VIII. Marriage, and the Consequence of it by Law. Where
Alterations are made by Marriage as to the Names of Dignity; as to change of
Name on Estates devised. Where or in what Cases Marriage shall amount to a
Countermand or Revocation of Livery or Attornment. If Marriage be a Revocation
of a Will or Countermand of Arbitrament. If Marriage be a Breach of a Condition
by way of Disability. A Lady of a Manor marries a Copyholder, if it be a
Suspension. In what Cases Marriage is a Release in Law or not. Woman Jailer
marries a Prisoner, if it be an Escape or not. Where a Term is extinct by the
Intermarriage or not. In what Cases the Husband shall be said Assignee of the
Wife or not. CHAP. IX. What things of the Wife are given, or do accrue to the
Husband by the Intermarriage or not. What he gains of his Wife's Lands in Fee
by the Marriage. What Estate or Interest he gains in her Chattels Reals, and
Chattels Mixed, which are partly in Possession, and partly in Action. What he
gains in her Chattels Personals, or in Chooses in Action. Diversity between
Property in Personal Goods, and a bare Possession. What things of the Wife the
Husband may release or discharge or not, as Obligations, Annuities, Promises,
etc. What Acts, Charges or Forfeitures of the Husband shall charge the Wife
after his Death. How and wherein the Wife shall be bound by her Husband's
Submission to an Award, or for a Rent of Owelty of Partition. How the Husband
may charge the Land of the Wife by Rent, Statute, Judgment, etc. What Lands of
the Wife shall be put in Execution for the King's Debt upon the Husband. What
Act of the Husband amounts to a Forfeiture of the Wife's Land, and for how
long. What Acts of the Husband and Wife shall be construed, as the Act of the
Wife so as to bind her after his Death or not. For what Acts or Facts of the
Wife the Husband shall be punished: Et e contra. Of Paraphernalia. What Things
or Actions the Wife shall have after the Death of the Husband. What Actions
Real, what Things and Actions Personal, as Obligations, Recognizances, Goods,
or Money purloined What Things Real, as Rents, Leases, etc. What Things the
Husband shall have after the Death of the Wife, as Leases in Trust, Arrears of
Rents, Presentations, etc. What Things the Wife may make good after the Death
of the Husband, as Bonds, Rents of Acceptance. CHAP. X. Tenant by the
Courtesy. The Nature of Tenancy by the Courtesy. Of what Estate a Man shall
be Tenant by the Courtesy, or not. If he shall be Tenant by the Courtesy of
an Estate in suspense or not. In what Cases the Husband shall be Tenant by the
Courtesy, where the Wife's Estate is defeasible by Condition. Four Things
belong to a Tenant by the Courtesy. What Seisin of the Wife it must be to
make the Husband Tenant by the Courtesy. In what Cases a Man shall be Tenant
by the Courtesy of a Seisin in Law. How a Man shall be Tenant by the Courtesy
in respect of the Issue, and how he must plead the having of Issue. CHAP. XI.
Dower. The Nature of Dower. Qualifications of the Wife to enable her to have
Dower. What Divorce shall avoid Dower or not. Of the Endowment of a Wife de
facto and de jure. What Seisin the Husband must have to make the Wife
Dowable. Of what Seisin of the Husband the Wife shall not be endowed. Of what
Estate a Woman shall be endowed. Of what Inheritances entire and not divisable
she shall be endowed, and after what manner. In what Cases of Lands or
Tenements, which are devisable, and which the Heir of the Husband shall
inherit, yet the Wife shall not be endowed. How she shall be endowed of Lands
mortgaged. For and in what respect of Disabilities a Woman shall not be
endowed. Where the Wife shall lose her Dower by the Attainder of her Husband
or not. Whether an Alien Woman shall be endowed, and how. What Act of the
Wife shall bar her Dower. Several Cases of Elopement and Divorce relating
thereunto. Assignment of Dower, by whom and how to be made. What Assignment of
Dower is against common Right or not. What things may be assigned in lieu of
Dower. Of Endowment by Meets and Bounds. Assignment of Dower by the Sheriff and
how. By the Heirs Assignment in Chancery. Of the Tenant in Dower having
Damages, what Charges made by the Husband the Wife endowed shall avoid or not.
The Writ and Declaration in Dower. Pleadings in Dower. What Pleas are good or
not in Bar of Dower. Trial, Evidence, Issue in Dower. Damages, Judgment and
Execution. Of the rationabili part bonorum, according to the Custom of London.
CHAP. XII. Of Jointures. The Nature and Reason of the Statute of 27 H. 8. cap.
10. of Jointures. Construction of the said Act relating thereunto. What
Estates are Jointures within the said Statute or not. What is a good Jointure
within the Statute of 11 H. 7. and what Alienation by the Wife is within that
Statute, illustrated in several adjudged Cases. What Agreement or VVaver a
Woman may make as to her Jointure; and what shall amount to an Agreement or
Refusal. Of Pleadings. CHAP. XIII. Of Fines and Recoveries. Of a Fine levied by
a Feme Covert as a Feme Sole, and the Operation of it. The reason why a Feme
Covert shall be barred by the Fine. The Operation of a Fine by Baron and Feme
illustrated by several Cases. Of Commissioners taking a Fine of a Feme Covert
Infant. Of the time of Acknowledgment. Where a Feme Covert shall be examined or
not. Where a Feme Covert shall be barred by Fine and Non-claim. Of the
Declaration of Uses by a Feme Covert. Of a Fine levied to Baron and Feme, and
the Operation of lt. Of a Common Recovery. How a Feme Covert may be Tenant to a
Praecipe. A Feme Covert barred by a Common Recovery. Whether a Feme Covert in
passing a Recovery ought to be examined privately. Recovery by Baron and Feme
within Age and Appearance by Attorney, if it be Error. Of Recovery by default.
CHAP. XIV. Attornment. What Act of the Husband or Wife shall amount to an
Attornment. Avowry for Rent out of the Wifes Land in whose Name it ought to be.
Where and to what purposes a Feme Covert shall be said a Disseisoress without
her proper Act or Entry, and where, and to what not. What Act of the Husband
shall be a Discontinuance of the Land of the Wife, and what not. What was a
Discontinuance at the Common Law. Where a Descent cast during the Coverture
shall toll the Entry of the Wife or not. CHAP. XV. Remitter. The Nature and
Reason of Remitter. What Act shall be a Remitter to the Wife. Remitter
wrought by a voidable Estate. Remainder expectant on an Estate for Life works
no Remitter. Notwithstanding what Acts and Alienations by the Husband the Wife
shall be remttted. Of Remitter by Acceptance. Where the Wife being remitted
during the Coverture, may after the death of her Husband wave the Remitter, and
where not. No Disagreement of the Husband shall divest the Remitter, and the
Reason. Where a VVarranty descending on an Infant or a Feme Covert, shall be a
Bar, and where not. Where a Baron and Feme shall be Jointenants; and where by
Intierties, and where by Moieties, with several Cases to illustrate that
curious Learning; and how it was at Common Law, and how it is now by the
Statute of Uses. CHAP XVI. Conveyances. What shall be said to be the Deed of
the Husband and Wife. Of a Feoffment by the Husband of the Wifes Land. Where
the Wifes Grant, if she join with her Husband, is void or not. Surrender by the
Husband how it operates. What shall amount to a Surrender or not. Of a Release
of the Husband of the Wifes Right to rent. Of his Release of Money to be paid
after the Wifes Decease. Of Exchanges of the Land of the Wife, and what shall
be a good Confirmation of it by the Wife. How a Man may execute an Estate to
his Wife. Of the Christian Names of Women in Grants. CHAP. XVII. Leases. Of a
Lease for Lives made by Baron and Feme. Of a Lease made by the Husband of the
Wifes Land, and how and wherein it shall bind the Wife or not. What shall be a
good Lease warranted by the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 28. The Qualifications of
such Leases to bring them within the Statute. What acceptance of the Husband
shall affirm a voidable Lease. What is a good Lease by Baron and Feme to bring
Ejectment of Leases for years made to Baron and Feme. Diversity between a Lease
for Life and a Lease for Years made to a Feme Covert. Lease to a Feme Covert
when it shall be said to vest. Of a Lease for Life made to Baron and Feme, if
the Husband may grant it when the Lease is made to Baron and Feme. If the
Husband may grant it when the Lease is made to the Survivor for Years. How if
the Remainder be to the Heirs of the Survivor. Of Leases for Life made by Baron
and Feme. Diversity where Livery is made by the Lessor in person, and where by
Letter of Attorney. CHAP. XVIII. Wills. How and in what Cases a Feme Covert may
make a Will. What she may devise without the consent of her Husband. If she may
make a Declaration in the Nature of a Will, without the Assent of the Husband.
Several Cases of the Husband's being bound to permit his Wife to make a Will.
Of Devises to the Wife by the Husband or others, and the Construction of such
Devises. What is a Devise by Implication or not. Of a Feme Coverts assenting to
a Legacy. If the Husband may devise the Term made to him and his Wife. Wife
Legatee of Goods is made Executor, if the second Husband's Executor shall have
them. CHAP. XIX. Rent, Reservation, Emblements. In what Cases the Wife shall
not have the Rent though the Reservation be to her. The Husband grants a Rent
out of the Wive's Term, and dies; If the Wife shall hold it discharged, and
why. Of what Arrears of Rent the Statute of 32 H. 8. c. 37. gives the Husband
power to recover. Feme Covert received the Rents of the Tenants, they not
having notice of the Coverture. Where the Husband shall be charged with the
Arrears. Avowry for Rent out of the Wife's Land, how to be brought. Where the
Executor of the Husband shall have the Rent, and not the Wife. Where the Wife
shall have the Emblements, and where the Husband. CHAP. XX. Copyhold. What Acts
of the Husband shall destroy, or forfeit the Custom of the Wife's Copyhold
Estate, and what not. Where she shall have her Viduity, though the Freehold be
severed from the Manor, and where not. Of Grant, and Surrender to and by Baron
and Feme, and the Construction thereupon. Customs of Manors as to Wifes or
Widows, which are good, or not. CHAP. XXI. Vide Will. Of the Wife's Separate
Disposition. Where the Money which the Wife had separate power to dispose of,
to whom it shall be paid. Separate Maintenance on a Proviso, and the Pleadings.
Where Detainer of the Husband is a breach of the Condition. Covenants in a Deed
of Separation between Baron and Feme, and for allowing yearly Maintenance, and
Pleadings thereupon. CHAP. XXII. What amounts to a Disposition of the Wife's
Term by the Husband, to vest the Interest in him, his Executors and
Administrators. What Condition in Mortgages shall survive to the Husband or
not. If the Mortgage of the Wife's Term does amount to a Disposition in Law.
Diversity between a Feoffment, and Bargain and Sale, as to the Extinguishment
of the Term of the Wife. Of the Forfeiture of the Wife's Term by the Outlawry
or Attainder of the Husband, or on extent. If Recovery by the Husband in
Ejectment alters the Term. If Payment of the Debts of the first Intestate,
vests a Term in him. What Trusts for the Wife the Husband may dispose of, or
not. What shall amount to a Forfeiture of the Wife's Term. CHAP. XXIII. What
Acts done, or Contracts made by the Wife, shall bind the Husband, or not. Six
Resolutions of the Court in Scott and Manby's Case, as to that Point, and other
Cases relating thereto, and the manner of laying the Action, and declaring
therein. CHAP. XXIV. Feme Covert, Executrix. Administratrix. How a Feme Covert
may be made Executrix, and of what things; what things the Administrator of the
Wife shall have, and not the Husband, as Chooses in Action, etc. Debt recovered
by Baron and Feme Executrix, and she dies, if the Husband shall have Execution.
What things Feme Covert Executrix, may do without her Husband, or not. Obligee
makes the Wife of one of the Obligor's Executrix, quid operatur. Legacy devised
to the Wife, who is made Executrix. Whether she shall be in as Excutrix, or as
Legatee. Of her assent to a Legacy. Debt as Executrix not extinct by the
Intermarriage, and why. Feme Executrix takes the Obligor to Husband, if that be
a Release in Law. Where the Husband shall be charged with the Waste of the Wife
as Administratrix, and the manner of Proceedings by the Sheriff in such Case;
and whether Execution shall be de bonis propriis of the Husband. Of Actions
brought by Baron and Feme as Executrix or Administratrix. Where Administration
belongs to the Baron and Feme. CHAP. XXV. Actions. Suits. Abatement of a Writ
or Suit in Law or Equity, by Marriage or Death pending the Suit. If the Wife be
put before the Husband, the Writ abates. Feme Plaintiff after Writ of Enquiry,
and before the Return marries, if the Action shall abate. Feme Sole depending a
Bill in Chancery takes Husband, if the Suit shall abate. How it is if she be
Defendant. Of Actions which the Husband may have for Wrongs done to the Wife.
Indictment by Baron and Feme, and against Baron and Feme. Where and in what
Cases Wives are indictable, without their Husbands or not. CHAP. XXVI. Joinder
in Action. Where and in what Actions Baron and Feme shall join, and where and
in what Actions not. In what Cases the Husband only shall have the Action.
Diversity between an Action which affirms Property, and which disaffirms
Property. Four general Rules of the Baron and Feme's Joinder in Action, and
Cases under each to direct where Baron and Feme must join in the Action, or it
may be brought by the Husband only. Particular Actions, as Trover, Indebitatus
Assumpsit, Account, Formedon, Ejectione Firm, Actions for Rent, Rescous,
Actions for Tithes, Covenant, Wast, Debt on Bond or Contract, Trespass,
Battery, Escape, Action on the Case sur Assumpsit, Actions on the Case for
Torts, Forcible Entry, Writ of Error, etc. and the manner of Declaring in such
Actions. Of Actions brought by a Feme Covert against a Feme Covert. In what
Cases a Feme Covert is enabled to sue without her husband. Of a Feme Sole
Merchant. CHAP. XXVII. Special Actions brought by a Woman. Cui in Vita. Appeal.
The Nature of an Appeal. The Process Pleadings and Trial in an Appeal. Quare
Impedit. Actions on the Case for Scandalous Words by Baron and Feme against
Baron and Feme, with Declarations and Pleadings therein, and where Baron and
Feme must join or be joined in the Action. CHAP. XXVIII. Actions against Baron
and Feme. Trover, Debt, Trespass, Actions on the Case, Waste, Covenant,
Account, Audita Querela, with the manner of Declaring and Pleading in each
Action. Actions against Baron and Feme by reason of Offenses against a Statute.
Information against Baron and Feme for the Recusancy of the Wife by the Stat. 1
Eliz. and 23 Eliz. In what Actions the Husband shall be charged after the Death
of the Wife. Where the default of the Wife shall be the default of the husband,
and e contra. Where the wife shall be received upon the Husband's default.
Wager of Law by Baron and Feme. In what Cases the Husband shall appear, and be
compelled to put in Bail for his Wife or not. Of Baron and Feme being sued to
the Outlawry, and how the Entry shall be. CHAP. XXIX. Declarations and
Pleadings. The manner of declaring against Baron and Feme, or by Baron and
Feme. In what Cases the Life of the Wife must be averred, or not. Where the
Husband shall be estopped to say that his Wife is remitted, and yet she shall
be received. In what Cases the Wife shall come in, and be received on the
Default of her Husband. Of the Wife's Pleading without her Husband. The manner
of Pleading Coverture. Of the Conclusion of Pleas in Actions by or against
Baron and Feme. Where it is necessary to aver the assent of the Husband.
Traverse when that the Wife died seized. Ad tunc and modo Uxor. if good. Of
Estoppels. Error assigned because she was a Feme Covert. Divorce pleaded.
Outlawry pleaded. Where there be two Women of one name in Debt on Bond, how to
plead. Where the Parol shall demur for the Nonage of the Husband and Wife.
CHAP. XXX. Issue. Evidence. Trial. Verdict. Trial of Marriage. Death of the
Husband where triable, and how; whether by Proofs or in Pais. If the Baron and
Feme shall join in a Challenge. In what Case by the Evidence of the Wife she
and her Husband were discharged of a Judgment. Where the Husband and shall be a
Witness for the Wife or not. CHAP. XXXI. Judgment. Execution. Damages. Where
Judgment against Baron and Feme shall bind the Husband surviving, or not. In
what Cases a Feme Covert shall be taken in Execution. Writ of Error brought by
all for the Coverture of one. The Coverture of a Woman not to be determined by
Affidavit. In Action against Baron and Feme, where Judgment shall be quod
Capiantur, or not. Where Baron and Feme both ought to be in Misericordia, or
not. Baron and Feme in Execution, and the Wife escapes, if Action lies against
the Sheriff. Where the Husband shall recover Damages Sole. Judgment that the
Baron and Feme shall recover Damages, in what Cases good. CHAP. XXXII. Offenses
against the Statutes concerning Women. Action on the Statute of 5 Eliz. c. 9.
against the Husband and Wife for the Wife's not appearing ad Testificandum, and
the Declaration of Polygamy against Stat. 1 Jac. c. 11. Of stealing Women, etc.
Construction of the said Statute, and of the Stat. 39 Eliz. c. 8. Of Rape.
Baron and Feme indicted of Perjury. Information against a Feme Covert for
Selling Fish. In all Statutes which provide for actual Wrong, Femes Coverts
shall be intended within them. CHAP. XXXIII. Of Divorce. The nature of a
Divorce. What are good Causes of Divorce. The several kinds of Divorces. What
Divorces declare the Marriage void ab initio. Of the Divorce causa
praecontractus. Causa frigiditatis, causa affinitatis Consanguinitatis, and
several Causes of each for Illustration. Of a Divorce a Mensa and Thoro, and
the Consequences thereof. What mean Acts done by the Husband shall stand good
or not, notwithstanding the Divorce. Of Suits and Actions after the Divorce.
Where and in what Cases notwithstanding a Divorce, the Wife shall be endowed or
not. Pleadings and Trial. What Divorce shall Bastardise the Issue, or not.
BOOKS Printed for and sold by John Walthoe at his Shop in Vine-Court,
Middle Temple.
1. LES Reports de Edw. Coke L'Attorney General le Roign. Des diverse
Resolutions and Judgments donez avec grand deliberation, per les Tres-reverend
Judges and Sages de la Ley, de Cases and Matters en Ley queux ne fueront unques
Resolve ou adjudges par devant: Et les Reasons and Causes des dits Resolutions
and Judgments, durant le Tresheureux regiment de Ties-illustre and Renomes
Roign Elizabeth, le Fountain de tout Justice, and la Vie de la Ley. Avec
References al touts Livers del Common Ley, cybien Ancient come Modern. In
eleven Volumes in Folio, with a new Table to the whole. Price in Quires 3 l. 10
s. 2. The Law of Obligations and Conditions: wherein is contained the whole
Learning of the Law concerning Bills, Bonds, Conditions, Statutes,
Recognizances and Defeazances, as also Declarations on special Conditions, and
the Pleadings thereon, Issues, Judgments and Executions with many other useful
Matters digested under their proper Titles, etc. In 8 vo Price 5 s. 3. A
Compendious and Accurate Treatise of Fines upon Writs of Covenant; and
Recoveries upon Writs of Entry in the Post. With ample and copious Instructions
how to draw, acknowledge and levy the same in all Cases. Being a Work performed
with great exactness, and full of variety of Clerkship. The third Edition;
wherein the former are reviewed, corrected and enlarged. With an Addition of
several Precedents, and many Observations, Rules and Cases concerning the
Effect and Operation of Fines and Recoveries. In 8 vo. 4. Lex Custumaria: Or A
Treatise of Copyhold Estates, in respect of the Lord and Copyholder: wherein
the nature of Customs in general, and of particular Customs, Grants and
Surrenders, and their Constructions and Expositions in reference to the thing
granted or surrendered, and the Uses of Limitations of Estates are clearly
illustrated; together with the manner of Declaring and ^leading, either
generally or as to particular Customs, with Trial and Evidence of Custom, and
of Special Verdicts, etc. In large 8 vo. Price 5 s.
BARON and FEME: OR A TREATISE of the Law concerning Husbands and Wives.
CHAP. I.
The Consideration of Marriage in the Eye of the Law. Of Affiances, and where
the Breach thereof is punishable. When the Solemnization of Marriage in the
Church began; and how the ancient manner of Espousals was. If Marriage be once
done by one in Orders, not to be dissolved for a defect of Ceremony, as to
Time, Place or License.

THERE is no Consideration respected in the Law so much as the Consideration of
Marriage, in regard of the Establishment of Families by Alliances, and the
Continuance of them by Posterity: 1 Inst. 9.
And therefore at Common Law, if a Man had given Lands to a Man with his
Daughter in Frankmarriage, a Fee-simple had passed without this word (Heirs)
and at this day it is an Estate of Inheritance in Tail; and how valuable a
Consideration it is for the raising of Uses every days Practice and Experience
can testify.

Sponsalia dicuntur futurarum nuptiarum conventio and repromissio, Clanlvil
lib. 6. c. 1.

If one be affianced to a woman and then forsake her, he is to be sued in Court
Christian, and not in a Court of Equity, for breach of this Oath; Si petit
ipsum canonice inimicitia, yet she may have remedy for the damages she
sustained for the Nonperformance of the Agreement, though others have said
that it was her Folly to trust his word, and therefore she had no remedy; Quia
Deus est procurator fatuorum. But its not to be doubted but a good remedy lies
upon an Assumpsit at Law, as hereafter will in several Cases appear.

When the Solemnization of Marriage in the Church began.
Before the time of Pope Innocent III. there was no Solemnization of Marriage
in the Church, and then it was sirst ordained; but before the said Ordinance
Marriage was solemnized in such form, viz. The Man came to the House where the
Woman inhabits, and in the presence of her Friends and Relations, took the
Woman to his own House; and this was all the Ceremony; and for this reason the
Man is said ducere uxorem, and then the Wife was said nupta viro, by reason she
is quasi cooperta nube (this Man) to whom she has subjected her self by
Agreement of Marriage. Now to read the several Forms of Marriage in the several
Countries of the World is very delightful, but is not to the purpose of my
present design, Moor 170.

Now by our Law Marriage being once lawfully solemnized, and without
impediment, By whom and at what time. Sid. 64. Tarry and Brown.
all the World cannot dissolve it if it be done by one in Holy Orders, let it
be at what time and place it will be; as the Case was in Siderfin's Reports,
the Party was married at twelve of the Clock at Night in an Alehouse.

And in Car. 2. Sid. 432. Maddox versus the Chancellor of Peterburrough.
a Libel was brought against J. S. Parson, in the Spiritual Court for marrying
without License in a Church. J. S. moves for a Prohibition in the King's Bench,
suggesting that the Church is donative, and that the Donor ought ex jure, to
appoint Commissioners to inspect and visit this, and that the Ordinary cannot
intermeddle with it. The Suggestion is good by Twisden: But the other Justices,
because J. S. had another Living Presentative, would not grant a Prohibition.

CHAP. Ii.
The Nature of a Feme Covert. Wherein a Feme Covert and an Infant differ as to
Privilege. What Acts the Husband may do to the Wife, and what the Wife to the
Husband; and the Explication of the Rule that they are one person in Law. And
in what respects she is said to be sub potestate viri. Of the change of her
Name and Dignity.

The Nature of a Feme Covert.
COverture is tegere in Latin, 1 Inst. 112.
and is so called for that the Wife is sub potestate viri. The Law of Nature
has put her under the Obedience of her Husband, and has submitted her Will to
his, which the Law follows, cui ipsa in vita sua contradicere non potuit, and
therefore will not bind her by her Acts joyining with her Husband, because they
are judged his Acts, and not hers; she wants Free Will as Minors want Judgment,
and yet the Law of the Land for necessity sake makes bold with this Law of
Nature in a special kind, and therefore allows a Fine levied by the Husband and
his Wife, because she is examined of her free will judicially by an authentical
person trusted by the Law, and by the King's Writ, and so taken in a sort as a
sole Woman; as also when she comes in by Receipt, Hob. 225.

A Feme Covert in our Books is often compared to an Infant, Wherein a Feme
Covert and an Infant differ.
both being persons disabled in the Law, but they differ much; an Infant is
capable of doing any Act for his own advantage, so is not a Feme Covert. A
Lease made by an Infant without Rent is not void, but voidable; but its void in
the case of a Feme Covert. If a Feme Covert enter into Bond, Non est factum may
be pleaded to it; but if an Infant enter into. Bond he must plead the special
matter that he was under Age. An Infant may bind himself for conveniences, as
necessaries for himself and Family, and the Law gives him authority so to bind
himself; but a Feme Coven cannot do so without the consent actual or implied of
the Husband, because thereby she is to bind another that has all the property
in her Estate, as was the Opinion of the Lord Chief Justice Hales in Scot and
Manby's Case. And yet a Feme Covert is a Favorite of the Law, and therefore
the Law gives her rationabile Estoverium, till Dower assigned: 2 Inst. 18.
And its said in some of our Books an Action lies not by the Executors against
her for her Paraphernalia: But more of this infra.

What Acts the Husband may do to the Wife, and the Wife to the Husband, though
they are but one person in Law.
Baron and Feme are commonly said to be one person in Law; the consequents of
which are, that a Man cannot grant Lands and Tenements to his Wife; and also if
a joint Estate be made of Lands to Baron and Feme and to a third person, 1
Inst. 112.
in this Case the Husband and Wife shall have but a moiety, and for this reason
also, if the Husband discontinues the Land of his Wife and takes back an Estate
to him and his Wife, the Wife is remitted, and so is the Husband, though he
cannot say so; for she cannot be remitted but the Husband also must be
remitted, for they are one person in Law, Cro. Eliz. 129.
Vide plus sub Titulo Moyeties.

Though Baron and Feme be but one person in Law so as neither of them can give
any Estate or Interest to the other, yet if a Charter of Feoffment be made to
the Wife, the Husband, as Attorney to the Feoffor, may make Livery to the Wife;
so a Feme Covert that has power to sell Land by Will may sell the same to her
Husband, because they are but Instruments to others, and the Estate passes
from the Feoffor or Devisor, 1 Inst. 188.

Though our Law makes the Woman subject to the Husband, yet he may not kill her
but it is Murder; he may not beat her, but she may pray the peace, 1 Ed. 4.1.
So he may not starve her, but must provide Maintenance for her. Nay, so near is
this oneness of Husband and Wife respected in the Law, Siderfin 123.
that if the Husband enter into Obligation for the Duress of his Wife the Bond
shall be void.

A Wife by the Law of God is sub potestate viri, Change of her Name.
and her Name of Dignity is changed. It was a pretty Case of Sherwood, Hill. 2
Car. 1. B. R. In Trespass the Defendant justifies the taking by the command of
J. Pots Armiger' and Dame Ursula his Wife, and Exception was taken to it,
because a Gentleman may not have a Lady to his Wife; and held a good Exception
to the Writ. A Writ of Partition was brought against the Duke of Suffolk and
his Wife by Ranulph Haward Esquire and Dominam Annam Powes uxorem ejus, and
Exception was taken because she was not named by the Name of her Husband, Dyer
29. b.
and held a good Exception; but it was amended and made Ad respondend. R.H. and
Annae uxori suae nuper uxor' Dom' Powes defunct.

Vide infra, of the Name of Nobility being lost or not by the Marriage.

CHAP. III. Of Bastardy.
Of the Writ de Ventre inspiciendo. The Form of the Petition for such a Writ.
The exact time for the Birth of an Infant. Of the Sheriffs Proceedings in this
Writ in the Case of a Widow, and in the Case of a Wife. In what Case the Child
may choose his Father. Who shall be said to be a Bastard or not. Who shall be
accounted a Bastard though born within Marriage. The signification of Mulier in
our Law. Bastardy in what Court to be proved, and why the Ecclesiastical Court
cannot proceed to the Trial of Bastardy before they receive Commandment out of
the King's Court. The Credit of the Bishop's Certificate in such Case. Where
the Trial of Bastardy shall be per Pais, and where by the Ordinary. The
difference between general Bastardy and special Bastardy, and where each is to
be tried. Bastard by our Law and Mulier by the Civil Law. Bastard by the
Spiritual Law and Mulier by the Common Law. What Divorce shall bastardize the
Issue. Who only may write to the Bishop to certify Bastardy. Of Bastard eigne
and Mulier puisne in case of descent. How Estates may be limited to a Bastard
by a reputed Name.

A Writ de Ventre inspiciendo.
THis is a Writ for the searching of a Woman that says she is with Child, and
thereby withholds Lands from him that is next Heir at Law, Regist. 227. 1 Inst.
f. 8.

A Feme supposed to be enseint at her Husband's Death.
Nota, says the Register, Quod si quis habens haereditatem, duxerit aliquam in
uxorem, and posteae moriatur sine haerede de corpore suo exeunte, per quod
haereditas illa fratri ipsius defuncti discendere debeat, and uxor illa dicit
se esse praegnantem de ipso defuncto cum non sit, habet frater and haeres ejus
breve de Ventre inspiciendo.

The Form of the Petition for such a Writ.
To the Right Honorable, etc. Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England. The
humble Petition of A. B.
Shows,
That whereas J. B. being in his Life time seized in his Demesne as of Fee, of
and in certain Lands, etc. in the County of C. lately died seized having at the
time of his death no Issue of his Body lawfully begotten. And whereas E. late
Wife and Relict of J. B. since the death of the said J. B. has and still does
pretend and give out in Speeches, that she is impregnate by the said J. B. to
the disherison of your said Petitioner, who is next Kinsman and Heir of the
Deceased J. B. and to whom the said Lands and Tenements by right of Inheritance
do descend, the said J. B. dying without Issue of his Body lawfully begotten.
And lest the said E. out of a design to deprive your Petitioner of his
Inheritance impose upon your Petitioner a supposititious Child as Heir of the
said J. B. deceased declaring the same to be born of her Body after the death
of the said J. B. to the disherison of your Petitioner against Equity and good
Conscience, etc.

May it please your Lordship to grant to your Petitioner his Majesty's most
gracious Writ de Ventre inspiciendo to the Sheriff of, etc. directed
returnable, etc.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.

The Lord Keeper ever grants a Day to the Wife to show Cause why such Writ may
not issue.

The Form of the Writ Vide Fitz. N. B.

Bracton says, If the Feme has not an Infant within 40 Weeks after her
Husband's Death, or if she be not found enseint, she shall be punished by
Imprisonment and Fine.

But if the Feme has a Child within the 40 weeks then such Infant shall have
the Heritage, if the other Heir cannot prove the Infant to be another's, and
not the Husbands.

The exact time for the Birth of an Infant.
It is held amongst Physicians, that by the Rules of Nature and their
Observations in Physic, that the exact time for the Birth of an Infant is 280
Days from the Conception, scil. 9 Months and 10 Days, accounting it per menses
solares, that is, 30 Days to every Month; but it is natural also if the Birth
be at any time within 10 Months (that is to say, 40 Weeks) for 10 Months and 40
Weeks are all one.

And it has been observed in respect of the many Infirmities of Women, that no
Woman since the Virgin Mary went her just time, Sed hoc restat probandum.

An Infant was born 40 weeks and 10 days after the death of the Husband, and
was held to be legitimate; so it was adjudged in the Case of Dr. Andrews, who
died of the Plague, 2 Jac. B. R. A Man dies 23 March 8 Jac. his Wife priviment
enseint, which was born 5 January after, which was by computation 40 weeks and
10 days after the death of the Husband; and the Physicians upon conference held
that 20 days backwards and 20 days forward does not take away Legitimetion, tho
40 weeks is the Tempus constitutum, Palm. 9. Lit. Rep. 178. and the Jury found
the Issue legitimate.

But by accident an Infant may be born after the 40 weeks, or before; and in
the Case of Dr. Andrews, he dyed of the Plague, so that he was sick but one day
before his death, and the Woman's Father-in-Law used her with great Inhumanity,
and caused her to lie in the Streets several nights; and she was in Travel six
weeks before she was delivered, and that she was delivered within 24 hours
after she was taken into the House and well used, which was a good Proof of
Legitimation; though it was proved on the other side that she was a lewd woman
of her Body: And at the Trial of Dr. Andrews's Heir Dr. Chamberlain, a Man
Midwife, informed the Court upon his Oath, that he had known a woman to be
delivered of one Child, and two weeks after to be delivered of anothet. And Dr.
Paddy and Dr. Momford then affirmed that the Birth is sooner or later according
to the Nutriment the Mother had for it.

So in Alsop's Case; The Wife after 40 weeks and 8 days was delivered of a
Daughter; by the Doctors it way be legitimate; for as well Antenatus might be
Heir in a Chlid born at the end of 7 months, so a Postnatus actually born after
40 weeks; and they held a Child may be legitimate, though it be born the last
day of the 10th month after the Conception, accounting the months per menses
Solares not Lunares, Godb. 281. 1 Rolls 356. 2 Cro. 571. Alsop and Stacy.

I shall only cite two Cases more on this Writ of Ventre inspiciendo, one was
in the Case of a Widow, and the other in the Case of a Feme Covert.

One was in the time of Queen Elizabeth: Ventre inspiciendo in case of a Widow.
Sir Francis Willoughby died seized of a great Estate of Inheritance, having
five Daughters, leaving Dorothy his Wife, who at the time of his death
pretended her self to be with Child by Sir Francis, which if it were a Son all
the five Sisters would lose the Inheritance descended to them. They prayed a
Writ de Ventre inspiciendo out of Chancery, directed to the Sheriff of London,
that he should cause the said Dorothy to be viewed by twelve Knights, and to be
searched by twelve women in the presence of the twelve Knights, and ad
tractand. per ubera and ad ventrem inspiciend', whether she was with Child, and
to certify the same into the Common Bench; and if she were with Child, to
certify for how long time in their Judgments, and quando sit paritura.
Whereupon the Sheriff accordingly caused her to be searched, and returned that
she was twenty weeks gone with Child, and that within twenty weeks fuit
paritura. Whereupon another Writ issued out of the Common Bench commanding the
Sheriff safely to keep her in such an House, and that every day he would cause
her to be viewed by some of the women named in the writ (ten being named
thereon) and some to be present at the Delivery, and to view the Birth whether
it were Male or Female; and the Sheriff returned, that such a day she was
delivered of a Daughter.

The other was in the time of King James the First, and it was one Thecar's
Case, In case of a Wife.
and the like Circumstances and Proceedings were in this Case Pasch. 22 Jac. 1.
with this difference. The Lady Willoughby's Case was in the Case of a Widow,
but this was in the Case of a Feme Covert, who was married within a week after
the death of her first Husband, who is supposed to get the Child, for here she
was a Feme Covert, and ought to cohabite with her Husband. They did not take
such a course as in the Lady Willoughbies Case, of taking her into the Sheriffs
Custody, but left her with her Husband, he entering into a Recognizance that she
should not remove from the House wherein they inhabited, and that one or two of
the women might see her every day, and two or three be present at her Travel;
for it was said that this Issue might well be said to be the Child of the first
Husband, and should inherit the Land. And after this course observed she was
delivered of a Female Child, who was afterward by Inquisition on Office found
to be the Daughter and Heir of the first Husband, Cro. Jac. 685. and Litt. Rep.
177. Thecar's Case, Winch p. 71.

In what case the Child may a choose his own Father.
Note, It is said in 1 Inst. f. 8. a. If a Man has a Wife and dies, and in a
very short time after the Wife marries again, and within nine months has a
Child, so that it may be the Child of the one or the other, that in this case
the Child may choose his Father, Quaere, hoc Casu Filiatio non potest probari.

Who shall be said to be a Bastard or not.
In respect of the months or weeks after the decease of the Husband, Vide sub
Titulo de Ventre inspiciendo more fully.

By our Common Law we term them all Bastards, which are born out of lawful
Marriage.

If the Husband be within the four Seas (viz.) within the Jurisdiction of the
King of England, if the Wife has Issue, no proof is to be admitted to prove
that Child a Bastard (for in that Case Filiatio non potest probari) unless the
Husband has an apparent impossibility of Procreation, as if the Husband be but
eight years old, etc. But if the Issue be born within a month or day after
Marriage between parties of lawful age the Child is legitimate.

If the Husband be castrate, Where Issue shall-be a Brstard though born within
Marriage.
so that it is apparent that he cannot in any possibility get Issue, if his
Wife has Issue diverse years after, this shall be a Bastard although it be
begotten within Marriage, because its apparent that it is not legitimate: In
the Starr-Chamber 14 Jac. Done and Egerton versus Hinton and Starkey, by the
Lord Chancellor and Montague, but Hobart contra.

If a Woman be big with Child by A. and after A. marries her, and the Issue is
born within the Espousals, this is a Mulier and not a Bastard. ( Mulier in our
Law signifies Uxor, and sic filius natus vel filia nata ex justa uxore
appellatur in legibus Angliae filius mulieratus vel filia mulierata.)

So if a Wife be big with Child by one, and after another marries her, and
after the Issue is born (though but three days after) this is a Mulier and no
Bastard, because born within the Espousals.

If a Feme Covert has Issue in Advoutry, yet if the Husband be able to beget a
Child, and he is within the four Seas, it is not a Bastard. Egerton's Case. So
it is if a Woman elope and live in Advoutry with another, but then the Husband
must be within the four Seas, so as by intendment he may come to his Wife.

Bastardy. In what Court to be proved.
If a Suit to prove a Bastardy and Legitimacy be first commenced in the
Ecclesiastical Court before any Question be moved of such Matter in the
Temporal Court of the King a Prohibition lies to restrain such Suit; and if it
accompanied with Practice and Fraud this is a Misdemeanour punishable in the
Chancery. And the reason why the Ecclesiastical Judge cannot enquire of
Legitimacy or Bastardy before he has received direction or commandment out of
the Temporal Court of the King is, because the Court Christian never had power
to intermedle with Temporal Inheritances direct or indirecte.

It has been resolved, that where the Question of Bastardy or Legitimacy has
been moved in the King's Temporal Court, and Issue upon it be joined there;
then it may be transmitted to the Ecclesiastical Court by the King's Writ to be
examined and tried there; and upon this the Bishop ought to make a Certificate
to the King's Court, which Certificate being made in due manner the Law gives
such Credit to it, that all the World shall be estopped and bound by it.

But in an Action on the Case for calling one Bastard, the Defendant justified
that he was a Bastard, and it was awarded that this should be tried per pais,
and not by the Ordinary, Hob. 179.

General Bastardy where tryable. Special where.
General Bastardy ought to be tried by the Bishop, and not per Pais, 18 Ed. 4.
3. a. Special Bastardy per Pais. When the Issue is joined upon Bastardy before
it shall be awarded to the Ordinary to be tried, Proclamation shall be made of
it in the same Court, and after the Issue shall be certified into Chancery
where Proclamation shall be made once a month for three month, and after the
Chancellor shall certify this to the Court where the Plea is depending, and
after it shall be proclaimed again in the same Court, that all those whom this
Plea does concern shall go to the Ordinary to make their Allegations, 10 H. 6.
c. 11.

If the Wife of a Man who has been beyond Sea by so long time before the Birth
of the Issue, which the Wife has in his absence, that the Issue cannot be his
Issue, this is a Bastard, Hill. 14 Jac. 2. in Camera Stellata, Done and Egerton.

In respect of Marriage unlawful.
If a Man having a Wife takes another Wife, and has Issue by her, living the
first Wife, this Issue is Bastard, for the Second Marriage is void, 7 Co. 44.
Kenn's Case.

If a Man marry his Cousin within the degrees, the Issue between them is no
Bastard until a Divorce, for the Marriage is not void, 18 H. 6. 34. b. So it is
if the Brother marry his Sister.

If a Man has Issue by A. and afterward intermarry with her, yet the Issue is
a Bastard by our Law, but a Mulier by the Civil Law.

An Idiot a nativitate may consent to Marriage, and his Issue shall be
legitimate, Trin. 3 Jac. Style and West, B. R.

Bastard by our Law, and Mulier by the Civil Law.
If A. has Issue by B. and after they intermarry, yet the Issue is a Bastard
by our Law, but a Mulier by the Civil Law, 11 H. 4. 84.

By the Constitutions of the Pope a Bastard born before the Espousals of the
same Parents, who after intermarry, is legitimate; yet it appears by the
Statute of Merton cap. 9. the King refused to accept such Law in this Realm,
and answered to the Motion of it in Parliament, Nolumus Leges Angliae mutari.

If the Parents are divorced causa Consanguinitatis, they not having notice of
this at the Marriage, the Issues had before are Bastards by our Law, and
Muliers by the Civil Law.

If a Man had Issue by a Woman, and after marry the same Woman, the Issue by
our Law is a Bastard, and by the Spiritual Law a Mulier.

Bastard by the Spiritual Law, and Mulier by our Law.
If a Man marry a Woman big with Child by another, and within three days after
she is delivered, in our Law this is a Mulier, and in the Spiritual Law a
Bastard.

If a Woman elope and has Issue in Avowtry, the Issue is a Mulier in our Law,
and by the Spiritual Law a Bastard, 43 E. 3. 19, 20.

But if a Man who has one Wife takes another, and has Issue by her, this
Issue is a Bastard by both Laws, for the second Marriage is void.

Divorce.
What Divorce shall bastardize the Issue, Vide Tit. Divorce.

At what time the Divorce being made shall bastardize the Issue, Vide Tit.
Divorce.

Jeo oye que il fuit agreed que si un ad issue bastard eign per un feme and
puis la feme marry un auter, and le Baron morust depuis la dit Feme marry a
luy per que el ad le bastard and ad issue auter fitz per luy and le Baron
morust que si en ceo case le bastard enter en les terres de queux son pere
morust seize and ad Issue and morust, que ceo nest tiel descent que barrera le
Mulier a claymer les dits terres, car le maxim tient lieu ou le marriage est
prosecut and nemy ou un marriage mean ovesque un estranger. Ex Manuscrip. Mri.
Brownloe.

Bastardy where tryable.
General Bastardy or unque accouple en Loyal Matrimony is tryable by the
Bishop's Certificate; but special Bastardy, as whether one was born or begotten
before the Espousals, or whether a woman be a man's wife or not; or whether she
were married to another before: These matters being specially alleged and put
in issue it shall be tried per Pais, Hard. 2. 63. Ashfield's Case.

If Bastardy be pleaded in one, for that he was born of a second wife, living
the first, this shall be rryed per pais, for the Marriage is void, 38 Ass. 24.
adjudged.

If Issue be, whether a Bastard or a Mulier, it shall be tried by the Ordinary.

But if the Issue be, whether a Bastard or born within the Espousals, it shall
be tried per Pais, 7 H. 4. 8.

So if the Issue be whether born before Marriage, it shall be tried per Pais,
for this lies well in the Conisance of the Country, 11 H. 4. 84.

In an Issue against an Infant, if Bastardy be pleaded in the Infant, this
shall not be tried by the Ordinary, but per Pais; because the Infant is not
compellable to take Issue upon it, for then he should lose the advantage of the
inquiry of Circumstances, and so no Issue shall be joined upon this; and if
Issue be not joined between the Parties the Ordinary shall not try it, 30 Ass.
45.

If Bastardy be pleaded in Abatement of the Writ, and the other says he is a
Mulier, this shall be tried per Pais, because it is not peremptory, 49 Ass. 45.

Who only may write to the Bishop to certify Bastardy.
Note, None but the King's Courts of Record, as the Court of King's Bench,
Common-Bench, Justices of Jail-deliver, and such like may write to the Bishop
to certify Bastardy, Mulierty, Loyalty of Matrimony, and such like
Ecclesiastical matter; for it is a Rule in Law, That none but the King can
write to a Bishop to certify; and therefore no inferior Court, as London,
Norwick, York can write to the Bishop; therefore in such Cases the Plea ought
to be removed in Banco, and this Court ought to write to the Bishop, and after
to remand it again, 1 Inst. 134.

In Assize, if the Tenant says that A. the Father of the Plaintiff took B. to
Wife, and had Issue the Plaintiff, and after they were divorced, and so the
Plaintiff a Bastard. To which the Plaintiff faith, that he is a Mulier; upon
which a Writ is directed to the Bishop, who certifies that the Plaintiff was
born en loyal Matrimony without fully certifying that he is fully a Mulier; and
although the Tenant had acknowledged in his Plea that there was a Marriage and
that the Plaintiff was born in it; yet because if there were a Divorce then
this was not a lawful Marriage, the Certificate aforesaid is good which
certifies that he was born in lawful Marriage, 43 Ass. 43.

Upon Issue of Bastard or not, if the Ordinary certify that the Plaintiff was
a Mulier prout per Inquisitionem invenit, this is good without certifying
generally Legitimus, 3 H. 6. Bastardy 2.

If a Writ issues to the Bishop to certify if J. S. be a Bastard, if he make a
Certificate, yet if he does not remand the writ which comes to him to warrant
the Certificate, it is not good, 41 Ass. 29. adjudged.

If a writ issue to the Archbishop Gardein of the Spiritualties sede vacant of
the Bishopric of Coventry and Lichfield, to certify whether A. was ever
accouple en loyal, etc. and he returns that Dr. Babington his Commissary of
Coventry and Lichfield had enquired, etc. this is not a good Return, because
delegata potestas non potest delegari; but the Return ought to have been in the
name of the Archbishop himself, Trin. 7 Jac. Foliam's Case.

If between Strangers another be tried a Bastard per Pais, this shall not bind
him that is so tried, because he is a Stranger to the Trial, and cannot have an
Attaint, Doct. and Stud. 68. b.

If a man be certified a Bastard by the Ordinary in an Action personal, he
shall be bound perpetually, as well as in Actions real, 19 H. 6. 18. b.

If the Defendant be certified a Bastard by the Ordinary, yet the Certificate
after shall lose its force, if the Plaintiff be afterward nonsuited, for then
the Certificate is not of Record, 18 Ed. 3. 34.

Of Bastard eigne and Mulier puisne in case of Descents.
A man seized of Lands in Fee, and has Issue Bastard eigne and Mulier puisne,
and dies: if the Bastard enters, and the Mulier dies, his wife priviment
enseint with a Son, and the Bastard has Issue and dies seized, the Son is
born, his Right is bound for ever; but if the Bastard dies seized, his wife
enseint with a Son, the Mulier enters, the Son is born, the Issue of the
Bastard is barred; for there must be not only a dying seized, but a descent to
his Issue.

Note, That the Case of Bastard eigne and Mulier puisne differ from the common
Cases of Descents and Bar; for Descents do only toll the Entry of him that
Right has, but leaves him to his Action; but now if a man seized of Lands in
Fee has Issue two Sons, Bastard eigne and Mulier puisne, and the Father dies,
the Bastard enters claiming as Heir to his Father and occupies the Land all
his Life without any Entry made upon him by the Mulier, and the Bastard has
Issue and dies seized, and the Land descends to his Issue, who enters; in this
Case the Mulier is barred for ever, both of his Entry and of his Action; for
the Issue of the Bastard is become in Judgment of Law as lawful Heir: For its
the ancient Law, Justum no^ est aliquem post mortem facere Bastardum, qui tot^
tempore vitae suae pro legitimo habebatur, 1 Inst. 224. 8 Co. Lechford's Case.

How Estates may be limited to a Bastard by reputed Name, or not.
If a Remainder is limited to J. S. Son of W. S. although he be a mere Bastard,
and no Mulie^ by the Spiritual Law, yet if he be reputed for hi^ Son, its a
good Remainder: But if an Estate for Life be made, the Remainder to the Issue
of the Body of J. S. or of him begotten on the Bod^ of A. S. if he has
afterward an illegitimate Issu^ yet this Issue shall never take this
Remainder, because he cannot have the Reputation of Issue before hi^ Birth, 1
Inst. 3. b.

If A. makes a Feoffment in Fee to the use o^ himself for Life, the Remainder
to the Issue Mak^ of one Mary Lloyd of her Body begotten by A. the Feoffor;
whether he be lawfully begotten or not so that he be the reputed Son of A. it
is sufficien^ for him to entitle himself to say, that he is the Son of the said
A. begotten on the Body of the said Mary Lloyd, and that he is so reputed in
the common Reputation of the Country, although he was not born nor in esse, at
the time of the Remainder granted; and although there are lawful Issues between
them which are puisne to the Bastard; for the person who is to take is
certainly described; for the Bastard of a woman is certainly known to be her
Issue, and this is limited to the eldest Issue, Mich. 38 and 39 Eliz. Blodwel
and Edwards.

But though a Bastard be a reputed Son, yet he is not such a Son in
consideration whereof an Use can be raised, because in Judgment of Law he is
nullius Filius, 1 Inst. 123. a.

By a Devise of all his Goods to his Children a Bastard eigne shall take a
Portion, Moor f. 10.

Note, An English Merchant living beyond Seas has Issue a Son by a woman of
that Country, who is an Alien, although by the Civil Law Partus sequitur
ventrem; yet it is not so in our Law, for the Child shall be of the Fathers
condition, for the woman was sub potestate viri, quasi under the Allegiance of
our King.

CHAP. IV. Queen.
How the Queen is an exempt person from the King in our Law. She is not to find
Sureties, nor to be amerced. She is to be sued by a Praecipe, not by Petition.
She may inform by her Attorney in Chancery. Queen Consort or Queen Dowager in
case of Treason, how to be tried. The Penalty for any to marry the Queen
Dowager without the King's License. She is not restrained by the Statute of 1
H. 4. c. 6. She and her Tenants not to pay Toll.

THough the Queen be a Feme Covert and a Subject, yet has she a Prerogative as
she is the King's Wife.

The Wife of the King of England is an exempt person from the King, and is
capable of Lands o^ Tenements of the Gift of the King, etc. and man sue and be
sued without the King as a Feme sole.

That the Queen as Feme sole may give and tak^ solely without the King,
appears by an ancien^ Charter long before the Conquest.

I Ethelswith Queen of the Mercians with Consent of my Eldermen will give by
Gran^ to Cawolf my most faithful Servant a ce^ piece of Land, being part of my
peculi^ power, etc. that he may have and posse^ at his pleasure as long as he
lives; an^ after his end and limit of his days he man leave it to whomsoever he
will for eve^ lasting Power and perpetual Inheritanc^ And we charge all Secular
Powers in the Name of God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, to observe the
aforesaid inviolably. These Witnesses subscribing and consenting thereunto, I
Etheldred King of the West Saxons, and Burghred King of the Mercians.

When the Queen sueth any Writ the Writ shall not say, if the Queen of England
shall secure thee, etc. for she ought not to find Sureties, as a common person
ought to do; for she shall not be amerced, Vide Fitz. B. de parco fracto.

A Protection may be allowed against the Queen, but not against the King;
neither shall the Queen be sued by a Petition, but by a Praecipe.

The Queen may inform by her Attorney in the Chancery by English Bill to have a
Decree made in the Court of the Queen confirmed; for though the Queen be a
Subject, yet has she a Prerogative with the King as she is his Wife.

Queen Consort or Queen Dowager in case of Treason shall be tried per pares, as
Queen Anne, Wife of King Henry the 8th, was, Pasch. 22 H. 8. in the Tower of
London before the Duke of Norfolk then High Steward.

Plenarty by six months against the Queen is a good Plea albeit she claims the
Advowson by the King's Indowment, 2 Inst. 361.

At a Parliament held 6 H. 6. it is Enacted, That no man shall contract or
marry himself to any Queen of England without a special License or Assent of
the King, on pain to lose all his Goods and Lands, 2 Inst. 18.

If a Queen Dowager marry any of the Nobility, or under that Degree, yet loses
not she her Dignity, as Katharine Queen Dowager of England, married Owen ap
Meredith ap Theodore Esquire, and yet she by the Name of Katharine Queen of
England maintained an Action of Detinue against the Bishop of Carlisle, 2 Inst.
50.

The Queen shall find no Pledges, for she shall not be amerced.

The Queen is not restrained by the Statute of 1 H. 4. cap. 6. concerning
Grants by the King, 1 Inst. 135.

In the Case of a Quare Impedit brought by her, Plenarty is no Plea, Quaere.

The Queen shall pay no Toll.

If the Queens Tenant alien any part of the Tenaney to one, and another part to
another, the Queen may distrain any one part for the whole, as the King may do;
but other Lords shall distrain pro rata.

CHAP. V. Privileges of a Feme Covert.
No Mortuary to be paid at her Death. She is not within the Statute of W. 2.
cap. 25. What Conditions in Law shall bind the Wife, or not. She may not be a
Constable, though the Custom be to elect by Houses. Laps shall incur against
her. Latchess not to be accounted against her for not Entry or Claim to avoid
Descent. What Privilege the Wife shall have in Suits by reason of the
Husband's Privilege.

IF a Feme Covert dies, no Mortuary shall be paid; but if a Woman survive her
Husband, and live in an House for a year sole with the Government of a Family,
and after dies, she shall pay a Mortuary, Linwood f. 7. This was ordained by
the Constitution of Simon Langhan.

The Statute of W. 2. cap. 25. a Feme Covert and Infant are not within this
Statute to have corporal Imprisonment by punishment by their Plea, by vouching
a Record, and failing of it, 2 Inst. 414.

What Conditions in Law shall bind a Feme Covert or not.
If Conditions in Law founded upon Skill and Confidence, as Offices of Parkship
or Stewardship in Fee, etc. descend to a Feme Covert, if the Condition in Law
annexed to them be broken, this shall bar her for ever: But if Feme Covert be
Lessee pur vie, or Tenant in Dower, and her Husband makes a Feoffment in Fee,
and the Lessor enters for the Forfeiture, as he may, yet the Feme after her
Husband's death may enter, for this is a Condition in Law without any Skill or
Confidence annexed to the Estate, 8 Co. 44 Whittingham's Case.

Women in Prison by reason of their Pregnancy have been released upon Bail,
Cro. Jac. 356.

She is punishable upon a Malefactoribus in Parcis, Hob. 95, 97.

She is imprisonable for force, Hob. 97.

She is punishable within the Statute of 10 Eliz. for hearing Mass, and within
23 Eliz. for not coming to Church.

A Woman (though the Custom be to elect by Houses) may not be a Constable, Cro.
Car. 388. Prouse's Case.

But Lapss shall incurr against a Feme Covert if she does not present within
six Months.

Regularly no Lachess shall be accounted to Infants or Feme Coverts for not
Entry or Claim to avoid descents; yet Lachess shall be accounted to them for
Nonperformance of a Condition annexed to the Estate of the Land; for if a Feme
be enfeoffed either before or after marriage, reserving a Rent, and for default
of Payment a Re-entry, in this case the Lachess of the Husband shall disherit
the Wife for ever, 1 Inst. 246. b.

Privileges in Suits.
If the Husband have Privilege in Chancery it shall not serve for his Wife. P.
C. Clark of the Crown in Chancery and his Wife, as Executrix to her first
Husband, were impleaded in Banco he brought a Writ of Privilege for himself
and his wife, and non allocatur, because the is not impleadable there, nor her
attendance requisite.

What Privileges the Wife shall have by reason of her Husbands Privilege in
Actions.
L. brought Debt against Sir Simon Fanshaw and his wife, as Executrix of
another, and sued to the Exigent, and at the return of the Exigent the
Defendant, Sir Simon, came into the Court voluntarily and prayed his
Privilege, because he was an Officer of the Exchequer, and per Curiam the
Defendant shall not have his Privilege, because the Action was brought against
him and his wife en auter droit. Rolls in his Argument of this Case took these
differences.

Diversities.
1. Where the Defendants are coming to make their appearance and are arrested,
as in 22 H. 6. 20. and where they are sued in one Court and the Husband demands
his Privilege because he is an Officer in another, as in this Case.

2. Where he is Defendant, and where he is Plaintiff.

3. Where he is sued in his own right, and where in the right of another, as in
this Case. In the first of these differences he shall have his Privilege, in
the later not. Quaere, If the Defendant had not surceased his time in this
Case, because he demands his Privilege at the Exigent, and not before, March.
Rep. 149. Levet and Sir Simon Fanshaw's Case.

T. P. a Clerk in Chancery, married a Feme, who was Executrix to her Husband,
Debt was brought against them in C. B. T. P. brings a writ of Privilege to have
the Action removed into Chancery; the writ was disallowed by the Court, and the
Defendant ruled to answer over, because the Wife was joined in the Action with
the Husband; aliter, where the Wife comes in aid of her Husband to follow the
Suit, Godb. p. 10. Dyer 377. Pole's Case.

If the Husband be solely impleaded in Banco, and he comes with his Wife to the
Court to defend the Suit, and both are arrested, there they shall have
Privilege.

CHAP. VI.
Who shall be said to be Baron and Feme, or in what Cases Marriage shall be
said to be valid or not. 1. In respect of Age: Of the time of Agreement or
Disagreement to the Marriage: What shall amount to such Agreement or
Disagreement. 2. In respect of Affinity or Consanguinity. What Marriages are
within the Levitical Degrees or not; with several Modern Cases of Precontracts.

In respect of Age. Consangunity. Divorce. Profession.


1. AGE. In former times the Marriage of a Ward made a considerable Title in
our Books. I remember Bracton lib. 2* f. 88. says, A Woman being Heir sine
dispositione and assensu Dominorum haereditatem habens maritari non potest; but
now the Law is altered, and therefore I shall not trouble the Reader with it;
only let me observe that in case the Lord disparaged the Ward in Marriage under
fourteen that then he lost the Wardship. Now there were four Causes of
Disparagement then looked upon.

1. Propter vitium Animi, as Idiot. 2. Propter vitium Sanguinis, as 1. A
Villensis.
2. A Burgensis, i. e. a Mechanic, Habedasher, Draper, etc. 3. The Son or
Daughter of a person attainted of Treason or Felony, albeit pardoned, for the
Blood is corrupted. 4. A Bastard. 5. An Alien or Child of an Alien.

3. Propter vitium Corporis, as 1. De membris, having one Hand, one Foot, one
Eye, etc. 2. A Deformity, as, to squint, be lame, crooked, etc. 3. Privation,
as, blind, deaf, dumb, etc. 4. Horrible Diseases, as, Leprosy, Palsy, etc. 5.
Natural Impotency to have Children, 6. Deflowred.

4. Propter jacturam Privilegii, as, to marry the Heir to a Widow, whereby he
should, by reason of the Bigamy, have lost the benefit of his Clergy; but that
Bigamy is ousted by the Statute of 1 Ed. 6. cap. 12.

The time of the Agreement or Disagreement to the Marriage, when they marry
infra annos nubiles.
The time of Agreement or Disagreement for the Woman is at twelve, or after;
and for the Man at fourteen or after, and there needs be no new Marriage if
they so agree; but disagree they cannot before the said Ages; but then they may
disagree and marry themselves to others without any Divorce, and if once they
give consent they can never disagree after, 1 Inst. 79. 2 Co. 16.

If a Man at fourteen marry a Woman at the Age of ten, at her Age of twelve he
may disagree, as well as she may, though he were of the Age of Consent; because
in Contracts of Matrimony both must be bound, or equal election of Disagreement
given to both: So it is e converso, if the Woman be of the Age of Consent, and
the Man under.

If a Man marry a Woman, who is within the Age of twelve years, and after the
Wife disagrees to the Marriage within the Age of twelve years also, and after
the Age of twelve years marry with another; now the first Marriage is
absolutely defeated so that he may take another Wife; What amounts to a
Disagreement.
for although the disagreement within the Age of Consent was not sufficient,
yet the taking another Husband after the Age of Consent affirms the
Disagreement, and so the Marriage is void ab initio, as it was adjudged in
Babington's Case. But if a man marry a woman within the Age of twelve years,
and after the wife at eleven years of age disagrees to the marriage, and after
the Husband takes another Wife and had Issue by her, this is a Bastard; for the
first continues notwithstanding the disagreement of the woman; for she may not
disagree within the age of twelve years, and so her disagreement was void, 1
Roll. Abr. 341.

A Feme marries with J.S. and within the age of twelve years disagrees and
marries with another, the second marriage resolved to be good; for the Church
providing against the change of Lust prohibits Divorces, but here under the age
of twelve years is not any such mischief, Per Noy, Banister's Case cited Dyer
13. in Margin. And by him marriage by Duress is good, against the Opinion of
Frowick, Palmer 52. otherwise by such Allegations Divorces would by frequent to
satistie the Lusts of men.

If a man within the age of fourteen takes a wife of twelve, or more, this is a
marriage, and they are Baron and Feme de facto; so that the husband may have
Trespass de muliere abducta cum bonis viri, Trin. 12 Jac. B. R. Bradshaw and
Fletcher. And if the man come to fourteen, and make any continuance of the
Action, this shall be a good agreement to the marriage, so as it afterward
shall not be defeated.

If disagreement be before the Ordinary, then they can never after agree to
make it a good marriage, though within the age of Consent. Quaere.

Debt on Obligation by Baron and Feme; the Defendant pleads the Wife had
another Husband in full life. The Plaintiff replies, that the Feme ad annos
nubiles disagreed. The Defendant demurs. The Question was, If he ought to agree
or disagree before annos nubiles? Per Popham, If she marry another Husband
infra annos nubiles this shall be a disagreement. But it was adjudged pro Quer.
because Cohabitation was with the second Husband all the time after the years
of Consent, More 575. Warner and sa Feme against Babington.

It was a Question, If the death of the Baron before the years of Consent of
the Wife does defeat the marriage ab initio, as disagreement shall do, or had
dissolved it without disaffirmance; and per Curiam it has dissolved and
disaffirmed it; for the Baron dying there is not any marriage, and Sponsalia
may be before the years of Assent, but not Matrimony, More 742. Sir Arthur
Gorge.

What Marriages are within Levitical Degrees or not.
IN the Statutes of 25 H. 8. c. 22. and 28 H. 8. c. 7. the Degrees prohibited
in the 18th of Leviticus are truly set down, and not only Degrees of Kindred
and Consanguinity, but Degrees of Affinity and Alliance are set down, and may
be best illustrated and viewed in this Scheme.

Of the Man's Part.
Degrees of Consanguinity prohibited, or a Man may not marry his Father's
Sister. his Mother. his Sister. his Daughter. the Daughter of his Son or
Daughter.
his Mother's Sister

Of the Woman's Part.
Degrees of Consanguinity, or a Woman may not marry her Father's Brother. her
Father. her Brother. her Son. the Son of her Daughter.
her Mother's Brother.

On the Man's Part.
Degrees of Affinity prohibited, or a Man may not marry his Uncle's Wife. his
Brother's Wife.
Father's Wife. his Son's Wife, or Wife's Daughter. the Daughter of his Wife's
Son or Daughter.
Father's Wife's Daughter. his Sister's Wife.


On the Womans's Part.
Degrees of Alliance prohibited, or a Woman may not marry her Aunt's Husband.
her Sister's Husband.
her Mother's Husband. her Husband's Brother.
her Daughter's Husband. the Son of her Husband's Son or Daughter.




The Act of 13 H. 8. provides for two things: The first was against the
dissolution of Marriages consummate with bodily knowledge upon pretense of
Precontracts; the other by reason of other Prohibitions to marry than God's Law
requires: But that Clause about Precontracts is repealed, 2 E. 6. c. 23. 1
Eliz. c. 1. Stat. 15 H. 8. c. 22. 18 H. 8. c. 7. cap. 16. 32 H. 8. cap. 38. are
the Statutes which concern Marriage within Levitical degrees.

Marriages between Cousin-Germans and all Marriages onwards between
Cosin-Germans are by the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 38. made lawful.

All Marriages are lawful which are not prohibited within the Levitical degrees.

Harrison married his Grandfather's Brother's Wife by the Mother's side, this
was held lawful by the Judges, Vaughan's Rep. etc. Harrison and Nunwel, where
you may read excellent Learning about the Common Law's cognizance as to
Marriages, and of the Construction of the Levitical degrees.

Quae eandem habent rationem propinquitatis cum eis quae nominatim prohibentur:
Regula.
And therefore though the Marriage of the Nephew cum amita and matertera is
forbidden by the said 18th Chapter of Leviticus, and yet the Marriage of the
Uncle with the Niece is not by express words prohibited, yet the same is
prohibited.

So Cro. Eliz. 298. Mann's Case. Mann had married his Wife's Sister's Daughter,
for which he was sued before the High Commissioners; for though this was not
expressly forbidden by the Levitical degrees, yet because degrees more remote
are forbidden, they gave Sentence of Divorce; and he grounded his Prohibition
on the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 38. and a Consultation was granted, because the
Prohibition is not to be, if it be within the Levitical degrees, and here it
was, general and therefore not good.

In Siderfin p. 434. Mich. 21 Car. 2. B. R. Hesward and his Wife against Horn.

It was moved for a Prohibition to the Spiritual Court, and the Suggestion was,
that they proceeded there to excommunicate the Plaintiffs, because the
Plaintiff H. had espoused the other Plaintiff, who was his last Wife's Sister's
Daughter, and it was granted, Vid. More 907. 2 Kelw. 551.

Grotius de Jure Belli lib. 2. f. 137. sect. 12, 13. distinguishes well that
Lineal Parents are only prohibited, not Collateral ascending or descending; and
to this the Court inclined.

The Plaintiff sued one in the Ecclesiastical Court for marrying his Sister's
Daughter, and the Defendant prayed a Prohibition, because out of the Levitical
degrees; but it was denied, because it is a Cause of Ecclesiastical Cognizance,
Raym. 464.

If a man marry his Mother or Sister they are Husband and Wife until a Divorce.

But if a Wife take a second Husband, living the first Husband, this Marriage
is void by our Law, as by the Spiritual Law, contra 9 H. 6. 14.

Whether Marriage be within the Levitical Degrees, determinable by the Common
Law.
One had married the Widow of his Brother's Son and the High Commissioners
adjudged it Incest* But per Curiam this Marriage is lawful, per Stat. 32 H. 8.
and 28 H. 8. And this Marriage being within the Levitical degrees shall be
determine^ by the Common Law; and so the Judges have taken upon them the
Exposition of the Levitic^ degrees by force of the Statute of 32 H. 8. as
appears by Person's Case remembered in Coke's Ne^ Entries, Litt. Rep. 356.
Williams's Case.

Prohibition was denied to the Ecclesiastical Cou^^ in Suit there to dissolve
an incestuous Marriage of his Brother's Daughter, Sir Thomas Jones 191.
Margatrides Case. Though the Suggestion was, that Land settled on the said
Marriage should be drawn into Question in the Spiritual Court, but no
Prohibition was granted in Collet's Case; for upon such pretense incestuous
Marriage may be sheltred, and this matter lies properly in the Spiritual
Jurisdiction. The Case was. Collet's Wife was the Sister of his former Wife now
dead; but upon Information to the Court, that the Suit in the Spiritual Court
was only a Contrivance of Collet to gain him Power to dispose of the Estate,
and Collet, the Father at first instance had confessed the prior Marriage, and
the Spiritual Court was ready to give Sentence for the Divorce upon his
Confession without farther Evidence; The Court proposed there should be a Trial
at Common Law upon a feigned Action, wherein the Issue should be, whether ever
Collet was married to the Sister of his Wife, which being refused, day was
given to show Cause why the Prohibition should not be granted, and Proceedings
to be stayed in the Interim, and so from Term to Term, Sir Thomas Jone's Rep.
213. Collet's Case.

As to Divorce declaring the Marriage to be void, Vide infra Tit. Divorce.

As to Profession, that is, when one is regular and professed under certain
Rules, as to become one of the four Orders of Friars, or a Monk, Canon or Nun;
it was held in our Books, that if a Deacon or Priest take a Wife, the Marriage
was not void, but voidable by Divorce: But if a Man marries a Nun, or a Monk
marries another woman, the Marriage is void, and the Issues are Bastards,
because they were dead persons in Law, and are under a Vow of Chastity, 1 Inst.
138. 12 Co. 8.

If an Idiot contract Matrimony, this is good and shall bind him, as was judged
in Styles and Wech's Case, 3 Jac. 1. cited in Siderf. Scot and Manbies Case 112.

Precontract.
Matrimonial Causes are of Spiritual Cognizance, and how.
In Construction of the Civil Law the Wife is Uxor before the Espousals by
Contract; for if they have Carnal Copulation after Contract, they shall not be
punished for Adultery or Fornication, only for Contempt against an Edict of the
Church, which has prohibited carnal Copulation before the Espousals solemnized
in facie Ecclesiae. If a Legacy be given to a woman cum uxor fuerit, and she
contract her self, she shall demand the Legacy in the Spiritual Court before
the Espousals celebrated, Mo^^ 170. in Bunting's Case.

CHAP. VII. Trial of Marriage.
Where and in what Cases Trial of Marriage sha^^ be by the Bishop's
Certificate, and where in Pai^ Of the Issue n'unqne accouple en loyal matrimony
where to be tried. If the Issue be, wheth^^ she be a Feme Covert or Feme Sole,
where to (...) tried, and the reason of the difference. T^^ diversity between a
Marriage in Right and (...) Marriage in Possession or de Facto; and the
consequence of the diversity. The Day and Pla^^ is omitted in the Bishops
Certificate, if good. T^^ Form of the Bishop's Certificate. The Credit the Law
gives to it.

MAtrimonial Causes are of Spiritual Cognisanc^ as the Right of Marriage,
N'unque accou^^ en loyal matrimony, Divorces, 4 Co. Bunting's Cas^ 7 Co. 44.
And so Bastardy general, but not the Consequents or Appurtenants of Marriage,
as the Age of Consent shall be tried at Common Law. So it is said 48 E. 3. 18.
All Matters of Marriage are not matrimonial, so as to appertain to the
Spiritual Court. And Fitzh. N. B. 644. a. takes a difference between Actions
for Money given in Marriage, and given by reason of the Marriage. In the last
Case the Spiritual Court shall not have Cognizance, though in the first Case it
shall; because it is not matter merely occasioning the Marriage, but as Reward
of it, Sid. 115.

Where and in what Cases Trial shall be by the Bishop's Certificate, or in
Pais, or not.
The Right of Espousals is evermore triable by the Bishop's Certificate, as if
the Issue be accouple en loyal matrimony or not; this is tryable by the Bishop,
and not per Pais, 7 H. 4. 25. 19 H. 6. 18. So if such Issue be in a Writ of
Dower it shall be tried by the Bishop; so in an Appeal: But whether a woman be
a Feme Covert or Sole is always triable per Pais: So if the Issue be Wife or
not Wife, married or not married, it is tryable per Pais, 7 H. 4. 25.

If a Feme and her Husband bring Trespass, Nient son feme shall be tried per
Pais: So if Feme Covert bring Assize, as a Feme sole, if the Tenant says, she
is a Feme Covert, it shall be tried by the Assize. In Assize by Baron and Feme
the Tenant says, that the Wife is the Wife of a Stranger. The Demandant says,
that the Marriage between them was within the Age of Consent, and after at
twenty years of Age she took him to Husband, and issint sa Feme, and not the
Wife of a Stranger; this shall be tried per Pais, 49 Ed. 3. 17. b. Isabel
Goodcheap's Case.

In a Cui in vita, if the Issue be whether the Alienor were her Husband it
shall be tried per Pais, for the Action lies if he were her Husband in facto.

In a Writ by W. C. and M. his Wife; if the Issue be whether she were the wife
of W. C. in Abatement of the Writ, this shall be tried per Pais, 39 E. 3. 16.

Whether a Marriage be solemnized shall be tried per Pais.
In a Writ of Covenant to assure certain Lands within twenty days after the
Marriage solemnised between A. and B. If the Issue be whether there were any
such Marriage solemnized or not, this shall be tried per Pais, and not by the
Ordinary, Mich. 4 Jac. B. R. Fletcher and Muffet.

If A. covenant with B. that if B. marry with the Daughter of A. rite and
legittime secundum Leges Ecclesiasticas he will assure to B. a Copyhold Estate.
B. brought his Action of Covenant, and alleges that he rite and legittime
espoused the Daughter of A. upon which Issue was joined, and found for the
Plaintiff. Exception was taken, because it ought to be tried by Certificate and
not per Pais: Sed non allocatur; for the Marriage is only in Issue, and that is
the substance, and not whether he were lawfully espoused; for the Legitimation
does not come in Question; and it was held sufficient for the Plaintiff to
allege a licet saepius requisitus without giving notice of the Marriage, for
he ought to take notice at his peril, Cro. Jac. 102. Fletcher and Pynset.

If the Issue be whether the Church is void or not void, Whether Coverture or
sole shall be tried per Pais, but encouple en loyal matrimony by the Bishop,
and the reason of the diversity.
this shall be tried per Pais; but whether a Church be full or not shall be
tried by Certificate; so if the Issue be whether such a Woman be covert or
sole, this shall be tried per Pais, though the Issue whether such a woman was
accouple en loyal matrimony shall be tried by Certificate; and the reason of
the diversity in both Cases, is this; Voidance or not Voidance, a Coverture or
Sole are things noturious to the Country, and distinguishable by them; but
Plenarty and loyal Matrimony are not things within their Cognizance: For though
a woman lie with a man as her Husband, yet the Country cannot judge whether
they are lawfully married or not, Sid. p. 39. in Watson and Baker's Case.

So is Ventris 77. If Issue be, whether she is the wife of such a man, it is to
be tried per Pais; and if she be wife de facto, shall be tried by that Issue;
but Loyalty of Matrimony is to be tried by the Bishop by Certificate.

Trin. 13 Car. 2. B. R. In Debt on a Bond to pay Money at Marriage, unques
accouple does not draw the Right of Marriage in question. Exception was taken;
it is not alleged that the party was married at the time of the Bill, but
Issue being joined upon married or not married, after Verdict this shall be
aided, there being a good Negation and Affirmation, 1 Glascock and Morgan.

Now the difference between a Marriage in Right and a Marriage in Possession is
much to be regarded and ought to be carefully attended to in Pleadings.
Diversity between a Marriage in Right and a Marriaage in Possession, and the
consequence thereof in Pleading.


Marriage in Possession is sufficient always in personal things and causes,
especially where the Possession of the Wife is in question: But where the
Possession of the Husband is in question there Marriage in Right ought to be;
and where Marriage in Possession falls in Averment, there it shall not be tried
by the Bishop, as in the Case of Marriage in Right where nunq' accouple is
pleaded, but in Pais. For in case of a Wife in possession nunq' accouple is no
Plea, but not his Wife: So is the Case 12 Ed. 3. Br. 481. A. brought an Action
of Trespass against B. and C. B. pleaded that C. is Wife of the Plaintiff, and
demanded Judgment of the Writ; the Plaintiff in his Replication said, nunq'
accouple, and this Replication was not allowed, but he was driven to say, Not
his Wife; for if C. were the Wife of the Plaintiff in Possession or by
Reputation it is sufficient to abate the Writ.

Upon Marriage de jure infra annos nubiles, if the Husband be murdered before
his Agreement, the Wife shall have an Appeal of Murder, or a Writ of Dower.

Of the Certificate of the Bishop, and the Return.
E. and his Wife demanded her Dower of the Lands of W. S. her former Husband.
The Defendant pleads nunq' accouple en loyal Matrimony. The Issue was, Quod
fuit accouple en loyal matrimony; thereupon a Writ was awarded to the Bishop,
who certified that she was accoupled in vero matrimonio cum praed. W. sed
clandestino, and quod W. and E. thori and mensae participatione nondum
cohabitaverunt usque ad mortem praed. W. Upon this Certificate Judgment was
given for the Demandant. Error assigned was, because there was neither day nor
place of the Marriage mentioned in the Bishop's Certificate. Sed non allocatur.
For the day or place of the Marriage is not material, for it is not issuable,
because the Certificate from the Bishop is concluding 2. It was assigned, that
this Certificate is not good, because it does not answer to the words of the
Issue, which was n'unque accouple en loyal matrimony; he ought to have
answered, Quod fuit copulatus in legitimo matrimonio, but he says, Quod vero
matrimonio, sed clandestino, which is but argumentative that they were lawfully
married, their cohabiting at Bed and Board: Sed non allocatur; for vero
matrimonio is as good as legitimo, and though it be clandestino it does not
vitiate the Marriage, and the other words prove they continued as Baron and
Feme, Cro. Car. 351.

In a Writ of Dower, upon an Issue n'unque accouple, etc. if a Writ issue to
the Bishop to certify, etc. and he certifies that the Husband being of 11
years, 10 months and 20 days of age, and the Wife of 16 years of age
intermarried in facie Ecclesiae, and so they were accouple en loyal matrimony;
this is not a good Certificate, because it does not give a full answer to the
Writ, whether they were accouple en loyal matrimony, Dyer 313.

But if upon such Writ and Issue the Bishop certify that he had made diligent
inquisition of the matter, by which he had found by lawful proofs that the
Woman at such a place in certain was accoupled in loyal Matrimony to the said
Husband mentioned in the Writ; this is a good Certificate although it was
objected that he should have certified his proper opinion, and not only the
Inquisition, for he had not certified so much as the Writ requires in effect,
Dyer 368.

The Plaintiff brought a Writ of rationabili part bonorum against the
Executors of the Husband, and demands her part of diverse Goods in certain. The
Defendant pleads, n'unque accouple en loyal matrimony; Upon which a Writ was
awarded to the Bishop of Chester, in whose Diocese the Wife pleads the
Marriage: The Plaintiff, who had the Carriage, delivers it to the Bishop, and
prays him to examine it; upon which, and notice given to the Defendant, he did
examine diverse Witnesses; afterward the Plaintiff seeing the Bishop inclinable
against him, took away the Writ from the Bishop's Secretary. The Defendant
takes another Writ without motion in the Court, Test the same Term: Upon which
the Bishop, without other Examination and without notice of this Writ to the
Plaintiff, returns under his Seal Episcopal Nunque loyal accouple; and the
Defendant thereupon prayed Judgment. Per Curiam. The Writ taken out by the
Defendant without motion was irregular, but by the Preignotaries the
Irregularity was in defect of notice to the Plaintiff. In this Case the
Plaintiff had two Children by the supposed Husband, which were by this
Certificate made Bastards, although reputed legitimate before, Sir Thomas Jones
p. 38.

A Certificate of Marriage by the Bishop is peremptory, the Marriage being at
Utrecht beyond Sea, and certified under the Seal of the Minister there, and of
the said Town, and that they cohabited two years together as Man and Wife, was
held a sufficient proof that that they were married, Cro. Jac. 542. in Alsop's
Case.

CHAP. VIII. Marriage, and the Consequence of it by Law.
Where alterations are made by Marriage as to the Names of Dignity; as to
change of Name on Estates devised. Where or in what Cases Marriage shall amount
to a Countermand or Revocation of Livery or Attornment. If Marriage be a
Revocation of a Will or Countermand of Arbitrament. If Marriage be a breach of
a Condition by way of Disability. A Lady of a Manor marries a Copyholder, if
it be a Suspension. In what Cases Marriage is a Release in Law or not. Woman
Jailer marries a Prisoner, if it be an Escape or not. Where a Term is extinct
by the Intermarriage or not. In what Cases the Husband shall be said Assignee
of the Wife or not.

What Alterations are made by Intermarriage.
IF a Woman that is noble by descent marry one that is under the degree of
Nobility, As to Names of Dignity.
yet she remains noble still; but if she gain her Nobility by Marriage, she
loses it, if she marry under the degree of Nobility; and so is the Rule to be
understood, Si mulier nobilis nupserit ignobili desinit esse nobilis. But if a
Duchess by Marriage marry a Baron of the Realm she remains a Duchess, and
loses not her Name, because her Husband is noble. Et sic de caeteris.

As to Devisees having changed their Name by Marriage.
A Man had Issue a Son and a Daughter, and devises his Land to his Sons in Tail,
and if he died without Issue, that it should remain to the next of his Name,
and died; the Son died without Issue; the Daughter being then married, and the
Question was, Whether she should have this Land. Per Curiam, she shall not; for
she had lost her Name by her Marriage; but it shall go to the next Heir Male of
the Name. Aliter, If she had not been married; for then she should have had it,
for she then was the next of the Name, Cro. Eliz. 532. Bon and Smith, and so
was Jobson's Case, Cro. Eliz. 576. Jobson devised Lands in Tail, the Remainder
to the next of his Kin of his Name; and at the time of the Devise the next of
his Kin was his Brother's Daughter then married to J. S. The Devisor dies, the
Tenant in Tail dyed afterward sans Issue, this Daughter shall not have the
Land, for she is of her Husband's Name; but if she had been unmarried at the
time of the Devise and death of the Donor, though she had been married at the
time of the death of the Tenant in Tail without Issue, yet she should have had
the Land.

As to alrcration of Estates, Vide Tit. Moyeties.

As to the Goods and Leases of the Feme, Vide infra.

As to the Alteration of Actions, Vide Tit. Abatement.

I shall only at present consider

Where and in what Cases Intermarriage shall amount to a Countermand,
Revocation, Release, Suspension or Extinguishment.
Livery within the View not revoked by Marriage.
Two Women were Jointenants in Fee, one of them made a Charter of Feoffment to
J. S. and Livery within the view, and afterward before it was executed,
marries. Per Curiam, This Livery was well executed after the Marriage, for an
Interest passes by the Livery within the view which cannot be countermanded;
the effectual part of it, Go and enter and take possession, was before the
Marriage; though the Estate be in the Wife till Entry, she has put it in the
Feoffor's power, and when he enters it has a strong Retrospect to the Livery,
Pleading.
and shall be pleaded as a Feoffment when she was sole, 1 Ventr. 186. Parsons
and Perat.

But a Livery by Letter of Attorney is revoked by Marriage; but Livery within
the View is a present Livery.

If A. a Feme sole lease for Life or Years, Attornment.
and after grants the Reversion to B. and afterward takes C. to Husband, this
is a Revocation of the Grant; so that nothing shall pass to B. by the
Attornment of the Lessee afterward, because by the Intermarriage C. is seized
in the Right of his Wife, and had a possibility to be Tenant by the Courtesy,
2 R. 2. Attornment 8. Vid. 4 Co. 60. Force and Hembling's Case. But if A. the
Feme, after the Grant of the Reversion to B. had taken B. to Husband, this had
not been any Revocation of the Grant, but that the Lessee might have settled the
Reversion by Attornment afterward, because the Husband may not have a better
Estate by the Intermarriage than he shall have by the Grant, Ibid.

A Woman devises Lands to A. and his Heirs, Devise.
if he survive her, and after she intermarries with the said A. It was argued
per Curiam that by the taking him to Husband and Coverture at the time of her
death the Writ is countermanded, it being her own Act, 4 Co. 61. Force and
Hembling.

If two Women exchange Lands, Exchange.
and one marries before Entry, this shall not defeat the Exchange.

If A. of the one part and B. and C. a Feme sole of the other part, Arbitrament.
submit themselves to the Arbitrament of J. L. and afterward C. takes J. S. to
Husband, and after the Arbitrator before any notice of the Marriage makes an
Award, that B. and C. shall pay 30 l. to A. yet this shall not bind J. S. and
C. his Wife, nor B. for for the Submission by the Marriage of C. is revoked as
to B. also, and this also without notice, 1 Roll. Abr. 331. White and Gifford.
So is Saccum's Case, 2 Keb. 865. In Debt on Bond to submit to an Award; the
Plaintiff on Oyer pleads the Intermarriage of the Wife with the Plaintiff
before the Award; to which the Defendant demurred. Per Curiam: Marriage is her
own Act, and was a Revocation of the power given to the Arbitrators.

A Widow binds her self in a Bond conditioned that if the said Obligor from
time to time and at all times upon request do such Act and Acts for the
conveying of such Mesuage, etc. and for such Estates, etc. The Obligee tenders
an Assurance, which was not according to the Condition, but differed in the
Limitation of the Estate, and the Obligor refused to accept it. She afterward
married, and the Question was, If Marriage be a breach of the Condition as to
disability.
if the Marriage were a breach of the Condition, she having disabled her self
to make a Conveyance, and the Baron is entitled to be Tenant by the Courtesy,
and yet it is but a Possibility; and the Court advised the Defendant to make a
good Conveyance, Hardr. p. 463. Edwards and Owen.

Copyhold suspended.
A Feme sole seized of a Manor wherein there were Copyholds, one of the
Copyholders marries with the Feme, the Copyhold is suspended by her
Intermarriage, Godb. 11. Cr. Eliz. p. 7.

What Agreements between the Husband and Wife, stand good or be extinguished by
the Marriage.
It is commonly held in our Law Books, that Agreement between Husband and Wife
before Marriage is extinguished by the Marriage, Hob. 216. Smith and Stafford,
but with this diversity, as was the Case of the Lady Pridgeon in Chancery. She
being a Widow, upon her Marriage with Sir Francis Pridgeon suggests an
Agreement precedent to the Marriage between him and her, and others on her
behalf, that notwithstanding her Marriage, the Rents and Profits of all her own
Estate, and what personal Estate and Goods she had should be at her own
disposal, but the Executors of Sir Francis claimed them: And the Chief Baron
Hales, who assisted at the Hearing, declared, That though where an Agreement is
between Baron and Feme before Marriage, that the Wife may by her Will dispose
of part of her Estate, or for a thing which is future to the Marriage, such an
Agreement was not dissolved by the Marriage, yet where an Agreement is to have
Execution during the Coverture, as was in the Case of the said Lady Pridgeon,
there the Marriage extinguisheth such an Agreement; and they concluded that the
Plaintiff had no ground of Suit, Cases in Chanc. 117, 118. Smith and Stafford's
Case was upon Speech of Marriage between A. and S. he promised, that if she
would marry him, and he dyed before her, he would leave her worth 100 l. she
married him: Now whether the Promise in Law was released by this Marriage was
the Question. And it was adjudged contrary to the Opinion of Hobert, that it
was not released, not being to be performed till after the death of him that
made the Promise.

The Lady Darcy being a Widow and seized of a Jointure of 700 l. per annum,
agreed to marry Mr. C. and he before the Marriage agreed with her by Writing,
that it should be lawful for her, or such as she should appoint, during the
Coverture to receive and dispose of the Rent of her Jointure as she pleased,
and the Deed was put into the Hands of H. her Agent. They married, and for ten
years H. received the Rents, and with the approbation of the Lady paid the same
to Mr. C. He dyed, the Lady exhibits her Bill to have Account from H. and made
Title to the same by the Agreement. Per Curiam. The Agreement was extinct by
the Intermarriage, Cases in Chancery 21.

So if Baron and Feme lease at Will the Land of the Wife rendering Rent, and the
Husband dies, ye^ the Lease shall continue, 1 Inst. 55. b.

Release in Law.
If Feme Obligee take the Obligor to Husban^ this is a Release in Law; so it is
if two Feme Obligees, and one takes the Debtor to Husband but if the Feme
Executrix take the Debtor t^ Husband, this is no Release in Law, for that wo^^
be wrong to the Deed, and in Law work a Dev^stavit, which an Act in Law shall
never wo^^ 1 Inst. 264. b.

As to Marriage being a Release in Law of Assumpsit, Vide Hob. 216. Smith and
Stafford, as 2 Sid. 58. and postea.

Intermarriage repeals her Submission to Arbit^ment dum sola, 3 Keb. 9.

Escape.
Plat's Case Plowd. 17. a. If a Woman be W^den of the Fleet, and one that is in
prison the^ marry her he is thereby out of Prison, and the La^ adjudgeth him
thereby to be enlarged, because it i^ repugnant that he as her Husband should
have the Custody of her, and she as a Jailer the Custody (...) him, cited 2
Veutr. 10.

Where a Term is extinguished or not. Where it comes to Husband or Wife, who
had the Inheritance.
Lease for years, the Reversion for Life to A. a Feme Covert, and the Lessee
grants his Estate to the Husband, and after the Wife dies; the Term is not
extinct, because the Husband had the Estate in several Rights, for the Freehold
was in the Wife, and the Husband only seized in her Right, 1 Roll. Abr. Lechden
and Winsmore. So it is adjudged in the Lady Plat and Sleep's Case. The Husband
has a Term for years in his own Right, and the Inheritance after descends to
his Wife, that coming to her en auter droit shall not drown and extinguish the
Term for years, which he had in his own Right; and so he may assign and dispose
of this Term at his own pleasure, notwithstanding the descent of the
Inheritance to the Wife, Cro. Jac. 275. Godb. 20.

A Lease made to Baron and Feme for years, who enters; the Lessor afterward
enfeoffs the Husband, who died seized; the Feme survives and claims the Term,
and the Question was between the Wife and the Heir of the Husband, whether this
Term was extinguished. Et per totam Curiam, By the acceptance of the Feoffment
the Husband had surrendered the Term, and it is extinguished: But if the
Conveyance had been by Bargain and Sale enrolled, or by Fine, it had been
otherwise, Cro. Eliz. 912. Downing and Syemor.

If a Feme lease at Will rendering Rent, and after take Husband, this does not
determine the Lease, but the Baron and Feme shall have an Action for the Rent,
1 Inst. 55. b.

So if a Lease be made to a Feme rendering Rent, who takes Husband, this Both
not determine the Lease, but an Action lies against them for the Rent or
Distress, 1 Inst. 55. b.

A Debt on Bond against Baron and Feme being made in her Viduity, with
Condition that she, her Heirs and Assigns perform all Contracts in a Lease made
by her Husband of a Warren to the Plaintiff She takes another Husband, who
enters on the Plaintiff. The Agreement found by the Jury. Now there was no
Estate alleged its the former Husband in the Right of the Wife, whereby though
the second Husband be Assignee in Law, yet he enter as on his own wrong not
claiming under her. The Husband an Assignee of Contract.
B^^ per Curiam it is not requisite that the Husban^ should be Assignee of the
Estate, but her Assign of Contract; She is bound for some intended Interest,
though no certain. Estate appear, which the Husband has by Marriage and does
act in her Righ^ 1 Keb. 348, 512. Hall versus Creswel and Uxor'.

CHAP. IX.
What things of the Wife are given or do accrue to the Husband by the
Intermarriage or not. What he gains of his Wifes Lands in Fee by the
Marriage. What Estate or Interest he gains in her Chattels Reals, and
Chattels Mixed, which are partly in Possession and partly in Action. What he
gains in her Chattels Personals, or in Chooses in Action. Diversity between
Property in Personal Goods and a bare Possession. What things of the Wife the
Husband may release or discharge or not, as Obligations, Annuities, Promises,
etc. What Acts, Charges or Forfeitures of the Husband shall charge the Wife e
after his Death. How and wherein the Wise shall be bound by her Husband's
Submission to an Award, or for a Rent for Owelty of Partition. How the Husband
may charge the Land of the Wife by Rent, Statute, Judgment, etc. What Lands of
the Wife shall be put in Execution for the King's Debt upon the Husband. What
Act of the Husband amounts to a Forfeiture of the Wife's Land, and for how
long. What Acts of the Husband and Wife shall be construed, as the Act of the
Wife so as to bind her after his Death or not. For what Acts or Facts of the
Wife the Husband shall be punished: Et e eontra. Of Paraphernalia. What things
or Actions the Wife shall have after the Death of the Husband. What Actions
Real, what Things and Actions Personal, as Obligations, Recognisances, Goods,
or Money purloined. What things Real, as Rents, Leases, etc. What things the
Husband shall have after the Death of the Wife, as Leases in Trust, Arrears of
Rents, Presentations, etc. What things the Wife may make good after the Death
of the Husband, as Bonds, Rents by Acceptance.

THIS Title is of great use, as will appear by the subsequent Cases, both as to
the present profit after Marriage, as for the future advantage after the death
either of Husband or Wife.

What the Husband gains of Lands in Fee by the Intermarriage.
If a man take to wife a woman seized in Fee of Lands, he gains by the
Intermarriage an Estate of Freehold in her right, which Estate is sufficient to
work a Remitter, and yet the Estate, which the Husband gains, depends upon
an uncertainty, and consists in Privity; for if the wife be attainted of
Felony the Lord by Escheat shall enter and put out the Husband; otherwise, if
the Felony be committed after the Issue had. Also if the Husband be attainted
of Felony, the King gains no Freehold, but a Pernancy of the Profits during
the Coverture, and the Freehold remains in the wife, 1 Inst. 351. a.

Chattels Real.
As for what Interest the husband has by the Intermarriage in a Term of years
of the wife, and how he may or may not dispose of it, Vide supra Tit.
Disposition of the Wife's Term.

Chattels Mixed.
Chattels Real being of a mixed Nature (viz.) partly in Possession and partly in
Action, which happen during the Coverture, the Husband shall have by the
Intermarriage, if he survive his wife, albeit he reduces them not into
possession in her life time; but if the wife surviveth she shall have them.
Rent.
As if the Husband be seized of a Rent Service charge or seck in the right of
his wife, the Rent becomes due during the Coverture; the wife dies, the
husband shall have the Arrearages; but if the wife survive the husband she
shall have them, and not the Executors of the husband. So it is of an Advowson,
if the Church become void during the Coverture he may have a Quare Impedit in
his own Name; Quare Impedit.
but the wife shall have it if she survive him: But if the Arrearages had
become due, or the Church had fallen void before the Marriage, there they were
merely in Action before the Marriage, and therefore he should not have them by
the Common Law although he had survived her. So of Reliefs. But now by the
Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 37. If the Husband survive the wife, he shall have the
Arrearages as well incurred before the Marriage as after, 1 Inst. 351. a.

B. and his wife brought a Quare Impedit against H. and made Title to present
in the Right of his wife, and after Issue joined the wife dyed. Per Winch. The
Writ is not abated, because this was a Chattel vested in the husband during the
Life of the wife, Winch. p. 73. Blunt's Case.

Chattels Personals.
Marriage is an absolute gift of Chattels Personal in Possession in her own
Right whether the husband survive the wife or not: But of personal Goods en
auter droit, as Executrix or Administratrix, etc. the Marriage is no gift of
them to the husband, although he survives the wife, 1 Inst. 351. b.

But there is a diversity between Property in personal Goods (as is aforesaid)
and a bare Possession, for if personal Goods be bailed to a Feme, or if she
finds Goods, or if Goods come to her hands as Executrix to a Bailiff, and she
takes husband, this bare Possession is not given to the Husband, but the Action
of Detinue must be brought against the Baron and Feme, 1 Inst. 351. b.

Custom of London.
By the Custom of London the wife shall have the Moiety of the Goods whereof her
husband died possessed, yet the husband in his Life time may give all the
Goods, but by his Will he cannot prejudice her concerning her part, Cro. Car.
345.

Glanvil in his Lecture on the Statute of 1 Jac. Of Monopolies 16 Febr. 1629.
Monopoly.
put this Case. If a Feme sole has a Patent for the sole using of a Trade
invented by her, and after takes husband, yet the husband shall have the
advantage of this within the Statute, because he is Assignee in Law.

Chose en Action.
Things in Action, as Debts by Obligation, Contract or otherwise the husband
shall not have them, unless he and his wife recover them. If a Feme Covert be
seized of an Advowson, and the Church becomes void, and the wife dies, the
Husband shall present; Aliter, if a Bond made to the wife, which is merely a
Chose en Action, 1 Inst. 120.

Estray.
If any Estray happen within the Manor of the wife, if the Husband die before
seizure the wife shall have it, for that property was not in the wife before
seizure.

Statute.
If a Statute be acknowledged to Baron and Feme they are Joyntenants of it, and
the wife shall have all by survivor; so if a Bond be made to Baron and Feme, 4
E. 3. 12. b.

Damages.
If Baron and Feme recover Land and Damages the Feme shall have the Execution of
the Damages and not the Executors of the husband, 4 E. 3. 13.

If Feme sole Obligee takes husband, and the husband makes a Letter of Attorney
to J. S. to receive the Moneys, who receives it accordingly, and after the Wife
dies, the Husband shall have Action of Account for the Moneys, for by this
Receipt it becomes a thing in Possession, Trin. 13 Eliz. B. R. Huntley and
Griffith, More 452.

If a Legacy be devised to a woman who takes an husband, and the husband makes
a Letter of Attorney to J. S. to receive the Legacy, and he receives it
accordingly, by this Receipt it cease to be a thing in Action and becomes a
thing in possession, and the husband or his Executors after the death of the
wife shall have account upon this Receipt, Ibid. More 452.

A Baron possessed of an Obligation in the Right of the wife may give it to a
Stranger, Bond.
and the Donee may justify the determining of it after the death of the
husband, Mich. 38 and 39 El. B. R.

If the wife have Goods and take an Husband, Executor of the Husband to have
the Wife's Goods.
the husband dies, the Executors of the husband shall have the Goods. If the
wife lose Goods and take Baron, and the Baron dies, the Executors of the
husband shall have these Goods, because the property is in him by the
Intermarriage notwithstanding the losing. If the Goods of a woman are taken,
which woman takes an husband, the Husband alone shall have the Replevin,
Siderf. 174. Powes and Marshal.

Land is devised to a Feme Executrix during the Minority of A. to hold to her
own use without account, Term.
provided that she keep and educate the said A. at School, etc. This such a
Term in the Executrix as is given to the husband upon the Intermarriage, and
the Education and keeping of the Child is not such a particular Privity, but it
may be performed effectually by another, Hob. 285. Balder and Blackburn.

An husband submits to an Arbitrament concerning the wife's Term it shall bind
the wife, Arbitrament.
for if the Baron had granted over the Term it should have bound the wife, and
by consequence the Submission being for the Interest and Title, of the Term, is
as much in effect as if he had granted over the Term, Dyer 183. in Margin.

But though the husband does gain these things by the Intermarriage, yet if he
be bound in an Obligation, and the Condition is, that he shall not sell the
Apparel of his wife, this is good; as if a man bind himself to a Stranger to
pay 20 l. per annum to his wife, this is good without doubt by Coke, Smith and
Watson's Case, 1 Roll. Rep 334.

What the Husband may release or discharge or not.
Covenant.
The Covenant was, that a Stranger should pay 8 l. yearly to one of the
Covenantees, and to one F. I. a Stranger; F. I. took husband one B. who did
release the Payment. Per Curiam. B. is a Strange^ to whose wife the Payment is
to be made; now he cannot release this, he having no Right at all therein, nor
yet any Remedy to come by it: And Judgment was pro Quer. 3 Bulstr. 29. Quick
and Harris versus Ludborrow.

Annuity.
A widow brought an Annuity against A. for 30 l. Annuity granted by the
Defendant to the Plaintiff by Indenture. To which the Defendant pleads a
Release by express words reciting the Annuity made by the husband of the
Plaintiff during the Coverture. The Plaintiff demurs; and per Curiam the Bar is
not good, because the Release of the husband may not extinct the Annuity of the
wife, being an Annuity for Life; but that she, if she survive the husband,
shall have an Action for it, More 523. Thomson and Butler.

After Divorce
If husband and wife are divorced causa adulterii, yet the husband may after
release a Legacy due to the wife, for the Divorce does not divorce Vinculum
Matrimonii, but a Mensa and Thoro, 43 El. Stephen and Tott: Roll. Rep. But if
after such Divorce the wife sues without the husband, as she may for a
defamation in the Spiritual Court, and recover, and Penance enjoined, expensa
Litis taxed, the husband may not discharge this, 14 Jac. Newton's Case. Promise.


If A. promise B. a Feme sole, that in consideration she will marry C. his
Brother, that he will give B. 10 l. if she survie C. And after B. takes C. to
husband accordingly; C. cannot after discharge A. of this Promise by his
Release to bind B. after his decease, because the Promise rests in Contingency
during the Life of C. the husband, Hill 6 El. B. R. Belcher and Hudson. Hob.
Smith and Stafford's Case. But express words of Promise had released it.

A Legacy of 10 l. was bequeathed to a Feme Covert to be paid eighteen Months
after the death of the Devisor. The Testator dies, Legacy.
and after the wife within the eighteen Months dies, and the Daughter of the
wife took Administration. But the Legacy belongs not to the daughter but to the
husband, for the husband had an Interest in it before the time of Payment
accrued, and he might have released it, 2 Rolls Rep. 136.

If the husband be indebted to the King he may assign a Debt due to the wife
before Coverture, Assignment of a Debt due to the Wife by the Husband to the
King.
as B. was indebted by a Statute in 2000 l. to C. who dying intestate
Administration was committed to his wife, who married Facone; Facone became
bound with another to the King in 600 l. and he and his wife did assign this
Statute by Deed enrolled to the King for the Payment of the said 600 l. Per
Curiam, this Assignment is good notwithstanding the Statute of 7 Jac. Vide Hob.
253. Breadman and Coals.

If a Feme be indebted to J. S. in a certain Sum as Administratrix to J. D. and
she takes an husband, Arbitrament.
and the husband and J. S. submit all matters between them to the Award of W.
M. he may make an Award of this Debt that is due by the Baron and Feme,
although it be done in Right of the wife, and as Administratrix, for it is now
chargeable by the Intermarriage, 1 Roll. Abr. 246. Cro. Jac. 447. La^ley and
Hutton. So an Arbitrator may make a Award upon such Submission of a Debt to the
wi^^ as Executrix, 21 H. 7. 29. b.

If A. and B. submit to the Arbitrament of J. S of all Suits and Actions
depending between the^ two, the Arbitrator may not make an Award of a Action
that B. and his wife have depending against A. for this is out of the
Submission, 1 Rob. A^^ 246. Brocas and Scavage.

What Acts, Charges or Forfeitures of the Husband shall bind the Wife after his
Death.
As for the disposition of the wife's Term, V^^ infra and supra.

Attornment.
If the husband attorn to a Grant in Pai^ Deed, this shall bind the wife, 9 Co.
85. b. C^nies Case.

Legacy released.
A Legacy is given to a Feme Covert, and (...) husband releaseth, and after he
and his wife for the Court Christian for the Legacy; the party (...) sued shall
not have a Prohibition upon the Re^^ of the husband, because the Temporal
Judges (...) not meddle with the Legacy, and by conseque^^ cannot determine it
whether the Release will ^^tinguish it or not, Yelv. 173.

Rent for Owelty of Partition.
If one Coparcener be married, and for Owelty Partition the husband and wife
grant a Ren^ the other two out of the part of the Feme Cow^ this Partition
being equal shall charge the part the Feme Covert for ever, 1 Inst. 196. b.

Rent.
If a Baron seized for Life, or in Fee, in R^^ of his wife grant a Rent and
dies, the Feme (...) hold it discharged, for she comes in paramount (...)
Charge, so if be be possessed for years in the Right of his wife, and grant a
Rent, 9 H. 6. 52.

The husband is seized of Land in the Right of his wife in Fee, and makes a
Lease for years of it, Conisee of a Fine avoids the Lease by the Husband of the
Wifes Land.
and after he and his wife levy a Fine come ceo, etc. to J. S. in Fee, and
after the husband dies, the Conisee shall hold the Land discharged of the
Lease, for the Lease was void by the death of the Husband, for the husband
joined for Conformity and Necessity, and all the Estate passed from the wife, 1
Co. 76. Bredon's Case, 2 Co. 77. Cromwell's Case.

So if a Baron seized in the Right of his wife in Fee, acknowledge a Statute,
So it is of the Grant of a Rent or Statute.
or grant a Rent out the Land, and after he and his wife join in a Fee come
ceo, etc. to J. S. in Fee, and after the husband dies, J. S. shall hold the
Land discharged of the Rent, and the Statute for the cause aforesaid, 2 Co. 77.
Cromwell's Case. So is Harvy and Thomas's Case, Cro. Eliz. 216. Harrison and his
wife sold the Land of the wife by Deed indented, but it was not enrolled within
the six Months, and afterward the husband alone makes a Lease by Parol, and
then the Baron and Feme levy a Fine to the Bargainee, and dye; the Question
was, if the Conisee of the Fine shall avoid this Lease. Per Curiam. He shall,
for being made by the Baron only, it was void as to the wife, and no Acceptance
can make it good; and as it shall be void to the wife so to the Conusee: So of
a Rentcharge granted by the husband, or a Recognisance by him.

But if Baron and Feme are Joyntenants in Fee, Aliter, where the Baron and Feme
are Joyntenants.
or in Tail, upon a Conveyance made during Coverture, and the husband
acknowledge a Statute, and after he and his wife acknowledge a Fine come ceo,
etc. to J. S. and suffer a Recovery to him, and after the husband dies, yet J.
S. shall hold this charged with the Statute, for he comes in of the Estate of
the husband as well as the wife, and there are no Moieties between them,
aliter, if the Co^veyance were made to them before Coverture. F^^ if Baron and
Feme are Joyntenants in Fee upon a Conveyance to them made before Marriage, a^^
the husband acknowledges a Statute, or grants (...) Rent out of the Land, or
lease the Land to another, and after he and his wife levy a Fine come (...)
etc. to J. S. and after the husband dies it see^ that J. S. shall hold one
Moiety discharged by (...) death of the husband, for the husband has (...)
power to charge the Moiety of his wife, but duri^^ his Life.

Lease for years in right of the Wife not to be extended on Judgment against
the Baron.

Lands, the years in right of the Wife subject to the King's Debt.


If a Baron possessed in the Right of his wife (...) a Term is condemned in a
Judgment, or acknow^^ledgeth a Statute and dies, this shall not be exte^^ed on
the wife, 9 H. 6. 52. b.

But if the husband be indebted to the King a purchase Lands for years to him
and his wife (...) dies, this Land shall be put in execution for the (...)
Debt, for the husband had power to dispose of (...) said Term, 8 Co. 5, 171.
Sir Gerrard Fleetw^^^ 2 Rolls Abr. 157.

If the Cognisee of a Statute dies Intestate, (...) Administation is granted to
his wife, who ma^^ J. S. who becomes Debtor to the King, the C^^tels which J.
S. had in Right of his wife as A^^nistratrix shall not be extended for this
Debt of King, for that these Chattels are to pay Debt^ Rolls Abr. 159. Buckler
and Rays.

Action brought by a Feme Covert.
2 H. 4. Sir Robert Belknap that Reverend (...) Learned Judge was banished out
of the Realm ((...) legatus in Vasconiam) not for any defect or off^^ of his,
but by the Might of his potent Ene^^ and the Malice of the Times; but Sybil
Belk^^ his Lady, continuing in England, the was wrong and she commenced a Suit
in her own Name alone, not naming her husband: Exception being taken against
it, because her husband was living; yet notwithstanding it was adjudged good
and she recovered, which made Markham say, Ecce modo mirum quod foemina fert
Breve Regis
Non nominando virum conjunctum robore Legis.
And yet it was not any such wonder, that the wife should have an Action or
Account as as a Feme sole where the husband is banished by Parliament or
abjured (Abjuration is called a Divorce between the husband and wise.) Weyland
18 Ed. 1. was exiled, his wife had her Jointure. 10 Ed. 3. The King brought a
Quare Impedit against the wise of an exiled man. 14 Jac. Wilmore brought
Trespass by the Name of Widow, her husband living at Lisbon in Portugal.

If Baron and Feme sue a Bond made to the wife in C. B. and the Deed is there
denied, for which they remain in the keeping of the Custos Brevium, and the
Baron die, the wife may have a Writ out of Chancery directed to the Custos
Brevium in B. C. that he deliver the Deed of the wife, because the Plea is
determined by the death of the husband.

Forfeiture.
A Baron is seized in the right of his wife pur vie, and they make a Feoffment,
By Feoffment.
this is a Forfeiture during the Coverture.

So if Baron sole makes a Feoffment, this is a Forfeiture during the Coverture.
But in these Cases it shall not be any Forfeiture against the wife after the
death of the husband, 8 Co. 44. Whittingham's Case.

Term.
But if the husband possessed of a Term in the Righ^ of the wife forfeit the Term,
this shall bind the wife for that he might dispose of the Term, 7 H. 6. 2. b. 9
H. 6. 2. b.

By acceptance of a Fine come ceo, etc.
If Baron and Feme, Lessees for Life, in Right of the wife accept a Fine come
ceo, etc. of a Stranger this shall not be any Forfeiture against the wife after
the death of the husband, because she was not exmined upon this Fine, Dyer 148.

Copyhold.
A Copyholder in Fee takes an husband, who makes a Lease for years without
License, which by the Custom of the Manor is a Forfeiture; thi^ Forfeiture
shall not bind the wife and her heirs after the husband's death, the wife after
his death shall have it again, Cro. Car. 7. 2 Rolls 244, 345. Sovern and Smith.
And Dodderidge took this difference. Where a Feme sole is a Copyholder, and she
takes an husband, who made a Lease for year^ without License, the same is a
Forfeiture, because it is her Folly that she will take such an husband a^ will
forfeit her Land: But where a Copyhold i^ granted to a Feme Covert, and the
husband makes (...) Lease without License, Diversity.
in such case it is no Forfeiture; and so in the Case of a Feme, Lessee for
Life, at the Common Law against Whittingham, 8 Co. 44. But I find no such
difference in Cro. Car.

Lapse of time for cutting of Woods shall bind the Wife.
Feoffment in Fee of a Manor to the use of himself and his wife for Life, the
Remainder to his Heirs; and in the Manor there are Under-Woods usually to be
cut every one and twenty years, and the husband suffered the Woods to grow five
and twenty years and dies. The Question was, if the husbands suffering it to
grow five and twenty years during the Coverture shall bind the wise so as she
should not cut the Woods? Per Curiam. It shall bind her, for that the time is
limited by Law, and if the time be incurred it shall not be felled afterward,
Godb. 5. 1 Brownl. 73. 1 Leon. 61.

If a Man make a Lease for years on Condition that the Lessee his Executors or
Assigns shall not alien, there if the wife, Forfeiture for Alienation.
Forfeiture for Condition.
Executrix and her second husband alien, this shall be a Forfeiture, for the
Condition follows the Estate and is inherent to it, Dyer 1. But where the
Agreement is collateral and personal, as if a Condition be that a woman shall
not beat J. S. and she takes an husband who beats him, this shall not be a
Forfeiture, for the Condition was annexed to the person of the wife: But the
Waste of the husband is the Waste of the wife, for that follows the Estate, and
is not personal.

Baron and Feme are possessed of a Term in the Right of his wife, Arbitrament.
as Executrix to her first husband, and a Stranger pretending Title to it, and
the husband submit to Arbitrament in writing for the Interest and Title of the
Lease; and the Arbitrators award one part to the Pretender, and the other
Moiety to the Baron and Feme. Quaere, If the Award shall bind the wife after
the death of her husband.

What Acts done by the Husband and Wife shall be construed as the Act of the
Wife or not, so as to bind her after the death of the husband or not.
If Baron and Feme are Patrons in jure uxoris if they confirm by Deed the Lease
of the Parson, Confirmation.
this is not good against the wife and her heirs, but only during the
Coverture, for the Deed of the wife is void, Dyer 131. 1.

Baron and Feme, Tenants for Life, Aid prier.
join in the praying of aid of a Stranger, this shall be no Forfeiture of the
Estate of the wife, 15 E. 4. 29. b.

A Statute Merchant was made by Baron and Feme, and they join in a Defeazance,
this shall not be the Defeasanze of the wife, 48 E. 3. 12.

In Cases of Limitation.
In Cases of Limitation of Estates, as if Limitation be, if a Ring be tendered by
a woman that the Land shall remain to her, and she takes an husband, and after
she and the Husband tender the Ring, this shall be a sufficient Tender, and
shall be intended the Act of the wife.

^^claring the ^es of a Fine.
If Baron and Feme join in a Fine of the wife's Land, the wife alone without the
husband may declare the use of it, Bekwith's Case, 2 Co. 27.

Many Acts in Pais made by the Baron and Feme shall be intended the Act of the
wife, as Agreement to the use of a Fine, which shall bind the wife after the
death of the husband.

Rent by Owelty of Partition.
Baron and Feme grant a Rent for equality of Partion, this shall bind the wife
afte the death of the husband, for it is her Act as well as the Act of the
husband and shall be intended for her benefit. Condition to reinfeoff.
Feoffment of a married woman on condition to reinfeoff, and she with her
husband makes the Feoffment, Attorn.
it is good. A woman Lessor pur vie with her husband attorns upon the Grant of
a Reversion it is good and shall bind the wife after the death of the husband.

Assent of the Wife to a Revocation.
If an Estate be conveyed with power that the husband with the assent of the
wife may revoke, the assent of the wife to such Revocation is good. So if the
Proviso be that a married woman without the assent of her husband may make a
Revocation of Uses and declare new, this is good, 2 Brownl. 139, 140.

Acknowldgement of a Deed to be enrolled.
Where the wife is examined by Writ she shall be bound, otherwise, not, 10 Co.
43. Baron and Feme acknowledge a Deed to be enrolled, this does not bind her
because she is not examined by Writ.

Payment to a Feme Covert.
Debt on an Arbitration Bond. The Defendant pleaded, the Arbitrator had awarded
that the Defendant should pay to the Plaintiff 10 l. and said he had paid it to
the Plaintiffs wife, who received it; upon which the Plaintiff did demurr.
Judgment pro Quer. For payment to her was not good, 1 Leon. 320. Froud and
Batt's Case.

For what Acts or Torts of the Wife the Husband shall be punished. Et e contra.
Vide Tit. Action, and Tit. Wast.
If a Lease be made to Baron and Feme, Waste.
and the Baron does waste and dies, if the wife agree to the Estate she shall
be punished for the waste done by her husband; in like manner as if a Stranger
had done the waste, after the death of the husband she is in from the Lessor,
and if the Action had been brought against the Baron and Feme, the waste should
have been quod fecerunt vastum, so as it is as well the waste of the wife, as
of the husband, 2 Inst. 303.

Paraphernalia.
By our Law the Apparel of the wife is called Bona Paraphernalia. The wife by
the Common Law ought to have her necessary Apparel for her Body after the death
of the husband, and not the Executors of the husband; but she shall not have
excessive Apparel.

If the husband deliver to his wife a Piece of Cloth to make a Garment and
dies, albeit it was not made into a Garment in the Life of the husband, yet the
wife shall have it and not the Executor, inasmuch as it was delivered to her to
that intent. But against the Debtee of the husband the wife shall have no more
Apparel than is convenient, Mich. 40 and 41 Eliz. Harwel's Case.

A Chain of Diamonds and Pearls being worth 370 l. being usually worn by a
woman who was the Daughter of an Earl in Ireland, and a Baron of England, and
the wife of a Knight and the King's Sergeant at Law, shall be Bona
Paraphernalia; so that the husband cannot devise them from the wife, Cro. Car.
343. the Lord Hastings and Dowglass. Richardson and Crook thought the wife
shall not have them as Bona Paraphernalia, because they were not necessary for
her, but only convenient: Jones and Berkly e contra: But all agreed she shall
have her necessary Apparel.

What things or Actions the Wife shall have after the death of the Husband.
What Actions Real. Personal.
What Things Real. Personal.

The wife shall have Trespass after the death o^ the husband for Trees cut upon
the Land during the Coverture, 18 E. 4. 13. 39 H. 6. 45.

If the husband pull down an House, which he ha^ in right of his wife, and
gives the Timber, the wife shall not have an Action for it, after the death
(...) the husband, 43 E. 3. 26. b.

Rose Edmonds brought Trespass against P. (...) putting in his Beasts into her
Land 1 May contin^^ ando usque January: On not Guilty, the Plain^^^^ had
Judgment. Error was brought, and Error i^ fact was, that Rose Edmonds was
Covert de Baron the first day of May, and so for a week after, and h^ husband
being dead it is gone with his person, an^ damages were given entirely: Per
Curiam, It i^ Error.

What thing personal. Vide Acceptance.
Bond.
If an Obligation be made to Baron and Feme, t^^ Feme shall have it by Survivor
if she will, 4 H. 6. ^ 10 Car. in Came. Scaccar. Spark and Fairman^ Case.

So the wife shall have a Recognisance by Survivor, Goods.
but if Goods are given to Baron and Feme the Feme shall not have them by
Survivor, but the Executors.

A Feme Covert purloyned her husbands Goods or Money, and put the Money into
other men's hands, Moneys purloyned.
who therewith buy Lands to her use, if the Heir or Executor of the husband do
sue in Equity for Relief, or to have the Land or Money restored, yet denied
Relief; for said Egerton Chancellor, he would not relieve the Heir or Executor
(nor the Husband himself if he were alive) for he sat not there to relieve
Fools or Buzzards, who could not keep their Money from their wifes.

Things Real. Vide Acceptance. Vide Rent.
If a Lease for years be made to Baron and Feme the Feme shall have it by
Survivor. Lease for years.


If a Feme seized of a Rent service, takes husband, Rent.
and after the husband dies, the wife shall have the Arrears incurred during
the Coverture, 15 E. 4. 10.

If a Feme make a Lease for Life or Years, reserving Rent, and after takes
husband, after the death of the husband the wife shall have the Arrears
incurred during the Coverture, and not the Executor of the husband, because
this issues out of the Freehold.

If a Rent charge be granted to A. a Feme, and B. for years, and after they
intermarry, and after Arrearages incurr, and after the husband dies the wife
shall have the residue of the Rent, and also the Arrearages in the Writ of
Annuity, for that they participate of the nature of the principal, and the
Executor of the husband shall not have the Arreares, Mich. 22 Jac. B. R. Carew
and Burgoigne.

What things the Husband shall have after the death of the Wife.
Arrears of Rent.
If a Feme having a Rent for Life takes an husband, and dies, the husband shall
have the Arreares incurred during the Coverture, 10 H. 6. 11, 12. 4 Co. Ognel's
Case; but he shall not have the Arrears incurred before the Coverture at Common
Law, but by the Statute of 32 H. 8. he shall.

If a Feme make a Lease for years rendering Rent, and afterward takes husband,
and dies, the husband shall have the Arrears incurred during the Coverture, 10
H. 6. 11.

Presentation.
If Baron and Feme in the right of the wife are seized of an Advowson, and the
Church is void, and after the Feme dies, yet the husband shall present to this
Church, for it cannot be granted over, yet it is not merely in Action, 1 Inst.
120. But otherwise of a Bond to the wife, as if J. S. becomes bound to a Feme
Covert, and she dies, her husband shall not have this Obligation without
Administration, for that it is a thing in Action.

Lease for years.
If the husband be possessed of a Lease for years of Land in the right of the
wife, and after the wife dies, the interest of the Lease is presently vested in
the husband by Law, and he shall have it and not the Administrator of the wife,
Dier 151. Plewd. 192. Wrotely and Adams, 1 Inst. 46.

Interest of a Term by the performance of the Condition.
A Feme possessed of a Lease for years, takes husband, and they join in the Grant
of a Term upon Condition that if they, their Executors or Administrators pay 10
l. at such a day it shall be lawful for them to re-enter, and after the wife
dies the husband pays the 10 l. and enters, and dies, his Executors shall have
the Term, and not the Administrator of the wife; for that the interest of the
Term survives to the husband, P. 12 Jac. B. R. Radford and Young.

If a Term for years be granted in Trust the Baron shall not have it, Tem in
Trust.
Per Coke in Waterhouse's Case.

What things the Wife may make good after the death of her Husband or not.
If a Bond be made to Baron and Feme, Bond.
the Feme may refuse this after the death of the Baron, 4 H. 6.6. and by such
waver this is made an Obligation to the husband only.

If Baron and Feme join in a Lease for Life of the Land of the wife rendering
Rent, Lease for Life, or Years.
the Feme may make this good by agreement after the death of her Baron, and
shall have the Rent, 10 H. 6. 4. So of a Lease for years, Vide Lease for one
and twenty years, or three Lives by the Statute, Infra.

CHAP. X. Tenant by the Courtesy.
The Nature of Tenancy by the Courtesy. Of what Estate a Man shall be Tenant by
the Courtesy or not. If he shall be Tenant by the Courtesy of an Estate in
suspense or not. In what cases the Husband shall be Tenant by the Courtesy,
where the Wifes Estate is defeasible by Condition. Four things belong to a
Tenant by the Courtesy What Seisin of the Wife it must be to make the Husband
Tenant by the Courtesy. In what Cases a Man shall be Tenant by the Courtesy of
a Seisin in Law. How a Man shall be Tenant by the Courtesy in respect of the
Issue, and how he must plead the having of Issue.

TEnant by the Courtesy of England is where a Man takes a wife seized of Lands
in Fee-simple or in Fee-Tail general, or seized as Heir in Tail special, and
has Issue Male or Female by the same wife born alive, though the Issue after
dies or lives, yet if the wife die, the husband shall hold the Land during
his Life by the Law of England.

Of what Estate a Man shall be Tenant by the Courtesy or not.
Regula.
It is laid down as a Rule by Littleton sect. 52. That in every case where a Man
takes a wife seized of such an Estate of Tenements, etc. as the Issu^ which he
has by his wife may by possibility inherit the same Tenements of such Estate,
as the wife has, as Heir to the wife: In this case afte^ the decease of the
wife he shall have the same Tenements by the Courtesy of England, otherwise
not. If Lands be given to a woman and to the Heirs Males of her Body, she
takes an husband and has Issue a Daughter and dies, he shall not be Tenant
by the Courtesy, because the Daughter by no possibility could inherit the
Mothers Estate in the Land; and therefore, if a woman Tenant in Tail general
makes a Feoffment in Fee, and takes back an Estate in Fee, and take an
husband, and has Issue and the wife dies, the Issue in a Formedon may recover
the Land against his Father, because he is to recover the Land by force of the
Estate Tail, as Heir to his Mother, and is not inheritable to his Father. If a
man takes a wife seized of Lands and Tenements in Fee and has Issue, and
after the wife is attainted of Felony, so as the Issue cannot inherit to her,
yet he shall be Tenant by the Courtesy in respect of the Issue which he had
before the Felony, and which by possibility might have inherited; But if the
wife had been attainted of Felony before the Issue, albeit he has Issue
afterward, he shall not be Tenant by the Courtesy.

If an Estate of Freehold in Seigniories, Rents, No Tenancy by the Courtesy of
an Estate suspended.
Commons or such like be suspended a Man shall not be Tenant by the Courtesy;
but if the suspension be but for years, he shall be Tenant by the Courtesy, as
if the Tenant make a Lease for Life of the Tenancy to the Seignoress, who
takes an husband and has Issue, the wife dies, he shall not be Tenant by the
Courtesy; but if the Lease had been made but for years, he shall be Tenant by
the Courtesy.

If a woman Tenant in Tail general takes an husband and has Issue, which
Issue dies, and the wife dies without any other Issue, yet the husband shall
be Tenant by the Courtesy, albeit the Estate in Tail be determined, because he
was entitled to be Tenant per Legem Angliae, before the Estate in Tail was
spent, and for that the Land remains. But if a woman make a Gift in Tail, and
reserve a Rent to her and her Heirs, and the Donor take husband and has Issue,
and the Donee dies without Issue, the wife dies, the husband shall not be
Tenant by the Courtesy, because the Rent newly reserved is by Act of God
determined, and no Estate thereof remains; aliter, if a man seized in Fee of
a Rent makes a Gift in Tail general to a woman, etc. 1 Inst. 30.

A woman takes husband and has Issue, Lands descend to the wife, the husband
enters, and after the wife is found an Idiot by Office, the Lands shall be
seized by the King; for the Title of the Tenancy by the Courtesy and of the
King being at one instant the Title of the King shall be preferred.

A man shall be Tenant by Courtesy of a Castle.

A man shall be Tenant by Courtesy of Common sans nombre.

Regula.
A man shall not be Tenant by the Courtesy of a bare Right, Title, Use, or of a
Reversion or Remainder expectant upon any Estate of Freehold, unless the
particular Estate be determined or ended during the Coverture.

In what Case the Husband shall be Tenant by the Courtesy where the Wifes
Estate is defeasable by Condition.
The Mother being seized of certain Lands had Issue two Daughters, and by
Indenture covenanted to stand seized to the use of E. her eldest Daughter in
Tail, on Condition that the said E. should pay to her other Daughter within a
year after the death of the Mother, or within a year after the other Daughter
should come to the Age of eighteen years, 300 l. and if E. should fail in the
payment of the said Sum, or shall die without Issue before such payment, then
to the use of the said second Daughter in Tail. The Mother dies, E. takes
husband, has Issue, and afterward dies sans Issue before the day of payment,
the husband shall be Tenant by the Courtesy: For as to the Condition of the
payment of the said Sums, the same is not determined, for she died sans Issue
before the day of payment viz. before the second Daughter came of the Age of
eighteen years, and as to that there is no Condition broken: And as to the
point of dying without Issue the same is not a Condition but rather a
Limitation of the Estate, and the same is no more than what the Law says, and
the Estate Tail is spent and determined by dying sans Issue, and does not cease
nor is cut off by any Limitation, 1 Leon. 167. Sams and Pain's Case.

A Man is entitled to be Tenant by the Courtesy, and makes a Feoffment in Fee
upon Condition, and enters for the Condition broken, and then his wife dies,
he shall not be Tenant by the Courtesy, because albeit the Estate given by the
Feoffment be conditional, yet his Title to be Tenant by the Courtesy was
inclusively absolutely extinct by the Feoffment, for the Condition was not
annexed to it.

Now four things do belong to an Estate of Tenant by the Courtesy.

1. Marriage.

The Custom of a Manor was, That if any man takes to wife any customary
Tenant, and has Issue, and shall over-live his wife, he shall be Tenant by
Courtesy, and pleads he took to wife Anne, to whom during the Coverture a
customary Tenement did descend and had Issue; by this Custom he shall not be
Tenant by Courtesy, for Anne was not a customary Tenant at the time of the
Marriage, 2 Lenn. Sir John Savage's Case.

2. Seisin of the wife.

Now there is a twofold Seisin, a Seisin in Deed, Law.
And this Seisin of the wife is intended a Seisin in Deed. As if a Man died
seized of Lands in Fee-simple or Fee-tail general, and these Lands descend to
his Daughter, and she takes husband and has Issue, and dies before any Entry,
the husband shall not be Tenant by the Courtesy, and yet in this Case she had a
Seisin in Law; but if she or her husband had during her Life entered, he should
have been Tenant by the Courtesy, 1 Inst. f. 29. Except the wife be actually
seized, the Heir shall not make himself Heir to the wife; and that is the
reason that a Man shall not be Tenant by the Courtesy of a Seisin in Law.

But in some Cases a Man shall be Tenant by the Courtesy of a Seisin in Law; as
if a Man seized o^ an Advowson, or Rent in Fee, has Issue a Daughter, who is
married and has Issue, and dies seized, the wife before the Rent become due,
or the Church became void, dies, she had but a Seisin in Law and yet he shall
be Tenant by the Courtesy, because he could by no industry attain to any other
Seisin, E^ impotentia excusat Legem.

The Tenant took the Seignoress to wife, and had Issue, the wife dyed, the
husband shall not be Tenant by Courtesy, for although the Seigniory was in her
at the time of the Marriage, yet by Priority in Law it ceased, so as no Seisin
of the Seignory was during the Coverture, 1 E. 3.6.

Copyhold.
A Baron shall not be Tenant by the Courtesy of (...) Copyhold unless there be a
Custom to warrant i^ Cro. Eliz. 361.

3. Issue.

If a Man seized of Lands in Fee has Issue (...) Daughter, who takes husband
and has Issue, the Father dies, the husband enters, he shall be Tenant by the
Courtesy although the Issue was had before the wife was seized; and so it is,
though the Issue had died in the Life time of her Father before any descent of
the Land, yet shall he be Tenant by the Courtesy.

If a woman seized of Lands in Fee takes husband, and by him is big with
Child, and in her Travel dies, and the Child is ripped out of her Body alive, yet
shall he not be Tenant by the Courtesy, because the Child was not born during
the Marriage, nor in the Life time of the wife, but in the mean time the Land
descended, Pleading.
and in Pleading he must allege that he had Issue during the Marriage.

If the Issue be born deaf or dumb, or both, What shall be said lawful Issue.
or be born an Idiot, yet it is a lawful Issue to make the husband Tenant by
the Courtesy, and to inherit the Land.

And if the Issue be born alive it is sufficient, though it be not heard cry, 8
Co. 34. Pain's Case. for the crying is but a proof that the Child was born
alive, and so is motion, stirring, or the like.

4. Death of the husband.

Yet it is not necessary that these four should concur altogether at one time;
and therefore if a Man takes a woman seized of Land in Fee, and is disseised,
and then have Issue, and the wife dye, he shall enter and hold by the Courtesy;
so if he has Issue which dies before the descent.

And though the Estate be not consummate till the death of the wife, yet the
Estate has such a beginning after Issue had in the Life of the wife, as is
respected by Law for diverse purposes; as after Issue had he shall do homage
alone; and if after Issue had the husband makes a Feoffment in Fee, and the
wife dies, the Feoffee shall hold it during the Life of the husband, and the
Heir of the wife shall no^ during his Life recover it in a sur cui in vita, for
it could not be a Forfeiture, for that the Estate a^ the time of the Feoffment
was an Estate of Tenancy by the Courtesy initiate and not consummate.

By Noy in his Lecture it is said to be adjudge 36 Eliz. Feme Tenant in Tail
acknowledges (...) Statute and takes husband, and has Issue and die^ the
Lands may be extended in the hands of Tenant by the Courtesy, and in the hands
of the Iss^^ in Tail, if the Tenant by the Courtesy surrende^ during the Life
of Tenant by the Courtesy, Dy^ 51. b. in margin.

Tenant by the Courtesy grants his Estate wi^ Warranty, and comes in as
Vouchee, yet shall have aid of him in the Reversion, Hob. 21.

Pleading.
In Pleading he must allege he had Issue duri^^ the Marriage, and upon that
point the Trial is (...) be had; and upon the Evidence it must be prov^ that
the Issue was alive, for mortuus exitus non (...) exitus: Proofs are crying,
motion, stirring, etc.

Et sic seisit' existen' habuer' exitum inter eos qu^ dam A. and postea and
antea etc. ead. M. apud (...) praed. obiit, and praedict. (Baron) ipsam
supervi^ and se tenuit intus in praed. etc. Et fuit inde s^^ seisitus in
dominico suo ut de libero tenemento ut ten^ inde per legem Angliae quousque,
etc.

CHAP. XI. Dower.
The Nature of Dower. Qualifications of the Wife to enable her to have Dower.
What Divorce shall avoid Dower or not. Of the Endowment of a Wife de facto and
de jure. What Seisin the Husband must have to make the Wife dowable. Of what
Seisin of the Husband the Wife shall not be endowed. Of what Estate a Woman
shall be endowed. Of what Inheritances entire and not divisable she shall be
endowed, and after what manner. In what Cases of Lands or Tenements, which are
devisable, and which the Heir of the Husband shall inherit, yet the Wife shall
not be endowed. How she shall be endowed of improved Lands. If she shall be
endowed of Lands mortgaged. For and in what respect of Disabilities a Woman
shall not be endowed. Where the Wife shall lose her Dower by the Attainder of
her Husband or not. Whether an Alien Woman shall be endowed, and how. What Act
of the Wife shall bar her Dower. Several Cases of Elopement and Divorce
relating thereunto. Assignment of Dower, by whom and how to be made. What
Assignment of Dower is against common Right or not. What things may be assigned
in lieu of Dower. Of Endowment by Meets and Bounds. Assignment of Dower by the
Sheriff and how. By the Heir. Assignment in Chancery. Of the Tenant in Dower
having Damages what Charges made by the Husband the Wife endowed shall avoid or
not. The Writ and Declaration in Dower. Pleadings in Dower. What Pleas are good
or not in Bar of Dower. Trial, Evidence, Issue in Dower. Damages Judment and
Execution of the rationabili part bonorum according to the Custom of London.

Tenancy in Dower, what.
WHere a Man is seized of certain Lands or T^nements in Fee Simple or Fee Tail
gener^^ or as Heir in Tail special, and takes wife, and dye^^ the wife after
her husband's decease shall be endow^^ of the third part of such Lands or
Tenements as we^^ her husbands at any time during the Coverture, whether she
has Issue by her husband or not.

Qualifications of the Wife to enable her to her Dower.
She must be of 9 years of Age at the death of (...) husband, else she shall
not be endowed: But if (...) take a wife 100 years old she shall be endowed. S^
must not be an Alien, nor one that elopes, V^ infra.

Three things are necessary to the consummation (...) Dower.

1. Marriage. 2. Seisin. 3. Death of the Husband.
1. Marriage. This must continue during the C^verture, for if that be dissolved
Dower cease^^ and yet this is to be understood when husband (...) wife are
divorced a vinculo matrimonii, as in (...) of Precontract, Consanguinity,
Affinity, etc. a^ not a Mensa and Thoro, as for Adultery.

If a Marriage de facto be voidable by Divorc^ respect of Consanguinity,
Precontract, Affinity, (...) yet if the husband dye before Divorce the wife
(...) be endowed; but if they are divorced a vin^^ matrimonii in the Life of
her husband, she los^ her Dower; aliter, if they were divorced causa adulterii.

Its to be understood of a wife de facto, Wife de facto and de jure.
as well as de jure; and therefore if the wife be past the age of 9 years at
the time of the death of the husband, she shall be endowed let the husband be
of never so young an age. Though the woman cannot consent before 12. nor the
man before 14. yet their imperfect incohate Marriage, from the which either of
the said parties at the age of Consent may disagree, after the death of the
husband shall give Dower to the wife; and therefore after the death of the
husband it is in Law accounted legitimum matrimonium quoad dotem.

If a Man take a wife of the age of 7 years, and after aliens his Land, and
after Alienation the wife attains the Age of 9 years, she shall be endowed, for
she was conditionally dowable at the time of her Marriage (viz.) if she
attained the age of 9 years before the death of the husband, 1 Inst. 33.

2. Seisin.

The husband must be seized either in Deed or in Law during the Coverture,
Seisin in Law.
or else she shall not be endowed, where Lands and Tenements descend to the
husband; now before Entry he has but a Seisin in Law, and yet the wife shall
be endowed, albeit it be not reduced to an actual possession, for it lies not
in the power of the wife to bring it to an actual Seisin, as the husband may do
of the wifes Land when he is to be Tenant by the Courtesy.

Grandfather, Father and Son, and the Grandfather is seized of three Acres of
Land in Fee, and takes wife and dies, this Land descends to the Father, who
dies either before or after Entry, now is the wife of the Father is dowable:
The Father dies, and the wife of the Grandfather is endowed of one Acre and
dies, the wife of the Father shall be only endowed of the two Acres residue;
for the Dower of the Grandmother is paramount the Title of the wife of the
Father, and the Seisin of the Father which descended to him (be it in Law or
actual) is defeated, and in that case Dos de dote peti non debet.

It is not necessary that the Seisin should continue during the Coverture, as
the Marriage must; for albeit the husband aliens the Lands and Tenements, or
extinguisheth the Rent, or aliens, etc. the wife shall be endowed.

Of what Seisin the Wife shall not be endowed.
And yet of every Seisin the wife shall not be endowed, as in these Cases
following.

The wife shall not be endowed of the Seisin (...) her husband had by
Inter-union on the King's possession.

The woman shall not be endowed both of the Land given in Exchange, and of the
Land taken i^ Exchange, and yet the husband was seized of both but she may have
her Election to be endowed (...) which she will.

Of a Seisin for an instant a woman shall not (...) endowed. If the Conusee of
a Fine does grant and render the Land to the Conusor, the wife of the Conusor
shall not be endowed, 1 Inst. 31. b.

What Seisin it is that entitles the Wife to her Dower.
1. He must be sole seized thereof and not i^ Jointenancy; if there be two
Jonytenants in Fee and one makes a Feoffment in Fee, his wife sha^^ not be
endowed.

Regula.
2. He must be seized of such an Estate during the Coverture, that the Child
that he shall beget o^ the said wife may by possibility inherit the said Lands.

And yet this is not a general Rule. If a Man be Tenant in Fee-Tail general,
and makes a Feoffment in Fee, and takes back an Estate to him and his wife,
and to the Heirs of their two Bodies, and they have Issue, and the wife dies;
the husband takes another wife and dies, the wife shall not be endowed, for
during the Coverture he was seized of an Estate Tail special, and yet the
Issue, which the second wife might have, by possibility may inherit. The same
Law it is, if she had taken back an Estate in Fee-simple, and after had taken
wife, and had Issue by her, yet she shall not be endowed, for that the
Fee-simple is vanished by the Remitter, and her Issue has the Land by force of
the Entail. But in this Case the Tenant cannot plead that the husband was never
seized of such an Estate, whereof the Demandant might be endowed, but he must
plead the special matter.

3. Death of the husband; it must be a natural not a civil death.

Note, It is not requisite that Marriage, Seisin and Age concur together all at
one time, but it is sufficient if they happen during Coverture.

If a Man seized of Lands in Fee takes a wife of eight years old, and alieneth
his Land, and afterward the wife attaineth nine years, and then the husband
dies, the wife shall be endowed; for though at the time of the Alienation the
wife was not dowable, yet forasmuch as the Marriage and Seisin in Fee was
before the Alienation, and the Title of Dower is not consummate till the death
of the husband, she shall be endowed.

Broughton and Randal's Case was a little odd. The Title of the wife to recover
Dower was, that the Father and Son were Jointenants to them and the Heirs of
the Son, and they were both hanged in one Cart; but because the Son, as was
deposed by Witnesses, survived, as appeared by some tokens viz. the shaking his
Legs, his wife thereupon demanded Dower, and had it upon the Issue unq^ sesie
que Dower, Cro. Eliz. 502.

Of what Estate a Woman shall be endowed.
Of every Estate of Freehold and Inheritance i^ Fee-simple, Fee-tail general,
or as Heir in Tail sp^cial whereof her husband was seized during the Coverture
either in Deed or Law, except as before.

Of Estate-Tail determined.
Of an Estate Tail in Lands determined a woman shall be endowed, in the like
manner and form as man shall be Tenant by the Courtesy, mutatis (...) tandis.

Castle.
She shall be endowed of a Castle that is o^ maintained for the private use and
habitation of (...) Owner.

Capital Mesuage.
She shall be endowed of a principal Mansion (...) Capital Mesuage, Si non sit
caput baron. seu (...) tatus.

Inheritances entire.
Though by many Inheritances that be entire whereof no division can be made by
Meets a^^ Bounds, a woman cannot be endowed of the th^^^ it self, yet the woman
shall be endowed thereof (...) a special and a certain manner, as,

Mill.
Of a Mill a woman shall not be endowed (...) Meets and Bounds, in common with
the Heir, (...) either she may be endowed of the third Toll-dish, (...) de
integro molendino per quamlibet tertium mense^

In Gilpin and Cookson's Case in C. B. was q^^ recuperet tertiam partem
molendini, and not of (...) third Toll-dish; and it is well enough, the Writ
^^ing of the Inheritance, and not of the profits; (...) on Recovery of the
third part of the Mill she she have the Toll-dish, and so is 1 Inst. 32. to be
i^tended, 2 Keb. 8.

A woman shall be endowed of the third part of the profits of Stallage;
Stallage. Fair.
of the third part of the profits of a Fair; of a third part of the profits of
the Office of the Marshalsea; of the third part of the profits of the keeping a
Park; Parkership. Dovehouse.
and of a third part of the profits of a Dove-house; and of the third part of
the profits of a Piscary (viz.) tertium piscem, vel jactum retis tertium.
Piscary.


She shall be endowed of the third Presentation to an Advowson. Third
Presentation.


She shall be endowed of the third part of the Profits of Courts, Fines,
Herriots. Courts. Herriots. Fines. Tithes.


She shall be endowed of Tithes, and the surest Endowment of Tithes is of the
third Sheaf, for what Land shall be sown is uncertain.

In some Cases of Lands and Tenements which are devisable, Inheritances
devisable, what she shall not be endowed of.
and which the Heir of the husband shall inherit, yet the wife shall not be
endowed. As if the husband makes a Lease for Life of certain Lands, reserving a
Rent to him and his Heirs, and he takes wife and dies, the wife shall not be
endowed; neither of the Reversion, though it be within the word Tenements,
Seisin.
because there was no Seisin in Deed or in Law of the Freehold; nor of the
Rent, because the husband had not but a particular Estate therein, and no
Fee-simple. But if the husband make a Lease for years, reserving Rent, and
takes wife, the husband dies, the wife shall be endowed of the third part of
the Reversion by Meets and Bounds together with the third part of the Rent.

If a Man makes a Gift in Tail reserving a Rent to him and his Heirs, Rent.
and after the Donor takes wife and dies, the wife shall be endowed of this
Rent, because it is a Rent in Fee, and by possibility may continue for ever.

A woman shall be endowed of a Common certain; but of a Common sans nombre in
gross, Common.
she shall not be endowed.

She shall not be endowed of a Common sans nombre, for then the Land should be
doubly charged, 11 Co. 45. Godfrey Pasch. 9 Car. B. R. Prewet and Drake. Though
in that Case in a Writ of Error Judgment was affirmed, because it shall not be
intended Common sans nombre, but appendant.

She shall be endowed of a Rent-Service, Rentcharge, Rent-Seck.

Annuity.
Of an Annuity that charge only the person, and issues not out of any Lands
or Tenements she shall not be endowed.

Estate suspended.
If the Freehold of the Rents, Common, etc. were suspended before the Coverture,
and so continue during the Coverture, she shall not be endowed of them. But if
after the Coverture the husband do extinguis^ them by Release or otherwise, yet
she shall be endowed of them; for as to her Dower in the eye of the Law they
are to have Continuance.

Land improved.
Of improved Lands she shall be endowed; as i^ the wife be entitled to have
Dower of three Ac^^ of Marsh every one of the value of 12 d. and (...) Heir by
his Industry and Charge makes it goo^ Meadow, every Acre of the value of 10 s.
the w^ shall have her Dower according to the improved v^lue, and not according
to the value, as it was in (...) husband's time; for her Title is to the
quantity (...) the Land viz. one third part. So it is if the H^^^ improve the
Lands by Building.

On the other side, if the value be impaired in the time of the Heir, she shall
be endowed according (...) the value at the time of the Assignment, and not
a^cording to the value as it was in the time of the husband.

Of what Estate the Wife shall be endowed.
^
Its a Rule: In every case where a woman tak^ ^n husband seized of such an
Estate in Tenement^ etc. so as by possibility it may happen that the wife may
have Issue by her husband, and that the same Issue may by possibility inherit
the same Tenements of such an Estate as the husband has, as Heir to the
husband, of such Tenements she shall have her Dower, otherwise not. As if
Tenements are given to a Man and the Heirs, which he shall beget on the Body of
his wife, in this case the wife has nothing in the Tenements, and the husband
has but an Estate as Donee in special Tail; yet if the husband die without
Issue, the same wife shall be endowed of the said Tenements, because the Issue,
which she by possibility might have had by the same husband, might have
inherited the same Tenements; but if such wife dies, living her husband, and
after the Baron takes another wife and dies, his second wife shall not be
endowed in this case, for the reason aforesaid, Lit. sect. 53. And therefore
though a woman be 100 years old, and the husband but four years old, and he
dies, she shall be endowed, because the Law faith, If she be above nine she
shall be endowed.

The wife shall not be endowed of Lands and Tenements, Not of Joyntenancy.
which the husband held jointly with another at the time of his death, for the
Joyntenant claims all by Survivorship, which is above the Title of Dower; but
Tenants in Common have several Freeholds and Inheritances, and their Moieties
shall descend to their several Heirs, and therefore their wifes shall be
endowed, 1 Inst. 37. b.

A Feme shall be twice endowed, as in case of a Recovery by Eigne Title, 1 Roll.
Abr. 684.

If the wife elope she shall be barred of her Dower, Elope.
and yet her Issue shall inherit.

If a Man seized in Fee of Land covenant to stand seized of it to the use of
himself and his Heirs until C. his younger Son take a wife, Not of an Estate
ended by express Limitation.
and after to the use of C. and his Heirs, and after A. dies, by which the
Lands descend to B. his eldest Son, who had a wife, and after dies, and after
this C. takes a wife, the Question upon a special Verdict was, if the wife of
B. the eldest Son, shall be endowed of the said Estate of her husband; and the
Court was divided in Opinion. But it seems she shall not be endowed, because
his Estate is ended by an express Limitation, and consequently the Estate of
the wife being derived out of it shall not continue longer than the original
Estate, Pasch. 10 Jac. B. C. Flavel and Ventrice.

Note, If Tenant in Fee takes a wife, and makes a Lease for years, and dies,
the wife shall be endowed, and she shall avoid the Lease, but after her death
the Lease shall be in force again, 1 Inst. 46.

Dower by Release.
The Bargainee has a wife and dies, afterward the Deed is enrolled, the wife
shall have Dower, Baron Frevil's Case cited in Flower and Baldwin's Case, Cro.
Car. 217. For by relation the Bargaine^ was seized ab initio, Vide Cro. Jac.
615. Amen's Case.

Not of a Fee gained in an instant.
If Tenant in special Tail take a second wife, wh^ is not dowable of the Tail,
and after makes a Feoffment in Fee and dies, his wife shall not be endowed, for
that he gains the Fee but in an instant, 8 Co. 43.

The husband ought to have a Fee or Tail and Franktenement in possession;
otherwise, the w^^ is not dowable.

The husband of the Demandant and Father (...) the Tenant being Tenant in Tail,
in consideration of a Marriage with his Son, Covenant to stand seized by Tenant
in Tail.
the Tenant in T^^ covenanted that the Land after his death should descend and
come to his Son and his Heirs, and after he takes the Demandant to wife, it was
adjudged he was seized of such Estate, of which she wa^ dowable, for that no
Estate was altered by her hu^band, for he was Tenant in Tail still as before
Quaere, If it had been a Covenant to stand seized, Cr^ Eliz. Blithman's Case,
Vide Moor.

J. S. seized in Fee by Indenture enrolled bargains and sells to the husband
for 120 l. in consideration he shall redemise it to him and his wife for their
Lives under a Pepper Corn; Mortgages.
and with Condition that if he paid the 120 l. at the end of 20 years, the
Bargain and Sale shall be void; he redemiseth it accordingly and dies; his wife
brought Dower. Per Curiam. Resolved in Chancery, that she shall have Dower, and
a Court of Equity shall not preclude her of it; and when he redemiseth it upon
the former agreement, yet the Lessees are to receive it subject to this Title
of Dower, and it was his Folly that he did not join another with the Bargainee,
as it is the ancient course in Mortgages.

And yet it is held in our Books upon a Mortgage,

Land be redeemed, the wife of the Mortgagee shall not have Dower, Cro. Car.
190. Nash and Preston.

If an husband takes a Fine sur Conisance de droit come ceo, and renders
Arrear; Instant.
although it was the husbands, yet his wife shall not have Dower, for it is in
him and out of him quasi uno flatu, and by one and the same Act, 3 Leon. 11.

A Man sold his Land upon Condition, Condition.
and after took a wife, and died, the Heir entered for the Condition broken, yet
the wife shall not be endowed; and so if the Condition had been broken before
the death of the husband, if he had not entered; for he had Title of Entry, 1
Brownl. 59.

A woman shall be dowable of an Estate granted by Tenant in Tail to her husband
and his Heirs, Of an Estate descendible for the Life of the Grantor.
and discendible only for the Life of the Grantor, 1 Sand. 261. in Took and
Glass's Case.

If a Man seized in Fee makes a Feoffment to diverse persons to her use for
Life, and to uses which he shall declare by his Will, and after marries, his
wife shall not be endowed. Per Curiam, aliter, if Uses expressed in his Will
bearing date tali die ante the Feoffment, ex Manuscript. Mri. Brownloe.

Baron is outlawed of High Treason, and five years passed after his death, yet
she shall be endowed.
One seized of Lands in Fee took a wife, and levied a Fine of the said Lands
with Proclamations, and afterward was indicted and outlawed of High Treason,
and dyed, and five years passed after the death of the husband, and the Heir
reversed the Attainder; the Question was in Vivian Menvil's Case, whether the
wife shall be endowed, 13 Co. 19. And it was resolved that the wife should be
endowed; for though a Fine levied and Non-claim of five years shall bar a woman
of Dower, and her five years is saved, yet in this case the wife is not to be
aided by that saving; for in respect of the Attainder of her husband she had
not any right of Dower at the time of his death, nor can she after his death
prosecute any Action for it. But the wife is aided by another former saving in
the said Act (viz.) And saving to all other persons (viz.) who were (...)
parties to the Fine, such Action, Right, Title, Cl^^^ and Interest, in or to
the said Lands, etc. as shall first grow, remain, descend or come to them after
the said Fine engrossed and Proclamations made, etc. So that they take their
Actions and pursue the^^ Rights according to Law within five years ne^^ after
such Action, Right, etc. to them accrued etc. and in this Case the Action and
Right (...) Dower accrued to the wife after the Reversal of the Attainder.

For or in what respect of Disabilities a Woman shall be endowed or not.
The wife of an Idiot, non compos mentis. The wife of one outlawed. The wife of
one attainted of Felony or Trespass, Heresy, Praemunire shall be endowed.
So note at this day, Where the Wife shall lose her Dower by the Attainder of
her husband, and where not.
if the husband be attainted of Felony the wife shall be endowed, and yet the
Issue shall not inherit the Lands, which the Father had in Fee-simple, 1 Inst.
40. b. But before the Statute of 1 E. 6. the wife should not have been endowed,
and the Issue should have inherited.

But the wife is not dowable if the husband be attaint of Treason, for her
Title begins by the Intermarriage, and ought to continue and be consummate by
the death of the husband, which cannot be in this Case; for the Attainder of
the husband has interrupted it, as in the case of Elopement; and this
Attainder is an universal Estoppel and does not run in Privity between the wife
and him to whom the Escheat belongs; but every Stranger may bar her of her
Dower by reason thereof, and a Pardon does not help her: For now suppose the
husband obtains a Charter of Pardon and dies, this does not help the matter,
for the same extends but to the Life of the Offender, but does not take away
the Attainder by which she is barred to demand Dower during the Attainder being
in force; and so it is though the Lands be aliened before the Treason
committed, as it was in Dyer 140. b. Lady Gate's Case, Vide Stat. 5 and 6 Ed.
6. cap. 11. ult. Provis. 1 Leon. 3. Mayney's Case.

If a Man marry an Alien woman she shall be endowed, 1 Rolls Abr. 675. Alien.
that is to be understood as a Parliamentary Case by Petitioning, and the
King's Answer, the Countess of Arundel's Case. For if a Man take an Alien to
wife, and after the husband aliens the Land, and after she is made a Denizen,
and then the husband dies, she shall not be endowed, because there was an
absolute disability; aliter, if she be naturalized by Act of Parliament.

As to Divorce Vide supra. Divorce.
If the wife be divorced causa praecontractus, consanguinei, or impotency, she
shall not be endowed.

If the wife elope she is barred of her Dower Vide infra.

What Act of the Wife shall bar her of her Dower.
Elopement.
If the wife elope from her husband, viz. if the wife goes away and leave her
husband, and tarrieth with the Adulterer, she loses her Dower unt^ her husband
willingly without coersion Ecclesiastical be reconciled to her, and permit her
to coha^^^ with him.

Sponte virum mulier fugiens and adultera facta,
Dote sua careat nisi sponsi sponte retracta.
Though in this Case of Elopement the wife cou^^ not be barred of her Dower by
the Common La^ but by the Statute of W. 2. cap. 34. Si uxor sp^^^ reliquerit
virum suum, etc. If the woman be tak^^ away not sponte, but against her Will,
and a^^^ consent and remain with the Adulterer without ^^ing reconciled, etc.
she shall lose her Dower.

If the wife go away with her husbands Agr^ment with A. B. and after A. B.
commits Adulte^^ with her, and she remains with him without Reconciliation,
she shall be barred of her Dower.

If she commit Adultery with him, though (...) does not continually remain with
him, it is a tarying within this Statute, 2 Inst. 436.

If the husband grant his wife with her Goods (...) another, by force of which
the wife lives with the Grantee afterward all the Life of her husband (...)
shall lose her Dower, because she lived in Adulter^ with him, 30 E. 1. lib.
Parliament. f. 96. Willi^^ Paynel and Margery his wife. The President (...)
this:

Elopement pleaded in Dower, Vide Dyer 106. a. 107. a. Parliament. 30 E. 1.
apud Westminster. Petitio Will. Paynel and Margaretae uxoris ejus, etc. quod Dominus
Rex iis reddere vellet tertiam partem manerii quae ipsam contingit de libero
tenemento Johannis Commoys primi viri sui, etc. Et Nic' Warwick pro Rege plead
Elopement de dit feme de sa baron ove le dit Will. Paynel and super hoc
praefat. Willielmus Paynel and Margareta protulerunt quoddam factum praed.
Johannis Commois primi viri in haec verba. Omnibus Christo fidelibus, etc.
Sciatis me tradidisse and commisisse de spontanea voluntate mea Dom. Willielm.
Paynel Milit. Margaret. de Commoys uxorem meam, and etiam dedisse and
concessisse and eidem Will relaxasse and quiet clamasse omnia bona and catalla
quae ipsa Margareta habet vel de caetero habere possit, and etiam quicquid est
de praedict. Margaret. bonis and catallis cum pertinentiis fuit. Ita quod nec
ego, nec aliquis alius nomine meo in praed. Margaret. bonis and catallis ipsius
Margaretae cum pertin. exigere vel vindicare poterimus nec debemus imperpetuum.
Volo and concedo and per praesens scriptum confirmo quod praedicta Margareta
cum praedicto Domino Willielmo sit and remaneat pro voluntate ipsius Willielmi.
In cujus rei testimonium and his testibus, etc. Et super hoc petit Judicium. Et
consideratum est quod praedictus Willielmus and Margareta nihil capiant per
petitionem suam sed sint in misericordia. Cest petitio fuit commence Westminster. 1.
29 Ed. 1. Et Judicium 30 Ed. 1.

If the husbands Friends send him away from his wife, so as the wife knows not
what is become of him, and they publish that he is dead, and afterward they
procure the woman to release all Marriages and interest in him as an husband;
and afterward by the persuasion of the Friends of the husband marries with
another, who dies, and she taken another husband, the wife having no notice of
the first husbands being alive, although the wife live i^ Adultery, and though
the first husband was not out of the Realm; yet inasmuch as she did not leave
her husband sponte, as the Statute says, bu^ by persuasion of the husbands
Friends, that he was dead; and it did not appear that she knew he was alive,
this is not any such Elopement as to b^ her of her Dower, 1 Rolls Abr. 680.
Green and Harvey.

Fine.
The wife had a Jointure made to her after Marriage, and she and her husband
levy a Fine sur Canisance de droit, etc. and alien the Jointure, (...) shall
not be good after the Coverture for her Dow^^ of the Residue of the Lands of
her husband, because her time of Election is not come until she become, sole
according to the Statute of 27 H. 8. c. 1^ Dyer 358 b. 1 Inst. 36. b. 3 Co. 32.
a.

The husband being Tenant in Tail, the Remainder to his wife for Life; the
husband makes a Feofment to the use of himself and his wife for Li^^ for a
Jointure, and dies without Issue; this Joy^ture was pleaded in Bar of Dower.
Per Curi^^ It is no Bar, because the wife is remitted, and (...) her first
Estate, and the Jointure avoided, More 8^ Wood and Shirley.

If the husband seized in Fee makes a Feoffme^^ reserving an 100 Marks Rent
yearly for twe^^^ years next ensuing, to him and his wife, and (...) and the
wife accept the Rent, yet this shall not (...) any Bar in a Writ of Dower,
because she deman^^ a Freehold; and that only of a third part, Temp^^ 1 Ed. 1.
65.

Of the wifes being barred by Fine and Non-ch^^ Vide Tit. Fine, and 13 Co. 20.

If Divorce be causa Consanguitatis, Divorce.
Praecontractus, Affinitatis, Frigiditatis, the wife shall not have Dower.

As concerning Dower at the Common Law, there must be assignment either by the
Sheriff, by the King's Writ, or by the Heir, or other Tenant of the Land by
consent and agreement between them.

Assignment of Dower. What persons may assign Dower, or not.
An Infant may assign Dower in Pais, because he is compellable thereto by Writ.

Guardian in Soccage may not assign Dower.

If two or more be Joyntenants of Lands, Joyntenant.
the one of them may assign Dower to the Wife of a third part in certainty, and
this shall bind his Companion, because they were compellable to do the same by
Law; but if one assign a Rent it shall not bind his Companion.

Assignment may be made by a Disseisor, Abator, By Disseisor.
Intruder, and be good, if there be no Covin, and if it be not prejudicial to
the Disseisee.

It is a general Rule, Regula.
No Assignment can be made but by such as have a Freehold, or against whom a
Writ of Dower does lie, and therefore Assignment by a Gurdian in Soccage is
void; and so by Tenant by Elegit, Stat', or Tenant for years, 1 Inst. 34, 35.

There needs no Livery of Seisin or Writing to any Assignment of Dower, No
Livery and Seisin.
because it is due of common Right.

If the husband make several Feoffments of several parcels, and dies, Dower
assigned by one Feoffment.
and the one Feoffee assigns Dower to the wife of parcel of the Land in
satisfaction of all the Dower, which she ought to have in the Lands of the
other Feoffees; the other Feoffees shall take no benefit of this Assignment,
because they are Strangers thereto, and cannot plead the same; but in the case
if the husband die seized of other Lands in Fee simple, which descend to his
Heir, and the Heir endoweth the wife thereof, this is good, and the several
Feoffees shall take advantage of it, and vouc^ the Heir; so as there is in this
case a Privity betwee^ the Heir and the Feoffees, 1 Inst. 35. a.

What Assignment of Dower is against common Righ^ or not.
To assign Dower of an Advowson is against common Right, for she ought to have
the third Pr^sentation of common Right.

So Assignment of Rent out of Lands is aga^^ common Right, 12 Ed. 4. 2.

Assignment of all the Wood or all the Mead^^ in lieu of all the Wood, Meadow,
Pasture, a^^ Land is not against common Right. Common Rig^^ is a third part of
each.

If she be dowable of three Manors, and she a^cept of the Heir, one Manor in
Dower, in allo^ance of all, this is an Endowment against comm^^ Right, 18 H.
6.27.

What things may be assigned in lieu of Dower.
Rent.
A Rent of the same Land may be assigned in (...) of a Dower, and this without
Deed.

Rent on Condition.
If a Man assign such Rent on Condition, this not good; for she ought to have it
free without Condition, as she should the Land, 27 El. W^^ worth's Case.

Twenty Acres of Corn out of the same Land.
In Dower, the Tenant pleads that he had assig^ed to the wife in the name of
Recompense of (...) Dower twenty Acres of Corn out of the same Lan^ and held a
good Bar, as well as a Rent or other Pro^ out of the Land; aliter, if an Horse
or Sheep, for this is not of the nature of the Soil, Moor 59.

It is a Rule. Regula. Assignment of other Lands.
Assignment of other Lands whereof she is not dowable, or of a Rent issuing out
of it, is no Bar of Dower.

If Dower be assigned on Condition the Condition is void; Assignment with a
Condition or Exception.
so if Dower be assigned of the Land excepting the Trees growing upon the Land,
this is a void Exception, for she comes in by her husband, 44 El. B. R. Bullock
and Finch, Plowd. Com. Colthirst and Bejushen.

If Dower be assigned with a Remainder over, Dower assigned with Remainder over.
this is a void Remainder, because the comes in by her husband, and if it
should be a good Remainder, it would be without a particular Estate, Pl. Com.
Colthirst.

Indowment by Meets and Bounds.
Albeit of many Inheritances that be entire, whereof no division can be made by
Meets and Bounds, a woman cannot be endowed of the thing it self; yet she shall
be endowed thereof in a special manner, Vide supra.

Note, Endowment by Meets and Bounds more beneficial for the Wife.
Endowment by Meets and Bounds according to common Right is more beneficial to
the wife, than to be endowed against common Right, for there she shall hold the
Land charged in respect of a Charge made after her Title of Dower, 1 Inst. 32.
b. As if a Man be seized of three Manors of equal value in Fee, and takes
Wife, and charge one of the Manors with a Rentcharge, and dies, she may,
by the Provision of the Law, take a third part of all the Manors, and hold
them discharged; ^ut if she will accept the entire Manor charged, she shall
hold it charged, 1 Inst. 171. a.

Not to be endowed by Meets and Bounds, where the Husband is seized in common.
Note, The husband must be sole seized; where (...) is seized in common she
cannot be endowed (...) Meets and Bounds, as if there be two Joyntenants (...)
Fee, and the one alieneth that which to him belo^^eth to another in Fee, who
takes wife and di^ the wife for her Dower shall have the third part (...) the
Moiety, which her husband purchased, to h^^ in common with the Heir of her
husband and (...) other Joyntenant, for here she cannot have Dow^^ assigned by
Meets and Bounds; aliter of Joy^^nants: For the Joyntenant, which surviveth,
clai^eth the Land by the Feoffment and survivo^ (...) which is above the Title
of Dower, and he (...) plead the Feoffment made to himself without na^^^ his
Companion which died; but Tenants in Common have several Freeholds and
Inheritances, (...) their Moieties shall descend to their several Heirs, (...)
therefore their wifes shall be endowed.

Assignment of Dower how to be made.
Generally by the Sheriff; sometimes by the (...) by consent; sometimes in
Chancery.

By the Sheriff.

Regula.
It is laid down for a Rule: Wherever the (...) demands Land, Rent or other
thing in certain, (...) Demandant after Judgment may enter or dist^^ before any
Seisin delivered to him by the She upon a Writ of Habere fac. Seisinam;
Demandant cannot enter or distrain till Execution sued.
but Dower, where the Writ demands nothing in ^^^tain, there the Demandant
after Judgment can^ enter nor distrain until Execution sued; by wh^ Execution
the Sheriff is to deliver the third part certainty to the Demandant, 1 Inst.
34. b. If a (...) man bring a Writ of Dower of 3 s. Rent, altho^^^ she ought to
be endowed of 1 s. yet she ca^^ after Judgment determine 12 d. before
Assignment, because the Demand was uncertain.

In Assignment of Dower the Sheriffs Return need not be of such precise
Certainty, The Sheriffs Return in Dower.
for it is but the Return of the Sheriff, therefore Quod habere fecit Seisinam
de uno Tenemento sive firma, etc. and when he says in the end, that he
delivered them all by Meets and Bounds it is sufficient, Cro. Jac. 612. Sir
Charles Howard's Case.

If the wife accept and enter upon the Sheriffs Assignment lesser Land in
quantity than the third of the whole, upon Record, Barred to demand more than
what she accepted upon the Sheriffs Assignment. Assignment of Dower amended.
she is barred to demand more, Moor 679. in Longvil's Case. The Court ordered
Amendment of Assignment of Dower being under value, and on refusal of an equal
division proffered to him by the Dowager, and committed the Sheriff for taking
60 l. of the Lady to execute his Writ of Execution, and Information against
him, 1 Keb. 743.

In Dower the Demandant recovered Dower of the Tenths of Wool and Lamb, How
Execution to be made of the Tenths of Wool and Lamb.
how Execution shall be made is the Question; and the Justices conceived that
the Sheriff might deliver the Tenths of every third Yard Land, and assign the
Yard Lands in certain, or deliver the third part of all in general; and this
Dower the Sheriff may assign without a Jury, 2 Brownl. 148.

If a woman recover Dower of a Rectory impropriate where there is not any
Glebe, How to be endowed of a Rectory impropriate where there is no Glebe.
Endowment of a Manor how to be.
the Sheriff shall put her in possession of the third part of the Tithes
generally, and not of the Tithes of the Land of the Parish in certain, Mich. 9
Jac. in B.R. per Curiam.

If a woman be dowable of a Manor the Sheriff may assign the third part of the
Manor in common in lieu of Dower without setting out by Meets and Bounds.

By the Heir.

Entry taken away by Descent revived by Endowment.
An Entry being taken away by Descent is revi^^ by his Indowment; as a Disseisor
dies seized, a^^ the Heir enter, etc. who endows the wife of (...) Disseisor of
a third part; now presently after (...) wife enters and has the possession of
the sa^ third part, the Disseisee may lawfully enter upon (...) possession of
the wife into the same third part, because when the wife is endowed she shall
not be (...) by the Heir, but immediately by her husband be^ the Disseisor, who
is in for her Life by a Title p^ amount the dying seized and descent; and the
la^ adjudgeth no mean Seisin between the husband a^ wife, Lit. sect. 393.

Acceptance waves the Endowment by Meets and Bounds.
If A. seized of Land in Fee takes wife, and a^^ devises it for one and twenty
years to B. and (...) and after C. his Heir assigns to the widow the the part
of the Land for her Dower without setting out by Meets and Bounds, and the wife
accepts it (...) satisfaction of her Dower, although she was (...) bound to
accept this so in common without set^^ it out by Meets and Bounds, for the
prejudice (...) might accrue to them to occupy it in common (...) inasmuch as
the third part in common is due by (...) Law, and they both consent to accept
this accord^ to the Law, they may by their consents wave (...) Assignment by
Meets and Bounds, which is only their own advantage; and albeit the Lessee for
y^ does not agree to it, yet the Assignment of the ^^nant of the Freehold shall
bind him, Trin. 16 Cootes and Lambert.

In Chancery.

Dower may be assigned out of Chancery by a W^ de dote assignanda; and if it be
evicted the Re^ shall be transmitted into Chancery, and there she (...) be
endowed de novo, Cro. Eliz. 364.

Damages.
If a Feme Tenant in Dower sue in a Court of Equity for Damages, Not to be
relieved in Equity.
where her husband died not seized, a Court of Equity ought not to relieve her,
for it is against the Law.

If the Baron make a Feoffment to the use of himself for Life, the Remainder to
the Son in Tail. Per Curiam, This is not such a dying seized of the husband for
the wife to have damages in Dower, Dame Egerton's Case. But the husband ought
to be seized of an Estate Tail or Fee-simple which may descend to the heir,
Lit. Rep. 341.

Alienation or death of the Heir after Recovery before Seisin prevents not
Damages, 1 Keb. 85, 646, 711.

If Tenant in Dower be disseised, Tenant in Dower not within the Statute of
Gloc'.
and the Disseisor makes a Feoffment, the Tenant in Dower shall recover all her
Damages against the Feoffee, for she is not deins le Statute of Gloucester, c.
1. by which every one shall answer for their time, 2 Brownl. 41.

What Charges made by the Husband the Wife endowed shall avoid, or not.
Lord of a Copyhold Manor in which were many Copyholders for Life takes wife;
Copyhold.
the Copyholder dies, the Lord grants this to another and dies, ad^udged that
the wife shall not avoid this Grant in a Writ of Dower, for that the Custom is
before the Title of Dower, 2 Co. 4. Dyer 8 Eliz. 21. con^ra.

If the wife accept Dower of the Heir against com^on Right she shall hold this
subject to the Charges ^f her husband, 8 H. 6. 27. otherwise, Dower against
common Right.
if she be ^ndowed against common Right by the Sheriff.

Advowson.
If A. seized in Tail of a Manor, to which an Advowson is appendant, grants the
next Presentation to B. and after marries C. and dies, and the wife is endowed
of this Manor with the Appurtenance in lieu of all her Dower, and after the
Church (...) void; Quaere, if she may present and avoid the Grant made before
Coverture.

Writ and Declaration.
Writ of Right of Dower.

Writ of Dower unde nihil habet.

Tenant for Life, Reversion in Fee of Lands whe^^of the Demandant had Title of
Dower, and (...) brought a Writ of Dower against the Tenant (...) Life, hanging
the Writ, he in Reversion levied Fine with Proclamations of the Reversion, the
^^nant for Life dies, five years expire, and the ^^mandant brought a new Writ
against the Tenant (...) possession, Hob. 165. Quaere.

In Fulliam and Harris's Case: The Writ (...) Praecipe A. quod reddat E.
Fulliam rationabile^ ^tem suam des terris, etc. dudum B. Fulliam qu^ dam viri
sui: Per Curiam, The Writ is ill; (...) it ought to be Praecipe A. quod reddat
E. Full^ quae fuit uxor B. Fulliam, etc. For in the begin^ of the Writ she
ought to be named Uxor of (...) husband, for that is the name whereby she
claims Dower, Cro. Jac. 217.

In Dower the Demand was de tertia part d^ messuagiorum etc. in tres parts
dividend': (...) Judgment was to recover Seisinam de tertia (...) tenementorum
praedictorum cum pertin' tenend' e^ separabilitate per metas and bundas. It was
ill, cause they are Tenants in Common, and the Ju^^^ment ought to have been
Tenendum insimul and communi; but had it been divided, aliter, Ex ^nuscript.
Mri. Brownloe.

Pleading.
If in a Writ of Dower the Tenant would bar the Demandant by a Jointure made
during the Coverture, he ought to say, Quod intrando agreavit; Bar by Jointure.
for if the wife enters and agrees, the same is a good Bar of Dower, 3 Leon.
272.

In Dower the Tenant pleads the Release of the Demandant made to such a Tenant
in possession tenementorum praedictorum, Release of the Demandant.
and because he does not say he was tenens liberi tenementi, it was held to be
no Plea, Cro. Jac. 151.

If one plead an Acquittance or Release in Bar of Dower, he ought to show that
this was for the same cause of Action, 5 H. 7. 1.

A Release of all his Right, etc. to him in the Reversion shall bar the wife of
Dower, 8 Co. Altham's Case.

N'unque accouple in loyal Matrimony pleaded in London, and Replication to it,
N'unque accouple en loyal Matrimony.
and the Record removed into the Common Bench, and Writ to the Bishop, Co.
Entr. 180.

In a Writ of Dower sued in any Court of Wales, if they are at Issue upon
n'unque accouple, etc. the Court there has not power to make Process to the
Bishop, but the King shall write to the Marshal there to amesne the Record here
in Banco, and here Process shall be awarded to the Bishop, 19 H. 6. 12.

In Dower against two, if one acknowledge the Action, and the other plead
n'unque accouple, etc. the Demandant shall not have Judgment against him who
acknowledged, until Issue tried, for this goes to the whole, 7 H. 6.34. So if
one acknowledge the Action, and the other plead Assignment of Rent out of the
Land, etc. in lieu of Dower, this ought to be tried before Judgment against the
other for the Moiety, for this goes to the whole.

Non-tenure.
Non-tenure to part or all is a good Plaa.

Assignment of Rent out of the Land pleaded.
In Dower the Defendant pleads Assignment of Rent out of the Land, but because
he does not say he was Tertenant at the time of the Rent assigned it was
adjudged against him, Dyer 361. and so i^ Beaumont and Dean's Case, 2 Leon. p.
10. The Defendant pleaded in Bar that he himself before the Writ brought did
assign a Rent of 10 l. per annu^ to the Demandant in recompense of her Dowe^
The Demandant demurs, and for cause shows, because the Tenant had not showed
what Estate he ha^ in the Land at the time of the granting the Re^ as to say,
that he was seized in Fee, and granted (...) said Rent, that it might appear to
the Court upon the Plea, that the Tenant had power to grant s^^ a Rent; and the
Demurrer was held good.

The Demandant after the death of her husband enters into the Land in demand,
and continued (...) possession of it five years, and afterward the (...)
entered, upon which she brought Dower, it was agreed that the Tenant needed not
to plead (...) temps prist after his Re-entry; Touts temps prist.
for the time the D^mandant had occupied the same is a sufficient Recompense
for the damages, 3 Leon. 50. Riches's Case

By the Heir.
If a woman bring a Writ of Dower against (...) Heir, and the Heir comes into
Court upon the Su^mons the first day, and pleads that he has been ^ ways
ready, and yet is to render Dower, etc. if (...) wife have not requested Dower
she shall lose (...) mean values and her damages; but if she have ^^quested her
Dower she may plead it, and Issue the upon may be taken, and a Request in Pais
is su^cient; And the reason why Touts temps prist (...) good Plea by the Heir
in this Case is to bar her of (...) damages, because the Heir holds by Title,
and (...) no wrong till demand be made, 1 Inst. 32. 33. a.

Dower was brought against J. S. J. S. pleads, and Judgment given for the
Defendant, and afterward the Judgment was reversed, and she brought a new Writ
of Dower; and the Tenant pleaded he always was ready, and yet is: Against which
the Demand pleaded the first Record to estop the Tenant; the Tenant pleads Null
tiel record; Mul tiel Record.
Per Curiam, the Demandant cannot conclude the Tenant by that Replication to
plead Null tiel Record, for the Judgment is reversed, and so no Record, and it
cannot be certified as a Record; but if Issue had been taken upon the Plea if
the Tenant, absque hoc that he was ready, the same might have been given in
Evidence against the Tenant, 30 Leon. 50. Riches's Case. Judgment of the
Reversion and of the Rent.


In Dower. If the Tenant show before the husband had any thing in the Land A.
was seized of the same Land in Fee, and let it for years, rendering Rent, and
granted the Reversion to the husband of the Plaintiff, who died seized of the
said Reversion, and demanded Judgment, if the Demandant shall have Dower, etc.
This is no Plea in Bar of Dower, but proves she had Title of Dower; but this
saves the Lease for years, and she shall have Judgment only of the Reversion of
the Rent, Winch p. 80. N'unque seized.


If Tenant in Fee Tail general makes a Feoffment in Fee, and takes back an
Estate in Fee-simple, and after had taken wife and had Issue by her, yet she
shall not be endowed, for that the Fee-simple is vanished by the Remitter, and
her Issue has the Land by force of the Entail; but in this Case the Tenant can
never plead that the husband was never seized of such an Estate whereof the
Demandant might be endowed, but he must plead the special matter, 1 Inst. 31. b.

The Issue was, N'unque seize que Dower; and per Curiam the Tenant shall never
give in Evidence a Remitter to defeat the Estate of the husband upon this
Issue, but ought to plead it and show the Remitter in certain, and that the
Issue was of another Estate than the husband had, and then the wife shall be
barred; and it is the same Law to say the husband's Estate is defeated by
Condition, Dyer 41. a.

Sir J. S. and Dorothy his wife, late wife to Sir H. Bowyer, brought Dower
against Barbara Wo^^ Widow: The Tenant pleaded that Sir H. Bowye^ was seized in
Fee of the Manor of W. and made a Feoffment thereof to the use of himself and
Dorothy, his wife, for the term of their Lives for h^^ Jointure, the Remainder
to one Bowyer, and the^ dyed, and his wife entered and claimed it for he^
Jointure. Et hoc paratus, etc. The Plaintiff replies that before the said
Feoffment made that the said S^ H. Bowyer, being seized of the said Manor, did
covenant to stand seized thereof to the use of himself in Tail, and for default
of such Issue to the use o^ his wife for Life, and after to Sir Thomas Henly
(...) Tail, and afterward made the Feoffment prout and died sans Issue, and
that she entered claiming by the Indenture of Covenant and was remitted. The
Tenant rejoyns, Remitter.
that the said Feme entered after the death of her husband, claiming her Estate
for L^ as Jointure by the said Feoffment, and demanded Judgment if she shall
against her Claim be remitted And to this the Plaintiff demurs. It was adjudg^
that she was volens nolens remitted for the benef^^ of him in Remainder. But
per Curiam, the Tenants Plea is ill; for the Tenant ought to have taken a
Traverse to the matter alleged in the Replication, Plea pleaded out of time.
and so ill in substance, as it is in Cro. Jac 488. But by Hobert, a Plea of
Claim by force of the Jointure was pleaded out of time and idle, and requires
no Traverse, Vide Hob. p. 71. Sir John Sherly and Barbara Wood.

Fine with Proclamations, Fine and Nonclaim.
and that she did not claim within five years after the death of the husband,
Co. Entr. 171. Vide supra Tit. Fine.

By Attainder of Treason or Petty-Treason the wife shall lose her Dower, and it
may be pleaded, Attainder of Treason.
5 Ed. 6. cap. 11. Not so of Murder or Felony.

Elopement by the Demandant is a good Plea in Bar, Vide supra. Elopement.


In Dower to say, General Issue.
that the husband had not but an Estate for Life is no Plea, for this is but
the general Issue, 10 H. 6. 17.

If a Divorce be a vinculo matrimonii, Divorce.
this is a good Bar.

It is a good Plea that the wife was not 9 years old at the time of the death
of the husband. That the Wife was not nine years old at his death. Alien.
Jointure.


That the wife is an Alien is a good Plea.

If an Estate be made to the wife before Coverture (or after, if after the
death of her husband she enter and agree to it) for term of her own Life, or a
greater Estate, this is a Bar, if it be expressed to be for a Jointure, or it may
be averred, 4 Co. 1. Vernon's Case. 1 Inst 36. Co. Entr. 171.

In a Scire Fac' to execute a Recovery in Dower, Acceptance of Tenant.
it is no Plea to say that the Demandant accepted a Rent after Judgment out of
other Land; but the Heir etc. may assign to the wife parcel of the Land, or a
Rent by parcel out of the same Land in full satisfaction of her Dower; Heir
vouched.
and if she bring a Writ of Dower against the other, he may vouch the Heir who
shall plead this.

Detainment of Charters pleaded.
Detainment of Charters concerning the same Lands whereof she claims Dower is a
good Plea in delay of her Dower, 11 H. 4. 3. b.

If detainment of Charters be pleaded in delay o^ Dower, he who pleads this
ought to allege wha^ Charters they are, as certainly as in a Count, or d^tinue
of them, 14 H. 6. 4.

In Dower against the Feoffee of the husband ^^^tinue of Charters is no Plea;
it is no Plea, but for the Heir, Hob. 113.

Demand of Lands in A. B. against the Heir. T^ Tenant pleads N'unque seisie que
Dower. The Ju^ found the husband was seized during the Covertu^^ de omnibus
tenementis infrascript. praeterquam (...) Tenements in, etc. sicut praed. M.
dotari poterit. (...) Curiam. Release Damages.
The Praeterquam is idle, and Surplusa^^ and the Seisin of Land in A. and B. is
confess and the Jury have assessed damage, and therefore ^^ing seized is not
found by the Verdict; but the D^mandant may pray Judgment of the Land and
r^lease damages; or the Demandant may aver (...) the husband dyed seized, and
have a Writ to enq^ of the damages, 1 Leon. 37. Butler and Aires.

Return of the Sheriff upon a Recovery by default.
In a Writ of Dower, if the Plaintiff recover (...) default, and upon this a
Writ is awarded to (...) Sheriff or Bailiff where the Recovery is to delive^ to
the Plaintiff tertiam partem per metas, and (...) enquire of the value by the
year, and how man time is passed after the first demand of the Dow^^ and what
damages she has suffered. And upon this the Sheriff returns, that he had
delivered (...) third part of the Lands, and that two years are pa^ after the
first demand, and damages 50 l. and a^cordingly Judgment is given to hold in
severalty as to recover damages. Though the Judgment is (...) good as to the
damages inasmuch as it is not aven^ that the husband of the Plaintiff dyed
seized, not (...) it so found by the Jury; so as the Judgment is e^roneous, yet
it shall be reversed only as to this, 1 R^ Abr. 776. Tie and Atkins.

The Tenant in Dower vouched the Son to Warranty, as Son and Heir to the
husband of the Demandant, who appeared and entered into the Warranty gratis, and
he pleaded he had nothing by descent from his Father: Upon which Plea the
Tenant and Vouchee were at Issue, and the Demandant had Judgment against the
Tenant to recover, but cesset Executio till the Voucher is determined; after
that, before the day of Nisi Prius, the Vouchee dyed, and at the day the Tenant
lost by default, and the Demandant prays to have a Writ of Seisin, Winch p. 88,
89.

In a Writ of Dower brought by a woman of a third part. Gavelkind.
The Tenant pleaded that the Lands of which Dower is demanded are in nature of
Gavelkind; and that the Custom of such Land is, that Dower ought to be demanded
of a Moiety. The Demandant demurs, and by the Justices she may demand Dower of
a third part, or by Custom, but Quaere, for it has been adjudged contrary, 1
Leon. 62. The Custom is, that the wife ought to be endowed of the Moiety of
such Land quamdiu non maritata remanserit and non aliter. Judgment against the
Demandant. 1 Leon. 133. Hunt and Gilborn.

Trial. Evidence. Issue.
If the Tenant plead that the husband is alive, That the husband is alive, how
to be tried.
this shall be tried by the Justices by Proofs before them for greater
Expedition, Vid. Precedent, Rast. Entr. 228. 2 Inst. 80. 8 H. 6. 23.

In Dower, Where the Judgment shall be taken upon the Confession, and not upon
the Verdict.
if the Defendant by his Plea acknowledges that the Baron was seized Que
Dower, etc. And Issue is taken upon an immaterial thing, and this is found pro
Quer. and Judgment accordingly; yet in a Writ of Error the Court shall take the
Judgment to be upon the Confession, and not upon the Verdict, 21 Ed. 4. 46. Per
Cur.

M. O. and her second husband brought an Actio^ of Dower against T. and
demanded Dower of (...) Indowment of one P. her first husband: It (...) agreed
that this Trial ought to be by Witnesses, a^cording to Dyer 155. Tryable by
Witnesses.
And it was awarded by (...) Court that the Council of either side should d^^
up Interrogatories, and put their names to the^ and then they should be
delivered, and he shall h^ the Examination of the Witnesses on both sides, a^
then seal up the Interrogatories again, and so (...) main until they were
delivered over to the Co^ and then qui melius probat melius habet, Winch (...)
Mary Over versus Tucker.

Verdict uncertain.
In a Writ of Dower of one Message, and (...) Garden; if the Defendant plead
N'unque seisie (...) Dower, and the Jury find that the husband of (...)
Demandant was seized of the said Message (...) Garden, all but so much as J.
S. had, etc. this (...) not a good Verdict, because non constat how m^^^ of the
Land J. S. had, and so merely uncertain (...) what Judgment should be given, 2
Roll. Abr. 65 Pope and King.

Damages. Judgment.
Request in Pais to assign Dower.
It is a needful thing for the wife after the de^^ of her husband, as soon as
she can, to demand (...) Dower before good Testimony, otherwise she (...) lose
her damages, 1 Inst. 32. b. and a Request (...) Pais is sufficient.

In what Writ of Dower damages shall be recovered, and from what time.
By the Statute of Merton the wife shall recei^^ damages in her Writ of Dower
from the time (...) the death of her husband; it must be in a Writ (...) Dower
unde nihil habet, not in a Writ of Right (...) Dower; for in no Writ of Right
damages are (...) be recovered, and she shall receive damages only when the
husband died seized of the Freehold and Inhe^^tance.

It is to be observed that the mean values and damages are to be recovered
against the Tenant in a Writ of Dower, and the Lord Coke cites Belfield and
Rouse's Case. The Tenant as to parcel pleads Non-tenure, and for the Residue
detainment of Charters upon which Pleas they were at Issue, and both Issues by
the Jury found against the Tenant, and found further that the husband died
seized such a day and year, and had a Son, and that the Demandant and the Son
by six years after the decease of the husband took the profits of the Land, and
that after the Son dyed without Issue, after whose decease the Land descended
to the Tenant, as Uncle and Heir to him, by force whereof he entered and took
the Profits until the purchasing of the original Writ, and found the value of
the Land by the year, and assessed damages and costs; and the Demandant had
Judgment to recover damages for all the time from the death of her husband
without any defalcation. Let the Tenant take heed therefore how he pleads false
Pleas. False Pleas.


The Statute of Merton extends to Copyholds where women are dowable.

If the wife have Dower assigned to her in Chancery she shall have no damages,
No damages on Dower assigned in Chancery.

Judgment on Nil dicit, and Enquiry and Damages assessed.


for the words of the Statute be, Et Viduae per Placitum recuperaverint.

W. brought a Writ of Dower against N. and Judgment was given upon Nihil dicit,
and because the Baron died seized a Writ of Enquiry of damages was awarded, by
which it was found that the third part of the Land, which she ought to have in
Dower, was of the value of 8 l. per annum, and that eight years elapserunt a
morte viri sui proxime ante inquisitionem, and assident damna ad 80 l. And the
Demandant had Execution after Judgment upon the Habere fac. seisinam. Error
assigned: 1. Because damages are assessed to the time of the Inquisition where
they ought to be but to the time of the Judgment, Sed non allocatur. 2. Because
damages are assessed for the whole eight yea^ after the death of the husband,
where it appeare^ that for part of the said years the Demandants w^^ seized of
the Lands by force of the Judgment, (...) Execution in the Writ of Dower, and
upon (...) the Writ of Error was allowed, 1 Leon. 56. Wall^ and Nevil. And it
was assigned for Error in (...) Case, that they assessed damages beyond the
Revenue: Sed non allocatur. For perhaps the De^^^dants have sustained more
damage than the bare Revenue.

If a Feme recover in a Writ of Dower before (...) Writ of Enquiry of damages
awarded, and before the third part assigned by Meets and Bounds; (...) Judgment
is perfect as to the Realty, Judgment when perfect.
and the ^^mages are given by the Statute by way of addition 17 Car. 1. B.
Steward and Steward.

If a woman recover Land in a Writ of Dowe^ and after the Sheriff return
damages from the Wit purchased usque diem Judicii, and after the Tenant brought
a Writ of Error in Executione Judi^^ He may upon this assign Error in the
Judgmen^ given for the damages upon the Return of the Sh^riff: The last
Judgment but an Inquest of Office.
For the last Judgment is not an Executi^^ but an Enquest of Office by the
Statute of Mer^^* And it is the use always to bring but one Writ (...) such
Case; and there is not any Writ Quia J^dicia reddita, but Judicium, Trin. 11
Car. 1. B^ Porter and Agar.

Pasch. 5 Jac. Rot. 39. Nihil dicit in Dower. J^dicium de recover Seisinam
versus praefat. R. d^ tertia part praedict' cum pertin'. Et idem R. (...)
misericordia and averment de dying seized. The Demand was de tertia part unius
messuagii and se^decim acrarum terrae cum pertin. per l'inquisitionem compertum
fuit quod terrae and tenementa praedict^ cum pertin. in Brevi praedict. ut in
inquisitio^ annex. specificat. sunt and existunt unum messuagium, quatuordecim
acras terrae cum pertin. insimul jacen. in L. praed. ad terram vocat. J. ex
Australi part, etc. sunt tertia pars. Et ulterius found the time of the dying
seized, and the damages, and the value, and costs. Ideo consideratum est quod
petens recuperet versus praefatum tenentem valorem tertiae partis praedict. cum
pertin. a tempore mortis praed M. quondam viri, etc. qui quidem valor per
tempus praed. in se attingit ad 100 l. Et dampna suae praedict. ultra valorem
praed. ad 5 s. 4 d. per inquisitionem praed. superius compert. necnon, etc.
quae quidem dampna, etc. ad 9 l. 13 s. Note, The Jurors found the Land in
demand to be of less quantity than the Demandant had counted. Ex Manuscript.
Mri. Brownloe.

Judgment. Execution.
In a Writ of Dower, Judgment against the Heir conditionally.
If the Heir of full age be vouched by the Tenant in the same County, the
Judgment shall be conditional, viz. against the Heir if he have Assets, and if
he had not Assets, against the Tenant, and the Tenant over against the Heir
when he had, 2 Roll. Abr. 751. But if the Heir be vouched in another County,
who enters into the Warranty, and says, he has nothing by descent, and the
Tenant avers that he had Assets, the Demandant shall recover presently against
the Tenant generally, and shall leave him to sue over to have value against the
Heir.

If the husband make a Lease for years, How Execution shall be where there is a
Lease for years.
rendering Rent and dies, the wife shall recover her Dower and have present
Execution of the Land; and thereby she shall have the third part of the
Reversion and of the Rent, and the Sheriff shall serve Execution of the Land as
if there were no Lease for year^; for it may be that the Lease is void, and if
the Lease be good, he who claims the Lease may re-enter upon the Land
notwithstanding the Recovery and Execution Godb. 165. Foliamb. Cro. Eliz. 564.
Winch 80. L^^ Rep. 293.

Dower against eight persons, two confess and six plead to Issue, how the
Judgment shall be.
One seized of Land in Fee takes wife, and e^feoffed eight persons, a Writ of
Dower is brought against eight persons, and two confess the Action and the
other six plead to Issue, the Demandant shall have Judgment to recover the
third part of the (...) parts of the Land in eight parts to be divided; (...)
after the Issue for the six found for the Demanda^^ she shall have Judgment to
recover the third part (...) the six parts of the same Lands in eight parts to
(...) divided.

A ^^ndment of ^gnment of Dower.
In Longvil's Case Trin. 16 Car. 2. B. R. It (...) moved for amendment of the
Assignment of Dow^^ being under value, and on refusal of an equal di^^sion
proffered by the Daughter to him, with libe^ to choose which two parts he would
for the H^ which the Court ordered, and committed the She for taking 60 l. of
the Lady Longvil to execute (...) Writ of Execution and Information against him.

Rationabili part bonorum according to the Cust^^ of London.
H. C. sues E. C. Executrix of her husband, (...) declares by Bill original in
nature of Debt pro u^ nabili part bonorum in the Court of the Man and Aldermen
of London, and alleges the Custo^ of London to be, that quando Civis and
liber h^^ de London' dies his Goods over his Debts and F^neral ought to be
divided in three parts, and the the wife of the Testator ought to have one pa^
the Executors the second part to discharge Le^cies, and to dispose at their
discretion, and the C^dren of the Testator, which were not sufficien^ provided
for in his Life time, a third part; and the the Custom is that the Plaintiff in
this Case ought to bring into Court a true Inventory, and sue before the Mayor
and Aldermen, and that she here had brought an Inventory of 18000 l. and
demands a third part (6000 l.) of the Executor. And this was removed to the
Common Pleas by Writ of Privilege: And Richardson said, that the Plaintiff
might declare in London without alleging the Custom, for that the Custom is
well known there; and a Procedendo was granted, Lit. Rep. 324. Honora Cason's
Case.

CHAP. XII. Of Jointures.
The Nature and Reason of the Statute of 27 H. 8. cap. 10. of Joyntures.
Construction of the said Act relating thereunto. What Estates are Joyntures
within the said Statute or not. What is a good Jointure within the Statute of
11 H. 7. and what Alienation by the Wife is within that Statute, illustrated in
several adjudged Cases. What Agreement or Waver a Woman may make as to her
Jointure; and what shall amount to an Agreement or Refusal of Pleadings.

As for the Nature and Reason of Joyntures.
IT was a Rule at Common Law, that a Right or Title which any had to any Lands
or Tenements of any Estate of Inheritance or Freehold might not be barred by
acceptance of any Waver of collateral satisfaction or recompense; and this was
the reason that no collateral recompense (as a Jointure) made to the wife in
satisfaction of her Dower was any Bar of Dower at Common Law. Now before the
Statute of 27 H. 8. cap. 10. ( of Us^ the greatest part of the Lands in England
was c^^veyed to diverse persons to Uses; and forasmuch (...) wife was not
dowable of Uses, her Father or Frie^^ procured the husband to take an Estate of
his Feo^^ or others seized to his use to him and his wife ^^fore or after
Marriage for their Lives or in Tail, a complete Provision for the wife after
the death the husband. Then comes the Statute of 27 H which transfers the
Possession and Estate of the la^ to the use by which the husbands were seized
a^cordingly, and by consequence, if other Provi^^ had not been made, the wifes
would have t^^ Dowers as well as their Joyntures; and for this Branches
concerning Joyntures were added to (...) said Statute of 27 H. 8.

The Act expresses plainly five Forms of (...) Limitation of Joyntures: As,

1. To the Baron and Feme and to the Heirs of (...) husband.

2. To the Baron and Feme, and to the Heirs their two Bodies.

3. To the Baron and Feme, and to the Hei^ the Body of one of them.

4. To the husband and wife for their Lives

5. To the husband and wife for the Life of wife.

But there are other Estates which are within (...) said Statute, though not
mentioned; and that (...) now under consideration.

What Estates are Jointures within the Stat^^ 27 H. 8. or not; or what is a
good Jointure.
1. In respect of the Estate limited.

2. In respect of the manner and frame of the C^veyance.

3. In respect of the Consideration.

Besides these five Examples above mentioned, there are other Estates, that are
not within the Statute: As,

When an Estate is limited to a Man for Life, the Remainder to the woman for
Life; though the woman has no joint Estate with her husband, yet this Estate is
as beneficial for her; and so was Ashton's Case, Dyer 228. Ashton in
performance of Marriage covenants between his Son and one A. makes a Feoffment
to the use of A. for Life for her Jointure, and after they entermarry, the
husband dies, this was a Jointure within the intent of the Act, though all the
Examples in the Act are of a Joint-Estate.

But the Estate, It must be immediate after the Husband's death in Creation.
which by force of this Act shall be in lieu and Bar of Dower, ought by the
Limitation to take effect after the husbands death immediately; and therefore
if the husband makes a Feoffment in Fee to the use of himself for Life, and
after to the use of B. for his Life, and after to the use of his wife for her
Jointure, this is not within the Act although B. dies before the husband; for a
Jointure must be an immediate Estate after the husband's death in Creation; and
shall not be aided by any event subsequent, or by matter ex post facto. It was
a Case put to my Lord Chief Justice Bridgman, when he was called up to be Chief
Justice: A Man makes a Feoffment in Fee to the use of himself for Life,
Remainder to the use of his second Son for Life, and to the use of such woman
as he shall marry, the Remainder to the Heirs of his second Son; the Father
dies, the second Son takes wife and dies, it is no good Jointure, and the wife
may bring her Dower; for the Estate which was limited to the wife ought to be
considered as it was at the time of the Creation of the Use; and at the time of
the Creation it cannot be said to be a Jointure within the Statute, because the
husband by possibility might have dyed before the Father, and then the wife
should not have an immediate Estate, Sid. p. 34. 5 Co. 2. Winch 33.

In some Cases though the wife has immediately Freehold after her husband's
decease, yet it is not a good Jointure to bar Dower; as if a Man make a
Feoffment in Fee to the use of himself for Life, the Remainder to his Executors
for years, the Remainder to his wife for her Jointure, this is no good
Jointure, Winch 33.

The Duke of Somerset purchased Lands to hi^ and the Duchess, his wife, and to
the Heirs Ma^^ of their two Bodies, this is a good Jointure within the intent
of the Act, Dyer 96.

It must be an Estate for the Life of the Wife.
It must be an Estate for Life of the wife; and a^^ Estate to the wife for Life
upon a Condition is (...) good Jointure within the Act, if the wife after the
death of the husband accept it; for it was a g^^^ that a Jointure is a
competent Livelihood of F^^^hold for a woman to take effect presently after the
death of the husband for the Life of the wife, if (...) her self be not the
cause of the determination or forfeiture of it. And therefore if the husband
make a Feoffment to the use of his wife pur auter (...) for her Jointure, this
is not within the Act, a^^ this may determine during her Life without any
d^fault in her. But if a Man make a Feoffment in F^^ to the use of himself for
Life, and after to the use (...) his wife, durante viduitate, this is an Estate
(...) Life to her, if she will, and therefore its a goo^ Jointure within the
Act. Acceptance of a conditional Estate for a Jointure, a good Bar of Dower.
And if the Condition bind her to any unreasonable thing, she may wa^ it, but
when after the death of her husband (...) enters and accepts the conditional
Estate for her Jo^^ture she is barred of her Dower, 4 Co. 3.

An Estate in Fee-simple conveyed to the wife (...) her Jointure, and in
satisfaction of her Dower is (...) Jointure within the Equity of the Act of 27
H. (...) for this is a competent Livelihood for the wife of (...) Estate of
Freehold to take effect presently after the death of the husband for all her
Life and more; but it is not a Jointure within 11 H. 7. c. 10. which restrains
the Alienation of women, and to restrain an Estate in Fee-simple that it may
not be aliened, is against a Rule in Law, and clearly out of the intention of
the Act, 4 Co. 3. b.

What is a good Jointure within the Statute of 11 H. 7. cap. 10. and what
Alienation by the Wife is within that Statute.
W. Bertram seized in Fee having three Daughters, by Indenture between him and
R. B. in consideration of 400 l. paid by the said R. B. and in consideration of
a Marriage had between R. B. Son and Heir of the said R. B. and Margaret,
eldest Daughter of the said W. Bertram, and the preferment of the Blood of the
Bertrams covenanted to stand seized to the use of Robert the Son, and the said
Margaret his wife, and the Heirs of her Body; and for default of such Issue to
the use of his other Daughters and their Issues, the Remainder to the Heirs of
the said W. Bertram; the husband dies having no Issue, and Margaret by Fine
conveyed it to the Defendant, on whom he re-entred as a Forfeiture within 11 H.
7. and it was resolved she was not a Jointress within that Statute
notwithstanding the 400 l. paid by R. B. the Father; for the Land moved from W.
B. the wifes Father, and the Preferment of the Blood of the Bertrams shows the
intent that the husband's Heirs should not be preferred, but the wifes; The
meaning of the Act of 11 H. 7.
for the meaning of the makers of that Law was only to disenable women, who
have any Estate in Dower, or for Life, or in Tail jointly with their husbands,
or only to themselves of the Inheritance or purchase of their husbands, or
given to them by the Ancestors of their husbands, or other persons seized to
the use of such husbands, or their Ancestors, when they became sole, or with
any after taken husband from making such Alienations, whereby the Heirs of such
husbands might, and before making of that Law, were frequently disinherited.
But in this Case the Advancement is by the Ancestors of the wife, and is not of
the Purchase of the husband or his Ancestors, nor assured by the husband or his
Ancestors, Cro. Car. 244. C^^land and Pyot, Jones Rep. 254.

Fine and render for 1000 years is within the Statute.
Feme Tenant in Tail within the Statute of (...) H. 7. accepted a Fine sur
Cognizance de droit c^^ceo, etc. and by the same Fine rendered the Land (...)
the Conisor for 1000 years, this is within the St^tute, 3 Leon. 78. Barker and
Tailor.

If a woman has Title of Dower, if before (...) be endowed she will enter and
levy a Fine, the fa^^ is within the said Statute, and yet she is not Tena^^ in
Dower, 3 Leon. 78. Barker and Tailor.

The Bishop of Exeter in consideration of faith^^^ Service done by N. T. for
many years past, gi^^^ Lands to N. T. and Sybil his Cousin in Tail, and (...)
Marriage was then intended to be solemnized ^^tween the said N. and Sybil,
which after was ^^lempnized; they had Issue, N. dies, Sybil ma^^ again, she and
her second husband alien the La^^ Per Curiam, Gift by the Husband or any
Ancestor of the Husband.
This was no Jointure within the S^^tute of 11 H. 7. for it was not a Gift by
the h^^band nor any Ancestor of the husband; and the consideration of Service
is no such Purchase as the L^^ intends, for it is not so valuable, but a
volunta^^ Gift of the said Bishop, Cro. Jac. 1.173. Ward (...) Walthew, Yelv.
101. 1 Brownl. 137.

If it be no prejudice to the Heir of the Husband it is not deins le Statute.
Where the Land moves from the husband but (...) the Remainder of the Estate is
to a Stranger, so as could be no prejudice to the Heir of the husb^ the
Alienation of the wife is no Forfeiture, as C^ Eliz. 224.

Mich. 28 and 29 Eliz. in Laughter and Humfries Case it was agreed, that an
Estate in Fee made by the husband to the wife is not a Jointure within 11 H. 7.
for that any collateral Heir might inherit it, and the Statute was made for the
benefit of the Issues between them.

The Case was. A Man and a Woman being Joyntenants in Fee of a Manor
intermarried, and levied a Fine thereof to a Stranger, who rendered it to them
in Tail; they have Issue three Daughters, the Baron dies, the Feme takes a
second husband, and they levy a Fine, and retake it in special Tail; the Feme
dies sans Issue by the second husband, the Daughter enters on Lessee for years
of the second husband and distrained a Copyholder for Rent. And it was a
Question whether the first Estate Tail was within the Statute of 11 H. 7. Per
Curiam, For one Moiety it was, but for the other Moiety it was not.

Covenant to stand seized to the use of my Brother and his wife for their
Lives, What Estate shall be said given by the Ancestor.
it is a Jointure within the Statute of 11 H. 7. as given by the Ancestor of
the husband, and it is within the words of 27 H. 8. which excludes Dower,
Plowd. 307. a.

D. R. seized in Fee of 20 l. per annum Lands, having only two Daughters,
covenants with J. K. in consideration of a Marriage between the said J. K. and
his Daughter M. and in consideration of 115 l. to be paid by J. K. to assure
the said Lands to the use of himself for Life, and after to the use of J. K.
and M. and the Heirs of their two Bodies, the Remainder to the Heirs of the
Body of Margaret, the Remainder to A. in Fee; the Marriage took effect, J. K.
dies, M. takes a second husband, and they alien by Fine. Andrew the Heir of the
Body of J. K. and M. enters. Per Curiam, This is not a Jointure within the
Statute of 11 H. 7. because the Land moved from the wifes Father, and her
Advancement in Marriage is intended the Cause of the Gift, and not the Money,
Cro. Jac. 624. Kinaston and Lloid, Jones Rep. p. 13.

Though a consideration of Marriage be joined with a consideration of Money, yet
it is a Jointure within the Statute.
But a Conveyance by the husband or his Ancestor in consideration of a Marriage,
though it be joined with a consideration of Money, yet is a Jointure within the
Statute. R. G. seized in Fee by Indenture covenants with R. B. as well in
consideration of 200 l. paid by R. B. and in consideration of a Marriage
between L. his only Son, and Anne the Daughter of R. B. to convey the Land to
the use of the said L. and Anne, and the Heirs of the Body of the said Anne to
be begotten, and to his right Heirs. The Marriage takes effect, the Father dies
before Assurance, L. makes the Assurance, and after they have Issue R. G. L.
and his wife alien by Fine, R. the Son enters as a Forfeiture, this is a
Jointure within 11 H. 7. But then the Question was, this being a Jointure
within the Statute, whether the Alienation by the Feme with the first husband,
who limited it, be a Forfeiture? Per Curiam. Its no Forfeiture neither within
the Words, nor within the Intent of the Statute; not within the Words, for it
is, the woman being sole or with any after taken husband; aliter, had it been a
Conveyance by the Father: it is not within the Intent because the husband
joined in the Alienation, and the Statute did not intend but to provide that
disinherison should not be done to the Heirs of the Husband, Cro. Jac. 474.
Kinkman and Tompson.

Fine and Render.
Baron and Feme seized in Fee Tail in the Right of the wife, they join in a Fine
and have it rendered back to them and the Heirs of their Bodies engendered: The
Baron dies, the Feme and her second husband alien; they may, and the Heir of
the first husband cannot enter; for though it is within the Letter yet it is
not within the Equity of 11 H. 7. Plowd. Eyston and Studd. Jones 253. Jenkins
and Young.

B. devises Lands to his wife in Tail, Remainder over and dies, the wife with
the second husband aliens by Fine and dies, this is within the Words, but not
within the Intent of the Statute; Inheritance must be limited to the Husband
and his Heirs.
for the Statute intends only of Lands given for the Advancement of the wife,
and the Remainder of the Lands is limited to a Stranger, and so shall not be
intended to be limited for a Jointure, where no Inheritance is limited to the
husband and his Heirs, so that the Entry of the Heir is not lawful, Cro. Eliz
p. 2. Fisher and Pitful, 1 Leon. 261, 262. mesme Case.

The husband seized of Lands in jure uxoris, they levy a Fine, Rent in lieu of
the Land.
the Conisee grants a Rent to them in Tail, the husband has Issue and dies,
the wife aliens the Rent, its out of the Statute of 11 H. 7. for the Rent comes
in lieu of the Land, Cro. Eliz. p. 2. cited in Foster's Case.

Baron and Feme being Tenants in Tail upon the Purchase of the husband, they
have Issue two Sons, Feoffment of the Feme, though to him who had the Reversion
in Fee, is a Forfeiture.
the husband makes a Feoffment to the use of himself for Life, the Remainder to
the wife for her Life, the Remainder to the second Son, and his Heirs; the
husband dies, the wife enters and makes a Feoffment to the Issue of the second
Son, the eldest Son may enter, for it is a Forfeiture within the Statute of 11
H. 7. and this Feoffment by the Feme, though it be to him who had the Reversion
in Fee, is a Forfeiture within the Statute, Sid. p. 63. Jones and Philpot.

A Man and a Woman being Jointenants in Fee of a Manor intermarried, and after
levied a Fine thereof to a Stranger, who rendered it to them in Tail; they have
Issue a Daughter, the Baron dies, the Feme takes a second husband, and they
levy a Fine, the Remainder to them in Tail special. Per Curiam, For the one
Moiety it is a Forfeiture within the Statute of 11 H. 7. and for the other,
not, Cro. Eliz. 524. Laughter and Humfries.

Fine and Render.
A woman Tenant in Tail within the Statute of 11 H. 7. accepted a Fine sur
Cognizance de droit come ceo, and by the same Fine rendered the Land back to the
Cognisor for 1000 years, this is within the Statute; for this is as mischievous
as a Discontinuance, Godbolt 6. 3 Co. Sir George Brown's Case. Moor 222. 2
Leon. 168. Vide supra Barker and Taylor's Case.

Of Estates devised by Will.
Some have been of Opinion, that no Estate devised by Will can be a Jointure
within 27 H. 8. for every Jointure by that Act is intended to be made before or
during the Coverture; but a Devise takes effect after the death of the husband:
But in Leak and Randal's Case, Mich. 38 and 39 Eliz. it was adjudged contra,
with this difference. Inasmuch as a Devise imports a Consideration in it self,
and therefore a Devise may not be averred to be to the use of another than the
Devisee, unless it be expressed in the Will, no more may a Devise be averred to
be for a Jointure unless it be expressed in the Will. But if a Man devise Lands
to his wife for term of her Life, or in Tail, etc. for her Jointure and in
satisfaction of her Dower, this is a Jointure within the 27 H. 8. for this is
within the Equity of the said Act, 4 Co. Vernon's Case.

In Vernon's Case Lands were settled on J. S. and J. B. and their Heirs to the
use of himself for Life, and after his decease to the use of his wife for Life
etc. and avers in pleading, that the said Estate limited to the wife was for
her Jointure, but it was upon Condition that she should perform his Will, yet
it may be averred to be for her Jointure, for one Consideration may well stand
with another, and although it be not expressed in the Deed, yet it may be averred.

Of the Feme's waving or agreeing to her Jointure.
If a Jointure be made to the wife before Coverture, after the death of the
husband; the wife may not wave it and take her Dower, as she may do by a
Jointure made during the Coverture: And

If Lands are conveyed to a woman before Marriage for part of her Jointure, and
after Marriage more Land is conveyed to her for her full Jointure, and in
satisfaction of all her Dower, and after the husband dies; in this Case, if the
woman waves the Land conveyed to her use after Marriage, she shall have the
Land conveyed to her before Coverture, and her Dower also in the residue; for
Land conveyed to the wife for part of her Jointure, or in satisfaction for part
of her Dower is no Bar for the incertainty of any Dower.

If a woman enter and agree to her Jointure made after Marriage, then she
cannot wave it: But

If she bring a Writ of Dower and had Judgment of a third part, she has estopt
and concluded her self to claim any Estate; for by this she has affirmed her
self to have but a Title of Dower.

Acceptance of Dower by Deed indented shall conclude the wife of her Right.

By bringing her Writ of Dower of the Residue she has tacitly affirmed that
she had not agreed to any Jointure made to her.

Pleading.
In a Writ of Dower the Tenant pleads, B. being seized in Fee made a Feoffment
to the use of himself for Life, and to Dorothy his wife for Life for her
Jointure, the Remainder over to a Stranger, and Dorothy held in by Survivor
claiming the said Estate. The Demandant replied, That before the said
Feoffment, the said B. covenanted to stand seise^ of the same Lands to the use
of himself in Tail, the Remainder to his wife for Life, the Remainder (...) a
Stranger in Tail, and afterward made the Feoffment prout, and then died sans
Issue, and afterward she entered by the Indenture and was seise^ by Remitter:
To which the Tenant rejoins tha^ she held it claiming her Estate by the
Feoffment i^ Jointure, and demands Judgment whether against that Claim she
should be remitted. The one Question was, whether the Rejoinder be good without
traversing the Intail claimed in the first Estate, alleged in the Replication,
or whether the Demandant ought to have taken a Traverse, because the Tenant i^
Bar pleads an Entry claiming that Estate by the Feoffment. Per Curiam. The
Tenant ought to have taken a Traverse to the matter alleged in the
Replication, Traverse.
and this is Matter of Substance; and for the Law, per Curiam, she shall be
remitted for the benefit of him in Remainder, and nolens volens she is in of
her first Estate, and that it is not any Jointure because it was to begin after
an Estate Ta^^ Cr. Jac. 489. Hob. 71. Shirley and Wood.

She must plead specially that the Jointure was made during Coverture to have
her Dower.
The Statute of Uses has a general purview, th^^ Jointures made for wifes
without distinguishing before or after Coverture shall bar Dower, and the^
comes with a Proviso, that if it be made during Coverture she may refuse it and
take her Dowe^ which is a kind of remedy provided for her out o^ the generalty
of the Law, and therefore must b^ pleaded by her, Hob. 71.

Where the Tenant pleaded a Jointure made to the Demandant and acceptance of it
after the husband (...) death, the Demandant may plead a Refusal after the
death of the husband without traversing the Acceptance; for it was not material
of her part to plead but that must rise of the part of the Refuser, H^bart 104.

CHAP. XIII. Of Fines and Recoveries.
Of a Fine levied by a Feme Covert as a Feme sole, and the Operation of it. The
reason why a Feme Covert shall be barred by the Fine. The Operation of a Fine
by Baron and Feme illustrated by several Cases of Commissioners taking a Fine
of a Feme Covert Infant. Of the time of acknowledgment where a Feme Covert
shall be examined or not. Where a Feme Covert shall be barred by Fine and
Non-claim. Of the Declaration of Uses by a Feme Covert. Of a Fine levied to
Baron and Feme, and the Operation of it. Of a Common Recovery. How a Feme
Covert may be Tenant to a Praecipe. A Feme Covert barred by a Common Recovery.
Whether a Feme Covert in passing a Recovery ought to be examined privately.
Recovery by Baron and Feme within Age and Appearance by Attorney, if it be
Error. Of Recovery by default.

Fines levied by a Feme Covert, as a Feme sole, and the Operation of them.
THough by the Law of Nature the wife is put under the Obedience of her
husband, The Reason why a Feme Covert is bound by her Fine.
and Nature has submitted her Will to his, and therefore will not bind her by
her Acts joining with her husband, because they are judged his Acts and not
hers, in that she wants a Free Will; yet the Law of the Land for necessity sake
of Commerce, and the like, by a Law of Policy makes bold with this Law of
Nature in a special kind; and therefore allows a Fine levied by the Baron a^
Feme, because she is examined of her Free Will j^dicially by an authentic
Person trusted by the La^ and the King's Writ, and so taken in a sort as a s^
woman; so also when she comes in by Receipt.

Fine levied by a Feme Covert, as a Feme sole, her Husband shall defeat it.
If a woman Covert levy a Fine alone, as a Fe^ sole, this shall bind her by the
reason before give^ but her husband may defeat it for himself and h^ too; but
she shall not be received to say she w^^ covert, though her husband shall; and
he may ^^ter and restore the Land to himself and his wife both Hob. 225. 7 Co.
8. Countess of Bedford's Case.

But she shall not.
But if a Feme Covert levy a Fine, as a Feme (...) if her husband die she shall
not defeat it, but the husband may defeat it during his Life, Styles 254. (...)
Haywood and William's Case. So is 7 H. 4.23. (...) a Feme Covert levy a Fine,
as a Feme sole, if (...) husband defeat it not, this shall bind her and h^
Heirs for ever. If a Feme Covert take a sec^^^ husband and they two levy a
Fine, this shall bi^^ her and her Heirs for ever, 7 H. 4. 24. 9 H. 4.23. 9 H.
6.34. But in both these Cases the husband may defeat it, and if the husband
avoid the F^^ this shall avoid the Fine against the wife and he Heirs
perpetually.

If a woman levy a Fine by the name of A. wi^^ of J. S. this Fine is merely
void, Quia constat per (...) Record, that she is Covert, Sid. 122.

One with another Man's Wife levies a Fine, the Court will not stay it.
If J. S. with the wife of another levies a Fi^^ by the name of J. S. and Jane
his wife of the ^^heritance of the Feme, and he who is the husba^^ comes into
Court and shows the matter, and pra^^ to stay the Fine, yet the Court shall not
stay it for the Court shall not determine the Loyalty (...) Matrimony; and if
the truth be so, that she is n^ the wife of J. S. it shall not hurt the
husband, Tr^ 7 Jac. B. Keblethwait and Ward.

The Court would not stop a Fine taken of a Feme Covert when she was dead, 1
Rolls Abr. 114. cited 2 Ventr. 48.

If the husband seized in Tail of Land for valuable Consideration bargain and
sell this to another in Fee, and covenant, that he and his wife shall levy a
Fine for better assurance; and it is agreed that 30 l. parcel of the
Consideration shall be paid to the husband upon the Cognizance of the Fine by
the Baron and Feme; Fine acknowledged by Baron and Feme before a Judge in the
Circuit, and on Bargain and Sale, and Baron died before the Term the Vendee has
no remedy in Equity.
and after they acknowledge a Fine before the Judge in the Circuit, and the 30
l. is paid and received by the wife, the husband being sick in bed, and the
husband dies before the Term, and upon this the wife stays the passing of the
Fine, and after brought a Writ of Dower; the Bargainee shall not have any
remedy in Equity against the Dower, for that it is against a Maxim in Law, that
a Feme Covert shall be bound without a Fine, 1 Rolls Abr. 375. Holy and Lunn.
But the Court agreed, if the wife had any personal Estate, as Executrix or
Administratrix to her husband, she shall be liable for this; and thereupon a
Commission was granted to enquire of Assets.

The Operation of a Fine by Baron and Feme.
When Baron and Feme join in a Fine of Lands, it shall be intended the
Inheritance of the wife, if the contrary be not showed.

Baron and Feme are Tenants in Tail, as Lands are given to J. B. and Eliz. his
wife, and to the Heirs of their two Bodies begotten, the Remainder in Fee to
the said J. B. J. N. levied a Fine thereof with Proclamations come ceo, etc. J.
N. dies; after his death and within five years Eliz. enters enterclaiming her
Estate. It was adjudged that the Entry of Elizabeth was lawful by the Act of 32
H. 8. The Statute of 32 H. 8. c. 28. explained.
cap. 28. whereby it is enacted, That no Fine, Feoffment or other Acts, etc. or
done by the husband only of any Lands, etc. being the Freehold or Inheritance
of his wife during the Coverture between them shall in any wise be or make any
Discontinuance thereof, or be prejudicial or hurtful to the said wife or her
Heirs, etc. Though the Words of the Act be, The Freehold or Inheritance of the
wife, and the Lands in this Case were the Freehold and Inheritance of the
husband as well as the wife, yet because it was in equal mischief it was
adjudged to be within the Statute, 2 Inst. 681. So is Hob. 257, 259. If Baron
and Feme be Tenants in special Tail the Baron's Fine is a clear Bar to the
Issue by 32 H. 8. though the wife may enter, if she survive, and though the
wife be remitted, if any Estate be limited to her upon her husband's Fine; and
when the wife enters upon the Conisee she is remitted to her own Entail, but it
is not to be aliened nor descend; descend it cannot, because the husband's Fine
bars; and aliened it cannot be, because it was aliened before, Vide more in
Hobart, Duncomb and Wingfield's Case.

Baron and Feme Tenants in special Tail, Baron levies a Fine, quid operatur.
If Baron and Feme be Tenants in special Tail and the Baron only levy a Fine,
the Femes Esta^^ Tail is only turned to a possibility, and only r^ducible by
Entry, if she survive, Hob. 257, 25^ When the Baron dies the Feme by her Entry
becomes Tenant in Tail again, and not Tenant in Ta^^ after possibility of Issue
extinct, though the Estate Tail cannot descend.

R. E. seized in Fee levied a Fine to the use (...) himself for Life, and after
to the use of such a wi^ as he shall marry, and shall survive him; he and his
wife levy a Fine to a Stranger; Feme by Fine bars her self of a possibility.
the Baron di^ the Feme survives, she by her Fine has barred h^^ possibility
by Estoppel, Moor 557. Wells and Fen^^ contra. Cro. Eliz. mesme Case.

If Baron and Feme acknowledge their Right to another by Fine and Release, and
the wife only oblige her and her Heirs to warranty, this is good, 44 Ed. 3.36.
b.

If Baron and Feme levy a Fine (of Lands whereof they are seized jure uxoris)
come ceo, etc.) this shall not be received with Warranty by them and the Heirs
of the husband; Warranty.
but it shall be received by them and the Heirs of the wife, because it is the
Inheritance of the wife, 44 E. 3. 14.

Lessee for Life, and after the Reversion is granted by Fine to Baron and Feme,
and to the Heirs of their Bodies, the Remainder in Fee to the Baron, and the
Baron and Feme by Fine release all their Right to the Lessee, and after they
die sans Issue, Release.
this is a good enlargment of the Estate of the Lessee, and this shall bar the
collateral Heirs of the Baron, 30 E. 3. 4. b.

A. Feme sole, and B. Jointenants for Life, Fine enure as a Release.
A. takes husband, and A. and her husband levy a Fine to B. by which A. and her
husband concedunt the Land, and totum, etc. and quicquid, etc. to B. and his
Assigns for ^he Life of A. and this with Warranty, and after B. dies during the
Life of A. in this case he in Reversion may enter, for that this Fine enures as
a Release to B. Trin. 22 Jac. B. R. Eustace and Scawen. The Lessor may enter
into the whole, and there shall be no Occupant of any part, because this Fine
enures as a Release, not by Mitter l'estate but by way of Extinguishment.

Baron and Feme by Fine grant Land to A. for 99 years, if he so long live, Feme
Covert by Warranty in a Fine sur concessit is bound in an Action of Covenant.
and they by the same Fine warrant the Lands to A. contra omnes homines toto
termino praedicto; the Baron dies: Per Curiam in Wotton and Field's Case, a
good Action of Covenant lies against the wife upon her Warranty in the Fine,
although she was Covert Baron: For when the Warranty is only annexed to an
Estate for years, it is only a Covenant for Damages in the person^ Lien, which
shall bind them and make them respo^sible for damages, as well as where such
Warranty (...) annexed to the Freehold, they shall be bound to warrant the
Land, and to answer in value of their o^ proper Lands, 2 Sand. 180. Wotton and
Hele, M^ Rep.

What Fine is no Bar to her Election of Dower.
The husband after Marriage assured to the wife (...) Jointure, they both levied
a Fine sur conisance (...) droit come ceo and que il ad etc. of the Gift of
(...) husband; this is not any Bar to the wife of (...) Dower, for the Election
is not given to the (...) to claim her Jointure until the death of the husb^^^
Dyer 358.

W. and his wife were seized of Lands to them (...) the Heirs of W. they by
Indenture bargain and (...) to P. in Fee, wherein was a Proviso, that if W.
(...) his wife, or the Heirs of W. pay 100 l. to P. (...) such a day, that then
it should be lawful for th^^ and the Heirs of W. to enter, and to rehave and
(...) joy, etc. and that then (after such payment) (...) Indenture and all
other Fines and Assurances to (...) passed between the said parties,
Construction.
should be to (...) use of W. and his Heirs (leaving out the wife) (...) and
his wife within seven years levied a Fine to (...) W. died, his wife paid the
100 l. Per Curiam (...) Feme shall have the Estate for her Life; so is (...)
first part, and the other Clause is not repugn^ but may stand together, Cro.
Eliz. 744. South^ and Manors.

Exchange.
Baron seized of Lands in the right of his (...) the Baron and Feme both joined
in Exchange (...) a Stranger for other Lands, which Exchange (...) executed;
the Baron and Feme seized of the L^ taken in Exchange aliened the same by Fine,
(...) the wife after the death of her husband may (...) into her own Land
notwithstanding that Fine, 1 L^ 285.

A. makes an Estate to Friends in Trust to the use of his wife to commence
after his death, Fine by the Wife docks a Trust.
the wife joins in a Fine with her husband of the Land leased in Trust; this
Fine shall dock the Trust, and there being an Extent upon the Land leased, this
Trust shall not prevent the Extent by reason of the Fine.

A Fine is levied by Baron and Feme, Baron and Feme levies a Fine, the Feme
being within age, the whole Fine shall be reversed, and not only quoad uxorem.
the Feme being within Age, and in Error brought the Fine is reversed for the
Nonage of his wife. The Question was in Worsley and Charnock's Case, if the
Fine should be utterly reversed, or should be reversed only as to the wife, and
should stand good against the husband; and two great Presidents were cited, the
one contrary to the other; they who argued that the Fine should be reversed for
the whole, cited Ely and Ford's Case, H. 8. A Fine was levied between R. Ely
Plaintiff, and N. Ford, and Jane his wife, Defendants; the wife being within
age, and Judgment was given Quod finis praedict. adnulletur and pro nullo
penitus habeatur, and that the Baron and Feme should be restored; and thereupon
a Writ issued to the Custos Brevium to bring into Court the Foot of the Fine,
and it was presently cancelled in Court. The other President contrary was 7
Eliz. Baron and Feme levied a Fine, the husband died the wife being within Age;
the wife took another husband and they brought a Writ of Error, and the wife by
Inspection was adjudged within Age, and the Fine was reversed as to her and her
Heirs only. But indeed in this Case the second husband was a Stranger to the
Fine, and so it might seem absurd to reverse it as to him; but in the principal
Case it was adjudged, that the Fine should be reversed as to both; for the
whole Estate moved from the wife and all passed out of her, and Judgment was
given Quod Finis praedict. reversetur. And by Gaudy, We cannot by this Reversal
make the Conisee to have a particular Estate during the Life of the wife, ideo
penitus reversetur, 1 Leon. 114. Worsley and Charnock. 2 Co. 77. cited in the
Lord Cromwell's Case.

Feme Covert Infant levied a Fine, in Error the Court will not permit the
Husband to disavow the Guardian.
A Feme Covert Infant levied a Fine, and he^ Friends got a Writ of Error in her
and her husbands name, and the Court would not suffer her husband to release.
But Hales, I cannot see how that ca^ be avoided: But he said, he had known in
suc^ Case, that the Court would not permit the husba^^ to disavow the Guardian
which they admitted for his wife, 1 Ventr. 209. 3 Keb. 14. in Marshal an^ Lady
Prettyman's Case.

1 Mar. Dyer 89. b. Verny's Case. A Fine was l^vied by a Feme Covert, Alleged
that the Feme died before the Test of the Certificate.
who died before Certifica^^ and Ingrossment; and the Fine afterward certif^^
and alleged Error in Fait, that the woman di^^ before the Test of the
Dedimus, whereas the Judge had certified the Concord taken after; a^^ this was
not admitted to be questioned after the Certificate.

The Court to judge of the Infancy of a Feme Covert, and not the Jury.
Feme Covert levied a Fine within Age; she wa^ inspected by the Court, and
ajudged within Age* whereupon a Scire Facias was issued to the Te^tenants, who
pleaded she was of full Age at the ti^^ of the Fine levied; upon which Plea
Issue was joi^ed and a Trial had at the Assizes, and Verdict p^^ Quer. who came
into Court and now prayed Jud^ment. Per Glyn. The Court is to judge of her
^fancy, and not the Jury; and though the Procee^ings are not duly had, yet they
do no hurt, and t^ Fine was reversed, Styles 472. Videan and Fletche^

Entering the Kings-silver.
If Baron and Feme levy a Fine, and the Conisan^ is taken six days before Term.
Pasch. 7 Jac. as the Writ of Covenant is returnable quindena Pasc^ which was
the third day of May, and the husba^^ dies the ninth of May, the Kings-silver
not bei^ entered; yet if upon Examination it appears the the Clark had entered
the Kings-silver in Paper bef^ any Exception taken to it, and that now he h^
entered the Kings-silver on the back of the Writ of Covenant as it ought to be,
the Fine shall not be stayed, Pasch. 7 Jac. B. Boothes's Case: For when this is
entered it shall have relation to the Writ of Covenant.

Farmer and his wife acknowledged a Note of a Fine 26 March by Dedimus
Potestatem, and the wife died the 27th of the same Month; the 28th day
Composition was made in the Alienation Office on a Writ of Covenant returnable
in Hillary Term before; and the Kings-silver was entered in the Office of the
Kings-silver as of the same Hillary-Term, and so the Fine was passed and
engrossed, and in Easter-Term the Heir of the wife moved against this Fine; but
the Court resolved the Fine must stand, Hob. 330. Farmer's Case.

Baron and Feme and a third person levied a Fine, Writ of Covenant against
Baron and Feme, and in the Summons the Feme was left out, its Error.
and the Writ of Covenant was against the Baron and Feme and the third person,
and in the Summons the Feme was left out; for this Error the whole Fine shall
be reversed; for being ill in part it is ill in all, Cro. Eliz. 290. Baxter and
his wife against Atonating.

If Baron and Feme are bound to levy a Fine upon reasonable Request, What shall
be a reasonable Request to levy a Fine.
if Request be made when the wife is enseint or sick, it is not reasonable; and
the Request to the husband alone is not good, More 124.

Of Commissioners taking a Fine of a Feme Covert.
Herbert Parrot's Case, A Feme Covert (his wife) at twenty years of Age levied
a Fine before Commissioners in the Country, and the wife dies sans Issue; she
had settled the Estate upon her and her husband, and the Heirs of their two
Bodies: The Court was moved to set it aside, but they agreed they could not
meddle with it; but if the wife had been alive and under Age, they might bring
her in by Habeas Corpus, and inspect her, and set aside the Fine upon Motion,
for perhaps the husband would not suffer the bringing of or proceeding in a
Writ of Error. And the Commissioners in this Case were not fined, because they
could not discern by the View whether she was of Age, she being twenty years
old: But had it been apparent by Inspection, that she was within Age, then they
ought to have been fined, 2 Ventr. p. 30. Mod. Rep. 246. But in Cavendishes
Case, 1 Roll. Rep. 113. the Commissioners did perfectly know that the Feme
Covert, who levied the Fine, was within Age; and for this cause every of them
were fined, but the Fine stood good and no^ reversed.

Carrel's Case in Dyer 220. b. and 12 Co. 142. was A Feme Covert of nineteen
years of Age acknowledged a Fine before Commissioners, several Judges being in
Town, who might have ex^mined her. She died on Friday Easter Week, but the Fine
and Kings-silver was entered as of Hillary Term, four days before the wife's
death: The original Writ of Covenant bore Date 15 Jan. Ret' Crast. Pur. and the
Dedimus Potestatem 18 Jan. Dyer says thi^ Fine was stopped the engrossing, for
undue means i^ gaining it, but in 11 Co. the Fine adjudged good.

Where a Feme Covert shall be examined or not.
A Feme Covert is not to be examined upon a^ Fine, but when she and her husband
pass some Estate or Interest, or make a Grant and Render (...) another, or
release her Right by a Fine of Lands o^ Tenements, 1 Inst. 353.

The Examination of a Feme Covert ought to b^ secret, and the effect is to
examine her whether (...) be content to levy a Fine of such Lands, namin^ them
particularly and distinctly, and the Estate the passes by the Fine of her own
voluntary free Will not by Threats, Menaces or any compulsory means; but where
nothing is moved in the Fine, but only that the husband and wife do take an
Estate by the Fine, this shall not conclude the wife, because in such case she
shall not be examined.

Against a Fine levied by her self a woman cannot be remitted, because she was
thereupon examined.

If a Fine be levied of Land to Baron and Feme, and the Baron and Feme grant
and render the Land, there the wife shall be examined, and the Examination must
ever be upon the Writ, and therefore a Baron and Feme upon a Fine levied to
them of Land cannot grant and render out of the Land, because the Rent is not
contained in the Writ, 2 Inst. 515.

8 H. 4. 8. b. If a Fine sur Grant and Render be made to Baron and Feme, she
shall not be examined; this is to be understood as the principal Case there,
that there was not any Conisance by Baron and Feme, but only a Grant and Render
by the other.

If a Fine sur Conisance de droit be levied to Baron and Feme rendering Rent,
the Feme shall be examined, because she is to be charged with the Rent, 46 E.
3. 15. b.

If a Fine upon Release be levied to Baron and Feme, she shall not be examined,
because the Fine is not an Estoppel, but for her advantage, 3 H. 6. 42. So if a
Fine sur Conisance de droit be levied to Baron and Feme, this shall not estop
the wife to claim another Estate.

Now a Fine, which passes an Estate, ought not to be received if she be not
examined; but if the Fine be received and recorded, the Feme Covert or her
Heirs shall not be received to aver that she was not examined nor assented; for
this should be against the Record of the Court, and tend to weaken the general
Assurances of the Realm, 2 Inst. 515.

Where a Feme Covert shall be barred by Fine and Non-Claim.
Fine and Non-Claim of the wifes Land shall h^^ the husband, who suffered five
years to pass, and all claiming under him, and the wife her self during the
Coverture, but the wife shall have a new five years after the death of the
husband, Cro. Car. 200 Holme and Heyfield's Case. 4 H. 7. c. 24.

Tenant for Life, the Remainder in Fee to a Feme Covert; the Tenant for Life
levies a Fine, the husband dies, the wife takes another husband, the Tenant
dies, the five years pass, the husband dies, the wife is barred and is not
remedied by the Statute of 32 H. 8. 28. Dyer 159. in Margin. And this neglect
of the second husband shall be prejudicial to the wife, Whetstone and Wentworth.

A Man seized of Lands in Fee takes a wife, and after levies a Fine, and the
Proclamations were made, and the five years pass in his Life, and he dies, and
after his death other five years pass, and after the wife brought her Writ of
Dower, she shall be barred, because the wife had Title by the Intermarriag^.
although it cannot be executed till after the dea^^ of the husband; and because
she had Title at the time of the Fine levied she shall be bound by Non-Claim
for five years after her Title consummate, More 53.

Declaration of Uses.
Beckwith's Case settles this in these Resolutions 2 Co.

If the husband alone declare the use of the Fin^ levied by them both of the
wifes Land; his Declation shall bind the wife, if her disassent does not
appear: Neither is it always necessary that the nam^ of the wife should be set
to the Indenture, which does declare the Use.

The wife has Estate in the Land, and is not sui juris, the husband is sui
juris, but he had no Estate in the Land, and therefore they differ in the
Limitation of the Uses, all is void.

If the husband and wife sell the Land of the wife for Money by parol, and after
levy a Fine to the Vendee, this shall bind the wife without other Writing,
proving her assent.

If Baron and Feme levy a Fine of the wifes Land, and an Indenture is written
in the name of the Baron and Feme, whereby the Land is limited to certain Uses,
and the husband only seal and deliver it, and the wife will not, but disagrees
to it; this Limitation of the Baron shall not bind the wife, although the wife
had not expressed her disagreement by any Deed or Limitation of other Uses, Mich.
15 Jac. B. R. Webb and Worfield.

Of a Fine levied to Baron and Feme, and the Operation. Vide supra Tit.
Examination of Feme Covert.
Feme Covert is Tenant for Life, the Remainder in Fee to the Son, which she
shall have, and he in Reversion before the Birth of the Son bargain and sells
the Land, and levies a Fine of it to the Baron and Feme, the particular Estate
of the wife is drowned in the Reversion, and the contingent Remainder is
destroyed, 2 Sand. 386, 387, 388.

Recovery.
Common Recovery against Tenant in Tail and his wife having nothing shall bind
the Entail, Plowd. 540. Ear and Snow, Hob. 27. And a Voucher may be by the
Baron only upon a Release with Wa^ranty to him and his wife, if the wife have
nothing Hob. 27.

Tenant for Life, the Remainder to Baron a^^ Feme and their Heirs, the Baron
and Feme suffer (...) Recovery: The Question was, if the Heirs of the wife are
bound by this Recovery, because the Feme being Covert, it was conceived she was
not Tena^ to the Praecipe, because it appears not she was examined. Per Curiam.
It is held Br. Abr. Recovery in value 27. Feme Covert is barred by a Common
Recovery.

Its prudential to examine a Feme Covert upon a Recovery, but not necessary and
why.


A Feme Covert is barred by a Common Recovey, and it is the common practice, 10
C^ 43. And it is not necessary to examine a Feme Covert upon a Recovery, though
it be prudential (...) do it; though in a Fine it is otherwise, beca^^^ there
is no Recompense in Value; and the Feme here is Tenant to the Praecipe, and she
shall be estopped to speak against the Recovery, for she joi^^ in the Recovery
with her husband, and here is (...) default made by the Baron; and now the
Record is perfect, and a thing contrary to it is not to be averred against it;
but before the Record was perfect she might have pleaded; and the Recompense i^
Value here shall go to the Heirs of the wife, and the Tenant for Life is also
bound by this Recovery, and the Feme is privy to the Recovery. If a Stranger
had been Tenant to the Praecipe, and the Baron and Feme had been vouched, the
Feme had been bound and this is a stronger Case, Styles 319. Locker and
Palfryman. But it was the Opinion of Chief Justice Bridgman in B. C. Sid. 11.
That a Feme Covert ought to be privately examined in a Common Recovery, but
said, the practice was otherwise, bu^ it was a fault, and ought to be
corrected, yet the Recovery passed without Examination: And so is my Lord
Coke's Opinion 10 Co. 45. in Portington's Case, That the wife had used to be
examined upon a Recovery, and a Dedimus Petestate^ granted to take her
Examination upon the Conisance.

Baron and Feme seized to them and the Heirs Males of the Body of the Baron,
the Remainder in Tail to B. the Reversion to the right Heirs of the Baron; the
Baron levies a Fine; the Conisee suffers a Recovery, and voucheth the Baron,
The Baron only is vouched, Quid operatur.
who voucheth the Common Vouchee: Per Curiam, this Recovery shall bind the
Tail, because he comes in in privity of the Tail, 3 Co. 6. Cupledike's Case.
The wife who had an Estate for Life with her husband was not vouched; and
though the Estate of the wife is not recontinued, yet the husband, as Voucher,
shall be in Judgment of Law in Privity of the Estate Tail which he once had;
and the Estate of the wife by the husband's Fine is put to a Right, so as the
husband comes in as sole Tenant in Tail: Aliter, if the Baron and Feme are
seized to them and the Heirs of their two Bodies with Remainders over. But

An Estate is made to Baron and Feme, and to the Heirs of the Body of the
husband, a Common Recovery is had against the Baron, who voucheth the common
Vouchee; the Baron survives his wife and dies without Issue; this is not good
to bar the Remainders, because at the time of the Recovery there were no
Moieties between him and his wife; and the Baron had not power to sever the
Jointure, and he, during the Life of his wife, is not seized by force of the
Tail, so that the Praecipe being brought against him only, the Conveyance
cannot for any part enure to the Estate Tail or to the Remainder; to all the
Estate it cannot enure, because the wife had a joint Estate with him, who was
no party to the Recovery; and for a Moiety it cannot be good, for there are no
Moieties between Baron and Feme, 3 Co. 5. Owen and Morgan's Case.

Bargainee a good Tenant to the Praecipe.
If Baron seized in the Right of his wife for Life, the Remainder in Tail to B.
the Remainder to C. and the husband bargains and sells the Land to another,
against whom a Praecipe is brought, when voucheth him in Remainder, and so a
Common Recovery passes; this shall bind the Remainde^ although not the wife,
because the Bargainee was a good Tenant to the Praecipe, 2 Rolls Abr. 394.

Where Baron and Feme are vouched it shall b^ intended to be in the Right of
his wife, 20 H. 7. 1. b. And therefore in Grosvenor and Massye's Case, 1 Leon.
291. n. 318. Four husbands and their wife are vouched in a Recovery, and the
Plaintiff brough^ his Writ of Error as Heir to one of the husbands he ought to
have brought it as Heir to one of the wifes.

Baron and Feme suffer a Recovery as Vouchees, if it be a Forfeiture.
In consideration of Marriage the Father enfeo^^ his Son, and a Feme sole in
Fee-simple, who inte^marry, this is not within the Statute 11 H. 7. they after
grant the Land by Fine to the Father, who renders to them in special Tail, this
is a Conveyance of each one for his Moiety to the Father, which Moyeties they
take divided by the Gift before Ma^riage, and then the Render of all to them in
sp^cial Tail; as to the Moiety of the Son, which ^e had by the Fine, the Gift
of the Father to the So^ and his wife is within the Statute of 11 H. 7. But
(...) to the Moiety, which the wife gives by the Fine, are which the Father
renders in special Tail, this w^^ not within the Statute. The Baron and Feme
su^^ a Recovery as Vouchees, this is a Forfeiture with^^ the Statute of 11 H.
7. Moor 715. The Queen ar^ Savage.

The Wife in a Common Recovery, being within Age, ought to appear by Guardian.
If a Common Recovery be suffered, and the Bar^^ and Feme as in Right of the
wife (the Feme being within age) are vouched, and they appear by A^torney and
vouch over, and so a Common Recove^ is had, this is Error; for though the
husband be (...) full Age, yet the wife being within Age, she ought to appear
by Guardian, Hill. 17 Jac. B. R. Holland and Lee. But says Rolls, 1 Abr. 288.
dubitatur. Dyer 290. 366. But no doubt is in the Case; for the appearance by a
Feme Covert, in a Recovery, within Age by an Attorney, is Error; and though it
may be objected, that the husband is of full Age, and therefore he may make
Attorney for himself and his wife, the Law is not so; for the Rule is, that the
husband cannot give away or lose the Inheritance of the wife; but it must be
given or lost by her self or her own Act, and she ought to appear by Guardian
notwithstanding the full Age of the husband, who is to be joined for Conformity
with her, Sid. 322. Raby and Robinson.

Dyer 290. 363. The Custom of London.
A Recovery suffered by Baron and Feme of the Land of the Wife is as strong to
bind the Right of the Feme Covert by the Custom of London, as a Fine at Common
Law. Vide there such Custom as to Wales.

Recovery by Default.
If the Baron lose by Default the Fee-simple Lands of the wife, the wife had no
Remedy but by a Writ of Right; but by the Statute of W. 2. c. 3. she shall have
a Cui in vita.

If a Recovery be had against Baron and Feme, Tenants for Life by Default, they
may have a Quod ei deforceat, 2 Inst. 350. by Stat. W. 2. c. 4. and after his
death she may have a Quod ei deforceat.

CHAP. XIV. Attornment.
What Act of the Husband or Wife shall amount t^ an Attornment. Avowry for Rent
out of the Wifes Land in whose Name it ought to be. Wh^^ and to what purposes a
Feme Covert shall be sa^ a Disseisoress without her proper Act or Entry* and
where, and to what not. What Act of (...) Husband shall be a Discontinuance of
the La^ of the Wife, and what not. What was a D^^continuance at the Common Law.
Where a Descent cast during the Coverture shall toll the E^try of the Wife or
not.

I Have considered what alterations have been made by Intermarriage, as to
Estates, Leases, Chattels, Actions, and what things of the wife accrue to the
husband by the Intermarriage, and what Charges Acts or Forfeitures made by the
husband bind the wife or not after his death. The next Reflectio^ shall be
briefly of such Titles, as concern Real Actions or Estates, as, Attornment,
Dissesin, Remit^ and the like.

If a Feme grant a Reversion to a Man in Fee and marry the Grantee, the Lessee
attorns to the husband, this is a good Attornment in Law to the husband, 1
Inst. 320.

If a Feme sole make a Lease for Life or Years, reserving Rent, and grants
the Reversion in Fee and takes husband, this is a Countermand of the
Attornment, 1 Inst. 310. b.

If there be Lord and Tenant, and the Tenant takes a wife, and after the Lord
grants the Service to the wife and her Heirs, and the husband accepts the
Deed, in this Case after the death of the husband the wife and her Heirs shall
have the Services, etc. for by acceptance of the Deed by the husband, this is a
good Attornment, etc. albeit during the Coverture the Services shall be put in
suspense, Lit. Sect. 559.

A Feme Covert is compellable to attorn, 1 Rolls Abr. 296.

If the husband accept the Grant of a Reversion, this shall amount to an
Attornment, 10 Co. 52. Lampet's Case.

A Feme may be Attorney to deliver Seisin to her husband, and the husband to
the wife, 1 Inst. 52.

Avowry, Vide Rent.
If the husband be seized of a Seigniory in the Right of his wife, Conisance
ought not to be made of Rent as Bailiff to the husband alone, but as Bailiff to
them both, 12 R. 2. Avowry 88. Contra 14 H. 4. Avowry 198.

If Lessee for years be, rendering Rent, Avowry to be made in the name of Baron
and Feme.
and the Reversion descend upon a Feme Covert, and after the Rent is arrear,
and the Baron distrains, and the Lessee brought Replevin; the husband ought to
avow in the name of himself and his wife, and not in the name of himself alone;
for the Avowry is to be made according to the Reversion, which is in the wife,
1 Rolls Abr. 318. Wise and Bennet.

In Replevin Def. ut Ballivus H. and A. uxoris ejus cognovit, etc. Quod ante,
etc. Willielmus S. fuit seisitus de septem acris pasturae cum pertin. in D.
unde locus est parcella in dominico suo ut de feodo and tenuit de praed. H. and
A. ut de Manerio suo de D. in Com. praed. per fidelitatem and reddit. 3 d. ad
Festum etc. Necnon per servitium fuct. sect. ad Curiam, and^ de quo quidem
Manerio Quidam R. W. fuit seisit^ in feodo, and sic seisitus per nomen, etc.
per q^^^dam scriptum suum indentat. gerent. dat. tali (...) and anno feoffavit
quendum R. S. and praed' A. t^^uxorem ejus de eodem Manerio habend' and tene^^
pro termino vitae naturalis ipsius A. ad quod quide^ feoffamentum praed' tenens
postea and ante, etc. apud (...) praed' se iisdem R. S. attornavit Quorum
pra^ter^ idem R. and A. fuer' seisiti de Manerio praed' (...) pertin' in
dominico suo etc. pro termino vitae ip^^ A. Ipsisque sic seisit' praed. R.
obiit ac prae^^ A. ipsum supervixit, and se tenuit intus ac fuit (...) sola
seisita in dominico suo ut de libero teneme^ pro termino vitae suae. Et sic
sesit' percipit vir^^ praed' H. per quod, etc. de quibus servitiis f^^ seisit'
per manus and in jure ipsius A. and sic cog^vit pro redditu. Ex Manuscript.
Mri. Brown^^ Trin. 19 Eliz. Rot. 543.

Where and to what purposes a Feme Covert shall be said a Dissesoress without
her proper Act or E^^ry* and where and to what not.
Regula.
It is regularly true, a Feme Covert cannot be (...) Disseisoress by her
Commandment or Procurem^^ precedent, or by her Assent or Agreement subsequ^^
but by her actual Entry or proper Act she may, (...) Inst. 357. b. and yet if
she be of Covin and confe^ with her husband to a Disseisin, she is a Disseisor^
and consequently shall not be remitted.

But it is universally true, a Feme Covert shall n^ be a Disseisoress by the
Act of the husband, as (...) the husband disseise another to the use of the
wi^^ the wife is not a Disseisoress by this Act, 12 E. 4. 9.^ So it is though
she agree during the Coverture, b^ her Agreement is void; or if both agree, she
is n^ a Disseisoress (unless Covin be in the Case.) But after the death of the
husband she agree to the Disseisin she shall be a Disseisoress.

If Baron and Feme enter into Land in the right of the wife where she had not
Right, the Feme is no Disseisoress, for it shall be taken to be the Act of the
husband only.

A Feme Covert cannot make a Disseisin to the use of her husband, 8 H. 6. 14.
b. Curia. Feme Covert cannot make a Disseisin to the use of the husband.
For although she gain an Estate by her Entry, yet she had not power to dispose
of it to another, being Covert, as she ought, if she makes a Disseisin to the
use of another; but contra 21 H. 7. 35. So a Feme Covert cannot disseise a Man
to the use of a Stranger.

If a Man take a Distress for Rent issuing out of the Land of a Feme Covert,
and the Baron and Feme make Rescous, they both are Disseisors, 21 E. 4. 53.

If the husband discontinue the Land of his wife, the wife being in possession
and disagreeing to the Feoffment claiming her first Estate, she is a
Disseisoress.

Note, If the husband disseised one to the use of his wife, no Agreement of the
wife shall be laid to the Disseisin, for that the cannot disagree during
Coverture, Ex Manuscript. Mri. Brownloe.

Nota, In Trespass ad novam assignationem Def. placitat liberum Tenementum
ipsius Def. and E. uxoris ejus in jure, etc. Ad quod Quer. dicit quod ipse fuit
seisitus quousque disseisit' per le Baron ad usum uxoris per quod fuer' seisit.
per disseisinam, and quod disseisee re-enter and Tresp' null' faciend'
mencionem de agreement del feme al disseisinam Quere car aliter d'estranger,
Def. maintain son Freehold and Traverse le disseisin, Ex Manuscript. Mri.
Brownloe.

Discontinuance. Where and what Act by the Husband was a Discontinuance of the
Land of the Wife at the Common Law, and what shall be a Discontinuance, and
what not.
If a Man be seized of Lands in the Right (...) the wife in Fee Tail or for
Life, and thereof enfeo^^ another, and dies, the wife may not enter, but m^^
bring her Action, which is called a Cui in vita, or (...) Sur cui in vita, for
the Heir; this was at Common Law before the Statute of 32 H. 8. c. 28.

Stat 32 H. 8. cap. 28.
But now by that Statute the wife and her He^ after the death of her husband may
enter into the Lands or Tenements of his wife notwithstanding the Alienation of
the husband. In what cases the Wife may enter after the Discontinuance of the
Action.


So it is where the husband and wife are joy^^^^ seized to them and their Heirs
of an Estate ^^de during the Coverture, and the husband makes a feoffment in
Fee and dies, the wife may now enter (...) that Statute, although it was the
Inheritance of th^^ both. So it is if the Feoffment be made by (...) Baron and
Feme (albeit the Words of the Statute (...) by the Baron only) for in substance
this is the Ac^ of the husband only. If Lands be given to ^^^o^ and Feme, and
the Heirs of their two Bodies, (...) the husband makes a Feoffment in Fee, and
dies, t^ wife is helped by the said Statute.

But note, If the husband levy a Fine with (...) clamations and dies, the wife
must enter or avoid (...) Estate of the Conisee within five years, or else
(...) is barred for ever by the Statute of 4 H. 7. Stat. 32 H. 8. helps the
Discontinuance, but not the Bar.
For t^ Statute of 32 H. 8. does help the Discontinuan^ but not the Bar; and
the Statute speaks of a Fi^ but not of a Fine with Proclamations, 1 Inst. 326.

Note, Of things that lie in Grant, as, Rents, Commons, etc. there can be no
Discontinuance.

J. B. and Jane his wife, being seized of Land to them and the Heirs of the
Body of J. B. the Remainder to Ed. B. and the Heirs of his Body, the Remainder
to W. B. in Tail, the Remainder to G. Edwards in Tail, the Remainder to the
right Heirs of J. B. J. B. and his wife, and W. B. the third in Remainder,
joined in a Feoffment with Warranty to M. K. and after the said Baron and Feme
levied a Fine to M. K. 1. What is a Discontinuance.
Whether the Feoffment be a Discontinuance of the Estate Tail? Per Curiam, It
is a Discontinuance, and the joining of William does not hinder a
Discontinuance, because there is an intermediate Estate Tail in Edward, which
is discontinued. 2. As to the Remainder.
This Feoffment and Fine to the same person make but one Assurance; and when
the wife is barred and her Estate destroyed by the Fine that she cannot enter,
those in Remainder cannot enter but are as at Common Law, Cro. Car. 321. King
and Edwards.

If a woman Inheritrix, The Wife may enter after her Husband dies in Nonage.
who has a husband within Age, and he being within Age makes a Feoffment in
Fee and dies, she may enter, and she shall take benefit of the Nonage of the
husband; for the Heir of the Husband cannot enter, for no Right or Title
discends to him.

A Baron seized of Land in the Right of his wife makes a Feoffment in Fee upon
Condition and dies; if the Heir enter upon the Feoffee for the Condition broken
(as he may;) for though no Right descended to the Heir, yet the Title of Entry
by force of the Condition descends to him: Discontinuance being defeated by the
Entry of the Heir for Condition broken.
The Entry of the wife is congeable upon the Heir, for by his Entry he has
avoided the Feoffment and so defeated the Discontinuance, and his Estate
vanishes, and the Estate vesteth in the wife without Entry or Claim.

Discontinuance or not by the Agreement of the wife.
If Baron and Feme make a Lease for Life by Deed of Lands of the wife, if the
Feme after the death of the Baron, agrees, it is no Discontinuance; but if she
disagree, it is a Discontinuance, Cro. Car. 406.

If a Man seized in the Right of his wife, lets the same Land to another for
Term of his Life, no^ the husband has again the Reversion of the Fee simple;
if the husband dies, living the wife and the Tenant for Life, and the Reversion
descend (...) the Heir of the Baron, and he grant the Reversio^ to another in
Fee, and the Tenant attorns, and th^^ the Tenant for Life dies, What is not a
Discontinuance.
and the Grantee of the Reversion enter, this is no Discontinuance to the wife
but she may well enter upon the Grantee, because the Grantor had nothing at the
time of the Grace in the Right of the wife when he made the Gra^ of the
Reversion, Lit. sect. 639. But if the Baron and Feme in such case join in a
Lease by Deed, the Reversion is not discontinued, but remains in the wife, and
yet it was at Common Law a Discontinuance for Life.

If Baron and Feme, Tenants in special Ta^ and the husband aliens in Fee, What
is a Discontinuance, and of the Husbands being seized by force of the Tail.
this is a Discontinuance of the Tail, for he is seized of all entirely, 8 Co.
71. Greenloes Case.

But if the husband be seized of Land in the Right of the wife in Tail, and
alien in Fee, this is not any Discontinuance of the Tail, for he is not seized
b^ force of the Entail, 1 Inst. 326.

If Lands are given to Baron and Feme, and t^ the Heirs of the Body of the
Baron, and the husban^ makes a Feoffment in Fee, this is a Discontinuance for
the husband is seized by forch of the Tail, an^ so it shall be pleaded, 9 Car.
B. R. King and Edwards. Plead.


If Tenant for Life be, the Remainder in Tail, and he in the Remainder enter
upon the Lessee and disseiseth him and makes a Feoffment over, this is not any
Discontinuance, because he is not seized by force of the Tail, Trin. 2 Jac. B.
Morlidge and White.

But if the Lessee for years be, the Remainder in Tail to J. S. and J. S. enter
upon the Lessee and makes a Lease for Life, or Feoffment in Fee, this is a
Discontinuance, for he was seized by force of the Tail at the time of the
Feoffment, Pasch. 11 Jac. B. R. Sir Kenelm Digby and Jordan.

If Baron seized of a Copyhold in the Right of the wife surrender it to the use
of another in Fee, Copyhold.
who is admitted accordingly, this is not any Discontinuance to the wife, 4 Co.
23. Bullock and Dibley.

The husband discontinues, and the wife is attainted, the King shall have the
Right of the Entry, Hob. 241, 243.

Descents. Where a Descent cast during the Coverture shall toll the Entry of
the Feme, and where not.
If a Feme sole be seized of Lands in Fee, Where a Descent cast during the
Coverture shall toll the Entry of the wife, and where not.
and is disseised, and then takes husband, in this Case the Baron and Feme as
in Right of the Feme, have Right to enter, and yet the dying seized of the
Disseisor in that Case shall take away the Entry of the wife after the death of
the husband, because when she was sole she might have entered and recontinued
the Possession; and it shall be accounted her Folly, that she would take such
an husband which would not enter before the Descent: But there if the woman
were within Age at the time of her taking husband, then the dying seized shall
not after the death of the Baron take away her Entry, because no Folly can be
accounted in her, she being within Age when she took husband, and after
Coverture she cannot enter without her husband.

And if the Baron and Feme in droit of the wife have Right and Title to enter
into Lands which another has in Fee or Tail, and such Tenant dies seized, the
Entry of the husband is taken away upon the Heir which is in by Descent: But if
the husband die the wife may well enter upon the Heir, for that no Latchess of
the husband shall turn to the prejudice of the wife or her Heirs, 1 Inst. 246.
a. b. and so is 9 H. 7. 24. Disseisee goes beyond Sea, or marries, where a
Descent is cast during the Coverture or absence, this shall bind, because it
was a default to go o^ marry when he was disseised.

Where Entry of Disseisee is congeable upon the Wife of the Disseisor after
Endowment notwithstanding the Descent.
If a Disseisor die seized, and his Heir enter, wh^ endows the wife of the
Disseisor of a third part o^ the Land, as to the part assigned in Dower
present^^ after the wife enters thereinto, the Disseisee m^^ lawfully enter
upon the Possession of the wife into the said part, because when the wife has
her Dower she shall be adjudged in immediately by husband, and by the Heir; and
as to that the Descent is defeated, and she is in by a Title paramount the
Descent and dying seized, 1 Inst. 240, 241.

CHAP. XV. Remitter.
The Nature and Reason of Remitter. What Act shall be a Remitter to the Wife.
Remitter wrought by a voidable Estate. Remainder expectant on an Estate for
Life works no Remitter. Notwithstanding what Acts and Alienations by the
husband the Wife shall be remitted. Of Remitter by Acceptance. Where the Wife
being remitted during the Coverture may after the death of her Husband wave the
Remitter, and where not. No Disagreement of the Husband shall divest the
Remitter, and the Reason. Where a Warranty descending on an Infant or a Feme
Covert shall be a Bar, and where not. Where the Baron and Feme shall be
Joyntenants; and where by Intierties, and where by Moieties, with several Cases
to illustrate that curious Learning; and how it was at Common Law, and how it
is now by the Statute of Uses.

BAron and Feme Tenants in special Tail with Remainder over, Where the Wife is
remitted.
the Baron discontinues by Fine or Feoffment, and then takes an Estate back to
himself and his wife in special Tail, by this the wife is ipso facto remitted.

Tenant in Tail before the Statute of 27 H. 8. made a Feoffment in Fee to the
use of his wife for Life, and after to his Son and Heir in Fee; then the
Statute is made and the Baron and Feme are dead, the Issue shall not be
admitted, Explication of the Statutes of 27 H. 8. and 32 H. 8.
and this for the violence of the Letter of 27 H. 8. So if a Feme having Right
of Lands discontinued where his Entry was not lawful, if she come to that Land
by way of an Use raised out of that Estate, she shall not be remitted, for she
must be in of the Estate, as she was of the Use; but now by the Statute of 32
H. 8. it has changed the Reason of this Case, which has given the wife Entry
against her husband's Fine; so that now by the Use raised to her out of such
Estate, she is not in of an Estate discontinued, but of an Estate whereupon
after the death of her husband she might have re-entred. Now as upon Re-entry
in such Case where the Entry is lawful, she is remitted; so where an Estate is
conveyed to her, and is in her, though by the Statute her Entry being lawful,
she shall be adjudged in of her best Estate, her Remitter being Intratio
legitima, though not actualis, Heb. 255, 256.

Where the Baron discontinues and retakes to himself and Wife, the Wife is
remitted.
A woman seized of Land in Fee takes husband, who aliens the same Land to
another in Fee, the Alienee lets the same Land to the Baron and Feme for Term
of their Lives, she is remitted, though it be by Deed indented; and though
there are no Moyeties between Baron and Feme, yet this is a Remitter presently:
So Estate granted by Intermarriage may be sufficient Estate to gain a Remitter
as well as an Estate made to Baron and Feme shall wor^ a Remitter; and she is
remitted in the Life of the Discontinuor, because she has a present Right, but
not so of the Issue in Tail.

Issue in Tail of full Age takes Husband, a Lease to her and her Husband by the
Discontinuee shall be a Remitter.
Tenant in Tail discontinues the Tail and has Issue a Daughter and dies, the
Daughter being of full Age takes Baron, and the Discontinuee makes a Release
of this to Baron and Feme for their Lives, this is a Remitter to the wife, and
the wife is in by force of the Tail, Lit. Sest. 671.

A woman seized of Land in Fee takes husband, who aliens the same Land to
another in Fee (and though it be by Fine) yet that shall not hinder the
Remitter, because a Feme Covert is not to be examined upon any Fine: But when
she and her husband pass some Estate or Interest or release her Right by a Fine
of Lands or Tenements; Where upon a Discontinuance by the Baron by Fine a Grant
and Render to the Wife shall be a Remitter to her.

Remitter wrought by a voidable Estate.


and therefore if the husband levy a Fine of the wifes Land, and the Conisee
grant and render the Land to the husband and wife, although the wife be not
party to the Original, nor to the Conisance, and therefore cannot take any
present Estate, but by Remainder only, yet it works a Remitter, and the Grant
and Render is not void, but voidable only by Error, 1 Inst. 353.

If the Baron discontinues the Land of his wife, and after takes back an Estate
to him and his wife and to a third person for their Lives, or in Fee, Remitter
for a Moiety.
this is only a Remitter to the wife for a Moiety; and for the other she must
have a Cui in vita, and his Disagreement shall not divest her of Remitter, 1
Inst. 356.

Land is given to Baron and Feme in special Tail, Remitter to Husband and Wife
maugre the Husband.
the Baron aliens the Land in Fee, and takes back an Estate to him and his wife
for Term of their Lives, this is a Remitter to the Baron and Feme maugre the
husband, for they are one person in Law; and it cannot be a Remitter to the
wife unless it be a Remitter to the Baron.

The Baron discontinues the Land of his wife, and the Discontinuee is
disseised, and after the Disseisor lets the same Lands to husband and wife for
Term of Life, this is a Remitter to the wife, except she were covenous to the
Disseisor: If such Discontinuee make an Estate of Freehold to the husband and
wife by Deed indented on Condition rendering Rent, and for default of Payment, a
Re-entry; and because the Rent is behind the Discontinuee enters, ^hen for this
Entry the wife shall have an Assise of Novel Disseisin after the death of the
Baron against the Discontinuee, because the Condition is defeated, ^et the
husband with his wife cannot have an Assise, because the Baron is Estopped,
Lit. Sect. 769.

Remainder expectant on Estate for Life works no Remitter.
And if the Baron discontinue the Tenements (...) his wife, and takes back an
Estate to him for L^^ the Remainder to his wife for Life, this is no Rem^ter to
her till after his decease, because during (...) Life the has nothing in the
Freehold, Sect. 680.

Baron and Feme Tenants in special Tail upon P^chase of the Baron they have
Issue two Sons: T^ husband makes a Feoffment to the use of himself (...) Life,
the Remainder to the wife for his Life, the R^mainder to the second Son and his
Heirs; the B^^dies, the Feme enters and makes a Feoffment to (...) Issue of the
second Son, and the eldest enters for (...) Forfeiture within the Statute of 11
H. 7. Heir remitted by the Entry of the Feme.
His En^ is congeable, and this Feoffment by the wife (tho^^ it be to him who
had the Reversion in Fee) is a F^feiture within the Statute; for by the Entry
of (...) wife he was remitted, Sid. 63. Jones and Phil^^

If Baron and Feme are Tenants in special Ta^ and the Baron only levies a Fine
to the use of (...) self and his wife for Life, Remainders remitted.
though the Entail be ^^red as to the Baron and the Issues, yet the wife is
^mitted to the Estate Tail, as she should have been (...) an Entry after her
husband's death, and the Re^^^ders, which were depending upon that Estate (...)
are likewise remitted, Hob. 257, 259. Duncomb (...) Wingfield.

Wife remitted upon a Writ of Entry in the Post.
If a Man seized in the Right of his wife ma^^s Lease for Life, the Reminder
over in Fee, and (...) he and his wife recover the same Land by a Wi^ Entry in
the Post against the Lessee for Life: (...) Dyer, the wife shall be remitted as
well as when Recovery is made to Baron and Feme, for the ^covery countervails a
Feoffment, Quaere, if she (...) not be estopped by the Record, More 32.

The Baron discontinues the Land of his Fe^^ Fee to the use of him and his wife
for Life, (...) Remainder over and dies, the wife enters, but not remitted,
notwithstanding that the Posse^ was transferred to her use by the Statute of
Uses, because the Statute says, Where the Use makes no Remitter.
he shall have possession in such manner as he had the Use, and the Use makes
no Remitter, so neither the Possession transferred to it, Plowd. Amy Townsend.

Remitter by Acceptance.
Trin. 15 Jac. Rot. 988. Duncomb's Case, Baron levies a Fine of the Land of his
wife and dies, the wife accepts a Lease for years of the same Land, and
resolved it was a Remitter, Dyer 171. in Margin.

Where the Wife being remitted during the Coverture may after the death of her
Baron wave her Remitter, and where not.
The Law shall adjudge the wife in of her better Estate, as by the Cases
foregoing may abundantly appear: But if both Estates be waveable, there albeit
the wife is prima facie remitted, yet after the decease of her husband she may
elect which of the Estates she will. As if Lands are given to Baron and Feme
and their Heirs; the Baron makes a Feoffment in Fee, the Feoffee gives the Land
to the Baron and Feme, and the Heirs of their two Bodies, the Baron dies; in
this Case the wife may elect which of the Estates she will, 1 Inst. 357.

So is Hobert 71. Sheerly and Wood's Case, which was this:

Dower of Sir H. B. The Tenant pleaded, that Sir H. B. was seized in Fee of the
Lands, etc. and made a Feoffment thereof to the use of himself and the
Demandant D. for the Term of their Lives for her Jointure, the Remainder over
to B. Sir H. B. died, and the Feme entered claiming it for her Jointure. The
Plaintiff replied, that the said Sir H. B. before this Feoffment did covenant
to stand seized to the use of himself in Tail, the Remainder to his wife for
(...) Term of Life, the Remainder to H. in Tail, a^ after made the Feoffment
prout, and then died s^ Issue, and she entered, and was remitted claiming (...)
Estate by Indenture. The Tenant rejoins, That (...) Feme after the death of her
Baron entered claimi^ her Estate for Life by the Feoffment, and demur^^ 1.
Possession and Right must meet.
Per Curiam, The Remitter to the husband co^ not work till her husband was dead
sans Issue, ^cause till then the Possession and Right did not (...) in her.

2. Because both the Estates were made to (...) during the Coverture, regularly
after the death (...) her husband she might claim which Estate she wo^^ yet in
this Case she shall be in her Remitter (...) volens, Where the Feme shall be in
her Remitter Nolens volens.
for the benefit of him in Remainder by (...) first Conveyance, Hob. 71. 255.
Wood and S^^ and affirmed in a Writ of Error, Cro. Jac. 489.

If a Feme Covert be Tenant for Life, and (...) Baron and Feme accept of a
greater Estate of (...) in the Reversion, yet after the death of her (...) she
may wave it, and claim her first Estate for (...) 2 Sand. 386.

A. seized of Land in jure uxoris for her Life (...) a Feoffment in Fee to the
use of his wife for (...) the wife is remitted, and is not like Amy Tow^se^^
Case, where the Entry of the wife was not (...) for she was Tenant in Tail,
which Estate was (...) continued by the Feoffment of the Baron. (...)
Sydenyam's Case was: B. seized in jure uxoris (...) Term for the Life of the
wife; they both surrend^ and took back the Lands to them and a third ^son, it
was held that the wife was not presently ^mitted, but after the death of the
Baron she m^ disgree to the Estate, 3 Leon. 93.

Of Disagreement by the Baron.
No Disagreement of the husband shall divest the Remitter.

1. Because the Estate made to the wife which wrought the Remitter is vanished
and defeated.

2. Because she is restored to her ancient and better Right.

3. Remitters tend to the Advancement of ancient Rights.

Where a Warranty descending on an Infant or a Feme Covert shall be a Bar, and
where not.
Where the Entry of a Feme Covert or Infant is not lawful when the Warranty
descends on her during the Coverture, the Warranty does bind them and her;
and the reason is, because the Estate whereto the Warranty is annexed
continues, and cannot be avoided but by Action in which the Warranty is a Bar.

The Father Tenant for Life, the Remainder to his Daughter and Heir apparent (a
Feme Covert) in Fee; the Father makes a Feoffment to diverse Uses with Warranty,
and after levies a Fine with Warranty and dies, the Daughter by consent of her
husband enters within the year after the Fine claiming the Land as her
Inheritance, the Entry by the Feme only by consent of the husband is good, and
the Warranty descending upon her during the Cover^ure, where her Entry is
congeable does not bind ^er, neither does it bind the husband, because it
^escends not upon him, and being void to bind ^er shall not bind him, Cro.
Eliz. p. 72. Ardes and Sympson.

Where the Warranty of the Baron being Tenant by the Courtesy, shall be a Bar
to the Issue of the Wife, and where not. Where the Feme shall vouch her Husband.
If the husband be seized of Lands in the Right his wife, and makes a Feoffment
in Fee with W^ranty, the husband dies, this Warranty shall (...) bind the Heir
of the wife without Assets, tho^^ the husband be not Tenant by the Courtesy, 1
(...) 366.

If a Man infeoff a Woman with Warranty, the intermarry and are impleaded; upon
the defau^^ (...) the husband the wife is received, the shall vouch (...)
husband notwithstanding the Warranty was p^^ (...) suspense; and so on the
other side, If a Woman i^feoff a Man with Warranty, and they interma^ and are
impleaded, the Baron shall vouch hi^^ and his wife by force of the said
Warranty, 1 (...) 390. a.

Where Baron and Feme shall take by Intierties; (...) where by Moieties.
Baron and Feme are Jointenants, and after the^ intermarry, they shall take by
Moyeties; but of La^^ given to them after Marriage, Baron and Feme cannot take
by Moieties during the Coverture.
they take by Intie^^^ for Baron and Feme cannot take by Moyeties d^^ the
Coverture. I let Lands to a Feme sole for (...) Life, who marries, and
afterward I confirm (...) Estate of the Baron and Feme, Habendum for Te^ of
their Lives; the husband does not hold ju^^ wirh his wife, but holds in the
Right of his (...) for Term of her Life, causa qua supra: 1. Bec^ the wife has
the whole for her Life. 2. Jointen^ must come in by one Title. But if I let
Land (...) a Feme sole for Term of years, who takes husb^ and after I confirm
the Estate of the husband (...) wife, to have and to hold the Land for the Term
their two Lives; in this Case they have a joint state of Freehold of the Land,
for that the (...) had no Freehold before; so the same Law is of a (...) lease
in both Cases, and the Chattle of the Fe^ Covert is drowned: But if Land is let
to a Feme sole for Life, who marries, and a Confirmation is made to the Baron
and Feme, they are Jointenants of the Fee-simple, and the husband seized in the
Right of his wife for her Life, for the Baron and Feme cannot take by Moieties
during the Coverture.

If a Man lets Land to the husband and wife, Habendum the one Moiety to the
husband for Term of his Life, and the other Moiety to the wife for the Term of
her Life, and the Lessor confirms the Estate of both in the Land; Habendum to
them and their Heirs; by this Confirmation as to the Moiety of the husband, it
inureth to the husband only and his Heirrs, for the wife had nothing in that
Moiety: But as to the Moiety of the wife they are Jointenants, for the husband
has such an Estate in his wifes Moiety in her Right as is capable of a
Confirmation, 1 Inst. 299.

There are no Moieties between Baron and Feme. If Tenants in Tail enfeoff a
Woman in Fee and dies, and the Issue within Age takes the same Woman to wife,
this is a Remitter to the Infant within Age, and the wife then has nothing, for
that the husband and wife are one person in Law, and therefore the Land cannot
be parted by Moieties. But if an Estate be made to a Man and a Woman and their
Heirs before Marriage, and after they marry, the husband and wife have Moieties
between them.

If Lands are given to two Men and a Woman in Fee, and afterward one of them
intermarries with ^he Woman, and alieneth Land and dies, in this Case the wife
has Right but to a third part; but ^f the Man and the Woman had been married
before the first Feoffment, then the Woman notwith^anding the Alienation of her
husband had Right to (...) Moiety of the Land.

Baron and Feme and a third Person purchase Lands jointly.
Baron a Feme and third person purchase Lan^ jointly, the Baron aliened the
whole, he and his wi^ died, the third Survivor shall have Assise of all, H^ p.
3. for all survives to the third person; for (...) Jointenancy was not severed
by the Alienation (...) the husband, for the wife and the third person (...)
join in a Writ of Right, 31 H. 6. Entry C^geable 54.

A Joint Estate is made to Baron and Feme and a third person, or to Baron and
Feme and to two other persons.
A Joint Estate of Land is made to Baron (...) Feme, and to a third person, in
this Case the B^ron and Feme have in Law but a Moiety, and t^ third person
shall have the other Moiety, for the are but one person in Law. The same Law is
wh^ an Estate is made to the Baron and Feme and (...) other Men, in this Case
the Baron and Feme (...) but a third part, and the other two Men the o^^ two
parts.

At Common Law, if Land had been given to (...) Baron and Feme and a third
person, and to (...) Heirs, and the Baron had made a Feoffment in Fee this had
been a Discontinuance of the one Moiety and a Disseisin of the other Moiety, so
as after (...) death of the Baron the wife has a Right of E^^ for one Moiety,
and the other Jointenant a (...) Entry into the other.

A Feoffment is made before the Statute of ^7 (...) 8. to the use of a Man and
a Woman, and (...) Heirs of their two Bodies, and they intermarry, (...) after
Marriage the husband sells the entire Land (...) dies sans Issue, and after the
Statute of 27 H was made the wife claims the Entry by Survi^ as Tenant in Tail
after Possibility, etc. Per Curi^ She shall have but a Moiety by reason of the
J^tenancy before Marriage; but the Issue, if any (...) shall have a Formedon of
the whole, Plowd. (...) 1. Co. 102. b. 4 Leon. 198. 10 Co. 68, 102. 2^ 66.

Tenant in Tail enfeoffs a Woman in Fee and dies, and his Issue within Age
takes the same Woman to wife, this is a Remitter to the Infant; and the wife
has nothing, for that the Baron and Feme are one person in Law, and then if
the Heir be in Remitter by force of the Tail, then it follows, that the wife
has nothing because the Land cannot be parted by Moieties, and the Freehold
and Inheritance of the wife is vanished clear away, Lit. Sect. 665.

Of Land recovered in value during the Coverture there shall not be Moieties,
Of Land recovered in value during the Coverture no Moieties.
although they had Moieties in the Land recovered against them, Plowd. 183.

If a Feoffment be made to a Man and a Woman and to their Heirs with Warranty,
and they intermarry, and after are impleaded, and vouch and recover in value,
Moieties shall not be between them; for though they were sole when the Warranty
was made, yet at the time when they rcovered and had Execution they were Baron
and Feme, in which time they cannot take by Moieties.

A Man gives Land by his Will to his wife for Life and dies; his wife marries
B. the Heir of the Devisor by Deed enrolled sells the said Lands to Baron and
Feme, Habendum to them, their Heirs and Assigns to their own use, and then the
wife had Issue, Where they takes by Intierties.
a Son (who was by the Will to be Christened by such a Name) this by this
Conveyance made by the Brother and Heir of the Devisor before the Birth of the
Son has destroyed the contingent Remainder; and the Baron and Feme took by
Intierties, and the Estate for Life in the wife in the entire Tenancy was
emerged, 2 Sand. 386.

Lands are given to A. B. and C. D. a Feme, Where a Recovery binds not the
Wifes Moiety.
and the Heirs of the Body of A. B. A. B. and C. D. entermarry, the Baron
suffers a Common Recovery against himself only without naming his wife, the
Recovery is falsified for one Moiety, because the wife, who was Jointenant with
A. B. was not named and party to the Recovery: This Recovery binds not the
Moiety of the wife, Lord Norris's Case, 1 Leon. 27^ 3 Co.

Copyhold Lands are surrendeed to the use of the wife for Life, the Remainder
to the use of the righ^ Heirs of the husband and wife, the husband entre^ in
the Right of the wife: Per Curiam, The Remainder was executed for a Moiety
presently in the wife, Where the Heir shall only have a Moiety.
and the husband of that was seized in the Righ^ of his wife, and the wife
dying first, her Heir sh^^ have it; but if the husband had died first, his H^^
should have had one Moiety, 3 Leon. p. 4.

Attornment.
A Reversion is granted to a Man and a Woman, and their Heirs, and before
Attornment they i^^^^marry, Where Baron and Feme and a Stranger are
Jointenants, the sole Alienation of the Baron shall bar the Stranger surviving,
and where not.
and then Attornment is made, in this Case the Baron and Feme have no Moieties.
So in the Case of a Letter of Attorney to make Livery.

If a Feoffment were made before the Statute of 27 H. 8. Of Uses, to the use of
a Man and a Woman, and their Heirs, and they intermarry, and then the Statute
is made; if the husband alien it is good for a Moiety, for the Statute executes
a Possession according to such quality, manner, form and condition as they had
in the Use; so as though it vest d^ring the Coverture, yet the Act of
Parliament excutes several Moieties in them, seeing they had se^eral Moieties
in the Use, 1 Inst. 187 b.

If the Reversion be granted to a Man and a Woman they are to have Moieties in
Law, By Attornment they shall have no Moiety.
but if th^^ intermarry and then Attornment is had, they sh^^ have no Moieties,
because it is by Act of Law, the by the purport of the Grant they were to have
Moi^ties, 1 Inst. 310. a.

Difference between joint Alienations and several.
If two Femes be jointly seized, and they take husbands, and the husbands join
in an Alienation an^ dye, the wives are Jointenants of the Right, an^ may join
in a Writ of Right, or they may have s^veral Cui in vita's at Election; but
when they ha^ recovered in those several Writs they shall be Jointenants again:
But if the husband had aliened severally, this had been a Severance of the
Jointure for a time.

If a Man make a Feoffment in Fee to the use of himself and of such wife as he
should afterward marry, for Term of their Lives, Where Baron and Feme shall be
Joyintenants.
and afterward he takes wife, they are Jointenants, and yet they come to
their Estate at several times, 1 Inst. 188. a.

If a Feme Coverr and J. S. are Jointenants for Life of a Copyhold, What is a
Severance of the Jointure.
and J. S. surrenders his Moiety to the husband this is a severance of the
Jointure, so that he is Tenant in Common with his wife, 14 Jac. Lane and Panel.

If a Feme Covert and J. S. are Jointenants for Life, Lease an actual Severance.
and the Baron and Feme by Indenture let the Moiety of the wife for years
rendering Rent, and after the wife dies, the Survivor shall not avoid this
Lease, because this was and is the Lease of the wife prima facie till she
disagree to it, and only avoidable, and the Survivor is not privy to her to
avoid it, for the Lease was an actual Severance during the years, 14 Jac. Rolls
Rep. Smalman and Ayborough.

Baron and Feme and a third person purchase Land to them and the Heirs of the
husband, Where a Release shall enure to the Husband sole and not to the Wife.
and the third person releaseth to the Baron all his Right, etc. without the
word Heirs, and afterward the Baron and Feme make a Lease of all for years
rendering Rent to them and the Heirs of the Baron; the Baron dies, the Heir
shall have the Moiety of the Rent after the death of the Baron, and a Release
to the husband only shall enure to him sole and not to the wife, Dyer 263.

CHAP. XVI. Conveyances.
What shall be said to be the Deed of the Husband and Wife. Of a Feoffment by
the Husband of the Wifes Land. Where the Wifes Grant, if she join with her
Husband, is void or not. Surrender by the Husband how it operates. What shall
amount to a Surrender or not. Of a Release of the Husband of the Wifes Right to
rent. Of his Release of Money to be paid after the Wifes Decease. Of Exchanges
of the Land of the Wife, and what shall be a good Confirmation of it by the
Wife. How a Man may execute an Estate to his Wife. Of the Christian Names of
Women in Grants.

What shall be said to be the Deed of the Husband and Wife.
DEbt on a Bond conditioned for the performance of Covenants in an Indenture
made between S. and Anne his wife of the one part, and the Plaintiff on the
other. The Defendant pleads the Indenture as an Indenture of W. S. and Anne his
wife, whereas in truth the Feme never sealed it. The Plaintiff replies, That
the Indenture showed by the Defendant non fuit facta inter W. S. and Anne his
wife on the one part, and the Plaintiff on the other. The Jury find the Baron
sealed it, but the wife did not: This Verdict is found against the Defendant,
who pleaded it as the Deed of the wife; and per Curiam the Plaintiff is not
estopped to say, that the Deed showed is not the Deed of the Baron and Feme;
but he is estopped by the Condition to say, there is not any such Indenture.
But if the Baron had sealed and delivered it in the Name of the Feme it had
been the Deed of the wife during the Life of the husband; and if they by
Indenture bargained and sold the Land of the wife rendering Rent, it had been a
good Deed of the Femes, because she afterward might have accepted the Rent,
and affirmed it as her Deed: And Judgment was pro Quer. Cro. Eliz. 269. Ship
and Steed.

Feoffment.
Baron and Feme make a Feoffment of the wifes Jointure, which she had by a
former husband, to one and his Heirs to the use of Feoffee for the Life of the
wife, this is a Forfeiture, for by the Feoffment the Fee-simple passes, and
that to the use of the Feoffor; and the Estate and the Use are several things,
and the Limitation for the Life of the wife cannot extend to both, 1 Leon. p.
126. Pierce and Hoe.

Baron and Feme join in a Feoffment of the wifes Land rendering Rent; the
husband dies, By acceptance of the Rent the Feoffment is affirmed.
the Feme takes a new husband before any Rent day, the second husband accepts
the Rent, the Feoffment is affirmed for ever.

If a Feme sole make a Feoffment on Condition to re-infeoff her at what time
she will, Feme Covert may request a Re-infeoffment without her Husband.
and after takes husband, she may require the Feoffee to re-infeoff her without
her husband, and if the Feoffee refuse to do it, the Condition is broken.

Where Baron and Feme Infants join in a Feoffment by Indenture, the Feme after
the death of her husband may have a Dum fuit infra aetatem; Dum fuit infra
aetatem.
secus where her self was of full Age at the time of the Feoffment, for there
she shall not have a Dum fuit infra aetatem, for the Nonage of her husband,
albeit they be but one person in Law, 1 Inst. 337. a.

Baron seized in Fee makes a Feoffment to the use of himself and his wife,
Feoffment of the Husband destroys a Contingent Use.
and to the Heirs of the Survivor of them, and afterward makes a Feoffment of
the same Land, and dies, the Feme enters, in this Case the Feoffment of the
Husband has destroyed the Contingent Use of the wife, Cro. Car. 102.

One being enfeoffed to the use of a Feme Sole, she takes an husband who sells
the Land to a Stranger, the Feme received the Money, the husband and wife pray
him, Sale of Land in Equity is the Sale of the Husband alone, though the Wife
received the Money.
that was enfeoffed to the use of the wife, to make an Estate to a Stranger,
this Sale in Equity ought to be construed the Sale of the husband alone, and it
shall be not esteemed that the wife did it, for the Deed of the Baron and the
Receipt of the Money by her is not material, because she cannot have the free
disposal.

One being possessed of a Lease of Tithes in the Right of his wife, as Executrix
to her former husband, grants totum jus, titulum and interesse suum de and in
decimis praedict'. By the Grant of totum jus suum what passes.
Verdict was pro Quaer', who claimed under the said Grant. It was moved in
arrest of Judgment, that the Declaration was not good, for he has not set
forth any good Title to enable himself to the Tithes: But per Curiam the Grant
is good, and the Lease he had in the Tithes in the Right of the wife did pass,
for he granted totum jus, etc. suum, and the word suum does import a propriety
in possession, and it is all one as if had especially named them in the Grant,
Cro. Car. 318. Arnold and Bidgood.

Where Infant Baron and Feme make a Conveyance to the King by Bargain and Sale,
this is not aided by the Statute of 13 Eliz. cap. 2. Stat. 13 Eliz. cap. 2.
explicated.
for that aids only where there is imperfection in the Conveyance, and not
where there is Disability in the person that makes the Conveyance: But where
Tenant in Tail makes a Conveyance by Deed, that is aided by the Statute, for he
may make a Conveyance by Fine, Cro. Jac. 364.

Two husbands and their wives join in a Grant of the Lands of their wives, and
covenant that they have Right to convey and covenant to make a farther
Assurance within seven years, and one of the wives are within Age at the time
of the making the Deed, and the Right of her Lands descended to her Son, an
Infant, by which the Moiety of the Estate was divested out of the Plaintiff.
Per Curiam. The wife being within Age at the time of the Covenant, as appears
by the Verdict, had not power then to convey the Estate according to the
Covenant, and there was no request to make the Assurance. Per Curiam. The Death
of the wife in the Infancy of her Son was the Act of God, and it was the
default of the Plaintiff that he did not demand Assurance in the Life of the
wife, and after her full Age, Sir Thomas Jones 195. Nash and Ashton.

Bargain and Sale. Grant. Where the Wifes Grant is void when she joins with her
Husband or not.
A Bargain and Sale binds not a Feme Covert but by Custom.

A Deed acknowledged by Baron and Feme shall by the Common Law be enrolled only
for the husband and not for the wife by reason of the Coverture, and though it
be enrolled for both, Deed enrolled binds not the Wife.
it binds not; Aliter by Custom, and no one has power to examine a Feme Covert
but by Writ, 2 Inst. 673. But

A Feme Covert in London may be examined, Custom of London.
and then she shall be bound by a Deed enrolled, Hob. 225.

Now if the husband is seized in the Right of his wife, The Freehold passes
during the Coverture.
and bargains and sells by Deed enrolled to another, this is an Estate of
Freehold; for this is as an Estate during Coverture, 2 Rolls Abr. 845.

S. and his wife being seized of the Parsonage of, etc. to them and the Heirs
of S. did give the same to King Henry the Eighth and his Heirs by their Deed,
the King by his Letters Patents granted it over, the wifes Grant is void, Hob.
224. 5. Anne Needler's Case.

Surrender.
Baron and Feme Jointenants for Life, the Baron may well surrender to him in
Reversion, and this shall bind the husband though not the wife, not shall be
any Discontinuance to her, yet this is not a good Surrender during the Life of
the Baron, Kelw. 42.

What is a Surrender or not.
If Lessee for Life enfeoff Baron and Feme in Reversion in Right of the wife,
this is a Surrender (admitting it not a Forfeiture) but if Lessee for Life
grant his Estate to Baron and Feme in Reversion in Right of the wife, this is
not any Surrender for the benefit of the Baron, 21 H. 7. 40.

M. and J. his wife take a Lease jointly for their two Lives, and now by new
Indenture take a new Lease to them two and the Survivor, the acceptance of the
second Lease to commence a die datus is a Surrender, because they conclude then
that the Lessor had power to make a new Lease, which he cannot do unless the
former be surrendered, More 636. Mellow and May's Case.

If Feme Lessee for years take husband, who after accepts a new Lease for their
Lives, this is a Surrender of the first Lease, Plowd. 199. Wroth and Adams.

Baron and Feme they cannot expressly nor by Acceptance of a new Lease surrender
the wifes Freehold so as to bind her surviving, Hobert p. 203, 204.

Baron and Feme are seized in the Right of the wife for Life of the wife, and
the King grants this to the wife for Life of the wife with Remainders over by
new Letters Patents in consideration of the Surrender of the first Estate, this
is a void Grant, for that this Surrender is not absolute inasmuch as the wife
after the death of the Baron may claim her first Estate, Hob. Swain and Holman.

Release. Vide Fine.
Baron and Feme are Lessees pur auter vie, the Lessor may enlarge their Estate
by Release for their own Lives, 2 Rolls Abr. 401.

Covenant was that a Stranger should pay 8 l. yearly to one of the Covenantees,
and to one F. S. a Stranger; F. S. took husband one B. who did release the
Payment; the Question was, whether by this Release the Defendant shall be
discharged of payment: B. is a Stranger to whose wife the payment is to be
made. Now he cannot release this he having no Right at all therein; the Release
is made by a Stranger who had nothing in the thing, nor yet any Remedy to come
by it: And Judgment was for the Plaintiff, 3 Bulstr. 27. Quick and Harris
versus Ludborough.

Release by the husband pleaded to an Action brought by the wife after his
decease for Money to be allowed her after his death not good, Brownl. 15.
Belcher and Hudson, p. 18. Smith and Stafford.

Exchange.
If Baron and Feme exchange with another this is good during the Coverture, 39
E. 3. 30.

If the husband exchange the Land of the wife for Lands of less value, if the
wife after his death once agree to the exchange she shall never avoid it
afterward, 9 H. 6. 52.

The husband and wife were seized of Lands i^ Right of the wife, they both
joined in Exchange of the Lands to a Stranger for other Lands, which Exchange
was executed; the husband and wife seise^ of the Land taken in Exchange aliened
the same by Fine. Per Curiam, The wife after the death of the husband may enter
into her own Land notwithstanding the Fine, 1 Leon. p. 285.

By the woman's acceptance of Dower out of Lands exchanged she agrees to the
Exchange, 3 Leon. 27.

Of a Feme Covert's being a Purchaser, and how (...) shall be good.
A Feme Covert cannot take any thing of the gift of the husband, but is of a
capacity to purchase of others without the consent of her husband, but her
husband may disagree thereto and divest the whole Estate; but if he neither
agree nor disagree, the Purchase is good; but after his death although her
husband agreed thereto, yet she may without cause alleged wave the same; so
may her Heirs also if after the death of the husband she agreed not thereto, 1
Inst. 3. a.

How a Man may execute an Estate to his Wife.
By no Conveyance at the Common Law a Man could during the Coverture either in
Possession, Reversion or Remainder limit an Estate to his wife: But a Man by
his Deed may covenant with others to stand seized to the use of his wife, or
make a Feoffment or other Conveyances to the use of his wife and now the Estate
is executed to such uses by the Statute of 27 H. 8. But a Man cannot covenant
with his wife to stand seized to her use, because he cannot covenant with her
for that they are one person in Law: And yet if Cestuy que use had devised his
wife should sell his Land and made her Executrix and died, and she took another
husband, she might sell the Land to her husband, for she did it en auter droit,
and the husband shall be in by the Devisor. So if a Charter of Feoffment be
made to the wife, the husband as Attorney to the Feoffor may make Livery to the
wife, 1 Inst. 112.

Of Christian Names of Women in Grants, whether one or several.
Johan makes a Lease by the Name of Jane, Quaere.

A Grant to T. and Ellen his wife, where her Name is Emmelin, yet it is good,
because it is the wife of T. 2 H. 4. 25. For wife Uxor is a good Name of
purchase, as uxori J. S. So if a Christian Name be added and mistaken, as Em'
pro Emmelin; for utile per inutile non vitiatur, 1 Inst. 3. a.

Agnes and Anne are several Names of Baptism and not one Name, Cro. Jac. 425.

Jane and Joan are but one Name, and not distinct several Names, Mich. 15 Jac.
B. R. Griffith and Midleton.

Isable and Sybil are distinct Names of Baptism, 1 Ass. 11.

CHAP. XVII. Leases.
Of a Lease for Lives made by Baron and Fem^ Of a Lease made by the Husband of
the Wife Land, and how and wherein it shall bind t^^ Wife or not. What shall be
a good Lease wa^ranted by the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 28. The Qualifications
of such Leases to bring them with in the Statute. What acceptance of the
Husband shall affirm a voidable Lease. What is a good Lease by Baron and Feme
to bring Ejectment of Leases for years made to Baron and Feme. Diversity
between a Lease for Life and a Lease for Years made to a Feme Covert. Lease to
a Feme Covert when it shall be said to vest. Of a Lease for Life made to Baron
and Feme, of the Husband may grant it when the Lease is made to Baron and Feme.
If the Husband may grant it when the Lease is made to the Survivor for Years.
How if the Remainder be to the Heirs of the Survivor. Of Leases for Life made
by Baron and Feme. Diversity where Livery is made by the Lessor in person, and
where by Letter of Attorney.

Lease for years made by Baron and Feme, Vide Tit. Rent.
By the Husband of the Wifes Land, and how and wherein it shall bind the Wife
or not.
By the Baron sole.
Voidable not void.
THE Husband makes a Lease of the wifes Lan^ and dies, the Lease is not
determined nor voi^ after the death of the husband, but voidable only by the
Entry of the wife after his death, Cro. Jac. 332. Jordan and Wikes. But

If Baron seized in Fee in the Right of his wife had Issue by her, and so is
Tenant by the Courtesy, and after makes, a Lease for years reserving Rent, and
after the wife dies, and after the husband dies before the end of the years,
yet this is void and ended in the Law before any Entry of the next Heir of the
wife, forasmuch as he cannot make this good by any acceptance of the Rent, the
Lease being made only by the husband, 1 Rolls Abr. 380, 381. Cro. Car. 399.
Miller and Manwaring.

But the husband makes a Lease of the wifes Land and dies, this Lease is not
determined nor void after the death of the husband, but voidable only by the
Entry of the wife after his death, Cro. Jac. 332. Jordan and Wikes.

If Baron and Feme lease for years by Indenture rendering Rent, Where a Lease
enures by way of Interest, and not by Estoppel.
where the husband had all the Estate in the Land, and the wife nothing, after
the death of the Baron the Lessee in an Action of Debt for the Rent brought by
the wife shall not be estopped to say that at the time of the Lease made the
wife had nothing in the Land, for this does not enure by way of Estoppel,
forasmuch as it enures by way of Interest, 1 Rolls Abr. 877. Brierton and
Evans, Cro. Eliz. 701. mesme Case.

By Baron and Feme.
What shall be a good Lease warranted by the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 28. Or,

What Lease for years made by Baron and Feme shall bind the wife and her Heirs
or not, Vid. 1 Inst. 44, 45.

By the Statute of 32 H. 8. any husband and wife seized of any Estate of
Inheritance in Fee-simple or Fee-tail in the Right of the wife, or jointly wi^
his wife before the Coverture or after, this-shall b^^^ the wife and her and
their Heirs; but such Lease must have these Qualifications.

1. They must be by Deed indented.

2. They must begin from the day of the making thereof, or from the making
thereof.

3. There must not be a double Lease in being (...) one time.

4. It must not exceed one and twenty years o^ three Lives from the making.

5. It must be of Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments manurable.

6. It must be of Lands or Tenements which have most commonly been letten to
Farm or occupied by the Farmers thereof, by the space of twenty years next
before the new Lease made.

7. There must be reserved the yearly accustomed Rent, which must be reserved
to the Baron and Feme and to the Heirs of the Feme.

8. They must not be made without Impeachment of Waste.

If they are made with these Qualifications they shall bind the wife and her
Heirs, but if they are not warranted by this Statute, yet they shall be good
against the husband.

The wife must join in the Lease and be made party to it, and seal and deliver
the same in person; and if it be for Life or Lives there must be Livery and
Seisin, Cro. Jac. 563. Greenwood and Tyler.

The husband purchased Lands to him and his wife and their Heirs, he
afterward, his wife not being party, let these Lands to L. and T. for 60 years
if they lived so long, rendering Rent, this Lease shall bind the wife by the
Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 28 for it is not within the Proviso, for that it is
not the sole Inheritance of the wife, Cro. Car. 22. Smith and Trinder.

If a Man possessed of a Manor for 99 years makes his Will and devises it to A.
his wife, Construction of the words of a Will impowring to make a Lease.
for her Life to set, let or make Estates out of it, and them in as ample
manner as I my self might, if I were living during the said Term; and after the
death of A. devises it to B. his Daughter, and to the Heirs of her Body
begotten and dies, A. being Executrix consents to the Legacy, and after makes a
Lease of a Tenement, parcel of the Manor, to C. for 99 years, if threee Lives
shall so long live, and dies, this is a good Lease against B. the Daughter,
although it was objected, that by this Clause she had only power to dispose of
it during her Life, 2 Rolls Abr. 261.

Baron and Feme seized of Lands in the Right of the wife levied a Fine to the
use of themselves for their Lives, and afterward to the use of the Heirs of
the wife, Proviso to make Leases.
Proviso that it shall and may be lawful to and for the Baron and Feme at any
time during their Lives to make Leases for one and twenty years or three Lives;
the wife being Covert made a Lease for one and twenty years, and adjudged a
good Lease against the husband, though it was made when she was a Feme Covert,
and by her alone, and this by reason of the Proviso, Godb. 327. pl. 419. Quaere.

Tenant for Life takes husband, Forfeiture or not.
and by Deed indented they make a Lease to him in Reversion for the Life of the
husband, reserving Rent, this is no Forfeiture; for he in the Reversion was
party, and a Surrender it is not, for their whole Estate was not given, and the
Reservation is good, 1 Inst. 42. Baron makes a Lease, then Baron and Feme levy
a Fine the Conisee shall avoid the Lease.
a.

Baron and Feme seized of Land in the Right of the wife, the husband alone
makes a Lease for years, afterward Baron and Feme levy a Fine, and they
^fterwards both die, the Conisee shall avoid the Lease, (...) Leon. 247. Harvey
and Thomas.

A Lease is made by Baron and Feme in jure ux^ris, and he dies, and she accepts
the Rent, it is good against her, Cro. Jac. 563. 2 Anders. 42. For by her own
Act she has affirmed that the Estate continues.

Second Husband accepts the Rent it binds the Wife.
Baron and Feme make a Lease by Indenture for Term of years, rendering Rent, the
Lessee enters, the husband before the day of payment of the Rent dies, and the
wife also before the day of payment takes a second husband, who accepts the
Rent at the d^^ and dies, the wife may not oust the Termor. She might have
avoided the Term before the day at her pleasure; but that Liberty she had
assigned to her second husband, Dyer 159.

Vide plus sub Titulo, What shall be a Disposition of the Wife's Term or not.

It was held Pasch. 18 Eliz. in C. B. Que si Baron and Feme sont and font Lease
de terres del Feme per fait Indent' pro 21 ans de le date de fait reservant
rent etc. Le Baron and Feme ou l'un de^^ adonque esteant deins age de 21 ans,
ceo lease (...) garrant estre bon per Stat. 32 H. 8. Et uncore f^^^ tenus que
si Jointure soit fait al Feme deins ^ge avaunt que el soit Espouse and puis est
marry, and s^^ Baron morust que el ne poit wave ceo Jointure and demand estre
endowed de tierce part de touts les terres de que son Baron morust seize. Mes
serra lie per per ceo Jointure fait avaunt les Espousals per reas^^ de Stat. 27
H. 8. cap. 10. come al temps de feas^^^ de Jointure el ad estre de plein age.
Ex Ma^^script. Mri. Brownloe. Wife conceals her Marriage and makes Leases as a
Widow, the Husband decreed in Chancery to confirm the Lease.


If a Feme sole being a Widow be seized of Lan^ and secretly takes husband, and
conceals her Marriage* and so continuing under the notion of a Widow* makes
Leases of diverse parcels of Land, and afterward the time of her Marriage is
published, the husband in Equity sought to avoid the Leases, but was denied
Relief, and decreed in Chancery to confirm the Leases during the Term.

Lease for years by Baron and Feme without Deed, is void, as to the Feme, Cr.
El. 656.

Baron and Feme, Baron and Feme Jointenants with another; she and her husband
make a Lease, and the wife dies, the Lease is good against the Survivor.
(in the right of the Feme) and a third person were Jointenants for the Lives
of the wife, and of the third person, the Baron and Feme by Indenture let the
Moiety for 21 years, the Feme dies, the surviving Joyntenant enters: Lessee
brings Trespass, and recovered; for the Lease is good, and is as a Lease made
by her, until she after Coverture, or one who claims in privity by her, avoids
it by Entry: for it is not void by the Death of the Baron, but voidable, and
the Avoidance ought to be by Entry, and this cannot be by the Jointenant's
Survivor, for he is paramount the wife, and so the Lease shall bind as long as
any Jointenant be alive, Cr. Jac. 417. Smalman and Ayborows, 1 Roll. rep. 441.
Mesme case.

If a Man demise Lands to B. his wife for life, the Remainder to C. in Fee,
Power to make Leases.
and by a Codicil he devises that B. shall have a power six months before his
death to Lease this for six years. B. takes a second husband, she and her
second husband may Lease this by Deed or without Deed for six years; and if
they lease this Habend' a die datus, it is good, 1 Roll's Abr. 329.

Lease by Indenture signed and sealed by Baron and Feme, (of the wife's Land)
and a Letter of Attorney by Baron and Feme to deliver it on the Land in both
their names, Lease of Ejectment by Baron and Feme.
and the Declaration was of a Lease by the Baron only, and not in the name of
the wife in Ejectment; the Declaration is good; for the delivery by the
Attorney is a void Delivery, and void Warrant as to the wife, and so it is the
Lease of the Baron only: but if the Lease had been delivered upon the Land by
Baron and Feme, it had been a good Lease for both. But now it is the Lease of
the Baron only, and not voidable, but void against the wife, Cr. Jac. 61^*
Gardner and Norman; and so in Wilson and Rich^ case, Yelv. 1. in such case the
Declaration was b^ Baron and Feme, and adjudged the Lease is the Lease of the
Baron sole, and does not maintain the Declaration. But in Cr. Car. 165.
Hopkans's case contra, where the Lease was sealed and subscribed by them both,
and a Letter of Attorney made by them to deliver it upon the Land. Et per totam
Curia^. It is a good Letter of Attorney for both, and the Lease well delivered,
and it is the Lease of them both during the husband's life.

Leases for years made to Baron and Feme.
There is a diversity between a Lease for life and a Lease for years made to a
Feme Covert. Diversity between a Lease for life, and a Lease for years.
If I let Land to a Feme sole for years, who takes husband, and after I
confirm the Estate to Baron and Feme, To have and to hold to them for the term
of their two Lives, this Confirmation makes them Jointenants for their Lives,
because the Chattel of a Feme Covert may be drowned, and the husband has such
a Possession in her Right of a Chattel as is capable of a Confirmation or a
Release; but a Feme's Estate of a Freehold cannot be altered by the
Confirmation made to the husband and her, as a term for years may, whereof the
husband may make Disposition at his pleasure, 1 Inst. 300.

Where the Baron shall be Assignee to the Wife.
Feme Lessee for years upon condition, that she, he^ Executors or Assigns, shall
not alien without the consent of the Lessor, she takes Baron and dies; (...)
husband is within the danger of the Condition, (...) he is Assignee; in Moor
and Ferrand's case, 1 L^^ page 3.

An Estate made to a Feme Covert, de novo, vests till the husband's dissent,
but to a new Lease made to a Feme, who was Lessee before, vests not till his
assent, Hob. 204.

Lease for life made to Baron and Feme.
I let Land to a Feme sole for term of her life, who takes an husband, and
after I confirm the Estate of the Baron and Feme, Habendum for term of their
Lives. Confirmation.
In this case the Baron does not hold jointly with his wife, but holds in
right of his wife for term of her life; but this Confirmation shall enure to
the husband by way of Remainder for the term of his life if he survive the
wife; he cannot hold jointly with the wife, because the wife has the whole for
her life, and Jointenants must come in by one Title, 1 Inst. 299.

Land is demised to Baron and Feme for their Lives, Land demised to Baron and
Feme for their Lives, Remainder to the Survivor in years.
the Remainder to the Survivor of them for years; the husband granted over this
term for years and died, the wife shall have it, and not the Grantee, because
there was nothing in the one or the other to grant over but the Survivor; so if
the wife had died after the Grant, and the Baron survived, yet he shall have
the term against his own Grant, Poph. 4, 5. So if a Lease be made to Baron and
Feme for their Lives, the Remainder to the Executors of the Survivor of them;
and the husband grant the term and dies, this shall not bar the wife, because
the wife had but a Possibility and no Interest, Co. Lit. 46. b.

But if a Lease is made to Baron and Feme for their Lives, the Remainder to the
Heirs of the Survivor, Remainder to the Heirs of the Survivor.
it is a good Remainder notwithstanding the uncertainty; and in that case the
husband after the death of the wife, shall have Judgment to recover the Land,
Godbolt 139.

Lease to Baron and Feme, and his Son for life, the Son dies; he in pleading
shall not say as amongst other Jointenants, fuer' seisit' in dominico suo ut de
libero Tenemento per termino vitiae ipsorum patris a^ filii per jus
accrescendi, but omitting per jus accrescendi. Ex Manuscript Mr. Brownloe.

Leases for Life made by Baron and Feme. Ut supra.
Lease by Baron and Feme of the Lands of the wife Habendum from Michaelmas for
life, Livery, Diversity.
and Livery is made after Michaelmas, Secundum formam Chartae, it is good
enough; and the difference is where the Livery is made by the Lessor in person,
and where by Letter of Attorney in the same Charter generally made: But if the
Letter of Attorney be to make Livery after Michaelmas, it is good enough in
both cases; for there is not any Intention that the Livery should operate in
futuro, but that Livery should be made when it should operate, and the Estate
should be good presently; and it differs from 2 Rep. 55. Buckler and Harvey,
where a Reversion was granted Habendum after Michaelmas for life, although the
Attornment be after Michaelmas, yet it being the Act of a Stranger shall not
make that good which otherwise would be void: But here when the Lessor makes
Livery himself after Michaelmas, it is well enough, Cr. Jac. 563. Greenwood and
Tyler. Lease made by Baron and Feme, in right of his wife, to J. S. Habendum
from Michaelmas following for term of life, after Michaelmas Baron and Feme
make Livery, secundum formam Chartae, it shall be good against the wife to bind
her; for the Livery alone did not make the Lease, but the Livery and Deed, and
it took its operation by both. And although if Livery had been made before
Michaelmas, it had been void to make it a good Lease; yet it being made after
Michaelmas, it is made a good Lease by the Deed and Livery, and not by either
of them solely, for the Livery in this case is but the Execution of the Deed,
and is a sufficient witness of their Agreement, which is the cause it ought to
be by Deed to prove the Agreement of the wife; and all Reservations, Covenants
and Warranties in the Deed, are good, and the Lessor and Lessee bound by them.

CHAP. XVIII. Wills.
How and in what Cases a Feme Covert may make a Will. What she may devise
without the consent of her Husband. If she may make a Declaration in the Nature
of a Will, without the Assent of the Husband. Several Cases of the Husband's
being bound to permit his Wife to make a Will. Of Devises to the Wife by the
Husband or others, and the Constitution of such Devises. What is a Devise by
Implication or not. Of a Feme Coverts assenting to a Legacy. If the Husband may
devise the Term made to him and his Wife. Wife Lagatee of Goods is made
Executor, if the second Husband's Executor shall have them.

How and in what Cases a Feme Covert may make a Will, and it shall be good or
not.
A Feme Covert may make a Testament, if her Husband agree to it after her
death, Mich. 8 Jac. B. Grant's Case.

A Feme Covert may not devise things in Action which she has, without the
Assent or Agreement of the husband, and by his assent she may make Executors,
or him to be Executor, 4 H. 6. 3. 39 H 6. 27.

A Feme Covert Executrix may not devise any Goods she has as Executrix,
without the assent of her husband or his Agreement afterward, although she may
make an Executor without his assent Grant's Case, supra.

Regularly a Feme Covert cannot make her Will, Regula.
and therefore a Feme Covert made a Will, and devises 30 l. per annum out of
some of her own Land to a charitable use; the Heir submits himself to an Award,
and is bound to perform it; the Arbitrators award payment of it, yet by Decree
of Chancery the Heir is discharged of the Payment, and the Devise was void ab
initio: The like case of an Infant.

If a Feme sole make a Feoffment to her own use, and after takes husband, and
after makes a Will that the Feoffees shall make an Estate to her husband and
dies; this Devise shall not be good in Chancery, because that all Acts by a
Feme Covert are void, and there Aequitas sequitur Legem.

But though a wife cannot make a Will without her husband's Assent, Declaration
in the nature of a Will.
yet she may make a Writing or Declaration in the nature of her Will, and it
shall be good in many cases, as was Tilley and Peirce's Case, Cro. Car. 376.
Debt upon Bond conditioned, Whereas the Defendent was to espouse A. S. a Widow,
if the Marriage took effect, and he should survive the said A. S. there were
paid to the Obligees 300 l. to and for such Uses and Purposes as she said A. S.
by any Writing under her Hand and Seal, subscribed and published in the
presence of two witnesses, should nominate, declare and appoint then, etc. The
Defendent pleads, she did not limit, declare or appoint any Use or Purpose for
the employment of that Money. Plaintiff replies, that she by her Will in
writing, sealed and published by her in the presence of two Witnesses, (naming
their names) did will and appoint such Sums to be paid, and that the Defedant
had not paid them, and on Arrest, Judgment, pro Quer.

The Condition of a Bond was; Whereas he had taken A. S. a widow, to wife,
Condition of a Bond to permit a Wife to make a Will.
being possessed of diverse Goods. If he should permit his said wife to make a
Will, and dispose in Legacies as much as she would, not exceeding 50 l. and pay
and perform what she appointed, so that it exceed not 50 l. that then, etc. The
Defendant pleads she made not any Will, and upon issue it was found that she
made a Will, and did dispose of diverse Legacies, not exceed 50 l. but that she
was Covert at the time of making the Will; and Judgment pro Quer. for it is a
Will within the Intent of the Condition, and it is but her Appointment which
the husband is bound to perform, Cro. Car. 219. Marriot and Kinsman.

The like Case is Cro. Car. 597. Sherman and Lilley. The Condition was to
permit his wife to make a Will of her first husband's Goods, to the value of
100 l. to be paid within one year after her decease, That then, etc. Defendant
pleads, that he permitted his wife to make a Will, but does not plead that he
paid it accordingly, and so the Plea was held to be ill.

It is held in 3 Keb. 624. Articles were made before Marriage, That the wife
shall make a Will, and the husband to pay the Legacies devised. Per Cur' Her
Will is void, and the husband bound only by the Articles to permit it, vid.
Mod. Rep. 211.

In Harris and Hessie's Case, 1 Keb. 347. Authority was given by the wife to
devise 300 l. and she disposes 200 l. by Fifties, and well, per Cur'.

If a Feme Covert make a Will, and devise Goods to another, and the husband
after her death deliver the Goods to the Devisee acccordingly, this shall bind
him, 26 E. 3. 71.

Of Devises to the Wife by the Baron or others, and the Construction of such
Devises.
A Man may devise Lands to the wife, though they be but one person in Law,
because the Devise does not take effect till after his death; Feme cannot
devise her Lands to her Husband.
but though a last Will does not take effect till after death, yet if a Feme
Covert be seized of Lands in fee, she cannot devise the same to her husband,
because at the time of the making her Will she had no power, being sub
potestate viri; and the Law shall intend it to be done by the Cohersion of her
husband, 1 Inst. 112. b.

If a Man devise Lands, whereof he is seized in Fee to his Son and Heir after
the death of A. the wife of the Devisor, Devise by Implication.
this shall raise an Estate for life to A. by Implication, because by this the
Divisor shows his Intention that this his Heir shall not have this during the
life of his wife; whereas had it not been for the Devise, he ought to have had
it presently upon his death, 13 H. 7. 17. b.

But upon a Lease for years on condition, that he should not alien to any
besides his Children, the Lessee devises part of the Estate to H. his Son,
after the death of the wife, and made his Executors. Per Cur'. This Devise to
the Son after the death of the wife, is not any Devise to the wife in the mean
time, for its plain he did not intend it to his wife, but to his Executors in
the mean time, and so no breach or forfeiture. (But in the other Case none
other could have it besides the wife, Cro. Jac. 74. Horton and Horton's Case.)
And if a Man devise a Term to the Son after the death of the wife of the
Devisor, this shall not raise any Estate to the wife, because it does not
appear that his intent was so, because the Son was not to have this by the Law
after the death of the Devisor w^^^^ut a Devise, but the Executor.

If a Man devise a Term to his wife, if she so long live unmarried, and if she
marry, then the wife shall have a Rent out of the Land, Consent to a Legacy of
a Term.
and make his wife Executrix and die, and the wife consent to the Legacy of the
Term, and enters upon it, and after takes husband, this Consent to the Legacy
of the Term is also a Consent to the Rent when the Contingent happens, Mich. 13
Jac. B. R. East and Hayward.

Feme Covert cannot assent to a Legacy.
It is settled, that a Feme Covert cannot assent to a Legacy; for if she should
have power to assent or disassent to a Legacy, then if a Term be devised to a
Feme for life, (who is also Executrix) Remainder to J. S. if the Feme takes J.
S. to husband, yet it should be in her power to affirm or destroy this Devise,
which would be mischievous, Syd. 188. Cook and Bellamy.

One devised a Term to his wife for life, and after to his Children not
provided for; and the Term was afterward sold upon Execution for the Debt of
the wife, and after the wife died during the Term; it was judged that
notwithstanding this Alienation, the Children of the Devisor should have the
Residue of the Term, Woodcock's Case.

Where the wife shall have the Goods, and not the Executors of the husband.
The Residue of my Goods I give to F. my wife, whom I make Executrix of this my
Will, to dispose for the Health of my Soul, and to pay my Debts; and dies: She
pays the Debts, and takes a second husband, who makes his Executor, and dies
possessed of the Residue of the Goods; the wife shall have them, and not the
Executor of the husband if he did not makes Gift of them in his Lifetime, Dyer
321. 1 Anders. 23. More 98. Plo. 544, 343, 545.

J. S. devises to his wife 100 l. to be paid at such a day, and if it is not
paid then, that his Executors sh^^^ pay her 200 l. at such a day after to come:
The w^^e dies before the first day, the Executors are ^^^^^arged, Hill. 2 Car.
Rot. 858. Dier 262. in margin.

Of the Husband's devising the Estate of the Wife.
If a Lease be made to Baron and Feme for years, the Baron cannot devise the
Term, because the wife is in by Survivorship before the Devise takes effect.

CHAP. XIX. Rent, Reservation, Emblements.
In what Cases the Wife shall not have the Rent though the Reservation be to
her. The Husband grants a Rent out of the Wive's Term, and dies; If the Wife
shall hold it discharged, and why. Of what Arrears of Rent the Statute of 32 H.
8. c. 37. gives the Husband power to recover. Feme Covert received the Rents,
they not having notice of the Coverture. Where the Husband shall be charged
with the Arrears. Avowry for Rent out of the Wife's Land, how to be brought.
Where the Executor of the Husband shall have the Rent, and not the Wife. Where
the Wife shall have the Emblements, and where the Husband.

What shall be good to the Wife or not.
A. Possessed of a Term for 100 years by Deed indented, mentioned to be made
between him and B. his wife of the one part; but she never sealed the Deed. A.
and B. assigns the Term to C. yielding and paying during the Term to A. and B.
and the Survivor of them, and to the Assign of the Survivor of them, 10 l. Rent
per annum, upon condition that if the Rent be not paid, it shall be lawful to
him and his wife, and the Survivor of them, and the Assigns of the Survivor of
them, to re-enter, and after A. dies; neither his Administrator, nor B. the
wife, shall have the Rent, Rent not to be reserved to a Stranger.
nor enter for the Condition broken: for the wife shall not have the Rent,
because she sealed not the Deed, and so the Rent cannot be reserved to her,
being a Stranger; and so it is void as to her, and the Administrator of A. shall
not have this as Assignee of A. during the life of B. in as much a^ this was
not intended as a Limitation to determine by the death of B. but to be reserved
to B. herself, and so the Assignee in Law of the husband cannot claim it,
because he did not survive the wife, and the wo^d Solvendo cannot enure by way
of Grant to the wife, Solvendo.
when it is by way of Reservation to the husband. And the Condition in this
Case runs with the Rent; Lessee assigns his Term rendering Rent to him and his
wife, (she seals not the Deed) and dies; the wife shall not have the Rent.
and therefore the Rent being gone, the Condition is gone also; and although
the Rent be reserved during the Term, yet the other words (to A. and B.)
restrain it, 2 Rolls abr. 450. Cro. Car' 289. Bl^^d and Inman, Godbolt 448. And
so is 2 Sanders 386. where the husband possessed of a Term by Indenture, to
which the wife was party, (but she did not seal (...) it) assigns all his Term
to the Assignee, rendering Rent to the said Baron and Feme, and the Survivor of
them, and dies; neither the wife nor the Administrator may have the Rent.

Debt for Arrears.
Rent was granted to Baron and Feme for their Lives, the Rent was Arrear, the
husband dies, another Rent is Arrear, the Feme dies intestate, and her
Administrator brought Debt for the Arrears du^ in the life of the husband and
after. Per Curiam, It will lie because the Arrears survived to the wife, as
well as the Rent it self, Cro. El. 791. Temple's Case.

Baron grants a Rent out of the Wife's Land.
If the husband has a Term in the Right of his wife, and the husband grants a
Rent out of it, and dies, the wife shall hold it discharged, for she comes in
paramount the charge, 7 H. 6.1. b. 9 H. 6. 5. She shall not have the Rent,
because she comes in paramount the Reservasion; but the Executor of the husband
shall have it. Contra Perkins, Sect. 834. 1 Inst. 46. b.

A Man possessed of a Term for 20 years in the Right of his wife made a Lease
for years, rendering Rent to him, his Executors and Assigns, and died, the Rent
is gone; but by Mountague, the wife in Chancery may be relieved, for the Rent,
Godb. 279.

A Feme sole is seized of a Rent in Fee, Remedy for Arrears.
etc. which is behind and unpaid; she takes husband, the Rent is behind again,
the wife dies, the husband by the Common Law should not have the Arrears grown
due before the Marriage; but the Statute of 32 H. 8. c. 37. gives the husband
the Arrears due before the Marriage, and a double Remedy for the same by Action
or Distress, 1 Inst. 162.

Tenant in Dower makes a Lease for years, rendering Rent, and takes husband; the
Rent was in Arrear, the husband dies, his Executors shall have the Rent.

When a Feme Covert receives from the Lessees the Rents, the Lessees not having
notice of the Coverture, Payment of Rent to the wife not good.
there being no Countermand of Payment to the wife. Per Curiam, This Payment of
Rent to the wife is no payment, but the husband may well demand it and recover
it again: The payment to the wife is not material, for by such pretenses Femes
Coverts should receive their husbands Rents without their Authorities, which is
not allowable, (but this seems to be durus sermo; and it is an hard case that
the Tenants should refuse to pay the Lessor, and so forfeit their Bonds of
Covenants, and it is a kind of Impossibility for them to divine whether she be
married,) Cro. Jac. 621. Sir Paul Tracy versus John Dutton.

Where the Husband shall be charged with the Arrears.
The Husband or his Executors, 10 H. 6, 7. 4 Co. 49. and Underwood's Case, B.
R. 1641. shall be chargeable in Debt for the Arrearages in the time of the
Coverture on Lease made to a woman, dum sola fuit, 1 Keb. 22.

Of Avowry for Rent. Vide Avowry.
Where the husband shall be charged in Debt for Rent.
Land is demised to a Widow, she marries, the Re^^ incurs during the Coverture,
the wife dies, the h^sband shall be charged in Debt for the Rent, R^mond 6.
Pain and Monshall.

If a Feme, having a Rent for life, takes husb^^^ and dies, Arrears.
the husband shall have the Arrearages ^^curred during the Coverture; but he
shall not ha^^ the Arrears during the Coverture by the Comm^^ Law, yet this
seems to be aided now by the St^^^ of 32 H. 8.

A Man possessed of a Term for 20 years in right (...) his wife, makes a Lease
for 10 years, rendering Re^^ to him, his Executors and Assigns, and died: T^^
wife shall not have it, Where the wife shall not have the Rent.
for she comes in by Title p^^mount; and it is but an Extract of 10 out of ^^,
the Remainder continuing as before, and the Exec^tors shall have it, for the
Rent shall be incident (...) him who has the Reversion under the Lessor, w^^
is the Executor, Poph. 145. Blaxton and Heath.

Emblements. Where the Wife shall have the Emblements, and where the Husband.
If Tenant in Dower sow her Land, and die before the Corn is ripe, the Corn in
Conscience belongs (...) her Executors, and not to him in Reversion; but
otherwise, it is in Conscience of Grass or Fruits, (...) the Diversity in Law
makes the Diversity in Conscience.

The Tenant in Dower may devise ^he Corn so^ed upon the Land, she is endowed
of: If the Husb^^^ sow the Land, the Property of the Corn is in the Ex^cutor,
but subject to this Condition; If the Heir ^^sign to her the Land sowed for her
Dower, she shall have the Corn, for she shall be in de optima possessione viri,
above the Title of the Executor, 2 Inst. 81.

If a Lease be made to Baron and Feme during the Coverture, and the Baron sows
the Land, and after they are divorced causa praecontractus, the Baron shall
have the Corn, because the Judgment is an Act of Law, 5 Cok. 116. Oland's Case;
and so it is if the Divorce be at the Suit of the husband, though Popham seemed
to doubt of it.

If an husband seized in Fee or for Life in the right of his wife, sows the
Land and dies, Baronsows the Land, and then there is a Divorce.
or his wife dies before Severance, yet he or his Executors shall have the
Corn, 1 Inst. 55. b.

If Baron and Feme, Jointenants for life, Where the Wife shall not have them.
and the husband sows the Land, and dies before Severance, his Executors shall
have the Emblements, and not the wife; for there is no Diversity in this case,
and where ^he husband is seized in the right of the wife, Mich. 5 Jac. Skehe
and Arnoll, B. C. but 1 Inst. 55. b. (...) contra: for there it is said she
shall have the Corn, and so it is said in Cro. El. p. 61. by Wray, that it was
so adjudged: Quaere Dyer 3. 6. 1 Roll's Abr. 727. Noy 149. per Cro. Car. 515.
she shall not have it.

But by Coke in Goodman and Gore's Case, Godb. 189. Sil. 270. Baron and Feme
are Jointenants, the Baron sows the Land, the wife surviving, shall have the
Emblements.

If a Feme seized in Fee, or for Life, of Land, Where she shall have them.
sows this, and after takes husband, who dies before Severance, it seems the
wife shall have them, and not the Executor or Administrator of the husband,
because the husband did not sow them.

If Baron seized of a Copyhold Land in Fee sows it, Copyhold.
and after surrenders it to the use of a Feme, who is accordingly admitted, and
after the Baron dies before Severance, the Feme shall have the Emblements, and
^ot the Executor or Administrator of the Baron; because the husband passed the
Emblements with the Land, to the Feme as an Executor to the Land, and by it the
Privilege which the Law gives to him that sows, is taken away by the Surrender,
and so is (...) one as if the Feme had sowed it, or purchased the Land sowed of
a Stranger.

If the Baron sows the Land, and dies before Severance, and his wife is endowed
of this Land so sow^^ of a third part, she shall have the Emblements, and not
the Heir or Executor; for she is to have the Land fuerit culta vel inculta cum
frugibus and redditib^^, Bract. 2. 96.

In Action of Trower the Question was. Feme tenant for Life takes the Plaintiff
to husband, the Remainder to another for Life, Hops.
and Hops were growing out of the ancient Roots, being within the Land in
question, the Feme dies a little before the gathering of the Hops; whether
these Hops appertain (...) the Husband, or to him in Remainder? The Co^^ held,
they are like Emblements, which shall go to the husband or Executor of the
Tenant for life, and ^ot to him in Remainder; for they are such things (...)
grow by Manurance, and Industry of the Owner, (...) not to be compared to
Apples and Nuts, which grow of themselves, Cro. Car. 515. Latham and Awood.

A Feme Copyholder, durante viduitate, sows the Land, and before Severance
takes husband; the Lord shall have it, Cro. El. 466. alias 471.

For what things created during the Coverture, the Wife shall be charged after
the death of the Husband, by her Agreement or Disagreement.
Rent.
If Baron and Feme accept a Fine, rendering Re^^ if she agree to the Estate after
the death of the husband, she shall be charged with the Rent, 50 E^ 3. 9. b.

If a Lease for years be made to Baron and Feme, rendering Rent, if after the
death of the husband the wife agree to the Lease, Debt lies against her for all
the Arrears incurred in the Life of the husband, 2 H. 4. 19. 6. but after the
death of the husband she may disagree to the Lease.

If Baron and Feme join in a Feoffment of the wife's Land, rendering Rent, the
Baron dies, By Acceptance of Rent a Feoffment affirmed.
the Feme takes a new husband before any Rent; the second husband accepts the
Rent, the Feoffment is affirmed for ever.

If Baron and Feme Lease by Deed, and after the husband dies, and she takes a
second husband, who accepts the Rent, this shall affirm the Lease against the
wife perpetually, Dyer 159.

If Baron and Feme join in a Lease for Life of the Land of the wife or years,
rendering Rent, the wife may make this good by Agreement after the death of the
Baron, 10 H. 6. 24. b. and shall have the Rent, 3 Leon. 271. Butler and Baker's
Case.

If Obligation be made to Baron and Feme, Obligation.
the wife may refuse it after the death of the husband, 4 H. 6. 6. and by such
waver, this is made an Obligation to the Baron sole.

So it is in Exchanges and Partition, where Possession of one is waved and
refused.

CHAP. XX. Copyhold.
What Acts of the Husband shall destroy, or forfeit the Custom of the Wife's
Copyhold Estate, and wh^ not. Where she shall have her Viduity, though the
Freehold be severed from the Manor, and where not. Of Grant, and Surrender to
and by B^^^^ and Feme, and the Construction thereupon. Customs of Manors as to
Wifes or Widows, which are good, or not.

What Acts of the Husband shall destroy the Custom of the Wife's Estate, or
forfeit it, or not.
THE Husband seized of a Manor in the Right of his Wife, lets a Copyhold Parcel
thereof, for years, by Indenture, and Died; this shall not destroy the Custom
as to the wife, but that after the death of her husband she may demise it by
Copy as before, Cro. El. 459, or 475. Conisby and Ruskey.

The Custom of a Manor is, If any Copyholder dies seized, having a wife at the
time of his death, that his wife shall have it during her Viduity, the Lord and
the Copyholder enfeoff J. S. thereof, and the Copyholder dies, his wife shall
have it during her Viduity; Custom continued quoad the Wife, though the Freehold
be severed from the Manor.
for the Custom is continued quoad her although the Freehold be severed from
the Manor* for the Lords Acts shall not prejudice the Copyholders Estate, and
it is a Privilege by the Custom fixes to the Estate, that the wife shall have
it after h^ death, Cro. Jac. 573. Waldoe and Bertler. Vid. ^ Rolls Rep. 178.
Mesme Case.

But the Custom of a Manor was found to be, that If a Copyholder in Fee died
seized, his wife should hold it during her Life as free Bench, the Lord
enfeoffs the Copyholder, who died seized; she shall not have the Land; but if
the Lord had enfeoffed a Stranger of the Land, yet the Land remained Copyhold,
and the Custom is not taken away, Cro. Jac. 126. Leshmere and Avery.

If a Copyholder makes a Lease for years of Lands, Feme that has the Widows
Estate, shall not avoid a Lease made by her Husband.
whereof a Feme by Custom is to have her Widow's Estate, she shall not avoid
the Lease, unless there be a special Custom to avoid it; for he comes under the
Custom, and by the Lord's License, as well as the wife, Cro. Jac. 36. Farley's
Case, Moor No. 147. Mesme Case.

Baron seized in the Right of his wife of a Copyhold Land, surrenders it. Per
Walmsley, It is a Discontinuance notwithstanding 4 Cok. 23. Discontinuance.
Cro. Jac. 105. Collins and Couck.

What Acts of the Husband shall forfeit the Wife's Estate or not.
Feme Copyholder takes husband, who lets the Lands for more years than the
Custom does warrant; it is made a Quaere in Head and Challoner's Case, Cro. El.
149. whether this shall bind the wife as a Condition in Law. But it is resolved
in Saverne and Smith's Case, Palm. 387. and 2 Rolls 344, 372. Mesme Case,
Copyholder makes a Lease for more years than the Custom warrants, it is no
Forfeiture.
if Feme Copyholder of Inheritance takes husband, the husband makes a Lease for
more years than the Custom will bear, the Lord enters for the Forfeiture, the
husband dies, the wife dies, the Heir of the wife enters, and his Entry
adjudged lawful, so that it is no Forfeiture.

Denial of rent.
Denial of Rent by the husband shall be a Forfeiture against the wife, and so
Denial to do Suit of Cou^ are present Forfeitures. If a Feme Copyholder tak^
husband who commits Wast, Wast.
this shall bind the wife; and the difference betwixt this Act, and the
husband's making a Lease is: In Wast the Forfeiture goes to the Inheritance of
the Wast, which continues for ever; but in Saverne and Smith's Case the
Forfeiture determines with the Lease. Vide Rolls Rep. 372.

But if a Stranger without the assent of the husband commits Wast, this is no
Forfeiture, 4 Cok. 27. Clifton and Molineux. Dodderidge in Saverne and Smith's
Case, Diversity.
took a difference, where the Copyhold came to the Woman after Coverture, his
Forfeiture shall not bind her; for then it cannot be said it was her Folly to
take an husband that would forfeit as it might if she had the Copyhold before
Marriage, Palm. 387.

Vide Hobert 181. Howard and Bartlet. Where the Severance of the Customary
Tenants from the Manor, shall not prejudice the Widow in her Customa^y Estate.
It is not in the power of the Lords to destroy Widows Estates. By the Severance
Incidents to the Tenancy are not destroyed, but Incidents to the Seigniory are.

The Custom is that a Woman shall hold durante Viduitate; she shall make a
Lease before Admittance; for in that case there is no Fine due to the Lord, and
the Law vests the Estate in her, Noy 29. Remingt^^ and Cole, Hob. 181.

Surrenders, Grants, and the Construction.
The husband takes Copyhold Lands of the Lord cui donor concessit seisinam, The
Wife is named after the Habendum, the Grant is good.
Habendum to Baron and Feme; this is a good Grant to the wife, though she be
named after the Habendum, and the wife by the^^ words takes a present Estate
with the Baron, which she cannot do by Common Law Conveyance, 1 Sanders 151.

A Copyholder in Fee (where the Custom was for a Widow's Estate) made a Lease
by License, Where Wife shall have the Rent, though no Party to the Lease.
reserving Rent to him and his wife during their Lives, (and did not say, and
either of them.) Per Curiam, The wife may have this Rent, though no Party to
the Lease, and it shall continue for the Life of either of them, Hill's Case,
cited 1 Vent. 163.

The husband seized in Right of his wife, The Wife to join with the Husband in
Grant of Copies.
cannot grant Copies in his own name, but ought to join the wife with him, Cro.
Jac. 99. in Shipland and Royden's Case.

Husband seized in the Right of the wife of Copyhold Land, surrenders it.
Walmsly held this a Discontinuance, notwithstanding 4 Rep. 23. Ideo Quaere; for
I conceive it makes no Discontinuance; and Cok. 4 Rep. is good Law. Vid. Lex
Cust. 178.

Customs of Manors as to Wifes, Widows; what are good and what not.
That the wife of a Copyholder for Life shall hold it durante viduitate, was
agreed to be a good Custom; and so the Custom of Taunton Dean, That if a
Copyholder in Fee marries a wife, if the wife survives, she shall have the Fee,
and sic e converso agreed to be good, Noy p. 2.

There can be no Dower nor Tenancy by the Courtesy of a Copyhold, without
special Custom, 1 Anders. 292. It was admitted by the Court to be a good
Custom, That an Executor or Administrator shall have a year in the Land of the
Copyholder against the wife that claims her free Bench, Noy 29. Remington and
Cole.

The Custom of a Manor was, That a Woman cooperta viro poterit devisare her
Copyhold Land to her husband, or any other by the assent of her husband. Per
Curiam, The Custom is not unreasonable; but because it was poterit devisare;
which is a word of Justification, and it should have been usi sunt devisare, by
way of Excuse, it was adjudged against the Plaintiff, Moor No. 268. 3 Leon. 81.
Skipwith's Case.

If a Man marry a Widow, it is a good Custom that she shall not have Dower,
Kitchen 149. Dalt. 30. b. but such a Custom of the wife of Tenant in Fee, is
not good.

By Custom the wife to have the Moiety as Survivor, is good; and if any Lease
be made, she shall have a Moiety of the Rent, 1 Keb. 357.

The wife that is endowable of the Moiety of Gavelkind Land, may not wave it,
and have the third part, Moor 260.

CHAP. XXI. Vide Will.
Of the Wife's Separate Disposition. Where the Money which the Wife had
separate power to dispose of, to whom it shall be paid. Separate Maintenance on
a Proviso, and the Pleadings. Where Detainer of the Husband is a breach of the
Condition. Covenants in a Deed of Separation between Baron and Feme, and for
allowing yearly Maintenance, and Pleadings thereupon.

COndition of a Bond was to pay 50 l. to the Plaintiff. Memorandum, Condition
to pay 50 l. to J. S. and the Wife is to dispose of the 50 l. yet it must be
paid to J. S.
It is agreed before sealling, etc. that the wife may dispose of the 50 l. to
whom she will in her lifetime to be paid by the Plaintiff accordingly, he
being only Trustee of the wife in the said Obligation. Defendant pleads, That
the wife of the Defendant with his consent made her Will, and by it bequeathed
30 l. of the said 50 l. to diverse Persons, and the rest to her husband the
Defendant, and made him Executor, and after dies, and so she disposed of the
said 50 l. in her life: In Debt on this Bond, and on Demurrer on this Plea,
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff; for the 50 l. ought to be paid to be
Plaintiff, notwithstanding the Disposal; Sir Tho. Jones, p. 216. Blunt and
Collins.

Covenant to pay to the Defendant's wife, or such as she appoints, 50 l. per
annum as a separate Maintenance, provided she live at such a place as N. and W.
appoint. Defendant pleads, She did not live at such a place as N. and W.
appointed. The Plaintiff replies, She was ready to live at any such place, but
that N. and W. appointed no place To which the Defendant demurred as being a
Condition precedent; but the Plaintiff insisted it was a Condition subsequent,
and so became impossible, one being since dead, and no place appointed.
Condition subsequent, and not precedent.
Per Curiam, The Defendant should say she lived at such a place, and that no
other was appointed; for this is a Condition subsequent, the Covenant being in
pursuance of a former absolute Agreement to pay so much; and it is like the
assent of the husband, which is intended till the contrary appears, 3 Keb. 363.
Leeds and Beer.

Condition not to meddle with the Goods of the first husband; Detainer of them
is a Breach.
Bond conditioned, That whereas the Defendant should marry such a Widow who was
possessed of diverse Goods of her first husband, and the Goods of his Children,
that her husband should not meddle with them; but that she and her Children
might enjoy them without Disturbance or Interruption of the Defendant. The
Defendant pleads Performance. The Plaintiff Assigns for Breach, that the first
husband was possessed of such Shop and Goods, and that the wife had them before
Marriage; and that such a day after the Marriage, the Defendant her new husband
took the said Goods into his hands, and them detains Verdict pro Quer. And
moved in Arrest of Judgment, that here is no sufficient Breach alleged,
because he does not show that the husband made a^^ Act or Disturbance; for by
the Intermarriage the Goods are in the husband, and its not showed that he
disturbed the wife to enjoy them. But per Curiam, The Breach is well assigned;
for it is said he detained them from the wife, especially being after a Verdict,
Cro. Car. 204. Crowle and Dawson.

The Wife saves Money by her Frugality.
The wife of an Improvident husband had, unknown to him, by her Frugality,
raised some Moneys for the good of their Children, which she had disposed of
for that purpose, being no otherwise provided for: this Disposition of the wife
the Lord Chancellor established by Decree; but afterward upon Review and
Assistance by the Judges, this Decree was reversed, as being dangerous to give
a Feme power to dispose of her husband's Estate: This was Scot and Brograves
Case, anno 1639. but in George's and Chancey's Case a Disposition by a Feme
Covert of Money raised out of separate Maintenance, is good against the
husband. Vide Supra.

A Feme Covert purloined her husband's Goods or Money, and put the Money into
other Men's hands, Wife purloining her Husband's Goods or Money.
who buy Lands to her use therewith; if the Heir or Executor of the husband do
sue in Equity for Relief, and to have the Land or Money restored, yet denied
Relief; for Egerton Chancellor said, He would not relieve Heir or Executor, (no
not the husband himself if he were alive;) for he sat not there to relieve
Fools or Buzzards who would not keep their Moneys from their wifes. The other
Chancellors have been of another Opinion, and with great reason.

An 100 l. was lent by the Lord Holles's Lady, and in the Note which was first
given for it, it was written that the Money should be disposed as the Lady
Holles should direct. An Action at Law for this Money being brought, it was
barred by the Statute of Limitations: A Bill was exhibited for Relief, and the
Statute of Limitations insisted upon; but in regard the Money was looked upon
as a Depositum, and a Trust thereupon for the Lady, a Decree was obtained for
the Money, 2 Ventr. 345. Lord Holles's Case.

Bond was given before Marriage, that the wife should dispose of 500 l. which
she did, and decreed good notwithstanding the Bond was cancelled by the consent
of the wife: But upon the releasing the said Bond, the husband gave a Note in
writing, that she should dispose of it, so as first he might be made acquainted
with it; and so the husband would have avoided the Note, pretending he was not
acquainted with it; supposing those words to be a Condition; but the first
Decree was confirmed 1 Rep. in Chancery 118. Palmer's Case.

Separate Maintenance.
A Feme Covert may sue without her husband for her Separate Maintenance, and
the Demurrer was over ruled. Cases, 35 Reins and Jews.

Money saved by the Wife out of her Separate Maintenance disposed by her.
Baron and Feme by Agreement separated and lived apart, and it was agreed the
wife should have 150 l per annum Separate Maintenance; and out of which she had
saved some Moneys, and put it out to Intere^^, and took Bonds in a Friend's
Name, and disposed (...) Money by Will; and this was in Chancery establi^^^^ a
good Disposition, Lady Prudgeon's Case. Cases 11^.

In Covenant: The Defendant covenanted with t^^ Plaintiff, That S. (wife of the
Defendant) should be permitted to live separate from the Defendant ^^til the
Defendant and the said S. by writing under their several Hands, attested by two
Witnesses, should give notice to each other that they would cohabit: And
further, that he the Defendant, during the Coverture, and until such notice be
given of their Desi^^s to cohabit as aforesaid, would pay to the Plaintiff f^^
the Maintenance of the said S. 300 l. per annum (...) four Quarterly Payments;
and sets forth, that the said S. from the Date of the Indenture of the
Covenants, to the time of the said Suit, did live separate from the Defendant,
and no notice of Cohabitation as aforesaid had been given during that time of
either side, and for 75 l. for one Quarter's Payment, being alive.

Defendant pleads in Bar, That after the Indentu^^ aforesaid, and before the
Action, another Indentu^^ was made between the Defendant and S. his wife o^ the
one part, and the Plaintiff of the other, reciting the first Indenture; and
further reciting, That t^^ Defendant and S. did intend to cohabit, and did s^
at that time, and expressing that it was the true ^^tent and Meaning of all the
said Parties to the sa^^ Indenture produced, ut supra, that so long as the
Defendant and S. should agree to cohabit, the said annual Payment should cease:
And the Plaintiff did by the last Indenture covenant, That so long as they
cohabited, that the Defendant should be saved harmless from the 300 l. per
annum Payment. The Plaintiff replies, They did not cohibit modo and forma pro
ut. The Defendant demurs. Judgment pro quer'; for unless the Cohabitation had
been according to the first Indenture, as by writing mutually subscribed, and
attested by two Witnesses, etc. it was no Bar; for the last Deed had not taken
away the Effect of the former, and a later Covenant cannot be pleaded in Bar of
a former: But the Defendant must bring this Action on the last Indenture if he
will help himself, 2 Ventr. 217. Gawden and Draper.

CHAP. XXII.
What amounts to a Disposition of the Wife's Term by the Husband, to vest the
Interest in him, his Executors and Administrators. What Condition i^ Mortgages
shall survive to the Husband or (...). If the Mortgage of the Wife's Term does
amount to a Disposition in Law. Diversity between a Feoffment, and Bargain and
Sale, as to the Extinguishment of the Term of the Wife. Of the Forfeiture of
the Wife's Term by the Outlawry or Attainder of the Husband, or on extent. If
Recovery by the Husband in Ejectment alters the Term. If Payment of the Debts
of the first Intestate, vests a Term in him. What Trusts for the Wife the
Husband may dispose of, or not. What shall amount to a Forfeiture of the Wife's
Term.

What amounts to a Disposition of the Wife's Term by the Husband, to vest the
Interest in him, his Executors or Administrators.
What power the Husband has of the Wife's Term.
THE Baron by the Intermarriage has full power over the wife's Term to alien
it; and if the wife dies, the Term survives to the husband; and if the husband
dies, it survives to the wife unless he dispose it: But the husband can make no
Disposition of it by his last Will, Plow. 416. Bransby and Gr^^tham; and so is
2 H. 4. 7. b. 1 Rolls Abr. 344 Pop. 5. where a Man possessed of a Term for
years in the Right of his wife, made a Lease for years of the same Land, to
begin after his death, and afterward he died, and the wife survived him, the
Question was, If the wife shall have this, or the Lessee? And per Curiam, The
Lessee shall have it; for as the husband, during his Life might contract for
the Land for the whole Term which the wife had in it; so might he do for any
part of the Term at his pleasure; for if he may demise the Land for 21 years,
to begin presently, he may make it also to begin at any time to come after his
death if the Term of the wife be not expired; but for the Remainder of the
Term, if the wife makes no Disposition during his Life, the husband shall have
it: But in this case, if the husband devise this Land to a Stranger, yet the
wife shall have it, and not the Devisee, as it happened in the Case of Matthew
Smith, because that by the death of the husband (before which the Devise cannot
take effect) the wife had it in her first Right not altered by the death of the
husband.

The husband can make no Disposition of it by his last Will.

So it is where Baron and Feme are Jointenants during the Coverture for 60
years; the husband by Indenture lets all the Land for 70 years to commence
immediately after his death, the husband died and the wife survived, the
Question was, If this were a good Lease to charge the Possession of the wife?
And Per Curiam, 1. It is a good Lease, Term in Interest, though not in
possession.
for here is a good Term created in Interest, although not in possession; and
it is not like a Case where nothing passes till his death: 2. The husband
having an Interest to dispose in his lifetime, he might dispose all the Term,
and it should bind the wife; so when he has disposed by an Act executed in his
life time of the Interest of the Term, and has created a Term in Interest,
this is as good as if he had granted all the Term, Cro. Eliz. 287. 1 Co. 155.
Moor 329. Grant and Locroft.

L. possessed of a Term for 18 years, and of another Term in Reversion of the
same Land for 40 years, died intestate: His wife takes Administration, and
enters and marries J. S. who let it to J. D. for 21 years, rendering Rent, and
makes his Executor and dies. Per Curiam, During the first Term for years the
Executor shall have it; for the husband had g^ven away all that Term; but for
the residue of the Term of 21 years, which is derived out of the Te^^ of 40
years, the wife shall have it as annexed to (...) Reversion or Term which the
wife had, Cro. El. 27^. Loftus's Case.

Disposition of part of the Term, no Disposition of the whole.
If a Man be possessed of a Term of 40 years in (...) Right of his wife, and
makes a Lease for 20 yea^^, reserving Rent and dies, the wife shall have the
Re^^due of the Term, but the Executors of the husb^^^ shall have the Rent; for
it was not incident to (...) Reversion, for that the wife was not Party to
(...) Lease: So note, A Disposition of part of the Term (...) no Disposition of
the whole, 1 Inst. 46. 6.

But Blackstone and Heath's Case is; A Man possessed of a Term for 20 years in
the Right of the w^^^ makes a Lease for 10 years, rendering Rent to him, (...)
Executors and Assigns, and died: The first Questi^^ was, If the Executors or
the wife shall have the Re^^ By Houghton and Crook the Rent is gone, agai^^^
Mountague, who held the wife should have it; (...) it was agreed that the
Executors of the husband (...) not have it: And if the husband after the Lease
m^^^ had granted over the Reversion, the Grantee sho^^^ not have it: But by
Mountague in that Case in Ch^^cery the wife may be relieved for the Rent, Godb.
27^ Pl. 396. Pop. 145.

Possibilities not vested in the Husband.
In Cases of Possibilities the Law does not ve^ them in the husband: As if a
Feme sole be possessed of a Chattel Real, and be thereof dispossessed, and then
takes husband, and the wife dies, and the Baron survives, this Right is not
given to the Baron by the Intermarriage; but the Executors or Administrato^^ of
the wife shall have it; so it is if the wife have b^^ a Possibility, as if the
husband possessed of a Term i^ the Right of his wife grants this to J. S. if he
sha^^ so long live, and dies, the wife shall have this Possibility of
Reversion; if J. S. dies within the Term, and not the Executors of the husband,
1 Inst. 351. 1 Rolls Abr. 345. So if a Lease be made to Baron and Feme for Term
of their Lives, the Remainder to the Executors of the Survivor of them, the
husband grants away this Term and dies; this shall not bar the wife, for that
the wife had but a Possibility, and no Interest, 1 Inst. 46. b.

Baron and Feme mortgage their Interest in the wife's Term, Baron and Feme join
in a Mortgage of the Wife's Term, the Feme dies, the Condition shall survive to
the Husband.
and before the day of Payment the wife died, and the husband paid the Money at
the day in Redemption of the Mortgage, and entered and took another wife, and
made her Executrix, who entered, R. took Administration to the Goods of the
first wife, and entered upon the Lessee, upon whom the second wife entered, and
made the Lease to the Plaintiff, and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff,
because that though the Lease was at first the wife's, and that the husband was
possessed in her Right; so as though he had purchased the Fee-simple, the Lease
had not been extinct; yet by the Intermarriage he has full power to alien it;
and if he survive the wife, he is to enjoy it against her Executors and
Administrators: So here when he survives, the Condition survives to him and
restores the Lease to him in state as it should have been if it had been
aliened, Hob. 3. Young and Radford, 1 Rolls Abr. 344. the same Case.

It is said in Rolls Abr. 344. If a Feme possessed of a Term take husband, and
they grant the Term upon Condition, and re-enter for the Condition broken, the
wife shall have the Term again: And the Case of Radford and Young is there
cited to be adjudged contrary to Hobart; which was, if a woman possessed of a
Term take husband, and they grant the Term upon Condition, if their Executors
or Administrators p^y 10 l. to re-enter, and after the husband pays the 10 l.
this is not any Disposition, but they shall be possessed in the Right of the
wife; for although he pay the Moneys to redeem it, yet perhaps he received the
Money when it was mortgaged.

If a husband possessed of a Term in Right of his wife grant this over upon
Condition, that the Grant^^ shall pay 10 l. to his Executors, the husband dies,
the Condition is broken; the Executors of the husband enter, the wife shall not
have the Term, for this w^^ a Disposition of the Term; all the Interest being
granted over, 1 Inst. 46. b.

If husband possessed of a Term in Right of the wife, grants this to J. S. if he
shall so long live, and dies, the wife shall have this, causa qua supra.

If a husband grant the Land which he had i^ Lease in the Right of his wife,
except part, the wi^^ shall have this part so excepted, for it is not disposed
of, Dyer 264.

Lessee for years assigns his Term to the wife of the Lessor and a Stranger,
and after the Lessee barg^^^^ and sells the Land for Money by Deed enrolled,
(...) dies; the Stranger dies, and the wife claims to h^^^ the Residue of the
Term not expired. Now (...) Bracebridge's Case, Plowd. where the husband i^
such a Case made a Feoffment, it was adjudged that by the Livery he had
extinguished, Extinguishment of the Term of the Wife.
and given over the Term of the wife: But some make a Divers^^y where the
husband makes a Feoffment, and where a Bargain and Sale, because by it nothing
passes b^^ the use; and after the Statute of 27 H. 8. the Possession is
conveyed in such manner as the Use, and by the Grant of the Use the Lease in
jure uxoris, passe^^ not, Moor 171.

Extent of the Wife's Term.
If a Term for years in the Right of the wife be e^tended for the Debt of the
Baron, this shall bind t^^ wife, 7 H. 6. 26. but the wife shall have the
Re^^due after the extent incurred.

If the Baron grant the Herb or Vesture of the Land, which he held with his
wife for years, and dies, the Grantee shall have the Grass or Vesture, 7 H. 6.
52.

If Baron and Feme be ejected out of the Term in Right of the wife, Recovery in
Ejectione Firm is a Disposition
and the Baron recovers in Ejectment brought by him in his own name only, this
is an Alteration of the Term, and vests in the husband only, 1 Inst. 46. b.

Upon Execution against the husband for his Debt, Term of the Wife sold by the
Sheriff. If Baron be outlawed or attainted.
the Sheriff may sell the Term during his Life.

Terms for years in Right of^ the wife, if the husband be outlawed or
attainted, they are Gifts in Law, 1 Inst. 351.

Though the husband be possessed of the Term in her Right, yet he has power to
dispose thereof by Grant or Demise; and if he be outlawed or attainted, they
^re Gifts in Law, 1 Inst. 351.

Two Femes Jointenants of a Lease for years, Two Femes Jointenants, one takes
Husband and dies, the Term shall survive.
one of them takes husband, and dies; yet the Term shall s^^vive; for though
all Chattels real are given to the husband if he survive, yet the Survivor
between the Jointenants is the elder Title, and after the Marriage the wife
continued sole possessed; for if the husband die, the Feme shall have it, and
not the Executors of the husband; aliter of personal Goods, 1 Inst. 185. b.

What Trusts of the Wife the Husband shall dispose or not.
If husband being possessed of a Term for years, grant this over in Trust, for
the Benefit of the wife, he may afterward dispose and forfeit this Trust, and
bar the wife, p. 8. Jac. in Scac. Wyke's Case; What Trust of the Wife the
Husband may dispose or not.
for he had as great a power of the use which he had in the Right of his wife,
as he had of a Term in the Right of his wife; but if he make a Lease for years
to another to the use of the wife if she so long live for her Jointure, the
husband may not dispose this Trust, Mesme Case, and so for the Benefit of his
Wife and Children.

If a Lease be made by the Father to P. A. (...) Trust for the Advancement of
his Daughter, who married with him, the husband may clearly dispose of this
Term, and no Remedy at Common Law for it, 1 Bulst. 118. Platt and Sleep.

If a Term for years be granted in trust to the (...) of the wife, the husband
ought not to have this Tr^^^ after the death of the wife.

If a Term for years be granted to the use of a Fe^^ Sole, and she takes
husband, and dies, the Admi^^strator of the wife shall have the use and not the
husband; because this Trust of the wife was a th^^^ in privity, and in nature
of an Action, for which there is no remedy but by Writ of subpoena; for the
Trust runs in privity in this case, and the husb^^^ shall not be Tenant by
the Courtesy of an Use.

The Husband cannot grant or charge the Term of the Wife in trust.
A Woman conveys a Lease in Trust for her (...), and after marries; in such case
it lies not in the power of the husband to dispose of it, and if the wife (...)
the husband shall not have it, but the Executor (...) the wife, March Rep. 45.
Sir John St. John's Case, so ruled at Common Law; and in Wytham and
Waterhouse's Case, a Lease for years was granted to the Defendant to the use of
the Grantor's Sister, whom he afterward should marry; who married her
accordingly, and then died: the Feme takes the Plaintiff to husband, and
afterward she died; and the Defendant takes Administration of the Plain^^^^
wifes Goods, and the Plaintiff sued the Defendant i^ Chancery to have the Term;
and it was decreed by the advice of all the Judges of England, that neith^^ the
Term nor the Use thereof appertained to the husband, Nor forfeit it for
Outlawry or Felony.
Cro. El. 466. And it was resolved in Ch^^cery, That the husband cannot grant
or charge the Term of the wife in Trust, Cases 225. as the w^^^ having assigned
her Term in Trust for herself before Marriage, and the husband without joining
with the Trustees, does mortgage the Trust; and the husba^^ being dead, the
Mortgagee exhibits his Bill to have the Lands conveyed to him, or that they
should redeem, and the Court dismissed the Plaintiffs Bill; for since Queen
Elizabeth's time it has been the constant course of this Court to set aside all
Encumbrances and Acts of the husband upon the Trust in the wife's Term, and
that he shall neither charge or grant it away, neither shall he forfeit it by
Outlawry or Felony if it be for Jointure.

A Trust was for raising of Money for a Feme sole in case she did not marry
contrary to the liking of Sir Ed. W. and his Lady; and if she did, Trust for
raising Money for a Feme sole if she marry with consent.
then to such persons as the said Sir Edward and his Lady, or the Survivor of
them, should nominate; and for want of such Nomination, then to Sir Edward and
his Lady; and Sir Edward and his Lady were Lessees in Trust. The Feme sole
married without their consent, Sir Edward died without any Appointment, and so
did his Lady. The Court was of opinion, that it was not in the power of Sir
Edward and his Lady to have disposed of this Lease, otherwise than for the
Benefit of the Feme sole, if she had lived; and her Administratrix was well
entitled to the Benefit of this Lease. Cases 58. Fleming and Walgrave.

A Trust was, Annuity purchased in Trust for the Wife, yet the Arrears decreed
to the Husband.
That one A. should purchase in his own name an Annuity of 80 l. per annum for
the Life of the Plaintiffs wife, and pay the same to her and her Assigns, and
the Bill in Chancery was to force the Payment of this Annuity to the Plaintiff,
who lived separate from his wife: It was decreed, That the husband being
Assignee of the wife, and that there being no Negative words by the Will to
exclude the husband from the Annuity, he could not exclude him, and so decreed
the Defendant to pay all the Arrears and the growing Annuity to the Plaintiffs
husband. Cases 194. Dakins and Beresford.

Diversity between a Lease for life, and a Lease for years.
Note, A Diversity between a Lease for Life and a Lease for years made to a
Feme Covert, for if I let Land to a Feme Sole for Term of years, who takes
husband, and after I confirm the Estate of the husband and his wife, To have
and to hold the Land for Term of their two Lives: In this Case they have a
Joint Estate in the Freehold of the Land, for that the wife had no Freehold
before; but her Estate of Freehold cannot be altered by the Confirmation made
to her husband and her, as the Term for years may, whereof her husband may make
Disposition at his pleasure; and this Confirmation makes them Jointenants for
life, because a Chattel of a Feme Covert may be drowned, 1 Inst. 300. a.

Term vests in the husband by Payment of Debts.
Executor de Son Tort dies intestate, his Mother administers, and after takes
husband, (there being amongst the Chattels of the wife as Executor de Son Tort,
a Term for years) the husband pays so much of the Debts of the first Intestate
as the Term for years is worth. Per Curiam, The Term for years is vested in the
husband, Sid. p. 76. Baker and Beresford.

What shall amount to a Forfeiture of the wife's Term, or not.
Lease for years is made to Baron and Feme, provided that if the same Land
shall come into other hands, than to Baron and Feme, and their Issue, that the
Lord upon tender of 100 l. may enter. By Dyer and Brook his Entry is lawful,
for it is the Act of the wife: By Marriage of an Husband who aliens.
Weston cont', for it is an Act in Law, and the husband is possessed in jure
Uxoris, aliter if the wife had been dead. The principal Case in Dyer was; The
Lessee covenants that if he, his Executors or Assigns, alien the Term, then the
Lessor to enter. Lessee makes his wife Executrix, and dies; the wife takes
husband, the husband aliens the Term, and it is debated there whether the
Lessor may enter. Baldwin; The Condition is not broken, because the husband's
Estate is made by Law, and cannot be said Assignee, and so like a Tenant by the
Courtesy: But by Brown and Shelley, an Assignment in Law is as strong as an
Assignment in Fait; and by the Espousals the Term vests in the husband, as if
it had been a Gift by the wife, and it was adjudged it was a Forfeiture, Dyer
6. b. 7. a.

CHAP. XXIII.
What Acts done, or Contracts made by the Wife, shall bind the Husband, or not.
Six Resolutions of the Court in Scott and Manby's Case, as to that Point, and
other Cases relating thereto, and the manner of laying the Action, and
declaring therein.

REgularly the Contracts of Femes Covert are void, in as much as their Powers
are transferred to their husbands by the Intermarriage, Sid. 120. Yet in 11 H.
6. 30. it is the Opinion of Martin, that if a Woman buy things suitable to the
Degree of her husband, he shall be bound by it; so 27 H. 8. 25. 67 Brook, if
the things come to the use of the husband, she shall be charged by the Contract
of the wife, Sid. 114. 2 Cr. Car. 258. and yet Hutton, Rep. 106. Bill and
Lully's Case, the Baron shall not be charged by the Contract of the wife, Sid.
123. Dyer 324. It is said in 1 Roll's Abr. 351. If a wife buy things for her
necessary Apparel without the assent of the husband, yet the husband shall be
bound to pay it, Sir Tho. Gardner's Case. But these seeming Diversities will be
reconciled by the following Resolutions in Scott and Manby's case.

Six Resolutions in Scott and Manby's Case.
1. Husband shall not be bound by Assumpsit in Law upon the Contract of his
wife, although for Necessaries, Sid. 109.

2. If the wife buys any things, and the husband does any Act precedent or
subsequent to show his assent, the husband shall be charged for it, though not
by Assumpsit in Law, yet by reason of the Assumpsit in Fact, whether they are
for herself, Children or Family, Sid. 120.

3. Though our Law does not exclude the wife from having a Community in using
the Goods of the Baron, (and so it is not Felony in her to take them) Stamf.
276. yet she may not dispose them; as she may not pawn them, and so enforce him
to a Redemption, Sid. 122. If the wife play and lose 40 l. of her husband's
Money, the husband shall recover this again in Action of Trover against the
Gamester, Tr. 6 Jac. Rot. 1717. Rice Rey versus Tho. Stephens.

Though the wife may not bind her husband by her Contract for Necessaries, yet
she is not destitute of a Remedy; but Chancery, or rather the Ordinary, will do
it, Sid. 124.

The buying of Goods in a Market overt of a Feme Covert, knowing her to be a
Feme Covert, (unless in such things in which she usually tradeth by and with
the Consent of her husband) binds not; but regularly Sale by a Stranger in a
Market overt, binds Infant or Feme Covert that has either in their own
Right, or as Executrix or Administratrix, 2 Inst. 713.

If the wife buys any thing, and it is found by special Verdict that this is
spent in the Household; yet the husband without his actual assent, shall not be
charged; so is 21 H. 7. 40. b. If my wife buy things to keep my Household, as
Bread, etc. and I do not know of this, and it is spent in my House, I shall not
be charged for it, Sid. 126. but the Employment to the Uses of the husband, is
good Evidence for the Jury to find that the husband Assumpsit, although it be
not binding Evidence: As is the Case of a Factor, or Servant that buys Goods
which come to the use of the Master, the Master shall be charged. So if the
husband be in a Voyage beyond Seas, and during his absence the wife buys
Victuals, or other Necessaries for her, this is good Evidence for a Jury to
find that the Baron assumpsit, and so the Judge ought to direct them; so if the
Baron will not cohabite wi^^ the wife, and she buys Necessaries, this is good
Evidence, etc. but this Evidence is not binding nor co^clusive; but Presumptive
only, as in the Chanc^^lor of Oxon's Case, 1 Co. in Trover and Conversi^^
Request and Denial is a good Evidence for the Jury to have found for the
Plaintiff; but being found sp^cially, the Court cannot give Judgment pro Quer'
(...) more in the principal Case. Also the husband mig^^ have contradicted such
presumptive Evidence by other Proofs, as that he gave the wife ready Money
(...) buy.

4. Admitting in such Case, that the husband should be charged by Assumpsit in
Law, yet if he prob^^^ particular Persons specially that they should not tru^^
his wife, he shall not be charged after such Prohibition; and Prohibition given
to the Mercer that she is a Feme Covert, and then let him trust her at his
^^ril. As to a Man's Prohibition in general not to trust his wife, as by
posting or putting her in the News-books, that none shall trust his wife, this
h^^ been void in it self, Sid. 119. because if such Pro^^bition should be good,
the Law gives her a fr^^ less power in enabling her for to contract w^^ there
is no person who may contract with h^^, Sid. 114.

5. Admitting that the husband shall be charged upon Assumpsit in Law for
Necessaries, the findi^^ of the Jury that the things bought by the wife (...)
necessary to the degree of her husband is not goo^ for the Law will that Women
shall be maintain^^ according to the Estate, and not to the Degree of the
husband: But the Jury ought to have found, the they were Necessaries suitable
to the Estate and Degree of the husband, or that they were necessary generally,
Sid. 128.

6. Where Women are allowed by their Husbands to be Housekeepers, and have
used to buy things without ready Money for the Household, the husband shall be
charged for them; for in such a respect the wife is as a Servant, Scott and
Manby's Case.

Baron shall not be charged in Trover and Conversion for things which the wife
buys, Delivery of Goods to a Feme Covert, not knowing her to be so.
though the buying be void: But if the delivery of Goods be to a Feme Covert,
not knowing her to be a Feme Covert, or to an Infant, not knowing him to be an
Infant, it is otherwise, Sid. 129. Mod. Rep. 841.

If a Woman will not cohabit with her husband, How it is if a Woman will not
cohabit with her husband.
and buys Victuals and Chattels for herself, and it is given in Evidence to a
Jury that these are Necessaries for the Estate and Degree of her husband; yet
this is no Evidence for a Jury to find that the Baron assumpsit; and there is a
difference between those Women that will cohabit with their husbands, and those
that will depart of their own heads.

Action was brought against the Defendant upon ^^deb. Assumpsit pro diversis
mercimoniis vendit' and deliberat', to the wife to the use of her husband, it
being for her wearing Apparel. After Verdict for the Plaintiff it was moved in
Arrest of Judgment, that this Declaration being laid, Declaration.
that the Sale was to the wife, though it was to the use of the husband, was
not good, as if it had been sold to the Servant of the Plaintiff. Yet per
Curiam, It being for her Apparel, and that suitable to her Degree, the husband
was to pay for it; and so it was resolved in Scott and Manby's Case, 1 Vent.
42. Dyer and East.

In Assumpsit the Plaintiff declared upon several Promises, three whereof were
for finding Lodging so many Months for the wife of the Plaintiff at his
request, and the last Promise was Indebitat' for Goods sold to the Defendant
himself. The Defendant pleads, Long before he lodged her, she went away without
his consent, and lived in Adultery with some Persons (...) respect of the
Profits taken by Dame Dorothy Fl^^ and himself, should be liable to the Payment
thereof. For the Tort died not with Floyd, as if Feme Tena^^ for life marries,
and the husband does wast and dies; Wast lies against the wife. Feme Executrix
takes h^^band, that wastes the Testators Estate; a Devasta^^^ lies against the
Feme after the death of the husband f^^ the Waste of the husband, Cases in
Chan. 81. Gil^^^ and Smith.

The Husband charged with the debt of the Wife for Goods.
The wife when sole bought Goods for Money, (...) after married, and died; the
Goods came to her h^^band's hands after her death, but the Debt rem^^^^ unpaid:
The Plaintiff Creditor brought a Bill to d^^cover the Goods, and it was
demurred to, but the Demurrer was overruled, Cases in Chan. 295. Freeman and
Goodham.

Vide Plus infra; Where the husband shall be punished for Torts done by the
wife.

CHAP. XXIV. Feme Covert, Executrix. Administratrix.

(...) a Feme Covert may be made Executrix, and of what things; what things the
Administrator of the Wife shall have, and not the Husband, as Cho^es in Action,
etc. Debt recovered by Baron and Feme Executrix, and she dies, if the Husband
shall have Execution. What things Feme Covert Executrix, may do without her
Husband, or not. Obligee makes the Wife of one of the Obligor's Executrix, quid
operatur. Legacy devised to the Wife, who is made Executrix. Whether she shall
be in as Excutrix, or as Legatee. Of her assent to a Legacy. Debt as Executrix
not extinct by the Intermarriage, and why. Feme Executrix takes the Obligor to
Husband, if that be a Release in Law. Where the Husband shall be charged with
the Waste of the Wife as Administratrix, and the manner of Proceedings by the
Sheriff in such Case; and whether Execution shall be de bonis propriis of the
Husband. Of Actions brought by Baron and Feme as Executrix or Administratrix.
Where Administration belongs to the Baron and Feme.

^st how a Feme Covert may make Executor, and then how she may be made
Executrix.
A Feme Covert may make her Testament of Goods, and make an Executor by the
assent ^f her Husband.

A Feme Covert may make an Executor of Ch^^^ in action due to her, 8 Jac. B. C.
Graunt's C^^ and so is

18 Ed. 4. 11. b. A Feme with the consent of (...) Husband may make an Executor
of things, which (...) husband shall not have by her death.

She may make her husband Executor of the Go^^ which she has as Executrix, if
he will accept (...) 4 H. 6. 31.

A Feme Covert cannot make Executor wit^^^ the assent of her husband, and the
Administration (...) her Goods of Right appertains to her husband, 4 (...)
Ognel's Case.

But a Feme Covert Executrix may make an E^cutor of the Goods which she has as
Execu^^^ without the assent of her husband, and in such (...) Administration
appertains not of Right to the ^^^band; and what she had as Executrix, she
had (...) auter droit, and not otherwise an Interest in the (...) M. 8 Jac.
Graunt's Case.

Administration of the Goods of a Feme Covert.
If a Feme Covert dies intestate, Administrati^^ may be granted of her Goods;
for peradventure (...) had Chooses in action, which are not given to the ^^^band
by Law, Dyer 251. admitted.

What things the Administratrix of the Wife (...) have, and not the Husband.
Chooses in action.
The wife's Administrator shall have Chooses in ^^on always, and not the
surviving husband; as i^ case of Lease or Bond: As if an Obligation be m^ to
the use of the wife. The Case was; Art^ Johnson was possessed of a Term for
years, and (...) signs it over to J. S. being Brother to the wif^ the said
Johnson, to the use of the said wife: Jo^^son dies, and makes his wife his
Executrix, (...) which the said wife takes Rob. W. to husband, (...) takes the
Profits of the said Lands during the life (...) the wife; the wife dies
intestate, J. S. as next of (...) took Administration as well of the Goods of
the said wife, as of her first husband. By all the Judges ^^e Administrator had
now as well the Interest as the ^^e of the said Term, as well in Conscience as
Law: And Rob. W. shall not have it, because it is as a thing (...) Action,
which the Administrator of the wife shall ^^ways have, and not the husband: As
if an Obligation had been made to the use of the wife, Pop. 106. ^^. Johnson's
Case.

Feme as Administratrix to her husband brought Debt for Arrears of Rent
incurred in the Life of the ^^^band; Arrears of Rent.
which Rent was granted jointly to Baron (...) Feme. Per Curiam, The Arrears
belong to the ^^fe in jure proprio, and not as Administratrix of (...) husband,
and the naming her Administratrixs ^^s surplusage, Moor 886. Dembian and Brown.

If a Feme Executrix to J. S. takes husband, and af^^^ the Baron and Feme
brought Action of Debt upon (...) Obligation in Right of the wife, Debt on Bond
by Baron and Feme Executrix, and they have Judgment, Feme dies, the Baron shall
not have Execution.
as Executrix to ^. S. against J. D. and have Judgment against him (...)
recover the Debt, with Damages and Costs; and ^er the wife dies before
Execution sued, the hus^nd shall not have Execution upon this Judgment; (...)
that he (although he be privy to the Judgment) (...) he shall not have the
thing recovered; but this be^ngs to the succeeding Executor or Administrator of
J. S. 1 Rolls Abr. 889. Beaumont and Long. ^^de Infra.

Lease to J. S. who assigned it over to K. who by (...) Will devised the same
to his wife, who made her ^^ecutrix also; and she afterward took one W. to
^^sband, and died. W. takes out Letters of Admini^^tion of the Goods and
Chattels of his wife, and ^sed it to the Plaintiff: The Question was if the
^^^e be in as Executrix or Legatee, Feme Legatee and Executrix, at Election.
for until Election ^^de she shall not have it as Legatee. But it was ^^ved
that the said wife, Executrix to her husband, had made a Lease by Deed,
reciting thereby that where the husband was possessed in Right of his wife as
Executrix of her first husband. Per totam Curiam, This is an express Claim as
Executrix; and then when the wife dies, if the husband would have a^vantage of
it, he ought to take out Letters of Administration of the Goods of the first
husband. Vid. 1 Le^^. 215. Cheyney and Smith.

A Woman is made Executrix, and after married, she cannot now assent to a
Legacy, there being no Interest vested in the husband. Assent to a Legacy.
Contra, Of a bare Authority given her to sell; but by Windham this assent, and
the husband's not contradicting it, is good Evidence that he did agree, 1 Keb.
708. Cook and Bellamy.

What things Feme Covert Executrix may do without her Husband, or not.
Feme Covert Executrix may make an Executor without his assent.

Feme Covert Executrix, without her husband, acknowledges Satisfaction of a
Judgment without real Satisfaction had, Acknowledge Satisfaction.
it is not good, Sid. p. 31. Lady Fe^ner and Sir Lewis Dives.

Feme Executrix may not give the Goods of the Testator in pios usus, without
the assent of the husband. Vid. 14 H. 6. 4. vid. Cook, p. 9. 43.

In Russel's Case, 5 Rep. 27. it is agreed that a married wife cannot do any
thing as Executrix i^ prejudice of her husband.

Two were bound to a third jointly and severally; the Obligee made the wife of
one of the Obligors Executors, and devises to her all his Goods, after Debts
and Legacies paid, and dies: The Woman Executrix administers; then the same
Obligor made her his Executrix, and died, leaving Assets to pay the Debt; then
the wife dies intestate, and the Plaintiff administrat. de bonis non, if the
Obligee brings Action and sues the surviving Obligor. It was resolved that the
Action lies not: 1. When the Obligee made the wife of one of the Obligors
Executrix, Obligee makes the wife of one of the Obligors Executrix
the Action was suspended during the Continuance of the Executorship, and then
the Rule is a personal Action once suspended, is extinct if it be by his own
Act, as here it is by making the Woman Executrix, Regula.
aliter by Act in Law. 2. When the Obligor made the Executrix of the Obligee
his Executrix, and left Assets, the Debt was presently satisfied by way of
Retainer, Obligor makes the Executrix of the Obligee his Executrix.
and so no new Action can be had for that Debt, Hob. 10. Friar and Gildridge,
Moor 855. Mesme Case: But if a Feme Executrix of a Debtee takes the Obligor to
husband, and after the Baron dies, this Suspension is not any Extinguishment,
Feme Executrix of a Debtee takes the Obligor to Husband.
because it was by Act in Law, and in auter droit, M. 30 and 31 El. Sir John
Needham's Case, 8 Co. 136.

A Feme Executrix marries with a Debtor of the Testator; the husband dies, and
Debt was brought against the Feme, who pleads riens enter les mains; and if
this were Assets was the Question? Per Curiam, Debt suspended.
This Debt is not Assets in her hands; for by the Intermarriage the Debt which
the Executrix had en auter droit, was not extinct but suspended; and the Action
was revived against the Executors of the Baron, and compared it to Darcy's Case
in the Commentaries, Cro. El. 114. Crossman and Read.

Though if the Feme Obligee take the Obligor to husband, this is a Release in
Law: Feme Obligee takes the Obligor to husband
But if a Feme Executrix takes the Debtor to husband, this is no Release in
Law, for that should work a Devastavit, which an Act in Law shall not work, 1
Inst. 264. b.

If a Man takes to wife an Excutrix, all the Debts being paid, and he has
Goods in his hands to pay Legacies, the wife dies, the husband cannot be sued
for these Legacies in the Ecclesiastical Court by the Legatees; for the next of
Kin to the wife may have Letters of Administration granted to him of these
Goods in the hands of the husband. And therefore if such husband, after his
wife's death, makes a promise, That in Consideration he had the Goods, being
more than would satisfy, if the Plaintiff being Legatee would forbear to sue
him for such a time, he would pay the Legacy. It is a good Consideration, 1
Bulst. 44. Smith and Jones.

Administratrix, dur' minoritate of the Daughter; Executrix made diverse Bonds
to the Creditors of the Testator, Of Husband's retaining Goods.
and then took husband. Per Curiam, The husband may retain so much of the
Testator's Goods as amounted to the value of the Debts paid. But Hobert, p.
250. makes it a Question, how the Case shall be if the wife die? for then the
Husband is no longer chargeable by her Bond: But it is said in 1 Rolls Abr. 923.
If the husband in the life of the wife declare that he retains such particular
Goods instead of the Obligations, although the wife after dies; yet by the
Declaration the Property was absolutely altered in the husband, Alteration of
the Property of the Goods.
and then the death of the wife will not divest it, Briers and Goddard.

Feme and another Person are Executors; Feme takes husband, the husband does
not alter the Property of the Goods of the Testator, and the wife dies; now the
other Executor shall have Action of Detinue against the same husband of the
said Goods, Ben^^. No. 38. p. 10.

Where the Husband shall be charged with the Waste of the Wife Administratrix:
The manner of the Proceeding of the Sheriff in such Case; and whether Execution
shall be de bonis propriis of the Husband.
If A. recover against B. Debt and Damages, Where Execution shall be de bonis
propriis of the husband.
and after B. dies, and Administration is granted to C. his wife, who wastes the
Goods; and after she takes D. to husband, and a Fieri fac' is awarded de bonis
Testatoris in the hands of D. and C. the Sheriff returns nulla bona, etc. And
upon this, on surmise that they have wasted the Goods, other Writ is awarded to
the Sheriff, si sibi constare poterit per Inquisitionem, that they have wasted,
then to warn them to show cause why Execution should not be de bonis propriis,
and the Inquest find this matter, and refer it to the Court whether the husband
and wife have wasted the Goods of the Testator, according to the Writ or not.
Upon this special Return the Court shall award Execution de bonis propriis, of
the Baron and Feme; for the Sheriff had returned the special Matter, and
therefore the husband is to be charged for the Conversion of the wife, M. 16
Car. 1. B. R. Knight and Hilton, Ux. versus Copping, 18 H. 6. 14. b.

Upon Suggestion of a Devastavit of a Feme Executrix, it was laid, Declaration
in Waste against Baron and Feme Executrix.
that the Baron and Feme Devastaver' and Converter' ad usum ipsorum; and upon
the Issue it was found accordingly: It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that
they could not convert to their own use; and so in Trover and Conversion, quod
Converter' ad usum ipsorum, is not good. But Per Curiam, Here the material part
of the Issue was the Wasting of the Baron and Feme, which they might do
jointly, and the Conversion is nothing to the purpose, 2 Vent. 45.

Now the reason why Execution shall be de bonis propriis of Baron and Feme, is,
the wife may have Goods as a Term, or Chattels real before the Coverture; also
she may have Goods after the husband's decease; and therefore in Debt the
husband is charged in Right of his wife, as Executrix, and Judgment is given
against them, it shall be de bonis suis propriis, and good. And it was
resolved, Cro. Car. 519. in Mounson and Bourne's Case, that a Devastavit may be
by a Feme by Eloigning the Goods, as a Feme Covert may do a Tort, and be
punished for it. It was held also, that if a Man take Executrix to wife, and
waste the Goods, it is a Devastavit in the wife. And if there be a Recovery
against Baron and Feme upon a Devastavit, if the Baron survive the wife, he
shall be charged; also if the Feme survive, she shall be charged: But if the
Recovery be not against Baron and Feme in the life of the wife, Where the
Husband shall not be charged.
and she dies, the Baron shall not be charged.

Feme is Executrix of her first husband, and she administered when she was Sole,
and then takes a second husband; Baron and Feme committed to the Fleet on a
Devastavit.
and there is a Devastavit returned, and a Capias ad Satisfaciendum against
both de bonis propriis, and the husband was committed to the Fleet, and so was
the wife, because the Devastation of the husband shall be the Act of the wife,
Dyer 210. marg. M. 38 and 39 El. B. C. Vaughan and Thomas.

A Woman is indebted by Obligation as Executrix, and had Assets of the Goods
for the Debt, and after takes husband, the Debtee demands the Debt of the
husband, and thereupon they submit themselves to Arbitration of all Actions and
Demands; the Arbitrators may make an Award of this Debt that the wife of the
husband as Executrix owed to the Debtee, Husband chargeable with a Devastavit
of the wife, though no Assets came to his hands.
And per Coke, in this Case, though no Assets came to the hands of the husband,
yet he is chargeable for the Devastavit made by the wife before Coverture.

So 21 H. 7. 29. Award of a Debt due to the Wife as Executrix.
b. The husband submits all Actions and Trespasses, etc. and the Award was of a
Debt due to the wife as Executrix. Per Curiam, This is a good Bar of the Debt
of the wife, 1 Rolls Rep. 269. Lumley and Hutton.

In Debt on Obligation against J. and his wife as Administratrix; The Defendant
pleads Payment by the wife after the Intestate's death, and on that Issue found
pro Quer': Judgment quod recuperet debitum against Baron and Feme, de bonis
Testatoris, si non, etc. the damages de bonis propriis.
Judgment was quod recuperet debitum against them de bonis Testatoris, si non,
etc. the Damages de bonis propriis. Per Curiam, This Judgment is well given; 1.
Although the Plea be false, yet he is altogether a Stranger to the Testator;
and therefore the Judgment shall be only de bonis Testatoris, and not where he
pleads fully administered, which is false in his own Conusance: Although the
wife has not any Goods during the Coverture, yet because the husband is only
charged in respect of the wife, and she might have Goods if she survived, and
Execution might be taken against her, the Judgment is good, Cro. Jac. 191.
John's and Adams.

It is said in Rolls Abr. 919. If a Feme Executrix take husband who wastes the
Goods, the Feme dies; by the Common Law there is not any remedy against the
husband: Devastavit returned against Baron and Feme; Feme dies, the Husband
shall be charged.
But in this Case by the Ecclesiastical Law, the husband shall be punished and
compelled to make Restitution; but if a Devastavit is returned against Baron
and Feme, and the Feme dies, yet the husband shall be charged, Sid. 330.

If the husband possessed of Goods in the Right of his wife as Administratrix,
Prohibition against a Spoliation.
grants the Goods to J. S. and after the wife dies, and after a new
Administration is granted to J. D. who sues the Grantee of the Goods for a
Spoliation, in the Ecclesiastical Court, a Prohibition lies, M. 11. Car. 1. B.
R. Clark and Daniel. So if such husband wast the Goods, and after the Wast
dies, if the husband be sued in the Spiritual Court for a Spoliation, or a wast
of the Goods, a Prohibition lies, 2 Rolls Abr. 302.

Term extinct in one respect, yet remains Assets in another.
Feme Executrix has a Term, and takes husband, and the husband purchases the
Reversion, the Term is extinct as to her if she survive; but as to all
Strangers it shall be accounted as Assets in her hands, Moor 54. 1 Leon. 720.
Crossman and Read. In Leon. the Case was, J. S. made his wife Executrix, and
died; J. D. being then indebted to the Testator in 60 l. upon a simple
Contract, the wife Executrix took to husband the said J. D. J. D. made his
Executor, and died: A Creditor of J. S. brings an Action of Debt against the
wife, Executrix of J. S. and upon the pleading, the Matter in Question was, If
by the Intermarriage of the wife with the Debtor of the Testator, Intermarriage
of a Feme with a Debtor of the Testator.
the same were a Devastavit or not, and if the said Debt of 60 l. due by J. D.
should be Assets in her hands? And per Curiam, It is no Devastavit nor Assets;
for the Woman may have an Action against the Executor of J. D. and it was
agreed per Curiam, that if a Man make a Debtor and a Stranger his Executors,
and the Debtor dies, the surviving Executor may have an Action of Debt against
the Executor of the Debtor.

Debt on Bond by Baron and Feme Executrix, and they have Judgment; Feme dies,
and the Husband shall not have Execution, and why.
If a Feme Covert, Executrix to J. S. take husband, and after the husband and
wife bring Action of Debt on Obligation in Right of the wife, as Executrix to
J. S. against J. D. and have Judgment against him to recover the Debt, with
Damages and Costs; and after the wife dies before Execution sued, the husband
shall not have Execution upon this Judgment; for that (though he is privy to
the Judgment) yet he shall not have the thing recovered, but this appertains to
the succeeding Executor or Admnistrator of J S. M. 7 Car. B. R. Beaumont and
Long, vide Supra, Trin. 11 Car. B. R. Jefferies's Case, Cro. Car. 208, 227.
after a year and day the husband brought Scire fac' to have Execution. But per
Cur' The Scire fac' lies not; for the first Action was brought by the Baron and
Feme Administratrix, which is en auter droit, and the Recovery being thereupon,
is in Right of the Intestate; and the Feme being dead, the Baron cannot claim
that Debt; for the Administratrix being dead, the Suit is merely determined,
and cannot be revived by any but he who comes in in that Right, and so does not
the husband; and he who ought to have the Scire fac' might have Privity and
Property in the Debt, and the husband has no Property in it.

W. and his wife being possessed in Right of the wife of a Term, which she had as
Administratrix to her first husband C. W. being indebted, by Contract granted
the Term to Coleman, to the use of W. and his wife for their Lives, and after
to the use of Coleman himself. W. is sued for this Debt and Recovery against
him, and the Sheriff by Fieri fac' sold the Term to the Defendant. Term in the
Wife as Administratrix, if extendible for the Debt of the Husband.
The Grant of the Term is not void by Stat. 3 H. 7. as made to defraud
Creditors; for this Grant is not to avoid Creditors, for the Term being in
Right of the wife as Administratrix if it so continued in the hands of W. and
had never been granted, this was not extendible for the Debt of W. and if W.
himself had it as Executor, it had not been extendible for his proper Debt, and
Fraud shall not be intended except expressly found.

Actions. Vide Supra.
A Feme Executrix takes husband, By Outlawry the Husband forfeits no Goods as
the Wife had as Executrix.
they bring Action of Debt as Executrix, and recover and have Judgment; but in
bar of this the Outlawry of the Baron is pleaded. Per Curiam, The Baron
forfeits nothing of the Goods which the wife had as Executrix, 3 Bulst. 210.
Hix and Ux. versus Harrison.

Indebitatus by Baron and Feme as Administratrix of J. S. on account as
Administratrix, and Arrearages found to Baron and Feme as Administratrix: The
Defendant demurs, because it is not said, The Debt was due to the wife as
Administratrix, 3 Keb. 396.

A Feme sole delivers a certain Sum of Money into the hands of J. S. the
Defendant thereupon Covenants with the Feme to pay to A. B. 100 l. per annum,
Covenant with a Feme to pay A. 100 l. per annum, Feme takes husband, husband
makes Executor and dies, the Executor may sue for the Arrears
so long as the Money shall continue in the hands of J. S. the Feme takes
husband, the 100 l. per annum is Arrear; the husband makes his Executor, and
dies, and after his death the 100 l. per annum is an Arrear also: The Executor
brings Action of Covenant upon the Indenture, and good; for the Covenant
concerns the Executor because he represents the Testator, Styles 140. Pope and
Hunt.

By a Grant of omnia bona and Catalla sua by Administratrix, what passes.
If Administratrix takes husband, and the husband grants omnia bona and catalla
sua, and it is expressed in the Deed that he gives an Horse in the Name of Seisen
of the Goods, which Horse is Parcel of the Goods of the Intestate, as it is
found by special Verdict, the Goods of the Intestate shall pass by this Grant,
2 Rolls Abr. 58.

Obligee made his wife Executrix, and died; and the wife being Executrix died
Intestate: The Plaintiff in the Action took out Letters of Administration of
the Goods and Chattels of the wife, and brought this Action of Debt on the Bond
as Administratrix of the wife; whereas the Plaintiff ought first to have taken
out Letters of Administration de Bonis non Administratis of the Testator, and
so to have brought he^ Action, Styles 225. Leg and Anderton.

Assumpsit against the wife of an Intestate in consideration of Forbearance, is
not good unless she administer, 1 Leon. 240. Filwicks and Holt.

Where and how Administration belongs to Husband or Wife.
Administration by our Law belongs to the husband, and not to the wife's
Kindred, by the Stat. 31 Ed. 3. c. 11. and the Stat. 21 H. 8. does not compel
the husband to take Administration, for it is a Penal Law, and extends only to
the wife and children; so is 4 Rep. 51. Ognel's Case, Cro. Car. 106. John's and
Row.

The Daughter takes husband, and dies; the Mother obtains Letters of
Administration, and a Prohibition was denied, because Administration ought to
be granted to the husband, and not to the Mother; and it is not like to the
Case of two in equali gradu, and one obtains Letters of Administration, which
shall not be repealed because they have executed their power, Sid. 409.

CHAP. XXV. Actions. Suits.
Abatement of a Writ or Suit in Law or Equity, by Marriage or Death pending the
Suit. If the Wife be put before the Husband, the Writ abates. Fe^^ Plaintiff
after Writ of Enquiry, and before the Return marries, if the Action shall
abate. Fe^^ Sole depending a Bill in Chancery takes Husband, if the Suit shall
abate. How it is if she be Defendant. Of Actions which the Husband may ha^^ for
Wrongs done to the Wife. Indictment by Baron and Feme, and against Baron and
Feme. Where and in what Cases Wives are indictable, without their Husbands or
not.

Abatement by Marriage. Death.

BY Marriage: It Is a Rule.

The Taking of an husband between the Ni^^ Prius, Reg.
and the Day in Banco is not Error, because it is but a Plea in Abatement; but
the Death of one of the Parties is Error, because by this the Writ is ab^ted,
though it cannot be pleaded, Sid. 143.

W. and his wife brought Case for Slanderous Words, against H. and his wife: H.
the Defendant dies, the Feme takes another husband, pendant the Suit, the Court
inclined because the Defendant had by her Intermarriage changed her Name, that
the Writ abated, Styles 138. White and Harwood.

If Feme Sole Plaintiff takes husband, the Writ is not abated, but abateable, 1
Leon. 168, 169.

Death or Coverture at the time of the Writ purchased, abates the Writ de
Facto, but Coverture after makes it abateable, i. e. only by Plea.

Trespass was brought by the Plaintiff, being a Feme Sole: It was tried by Nisi
prius, Plea, at the day in Banco, that after the Verdict, and before that day,
the Plaintiff took Husband.
and Verdict pro Quer' and Damages. The Defendant at the day in Banco pleads,
that after the Verdict, and before that day, the Plaintiff took to husband one
J. S. and ^e being married, demanded Judgment. Per Curiam, This Plea cannot be
pleaded; for the Defendant has no day to plead it, and the Plaintiff had
Judgment, Cro. Car. 232.

Feme makes a Letter of Attorney to the Plaintiff to gain a Debt, and then
marries; this is not any Countermand or Revocation of the Suit, and the Writ is
not abated, but only abateable, 1 Leon. 186, 189. Lee and Madox.

By Death.

Action was brought by H. against Sir Tho. Pope and A. his wife, as Daughter
and Heir of Sir Tho. W. and hanging the Writ, Pope died: Hobart was of opinion,
that the Writ shall not abate. But Executrix brings Action in her own Name, and
the Name of her husband, and pendant the Writ, the Baron dies, the Writ shall
abate, Winch. p. 102. Holman versus Sir Tho. Pope and his wife.

Feme pendant the Writ against her, takes husband; this does not abate the
Writ, but the Recovery against her upon the first Writ is good: But if after
the Original Process sued, and before the Return she take husband, this shall
abate the Writ, by Dodderidge in Heydon and Miller's Case, 2 Rolls Rep. 53.

Several Writs of Scire fac' by Baron and Feme, against Terretenants, Baron
dies; Quaere if Writ abate against all.
Baron and Feme bring several Writs of Scire fac' against Terretenants in diverse
Counties: Judgment is given against some of them by default, and penda^^ the
Pleas of others; and before any Execution the Baron dies, Quaere if all the
Writ abate as well against those against whom Judgment was given, a^ against
those who have pleaded, Hob. 287.

Trespass against Baron and Feme; after Verdict pro Quer' the Plaintiff died,
between the day of Nis^ Prius, and the day in Banco, in 11 H. 6, 7. b. It is
held by all the Court that the Death of the Plainti^^ or Defendant, Death after
Verdict, and before the day in Banco.
after Verdict by Nisi prius, and before the day in Banco, shall abate the Writ
or Bill: But the Court doubted in the principal Case, because this is in an
Action of Trespass, which is but personal, and is joint and several; and it is
clear, if the Feme had been dead, and the Baron survived, Judgment should have
been entered against him, and the reason is the same, that she surviving should
be chargeable for the Trespass, Adjornatur, Cro. Car. 509. but in Cro. Jac.
356. in the Case of Ridgley against Lee and hi^ wife. In Ejectment the husband
died since the Nis^ prius, and before the day in Bank. And per Curiam, Because
it is in the nature of a Trespass, and the Fe^^ is charged for her own Fact,
the Action conti^^es against the wife, and Judgment should be entered against
her Sole, because the husband was dead.

The Wife is put in the Writ before the Husband.
The Writ shall abate if the wife be put before the husband, 2 Leon. p. 59.

A Writ brought against Baron and Feme ab^^^ by the death of the Feme, though
after Verdict, H^^ 129.

Ejectment.
Ejectment versus Baron and Feme, and thou^^ they are one Person in Law; yet if
Baron die, (...) Plaintiff may proceed against the wife.

If a Feme Sole bring Trespass and Recover, and a Writ of Enquiry of Damages is
awarded, and before the return of it the Plaintiff takes husband, Writ
abateable by Plea.
and after the Writ is returned, and Judgment given upon it without any
Exception taken by the Defendant, he shall not have advantage of this in a Writ
of Error, because the Writ was but abateable by Plea, 1 Rolls Abr. 781. Smith
and Odiham.

Abatement in Chancery Suits.
If a Feme Sole takes husband pendente Lite, the Feme by her own Act has
abated her Suit, otherwise where she is Defendant.

If a Feme Sole have a Bill depending in the Court of Chancery, and pendent the
Suit, takes husband; by this her own Act, her Suit is abated, and if she and
her husband will have the effect of the Suit, they must both join in a Bill of
Reviver: But if a Feme Sole in such Case be Defendant and marries, in that case
the Plaintiff may go on with his Suit, for the Marriage is no Abatement or
Impediment because she is Defendent.

If the Plaintiff exhibits a Bill against a Feme Sole, whereto she makes
answer, and after marries; the Plaintiff may proceed against her and her
husband, without any Reviver, and her husband shall be bound by that answer she
made before Marriage, in regard she shall not be admitted to take advantage of
her own Act; contrary where a Woman Sole exhibits her Bill, to which the
Defendant answers, and then marries; her husband and she cannot proceed
against the Defendant without Bill of Reviver.

If a Man and his wife exhibit their Bill of Complaint, whereto the Defendant
answers, and the Man dies, the Woman shall be at her Election, whether she
will exhibit a new Bill, or proceed upon the former, and the Defendant shall be
bound by the answer made to the Man and his wife.

Baron and Feme join in a Bill for a Duty due (...) the wife; she dies before
the hearing, the Baron ^^ter her decease exhibited a new Bill, and served
^^^cess to hear Judgment; because the Defendent (...) not called to answer the
hearing was put off.

If a Man exhibit a Bill against a Man and his w^^^ for a Matter which wholly
concerns the wife, a^^ both answer, and after the Baron dies, this is an
Abatement of the Suit that the Plaintiff cannot proceed against the Feme
without Reviver; for the Fe^^ shall not be constrained to abide by that ans^^^
which she made with her husband, because she w^^ then under the Power and
Coertion of her husband; and he being dead, and she seized and possessed of the
thing in question as her former Estate, she ought to make new answer, otherwise
ought not to be bo^^^ in Equity; but if she abide by her answer made with her
husband, then the Plaintiff may procced, and have a Decree to bind her.

If Baron and Feme in the Right of the wife exhibit their Bill upon a Matter in
Equity, whereunto the Defendant answers, and the Feme dies, this is in some
cases an Abatement of the Suit. As for instant^; If the wife be Guardian in
Socage, and takes husband, yet the Feme continues Guardian; and if Baron and
Feme in that Capacity exhibit their Bill for any Matter in Equity, and the wife
dies, it is an Abatement of the Suit.

Of Actions which the Husband may have for Wrongs done to the Wife. Vide
Indictment.
Trespass. de Uxore rapta and abducta cum bonis v^^* Vide Dyer 256. pl. 10. 2
Cr. 502, 538. 2 Inst. 18^, 434. Fitz. N. b. 84. W. 1. c. 34. 6 Rep. 46 Dyer 207.

The Stat. 6 R. 2. gives Appeal of Rape to the husband where the wife consents
to the Ravisher; but the husband in Reputation shall not have this Action: ^^t
where it is a Marriage voidable till the Marriage be adnulled, the husband may
have Action within this Statute; but if the wife take two husbands, the second
husband may not, because he is not Baron de Facto or de Jure, Lit. Rep. 75.

Indictments. Vide Information and Offenses.
Indictment for Assault and Battery made upon Baron and Feme, Assault and
Battery.
and for pulling down the House of the husband. Exception was taken because the
Indictment did conclude ad damnum ipsorum, whereas it should be ad damnum of
the husband only. But per Curiam, The Indictment is good though ad damnum
ipsorum is left out, Styles, p. 155.

Action on the Case in nature of a Conspiracy was brought against A. and B. his
wife, for that they mal^tiose, conspired to indict him for stealing a Woman's
Ruff, de bonis and catallis of B. the wife; and not guilty was pleaded, and
Verdict for the Plaintiff. Though a Feme Covert may not have any Goods, (Goods
of the Wife) how to construe after a Verdict.
^et being after Verdict, it shall be intended to be as it ^ay be, (viz.) that
these were the Goods of the Wife, dum sola fuit; and that the stealing was
intended then, and not whilst she was a Feme Covert, 1 Rolls Abr. 3. Skinner
and Parker.

Where Wives are indictable without their Husbands, or not.
It was a Question in Fenner's Case, Whether a Feme Covert may be indebted
without her husband, (...) forestalling or engrossing contra forman Statuti,
and no opinion was given, because the Indictment was F. Spinster alias dict',
wife of F. so that it does not appear properly by the Indictment, that she is a
Feme Covert, because this which comes after the alias dict' is not parcel of
the Name. But it was agreed, that for greater Offenses, as for Recusancy,
Felony, wives are indictable without their husbands, Sid. 410. Fenner's Case;
but the husband being in Court, they set a Fine upon him.

CHAP. XXVI. Joinder in Action.
Where and in what Actions Baron and Feme shall join, and where and in what
Actions not. In what Cases the Husband only shall have the Action. Diversity
between an Action which affirms Property, and which disaffirms Property. Four
general Rules of the Baron and Feme's Joinder in Action, and Cases under each
to direct where Baron and Feme must join in the Action, or it may be brought by
the Husband only. Particular Actions, as Trover, Indebitatus Assumpsit,
Account, Formedon, Ejectione Firm, Actions for Rent, Rescous, Actions for
Tithes, Covenant, Wast, Debt on Bond or Contract, Trespass, Battery, Escape,
Action on the Case sur Assumpsit, Actions on the Case for Torts, Forcible
Entry, Writ of Error, etc. and the manner of Declaring in such Actions. Of
Actions brought by a Feme Covert against a Feme Covert. In what Cases a Feme
Covert is enabled to sue without her husband. Of a Feme Sole Merchant.

Where and in what Actions Baron and Feme shall join, and where and in what not.
I Shall consider,

1. In what Cases the husband only shall have the Action.

2. In what Cases Baron and Feme must join.

3. Where the husband may join his wife with him or not at Election.

In what Cases the husband only shall have the Action.

There is a Diversity between Actions which aff^^ Property, Reg.
as Replevin, Detinue, etc. for those ought to be brought in the name of the
husband only, because the Property is affirmed, Diversity between Actions which
affirm Property, or disaffirm it.
and Actions which disaffirm Property, as Trespass, Trover, etc. for th^se
ought to be brought in both their Names, beca^^^ they are founded in Tort made
before Covert^^^, Sid. 172. Powis and Marshal; therefore Trover and Conversion
by Baron and Feme, Trover.
for Trover supposed before the Coverture, and Conversion afterward Though two
Justices in that Case were of opi^^^^ that the Action ought to be brought by
the Baron ^lone, Of Goods lost before or after the Marriage.
because the cause of Action is after the Con^^^sion, and subsequent to the
Marriage, Beaumont (...) Graves's Case. If Trover be laid to her before the
Marriage, which was the Inception of the cause of Action, the wife may be
joined; aliter if the Co^^^^sion be laid after the Marriage. In the first Case
the husband may bring the Action alone, or jointly with the wife. If one has
the Custody of a Wom^^'s Goods, and afterward marries her, she may join i^
Detinue with her husband, for his use in Bailm^^^, the Proprietor is to some
Purposes in Possession, (...) to other Purposes out of Possession, 1 Vent. ^^ 3
Keb. 329. Trover after the Marriage of Good lost and converted before, is well
brought by Ba^^^ and Feme, as on Bailment of Goods before Marriag^ they are in
Possession as to Trespass, or out as to D^tinue; to some Purposes this is but
as a thing (...) Action, and the Property not altered by Marriage.

Baron and Feme Executrix bring Trover for Goo^ of the Testator found and
converted, it is well brought for the Possession of the wife as Executrix, is
also (...) Possession of the husband, and the Damages reco^^red shall be to the
Estate of the Testator, and so may concern them both, Styles p. 48. Fremling's
Case.

Shuttleworth and his wife brought a Trover and Conversion, Of the Goods of the
Wife dum sola.
and count that they were the Goods of the wife dum sola fait, and that she
lost them, and the Defendant found them, and after they intermarry; and after
the Defendant converted them, and it was adjudged against the Plaintiff,
because notwithstanding the Trover of the Defendant this Property continued in
the wife, and then by the Intermarriage the Property was in the Baron, and then
the Baron ought to have brought this Action alone without the wife, cited 1
Rolls Rep. 45.

Trin. 6 Jac. Rot. 1717. Ray and Stephens; For Money lost by the wife at Cards.
Action of Trover by the husband for Money, which the wife had lost at Cards,
and Judgment was for him though she played in his absence, yet he may have
Action for the Money won by her.

If the Goods of a woman are taken, and the woman after marries, Replevin.
the husband Sole shall have Replevin, Fitz. Rep. 43.

In all Cases where the wife shall not have the thing when it is recovered,
Regu.
neither sole to her self nor joint with her husband, but the husband only
shall have it, there the husband sole shall have Action without the wife to
recover it: As the husband shall have Action sole sur Stat. 5 R. 2. for entering
into the Lands of the wife, 38 H. 6. 3.

He shall have a Quare Impedit sole, 38 H. 6. 3. b. so in Trepass for taking
the Charters of the Inheritance of the wife, 38 H. 6. 4.

Baron shall have Trespass sole for Trespass on the Land of the wife, 38 H. 6.
3.

The husband sole shall have an Action for words spoken against his wife, Words.
and if the wife be joined with him, Judgment shall be arrested, Sid. 346. but
they must be such words which are only actionable in respect of Collateral
Damages.

Baron and Feme may not bring Trespass of Assault and Battery of the wife, but
the husband ought to bring the Action alone, because whatever Damages should be
recovered would go to the husband only, Styles p. 52.

Reg.
This Rule is in 3 Bulstr. 163. Bret and Cumberland: It is a good and sound
Rule, That which the husband may discharge alone, and of which he may make
Disposition to his own use, and where the husband may have the sole Profit of
that which is recovered; for the Recovery of this he may have a^ Action in his
own name without his wife, as Covenant. Vide Infra.

Reg.
For Personal things Baron and Feme cannot join: But for Personal things in
Action, it is in the Election of the husband to join his wife or not. And upon
a Judgment given in Trespass by Baron and Feme, of their Close broken, and Corn
carried away, it was reversed, Cro. El. 133. Arundel and Short: So is the Rule
in March.

Where Baron and Feme sue for Personal things done to them, they shall not
join; but where they have a joint Interest as in Case, Quare Impedit, they
shall join, March 47.

Reg.
Actions for Torts which survive to the wife after the death of the husband, the
wife shall join, and in no other case. Baron and Feme bring Trespass for the
Battery of the wife, and Tearing the wife's Co^^ ad damnum ipsorum. Per Curiam,
The Action as to the Tearing the Coat ought to be in the name of the Baron
only; for it is the Goods of the Baron, and this had special Damages found by
it self, and then it is ad damnum ipsorum, which ought not to be, Sid. 224.
Staunton and Ux. Vide Hobart.

Reg.
In all Cases so long as the first Contract, or specialty made to the wife dum
sola, continues, she shall join, for as much as if she die, the Baron shall not
have Action for it, but ^s Administrator to her. And therefore in Action on the
Case sur Assumpsit, the Plaintiff declares that the Defendant being in Debt to
the wife of the Plaintiff dum sola, he assumed to pay the Plaintiff; and he
further declares, that he being in Debt to the wife of the Plaintiff, etc. in
other Sums, he accounted with the Plaintiff, and was found in Arrears so much,
which he promised to pay: And after Verdict pro Quer' Judgment was arrested
causa qua supra; but if the husband declare that the Defendant accounted with
him for Money due to the wife dum sola fuit, and was found in arrear, which he
assumed to pay; and in consideration also that the Plaintiff would forbear
until such a time, he assumed to pay: In the first Case it is ill after
Verdict, because the first Contract continues, and the wife ought to be joined;
but in the second Case the Action is founded upon a new Contract, which
changes the first by the consideration of Forbearance, and therefore in that
Case the Action is well brought by the Baron Sole, Sid. 299. Tyrrel and Bennet.

L. (the Plaintiff) married a Feme to whom Money was due dum sola fuit, and the
husband and the Debtor came to account for the Money. The Debtor being found in
Arrear promises to pay the Money due upon the account, to the husband at a
certain day; and for not performing his Promise, Plaintiff brought Action on
Indebitat' Assumpsit. Per Glin, C. J. It is true the Account alters not the
nature of the Action, Account alters not the nature of the Action of Indebit'
Assumpsit, but if the Jury find a special Promise, Q.
but here the Verdict finds there was a special Promise made to pay the Money
to the husband; and here is a distinct day set for the Payment of the Money,
and the Consideration is good; for here is a Debt due to the husband, and he
may release it: And the Doubt made by the Jury is, Whether the Action be well
brought by the husband alone? Here is a Promise made to the husband, and he
has brought the Action as if the Defendant were indebted to him; yet he is not
indebted to him generally, but sub modo, (viz. jure uxoris) but it was not
resolved, because the Writ of Error was ill, Styles Rep. 473. Coney and Laws.

If A. conveys Land to B. in fee by Indenture and Covenants, Covenant.
with him, his Heirs and Assigns, to make any other Assurance of it upon
request, for the better Settlement to B. his Heirs and Assigns; and after B.
conveys this to C. in fee, who conveys this to D. and his wife, and the Heirs
of D. and after D. requires of A. another Assurance, according to the Covenant,
and he refuses; the Baron Sole without the Feme may not have Action of
Covenant as Assignee to B. because he and his wife are Assignees, and therefore
ought to join in the Action, P. 14. Car. B.R. Midlemore and Goodale, Cro. Car.
505.

But in most other Cases out of the foregoing Rules, the Baron may join the
wife with him or not, at Election.

But for the fuller Illustration of this Subject, (wherein our Books seem to
vary) I shall treat of the particular Actions brought by Baron, or Baron and
Feme; and show how the same are laid, and the Pleadings thereupon.

And first of Actions which are real, or savor of the Reality.

Formedon.
Formedon in Reverter brought by Baron and Feme, the Writ must conclude to the
Feme only. The Case was, Robert Earl of Essex, and Frances his then wife, by
Fine gave Lands to W. G. and F. M. and the Heirs of the said W. to the use of
Eliz. Sidney, Daughter and Heir of Sir Philip Sidney Knight. and for default of
such Issue to the use of the said Lady Frances, and her Heirs; Et que post
mortem praed' Eliz. ad prefat' Franciscam revertere debent per formam d^^tionis
praed' ac vigore Stat. Et eo quod praed' Elizabeth obiit sine haerede de
corpore suo exeun': And the Earl and Countess counted accordingly: The
Defendant Vicount Lisle pleaded in Abatement of the Writ, that the said
Countess at the time of the death of the said Elizabeth, was Covert of the
Plaintiff her now husband; so that the Right of the said Tenements, si quod,
etc. to her husband and her, did revert; and so by the said Writ it ought to be
supposed: Demaindant demurs, and Judgment was, That the Writ was sufficient.
The Differences are fine: If it were a Formedon in Descender upon a Descent to
the wife, there the Descent in the Writ must be made to the wife alone; for the
Descent follows the Blood, and to that the Baron is a Stranger. But in a
Formedon in Reverter, wherein already nothing is invested, but the Right only
returns; there it may be laid to Return, either to the wife alone, or to the
Baron and Feme.

But in a Cessavit by Baron and Feme, or a Writ of Escheat, or a Consimili
casu, or Action of Wast, because there is vested in them a Seigniory or a
Reversion actually, and the Land holden, or the present Estate to return, is to
come in Possession; in those Cases the Reverter is to be made to them both, E.
Clanrickard, Hob. 1. 2.

If a Disseisin be made upon Baron and Feme in the Lands of the Feme, Assise.
in Action brought to recover this Land again, the Baron and Feme must join, 1
Bulst. 21.

If a Feme recover in Assise, and after take Baron, and they are re-disseised,
the Baron and Feme shall have a Redisseison, because the husband joineth for
Conformity, and it is in the Right of the wife who was disseised before, 1
Inst. 154. b. though the Statute says, iidem Disseisitores.

W. and M. his wife were disseised of the Land he held in jure uxoris, and
dispossessed of his Goods; in Assise port by Baron and Feme, Judgment was given
for them both, damna pro disseisina 100 l. and pro bonis 100 Marks; Judgment
was reversed for the 100 Marks, because the wife had nothing in them, 2 Inst.
236.

Q. Impedit.
In Quare Impedit Baron and Feme shall join, and yet the Avoidance goes to the
Executors of the Baron, Lit. Rep. 285.

Ejectione Firm.
In Ejectione Firm, and Ravishment of Ward, the wife shall join, Lit. Rep. 285.

Pur Rent. Vide Avowry.
Avowry.
In Avowry for Rent in the Right of the wife, they ought to join, 4 H. 6. 14. as
if Rent be due to the wife before Coverture, she and her husband must join in
the Avowry.

In Replevin the Defendant avows, because his Ancestor was seized in Fee, and
let the Land in qua, etc. for years, rendering Rent, and for Rent due to him and
his wife in Right of his wife, he avows the taking; after Verdict for the
Avowant Exception was taken, because the Baron Sole avows, and does not join
the wife with him; whereas it appears the Rent is due to him and his wife, and
he ought not to avo^ in his own name only: But per Curiam, Because he shows the
Truth of the Matter what it is, and does aver the Life of the wife, and so the
Distress well taken by him, and the Rent due to him it was adjudged that the
Avowry was good enough, Cro. Jac. 442. Wise and Bellent.

Note, Rent is as a Chose in Action. If a Man does marry a wife which has a
Rent, if the wife dies before the husband has recovered it, he can have no
remedy to recover it after the death of the wife; for it is merely a thing in
Action, and of the same nature as an Obligation which is made by a Feme Sole,
who takes husband and dies, 1 Bulst. 132.

Vide Rescous.
In Replevin the husband avows Sole for Rent Arrear to the wife dum sola:
Avowry by the Husband Sole.
It Is well enough if the wife were made the Defendant there they must both
avow, 2 Cro. Jac. 3. 3 Keb. 647. Duke of Albemarle and Cutler.

The husband distrained for a Rent Charge in Fee, granted to his wife for
Arrears durante viduitate of the wife, and upon Rescous he brought the Action
alone, and good, or at his Election he might have joined his wife with him,
Cro. El. 459. Fenner's Case.

For Tithes.
Action of Debt upon the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. Tithes.
by Baron and Feme for not setting forth of Tithes; the Baron and Feme may join
if the Baron be seized in Possession of the Rectory in the Right of the wife,
or in Jointure; and upon Writ of Error Judgment was affirmed, Moor 912.
Wentworth and Crisp: So Cro. El. 608, 613. Baron and Feme possessed in the Right
of the wife as a Termor, they may join because the wife is Proprietor, and the
Action is given to the Proprietor or Fermor.

An unmarried Woman being Proprietor of a Parsonage took husband, Proprietor.
the husband may not sue for the treble Damages on the 2 Ed. 6. without his
wife; for the Baron is not intended Proprietor as the Statute intends, but the
wife, 2 Brownl. 9. Ford and Pomeroy's Case.

Covenant.
A. covenants with B. and his Assigns, for further Assurance; B. assigns to
Baron and Feme; they must join in the Action of Covenant. Vide supra,
Middlemore and Goodale's Case.

Baron alone may bring Covenant real on a Breach during Coverture of a Covenant
made to the wife dum sola, 1 Keb. 20.

Lease for years was made to B. Defendant rendering Rent, afterward the
Reversion of this was granted to the Plaintiff and his wife; Debt for Rent by
the Baron after the Term
the Tenant for years attorns, the Term ended, and for Rent Arrear the Baron
brought Action of Debt alone. It Is agreed, had the Term continued, he ought to
have joined his wife with him. And per Curiam, The Action of Debt is well
brought here, in respect of the nature of the thing by him to be recovered,
which is as a Sum in gross, and the thing to be recovered is the Rent which the
Baron alone is to have: The Action generally brought is good; but had the
husband brought the Action as Assignee, by Assignme^^ made to him alone;
whereas the Reversion was granted to him, and his wife jointly, that had not
been good, 2 Bulst. 234. North and Wyard, 1 R^lls Rep. 51. Mesme Case. In
Replevin, Avowry (...) made for Rent due to the Baron and Feme, and it appears
that part was due to the wife before Marriage, and part after: It was said that
the Avowry ought to have been for that part of the Rent due before Marriage,
Avowry.
and a retro fore dum sola fuit; and this had been the surest way: But per
Curiam, It is good enough; but the Pleading the Avowry as made by them both, is
good in Law; in as much as the whole Rent is now due to them both; for the Rent
was due to the wife dum sola fuit, and so the same continued at the time of the
Marriage, and now by Marriage this is also made the Debt of the Baron, and the
same by Marriage is due to him as well as to the wife, 1 Bulst. 136, 137.
Bowls and Peers.

It Is said in 2 Keb. 712. Where the Wife is no Party in the Avowry.
the Defendant avows by Devise of Rent to Jane Do, who marries: Judgment was
for the Avowant, notwithstanding the Avowry be in jure uxoris, and the wife no
Party; for unless she be made a Defendant in the Replevin, she need not be
Party in the Avowry, Osborne and Whittington's Case, and 2 Cro. Wise and
Bellent's Case cited.

If a Lease be made by Baron and Feme of the wife's Land, rendering Rent, By
Baron alone.
the Baron may bring an Action alone for the Rent; and quaere if they may join,
2 Bulst. 21.

Reversion granted to Baron and Feme, and to the Heirs of the husband, there is
a Lease in being and Covenant that the Lessee shall repair; for not repairing
the Plaintiff brings this Action without his wife, whereas the Feme has an
Estate therein as well as the Baron. Sed Per Curiam, The Action being personal,
and Damages only to be recovered, the Baron may have the Action solely, or join
the wife if he please, Cro. Jac. 399. Sir J. Bell and Cumberland. On Statutes.

Baron and Feme joined in Action on the Statute of Laborers, and the Writ
abated.

On the Stat. 2 Ed. 6. of Tithes. Vid. supra.

Debt was brought by B. and his wife, Debt for rent.
against E. for Arrears of Rent upon a Lease for years made by the Feme, and
her first husband, to the Defendant by Indenture. The Defendant pleads, Pledge.
That the Ancestor of the first husband was seized in Fee, and that it
descended to the first husband, and he was Sole seized, and so the Feme had
nothing at the time of the Lease made. The Plaintiff demurs: Per Curiam, The
Plea is good. It is true, when two join in a Fine or Matter of Record, he who
accepts of them is concluded to say that both gave it; but where it is by Deed,
it is otherwise, for that cannot enure from one by way of Interest, and from
the other by way of Estoppel, One Deed cannot enure from one by way of
Interest, and from another by way of Estoppel where both join.
for one Deed cannot enure to two l^^^rests: Also when two join in a Deed, and
the on^ only has the Interest, it enures by way of Confirmation from the
other, and not by way of Estopp^^ But here this can neither be by way of
Estoppel, (...) a Confirmation; for the Deed is utterly void as (...) the Feme,
she being Covert, and it cannot be an Estoppel, because an Estoppel ought to be
mutual o^ both parts, and the Deed of a Feme Covert can^^^ estop her, Cro. El.
700, 701. Brereton and Evans.

Q. Elizabeth made a Lease of certain Mills for (...) years to W. Cumberland,
with Covenant to rep^^ the Reversion comes to the King, who did grant (...) to
Sir John Brett, and his wife; and for the Breach of the Covenant in the Letters
Patents, for not rep^^^ing the Mills, the husband alone brings the Act^^^ And
per Curiam, It is well brought, and he ^ight have joined the wife with him if
he would, 3 (...) 163. Brett and Cumberland.

Baron and Feme join in Covenant, and the Action was brought against them both,
and it abated because it shall charge the husband only, 24 Ed^^^^ 3.38.

S. and his wife seized of Land to them and (...) Heirs of the Baron, let by
Indenture to the Defendant, wherein he covenants with him, and with the H^^^
and Assigns of the Baron to repair; Husband and w^^^ conveyed the Reversion to
the Plaintiff, who (...) Covert, and concludes his Declaration per quod ab ei
accrevit, as Assignee of the husband, and (...) not the wife to be dead; yet
good because (...) brought by the Assignee of him who had the Inheritance, and
the Estate for Life, being transferred in f^^ is drowned, Cro. Car. 285. Major
and Tabot.

Waste.
Lease for Life is made to one, Waste.
the Remainder to Baron and Feme, and to the Heirs of the Baron: Baron and Feme
may join in Action of Waste, 17 Ed. 3.7. so if Baron and Feme during the
Coverture make a Lease, and Waste is committed.

Error of a Judgment in Waste against Tenant for years brought by Baron and
Feme, of a Moiety, being seized in Reversion to them and his Heirs ad
Exberedationem of them. Per Curiam, They must join in the Action, but the
Conclusion must be ad Exheredationem of him; but the Original not being
certified, it is well enough. 2. Damages are given to the Baron and Feme. Which
per Cur' is ill, and should have been amended in Bill; but now it is too late,
and Judgment was reversed, 3 Keb. 125. Curts and Bourne.

In a Writ port by Baron and Feme upon a Lease by the wife, for her own life,
before the Coverture, the Court shall suppose ad Exheredationem of the wife,
for she had the Reversion, and shall enter for the Forfeiture, 42 Ed. 318.

So if Baron and Feme bring a Writ of Waste for the Inheritance of the wife,
the Writ ought to be ad Exheredat' of the wife; for if it be ad Exheredatio^em
of the Baron and Feme, the Writ shall abate, 8 H. 6.9.

In Action of Waste in the Tenuit he is to join the wise with him, because this
is in the Realty, and the Locum vastatum is also there to be recovered.

Debt on Bond.
Obligation made to a Feme Sole, who takes husband, and dies; living the Baron,
he shall not have the Obligation, nor any means now to reco^^^ the same Money
due upon it; for this is a thing in Action, the Benefit whereof cannot be had
but as in the Right of the wife, which is now lost by her Death, 1 Bulst. 137.
Bowls and P^^^'s Case, Noy 149. Styles 208. but he may admi^^^ and have it.

Bond is made to a Feme Sole, who marries, the husband must join with her in
the Suit; for if cause of Action arise before Coverture, though but Trespass
where Damages are only recoverable, they and join, 1 Keb. 440. Hardy's Case.

Pleads.
If a Bond be made to a Feme Covert, and the husband disagree, the Obligor may
plead n^^ of factum, for by his Disagreement the Obligation is no Deed, 10 Rep.
119. Whelpdale's Case.

Ad damnum ipsorum.
Debt by Baron and Feme upon a Bond made to the wife dum sola, ad damnum
ipsorum, and good, and it is the usual way in such Actions to declare so, and
the Money due upon the Obligation not be^^g paid to the wife while she was
Sole, it was a ^^mage to her; and now being Covert, it is a ^^mage to the Baron
also, and so it is ad damnum (...) sorum, Styles 134.

If a Bond be made to Baron and Feme, the Ba^^^ alone for this may have an
Action of Debt, 3 B^^^. 163.

Debt on Bond to the Wife dum sola, they must join.
Action of Debt on Bond to the wife dum sola, brought by the husband only
without her, is (...) good: For if Cause of Action arise before Covertue though
but Trespass, where only Damages are recoverable, they must join; so in
Indebitatus on Money due from the wife dum sola, on account being brought
against him alone, Judgment was revers, 1 Keb. 440. Hardy and Robinson.

Debt for Debt, Damages and Costs, recovered by B. and his wife, modo
superstite, against the De^^dant; and because the wife was not named in the
Action, the Defendant demurred, but the Action well lay per Cur', Cro. El. 844.
Butler and Dealt.

A. makes a Bond to Baron and Feme, Baron dies, the wife administers, and
brings Debt on the Bond as Administratrix; she dies before Judgment, and her
Executor brought Debt upon that Obligation. It lies not. It was in her a
sufficient Election and Waver, and that personal Duty being a Chose in Action
may well lie in Jointure between Baron and Feme, Noy 149. Norton and Glover.

Obligation made to Baron and Feme, Joinder or not at Election.
the better opinion is, that the Baron may bring the Action on this Obligation
alone in his own name, or he may join the wife at Election, Styles p. 9.

Debt on Account.
Baron and Feme assign Auditors to the Receiver of the Feme before Coverture,
and found in Arrearages, they ought to join in Debt upon this, for the Debt was
before the Coverture, and it was but put in certain by the Auditors, 15 H. 4. 9.

Debt lies by the Baron only for Debt, Damages and Costs, recovered by the
Plaintiff and his wife, modo superstite, Cro. El. 844.

Debt on Bond to P. and K. ux. ejus, Judgment.
made to the said K. dum sola fuit, and Verdict and Damages assessed to Baron
and Feme ratione detentionis debit' and good, for the Damages shall be to both,
Cro. El. 259. Gurney and Ux. verse. Sir Ed. Clear.

Baron alone may bring Debt upon a real Contract made to the wife dum sola
fuit, On real Contract.
and broken during Coverture, 1 Keb. 20.

If Baron and Feme bring Action of Debt for Debt due to the wife, and recover,
the Feme dies, Scire fac' upon a Judgment recovered by Baron and Feme, brought
by the Baron only.
the Baron may bring a Scire fac' to execute this Judgment; for the Debt being
recovered, the Baron after the death of the wife shall have it; but if the Feme
be Administratrix to her former husband, and Baron and Feme bring Debt upon a
Bond due to the Intestate, and had Judgment to recover the Debt and Damages,
and Feme dies, and after year and day past, the Baron brings a Scire fac' to
have Execution, it lies not, because it was a Debt demanded by the wife en
auter droit; and though they recover, yet she dying before Execution, the Debt
remains to him who takes Administration in Right of the Intestate; and although
the Baron be Party to the Judgment, yet he has no Property in the Debt, and he
who ought to have the Scire fac', must have Privity and Property to have the
Debt, Cro. Car. 208. Beaumont and Long. Vid. p. 227, 464.

For award Money.
If Award be made that 7 l. shall be paid to a Feme Covert, and 13 l. to the
husband, the husband Sole shall have an Action for all the Money, because it is
a thing as comes in the Coverture; as if Baron and Feme make a Lease reserving
Rent, the Baron Sole shall have Action for the Rent Arrear. If the next
Avoidance be granted to Baron and Feme, the Baron Sole shall have it, Lit. Rep.
13.

Trespass. Battery.
Baron and Feme bring Action of Battery for the Beating of him and his wife:
The Writ shall abate, because the wife cannot join for the Battery of the
Baron, and the Baron cannot have Judgment alone, because the wife is joined
with him in the Original: But the Baron and Feme shall have Judgment for the
Battery of the wife, for this is but one Judgment, 1 Rolls Abr. 782.

Baron and Feme brought Action for the Beating of the wife, and ad damnum
ipsorum, it is good because it is such an Action as may survive to her alone,
and cannot be otherwise, Sid. 387. Horton and Ux. verse. Byles.

Trespass of Battery by Baron and Feme, Declaration.
and Verdict: It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the Declaration was by
Baron and Feme for an Assault and Battery made to the wife, and they also
declare that the Defendant, alia enormia eis intulit, which ought not to be,
but ei intulit; for the Wrong being a personal Wrong done to the Person of the
wife only, cannot be said to be done to the Baron, to which the Court agreed,
Styles p. 236. Watts and his wife verse. Lord; but Cro. Jac. 664. Tomlins Case
contra, because it is but Form, and the Baron may have Wrong by his wife's
Battery; and so (eis) is good.

Trespass of Assault and Battery by Baron and Feme, Declaration.
and taking of an Horse; and the Declaration is ad damnum ipsorum. Per Curiam,
The Baron and Feme cannot join in this Action, but ought to bring several
Actions, for the Wrong done to each was several, Styles 130. Stradling and his
wife verse. Bore^an.

Baron and Feme brought Trespass and Battery for beating them both; upon not
guilty pleaded, Verdict was, so much damages for beating the Husband, and so
much for beating the Wife.
the Verdict was for so much Damages for beating the Baron, and so much for
beating the wife: On motion to arrest Judgment, the Court said the Plaintiff
^ight release Damages for beating of himself, and take Judgment for the other,
1 Vent. 328.

Trespass of Assault, Battery and Wounding the husband and wife; on not guilty,
the Verdict was as to the wife guilty, and quoad resid. not guilty. Verdict.
It was moved that Baron and Feme could not join in an Action for beating them
both, Cro. Jac. 355, 655. 2. That there is nothing found as to the beating the
husband, and so it is an imperfect Verdict, Et quoad residuum shall extend only
to the other Trespasses as to the wife, Yelv. 106. Per Curiam, The Verdict has
cured this Mistake in the Action, Styles 349. 2 Vent. 29. Hooker's Case.

Now the Case in Cro. Jac. is, Trespass by Baron and Feme for Battery done to
them both, Declaration.
and found for the Defendant, and certified he did it as Constable, and double
Costs prayed by Stat. 7 Jac. c. 5. It was moved that the Declaration was ill,
because Baron and Feme cannot join in Battery done to then both; and therefore
Judgment ought to have been given against the Plaintiff on the Declaration, and
not upon the Verdict, and so no Costs. But per Curiam, Because the Defendant
was found not guilty, and what he did was as Officer, the Plaintiffs shall not
take advantage of the Insufficiency of the Declaration or Writ to excuse
themselves, Cro. Jac. 175. Heydon's Case.

Declaration.
Baron brought Action of Trespass for Beating him, nec non for beating his wife
per quod consortium, etc. amisit. Per quod consortium amisit.
It was moved that the Plaintiff ought not to join the Battery done to the
wife, in the Action with the Battery done to himself; and therefore he ought to
have joned his wife with him in the Action. B^^ per Curiam, It is well brought;
for the Action is (...) brought in respect of the Harm done to the wife, (...)
for the particular Loss of the Baron, for the Loss ^f the Company of the wife,
which is a particular L^^^ to himself, as the Master for his Servant. And
Ch^ley's Case was, Action was brought for the Battery (...) his wife, per quod
negotia sua infecta remanser^^ and had Judgment to recover, Cro. Jac. 501. C^^
and Lawson, 2 Rolls Rep. 51. Mesme Case.

Trespass, that the Defendant made Assault on (...) Plaintiffs wife, and illam
verberavit and male tra^^ vit, nec non the said Eliz. cum one Gown, one
^eticoat, of the Goods of the Plaintiff, simulcum (...) said Eliz. apud D.
cepit abcarravit and deti^^ and per quod solamen and consortium, etc. amisit.
O^ non culp. Declaration.
Verdict pro Quer' it was assigned for En^ because the Action was brought by
the Baron Sole for the Battery of the wife, which ought not to be; for the tort
and Damage is properly done to the wife, and therefore the husband Sole shall
not sue; and if the wife survive the husband, she shall have the Damage, and
then the Damage being entirely given, the Judgment is erroneous. Per Curiam,
The Action is not here brought for the Battery of the wife, but for the Loss of
the husband for want of her Company and Aid, and all is concluded with the per
quod, and which extends to all that went before, Cro. Jac. 538. Hyde and
Scissor. The like Case, Action for Battery, whereof she died.
per quod solamen, etc. Cro. Car. 89. Young and Pridd. But Yelv. 89. is, that
Baron Sole shall not have Action for Loss of Service by beating his wife, for
Damages shall be given to the wife for tort offered to her Body. The Plaintiff
declared for assaulting his wife, of which she died, is not good; this being a
personal Tort to the wife, is now dead with the wife, and it is now become an
Offense to the Crown, and drowns the particular Wrong, Yelv. 89. Higgins and
Butcher. Vid. 2 Inst. 434.

Trespass of Assault, Ad damnum ipsorum.
Battery and Imprisonment of the wife, until the husband paid 10 l. ad damnum
ipsorum, it is well enough, 2 Keb. 188, 230. Brown and Tripp.

Battery brought by the husband for the beating of the wife ad damnum ipsorum,
it is ill on general Verdict pro Quer', and for the Battery of him she cannot
join; but if the Jury had found the Battery or Damages several, it might be
otherwise, 2 Keb. 269. Jones and Aloff.

So is Dunoill and Mascal's Case, 2 Keb. 813. Action for Battery of the Wife,
and taking from her an Apron.
In Trespass by Baron and Feme for beating the wife and taking away from her an
Apron, etc. and Verdict pro Quer' general. It was moved in Arrest of Judgment,
that the wife cannot join as to the Goods, and Judgment was stayed per Curiam,
Unless there had been several Pleas, and several Damages, 3 Reb. 813.

Note, Where the Action and Damages do survive, the Conclusion shall be ad
damnum ipsorum, as in Action for Battery of the wise; but in Action for beating
the Baron and Feme, they cannot join not conclude so, 2 Keb 434. Atwood and
Parnes's Case.

Verdict.
Assault by Baron and Feme for beating Baron and Feme, they were found guilty of
beating the wise only, and nothing was found concerning the Battery of the
Baron. Per Curiam, If not guilty had been found as to the Baron, it had been
well; but here is a non Liquet as to him, 10 Co. 130. b. and it is a void
Verdict, part of the Issue being only found, 1 Just. 227. and here is no
Discontinuance, the whole being continued, and Venire de Novo awarded, Hardr.
166. Rochel's Case.

Of Trespasses done to the Estate and Freehold of the Wife.
Quare clausum fregit.
Trespass by Baron and Feme, quare clausum fregit. Per Curiam, They may well
join in this Action, so they shall join in a Quare Impedit; and so in Action of
Trespass for cutting down of Trees; and in the principal case, it shall be
taken by Intendment that they are Jointenants, 1 Bulst. 110. Maynard and Towe.

2 Vent. 195. Trespass quare clausum fregit by Baron and Feme: Pollixfen C.
Justice was of opinion, that the wife ought to be joined with him though it was
her Land; Ventris contra, The Action will survive, and they have Election to
join or to bring it alone, 1 Brownl. 21. 1 Rolls Abr. 348. Hob. 189. 1 Cro. 96.
3 Cro. 306. Trignel and Reeve, Bright and Addis Case.

Trespass by Baron and Feme for entering upon the wife's Land, q. c. Fregit and
herbam ipsius T. and Ux. ejus messuit, etc.
and herbam ipsius Thomae and Annae adtunc and ibid crescen' messuit and
succedit and in foenum composuit, and 20 carucat' inde provenien' etc. It was
objected, that this Action does not lie for Baron and Feme for the 20 Loads of
Hay taken, for it is a Chattel severed from the Inheritance, and vested in the
husband. Per Curiam, They may well join as they may join in Trespass, de clauso
fracto, and cutting their Grass; so they may for carrying away the Hay coming
of it, aliter if it had been for 20 Loads of Hay, and not said inde provenien'
Cro. El. 196. Cookson and Castle's Case; the like Case is that of Wilks and
Peerson, 1 Leon. 105. No. 140. Trespass by Wilks and his wife, and Tho. P.
Quare clausum fregit herbam suam messuit and foenum suum asportavit ad damnum
ipsus W. and Ux. and Tho. P. Exception was taken that it was not the Hay of the
wife, nor was she damnified by it, but her husband. By Wray it is good enough;
for though it be not good for the Hay, yet it is for the breaking the Close,
and herbam messuit makes it good.

Trespass by Baron and Feme for breaking the Close of the wife ad damnum
ipsorum, Ad damnum ipsorum.
and after Verdict. Per Cur' This Declaration is not good, nor aided by the
Stat. Cro. Jac. 473. Marshal and Ux. verse. Dorley.

Trespass, Quare clausum fregit and blada messuit, brought by Baron and Feme,
and Judgment given for them, but it was reversed, because Feme Covert may not
have Blees in Common with her husband; and if it were that the Blees were
common to them before the Coverture, they ought to be showed, for the Count
ought to have a general Intendment and not special.

P. 31. El. B. R. Note, The Difference between this Case and the Case of
Cookson supra, Quare herbam messuit, and 20 carectatas foeni inde provenien'
etc because the Hay depends on the breaking of the Close, and all was but one
Trespass, Dyer 305. 6. in marg. yet vide 2 Rolls Rep. 264.

Trover. Vide Supra Principio hujus Capitis.
Escape.
Baron and Feme brought Escape; the husband only arrests the Prisoner with a
Latitat, and takes the Latitat in his own Name Sole; and now in the Declaration
in Escape, he declares that he took out the Latitat ea intention, to charge
the Prisoner upon a Bond made to the wife when she was Sole; and per Cur' it is
good, 2 Rolls Rep. 312.

If Trespass be made to Baron, and Battery to the wife, the Action shall be
brought ad respond' A quare clausum fregit and subboscum, etc. ac in E Uxor'
ipsius A. ibid. insultum fecit: Et ad respond A. and E. de placito quare
clausum ipsorum A. and E. etc. fregit ac in ipsam E. insultum fecit, etc. Et
non ad respond' A. quare clausum ipsius A. apud, etc. fregit. Et in ipsam E.
apud R. insultum fecit, come fuit is Case de Midwych. Ex Manuscript. Mr.
Brownloc.

Action on the Case.
Sur Assumpsit.

The Plaintiff in consideration, the Father of the Defendant, having Interest
in certain Wood and Timber, would not cut them, but would permit them to come
to the Defendant, his Heir apparent to the Land; he assumed to pay 100 l. to
his Daughter, being the wife of the Plaintiff: Verdict pro Quer' It is intended
after Verdict, that the Father had good power to cut them down. Per Curiam, The
Action is well maintainable by the Plaintiff, for the Benefit appertains to the
Daughter, and he may refuse it, Sir Tho. Jones 102, 103. Dutton and Ux. against
Poole, 1 Vent. 318. Mesme Case, vid. 331.

T.T. was indebted to T. J. in 20 l. T.J. made E. his wife Executrix; whereas
T.T. was indebted to E. for Wares bought of her, and T.T. died, and made his
wife Executrix, (now the wife of the Defendant) and E. took the Plaintiff to
husband, and the Plaintiff required payment, and the Defendant in consideration
he would forbear her, promised, etc. Quaere, If the wife ought to have been
joined in the Action; because the ground of the Action to the Plantiff
principally arises from the Plaintiffs wife, being Executrix to her husband,
and for a Debt due dum sola: But by two Judges against one, it is good without
her, for that is but part of the Consideration, and the Forbearance is his Act
only, and therefore the Act only lies for him, Cro. Jac. 110. Mines and Lee.

Whereas the Defendant received of the Plaintiffs Money by the hands of the
Plaintiffs wife, etc. The Defendant in consideration thereof, promised unto
them to pay it at such a day, and alleges the Breach for Non-payment. The
Defendant pleads Non assumpsit, and found for him: It was moved in Arrest, that
this Promise is void, being for Moneys of the Baron and Feme's; Ad damnum
ipsorum.
and ad damnum ipsorum cannot be, for a Feme Covert cannot have Goods with her
husband; and though it was objected, that it may be for Money due to the wife
dum sola, or for Rent during the Coverture, it was held it shall not be so
intended without it had been showed, and adjudged for the Defendant, Cro. Jac.
p. 644. Abbot and sa Feme verse. Blofeild.

Indebitatus by the Baron alone for Money due to the wife of the Plaintiff, as
Executrix; Judgment per Curiam was stayed, though the husband has power to
discharge such a Debt. So had it been sur computasset with the wife, or any
other Promise raised by the Law: But by Windham, were the Action a Promise made
to the husband in consideration of Forbearance, he alone might bring the
Action, 1 Keb. 106, Tyrrel and Bennet, Sid. 299.

If Assumpsit be made to a Feme Covert they ought to join, Sid. 25. Shipston
and Booler, as Assumps^t. A Feme Covert, which was a Surgeon, in consideration
of a Cure by her made, that the Action ought to be brought by the Baron, Cro.
Jac. 205. Brafford and Buckingham, 2 Sid. 128. in both their Names.

Promise to Feme.
If A. speak with B. to sell Land to B. and after B. promises to C. the wife of
A. in consideration she will not hinder the said A. her husband, to levy a Fine
to him of the said Land to pay to her 10 l. or to give her a Riding Suit,
Election.
if the wife does not hinder the husband, but he levies the Fine accordingly;
the husband and wife may have Action on the Promise, for the Promise is laid in
the Declaration to be made to the wife, for they may join at the Election of
the Baron, 1 Rolls Abr. 32. Faucet's Case.

Promise to the Feme.
If A. be in Execution at the Suit of B. and C. a Stranger comes to B's House in
the absence of B. and assumes to the wife, that if B. her husband will
discharge A. out of Execution, that he will pay the Debt at such a day if A.
does not pay it before; and after B. comes to his House, and his wife shows to
him the said Assumpsit and agrees to it, and discharges B. out of Execution,
B. shall have Action on this Assumpsit, 1 Rolls Abr. 31, 32. 27 H. 8. 24.
Tatam's Case, Godbolt 361.

Promise made to the Baron and Feme during the Coverture, Action may be brought
in the name of the Baron only, or else he may join her at Election, as I
conceive.

C. and his wife brought Action on the Case against T. and declared that the
Defendant in consideration the Plaintiff would marry A. that is now the
Plaintiffs wife, did assume to make good a Legacy given by her Father's Will,
and 40 l. more, at such a time; and that thereupon he did marry her. On non
Assumpsit, and Verdict pro Quer', it was moved in Arrest of Judgment that the
wife was joined in the Action. And Per Curiam, Though the Money he promised be
paid to the Wife, yet Baron Sole shall have the Action.
here the Promise was made to the husband only, and he is only to have the
benefit of the Promise; and though the Money is to be paid to both, yet it
would be inconvenient to entitle the wife to it, for then the wife might have
released it before Marriage; Quer' nil capiat per billam, Styles 297, 313.
Cotterel and his Wife against Theobalds. Whereas the wife of the Plaintiff in
consideration the Defendant should marry her Daughter, had given to him 10 l.
he promised to the wife that if he did not marry her Daughter, he would repay
the 10 l. and avers he did not marry her; and Verdict pro Quer'. The Action was
brought by Baron and Feme. And Per Curiam, It is well brought; for the
Agreement of the husband makes the Promise good ab initio to the husband, and
it being made to wife, they may join in the Action, Cro. El. 61. Prat. and Ux.
verse. Tailor, 1 Keb. 252.

If a Man promise to give an 100 l. to the wife of J. S. they ought (per Cur')
to join in Action for Recovery of it, 1 Bulst. 21.

Action on the Case pur Tort.

A Feme Sole had Right to Common for her life, and she marries; the husband was
interrupted in ta^ing the Common, and he brought Action in his own ^ame and
good, being only to recover Damages, 2 Bulst. 14. Butler's Case.

So in Quare Impedit.

So in Ejectione Firm.

John C. and Joan his wife brought Action on the Case against G. M. and
declared, Whereas the said John and Joan were seized of a Mesuage and Lands in
jure Joanne, and that the said John and Joan, and all those whose Estates they
have, etc. in j^r^ Joanne time out of memory have Common in such a Waste, which
is the Soil of the Defendant pro c^^ nibus averiis levant and couchant, etc.
and the Defendant had enclosed 20 Acres of the said Waste. Per C^riam,
Prescription for Common in jure Uxoris.
The Prescription is good, though it had been better if he had said all those
whose Estate the wi^^ has; but this is Tantamount, for it goes merely to the
State of the wife; and the better opinion w^^, that the wife could not join in
this Action, as if he were seized in the Right of the wife, and he brings
Trespass for Trespass done upon the Land, the wife may not join, for she shall
not have Damages if he survive; but if Battery be to the wife, they both shall
join, for the wife shall have the Action if she survive, and so was the Cook of
Grays-Inn's Case; but be^ the husband only loses the benefit of the Common,
and the wife shall not take this with her Cattle, f^^ she shall have none
during the Coverture, Litt. Rep. 285. Castrell and Sir Geo. Mar.

But in Baker's Case, Cro. Car. 418. Action was brought by Baron and Feme, for
that the wife before Marriage was possessed of a Lease for years of a Close, and
had a Way from her Close over -- And the Defendant to hinder her of her Way,
erected a Building ex transverso viae praed' and that afterward she married
the Plaintiff Baker, and they a^^ their Intermarriage could not use the said
Way, (...) their Damage, etc. It was excepted, that the w^^^ ought not to join
with the husband for the stopp^^^ during the Coverture, sed non allocatur, for
(...) Wrong was done to the wife, and the husba^^ had it but in the Right of
the wife, Baker verse. Brereman.

Baron and Feme join in Action on the Case for a Vexatious Suit in the Court of
the Ordinary, being presented falsely and maliciously, that they made Hay on a
Sunday. It was a Doubt if the Action lay by Baron and Feme, because their
Vexation is several, at least the Feme cannot have Damages for the Vexation to
her husband, and adjornatur, Cro. Jac. 355. Ward and Ux. verse. Pease.

Feme Lessee for years of a Mill, takes husband, Suit to a Mill.
the Baron and Feme cannot join in an Action on the Case for the Suit, because
it is only to recover Damages, and not the Term, Hob. 189.

One covenants to stand seized to the use of himself and his wife, for their
Lives, and after to his Son, except the Timber Trees, saving that his wife
shall have the Shrowds and Loppings. Husband dies; she marries the Plaintiff:
The Son cut down 50 Oaks, whereby the Plaintiff lost the benefit of the
Shrowds. Verdict pro Quer' This Action was brought by Baron and Feme, and good,
though the husband might only have released the Damages; and if she survive,
she shall have the Action, and the Damages also, Cro. Car. 437. Trigmel against
Reeve.

Rescous.
The Baron destrains for Rent due to the Feme dum sola fuit; Rescous is made,
Baron Sole shall have a Writ of Rescous, or at his pleasure, he may join the
wife with him; yet for a Debt due to the wife dum sola, they ought to join,
More 442. Fenner and Plasket.

Rent Charge granted to the wife, and to E.C. her first husband, E. C. died;
she married the Plaintiff, and for Rent due durante viduitate of his wife, he
destrained, and upon Rescous he may bring Reason in his own name, or join the
wife with him as Election, Cro. El. 459. Fenner's Case. Vid. Supra.

Detinue.
Baron and Feme shall join in Detinue for Cha^^s concerning the Inheritance of
the wife, (for the (...) shall have them again when recovered,) 38 H. 64.

Baron and Feme may join in a Writ of Res^^ where the husband claims the
Seigniory in the Ri^^ of the wife, 15 Ed. 4.9. b.

For Bailment dum sola Baron and Feme ca^^ join in Detinue, 1 Keb. 640.

Forcible Entry.
In Action of Forcibly Entry on the wife's L^^ she was joined with her husband,
2 Vent. 195.

Baron and Feme brought a Writ of Conspiracy, I will not lie, March Rep. 47.

Error. Vide Fine. Where the Baron and Feme shall join or not, and (...) and in
what Cases.
If Action be brought against A. as a Feme s^^ where she is a Feme Covert, and
she pleads to (...) as a Feme sole, and after a Judgment is given again her,
and she is taken in Execution, she and her (...) band may bring a Writ of Error
for this, otherw^^ the husband would be prejudiced in his Consort^ of his wife,
and of her care about his Family; and (...) has no other means to aid himself.
But in the case (...) a Fine the Baron may enter and avoid it, M. 15. Car. 1. B
R. Edwards and Simpson on Judgment in the Marshalsea, Tr. 1651. Haywards Case.
So in the same Case if the Action be brought against A. and others, they all
with the husband may join on the Writ of Error, 1 Rolls Abr. 748. Coverture of
the Wife assigned for Error.
and the Judgment shall be reversed for all, because it is entire. They may
assign for Error the Coverture of the wife, 1 Rolls Abr. 776. and the
Difference is, in Styles Rep. 280. a Stranger to a Record may not bring a Writ
of Error to reverse it, as in the principal Case the Baron was, but that is
only where he may have another remedy to avoid the Prejudice; which in this
case he has not.

If the husband seized in the Right of his wife make an Ejectment Lease,
Ejectment.
and the Lessee bring Action upon it, and had a Verdict and Judgment, it is no
Error to allege the Death of the woman before Judgment; by which the Interest
of the husband, and the Lease made by him determines, because the wife nor
husband are Parties to the Action, and this depends upon the Title to the Land,
for the Plaintiff may say that the Baron was seized in his own Right, Hob.
Wilks and Jordan, 1 Rolls Abr. 768.

If the wife be received by default of the husband, and lose the Land by
Judgment, the Baron and Feme shall have a Writ of Error, 4 Ed. 3.21. b.

If Baron and Feme levy a Fine, they may by Error reverse the Fine for Nonage
of the wife, during the life of the husband, 2 Co. Beckworth's Case, 77. b.
Worsley's Case.

W. and his wise brought Error to reverse Judgment and Outlawry against them in
Debt, Husband cannot assign Error without his Wife to reverse Outlawry against
them.
and because it was to reverse Outlawry, they could not assign Error but in
Person; and because the husband could not bring in his wife, it was held that
he could not assign Error, for he cannot assign it without his wife, and so is
the Course of the Court, Cro. El. 6^ Wade and his wife against Smith.

Regula.
Where Baron and Feme sue in an Action they s^sue by Attorney, for the husband
makes Attorney (...) them both, 2 Sanders 213. This is to be underst^^^ where
the wife is of full age.

Actions brought by a Feme Covert without (...) Husband. Of a Feme Sole
Merchant.
In two Cases a Feme Covert has been in our a^cient Books held to be able to
sue without naming her husband.

1. In Case of Exilement. 2. In Case of Abjuration.
As to Exilement it was the Case of Sir Ro^^ Belknap's wife: Her husband being
banished beyon^ Sea in the time of H. 4. she sued a Writ of Dow^ in her own
name without her husband, he being alive, and recovered it: Which occasioned
one to mak^ this Reflection.

Ecce modo mirum quod foemina fert breve Regis,
Non nominando virum conjunctum robore Legis:
And yet it was no such wonder; for King Edw. (...) long before brought a Quare
Impedit against the La^ Maltraverse, and she pleaded she was Covert of B^ron;
whereto it was replied for the King, That (...) husband the Lord Maltraverse
was exiled for a c^^tain Cause, and she was ruled to answer.

So in the Case of Abjuration: It was Weyland Case in the time of Edw. 1. It
was held that after the Abjuration of her husband she should have her Joi^ture,
and an Action was brought by her alone for a personal Wrong done to the Estate
conveyed to her, 1 Inst. 132. b. 133. a. 3 Bulst. 188. because this Exile and
Abjuration is a civil Death: But in Relegation or Exilement for a time aliter.

In some other Cases a Feme Covert may sue without her husband.

Feme Covert by the Custom of London shall sue without her husband as a Sole
Merchant, by Wray; but the Action must be laid within the City, in Chamberlain
and Sharp's Case, 1 Leon. 131.

But every Feme which trades in London is not a Feme Sole Merchant.

On Habeas Corpus to remove the Body cum causa of the wise of B. it was
returned, That the Action was brought against her and her husband, in Lands as
a Feme Sole Merchant, for Wares bought by the Feme, wherein the husband was
only named for Conformity; and by the Custom the Execution shall be only
against her, Cro. Jac. Langham verse. the wife of Bluet.

The Case in Littleton's Reports was; Bluet was a Vintner, and pressed for a
Soldier beyond Sea, and goes over Sea; the wife takes an House, and buys Wine
of Langham, who trusts her, supposing her to be a Feme Sole Merchant: After the
husband returns, and the wife denies to pay for the Wine, and the Doubt was if
the wife were a Feme Sole Merchant by the Custom, and the Words of the Custom
were read, That where a Woman exercises a Trade, wherein her husband does not
intermeddle, she shall have all Advantages, and shall be sued as a Feme Sole
Merchant by the Custom: And by Richardson and Yelverton, she is not a Feme Sole
Merchant within the Custom, for her husband exercised the same Trade; and by
Yelverton Feme Sole Merchant ought to be the Widow of a Tradesman, who takes a
second husband, and she after exercises the Trade of her first husband. But
Croke, Hutton and Harvey contra. If the husband meddle with the Trade of the
wife, then she is not a Feme Sole Merchant; but if the husband be beyond Sea,
or becomes Bankrupt, or leaves his Trade, and the wife exercise the same Trade,
or they both exercise the same Trade distinctly by themselves, and not meddle
the one with the other, the wife is Sole Merchant, Lit. Rep. 31. Mesme Case;
but vid. in 1 Croke 67. the same Case.

The Custom of a Feme Sole Merchant was alleged, and a Procedendo was awarded.
Feme was indicted as a Feme Sole Merchant, for selling Ale, and her husband not
joined; where she uses the same Trade, she does it as a Servant, and he alone
shall be indicted: Nor will any Action lie here (in B. R.) against her alone,
and a Procedendo was awarded, 2 Keb. 583. Moreton and Packman: So a Procedendo
was awarded in Royston and Ivory's Case on Suit of a Feme Covert as Sole
Merchant, the Custom being alleged in the Declaration, 3 Keb. 302.

Wife may sue as a Feme Sole in the Spiritual Court.
If Baron and Feme are divorced causa Adultera, and after the wife sues Sole
without the husband for a Defamation; although the Divor e does not dissolve
the Marriage, yet because the wife may sue as a Feme Sole, in such Case by the
Course of the Spiritual Court, no Prohibition shall be granted though it be
against the Usage of our Law, 2 Rolls Abr. 298. and fol. 300, 301.

There is a Case in 1 Bulst. 140. which I think is misreported: If a Feme
Covert in the absence of her husband, he being beyond Sea, does bring Trespass
of Assault and Battery made upon her, in her own name, and in the name of her
absent husband, this is well brought, and she may bring such Action in her own
name without her husband, quod cave; but she cannot be sued by another without
her husband, though he be then beyond Sea, such a Suit cannot be maintained
before the return of her husband.

If I make a Lease to Baron and Feme, Baron and Feme Covenant not to commit
Wast, Baron dies, no Action lies against the wife.
and they Covenant to do no Waste, or to repair Houses, and the husband dies,
and the wife survives, and holds it; if the wife commit Waste, or do not
repair the House, no Action lies against her; but in such Case the wife is tied
to pay Rent, or to perform a Condition made on the part of the Lessor, but not
to observe or perform the Covenant of the Lessee, 1 Brownl. 31.

If a Suit be in the Spiritual Court against a Woman for exercising the Trade
of a Midwife without License of the Ordinary against the Canons, Suit against a
Woman for exercising the Trade of a Midwife.
a Prohibition lies; for this is not any Spiritual Function, of which they have
Conusance, 2 Rolls Abr. 286. Benskin and Crips.

CHAP. XXVII.
Special Actions brought by a Woman. Cui in Vita. Appeal. The Nature of an
Appeal. The Process Pleadings and Trial in an Appeal. Quare Impedit. Actions on
the Case for Scandalous Words by Baron and Feme against Baron and Feme, with
Declarations and Pleadings therein, and where Baron and Feme must join or be
joined in the Action.

Cui in Vita.
IS a proper Action or Remedy to be brought by the wife upon the husband's
aliening her Lands by Feoffment, etc. the wife at Common Law might not enter,
but is put to her Action, which is called Cui in vita; and upon this
Discontinuance her Heir might have a Sur cui in vita; but if the wife were
Tenant in Tail, and her husband alien in Fee, and dies, and the wife dies, the
Issue in Tail cannot have a Sur cui in vita, but he must have his Formedon in
Discender by Stat. W. 2. c. 1. but this is remedied by the Stat. 32 H. 8. and
the wife may enter.

If the Baron and Feme lose by default, and the Baron die, the wife shall not
have a Quod ei deforc', for a Cui in vita in that Case is given to her by the
Stat. W. 2. c. 3.

So on Recovery in Action of Waste against the Baron and Feme by default, the
wife shall have a Cui in vita, 1 Inst. 355.

In a Sur cui in vita of a Mesuage, the Parties being at Issue, it was found by
Verdict, that a Discontinuance being of a Mesuage, the Discontinee pulls it
down, and erected a new House part on the Land discontinued, and part on his
own Land adjoining, and ^^e Writ was brought for the entire Mesuage, and well;
and there needed no Foreprise. And the Demandant recovered, but Judgment was
entered specially, that the Demandant should recover Mesuag' praed', viz. so
much in length, and so much in breadth, as the Verdict found, Cro. El. 234.
Hayes and Allen.

But by the Stat. 32 H. 8. c. 28. in such Case of Discontinuance the wife and
her Heirs, after the death of the husband, may enter into the said Lands and
Te^ents so aliened, and are not driven to this Action, 1 Inst. 326. a. 2 Inst.
456.

Appeal.
Faemina de morte viri sui inter brachia interfecti and non aliter poterit
appellare, says Fleta. Where by inter brachia is understood the wife, which
the Dead had lawfully in possession at his death; for she must be his wife de
facto and de jure, for in Appeal n'unque accouple en Loyal Matrimony, is a good
Plea, 1 Inst. 69.

The wife in possession without lawful Matrimony shall not have Appeal, None
but a Wife de jure shall have an Appeal.

A Wife de facto shall have Dower.


she must be wife de jure as well as de facto, without Elopement or Divorce, 1
Inst. 317. and the Plea n'unque accouple shall be ta^en strictly: But a wife de
facto shall have Dower though not an Appeal, and in other Cases she shall ^ave
Appeal where she cannot have a Writ of Dower: As if she elope she is barred of
her Dower, but not of ^er Appeal, because the Stat. W. 2. c. 34. bars her of ^n
Dower, but not of her Appeal. If the husband be ^ainted of Treason, the wife
shall not be endowed; (...) if any kill him, she shall have Appeal, 1 Inst. 33.
b.

A Woman at this day may have an Appeal of Ro^^ry, Rape and Mayhem, for she is
not restrained ^^ereof, 2 Inst. 68, 69.

Before the Stat. Mag. Char. cap. 34. a Woman as well as a Man might have had
an Appeal of the death of any of her Ancestors, but now she is disabled to
bring Appeal of the death of any but her husband; but the Son of a Woman shall
at this day have Appeal if he be Heir at the death of the Ancestor.

No Appeal lies for a Woman as Heir.

Appeal annexed to the Widowhood.
The Right of Appeal of the death of her husband is annexed to her Widowhood,
therefore if the wife of the dead Person marry again, her Appeal is gone,
though the second husband die within the year. And if she brings her Appeal in
her Widowhood, and takes husband, the Appeal abates for ever. So if in Apeal
she has Judgment of death against the Defendant, if after she take husband,
she can never have Execution of death against him.

Albeit, the husband be attainted of High Treason or Felony, yet if he be
slain, his wife shall have an Appeal; for notwithstanding the Attainder, he was
vir suus, but the Heir cannot have an Appeal, for the Blood is corrupted
between them, 2 Inst. 68, 69.

It must be within the year and day.
After the year and day the Appeal of death cannot be commenced; the year and
day is to be accounted from the death.

Process.
The Plaintiff pursues an Appeal for the Murder of her husband; upon the return
of the Writ it was moved that the Plaintiff might prosecute by Attorney, for
which a Warrant was produced under the Hand and Seal of the Plaintiff; which
being avowed by her in person, she was admitted so, and the Warrant filed, and
after the Appeal was arraigned in the French Language; and after the Prisoner
being at the Bar, was arraigned by Lindsey Secundary, and pleads not guilty:
Upon this he was delivered by Mainprise of a Lord and two Esquires, to appear
de die in diem, Sir Tho. Jones 210. Warren and Verden.

By the Stat. of Gloc' cap. 9. Count in Appeal.
the Count of the Appellant must comprehend Seven things: 1. The Fact. 1. The
Year. 3. The Day. 4. The Hour. 5. The Year of the King. 6. The Town where the
Fact was alone. 7. With what Weapon (if any Weapon were) of which you may fully
read in 2 Inst. 317, 318, 319.

Pleadings, or Bars in Appeal.
In Appeal of Murder by a Feme. The Defendant pleads nient accouple en Loyal
Matrimony, Et si, etc. not guilty to the Felony. The Plaintiff replies, She was
accouple en Loyal Matrimony, nor does not an^^er nor plead that he was guilty
of the Felony. Quere, If it be a Discontinuance, Et per Curiam.

When a Plea is pleaded which is triable at Common Law, and concludes over to
the Felony, Reg.
there be Plaintiff ought to reply, and conclude over to the felony; but when
he pleads a Plea triable otherwise ^^an by the Common Law, it is otherwise,
Cro. El. 1223. Withington and Delabar.

B. was indicted for the Murder of W. and being reigned upon it, that A. the
wife of W. brought Appeal against him for this Murder, and that he was a
reigned upon it, and pleaded not guilty, and found (...) Jury that he was not
guilty of Murder, but Manslaughter; and that thereupon he prayed his Clergy,
and had it, and demands Judgment if he shall be put again to answer this
Felony, and it was adjudged a good Plea. Quere, For the finding him guilty of
Manslaughter in the Appeal, is more than needs, and then the Allowance of
Clergy is to no purpose, Cro. ^ct. 256. Barley's Case.

In Appeal brought by E. B. of the death of her husband against R. B. who came
in upon the Exi^^ent. The Defendant appears, and demands Oyer of ^he Writ, and
of all the mean Processes which were entered upon Record. Then the Plaintiff
having declared in her Appeal, the Defendant pleads that at the general
Jail-deliver at York before Commissioners assigned, Pleading of Conviction
with Clergy allowed.
he was indicted of the Felony comprised in the Appeal, and arraigned and found
guilty of Manslaughter, and had his Clergy, prout patet per record': And
further says, that nullum judicium was given upon the Premises, and took all
the material Averments, etc. Et quoad murdrum and feloniam praed' he says he
is not guilty, and Plaintiff demurs; it was agreed per Curiam, 1. No Appearance
by the Defendant in Appeal shall aid any Discontinuance of Suit, but Error in
the mean Process is salved by an Appearance after, as in 9 H. 6. 2. in Appeal
the Exigent cepi corpus, where it should be exigi fec. The Defendant appeared,
and was acquitted, and prayed his Damage; he shall have his Damage, because the
foundation of the Suit, (viz.) the Writ of Appeal, and all the Process which
issued at the Suit of the Party, is good and right. 2. The Plea was good; 1.
Because ex necessitate juris: The Defendant need not plead omnino to the
Country, where he had pleaded a good special Plea before; and here the pleading
of the Connection with the Clergy allowed, is a good Plea in Bar of this
Appeal, and so was Wrott and Wigg's Case, 33 El. and 4 Co. 45, 46. Burgh and
Holcroft; and then the Pleading further to the Felony is negative: And the word
(Murdrum) can be taken for no other than Manslaughter, and he does not say
malitia praecogitate, Yelv. p. 204. 9 Jac. Bradley and Banks.

Release of Action criminal or mortal, or Pleas of the Crown, is a good Bar in
Appeal, 1 Inst. 289. b.

Trial.
Appeal for the death of her husband. Upon several Issues pleaded, the
Plaintiff was nonsuited upon a Trial against the one. Per Curiam, It is a
Nonsuit against all; and therefore as to the Suit of the Party, it was ruled
that he should be discharged; but that the others who were not tried, should be
arraigned at the Queen's Suit, Cro. El. 460. Curtis verse. Savill and three
others.

It is against a Rule in Law that a Trial for Murder by Appeal or otherwise,
should be out of the County where it was committed; Appeals were never allowed
in Counties adjoining for Murder done in Wales, Cro. Car. 247. Fentley and
Price.

In Appeal by a Feme Covert of the death of her husband, if the Defendant says
that the husband is al^ve in another County, this shall be tried by Proofs, 43
Ass. 26. so if he says he is alive generally, without saying in another County.

If the Appellee be acquitted, Appellee acquitted shall recover Damages.
he shall recover Damages by Stat. W. 2. c. 12. yet every Appellee upon his
being acquitted, shall not recover Damages. As if a Feme Covert be appealed
alone without her husband and acquitted, because of her Disability; but if
Appeal be brought against husband and wife, and they be acquitted, Damages
shall be recovered by the husband alone, and shall be given to the husband and
wife, for the Damage of the wife, 2 Inst. 385, 386.

If a Feme Covert be acquitted upon Appeal, she ^^all have Damages against the
Abettor, 2 Hob. 98.

Quare Impedit.
If the husband be disturbed to present to an Adtowson which he had in the
right of the wife, and dies, the wife shall have a Quare Impedit of this
Disturbance, 3 H. 5. Q. Imped. 21.

Husband seized of an Advowson in the right of his wife, presents, and after
has Issue, and the wife dies, and after the Church is void, the husband shall
not have Assise of Darrein Presentment, because he is in of another Estate than
he presented to before; for before he was seized in the right of his wife, and
now he has an Estate for life, Keb. 118. b. but if the husband after Issue had
presented, and after the wife dies, and the Church is void, the husband shall
have this Writ of Darrein Presentment, because he had Inception to an Estate
for life by the Courtesy by the first Presentment, wh ch is now complete.

If two Copartners be, and they cannot agree to present, the eldest shall
present; and if her Sister disturbs her, she shall have a Quare Impedit against
her. So Tenant per Courtesy of the eldest shall present.

A. and B. his wife present to a Church to which they have no right, this gains
nothing to the wife; for the wife is at the will of the husband, and
Presentation is but Commendation, or the Act of the husband, and it is not like
to an entry into Lands by them; alit' it is when the wife has right, March p.
90.

Actions on the Case for Scandalous Words spoken by Baron and Feme against
Baron and Feme.
Thou art a Witch, no Action lies. Action lies not for calling one Witch,
without alleging she has done some Act, Cro. Car. 478, 480. 1 Rolls Abr. 45.

Thou art a Witch, and I will prove thee a Witch; Action lies, Cro. Jac. 150.
Edwards and Dusley.

Thou art a Witch, is not actionable, and the Addition of these words, I have
seen thy Imps and Spirits in the night, is but matter of fancy, and not triable
if true, Cro. Jac. 399. Lloyd and Coke, 1 Rolls Abr. 44. contra.

Thou art a Witch, and were the Death of such a Man's Child, at whose Birth
thou were Midwife; it is actionable by the Stat. 1 Jac. a Witch is punishable,
Godb. 341. 2 Rolls Rep. 343.

She sacrificed one of her Children to the Devil to the intent to bewitch his
Mother; Action on the Case for these words, for she is punishable by the Stat.
of Witches, 1 Rolls Abr. 44. Lock and Lock.

Thou art a Sorcerer and Inchanter; no Action lies; for this is but a sort of
Cosenage, 1 Rolls Abr. 45.

He has bewitched my Wear, and I can take no Fish; no Action lies.

She is a Witch, and a very strong Witch; no Action lies, Cro. Car. 282, 324. 1
Rolls Abr. 45.

Thou art a Witch, for thou did bewitch my Wife's Milk; (...) and Action
lies, Cro. Car. 141. 1 Rolls Abr. 45.

But there are many more Cases of the like nature in our Books, which because
they properly belong to mother Title, I shall not further take notice of, but
come to such Cases which more immediately concern this Subject.

Action was brought in London for calling a Woman Whore; the Defendant removed
the Cause into B. R. and the Court granted a Procedendo to try it in London,
for by Rolls we cannot determine the Custom, Styles Rep. 244.

The Defendant's wife spoke of the Plaintiff's wife these words, Thou art a
Theivish Queen, and have stolen my Faggots, innuendo, five Faggots of the
Defendant's and his Wife's: It was moved that the words are not actionable; for
a Feme Covert has not any Goods that can be stolen. But per Curiam, The
Action lies, she charge her with Felony, and it is no matter whose Goods they
are, Cro. Jac. 600. Stamp and Ux. verse. White and Ux.

Thou have stolen my Goods, innuendo the Goods of a Feme Covert.
If a Feme Covert says to another, Thou have stolen my Goods; the other asked,
What Goods; the wife answered, My Plow and Stuff: And in the Declaration the
Plaintiff averred innuendo, the Plow and Stuff of the husband: No Action lies,
for a Feme Covert cannot have Goods, 1 Rolls Abr. 74.

Thou have sought the Blood of my Husband, and wast his Death; for had thou
been an honest Woman he had been alive still; and avers in Facto that her
husband was killed: The words are actionable, Cro. El. 293. Gastrell and
Townsend.

Toose his wife, innuendo the Plaintiff, Has killed thy Husband; innuendo J.
D. her husband lately dead: The words were adjudged actionable, Cro. Jac. 306.
Toose's Case.

If a Man says, A Woman told me Megs his Wife had poisoned Griffin her first
Husband in a Mess of Milk: Meg and his wife may have Action of Slander for
this, for otherwise a Man may raise a Slander of his own head, and not be
punished, 1 Rolls Abr. 64. Meg and Griffin.

One said of a Woman, Thou did poison thy husband, and I will justify it to
thy face; Action lies, though it is not said she did it voluntarily; but it is so
intended by common Acceptance, but it must be averred that he was dead before
the words spoken, 1 Rolls Abr. 71. Gardner and Spurdance.

If the Plaintiff declare that the Defendant spoke these words of her, Thou art
a Villainous Queen, and a Murdrous Queen, for thou did murder my Wife; and the
Jury find she spoke the words of the Defendant in the third person, She is a
Villainous Queen, etc. This is a material Variance, and cannot be intended the
same words, 2 Rolls Abr. 716. Blisset's Case.

Mrs. P. wrote a Letter to one to poison her husband; Action lies for these
words, cited in Dean and Eton's Case, 1 Bulst. 201.

Wallis's Wife is thy Whore; no Action lies at Common Law, but in Spiritual
Court: But to say, One keeps a Bawdy House, is actionable at Common Law, Sid.
61. Wallis's Case.

Thou art an Whore, and I will throw thee out of thy Living, (viz. Copyhold)
and she was possessed of a Copyhold dum sola and casta; it is actionable, Sid.
214. Boy's Case.

She is an Whore, and her Children, (innuendo which she had by her former
husband) are F 's Bastards; the words are actionable, though the Children
cannot be Bastards in Law, but in Reputation they may, and it is loss of
Marriage, Cro. Car. 322. Bryan and Cockman.

She was with Child, and miscarried at C. N. his House: Words spoken of a
Virgin; per quod she lost Suitors, and was threatened by her Father to be turned
out of his House; but no particular Damage assigned: Not actionable, Sid. 398.
Barnes and Prudlin.

Thou art an Whore-master, for thou have lain with Brown 's Wife, and had to
do with her against a Chair; per quod, etc. Judgment pro Quer', Cro. Jac. 323.
Matthews and Craple.

Action on the Case for saying, He had two Bastards, and should have kept them.
By which Discord arose between him and his wife, and they were likely to be
divorced; not actionable, for it is but an Imagination of being divorced, Cro.
Jac. 473. Barmend's Case.

He has three Wives: Actionable and within the Statute.

What do you mean to entertain him, for he was a very harsh Man to his former
Wife, and would not allow her Necessaries, and is of a small Estate: Per quod,
the wife refused him, and the words adjudged actionable, Shepherd's Case cited,
Litt. Rep. 193.

Of a Woman who was in Communication of Marriage, She is a Burstenbellied
Queen, and her Gutts hang down to her Garters; adjudged actionable, Harvey's
Case cited in Bridge and Langton's Case, Litt. Rep. 193.

Where Baron and Feme must join in the Action or not, and how Judgment shall be.
Action on the Case was brought against V. and his wife, for words spoken of
the Plaintiff by the Defendant's wife: Where Wife is found guilty only, yet the
Judgment was against Baron and Feme.
Upon not guilty, Verdict was for the Plaintiff, and Judgment given, and a Writ
of Error brought: And this Exception was taken, That the Verdict found the wife
only guilty, and yet the Judgment was given against Baron and Feme. Per Glin
Chapter Justice, the Jury have found the wife guilty, and so the Declaration is
true, and therefore just cause of Action, and the Judgment well given, Styles
p. 460. Abbot and Vaughan.

C's wife is a Bawd and keeps a Bawdy House: They join in the Action, and
conclude ad damnum ipsorum, and good, Chambers and his wife verse. Risley, March
p. 212.

In Action against Baron and Feme if the Plaintiff declare, Declaration.
that they dixerunt of the Plaintiff certain scandalous words, such a day and
year: If the Defendants plead not guilty, and the Jury find the husband guilty
and the wife not guilty, in this Case the Plaintiff shall have Judgment, for
although the words by the Baron and Feme may not be jointly spoke in as much as
they have two Mouths, and the speaking of the one is not the speaking of the
other, so that it shall be taken that the words were severally spoken at the
same time; in which Case the Action ought not to be brought against both, in as
much as if they had been both found guilty, there ought to have been two
Judgments, one against Baron and Feme, and the other against the Baron only,
which is not to be suffered upon one Writ; and therefore if the Plaintiff had
demurred upon this Declaration, it had not been good; yet when the wife is
found not guilty, there need not be but one Judgment, (viz.) against the Baron;
and for this the Verdict had made it good, and so the Plaintiff shall have
Judgment against the Baron, 1 Rolls Abr. 782 so is Styles p. 349. Butcher and
Orchard.

H. 32 El. B. C. Fishume's Case. Baron and Feme and their Son, brought Action
on the Case for saying, That they had committed Treason for coining of Money;
and adjudg'd, no Action lies. Action on the Case for slanderous words spoken by
Baron and Feme lies not, for they cannot speak together, Dyer 19. Margin.

Action for words spoken against Baron and Feme for words laid to be spoken by
the wife: Upon not guilty pleaded, a Verdict was found for the Plaintiffs, Quod
ipsi non sunt inde culpabiles, and good, Quod ipsi non sunt culpabiles.
and it is no Error, 3 Bulst. 62. Quelsh and Ux. versus Carpenter.

In Action on the Case against Baron and Feme for words spoken by the wife:
Verdict.
The Baron is to be found not guilty, because nothing is laid to his charge;
and if they are both found guilty as to the husband, the Verdict is void, but
good as to the wife alone, 3 Bulst. 60.

The Defendant's wife spoke of the Plaintiff's wife scandalous words, and he
brought his Action against Baron and Feme, and they pleaded quod ipsi non sunt
^alpabiles, and good, for the Baron and Feme are ^harged as for the wrong of
the wife, Cro. Car. 417. Needler and Simnel.

Action on the Case by a Victualler for saying of his wife, She was a Bawd of
Bawds, and a Bawd to her own Daughter; and special Damage, Quod ad damnum
ipsorum, Ad damnum ipsorum.
1 Cro. 419. The special Damage is only the husband's, and the Action would not
lie without the special Damage, and Judgment was stayed, they ought not to have
joined; had the Damage been laid per quod, he lost Consortium of the wife, they
could not join, French and Lever in B.C. 1 Keb. 791. Coleman and Ux. verse.
Haroll.

Error on a Judgment in C. B. was, That the Baron and Feme should recover, and
it was assigned for Error in B. R. because the Baron only is to have the
Damages; and yet Judgment was affirmed by the whole Court, Godb. 369. pl. 459.
Litchfeild and his wife verse. Mellhouse.

So Case by Baron and Feme of words spoken of the Plaintiffs wife ad damnum
ipsorum, and Judgment was stayed after Verdict pro Quer', 2 Keb. 387.

When Judgment is given against Baron and Feme for words spoken by the Feme, In
mia'.
both must be in mia' Hob. 127.

If A. a Feme Covert, speak scandalous words of B. another Feme Covert; and
after the husband of B. makes a Release of this to the husband of A. and after
A. sues B. in Court Christian for this Defamation, and there the Release of the
husband of B. is pleaded; Release.
and notwithstanding Sentence is given there for A. and Costs taxed, Suit for
Defamation.
and upon this an Appeal; yet no Prohibition lies as to this matter, because
there they have Jurisdiction of the Cause, and also of the manner of
Proceeding: But a Prohibition lies as to the Costs, for the Costs shall go to
her husband, who had made the Release, 2 Rolls Abr. 301. Perry and Hubbard.

Where the Wife may sue Sole.
The wife sues in Court Christian for a Defamation, (as she may sue Sole there)
and the husband and the other refer themselves to the Award of J. S. who makes
an Award; and this is pleaded in Court Christian, and not allowed; yet a
Prohibition was denied, because this Suit is only to restore her to her Fame,
which the husband cannot hinder, 2 Rolls Abr. 301. Pannell and Watford; and so
is Motam's Case there, where the wife after Divorce causa Adulterii a Mensa and
thoro, sues for Defamation.

Action for words against Baron and Feme. Defendant pleads quod ipsi non sunt
culpabiles, Quod ipsi non sunt culpabiles.
and found pro Quer' Moved in Arrest of Judgment, because Issue was not well
joined; for being for words spoken by the wife, it ought to be quod ipsa non
est culpabilis, sed non allocatur; for the Baron and Feme are charged as for
the Wrong of the wife, Cro. Car. 417. Needler against Symel and his wife.

CHAP. XVIII.
Actions against Baron and Feme. Trover, Debt, Trespass, Actions on the Case,
Waste, Covenant, Account, Audita Querela, with the manner of Declaring and
Pleading in each Action. Actions against Baron and Feme by reason of Offenses
against a Statute. Information against Baron and Feme for the Recusancy of the
Wife by the Stat. 1 Eliz. and 23 Eliz. In what Actions the Husband shall be
charged after the Death of the Wife. Where the default of the Wife shall be the
default of the husband, and e contra. Where the wife shall be received upon
the Husband's default. W^ger of Law by Baron and Feme. In what Cases the
Husband shall appear, and be compelled to put in Bail for his Wife or not. Of
Baron and Feme being sued to the Outlawry, and how the Entry shall be.

Trover.
Trover by the Feme, and conversion against Baron and Feme.
TROVER by the Feme, and Conversion by the Baron and Feme. The Action must be
brought against them both, 1 Leon. p. 312. and not against the Baron only, for
the Action does sound in Trespass; and it is not like to Detinue, for upon
Detainer by the wife, the Action lies against the Baron only, Marsh's Case.

Whether the Wife may be said to convert Goods.
Whether and how the wife may be said to convert Goods, has been a Question in
our Books. Mich. 7 Jac. Trover was brought against Baron and Feme, and
Plaintiff declares he was possessed of diverse Goods in Specie until such a day,
and lost them, which came to the Possession of both the Defendants, and they
converted them ad damnum, etc. And upon not guilty pleaded, found pro Quer'.
Exception was taken to the Declaration, because the Conversion is laid to the
Charge of the wife as well as to the Charge of the husband; and Feme Covert may
not convert Goods, but it shall be said the Conversion only of the husband, for
as much as she cannot have Property, but all is in the husband. To which it was
answered by Yelverton, That this Action is not grounded in any Property
supposed to be in the Defendants, but upon the Possession only; and the Point
of the Action is the Conversion, which is a Tort with which a Feme Covert may
well be charged as well as she may be charged with a Trespass, or a Deisseism
committed. And if a Feme Covert take my Sheep and eat them, ^r other Goods, and
convert them, I shall well have ^^s Action against Baron and Feme; and suppose
the Conversion in the wife only, (viz.) the Tort. But ^^aron and Feme may not
have Action on Trover, and suppose the Possession in them both, for the Law
^ransfers all in Point of Ownership to the husband, Quod fuit concessum, per
Curiam. But this seems not ^o be Law; for in Berry and Neve's Case, 20 Jac. 1.
^u. Jac. 661. an Action lies not against Baron and ^ane for converting Goods to
their uses, for it is the Conversion of the husband only, and they are only to
^^s use; and although they may be charged with a ^^int Battery or Imprisonment,
yet it cannot be so for Goods converted; and the Judgment shall not be re^^rsed
quoad the wife.

And yet in Rhemes and Humfries's Case, Cro. Car. ^54. Trover was brought
against Baron and Feme (...) Conversion by Baron and Feme ad usum ipsorum (...)
not guilty: Both are found guilty, Conversion ad usum ipsorum.
and Damages ^^sessed. It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, That ^^e Action lies
not against Baron and Feme jointly for Conversion to their uses during the
Coverture; for ^hen they join it is the Act of the husband only, and ^^e Feme
cannot convert to her own use: But Action of Trover well lies for Conversion by
the Feme before Coverture, or by the Feme only during the Coverture, for she
may do a Tort solely, and the husband shall be joined with her, but not where
she joins with her husband; and Judgment was given for the Defendant, Cro. Car.
254.

Trover was brought against Baron and Feme, and that they converted them ad
usum ipsorum, and for that cause Judgment was reversed; for a Feme Covert
cannot convert to the use of the Feme, but all is done to the use of the
husband, Cro. Car. 494. Perry and Diggs, though it was alleged in such case, 1
Vent. 33. when it was ad usum proprium converterunt, that proprium might be
applied to the use of the husband only, and so if it had been ad usum suum: But
per Curiam, Neither had been good; so was Gallop's Case, Styles 136. And it was
prayed that Judgment might be entered, quod querens nil capiat per billam; for
if it be quod def' eat inde sine die, the Plaintiff could not have brought
Action de novo.

Trover was brought against Baron and Feme supposing the Trover to be by both,
and the Conversion by the Feme only. Quod ipsi non sunt culpabiles.
The Defendants plead quod ipsi non sunt inde culpabiles: After Verdict pro
Quer' Judgment was stayed in as much as the Declaration does not charge the
husband with any Tort, but only the wife, the issue ought to have been quod
ips^ non est inde culpabilis, Cro. El. 883. Cox and Crapnell; and so a
Repleader was awarded after Verdict.

If the wife take Corn and make Bread, and eat the Bread, this is the Trover
and Conversion of the husband; so if she buys Clothes, and makes a Garment and
wears it, the Baron and Feme shall be charged in Trover and Conversion, Sid.
113.

Trover against Baron and Feme of the Trover of the wife, and Conversion of the
wife during the Coverture. The Defendants pleaded not guilty, and found against
them. The Judgment was, Judgment.
That the Feme, sit in misericordia; where it ought to be that the Baron and
Feme, sint in misericordia; for she cannot pay it without her husband: And it
was erroneous also, because the Baron pleads with the wife, and does not
confess the Action, for that is the cause of the misericordia. Also the usual
course is in Actions against Baron and Feme for Trespass done by the Feme
during the Coverture, if they be thereof convicted to have the Judgment ideo
capiantur against both; yet this is no Offense against the Baron himself: And
by all the Clerks this is their course, Cro. Jac. 9. Wood and his wife verse.
Dr. Sutcliff.

Debt.
Baron and Feme cannot be joined in one Action of Debt against them for several
Contracts, On several Contracts, the one made by the Wife dum sola, the other
by the Husband.
the one ^^de by the wife dum sola, the other by the husband, (...) was Revell
and Gray's Case. Revell brought ^ction of Debt against Gray and his wife for 3
l. 18 s. and declared for 39 s. upon the wife's Contract dum ^^a fuit, and the
other 39 s. upon an Insimul com^averunt with Gray the husband after Issue
joined, ^^d nil debent, and Verdict pro Quer' Judgment was ^^yed, Hob. p. 184.

Debt against Baron and Feme for the Debt of the ^^^e upon Obligation made by
the wife dum sola. upon non est factum pleaded, Quod Capiantur.
and found pro Quer' (...) Judgment was that the Baron should be in
mise^cordia, and that the Feme capiatur; and this being ^igned for Error, the
Judgment was reversed, for it should be capiantur for both, Cro. El. 381.
Peircy and ^ardolf.

Now Debt against Baron and Feme for the Debt of the wife must be in the debet
and detinet, 3 Le^^. p. 206. This was upon a Bond made by the wife dun sola;
the husband has the Goods of the wife in his own Right, and so is the Register
140. Walcot and Powel's Case. And if Debt is brought against Baron and Feme
upon Recovery of Damages to the Feme dum sola, it is good in the debet and
detinet, 47 Ed. 3.23.

For Rent.
Feme Lessee for Life takes husband, and dies; Debt lies against the husband for
Rent incurred during the Coverture, 1 Rolls Abr. 592.

Debt on Lease made to a Feme when Sole, may be brought against the Baron Sole
in the Life of the wife, because during the Coverture he is Assignee in Law,
and receives the Profits, 1 Keb. 20.

Debt on Escape.
Debt. Whereas he recovered against T.A. and Mary his wife in Trespass 202 l.
and Mary was committed in Execution, and that the Defendant suffered her to go
at large. The Defendant pleads fresh Suit. It was objected, this Action for
Escape lay not, but Action on the Case; for she has nothing but what is her
husband's, and the husband is the principal Debtor, and subject to the
Execution. Per Curiam, This Action lies as well as Case, for the wife was only
committed to Prison, and not the Baron, and she is the sole Debtor who is
imprisoned, Cro. Jac. 657. Whiting and Sir Geo. Reynell.

Escape.
In Debt on Escape the Plaintiff declares J. S. and his wife were in Execution,
etc. and that they escaped on nil debet. The Jury found the husband was on
Execution, and he escaped: And further, that the wife was not in Execution
(being for Debt contracted before Coverture) and Judgment for the Plaintiff,
though the Verdict was not pursuant to the Declaration in the whole, Sid. p. 5.

If a Feme Sole do owe me Money, Feme Sole owes Money, and takes Husband,
Action lies against both.
and takes husband, I may very well have Action of Debt against them, and count
that they owe me so much without saying dum sola fuit; yet this was the proper
Debt of the wife when she was Sole, and now by the Marriage this is also made
the Debt of the husband during the Coverture: And this was one Grubb and
Johnson's Case, cited in Bowls and Peere's Case, 1 Bulst. 136, 137.

Trespass.
Of Assault and Battery,

Against Baron and Feme the Jury found the Feme only guilty, and not the
husband: Jury finds the Feme only guilty, and not the Husband.
It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that this Verdict was against the
Plaintiff; for in this Case he ought to have joined the husband only for
Conformity, and he declaring of a ^attery of both, the Baron being acquitted,
he has ^^iled of his Action: And so is Yelv. 106. Drury and Dennis's Case;
where Battery is brought against Ba^^on and Feme, supposing that they beat the
Plaintiff, or the Mare of the Plaintiff; and on not guilty, the ^^y found the
Feme only did the Battery, and not ^e husband: This Verdict was there said to
be against the Plaintiff; for now it appears the Action of the Plaintiff to be
faux, for the husband shall be join^d in such Case but for Conformity, and
there is a special Writ in the Register to such purpose. And it (...) not like
to a Battery charged upon J. D. and G. S. for there one may be found guilty,
and the other acquitted, and good; for these are in Law several Tre^^sses: But
the Court in the principal Case gave ^^dgment pro Quer', and said that in
Yelverton was a strange Opinion, 1 Vent. 93. But Action of Assault and Battery
for bearing the Baron and Feme, upon not guilty pleaded, the Defendant was
found guilt^y of beating the wife only, and nothing was found concerning the
Battery of the Baron. Per Curiam, If non cul' had been found as to the husband,
it had been well; but here is a non Liquet as to him, vid. 10 Co. 130. Verdict
void.
b. and took a Diversity between, their being Plaintiffs and Defendants; for if
there be a Mistake as to one of the Defendants, it may be well, as in Action on
the Case brought against Baron and Feme for words spoken by them both, and the
Baron be found not guilty, and the wife guilty, it is well. But afterward it
was held a void Verdict, because only part of the Issue was found, as 1 Inst.
227. and there is no Discontinuance, for the whole is continued; and by Chapter
Baron Bridgman, Venire de novo awarded, Hard. 166. Rochell and his wife against
Stedle and his wife.

In Battery against Baron and Feme the Baron pleads generally not guilty; The
Wife cannot plead by herself.
and the Baron and Feme quoad, the wounding, plead not guilty, and quoad the
Battery, the wife pleads in Justification, Et hoc parata est verificare, where
it ought to be parati sunt, Cro. Car. 594. Watkinson and Turner in such Case,
Cro. Jac. 239. Watson and Thorn; the Baron justified, for that the Plaintiff
assaulted his wife, in aid of whom, etc. the Feme justifies by her self, and
pleads son assault demesne. Plaintiff replies, De injuria sua propria absque
Tali causa; and both Issues found for the Plaintiff, and entire Damages. Per
Curiam, It is ill, for the wife by her self cannot plead, and the Damages being
entirely assessed, all was ill.

Assault and Battery by Baron and Feme against Baron and Feme, for Battery of
the Plaintiff's wife: Upon not guilty pleaded, it was found the Baron was not
guilty, and the wife was only guilty; and the Judgment was quod capiantur, Quod
capiantur.
and good, Cro. Cro. 203. Hales and White.

Trespass was brought for mean Profits. Trespass for mean Profits.
The Count was against Baron and Feme for Trespass done cum ^veriis suis, and
says not whether they were their Beasts after, or hers before Coverture. Per
Curiam, It Is good enough after a Verdict: for she may be Executrix, and so by
Marriage they may be his Goods, but then the Actions should have been several,
according to their several Capacities: And if the Goods of an Executrix after
taking husband be stole, the Indictment must be of taking his Goods, 1 Keb.
944. Collingwood and Bishop.

Note, In Trans. ad novam assignac' Def. placitat' Liberum Tenementum ipsius
Defendentis and E. Ux. ejus in jure, etc. Ad quod quer' dicit quod ipse fuit
scisitus quousque disseit' per le Baron ad usum Ux. per quod fuer' seisit' per
dissesinam and quod disseisee reenter. and Tresp. null faciend' mentionem de
Agreement del Feme al dissei. Qu'. Car aliter de estranger. Def' menteyne son
Freehold and traverse le disseisin. Ex Manuscripto Mri. Brownloe.

Action on the Case. Vide Words.
Action on the Case does not lie against Baron and Feme for negligent keeping
of Fire in their House, For negligent keeping of Fire.
by which the House of the Plaintiff was burnt; for this Action lies by the
Custom of the Realm against Patrem familias, and not against a Servant, or a
Feme Covert, who is in the nature of a Servant, 1 Rolls Abr. 2. Shelley's Case.

Feme Covert, and another at her Request, are bound in a Bond for the Debt of a
Feme Covert, and after the death of her husband she had assumed to ^^ve the
other harmless against that Bond; this Assumpsit shall not bind the wife, Godb.
138. in Barton and Edmonds Case. Aliter in Case of an Infant.

Feme Covert affirming her self to be a Feme Sole to entice to Marriage.
Action on the Case brought against Baron and Feme; because the wife affirmed
herself to be a Feme Sole to entice the Plaintiff to marry her; Action lies not
against Baron and Feme, because it is Felony; and all the ground of this is the
Contract and Communication of the wife, which cannot bind her husband, Sid.
375. Cooper and Witham and his wife.

Waste.
Waste lies not against the husband for Waste committed by him in the time of
his wife. Feme Tenant for Life takes the Defendant to husband, who committed
Waste, and his wife died, and Action was brought, and it was not brought in the
Tenet, not the Tenuit; and therefore the Writ of Waste is not good, because it
is variant from the Register, for it ought to have been the one way; and to
make his Count special, Writ and Count.
and the Form of the Count was ill, because the Writ supposes that the Baron
fecit v^stum; whereas the Baron being charged as Tenant i^ the Right of his
wife, the Writ ought to have been fecerunt vastum. And the Court was of opinion
that the Writ lies not against the Baron for Waste committed by him in the time
of his wife; for he is to be charged by reason of his wife, and jointly with
her, and she being dead the Action is gone, for it is but a personal Wrong done
by her, though the Prothonotaries informed the Court that such Action had been
brought against the Baron, and the Writ was quod tenuit in jure Uxoris, which
the Court marvelled at, Cro. El. 357. Baron seized in Right of the Wife, does
waste, Feme dies, and he shall not be charged.
and so is 1 Inst. 54. Baron seized for Life of the wife, and in the Right of
the wife, does waste, and after the wife dies, no Action of Waste lies against
the husband in the Tenuit, for that he was seized, but in the Right of his
wife, and the Freehold was his wife's. But if Baron possessed for years in the
Right of his wife, does waste, and the wife dies, Action of Waste lies against
the husband, for that the law gives the Term to him, 5 Co. 75. b.

A Lease for Life is made to A. the Remainder to a Feme Sole for years, they
intermarry, Waste is committed, Lessor brings Action of Waste; he shall recover
as well the Estate for Life, as for Years, 2 Leon. p. 7.

If a Woman while she is Sole commits Waste and marries, Feme Sole commits Wast
and then marries.
the Writ shall be that the Woman while she was Sole committed the Waste.

A Man gives Land to his wife during the Minority of his Son, on condition that
she shall not make Waste; she takes husband, who commits Waste; this is no
breach, Latch 20. in Webb's Case, 2 Leon. 35. Cobb and Priour.

If a Man have Land in the Right of his wife, and commits Waste, and the Woman
dies, no Action of Waste lies against the husband after the death of the wife,
1 Brownl. 238, 239.

Baron and Feme shall be punished in Waste for Waste made by a Stranger, 1
Inst. 54. b.

Feme Lessee for Life takes husband, the husband does waste, the wife dies,
the husband shall not be punished by this Law of Gloucester, c. 5. Stat. Glou'
c. 5.
for the words be home que tient, etc. pur vie; and the Baron held not for
Life, for he was seized in the Right of his wife, and the Estate was in his
wife, 2 Inst. 301.

If Feme Lessee for Life takes husband, who does waste, Action lies against
them both, 33 H. 6. 31. 17 Ed. 3. 68. b.

If Feme Lessee for Life takes Baron, who commits Waste and dies, Action of
Waste lies against the wife for this.

Covenant.
Upon a Warranty in a Fine sur concessit. Vide Supra, Pen Hale's Case, 2 Sand.
177.

Account.
Action of Account was brought against a Feme Covert Administratrix, and her
husband in B. C. and Judgment given against the Defendants quod co^p^tent. The
Feme dies, and the Baron brings a Writ of Error in B. R. to reverse this
Judgment. Per Car', This Writ of Error lies not, because the Record cannot be
removed by it, for that would disturb the Proceedings in the Common Pleas, and
the Party would have no fruit of his Suit if the Record were removed, nor any
remedy to recover the Arrears due to him; yet the Original is determined by the
Judgment given quod computent, and a Scire fac' lies by the Executor, as the
Case here is, Styles 290. Spitlehouse Case.

Audita Querela.
Baron and Feme sue Execution after a Defeasance: On a Statute made to Baron
and Feme, Audita Querela should be brought against both, 1 Rolls Abr. 312.
although the Defeasance be void as to the wife; for the Action is in lieu of an
Answer to the Execution which is sued by both, and it is all one as if the
Baron alone had made the Defeasance which should be a sufficient Discharge, 11
Ed. 4. 8. b.

Actions against Baron and Feme upon Offenses against a Statute. Vide Offenses.
Information for Recusancy.
The Baron is not to be joined where Fine and Imprisonment is to be; Regu.
but on the Statute of Recusancy or keeping Alehouses, the husband must pay the
Fine, therefore must join, for it cannot be levied on her, though she commit
the fault, 2 Keb. 4.68.

Information lies against Baron and Feme for the ^ecusancy of the wife, to
recover 20 l. the Month by the Stat. of Eliz. and the Stat. 7 Jac. c. 6. does
not alter any of the former Laws, but prescribes that a Feme Covert Recusant
being convicted, if she after three Months do not conform her self, she shall
be committed to Prison, unless the husband will pay 10 l. for every Month that
she shall be out of Prison and not conformed. The Plea on Record is, Et praed'
J. C. and Magdalena veniunt: Et praed' Magdalena dicit quod ipsa non est
culpab. etc. and a Plea by a Feme Covert is void; but the Docket otherwise, and
it was mended, Cro. Jac. 529. Parker and Sir J. Curson's Case. The Question in
Parker and Webb's Case, Cro. Jac. 480. was, Whether a Feme Covert being
convicted by Indictment at the King's Suit, be liable to the Suit of an
Informer upon the Stat. 23 Eliz. after the year that she was convicted? Vide,
for it was not determined.

It is resolved, That the husband is liable to the Penalty of 23 Eliz. c. 1. of
20 l. per Month, though he himself be no Recusant, 3 Bulst. 87. Le Roy verse.
Law.

If Baron and Feme be sued in Debt for the Recusancy of the wife, both must
appear, or both be Outlawed, Hob. 174.

A Feme Covert affirms she is Sole, and induces J. S. to marry her; no Action
lies against the husband, 2 Keb. 399.

The wife may not join Issue without her husband in Information against Baron
and Feme for the Recusancy of the wife, 2 Rolls Rep. 90.

Stat. 1 Eliz. and 23.
Feme Covert is within the Stat. 1 Eliz. and the Stat. of 23 Eliz. refers to the
first, and therefore a Feme Covert is deins Stat. 23. and therefore she shall
forfeit for every Month 20 l. and this may be recovered by Information against
Baron and Feme, as was resolved 35 Eliz. at Russel-house by Puckering Lord
Chancellor, and all the Justices; but there it was resolved, If Feme be
indicted for a thing, the Husband shall not be charged.
if a Feme Covert be indicted for this at the King's Suit, the husband shall
not be charged, because he was not Party to the Judgment; for if a Feme be
indicted for any thing, the husband shall pay nothing, because he is not Party
to the Judgment; but otherwise it is for Actions of Battery, and for Words,
because the husband there is no Party to the Judgment; so it is also where the
Informer informs, and this was the cause of making the Stat. of 35 Eliz. by
which Statute the King may have Action of Debt, and so recover the Penalty
against the husband, 1 Rolls Rep. 93. Dr. Foster's Case.

In what Actions Husband shall be charged after the Death of his Wife, or not.
1 Rolls Rep. 351, 352.
If Feme Lessee for Life rendering Rent, takes husband and dies, the husband
shall be charged in Action of Debt for Rent incurred during the Coverture,
because he took the Profits out of which the Rent issued, 10 H. 6.11.

If a Woman be indebted to another, and takes husband, and dies; the husband
shall not be charged in Debt for this after the death of the wife, because it
was but a Chose in Action, 10 H. 6.10.12. 20 H. 6.22. b.

If Feme Lessee for Life takes husband, and dies, the husband shall not be
charged for this during the Coverture, for he was never Lessee, 5 Co. Foliamb's
Case.

If A. take B. Executrix to wife, against whom Action of Debt is afterward
brought as Executors, and Judgment given against them to recover de bonis
Testatoris; and upon this a Fieri fac' issues to levy the Debt and Damages; and
the Sheriff upon this returns a Devastavit, and after the wife dies, it was
doubted in Trotman and Jane's Case, whether Execution upon this Judgment may be
sued against the husband, there not being any Judgment upon the re^^^ of the
Devastavit to recover de bonis propriis, 9 Car. B. R. Vide as to this supra.

Process. Where the default of the Wife shall be the default of the Husband,
and e converso.
Where the husband is to have a Corporal Penance for the default, there the
default of the wife shall not ^e the default of the husband, 11 H. 4. 7. 9 H.
6. 8. (...) if on a pluries capias the husband appears, and the wife makes
default, this shall not be the default of the husband for the Corporal Pain. So
in Capias, if the ^usband make default, and the wife appear. So if ^^on the
Exigent the Baron and Feme have a Super^^eas, and notwithstanding this they are
returned ^utlawed; and at the return the Baron appears, and ^e wife makes
default, this shall not be the default of ^e husband for the Corporal Pain, 9
H. 6. 8.

But otherwise it is where the Baron is not to have a Corporal Pain by the
default, 11 H. 4. 72. as if Baron and Feme are attached in a Trespass, the
default of the wife is the default of both, and so the Issues forfeit. In
Assise the default of the wife shall be the default of the husband.

In Action of Debt against Baron and Feme, if the Baron appears, and the Feme
make default, the Baron shall not be put to answer, but Process shall issue
against the wife, and idem dies given to the husband, M. 11. Jac. B.
Thoroughgood and Dunham.

If Action of Waste be brought against Baron and Feme, and the Baron appear
upon the Distringas, and the wife make default, this shall be the default of
them both, 1 Brownl. 239.

Resceipt. Where the Wife shall be received upon the Husband's default, and e
contra.
In every Case that the wife is received for default of her husband, she shall
plead and have the same advantage in pleading to defend her Right, as if she
were a Feme Sole; but after receipt, she cannot levy a Fine, for that were to
give away her Right, 1 Just. 352. b. vid. 2 Inst. W. 2. c. 4.

After a Verdict against Baron and Feme the wife cannot pray to be received,
Hob. 177. Bell and Hartley. This was in Action of Waste.

A Resceipt shall be by a Termor or Feme Covert, after a nihil dicit, 9 Ed. 4.
c. 37. and a Receipt shall be by a Feme after a Writ of Enquiry of Waste
returned, and the Waste required, Cro. El. 263. Elmer and Thackam.

In Formedon the Tenant pleaded non Tenure, and found for the Demandant, and
now the Feme after Verdict prayed to be received upon the feint Plea of her
husband, because he had pleaded non Tenure, where she might have traversed the
Gift, and he brought a Writ out of Chancery, de Attornat' recipiendo for the
Feme. And per Curiam, It was received, for false Pleading is feint Pleading,
and feint Pleading is within the Statute, and here needs not any new
Declaration, because the Feme is Party to the Suit; aliter when he in Reversion
is Party to the Suit, and is received, Cro. El. 826. Greswold and Holmes.

Baron and Feme Jointenants for Life, the Baron Sole is impleaded, and made
default, and the wife prayed to be received; but she is not receivable, because
she was not Party to the first Writ; but he in Reversion shall be received, and
shall abate the Writ for Jointenancy, Moor 242. Caine's Case.

Feme Covert has a Reversion and Tenant for life is impleaded, and she
conceives her husband will not pray to be received; she may have a Writ
directed to the Justices, testifying therein, that she will make such Attorneys
jointly and severally, command^ng the Justices to receive them for Attorneys;
and it must be mentioned in the Writ that she is decri^^, etc. and cannot come
in Person, and pray to be ^eceived.

Ley Gager.
Debt against Baron and Feme for certain Barrels of ^^er sold to the wife dum
sola fuit. Baron and Feme both wage Law.
They both wa^^d their Law, and both Baron and Feme did swear ^^cording to the
form of the Oath. Quod nota, ^he Baron did swear for the Debt of the wife, Cro.
^^ct. 161. Weeks verse. Holmes and Ux.

Account of the Receipt of 10 l. by the hands of the Plaintiff's wife. The
Defendant waged his Law, because a Receipt by the hands of the wife of the
Plaintiff or Defendant, is all one as Receipt by their own hands, Cro. El. p.
919. Goodrick's Case.

The husband and wife of full Age for the Debt of the wife before the
Coverture, shall make their Law, 1 Inst. 172. b.

In what Cases the Husband shall be compelled to appear and put in Bail for his
Wife, or not.
Husband to remain in Prison till he puts in Bail for his Wife; in what Case or
not.
In Action (as Debt) against Baron and Feme for the Debt of the wife; if the
husband be taken by Capias or Exigent, he shall remain in Prison until he puts
in Bail for his wife: And by the Clarks it is a common course. But in Action
against Baron and Feme in Banco, if the husband comes in upon the Capias or
Exigent, he shall not be compelled to put in Bail for his wife.

If the husband appear upon the Original in B. R. where it is against Baron and
Feme, he ought to put in Bail for his wife.

If a Latitat Issue against Baron and Feme, and the wife is arrested but not
the husband; the husband in this Case shall not be compelled by the Course of
the Court to appear for himself and his wife, the husband not being arrested.
Per Curiam, And the Clarks in Story and Smith's Case, M. 10 Car. B. R. But they
say, that if the husband had been arrested, but not the wife, the husband shall
be compelled to appear for himself and his wife.

In Action of Debt against Baron and Feme in B. R. upon the Statute of (...)
Recusants for the Recusancy of the wife; the husband who is in Custod^ marr'
shall remain in Prison unless he puts in Bail as well for himself as his wife,
37 El. B. R. Philpot and Young: But it is in the Election of the Court, whether
they will compel him to give Bail for his wife, or not; for all Bails are in
the Discretion of the Court; so Hob.

Loveden's Case. In Debt for the Recusancy of the wife, the husband may not
appear by Supersedeas only, for either they ought both to appear, or both be
Outlawed.

Latitat was sued against J. S. and A. S. Baron and Feme, by T. D. The wife was
arrested, Latitar against J. S. and his Wife, the Wife was arrested, but the
Husband could not be taken.
but the Baron could not be taken. The Sheriff returned Cepi Corpus for the
wife, and non est inventus for the Baron. And the Court held nothing could be
done in this Case, unless there were Bail put in by the husband; for the Feme
without the husband cannot be sued, nor can put (...) Bail; and against the
husband, unless he be first taken and put in Bail, there cannot be any
Declaration, and therefore in this Case, in regard the Plaintiff cannot
declare, the Feme was dismissed; and it was said he ought to sue them by
Process of Outlawry, Remedy by Process of Outlawry.
and by ^^at means he might have remedy: For it were a great mischief that a
Feme Covert should intermeddle, and merchandise, and procure Goods into her
hands, and the Baron absenting himself, or keeping in his House, there should
be no remedy against them, Cro. Jac. 445.

The Court of King's Bench was moved on the be^^lf of the Lady Baltinglass.
There was an Action (...) the Case brought against Baron and Feme, and the Feme
appeared, and the husband would not, and that the Plaintiff's Attorney stood to
have special Bail (...) her; which she could not procure, and therefore (...)
was prayed she might be delivered on common ^^il: But by Glin, if there be
cause to have special ^^il, the wife must lie in Prison until the husband
ap^^ar and put in Bail for her; for she cannot put in (...) for herself, she
being a Feme Covert, Styles 475.

Action of Debt against Baron and Feme upon the ^^titat. The Feme appeared, she
shall be accepted (...) Curiam; but where the Feme is in Execution, she shall
not be discharged, nor could the Lady Baltinglass, who was in Custodia only
upon Process: But per Curiam, She ought to be discharged, and that without
Bail, if it appear upon the Writ that she is a Feme Covert; but if she be sued
as a Feme Sole, she shall put in Bail. Feme Covert appeared on the Latitat: Qu.
If she shall be dismissed.
And by Twisden, it is an unreasonable Course, that the wife because she cannot
appear by Reddidit se, but in Custodia, therefore she should not be dismissed
as in B. C. else would this be as good as a Divorce, a continual non est
inventus being returned against the husband, and no Declaration o^^ be against
her, and so she shall be always in Prison. And this being but an Arrest on mean
Process, and to say she is in Custodia, is no reason, because when he comes in
he shall find Bail for himself and his wife, and so the Plaintiff may declare
against them both in Custodia. Per Curiam, She was discharged. Three Opinions
have been in this Case; 1. That she should lie in Prison till the husband come
in; and that is unreasonable. 2. That she ought to file a common Bail if
another will be bound for her, which may prevent a Fraud in arresting of her at
the beginning of a long Vacation; this the Court conceived reasonable: but it
is at the Election of the wife whether she will or not. 3. That she ought to be
discharged without Bail, which the Court conceived reasonable, and so awarded
here, 1 Keb. 187, 188. Bart and Desmond.

In Action against Baron and Feme, and the Feme was an Infant, and the wife
appeared per Attornat'; whereas the Court ought to have admitted her per
Gardian', and for this it was reversed; but if the wife be of age, then the
Baron makes Attorney for her and himself, Entry as to appearance.
and the Entry is per Attornat' of the husband and wife; and by Hale the
husband cannot disallow the Guardian made by the Court for his wife, 1 Vent.
185. Freeman and Reddayle.

Suit against Baron and Feme; the Feme is arrested and gives Bond for her
appearance, and now prayed to be delivered on common Bail. The Sheriff having
returned Cepi Corpus of the Baron and Feme both having only taken her; but the
Court denied after return of Cepi Corpus, contra if non est inventus had been
returned as to the husband: But yet if it appear only a Practice, they will
discharge her; to examine which, they gave rule to the Sheriff to return the
Body of the husband, 1 Keb. 367. Dethick and Yaxley and Ux.

Debt was brought against Baron and Feme for Debt supposed to be due from the
wife dum sola fuit, and there was special Bail put in; and after Judgment
against Baron and Feme, they render themselves to Prison in discharge of their
Bail, and it was moved for the wife to discharge her, because there was not any
Debt due from her before Mar^age, but that this Action was contrived between
(...) husband and the Plaintiff to make the wife a Prisoner. And it was agreed,
On mean Process, if the wife be taken before the Husband, she shall be
discharged: Not so upon Execution.
That on mean Process if ^^e wife be taken before the husband, she shall be
dis^^arged; and when the husband is taken, he shall give appearance for both;
but upon Execution the wife ^ay be taken before her husband, and shall be
de^^red: But in this Case the wife, because of the Pra^^^e, was discharged,
Sid. p. 395. Gabree's Case, 1 Keb. 442, 576. Mesme Case.

If Baron and Feme be arrested in an Action which requires special Bail, Baron
to put in Bail for his Wife.
and the husband puts in Bail for ^^mself, he must put in Bail for his wife
also; but if (...) lies in Prison, the wife cannot be let out upon com^on Bail;
aliter if the husband abscond himself, and ^^^not be arrested, 1 Vent. 49.

Note, For a Rule; Unless the wife be arrested, Reg.
or (...) husband give Bond for her appearance, he shall (...) be forced to put
in Bail for both if he will lie in ^^ison, but else he shall before he can be
bailed in Debt upon a Statute entered by the wife dum sola, against Baron and
Feme: And the Court agreed; so the husband must put in Bail for both, though
she was never arrested. And so it is said, The husband in Execution on an Action
brought against him and his wife, is not bound to appear for her, unless she be
arrested; but he shall not be discharged, unless he put in Bail for himself and
her, 1 Keb. 213, 225, 277. Cranmer verse. Andrews.

Escape.
The Escape of the husband is the Escape of the wife, and in Ca. Sa. against
Baron and Feme, the Jailer suffered the husband to escape, the Court said they
would discharge the wife unless the Plaintiff would get the husband taken
again, 1 Vent. 51. Jackson and Gabree.

If Action be brought against Attorney of King's Bench and his wife, Privilege
for the Wife of an Attorney.
and he declares against the husband being an Attorney of the Court in proper
Person, and against the wife in Custodia Marr' upon Bail filed for the wife
only; this is not good, because the husband ought to put in Bail for his wife,
and Bail may not be filed only for the wife without Bail for the husband, and
the husband may not have his Privilege in this Case, when the Action is brought
against him and his wife, 1 Rolls Abr. 580. Morthwait and Elsey. Per Curiam, He
ought to put in Bail, Styles 226. Mesme Case, and M. 17 Car. 1. Sir Simon
Fanshaw's Case.

It is the Custom of B. R. where Process of Outlawry issues against Baron and
Feme, and the Baron appears, In Process of Outlawry Bail refused for the
Contempt of the Wife.
he shall have day by Bail until the appearance of his wife; but it is in the
Discretion of the Court when he comes in upon the Exigent, whether he should be
let to Bail; and this Court used not to let the husband to Bail, but to
continue him in Prison for the Contempt of his wife until the Feme comes in,
and therefore the Bail was refused, Cro. El. 370. Philpot's Case.

For Debt due by the wife before Marriage the husband was returned Outlawed,
and the wife waved; but before the return of the Exigent one E. an Attorney
procured for the wife a Supersedeas, surmising that the wife had appeared by
him as her Attorney. Per Curiam, Upon the Sheriff's return in Outlawry.
If upon the Exigent the Sheriff had returned reddidit se, or upon pluries
Capias had returned Cep. Corpus for the wife, then her appearance should be
entered, but not by Attorney, as it is here, and the Exigent should only issue
against the husband, and idem dies should be given to the wife: But if upon a
Pluries Cap. the Sheriff return for the husland Cepi Corpus, and a non est
inventa for the wife; yet an Exigent shall issue against both, because it is
intendable that the husband may bring in his wife; but if upon Exigent the
Sheriff returns reddidit se for the husband, and for the wife, and she is
waved, the husband shall go sine die: But in this Case, because the Exigent was
returned against both to be Outlawed, the Supersedeas supposing the Appearance
of the wife, is idle and void; and therefore it was disallowed, and the Exigent
appointed to be filed against ^ath, Cro. Car. 58. Smith verse. Ash and his wife.

Process continues against Baron and Feme till the ^xigent upon which the
husband appeared, They are at Exigent, no Supersedeas shall be received for the
Baron without the Wife.
and put in a Supersedeas for himself only, without making ^ention of his wife:
The Preignotaries said, by the supersedeas the husband is sine die, for he
shall not be ^^ven to answer without his wife as this Case is, and it is
impleaded as in the Right of the wife, and there^^ the wife shall be waved, and
the Baron dischar^^d, Lib. Intr. 187. But the Court gave order that (...)
Supersedas should be stayed without recording the appearance of the husband; as
so was it in the Case Lady Mallory and her husband, who were sued in (...)
Action of Debt, and Process continued against them (...) the Exigent; upon
which the husband appeared, ^d put in a Supersedeas for himself without
speaking of the wife; and his Supersedeas was not allowed, but Process
continued until Outlawry, 1 Leon. 138, 139. Bilford and Fox.

In Chancery.
If a Man be served with a Subpoena in London against him, and his wife being in
the Country; yet if he satisfy not the Court as well for her as for himself, he
being here in Person, an Attachment shall be awarded against him and his wife,
as though he had never appeared.

Outlawry.
If the Record be that the wife is Outlawed, this is erroneous, for it ought to
be waved, 2 Rolls Abr. 804. Hayman and his wife.

Wife in what Case may make an Attorney.
Pasch. 42 Eliz. B. R. contra: Process in Debt against Baron and Feme continues
until the Exigent; the Baron appears, but will not suffer his wise to appear:
And it was ruled per Cur', That in this Case she may make an Attorney to
prevent that she be not waved, Dyer 271. b. margin.

Exception to avoid an Outlawry in Baron and Feme.
In 3 Bulst. 212. Exceptions were moved to avoid an Outlawry in Baron and Feme:
1. Because the wife cannot be said Outlawed, but waved. 2. It was comparuit for
comparuerit. Per Curiam, In the same Term such an Outlawry may be avoided upon
Exceptions by a motion in Court; but this being in another Term, the same could
not be avoided but by a Writ of Error: And the Court bailed him upon the Writ
of Error; but they said he ought to appear in Person next Term, and so assign
his Errors to reverse the Outlawry.

Debt was brought against Baron and Feme for Debt dum sola, and upon this the
husband was Outlawed, and the wife waved; the wife was taken and imprisoned,
but the husband could not be found, and the wife was discharged upon the Act of
Indemnity, which pardons Outlawries, without suing a Scire fac' against the
Plaintiff, and it was said she might not have a Supersedeas: But Hutt. Rep. 86.
1 Co. 44. b. 3 Cro. 370. 1 Cro. 58. she may in this Case have a Supersedeas
upon the Exigent, Sid. p. 20, 21. Biron and Beckley.

In Trespass against Baron and Feme if the Baron comes in by the Exigent, and
the wife comes not in, and for that it appears to the Court that the Exigent
was discontinued against the wife, they award a new Exigent against her; yet
the Baron shall be put to answer presently, and shall not tarry till the wife
comes in although he ought to answer again with the wife when she comes in;
when he has pleaded, he shall have idem dies with the wife, 39 Ed. 3.18.

In Trespass against Baron and Feme, if the Baron make default, and the wife
appears, the wife shall not be put to answer till the Baron comes in, or be
Outlawed, 22 Ass. 46.

The wife may not plead to Outlawry without her Baron, She may not plead to
Outlawry without her Husband.
nor plead Pardon of Outlawry without her husband, 2 Rolls Rep. 90. Sir Geo.
Curson's Case.

CHAP. XXIX. Declarations and Pleadings.
The manner of declaring against Baron and Feme, or by Baron and Feme. In what
Cases the Life of the Wife must be averred, or not. Where the Husband shall be
estopped to say that his Wife is remitted, and yet she shall be received. In
what Cases the Wife shall come in, and be received on the Default of her
Husband. Of the Wife's Pleading without her Husband. The manner of Pleading
Coverture. Of the Conclusion of Pleas in Actions by or against Baron and Feme.
Where it is necessary to aver the assent of the Husband. Traverse when that the
Wife died seized. Ad tunc and modo Uxor. if good. Of Estoppels. Error assigned
because she was a Feme Covert. Divorce pleaded. Outlawry pleaded. Where there
be two Women of a name in Debt on Bond, how to plead. Where the Parol shall
demur for the Nonage of the Husband and Wife.

IN Assumpsit the Plaintiff declares, where T. S. and M. his wife were seized
to them, and the Heirs of T. of five Acres of Meadow lying near a River called
W -- River; and being so seized by Indenture, let the same to the Plaintiff for
21 years, by force whereof he was possessed. The Defendant such a day Erected a
Watermill super and trans. the said River; Tort.
by reason whereof obstupavit the Water, so that the Water overflowed the
Banks, and inundavit the said five Acres of Meadow, by which they became
barren, and scirposae, ad damnum, etc.

The Defendant demurred in Law upon this Declaration: Exception 1. That Baron
and Feme were seized, and shows not how the Estate began.
Because he counts the Baron and Feme were seized to them, and the Heirs of the
Baron, and shows not how the Estate began; for it being a special Estate, and
but a particular Estate in the wife, the Commencement of it ought to be showed.
Sed per Curiam, It Is well enough, it being an Action on the Case by their
Lessee; so that it is but a Conveyance to the Action, and the Inheritance is in
the husband. Exception 2. Because he declares of a Lease by husband and wife by
Indenture, and heweth not that a Rent was reserved, and then it cannot be the
Lease of the wife. But the Court held it to be good; for it is the Lease of the
wife till she disagree, Cro. El. 112. Jackson and Mordant.

Baron and Feme, and the Heirs of the husband, seized in Fee of a Watermill,
and prescribe a Watercourse, etc. and the Defendants erected a new Mill, and
obstupavit. Exception was taken to the Declaration, Prescription alleged in
Baron and Feme.
because the Prescription is alleged in the Baron and Feme, and the Feme had
only an Estate for life, and so cannot prescribe sed, non alloc'; for when the
Feme is jointly seized with her husband, who had the Fee, the Prescription may
be alleged in both, Cro. El. 112. Brown and Mordant.

Plaintiff marries with Alice Executrix of J. S. her first husband. Assumpsit.
Defendant was indebted to J. S. in 100 l. and promised the Plaintiff if he
would forbear Suit against him for the Debt till Michaelmas next, that then he
would pay the Debt to the Plaintiff; and avers how that the Defendant was not
sued till Michaelmas, Averment of a Life.
and found pro Quer' sur non assumpsit. Sed nil capiat prbillam; because the
Plaintiff does not aver the Life of A. his wife, who was the Executrix of J. S.
for the Promise of the Defendant was made in respect of a Debt en auter droit,
which was to Alice as Executrix, and not in respect of any Debt due to him;
then the Promise ensues the nature of the Debt, (viz.) to be recovered to other
use, (viz.) to the use of J. S. and shall be Assets, and by the death of the
wife the Promise is determined: And though the Plaintiff may not join the wife
with him in the Action, because the Promise was particular and personal, yet he
ought to have averred the Life of the wife, because the Plaintiff shall recover
nothing to his own use, Yelv. 84. Lea and Minn.

If a Feme Covert, or a Monk and a Stranger, are bound in an Obligation: In
Debt upon this the Action shall only be against the Stranger, and he shall not
say in the Declaration that the other is a Feme Covert, or a Monk; per Coke and
Doddridge; but by Houghton, Averment.
if it does not appear in the Deed that she is a Feme Covert, it ought to be
averred, 1 Rolls Rep. 41. 32 H. 6. 31.

But of the manner of declaring by or against Baron and Feme, so Vid. Sparsim,
per Touts Titles.

Pleadings. Resceipt. Vide Resceipt.
Littleton's Case, Sect. 666. is a nice Case. If a Woman seized of certain
Lands in Fee takes husband, who alieneth the same Land to another in Fee; the
Alience lets the same Land to the husband and wife for Term of their two Lives,
saving the Reversion to the Lessor and his Heirs: In this Case the wife is in
her Remitter, and she is seized in Fee as before, and the Lessor has nothing
in the Reversion. But in this Case if the Lessor will sue an Action of Waste
against the husband and his wife, for that the husband has committed Waste,
the husband cannot bar the Lessor by showing this; that the taking back the
Estate to him and his wife, Remitter.
was a Remitter to the wife, because the husband is estopt to say that which is
against his own Feoffment. But if the husband make default to the grand
Distress, and the wife pray to be received, she may well show the whole matter,
and how she is in her Remitter, and she shall bar the Lessor of his Action; for
in every Case where the wife is received for default of her husband, she shall
plead, and have the same advantage in Pleading as if she were (...) Feme Sole,
etc.

If Judgment be to be given for two defaults, and after it is adjourned till
another Term, the wife shall not be received this Term before Judgment, for
that she does not come in parata petenti respondere, in due time, 9 H. 6. 37.

In Action of Waste against Baron and Feme, after the Waste found before the
Sheriff, and returned in Banco, the wife shall not be received, to avoid
contrary Verdicts, 2 H. 4. 6.

In Assise against Baron and Feme, if they plead Recovery in Bar, and at the
day fail of the Record, by which Judgment is to be given by the Statute as
Disseisors, yet the wife may be received, 7 H. 4. 16. b. 10 H. 4. 9. b.

In Action of Waste against Baron and Feme, and no Waste pleaded, the wife
shall be received after Inquest taken, and before Judgment, 22 Ass. 11. 28 Ed.
3. 91.

If in a Writ of Error to reverse a common Recovery brought against Baron and
Feme, and the Baron and Feme are returned Terretenants Octab. Trin. and then
they appear, and the Plaintiff assigns Errors, and after the husband does not
put in any Plea but makes default, on which the Plaintiff prays the Errors may
be examined: But after in Hill. Term the wife comes in, and says this is her
Land, and prays to be received. It was doubted in the Earl of Oxford and
Muschamp's Case, whether she shall be received, in as much as she comes before
Judgment, 11 Cor. 1. B. R.

In Formedon the Tenant pleads Non-tenure, and found for the Demandant; and now
the wife of the Defendant after Verdict prayed to be received upon the feint
Plea of her husband, because he had pleaded Non-tenure, where she might have
traversed the Gift; and he brought a Writ out of Chancery de Attornat' faciend'
for the wife. And per Curiam, It was received; for false Pleading is feint
Pleading, and here there needs not any new Declaration, Where there needs a new
Declaration or not.
because the wife is Party to the Suit; aliter where he in Reversion is not
Party to the Suit, and is received, Cro. El. p. 826. Greswold and Holmes.

Of the Wife's Pleading by herself.
In Battery the husband justifies, for that the Plaintiff assaulted his wife,
in aid of whom, etc. The wife for her self pleads, and justifies de son assault
demesne. The Plaintiff says, de injuria sua propria absque Tali causa: Both
Issues are found for the Plaintiff, and the Damages are entirely assess'd, all
is ill; and a Repleader was awarded, Cro. Jac. 239. Thorp and Watson.

Assumpsit was brought on the Promise of the wife dum sola. The Plea was entered
in this manner; Et praed' J. N. and Bridgetta ven' and Def. etc. and praed'
Bridgetta dicit quod ipsa non Assumpsit: Verdict pro Quer' Per Curiam, It is
ill, for the wife cannot plead by her self, (except in Receipt) and the Trial
is idle, and not helped by any of the Statutes of Jeofailes, and a Repleader
was awarded, Cro. Jac. 288. Tumpion and Newson: It ought to have been quod
praed' J. and Bridgetta dicunt quod ipsa Bridgetta non Assumpsit, Yelv. 210.
Mesme Case; so Cholmly and Apsley's Case cited there: Action was brought
against Baron and Feme for words spoken by the wife, and the wife only pleads
not guilty, and Verdict pro Quer'; but could not have Judgment, but a Repleader
was awarded.

Of Pleading Coverture.
Debt on Bond against Feme. Defendant pleads that at the time of the making the
Bond she was wife to J.J. who as yet in plena vita existit; Et sic non est
factum. The Plaintiff shows how that after this Bond made, there was a Suit in
the Spiritual Court concerning the Marriage between the said J.J. and the
Defendant, and for that he had another wife alive at the time of the Espousals
with the Defendant, the Defendant's Marriage was by Sentence adjudged void and
null; and avers the Life of the first wife at the time of the second Marriage
with the Defendant, and demurred upon it; judged pro Quer': For this Divorce is
but Declaratory, because the Marriage was merely void, and there needed not any
such Sentence of Divorce; for it was void ab i^itio, and she always was Sole,
Cro. El. 857. Ridleslen and Wogan.

Eliz. W. brought Trespass by the name of a Widow. The Defendant pleads she was
Covert Baron, Plea disallowed for the Impossibity of the Trial.
(viz.) of one J. W. who is in full Life at Lisbon in Portugal; and this Plea
was disallowed for the Impossibility of the Trial, Moor 851. Eliz. Wilmot's
Case.

After Imparlance as Feme Sole in Trespass and Assault, the Defendant pleads
that at the time of the Bill exhibited, she was Covert, and concludes in Bar.
Per Curiam, This is but as a Plea in Abatement, and therefore granted a
respondeas Ouster, 1 Keb. 822. Beck and Carolier.

On Obligation Infancy must be pleaded, and the Party cannot be aided on non
est factum; but a Feme Covert may, Regu.
3 Keb. 228. for it is a Rule in every Case where the Obligation is void, he
shall conclude non est factum, as a Feme Covert shall plead non est factum, for
it is void as to her; otherwise where the Bond or Deed is only voidable, for
there he shall show the special Matter, and conclude Judgment si actio: For
when the Deed is voidable, and so remains at the time of the Pleading, (as in
case of Sealing a Bond by the Infant, or duress) here he cannot plead non est
factum; but it must be avoided by special Pleading, and conclude Judgment si
actio, 5 Co. 119. Whelpdale's Case.

Debt by H. against J. and his wife. The Defendant pleads that tempore
Confectionis, and shows the day that she was Covert Baron. The Plaintiff
confesses it, but says that the same day she and sealed it was the day of the
Marriage in the Morning before the Espousals. The Defendant demurs, and the
Plaintiff had Judgment, 2 Rolls Rep. 431. Jackson's Case.

Debt on Bond. The Condition was, That S. the Defendant with his wife, should
appear at the Marshalls-Court, and for Non-^ppearance the Action is brought. S.
appears and p^^^ds, that at the time of the Obligation he was solus and
innuptus. The Plaintiff demurs. Per Roll, This Plea is not the same with ne'
unque accouple; for one extended to a Feme de facto, the other to a Feme de
jure: but Judgment pro Quer', Styles Rep. p. 17. Pain and Skeltrome.

Conclusion of Pleas.
Vide Supra. Non est factum.

Battery against Baron and Feme. They plead Quoad the Wounding non culp. and
Quoad the Battery, the Feme pleads in Justification, and concludes with an
Averment, Et hoc parata est verificare. Et hoc paratae est verificare.
The Question was if it ought not to be, Et hoc parati sunt verificare? and by
the opinion of some the husband ought to have joined with the wife, Cro. Car.
594. Pelham and Hemings.

Trover against Baron and Feme, and that the wife after Coverture found the
Goods, and converted them to her own use. Quod ipsi non sunt culpabilies.
They plead quod ipsi non sunt culpabiles; and it was held ill, for that no
Tort is supposed in the husband, and they ought to have pleaded quod ipsa non
est culpabilis, Cro. Jac. 56. Cox and Cropvell.

Action of Assault, Battery and Wounding against L. and his wife. The
Defendants plead non culp. as to the wounding. The Feme pleads a special Plea
in Justification, that what she did was in the defense of her husband. The
Plaintiff replies, De injuria sua propria.
De injuria sua propria, and does not traverse absque tali causa, and the Jury
finds entire Damages. Per Curiam, The Issue joined is an immaterial Issue, and
there can be no Judgment; and a Repleader was awarded, Styles p. 198, 210.
Jennings and Lee.

Trespass against B. and Ux. simul cum Bennet, of an Assault. The Defendants
plead his Assault on them. The Plaintiff shows forth a Writ taken out against
the husband: To which the Defendant demurred; 1. Because the Writ is not said
taken forth against the Defendant, simul cum Bennet, sed non allac'. 2. The
Replication is only of the Arrest of the husband: Sed non alloc'; the wife
coming in after the Assault begun, and need not be de injuria sua propria as to
the wife, 3 Keb. 763. Puller's Case.

Debt on Bond conditioned for the Performance of Covenants in an Indenture
between W. S. and A. is wife of the one part, and the Plaintiff of the other
part. The Defendant pleads the Indenture as the Indenture of W. S. and A. his
wife, whereas in truth the Feme never sealed. Whether it be a Deed of the Wife
and Pleading, that she never sealed it.
The Plaintiff replies, The Indenture showed by the Defendant non fuit fact
inter W. S. and A. his wife on the one part, and the Plaintiff on the other:
The Jury find the husband sealed it, but the wife did not. Per Curiam, The
Verdict is found against the Defendant, who pleaded it as the Deed of the Wife,
and it was held, that the Plaintiff is not estopped to say that the Deed shown
is not the Deed of the Baron and Feme; but he is estopped by the Condition to
say, Estoppel.
that there is not any such Indenture. Two of the Judges held, that if the
Baron had sealed and delivered it in the name of the Feme, it had been the Deed
of the Feme during the Life of the Baron, Cro. Eliz. 769. Sleep and Steed.

Where it is necessary to aver the assent of the Baron, or not.
If an Estate be made to a Man's wife de novo, it is not necessary to aver his
Assent, for it vests till he dissent, Hob. 204. but if the Feme Covert has a
Lease for Life and surrender it, and take a new one, the husband's Assent is
necessary, because the wife had an Estate before, which cannot be divested but
by his Assent to the later Estate.

In Trespass the Defendant pleads in Bar, that such an one was seized of the
Land in the Right of his wife, and that his wife died seized, and that he was
Heir to her, and gave color to the Plaintiff. The Plaintiff replied, that the
Baron and Feme were jointly seized, Traverse.
and that the wife died, after whose Death the husband was seized by
Survivorship, absque hoc, that the wife died seized. Per Curiam, This Traverse
is not good that the wife died not seized, but it, ought to be that she died
not Sole seized, Winch p. 7.

In Replevin the Defendant makes Avowry in the Right of Mary, Adtunc and modo
Uxoris.
adtunc and modo Uxoris ejus, of the taking of Cattle as a Distress. The
Averment of modo the wife is certain enough, 2 Keb. 729. Poo versus Long vile.

In Trespass the Defendant justified by License to the Defendant for himself
and his wife, to inhabit there. The Plaintiff replies, Non Licentiavit, the
husband and wife modo and forma, Modo and ferma.
and it is found non dedit Licentiam modo and forma. This is a Variance, 3 Keb.
755. Jepson and Jackson.

Debt was brought by B. and his wife against the Defendant for Arrears of Rent
upon a Lease for years made by the Feme and her first husband, to the Defendant
by Indenture. The Defendant pleads that the Ancestor of the first husband was
seized in Fee, and that it descended to the first husband, and that he was Sole
seized, and so the Feme had nothing at the time of the Lease made. The
Plaintiff demurs, and shows for cause, that the Lease being by Indenture, the
Feme has the Reversion by Estoppel against the Lessee, and the Defendant
cannot contradict it, Estoppel.
and say she has nothing, 11 H. 4. 1. But per Curiam, The Plea is good; 1. For
in this Case it is no Estoppel, for the Deed is utterly void as to the Feme,
she being Covert, and it cannot be an Estoppel, for an Estoppel ought to be
mutual on both parts, and the Deed of a Feme Covert cannot estop her, or bind
her to any effect, Cro. Eliz. p. 700. Brereton versus Evans.

If Land descend to a Feme Covert, Ex Manuscript. Mri. Brownl.
Entry shall be pleaded by the Baron and Feme in Descent to Daughters; he shall
say, Post cujus mortem reversio Teneuentorum praed' cum pertin' discend'
praefat' A. and B. ut filiabus and coharedibus praed' W. You shall never say,
Et se tenuit intus, but where they are in of a joint Estate; for if a Feme
Tenant for Life take husband, and the husband dies, you shall say, Obiit post
cujus mortem pred' le Feme fuit scisita Tenementis pred' in dom' suo ut de
libero Tenemento.

If Land descend to two Women Covert, and they enter, and the husband of one
dies; you shall say, Le Feme survive and fuit seisita de medietate Tenementorum
in feodo.

Note, When Land is given to Baron and Feme in Tail special, and the Baron
dies, the wife if she will maintain the Estate Tail, must allege that the
Baron and she had Issue in plein vie A. otherwise she is but as Tenant in Tail
after Possibility of Issue extinct, which is but as Tenant for Life.

Annuity is devised by Will to a Feme Covert for Life, who dies, the husband
brings Action of Debt upon the Statute of 32 H. 8. for the Arrears against the
Administrator of the Terretenant. Nil detinet to Action for Arrears of Rent.
To which the Defendant pleads nil detinet; if a good Plea or not, Hard. 332,
333. because the Action is grounded upon a Will in writing, which (as was
urged) was equivalent to a Deed, and to a Deed it were not a good Plea. As in
Case of Debt upon Bond or Speciality; but by Hales a Will is not a Deed, and
nil detinet is a good Plea to Action of Debt grounded on a Will.

Marriage averred.
In Avowry as Bailiff to Baron and Feme for Rent Arrear. The Plaintiff demurred
specially, because the Marriage is not averred, sed non alloc'; but by Hales
the Life of the wife is not averred, which is ill on special Demurrer, but on
Verdict or general Demurrer it would be well enough, 3 Keb. 151. Harlow and
Bradnock.

Error may be assigned that she was a Feme Covert at the time of the
appearance, though she appeared and pleaded as a Feme Sole.
If Action on the Case be brought against A. S. a Feme Covert as a Feme Sole,
and she appears, and pleads to it as a Feme Sole, and Judgment given against
her, upon which she and J. S. her husband brought a Writ of Error; they may
assign for Error that she was a Feme Covert at the time of the Appearance and
Pleadings, etc. for otherwise the wife may be taken ad Executionem, without the
Conusance of the husband, and so be bereaved of the Society of the Woman, and
he has no other means to defeat it, 1 Rolls Abr. 759. Edwards and Simpson.

B. and Anne his wife were Plaintiffs in Assumpsit against Hudson; and declare
in consideration that Anne dum sola fuit would marry one Tho. M. at the request
of the Defendant, the Defendant promised after the death of Tho. M. to pay to
the said Anne 40 l. per annum during her Life; and shows that upon this she
married Tho. Mason, who after dies, and she took to husband B. the Plaintiff,
and that 4 l. is in arrear for 2 years after Tho. Mason's death. Release
pleaded in Assumpsit.
The Defendant pleads in Bar a Release made to him by the said Tho. Mason,
during the Marriage of Anne. The Plaintiff demurs, and adjudged for the
Plaintiff. This Release does not discharge the Promise, because though the
Promise was present, yet the Execution of it was in futuro, and such that he
which releaseth it can never have an Action for it; aliter if he by express
words released all Promises, Promise cannot be released till it comes in Esse,
unless by express words.
or all Actions and Quarrels which he or his wife had or might have; for a
Promise being a special Cause of Action, may not be released until it comes in
Esse, no more than a Covenant, Yelv. 156. Belcher and Hudson, Cro. Jac. 222.
Hob. Smith and Safford's Case.

Debt against Baron and Feme as Executrix to her former husband, upon a Bond of
200 l. The Defendants, by J. G. their Attorney, plead, (viz.) Praed' Joh' and
Margareta by their Attorney plead that they were divorced before the Writ
purchased. Divorce pleaded.
The Plaintiff demurs, 1 Because it is not alleged that the Divorce did
continue, for it may be it was repealed; sed non alloc', for it shall be
intended to continue if the contrary be not showed. 2. Because they plead as
Baron and Feme, Et praed' Joh' and Margareta, and that after Imparlance; sed
non alloc'; for they do not plead, Et praed' Johannes and Margareta Ux. ejus,
for then it should be an Estoppel, Cro. Eliz 352. Underhill verse. Johannem
Brott and Margaret his wife.

Where the Baron may plead as a Devise to him Sole.
An Estate is devised to a Man and his wife, and their Heirs: If the husband
survives, he may plead it as a Devise to him Sole, Cro. Eliz. 359.

Outlawry in the husband cannot be pleaded where he and his wife sue as
Administrators, Outlawry pleaded.
Hardr. p. 60.

Debt on Bond entered in to Elizabeth Perkins, who was the Plaintiff's wife, and
as her Administrator brought the Action. The Defendant pleads he delivered the
Bond to one Elizabeth Perkins's Sister, quae obiit sola and innupta, absque
hoc, that he delivered it to Elizabeth Perkins the Plaintiff's wife. Special
Demurrer. If it be taken that there be two of the name, the Defendant should
have pleaded non est factum, for it amounts to no more, or at least he ought to
have induced his Plea that there were two Elizabeth Perkins's; Traverse.
but this Traverse is designed to bring the Marriage in question, which is not
to be tried now. Judgment pro Quer', 1 Vent. 77. Gifford and Perkins.

A. brought Action against Julian Goddard a Feme Sole, where the Parties are at
issue, and a Scire fac' is awarded; and before the return of it, she takes to
husband one Doyly; and after upon special Verdict found in the said Suit,
Judgment was given in Banco pro praed' Juliana against the said A. Upon which
Judgment, A. brought a Writ of Error in B. R. and a Scire fac' is awarded
against Julian Goddard as a Feme Sole; and she appears by Attorney as a Feme
Sole by assent of the husband, and after the Judgment is reversed, and the
Judgment was entered quod praed' A. recuperet, etc. versus praed' Julianam,
etc. and Costs and Damages taxed. On which Judgment A. sues a Ca. Sa. versus
Julian Goddard; by force of which the Sheriff takes Julian, who is called
Doyly, being the wife of Doyly; yet this is lawful, for the wife so long as the
Judgment is of effect, is estopped to say that her name is other than Julian
Goddard; and the Sheriff being a Minister to execute the Judgment, may take
advantage of this Estoppel, Estoppel.
1 Rolls Abr. 869, 870.

In Account against the husband it is a good Plea to say, that his wife was a
common Taverner, and that the Plaintiff delivered the Tonels of Wine (for which
the Account is brought) to the wife to sell for him, without the Assent and
Accord of the husband, and she sells them accordingly, and delivers the Money
to the Plaintiff, 13 R. 2. Account 50.

In Action brought by Baron and Feme for the Inheritance of the wife; Parol
demurs for the Nonage of the wife, or not.
the Parol shall not demur for the Nonage of the husband, because in jure
Uxoris, Dyer 137.

But in Action of Debt brought against Baron and Feme upon Obligation of the
Ancestor of the Feme, the Parol shall demur for the Nonage of the wife, 8 Ed.
2. Age 125.

In a Praecipe quod reddat against Baron and Feme of Land which the wife had by
Descent, the Parol shall demur for the Nonage of the wife, although the husband
be of full age, 18 Ed. 3.33.

If a Feme in by Descent be received for default of her husband, the Parol
shall demur for her Nonage, though the husband be of full age, 18 Ed. 3.33.

CHAP. XXX. Issue. Evidence. Trial. Verdict.
Trial of Marriage. Death of the Husband where triable, and how; whether by
Proofs or in Pais. If the Baron and Feme shall join in a Challenge. In what
Case by the Evidence of the Wife she and her Husband were discharged of a
Judgment. Where the Husband shall be a Witness for the Wife or not.

Trial of Marriage. Vide Title Marriage. Death of the Husband where triable,
and how.
IF the Life of the husband be pleaded, (in Dower) and the Demandant says he
is dead; this shall by tried by Pooofs, and not per pais, 8 H. 6. 23.

In Assise against Baron and Feme, if the Feme comes, and alleges the Death
of the husband in another County; if this be tried per pais, it shall be tried
where the Death is alleged.

In a Writ of Dower, if the Tenant says that the husband is in full life at a
Place beyond the Seas, (as at Paris) this shall be tried by Proofs, 26 Ed. 3.
70. for the Country cannot know it.

Trials by Proofs.
The manner of Trial by Proofs is more particular in Thorn and Rolf's Case, Dyer
185. a. In Dower the Issue was upon the Life or Death of the husband, and day
given to each Party ad docend' Curiam, (viz.) to the Demandant de morte viri,
and to the Tenant de vita by Proofs, ut oportet; and the Demandant protulit
duos Testes de morte; whereof one was the Brother of the husband, who were
sworn and examined by Lennard second Prothonotary, and their Testimony tended
to no full Proof, but by Conjectures and Presumptions, (viz.) that the husband
departed this Realm An. 1 Ma. for Religion, and was a Minister, and for these
seven years he had been absent; and Religion now was restored, and he was not
returned, and no Merchant of Germany; or English who traveled those parts,
could learn any thing of his Life, nor no Token of it; and therefore they
conclude in their Consciences, that they rather think him dead than alive, and
these Testimonies were entered verbatim in Record ante judicium redditum, and
nullus Testis ex part tenentis productus fuit de vita viri; ideo concessum
fuit quod petens recuperet seisinam, etc. Vide Stat. Jac.

In Ejectione Firm verse. Baron and Feme. Upon not guilty pleaded, and a Venire
fac' granted, the Jury find the wife not guilty, Special Verdict for the
Husband adjudged insufficient; a Venire fac' de novo shall be granted for both.
and found a special Verdict as to the husband; which special Verdict is after
adjudged insufficient by the Court: A Venire fac' de novo shall be granted for
both, as well for the Feme as for the Baron; and upon this new Writ the wife
may be found guilty, because the Record and Issue is entire, and for this their
Verdict insufficient in the whole and void, M. 9 Jac. B. R. Langley and Pain;
and the Clarks said this was their Course to grant a Venire de novo for the
whole.

Where a Battery is brought against Baron and Feme supposing they beat the
Plaintiff, or the Mare of the Plaintiff: And upon not guilty pleaded, Verdict.
it is found that the Woman only made the Battery, and not the Baron. This
Verdict is against the Plaintiff, for it now appears that the Plaintiff's
Action was false; for the Baron in this Case shall not be joined for Conformity
only, and there is a special Writ in the Register for this purpose, and it is
not like a Battery charged upon J. D. and J. S. for there one may be acquitted,
and another found guilty, and good, because they are in Law several Trespasses,
1 Brownl. 209. Drury and Dennis.

The wife may not join Issue without her husband in Information against Baron
and Feme, for the Recusancy of the Feme; and in 42 Ed. 3. she may not plead to
Outlawry without her husband, 2 Rolls Rep. 90.

Challenge.
Trespass by Baron and Feme. Defendant pleads not guilty; and the husband only
made a Challenge that he was Servant to the Sheriff. Per Curiam, The husband
and wife should join in the Challenge, although the Cause of Challenge
proceeded from the husband only. But after Trial it was aided by the Stat. of
Jeofayles, and Judgment pro Quer', 1 Brownl. 234. Wright's Case.

Evidence.
Vide 1 Inst.
Parris pretended to help a Woman who had little Portion, to a great Fortune;
and the day before the Marriage P. procures the Woman to come to a Tavern, By
the Evidence of the Wife, she and her Husband are discharged of a Judgment
where he said, for her provision after Marriage, in case the husband would not
maintain her, she ought to seal certain Papers; which in truth were Warrant of
Attorney and Release of Errors; and he paid to her 100 l. before Witnesses, and
went into the next Room, and took it back again. P. was informed against for a
Cheat, for extending the husband's Lands upon this Judgment: And the wife gave
this Matter in Evidence, and the Court set aside the Judgment, and principally
upon the Evidence of the wife.

Husband admitted to be a Witness.
Mrs. Dormer bought a Child of Tucky, and pretended it her own, and
false-swearing about it, as vid. Sid. 377. and Information of Perjury was
brought. Now the husband of Tucky may be admitted to prove the Issue whether
the Child were feigned, albeit not to prove or excuse his wife's Subornation of
the other Defendant B. the Midwife in this Deception, 2 Keb. 403. the King
verse. Buckworth.

The first husband was produced at the Trial to prove the first Marriage, And
where not.
but the Court totally refused his Testimony. Per Curiam, The Feme cannot be
Evidence against the Baron, nor the Baron against the Feme in any Case except
Treason, because it might occasion implacable Dissension, according to 1 Inst.
6. b. and denied the Lord Audley's Case to be law, Hutton p.

A wife cannot be produced as a Witness either for or against her husband, 1
Inst. 6. b.

CHAP. XXXI. Judgment. Execution. Damages.
Where Judgment against Baron and Feme shall bind the Husband surviving, or
not. In what Cases a Feme Covert shall be taken in Execution. Writ of Error
brought by all for the Coverture of one. The Coverture of a Woman not to be
determined by Affidavit. In Action against Baron and Feme, where Judgment shall
be quod. Capiantur, or not. Where Baron and Feme both ought to be in
Misericordia, or not. Baron and Feme in Execution, and the Wife escapes, if
Action lies against the Sheriff. Where the Husband shall recover Damages Sole.
Judgment that the Baron and Feme shall recover Damages, in what Cases good.

Where Judgment against Baron and Feme shall bind the Husband surviving or not,
or the Wife.
Where there is a Devastavit returned against Baron and Feme, and the Feme
dies, the Husband shall be charged.
DEbt was brought against Baron and Feme upon Obligation made by the Testator of
the wife, and Judgment, and Fieri fac', and upon this a Testat' Fieri fac'; and
upon this a Devastavit was returned, and Judgment was for the Plaintiff to
recover, and then the wife dies, Error was brought to reverse this Judgment:
And upon several Debates it was adjudged that there was not any Error in
redditione judicii, etc. but that the Baron is liable to this Execution
notwithstanding the Death of the wife, Sid. 337. Eyres and Coward, and so
resolved in Mounson and Bourne's Case. If there be a Recovery against Baron and
Feme in a Devastavit, if the Baron survive the wife he shall be charged; and if
the wife survive she shall be charged; so is Jacobson and Charlton's Case, 3
Keb. 205. In Debt against Baron and Feme Executrix, on Obligation of M. to the
former husband, and Verdict on Devastavit after Scire fac' and Fiere fac' and
Error and Judgment affirmed. And if the husband dies, the wife shall be
discharged in Execution.
The Feme alone was taken in Execution. She shall not be discharged, here being
a Verdict of the Waste. And per Hales, had the Wasting appeared to be during
the Coverture by her, yet she alone might be taken in Execution.

If Debt on Bond be brought against Baron and Feme, and Judgment, and then the
wife dies, Debt.
yet the husband shall be charged, Sid. 337.

If Baron and Feme obtain a Judgment in Debt in the Right of the wife, and the
wife dies, yet the husband shall have Execution upon this Judgment, Sid. 337.
and not the Administrator of the wife, because the Debt is altered by the
Judgment.

In what Cases a Feme Covert shall be taken in Execution, and in what not.
In a Devastavit. Vide Supra.

The Court discharged a Feme Covert taken in Execution on Judgment, on Demurrer
to Coverture pleaded in Abatement after Imparlance. The Court awarded a
Supersedeas, no Judgment being entered. Supersedeas.
Affidavit was made that she was Feme Covert before, 1 Keb. 143.

Judgment against the Lady Prettyman as Sole, and she was pretended to be
married before Judgment, and it was prayed that she might be discharged of the
Execution, and a new Scire fac'. Per Curiam, If Feme Covert be taken in
Execution, she shall not be discharged but by Writ of Error.
She might have pleaded this alone upon the Scire fac'; but now being taken in
Execution, they cannot ease her till Sentence in Spiritual Court for the
Marriage: But she might with her husband bring a Writ of Error, and assign this
for Error. In Trespass against A. B. and several others: A. being Covert, all
brought a Writ of Error, and for it the whole Judgment was reversed, 3 Keb. 13.
Marshall and the Lady Prettyman; and the Court will not suffer the husband to
release the Error.

Coverture or not, not to be determined on Affidavit.
In Hunsty and Sanders's Case Council prayed, that a Feme Covert, the Defendant,
might be discharged on Affidavit that at the time of the Bond which she entered
into as Feme Sole, she was Feme Covert; Sed non allocatur; this being for Rent
of an House taken by her as Sole. And in the Lady Prettyman's Case the Court
did not determine it by Affidavit, 3 Keb. 382.

The Defendant Feme Covert prayed to be discharged of a Cap' Excom' returned in
B. R. for Nonpayment of Costs on Libel against her for Incontinence, being not
within 5 El. cap. 23. sect. 12. which the Court agreed, and the Capias
discharged: Some coneeived it was not avoidable but by Plea, 3 Keb. 836. Dom.
Rex and Coats.

Judgment against Baron and Feme where the Baron was acquitted, ought not to be
against a Feme Covert by Stat. W. 2. c. 35. Cro. Jac. 417. Dr. Hussy and Moor.

If the Feme die after a Verdict, no Judgment c^n be given aganst the Hus^and.
If Action be brought against Baron and Feme, and the Feme die, though it were
after a Verdict, yet no Judgment can be given against the Baron, Hob. 129. It
was the Case of Cowley and his wife against Pouiton and his wife, for
scandalous words by one of the Women against the other Woman: And after a
Verdict the Court was informed that one of the Women was dead; whereupon
Judgment was stayed, Hob. 129.

In Action verse. Baron and Feme where the Judgment shall be capiatur, or not.
In Debt upon Bond against Baron and Feme for the Obligation of the wife before
Coverture: On non est factum pleaded it is found against them, both shall be
imprisoned, for the husband is guilty of the Fauxity in denial of the Deed,
which is the cause of the Imprisoment as well as the wife, 1 Rolls Abr. 221. 15
Jac. B.R. Wood and Sutcliff, and Hill. 37 El. in Ca^era Scaccarii, Say and
Bardoife, 1 Rolls Abr. 221.

But in Trespass against Baron and Feme if the wife be found guilty, and the
husband not guilty, the husband shall not be imprisoned, 22 Ass. 87. but that
seems not to be Law, for in Wood and Sutcliff's Case, 15 Jac. B. R. and Trin. 4
Jac. B. R. White and Halsey's Case, Action of Battery was brought against Baron
and Feme, and the Baron found not guilty, and ^he wife guilty, and the Judgment
was given quod capiantur, as well the Baron as the Feme, for that ^he Baron is
Party to the Action, and ought to pay ^he Fine of the wife, P. 11 Car. B. R.
Mayow and C^okshoot, and Cro. Car. 405. 1 Rolls Abr. 221. So ^t was in
Ejectment against Baron and Feme, and the Defendants pleaded not guilty; the
wife was found guilty, and the Baron not guilty, and the Judgment ^as quod
capiantur, and good; for it is only for Fine ^o the King, and the Imprisonment
is no longer than ^ll the Fine is paid.

But in Trespass of Assault and Battery against Ba^^n and Feme for a Battery
done by the wife, the Defendant being found guilty per Cur', a Capiatur ^all be
against the husband only, although the Wrong (...) only done by the wife, Cro.
Car. 513. Awayn's Case.

Where Baron and Feme must be both in misericordia.
Trover and Conversion against Baron and Feme, and the Baron being requested to
deliver the Goods with his wife, refused, and the wife alone is in
misericordia; it is erroneous, the Baron and Feme ought to have been in
misericordia. Vide the late Statute of Car. 2. 3 Bulst. 151. Wood and his wife
against Dr. Sutcliff.

Dr. S. recovered in Trover against Baron and Feme, had Judgment against them,
and both taken in Execution, Escape.
the wife escaped, Debt lies against the Sheriff, 2 Bulst. 320. Dr. Sutcliff
and Sir Geo. Reynell. For the wife was in Execution, and a Wrong was done by
the Sheriff, and the Imprisonment is several, and so the Escape is several, 1
Rolls Abr. 215.

In Trover and Conversion against Baron and Feme for the Conversion of the wife
during the Covertu^e, if the wife be found guilty, and the Baron not guilty, In
misericordia.
yet both shall be in misericordia, for the Amerc iament is not for the
Conversion, but for the delay of Suit, and not rendering the first day, of which
the Baron is as well guilty as the wife, 1 Rolls Abr. 315.

Judgment against Baron and Feme where the husband was acquitted, ought not to
be given against a Feme Covert by Stat. West. 2. c. 35. in Ravishment of Ward,
Cro. Jac. 413. Hussy and More.

Action on the Case against Baron and Feme for scandalous Words spoken by the
wife, and Judgment is given against them both; as well the husband as the wife
shall be amerced, Hob. Scaef and Nelson.

Action of Case against W. and his wife for Words spoken by the wife. The
Defendants plead, Quod ipsi non sunt inde culpabiles. The Plaintiff shall have
his Judgment; for the Plea of the husband is void, and so good for the wife, 1
Rolls Rep. 216. Carpenter verse. Welsh and Saffene.

Costs. Damages.
In Trespass by Baron and Feme for Imprisoning the wife until a Fine paid; for
all the Trespass except the Fine they shall recover Damages in Common, 11 H. 4.
16. b. but for the Fine the husband shall recover Damages sole, because it was
his Chattel.

In Assise by Baron and Feme, if it be found they were disseised they shall
recover Damages of the Issues in Common, 11 H. 4. 16. b. but if it be found
that certain Goods of the husband were taken upon the Land, the husband sole
shall have Judgment of ^he Damages for them, 11 H. 4. 17. adjudged.

If Baron be possessed of a Term in the Right of the wife, and Damages are
recovered against him, the Damages shall not affect the Term of the wife after
the Death of the husband, in regard she came in Paramount; aliter if an Extent
be upon it, or upon (...) Recognizance in the Life of the husband, 9 H. ^. 52.

If Ba^on and Feme join in an Action, and a Verdict is given for the
Plaintiffs, and the Jury ^ess Damages ultra misas and custagias per ipsum which
is the husband) circa sectam suam exposita (...) so much, and pro misis and
custagis illis to so ^uch. And upon this Judgment is given, That the ^usband
and wife shall recover the Costs and Damages; although it is found that the
husband only ^xpended and disburbed the Money for the Costs ^f Suit, for as
much as the wife had nothing; yet ^^e Judgment is good that the Baron and Feme
^all recover the Costs, for there may not be one ^^dgment for the Costs, and
another for the Da^ages, 1 Rolls Abr. 516. Confee and Berree.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Divorce.
The nature of a Divorce. What are good Causes of Divorce. The several kinds of
Divorces. What Divorces declare the Marriage void ab initio. Of the Divorce
causa praecontractus. Causa frigiditatis, causa affinitatis Consanguinitatis,
and several Causes of each for Illustration. Of a Divorce a Mensa and Thoro,
and the Consequences thereof. What mean Acts done by the Husband shall stand
good or not, notwithstanding the Divorce. Of Suits and Actions after the
Divorce. Where and in what Cases notwithstanding a Divorce, the Wife shall be
endowed or not. Pleadings and Trial. What Divorce shall Bastardise the Issue,
or not.

A Divorce is where the Espousals were lawful, according to the Maxim, Ubi
nullus habitus ibi nulla potentia. So if a Man marry a second wife, the first
living, there needs no Divorce in regard it is void, ab initio, by Law: For you
must know by our Common Law the Espousals in the Church be so strong, they
cannot be defeated without a Divorce, and without giving notice in Convention;
and if they die before such Convention, the Issue shall never be a Bastard, in
as much as the Espousals were not void but voidable; and in all Cases where the
Espousals are voidable, it behooves that the Party be convened before
Separation, or otherwise the Espousals continue lawful, and the Issue is
Legitimate, Moor 171.

What are good Causes of Divorce, and of the several kinds of Divorce.
Formerly some Matters were Causes of Divorce, which are not so now: As

1 and 2 P. and Mary, c. 8. A Divorce propter Impedimentum publicae honestatis
and justitiae.

Causa Compaternitatis or Commaternitatis, (Godfather or Godmother) which in
the Act of 1 and 2 P. and M. c. 8. are called cognatio Spiritualis, causa
Professionis. Observe, if a Deacon or Secular Priest had taken wife the
Marriage was not void, but voidable, causa Professionis; and if either Party
had died before Divorce, the Marriage had been Legitimate, and should have
inherited, for that Deacons and Priests within England were not Votaries,
(viz.) had not vowed Chastity; but if a Monk or Nun had married before the
Stat. 32 H. 8. c. 38. and of 2 Ed. 6. c. 21. the Marriage had been merely void.

Causa cognationis Legalis, (viz.) Adoption.

These are all taken away.

In our Books the Division is Common of Divorces, a Vinculo Matrimonii. a Mensa
and Thoro.


Those Divorces which dissolve the Vinculum Ma^rimonii, are

Causa Praecontractus.

Causa Frigiditatis: Where the Party has perpe^^am impotentiam.

Causa Affinitatis or Consanguinitatis.

Causa Saevitiae sive Metus.

These Divorces declare the Marriage void ab initis, and declare the Issue a
Bastard.

Something I shall say of each of these, and the Consequences thereupon.

Causa Praecontractus.
By the Divorce Causa Praecontractus, as I said, there is a Nullity of the
Marriage, and the Children are mere Bastards, 2 Inst. 93. by the Divorce causa
praecontractus the first Parties are complete Baron and Feme. It was Sir Robert
Paine's Case, Sid. 13. If a Man contract with a Woman to marry her, and after
he marries another Woman, the first Woman sues in the Spiritual Court, and it
is by Sentence adjudged that the Man and first Woman are Baron and Feme; by
this Sentence the first Man and Woman are complete Baron and Feme without any
other Solemnity, By Divorce Causa Praecontractus, the first Baron and Feme are
complete Baron and Feme without other Solemnity.
quod Twisden negavit; and said the Marriage ought to be solemnized before they
can be complete Baron and Feme: And Noy in his Lent reading An. 1632. held,
that if the wife be divorced from her husband causa praecontractus, made with
another by verba de praesenti, that in this case immediately by Sentence given
in Court, the Marriage shall be consummate between the Woman and her first
husband, without any Rites in facie Ecclesiae; aliter upon Contract by verba de
futuro, Dyer 105. b. in margin.

Two were precontracted, one after is espoused to a Stranger, and after sued in
the Spiritual Court, and Sentence is there given that they shall marry
according to the Precontract, and she marries; this is good without Divorce or
Consent of the husband, and their Issue is not a Bastard, Moor 169. Bunting's
Case.

Causa frigiditatis: Where a Man has perpetuam impotentiam generationis.

It has been a great Question, If the Parties divorced Causa Impotentiae
intermarry others, and have Issue, whether the Issues are Bastards.
if the Parties divorced intermarry severally with others, and have Issue
severally, whether the second Marriage is void, and whether their Issues are
Bastards? My Lord Dyer cites one Bury's Case, fol. 179. a. Sentence against
Bury, Causa frigiditatis naturalis ad sectam Uxoris suae; and the wife was
married to Carry, by whom she had Issue, and she gave all her Inheritance to
Carry her second husband; and Bury was married to another Woman, by whom he had
Issue: And in this Case the Opinion of the Doctors was, that then the Persons
shall be compelled to cohabit together as Man and wife, Eo quod Sancta Ecclesia
decepta fuit in priori judicio. Harrison in his Lent Reading cites a Case to be
adjudged Hill. 37 El. Stafford and Money. Feme sues a Divorce for Frigidity,
and after the husband marries another wife, by whom he had Issue, and adjudged
that the second Marriage is void; and the Civilians gave the Rule, Qui aptus
est ad unam aptus est ad aliam, and quando potentia reducitur ad actum debet
redire ad primas nuptias. Impotentia and frigiditas, quoad hanc est causa
sufficient divorce apres l'exploration, and Trial pro tres ans and auters,
Ceremonies, enjoined by Canons, and the second Marriage of both is good
notwithstanding that the Party impotent have Children. Vid. Moor 225. 2 Leon.
169, 170, 171, 172.

In Berry's Case the first Judgment was given upon a Libel, which was that he
was frigidus, and the Sentence was accordingly; but no mention whether
maleficiatus, or not quoad hanc only, or frigidus a natura; but because that
after he took a second wife, and had Issue by her, a great Question was whether
he shall be intended maleficiatus quoad hanc, or not? for the Proofs of the
first Sentence tend to prove a perpetual Frigidity, and upon a special Verdict
all this appearing, the first Sentence was intended to be true, 1 Rolls Abr.
212.

Causa Affinitatis, Consanguinitatis. Vide Supra tit. Bastard.
Causa Saevitiae sive Metus.

Causa Saevitiae.
If the husband take from his wife Apparel, and other Necessaries, this is a
good Ground to sue a Divorce Causa Saevitiae.

If one of them be in Dread of the other for poisoning, it is a good Ground for
Separation by Sentence.

Causa Adulterii,
Divorce a Mensa and Thoro, or Causa Adulterii: This does not dissolve the
Marriage, for it is subsequent to the Marriage as the others are precedent. And
in case of Divorce Causa Adulterii, the Coverture continues between them: If
the husband after such Divorce release an Obligation, or any other Duty due to
the wife before Coverture, it has been held a good Release; Yet the Espousals
continue.
which proves that the Marriage continues, and the wife after such Divorce
shall have Dower of her husband's Lands, which proves that the Espousals
continue. And therefore in Littleton's Case, Sect. 380. a Lease is made to the
husband and wife, To have and to hold to them during the Coverture between
them; in this case they have an Estate for their two Lives, upon condition,
(viz.) if one of them die, or that there be a Divorce between them, then it
shall be lawful for the Lessor and his Heirs to enter. Littleton here speaks
of such Divorce as dissolves the Marriage a Vinculo Matrimonii; for though the
husband and wife are divorced Causa Adulterii, yet the Freehold continues
because the Coverture continues.

If a Woman be divorced a Mensa and Thoro, How a woman divorced a Mensa and
Thoro shall sue.
she must sue by her next Friend, as was Lady Rosse's Case; aliter if she is
divorced a Vinculo Matrimonii: As if a Man marries a second wife, the first
living, the second wife may sue by the name when she was Sole, for that the
second Marriage is void ab initio.

What mean Acts done by the Baron shall stand good or not, notwithstanding the
Divorce.
Where Baron and Feme are divorced, where she is an Inheritrix: Mean Acts
executed shall not be reversed by the Divorce, as Receipt of Rent, Waste,
Presentment to a Benefice, Gift of the Goods of the wife; contrary of
Inheritances, if the husband had discontinued or charged the Land.

He may release an Obligation due to the wise before Coverture, after a Divorce
a Mensa and Thoro; so of a Legacy, as was the Case of Stephens and Totty. F.T.
was divorced from the husband Causa Adulterii in the husband; the wife sued
Stephens in the Spiritual Court for a Legacy given to her by a Stranger, and he
pleaded the Release made by the husband after the Divorce. Per Curiam, This
Divorce is not a dissolutio a Vinculo Matrimonii; so as that any of them may
marry again, but it is a Separation only, and they be not compellable to
cohabit; but if they will they may, without any new marrying. And in regard
this Separation does not avoid the Marriage absolutely, but they still remain
Man and wife, the Release to the husband was good to extinguish the Duty. And
the Books which speak that the Feme shall have her Goods after Divorce, are to
be intended of an absolute Divorce ab initio, Cro. El. 908.

If a Feme post annos nubiles, (viz.) at 12 years contract Matrimony with A.
and after marry with B. and after that she have passed the age of 16 years, her
Marriage with B. is dissolved, Causa Praecontractus; by this Divorce there is a
Nullity of the Marriage ab initio; and if she had any Goods or Personal Estate,
Where the Wife shall have the Goods again.
she ought to have the same again, for cessante causa cessat Effectus. But if
he had given or sold them before without Collusion, then there had been no
remedy; but if it were by Collusion, there the wife might have averred the
Collusion, and she may have the Goods, whereof the Property may be known either
by Detinue, or in Chancery; and the rest that lay in Money, and the like, she
may sue for by the Spiritual Law, or in Chancery: And the Reason, in Dyer 13.
a. why she shall have her Goods again is, because the Cause and Consideration
of the Gift of them in Marriage, is now defeated, for the Goods were given in
Advancement of her Marriage.

If the husband aliens the Land of the wise, and after they are divorced causa
Praecontractus, or any other Cause which dissolves a Vinculo; the wife during
the Life of the Baron may enter by the Stat. 32 H. 8. c. 28.

If Baron and Feme purchase jointly, and are disseised, the Baron releaseth,
and after they are divorced, the Feme shall have a Moiety, albeit there were
not Moieties before the Divorce, for the Divorce converted it into Moities.

Of Suits after Divorce. Vide Actions.
If a Man be obliged to a Feme Sole, and after she marry him, and after she is
divorced; she may have an Action afterward which by the Marriage was suspended.

Feme sues again.
If Baron and Feme are divorced Causa Adulterii, and after the Feme sues without
the husband for a Defamation; although the Dviorce dissolve not the Marriage,
yet in regard the Feme by the Course of the Civil Law may sue alone, in such a
Case a Prohibition has been denied.

Where and in what Cases, notwithstanding a Divorce, the Wife shall be endowed,
or not.
If Baron and Feme are divorced, a Vinculo Matrimonii, Dower cease, but not
if it be only a Mensa and Thoro, 1 Inst. 32. a.

If a Marriage de facto be voidable by Divorce in respect of Consanguinity,
Affinity, Precontract, or the like, whereby the Marriage might have been
dissolved, and the Parties freed a Vinculo Matrimonii; yet if the husband die
before any Divorce, there now because it cannot be avoided, this wife de facto
shall be endowed, for this is Legitimum Matrimonium quoad dotem, 1 Inst. 33. a.

A Woman Copyholder for Life according to the Custom of the Manor, durante
viduitate, takes J. S. to husband, she being Niece to a former wife of J.S.
upon which J.S. is questioned for an Incestuous Marriage, and does Penance, and
is bound not to keep her company; and after J.S. dies, this Marriage does not
determine her Estate, for she was not divorced a Vinculo Matrimonii, though
there was cause for it, Hob. Remington's Case.

Pleading.
In Pleading of a Divorce the Judges coram quo, must be precisely pleaded, 2
Leon. p. 170, 171.

Trial.
Divorce shall be tried by the Bishop, and not per Pais, 7 H. 4. 23. 19 H. 6.
18.

What Divorce shall Bastardise the Issue, or not.
It appears before that such Divorces which dissolve Vinculum Matrimonii, shall
Bastardise the Issue, if they are executed during the Lives of the Parties,
otherwise not; and the Issue may not be made a Bastard after their Death: For
the Divorce in the Spiritual Court is pro peccatis, which cannot be after their
death; and they cannot disinherit an Issue there.

If A. takes B. to wife within age of consent, and after at the age of consent
they dissent, and marry elsewhere, and have Issue and die, it cannot be
examined in the Spiritual Court after, whether they consented at the age of
consent before their dissent, because they cannot Bastardise the Issue after
their death; Englefeild's Case; and a Prohibition granted out of Chancery upon
it.

And it is a general Rule, that after their death the Spiritual Court cannot
examine any Matter to Bastardise the Issue. If two are divorced for
Consanguinity, if they were ignorant of the Consanguinity, the Issue shall be
Ligitimate, 1 Rolls Rep. 212.

CHAP. XXXIII. Offenses against the Statutes concerning Women.
Action on the Statute of 5 Eliz. c. 9. against the Husband and Wife for the
Wife's not appearing ad Testificandum, and the Declaration of Polygamy against
Stat. 1 Jac. c. 11. Of stealing Women, etc. Construction of the said Statute,
and of the Stat. 39 Eliz. c. 8. Of Rape. Baron and Feme indicted of Perjury.
Information against a Feme Covert for Selling Fish. In all Statutes which
provide for actual Wrong, Femes Coverts shall be intended within them.

H. Brought an Action sur Stat. 5 El. c. 9. Upon the Stat. 5 El. c. 9. for not
appearing ad Testificandum.
against H. and his wife for the Penalty of 10 l. given by the said Statute
against him, who was served with Process ad Testificandum, etc. and does not
appear, not having any Impediment, etc. And showed that Process was served upon
the Defendant's wife, and sufficient Charges, having regard to her Degree and
Distance of the Place, etc. tendered to her, and yet she did not appear.
Verdict pro Quer'. Moved in Arrest of Judgment; 1. Because the Plaintiff in
setting forth he was damaged for the not appearance of the wife, and has not
showed how damnified. Respond' Though the Party be not at all damnified, yet
the Penalty is forfeited. 2. A Feme Covert is not within the said Statute, for
no mention is made of a Feme Covert. Respond'. Femes Coverts are within the
said Statute, otherwise it would be a grand Mischief, for she may be the only
Witness. 3. The Declaration is, That the Plaintiff tendered the Charges to the
wife, where he ought to have tendered the same to the husband. Respond'. The
wife ought to appear, and therefore the Tender ought to be to her: And Judgment
pro Quer', 1 Leon. 122. Havithlom and Harvey, Mesme Case, Cro. El. 130.

Polygamy.
Per Stat. 1 Jac. c. 11. If any Person or Persons within his Majesty's
Dominions of England and Wales, being married, do marry any Person or Persons,
the former wife being alive, that then every such Offense shall be Felony, and
the Person and Persons so offending, shall suffer death, as in Cases of Felony.
But this Act shall not extend to husband or wife, being absent seven years from
the other beyond the Seas. Nor shall it extend to any Person divorced at the
time of such Marriage in the Spiritual Court, nor to Marriage within the age of
Consent.

As to a Woman being divorced, and then marrying again. It was one Porter's
Case: R. was lawfully espoused to one Porter, and had sued a Divorce propter
Saevitiam, and it was Separamus a Mensa and Thoro, but no word of Divorciamus.
By the better Opinion she is within the Proviso, and that it was not Felony;
but it appeared by the Canons that such Persons as are divorced a Mensa and
Thoro, may not marry again; and it was clearly agreed by the Civilians, that
the second Marriage was unlawful, and that she might be in danger of the
Statute; but it was not adjudged there: But in my Lord Rosse's Case ir was the
Opinion, that they might marry again, Cro. Car. 461. Porter's Case.

One Williams was indicted at Bristol upon the Stat. 1 Jac. 11. for having two
Wives, and upon not guilty, a special Verdict was found that the said Williams
married one wife, and was afterward divorced from her Causa Adulterii, and
afterward married the other; and if that were within the Proviso of that Stat.
which provides for those who are divorced, was the Question. And it was
resolved without Argument by Bramstone Chief Justice, and Heath, (caeteris
absentibus) that it is within the Proviso, for the Statute speaks generally of
Divorces, and it is a Penal Law: And Heath said that by the Law of Holy Church
the Parties divorced Causa Adulterii, might marry; and he cited Porter's Case,
who was divorced Causa Saevitiae, and said it was resolved that that was not
within the Proviso, because only a Divorce a Cohabitatione, and a Temporal
Separation till the Anger past. But here it is a Vinculo Matrimonii, (in which
last he was much mistaken) March Rep. 101.

One was indicted of Felony upon the Stat. 1 Jac. c. 11. for having of two
Wives; and the Evidence was, that he espoused one beyond the Seas, and another
here; and the Court was of opinion that he was not within the Statute. Quaere,
If the second Espousals were beyond the Seas, for that makes the Offense, and
cannot here be tried, Sid. 171.

Council on 1 Jac. c. 11. prayed stay of Process upon the Recognizance of the
Prosecutor, who was bound over by Judge Archer, Judge of Assize in Cornwall, to
prosecute the Defendant for having two Wives; in regard he being taken in
Cornwall, must be tried there, and that therefore it might be saved. But per
Curiam, This being an Affirmative Statute, does not take away the Trial by the
Common Law where the Offense was committed, and agreed to save the
Recognizance, Pengell and Dr. Eaton's Case, 2 Keb. 31.

Of Stealing Wives.
Information was exhibited in the name of Sir Tho. Fanshaw (Clerk of the Crown,
and so to this purpose, Attorney for the King) against T. and others, for
taking and marrying the sole Daughter and Heir apparent of T. of Kent, without
the Assent, and against the Will of the Father; and this was an Information for
Offense at Common Law: And the Evidence was, That T. was oftentimes at her
Father's House, and in her Company; and there he secretly contracts himself to
his Daughter, she being fifteen years of Age; and by Appointment between him
and his Daughter, his Daughter left her Father's House, and met T. who came
with Horses from London to Kent, and brought the Daughter to London, and there
were married. And upon the Evidence the Jury at the Bar found them guilty. The
Cause being prosecuted by the Father and Mother, who gave Evidence against
them, they prayed the Fine might be moderated, and were discharged out of
Prison upon Bail. And all that this was an Offense punishable by Fine and
Imprisonment at Common Law, Sid. 387. the King against Twisleton; and the
Statutes 4 and 5 P. and M. and 3 H. 7. c. were but Aggravation of Punishment,
and do not create any Offense originally, 2 Keb. 432.

Offenses against Penal Laws.
In the time of K. Charles 1. the Lady Fullwood, Roger Fullwood, and diverse
others, were indicted in the County of Surrey, That whereas Sarah Cock was a
Maid who had a Portion of 1300 l. the said Roger by Procurement of the Lady, at
the Parish of St. Savior, violently, and with force, and against the Will of
the said Sarah, took and carried the said Sarah to St. Saviors, and there
married her against the form of the Statute. They plead not guilty. The said
Roger Fullwood, R. B. and J. H. were indicted in the County of Middlesex, de eo
quod, the said Sarah having a Portion of 1300 l. For Lucre of the gain of the
said Portion, they took her at N. in Com. Midd' against her Will, and carried
her to St. Saviors in Surrey, and there the said Roger married the said Sarah
contra formam Statuti; and a Copy of the Indictment in Midd' was allowed them.
It was in the Case agreed, That the taking of a Woman unless she be married or
defiled, is not Felony, within the Statute; and if the taking of such a Woman,
and the marrying or defiling be in several Counties, it is Felony compounded of
all the three parts, as Stroke and Death are but one Murder. Per Curiam,
Although it had been objected, That it was an Obsolete Statute, yet they were
deceived, for the Statute is good, and of good use; but many had not been
executed thereupon, because they had their Clergy: For the taking whereof away,
the Statute 39 El. c. 8. was made. And whereas it was pretended, that Sarah was
married with her Consent, and therefore not within the Statute; the Court said,
That the taking being unlawful, and against her Will, though the Marriage was
with her Will, yet it is Felony within the Statute: And although this was not a
Marriage de jure, because he was in such fear that she knew not what she
answered or did; yet it is a Marriage de facto, and is Fe^ony within the
Statute, and Judgment was given that ^hey should be hanged.

31 H. 8. Rot. 14. inter placita Regis: Henry Sturges and Phillip Sturges were
indicted for taking one Agnes Hobson against her Will, who was the Daugh^er and
Heir of John Hobson, who was seized of Lands ^f 20 l. per Annum Value. And they
pleaded to the ^ndictment, that they ought not to answer pro eo ^uod non
mentionatur, in the said Indictment, quod ceperunt ad intentionem maritandi
dictam Agnete^^ vel ad prostituendam, etc. and they were discharged.

Hill. 3 and 4 P. and M. Rot. 10. Roger Tompson and Peter Rewley were indicted
pro eo quod Felonice ceperunt Margaretam Burton and Margeream Burton, Daughters
and Coheirs of Roger Burton deceased, and against their Wills, etc. and they
pleaded they ought not to answer to the said Indictment, pro eo quod non
apparet in quo loco nec quomodo, they took the said Daughters, and pro eo quod
non mentionatur in dicto indictamento, that the said Roger or Peter married or
defiled the said Margaret or Magery, ils aleront sans jour.

Though the words in the Purview of the Statute of P. and M. seem to be
general, and to extend to all Women unlawfully taken against their Wills; yet
considering that the Preamble of the Statute cannot be conceived to be idle, it
must be intended to restrain the purview to the particular Cases in the
Preamble mentioned, (viz.) that they shall be Maids, Widows or Wives, their
Substance in Lands or Goods, or otherwise Heirs apparent, Stat. P. and M.
Explained.
that the Motive be Lucre, and the End to be married or defiled, and the
Purview is what Person or Persons should steal away a Woman (so) against her
Will unlawfully: This word (so) did bind up the Preamble to the Purview, Cro.
Car. 484, 488, 492.

In Fullwood's Case diverse Witnesses proved that she was willing to marry him,
and appointed a Tailor to make her a Gown, and was found in Bed with him: But
she made Oath that she did it for fear of his Threats, and that she knew not
what she did. It was not expressed in the Indictment that they took her ea
intention to marry or defile her, as in the Case of 31 H. 8. but the Court
resolved it was good; for in regard it appears apparently by the Indictment,
that they took her and abduxerunt for Lucre, and the same day married her, that
shows the Caption to be with an Intent to marry her, and there be no such words
in the Statute as ea intention.

Information for Recusancy. Vide Supra, tit. Information.

A. steals his wife against her Friends Consent, and after sues in Equity for
her Portion, but denied Relief by Egerton Chancellor, and said, He that steals
the Flesh let him provide Bread how he can, he shall have no relief in Equity.

Note, By the express Purview of this Statute the Accessory or both, before and
after are made Principals, as the Receivers of the Woman, 12 Co. 20, 21.

Feme Coverts Keepers of Gaols, shall be chargeable in Debt for the Escape of a
Prisoner, 2 Inst. 382. and so Infants.

Rape.
A Man of 60 years of age who had a wife was arraigned at Newgate, 22 Jac. of
the Rape of a Girl then of the age of 7 years and no more, by the apparent
Evidence of diverse Women, and the Surgeon, and the Damsel her self, and he was
hanged, Dyer 304. in Margin.

Perjury.
Baron and Feme convicted of Perjury, she only was taken; and Council prayed
that she might stay till the Baron comes in to receive Judgment together; which
the Court denied, and the Indictment was joint, which was well enough: So of
the Issue jointly taken, 1 Keb. 585. the King and Chedwick.

Information was brought against a Feme Covert for Selling Fish. Twisden,
notwithstanding Hob. Moor and Hussey's Case, conceived this lay not against
her, but against the husband alone, 11 Co. 64. being his Contract, to which the
Court inclined, 2 Keb. 634. the King against Jordon.

M. 24 Car. 2. B. R. The King against Storey: The Court fined him 100 l. and
Good behavior for 5 years on Information for deceitful taking away out of her
Mother's Custody Mrs. Gilburne, under 16 years old, with intent to marry her,
and well; Geery 50 l. and Goodhaviour for a year; Lenthall 40 Marks; who were
Women guilty of the Exploit, and found guilty only of the Deceit, 3 Keb. 101.

For all Statutes which provide for actual Wrong, a Feme Covert shall be
intended within them, 9 H. 8.6. If a Feme Covert make actual Disseisin with
force, she shall be imprisoned, 9 H. 4. 7. b.

Precedents.
Det' super Obligac' fact' al Feme sole and alter^ uxor^ B. V. and Vir
dissentit ab obligation' and alter Obligor prosequitur Actionem.
PAsch. 28 Eliz. Rot. 112. ss. I. B. summonit fuit ad respondend Susan C. de
placito quoth reddat ei 40 l. quas ei debet and injuste detinet etc. Et unde etc.
dic quod cum pdict I. (tali die and anno) apud A. per quoddam scriptum suum
obligatorium concessit se teneri eid S. and cuidam H. adtunc uxori B. V. in
pred 40 l. solvend eisdem S. and H. (tali festo) tunc prox. sequen Predictusque
B. ^ost confectione scripti pred and ante diem impetationis brevis originalis
ipsius S. habens noticiam quoth pdict I. per idem scriptum tenebatur and
obligabatur eidem S. and pfat H. adtunc and adhuc uxori ipsius B. in pred 40 l.
scripto illo ^ost hujusmodi noticiam and ante diem impetra^ionis brevis
originalis ipsius S. scl^t (tali die (...) anno) apud A. pred dissentit and
scriptum illud ^^tunc ut fact pred H. acceptare penitus recusa^it predictus
tamen I. licet sepius requisite pdict ^^dem 40 l. eisdem S. and H. ante pdict
recusa^^nem pdict B. seu eidem S. post recusationem ^^sdem B. non reddidit sed
ill etc.

Pasch. 33 Eliz. Rot. 1940. Brownloe Hertff. Gabriel Child and Agnes sa Feme
que la Feme Thomae Henerey Demand' versus Eliz. Connyesby Vid' and Henry Hendry
la tierce part de deux meases cum pertin in R. come sa Dower del endowment de
dit T. J. son Baron etc.
Bar. Quod quondam vir, etc. concessit annualem redditum 20 l. petent. in
satisfactione dotis ipsam contingen'.
Et pdict Eliz. and Henricus per I. K. Attornatum suum ven and dicunt quoth pred
Gabriel and Agnes dotem ipsius Agnetis de tenementis pdict cum pertin unde etc.
ex dotatione pdict T. quondam viri sui habere non debent quia dicunt quoth pdict
F. in vita sua fuit seisit de tenementis pdict cum pertin in dominico suo ut de
fe^^d et tenementa illa cum pertin tenuit de Henric (...). Mil' ut de Manerio
suo de D. in Com p^^ct Heref. per servitium militate que quidem tenementa cum
pertin sunt and tempore mortis pdict T. fuer clari annui valoris ultra o^^^
omnia and reprisas 12 l. Predict T. sic de tenementis pred cum pertin in forma
pdict sei^^^ existen apud R. pred duxit in uxorem pred Agnetem and post
disponsalia inter eosdem T. and Agnetem celebrat scilicet ( tal die and anno)
apud A. pdict condidit voluntatem suam in scriptis and per eandem voluntatem
suam voluit and legavit psat Agneti tunc uxor ejus quendam annualem re^dicum 20
l. exeun etc. percipiend de omnibus terris and tenementis ipsius T. in Parochia
de R. and T. pdict ad duos anni Terminos per equales portiones solvend prima
solutione inde incipiend ad finem sex mensium prox. post decessum ejusdem T.
and sic quolibet dimidio anni durante vita naturali ejusdem Agnetis in plenam
satisfactionem totius dotis ipsius Agnetis ipsam de terris and tenementis
ipsius T. contingen Et postea apud R. pred obiit de terris and tenementis pred
cum pertin in forma pred seisit post cujus mortem and ante impetrationem brevis
pred scilt (tali die and anno) pred Agnes apud R. pred dum ipsa sola fuit pred
annualem redditum 20 l. in plenam satisfactionem totius dotis ipsius Agnetis de
tenementis pred cum pertin contingen acceptare agreavit Et hoc parat est
verificare unde petit Iudicium si pdict Gabriel and Agnes dotem ipsius Agnetis
de tenementis pdict cum pertin unde etc. ex donatione pdict T. quondam viti sui
habere debeant etc.

Glanvil.
Et pdict G. and Agnes dicunt quod ipsi per ali^ne palligat a doie ipsius
Agnetis de tenementis pdict cum ptin unde etc. habend pcludi non de^ent quia
dicunt quoth eadem Agnes dum ipsa sola ^elt, non agreavit acceptare pdict annualem
red^^um ^0 l. in plenam satisfactionem dotis to^us dotis ipsius Agnetis ipsam
Agnetem de te^^mentis pdict cum ptin contingen prout pred ^^iz. and Henric
superius allegavexunt Et hoc ^et quoth inquiratur per patriam etc. 4 Co. f. 4.
Repl'. Demandant dicunt quod le feme ne agree a pay.
Ver^on's Case est adjudge que cest bar est bon and deins ^e equity de Stat.
del 27 H. 8. de Joyntures.



Dower. Narratio in Dote.
ANna que fuit uxor R. D. per A.D. Attornatum suum petit versus Iohannem D.
tertiam partem Maneriorum de O. and N. cum pertin ac december Mesuagiorum december
toftorum nonagint acr terre cum pertin in E. ut dotem ipsius A. ex donatione
pdict R. quondam viri sui and unde nihil habet etc.

Plea. Non fuit in legitimo Matrimonio copulat' vide supra. Plea. N'unque seize
que Dower.
Et pdict I. per.. Attornatum fuum venit and dicit quoth pdict Anna dotem suam de
tenementis pdict unde etc. versus eum habere non debet quia dic quoth pdict R.D.
quondam vir ipsius A. ex cujus dotatione etc. nec die quo ipse R. eandem A.
desponsavit nec unquam postea feisitus fuit de cenementis illis cum pertin unde
etc. de tali statu ita quoth eadem A. inde dotasse poruit (...). de hoc ponit se
super Patriam Et pdict A. similiter Ideo etc.

Plea Acceptation' Annuitatis in satisfactionem Dotis.
Et pdict I. per.. Attornatum suum venit and dicit quoth pdict A. dotem suam de
tenementis pdict cum pertin ex dotatione pdict I.H. quondam viri sui habere non
debet quia dic quoth diu ante tempus impetrationis brevis originalis ipsius A.
scilt (tali die and anno) apud B. pdict I. assignavit pfat A. annuitatem sive
annualem redditum sex librarum legalis monete Anglie exeun de omnibus cerris
and tenementis pdict cum pertin habend and tenend eidem A. pro tempore vite sue
in nomine dotis sue exeun de omnibus terris and tenementis pdict que fuer pdict
I. H. quondam viri sui etc. Quem quidem redditum sex librarum pdict A.
acceptavit in plenam satisfactionem totius dotis sue ipsam de omnibus terris
and tenementis pdict que fuer pdict I. contingen Et hoc etc. Vnde petit
Iudicium si pdict A. dotem suam de tenementis pdict cum pertin habere debeat
etc.

Et pdict A. dicit quoth ipsa per aliqua preallegata a dote sua pdict habend
precludi non debet quia protestando quoth ipsa non acceptavit pdict annuitatem
sive annualem redditum ser librarn legalis monete Anglie in plenam
satisfactionem totius dotis sue ipsam de omnibus terris and tenementis pdict
cum ptin que fuer pdict I. H. contingent prout pdict I. superius allegavit pro
pl^ito eadem A. dicit quoth pdict I. non assignavit eidem A. pdict annuitatem sive
annualem redditum sex librarum legalis monete Anglie exeun de tenementis pdict
cum pertin habend and tened eidem A. pro termino vite sue nomine dotis de
omnibus terris and tenementis pdict que fuer pdict I. H. quondam viri sui etc.
prout idem I. superius allegavit Et hoc parat est verificare ^^de petit
Iudicium Et quoth ipsa de tenementis pdict cum pertin dotare possit etc. Repl. Non
acceptavit.


Et pdict I. ut prius dic' quoth pdict I. assignavit pfat A. pdict annuitatem sive
annualem ^eddicum sex librarum exeun de tenementis pd cum pertin habend and
tenend eidem A. pro termino vite sue nomine dotis sue de omnibus terris and
tenementis predict que fuer predict I. H. quondam viri sui prout idem I. supius
allegavit Et de hoc ponit se super Patriam etc.

Plea. Elopement.
Et pdict A. per.. Atttornatum suum venit and dicit quoth pdict K. dotem suam de
tenementis pdict cum pertin ex dotatione pdict I. habere non debet quia dicit
quoth pd K. in vita pdict I. scilicet (tali die and anno) apud W. in Com L. sponte
sua reliquic pfat I. virum suum and ab eo abiit and elopavit cum quodam T. W.
and cum ipso T. W. apud K. in pdict Com L. in adulteris moram traxit continuam
tota vita ipsius I. minime reconciliat ad pfat I. virum suum in vita ipsorum I.
Et hoc etc. Vnde etc. si dotem suam de tenementis pdict cum ptin ex dotatione
etc. in hac part habere debent etc.

Repl.
Et pdict K. dicit quoth ipsa per aliqua preallegata de dote sua de eisdem
tenementis cum pertin de dotatione pdict I. quondam viri sui versus prefat A.
habend precludi non debet quia dicit quoth ipsa in vita pdict I. non reliquit
ipsum I. virum suum nec ab eo abiit cum pfat T. W. nec moram cum ipso in
adulterio trahend fecit prout pdict A. superius allegavit Et hoc petit quoth
inquiratur per Patriam etc.

Bar per acceptance de Jointure cum recitatione Stat. 27 H. 8.
Et pdict T. H. per.. Attornatum suum ven and dicit quoth pdict R. and D. dotem
ipsius D. de tenementis pdict cum pertin unde etc. ex dotatione pfat D. quondam
viri etc. habere non debent quia dic quoth in Statut in Parliamento Domini Henrici
nuper Regis Anglie odavi apud Civitatem London tertio die Novembris anno Regni
sui vicesimo primo inchoat and ex eadem Civitate usque ad Palatium suum apud
Westminster in Com Midd and adjornat and prorogat atque ibidem continuat usque ad and
in decimo septimo die D. iunc prox. sequen and ab eisdem die and loco per
diversas Prorogationes usque ad and in quartum diem F. anno Regni sui vicesimo
septimo continuat and prorogat inter alia inacticat ordinat and stabilit
existit authoritate ejusdem Parliament quoth cum diverse person perqui sivissent
sive habuissent statum fact and composit de and in viversis terris tenementis
and hereditamentis sibi ipsis and suis executoribus and heredibus dici sive
viro and uxori and heredibus de little ambobus corporibus procreat' aut hered
^alus eorum corporum procreat' aut marito and ^xori pro termino suarum vitarum
aut pro termino vite old utoris sue aut ubi aliquis talis status sive
perquisitio aliquorum terrarum tenementorum sive hereditamentorum fuit aut
ext^at imposterum foret fact alicui marito and ejus uxori modo and forma
superius express. alicui all person seu personis heredibus and assignatis
suis (...) usum and opus dictorum and uxoris vel ad asum uxoris prout prius
memorat existit pro junctura uxoris quoth extunc quolibet hujusmodi casu quelibet
mulier nupta habens talem juncturam fadam aut extunc in posterum fiend non clam
seu haberet aliquem titulum altrujus dotis de resid terrarum tenementorum vel
hereditamentorum que aliquo tempore fuissent dicti viri sui per quem ipsa
habuisset aliquam talem juncturam nec peteret neque clam dotem suam de and
versus tos qui haberent terras and tenementa dicti viri sui sed si haberet
nullam talem juncturam tum ipsa foret admisse and habilis ad prosequend habend
and ^^tend dotem suam per breve de dote secundum debitam formam and ordinem
Communium Legum hujus Regni eodem actu sive aliqua lege aut provisione in
contrarium inde non obstant prout in eodem actu before continetur Et idem T.
H. ulterius dicit quoth pfat nuper Rex Henricus octavus fuit seisitus de scitu
etc. in etc. in dominico suo ut de feodo and sic inde seisius existen idem
nuper Rex postea videlicet ( tal die and anno) per Literas suas Patentes geren
dat apud Westminster eisdem die and anno de gratia sua speciali ac ex certa scientia
and mero motu suis dedit and concessit pfat D. in vita sua and eidem Ducisse
adtunc uxori sue pdict scitum etc. habend and tenend eisdem D. and Ducisse pro
termino vitarum suarum and eorum alterius diutius viventi remanere inde post
mortem eorundem Ducis and Ducisse hered de corpore ejusdem Ducis procreat
Quarum quidem Literarum Patentium pretextu iidem Dux and Ducissa fuer de pdict
scitu etc. cum pertin seisit videlicet idem Dux in dominico suo ut de feodo
talliato and pd Ducissa in dominico suo nt de libero tenemento Et sic seisit
existen idem Dux postea apud H. in Com S. obiit and pdict Ducissa ipsum
supervixit and se tenuit in pdict scitum etc. cum pertin and fuit and adhuc
eristit inde seisit in dominico suo ut de libero tenemento per jus accrescendi
etc. atque proficua and exitus inde agreeando and consentiendo ad juncturam
illam a tempore mortis pfat Ducis hucusque continue percepit and habuit Et hoc
paratus est verificare unde petit Iudicium si pdict R. and Ducissa dotem ipsius
Ducisse de tenementis pdict cum pertin in demanda pdict superius spec habere
debeant etc.

Appeal for the death of the Husband against the Principal and Accessories.
Heart. ss. E. D. nuper de etc. al^s dic I.A. nuper de etc. I.W. nuper de etc.
and L.B. nuper de etc. attach^ fuer per corpora sua ad respond P. que fuit uxor
T. S. Gen de morte pd T. S. quonda viri sui unde eos appellat Et sunt pleg' de
prosequend scilicet T. A. de Land Gen and W. E. de etc. Et unde eadem P. per T.
W. jun and I. F. Attornatos suos conjunctim and divisim juxta forma Statuti
etc. instanter appellat pdict E. D. I. A. I. W. and L. B. de eo quoth ubi pdict T.
S. fuit in pace Dei and dicti Domini Regis nunc apud S. pdict in Com pdict
Hextford sexto die Maii anno etc. circa horam quartam post meridiem ejusdem
diei ibi scil^t apud S. pdict in pdict Com Hertf. ven pdict I. A. I. W. and L.
B. ac felonice ac ut felones dict Domini Regis nunc ex malitiis suis pcogitat
and insult pmeditat contra pacem dict Domini Regis nunc coron and dignitates
suas die anno hora loco and Com Hertf. pdict and in pfat T. S. adtunc apud S.
pdict in pd Com Hertf. insult fecer Et pdict L. B. cum quodam gladio de ferro
and calybe vocat a Rapier ad valentiam trin solidorum and quatuor denar quem
idem L. in manu sua dextra adtunc eodem sexto die etc. apud S. pd in pd Com
Hertf. habuit and tenuit pfat T. S. in and super dextrum genu ipsius T.S.
adtunc apud S. pd felonice voluntary and ex malitia sua pcogitat percussit and
pupugit dans eidem T. S. adtunc and ibidem scil^t apud S. pd cum gladio pdict
in and super dextrum genu ipsius T. S. pd unam plagam mortalem profunditat sex
pollicium and latitud unius pollicis de qua quidem plaga mortali pdict T. S.
adtunc apud S. pdict in pdict Com Hertf. instanter obiit Et pdict I. A. and I.
W. apud S. pdict felonice and ex malitiis suis pcogitat fuer adtunc psentes
auxiliantes abettari procurare consultare and manuteneri dict L. B. ad felon
and murdrum pdict in forma pdict felonice faciend and perpetrand contra pacem
dicti Domini Regis nunc coron and dignitates suas Et sic pdict L. B. I. A. and
I. W. pdict T. S. dicto sexto die Maii anno etc. apud S. pdict in pdict Com
Hertf. felonice voluntary and ex malitiis suis pcogitat interfecer and
murdraver contra pacem dicti Domini Regis nunc coron and dignitates suas Et
pdict E. D. ante felon and murdro pdict in forma pdict fact scil^t quined die
Maii anno etc. apud S. pdict in Com Hertford eisdem L. B. I. A. and I. W. ad
faciend and perpetrand felon and murdrum pdict modo and forma pd ex malitia sua
pcogitat malitiose and felonice incitavit procuravit and consulit Anglice did
counsel. Ac etiam I. D. sciens pfat L. B. I. A. and I. W. felon and murdrum
pdict in forma pdict fecisse ipsos L. B. I. A. and I. W. postea scil^t pdict
sexto die Maii etc. apud S. pd in Com Hertf. pd post felon and murdrum pdict
per ipsos L. B. I. A. and I. W. in forma pdict fact felonice receptavit
concelavit hospitavit Anglice did lodge and confortavi^ ac ipsos ad fugand and
escapiand pro felonia and murdro pdict modo and forma pdict fact adjuvavit
Anglice did help excicavit and consuluit contra pacem etc. Et quam cito iidem
felones and murdr pdict in forma pdict tecissent fugerunr dict P. recent
insecut fuit de villa in villam usque quatuor propinquiores Et ulterius
quousque etc. Fresh suit.
Et si iidem felones felon and murdrum pdict in forma pdict eis imposit' velint
dedicere pdict P. hoc parata est versus eos probare prout Curia etc.

Et pdict E. D. I. A. I. W. and L. B. in propriis personis suis ven and defend
vim and injuriam quando etc. omnem feloniam and murdrum and quicquid etc. Et
seperal dicunt quoth ipsi in nullo sunt inde culpabiles Et inde de bono and malo
seperatim ponunt se super Patriam Et pdict P. similiter Ideo etc.

Det sur Obligac' versus Administratric'. Def. plede plene administravit Quer.
replic' que il ad prosecut' original Writ verse. Def. and sa Baron and proceed
al Issue and abate sur mort de Baron, and il recent. exhibuit Bill. Note, le
Bill fuit exhibit Pasch. 19 Car. 2. (...) Sur Obligac. plene administravit
plede.
Precludi non debet quia dicit quoth diu ante exhibitionem bille pdict scil^t
(tali die and anno) idem Quer pro recuperatione debiti pdict ei in forma pdict
aretro and insolut existen prosecut fuisset extra Cur Canc dicti Domini Regis
nunc (ad Cur Canc apud Westminster in Com Midd tunc existen quoddam breve original
dicti Domini Regis vsus quendam I. S. nuper de etc. and pdict Elizabetham tunc
uxorem ejus nuper administraticem bonoru and catallorum que fuer E. S. qui
obiit intestat nuper dict etc. tunc Vic Essex. direct per quod quidem breve
originale pcept fuit pfat tunc Vic Essex. quod pciperet pdict I. and Eliz. quoth
just and sine dilatione redderent dict ( Quer) pdict 40 l. quas ei injuste
detinebant Et nisi fecissent Et pdict ( Quer) fecisset pdict tunc Vic securum
de clamore suo prosequend tunc summon pro bonos summon pdict I. and Eliz. quoth
essent coram Iusticiariis dicti Domini Regis apud W. in Octab^ Sancti Hillarii
ostens^ quare non fecissent Et quoth idem Vic haberet summon and breve illud
posteaque in Octab^ Sancti Hillarii pdict coram Justice dicti Domini Regis apud
W. pdict I. and Eliz. ad breve pdict comparaverunt and pdict ( Quer) superinde
versus eos narravit Et pdict I. and Eliz. inde placitaverunt ad exitum
Posteaque scilicet (tali die and anno) apud H. pdict in Parochia and Warda pd
pdict I. obiit ac ratione inde brevis originale pdict and tot process. inde
cassat fuer Et idem ( Quer) recent postea exhibuit billam ipsius Quer hic in
Cur ipsius Domini Regis versus pdict Elizabetham Et pdit Quer ulterius dicit quoth
breve originale pdict prosecut fuit and billa pdict exhica fuit versus pdict
Elizabetha pro debito pdict and non pro alio debito Et idem ( Quer) ulterius
dicit quoth tempore impetrationis brevis originalis pdict pdict (Def.) habuit
diversa bona and catalla que fuer pdict E. S. tempore mortis sue in manibus
suis administrand ad valentiam debiti pdict unde ead (Def.) eid ( Quer)
dedebito suo pdict satisfecisse potuit videlicet apud H. pdict in Parochia and
Warda pdict Et hoc etc. unde etc.

Rej. Non recent. exhibuit billam.
Et pdict (Def.) dicit quoth pdict ( Quer) non recent exhibuit billam ipsius Quer
in Cur Domini Regis hic versus ipsam (Def.) mode and forma prout pdict ( Quer)
superius inde placitando allegavit Et de hoc ponit se super Patriam etc.

Bar al Bond. Plede que le Execut' del Def. marie le Debtor.
Actio non Quia dicit quoth post confectionem scripti pdict R. T. in vita sua apud
C. pdict condidit testamentum and ultimam voluntatem sua in scriptis ac per
idem testamentum suum pd Eliz. Executricem testamenti illius constituit and
ordinavit etc. postea obiit post cujus mortem eadem Elizabetha pdict
testamentum pdict R. T. in debita juris forma probavit ac onus executionis
testamenti illius super se suscepit Et postea and ante diem impetrationis
brevis originalis ipsius Eliz. scilicet (tali die and anno) eadem Eliz. apud C.
pd cepit in virum pfat Iac. H. ac ratione inde tam omnes actiones super pdict
script obligatorio habend quam pdict debitum 10 l. super pd script obligatorio
pet penitus in lege extinct suer and exonerat devener and adhonerat exist' Et
hoc peratus etc.

Action brought by a Man and his Wife for scandalous Words, That she had a
Child dum sola suit.
ss. B. P. Gen and C. uxor ejus queruntur de E. A. in custod Mar etc. pro eo
videlicet quoth cum ead C. bonorum nominis fame conditionis conversationis and
gesture a tempore nativitatis sue hucusque fuerit ac dum ipsa sola non solum
vitam honestam and immaculatam degit verumetiam ut feminam castam seipsam
gesserit habuerit and gubernaverit abs quovis corrupt incasto pravo aut malo
vivendi genere intact and immaculat remanens ex venerabili and generosa stirpe
in Comitat pdict prognat existit pretextu cujus non solum eadem C.
consanguineorum suorum verumetiam quam plurimorum aliorum Dom Regis fidel
subdit benevolentiam and amicitiam sibi tonciliaverit Cumque quidem A. R. Gen
avunculus ipsius B. magnas diversasque annuales exibitiones eid B. dedisset ac
omnia terras tenementa sua eide B. post mortem suam relinquere in animo
habuisset (liberorum aliquem de corpore suo exeun non habens) pdict Def.
pmissorum non ignarus ac percipiens ipsam B. pfat C. matrimonii causa affidat
fuisse ipsamque C. in urore sua ducere intendisse diabolica and matiosa me^te
sua machinans and intendens non solum bona nomen and famam pd C. ledere verum
etiam ipsum B. in tantum odium and displicentiam apud A. R. Avunculum suum
inducere ut idem Avunculus ejus omnia terras and tenementa sua aliis personis
post mortem sua conveyaret ac assuraret ac pdict B. inde penitus exhereditaret
and ut pdict B. and C. post sponsalia inter ipsos B. and C. celebrat scil^c
(tali die and anno) apud etc. dixit locutus fuit and propalavit Avunculo pfat
and A. uxor ejus in psentia quamplurimorum fide dign Domini Regis nunc subdit
de pfat C. dum ipsa sola fuit hec falsa ficta and scandalosa Anglicana verba
sequen videlicet I (ipsum pdict E. A. modo Def. innuendo) marvel that you (
pdict Avunculum innuendo) will bestow your Kinsman (ipsum B. modo Quer
innuendo) on that base Woman (C. uxorem pfat B. modo Quer innudo) for she
(ipsam C. iterum innuendo) has had a Child ubi revera eadem C. dicto tempore
dictionis and propalationis verborum illorum aut a toto tempore vite sue usque
sponsalia inter ipsum B. and C. celebrata in pura virginitate sua remansisset
and nullam prolem habuisset Quorum quidem scandalosorum verborum dictionis and
propulationis ptextu eadem C. non solum in bonis nomine fama and estimatione
suis quibus preaucea gavisa fuerat multipliciter lesa and denigrata existit
verum etiam idem B. in magnam displicentiam and odium pdict A. R. Avunculi sui
incidit ac diversas annuales exhibitiones quas pd A. R. ejus Avunculus ei dare
solitus fuerat (ulterius idem facere desistt sect) amisit ac idem R. Avunculus
ipsius B. pdict scandalosis verbis ipsius E. fidem adhibens pro eo quoth idem B.
ipsam C. in uxorem duxit terras tenementa sua annui valoris centum librarum
diversis aliis personis eidem B. ignot habens post mortem ipsius A. Avunculi
sui conveyavit and assuravit a pdict B. and A. post sponsalia pdict huc usque
indies maxim depauperat sunt unde idem Quer dicunt quoth ipsi deteriorat sunt and
dampnum habent ad valentiam 3000 l. Et inde produc sectam.

Declaration in Covenant brought by a Man and his Wife, where the Lessor enters
upon the possession of the Lessee and with their consent enfeoffs the Plaintiff
(Feme sole) as Assignee. Hill. 22 Car. 2. Rot. 1667. B. C.
War ss. H I. nuper de etc. summonit fuit ad respondend T. R. and Anne uxori
ejus assign E. M. Gen de placito quoth teneat eis conventionem inter pdict E. and
pfat H. I. fact secundum vim forma and effectum quarunde Indenturarum inde
inter eos confectarum Et unde iide T. K. and A. per etc. Attornatum suum dicunt
quoth cum pdict E. fuit seisitus de vigint acris pasture cum pertin in W. in Com
pdicte in dominico suo ut de feodo Et sic inde seisit existen idem E. (tali die
and anno) apud W. pdict per quandam Indenturam suam inter ipsum E. per nomen E.
M. etc. ex una part and pfat H. I. per nomen etc. ex altera part fact cujus
alteram partem sigillis pdict (Def.) signat iidem T. K. and A. hic in Curia
proferunt cujus dat est iisdem die and anno admisisset concessit and ad firmam
tradidisset and per eandem Indenturam dimisit concessit and ad firmam
tradidisset pfat H. I. tenementa pdict cum pertin per nomina omnium illarum
suarum separalium sive parcellarum pasture ( So recite the Deed and Covenants
and the Covenant to repair, ut sequitur) Et pdict H. I. pro seipso Executoribus
Administratoribus and Assignatis suis convenisset and agreeasset ad and cum
pdict E. M. Heredibus and Assignatis suis per Indenturam pdict modo and forma
sequent videlicet quoth ipse pdict H. I. Executores Administratores and Assignati
sui de tempore in cempus and ad omnia tempora durante dicta dimissione (Anglice
Lease) ad eorum vel alicujus eorum propria custag^ and mis^ manutenerent
repararent and custodierent sepes fossas pontes januas parca (Anglice Pounds)
repagula palos (Anglice Pales) posts fensuras (Anglice Fences) and clausuras
(Anglice Enclosures) dictis pmissis spectan in and per omnes requisite (Anglice
needful) and necessar reparaciones quando necessitas requiret and ad quamlibet
pertem inde sufficient reperat manutent and custodit ut ipsi recepissent eadem
in fine expiratione vel al determinatione dimissionis pdict pdict E. W.
Heredibus vel Assignatis suis quiet and pacifice relinquerent and sursum
redderent prout per eandem indenturam inter alia before apparet Virtute cujus
dimissionis pdict H. I. in tenementa pdict cum pertin except pexcept intravit
and fuit inde possessionat ipso H. I. sic inde possessionat existen and pdict
E. M. de reversione tenementorum pdict cum pertin in dominico suo ut de feodo
seisit existen id E. M. postea scilicet (tali die and anno) in tenementa pdict
cum pertin super possessionat ipsius H. I. inde intravit and de eisdem
tenementis cum pertin cum assensu and consensu pdict H. I. adtunc feoffavit
pdict Annam dum ipsa sola fuit Habend and tenend eidem Anne Hered and
Assignatis suis imperpetuum Virtute cujus quidem feoffament eadem Anna dum ipsa
sola fuit fuit seisita de tenementis pdict cum pertin in dominico suo ut de
feodo ipsa Anna sic inde possessionat existen pdict H. I. in tenementa pdict
clamando terminum suum pdict inde intravit and fuit inde possessionat pro
residuo termini pdict Et sic inde possessionat existen ac eadem Anna de
reversione tenementorum pdict cum pertin in dominico suo ut de feodo seisita
existen eadem Anna postea scilicet (tali die and anno) apud W. pdict cepit in
virum pdict T. per quod iidem T. and A. fuer durante residuo pdict termino
december annorum seisit de reversione tenementorum pdict cum pertin in dominico
suo ut de feodo in jure ipsius Anne usque and ad finem termini pdict and abinde
semper postea hucusque iide T. and A. fuerunt and adhuc seisiti existunt de
tenement pd cum pertin in dominico suo ut de feodo in jure ipsius A. Et iide T.
and A. ulterius dicunt quoth pd tempore confect Indenture pd necnon tempore prime
intrationis pd H. I. in tenementa pdict cum pertin Virtute dimission pdict
omnia and singula sepes fosse pontes janua parca (Anglice Pounds) repagula pali
(Anglice Pales) fensure and clausum pdict tenementis cum pertin superius
dimiss. spectan fuerunt been and sufficient reperat Quodque post confectionem
Indenture pdict and post desponsalia inter ipsos T. and A. celebrat and ante
diem impetrationis brevis originalis ipsorum T. and A. nec non ante finem
termini pdict scilicet (tali die and anno) and ab eodem vicesimo die etc. usque
and ad finem termini pdict sepes videl^t mill perticat sepium quodlibet
perticat inde precii 2 s. janue videlicet 20 janue quelibet janua inde pretii
10 s. pale videlicet mill pale quelibet pala inde precii 4 d. pdict tenementis
cum pertin superius dimiss. spectan fuer fract dirupt prostrat and in magno
decasu pro defectu reparationis inde Et quoth sepes janue pala sic fract dirupt
and prostrat exist^n per pdict H. I. in fine termini pdict eisdem T. and A.
relict fuer minime reparat contra formam and effectum Indenture pdict pdict
tamen H. I. licet sepius requisite pdict sepes januas and pala reparare minime
curavit Et sic iidem T. and A. dicunt quoth ipse H. I. Executores Administratores
and Assignati sui de tempore in tempus and ad omnia tempora durante dimissione
(Anglice Lease) ad eorum vel alicujus propria custag^ and mis^ manutenerent
reparerent and custodirent sepes januas and pala etc. dictis pmissis spectan in
and per omnes requisite (Anglice needful) and necessar reperationes quando
necesse requireret Et eadem and quamlibet partem inde sufficienter reparat
manutent and custodit ut ipsi recepissent eadem in fine expirationis vel al
determinationis dimission pdict pdict E. M. Heredibus vel Assignatis suis
quiet and pacifice relinquerent and sursum redderent eisdem T. and A. non
tenur sed infreger ac ill eis hucusque contradixerunt and adhuc contradicunt
Vnde dicunt quoth deteriorat sunt and damna habent ad valenc etc.

Narratio pro Administrat' de bonis non administrat' per uxor' ejus versus duos
Executores.
H. G. and Anna uxor ejus execut testamenti A. C. nuper dict etc. and Isabella
Coexecutrix testamenti pd summon fuer ad respond W. H. administrat bonorum and
catallorum que fuer I. R. per Iuditham R. Administratricem bonorum and
catallorum que fuer pfat I. qui obiit intestat non administrat de placito quod
reddant ei 30 l. quas ei injuste detinet Et unde idem W. per etc. Attornatum
suum dic quoth cum pdict A. C. in vita sua (die loco and anno) per quoddam
scriptum suum obligatorium etc. concessisset se teneri pfat I. in vita sua in
pdict 30 l. solvend eidem I. cum inde requisitus fuisset pdict tamen A. C. in
vita sua ac pdict Anna and Isabella post mortem ipsius A. dum eadem Anna sola
fuit nec non iidem H. and Anna and Isabella post desponsalia inter eosdem H.
and Annam celebrat licet sepius requisite pdict 30 l. pfat I. in vita sua seu
pdict W. and Iudithe in vita ipsius Iudithe post mortem ipsius Iohannis necnon
eidem W. post mortem ipsius Iudithe cui administratio omnium bonorum and
catallorum que fuer pdict Iohannis tempore mortis sue pdict Judith
administratric bonorum and catallorum que fuer pfat Iohannis non administrat
pro tal die and anno apud G. post mortem ipsius Iudithe commissa fuit non
reddider sed ill eis reddere contradixer ac pdict H. and Anna and Isabella ill'
eidem Willielmo adhuc reddere contradic ac injuste detinent unde dic quoth
deteriorat etc.

Aliter.
I. W. and E. uror ejus administratrix omnium and singulorum bonorum and
catallorum jurium and creditorum que fuer R. F. tempore mortis sue per S. F.
nuper Executricem testamenti pdict R. non administrat queruntur de R. B. nuper
de L. Armig^ al^s dict R. B. de Interiori Templo London Gen in custodia Mar
etc. de placito quoth reddat eis centum libras legalis monete Anglie quas eis
injuste detinet pro eo videlicet quoth cum pdict R. B. ( tal die and anno) apud L.
pdict videlicet in Parochia beat Marie de Arcubus in Warda de Cheap per
quoddam scriptum suum obligatorium sigill' ipsius R. sigillat Curieque dicti
Domini Regis nunc hic ostens^ cujus dat est eisdem die and anno cogn se teneri
and firmiter obligar pfat R. F. in vita sua in pdict centum solid solvend eide
R. F. cum inde requisitus esset pdict tamen R. B. licet requisitus etc. pdict
centum libras pfat R. in vita sua seu pfat S. in vita sua post mortem pdict R.
F. seu eidem E. post mortem pdict S. dum sola fuit cui quidem E. administrac
omnium and singulorum bonorum and catallorum jurin and creditorum que fuer
pdict R. in tempore vite sue per S. F. nuper Executor testamenti pdict predict
R. non administrat cum testament pfat R. annex per (...) post ipsius S. mortem
scil^c ( tal die and anno) apud L. pdict in Parochia and Warda pdict debit modo
commissa fuit seu eisdem I. and E. post deponsalia inter ipsos celebrat vel
eorum alicui non solvit set ill' pfat R. F. in vita sua ac pfat S. post mortem
ipsius dum sola fuit ac eisdem I. and E. post desponsalia inter ipsos celebrat
and eorum cuilibet solvere omnino contradixit and ill' eisdem I. and E. adhuc
solvere contradic ac in just detinet in retardatione administrationis bonorum
and catallorum pdict and ad dampnum ipsorum I. and E. 40 l. and inde produc
sectam etc. Et proferunt hic in Curia dicti Domini Regis nunc iidem I. and E.
literas administratorias etc.

Indebitatus Assumpsit per virum and uxorem pro denariis accommodat' defendent'
per uxorem dum sola fuit.
Kanc ss. C. B. and H. uxor ejus queruntur de I. L. in custod Mar etc. pro eo
videlt quoth pd I. L. tal' die and anno apud L. in Com pd indebitat fuisset pfat
H. dum ipsa sola fuit in 16 l. legalis etc. pro diversis denariorum summis per
pd G. dum sola fuit pfat Def. super requisitionem ipsius Def. ante tempus illud
accommodat pdictoque I. L. eidem I. H. sic inde indebitat existen idem I. in
consideratione inde postea scilt (eodem primo die Aprilis die and anno) apud L.
pd in Com pdict super se assumpsit pfat H. dum ipsa sola fuit ad tunc and
ibidem fideliter promisit quoth ipse idem Def. pdict 16 l. eidem H. cum inde
requisite esset been and fideliter solvere and contentare vellet Cumque etiam
pdict H. dum ipsa sola fuit scilt (primo die Aprilis die and anno supradict)
apud L. pdict in Com pdict ad special instanc and requisition pdict Def. mutuo
dedisset and accommodasset eidem Def. 20 l. similis monete pdict Def. in
consideratione inde postea scilicet eodem primo die Aprilis anno vicesimo
supradict apud L. pdict in Com pdict super se assumpsit pfateque H. dum ipsa
sola fuit adtunc and ibidem fideliter promisit quoth ipse idem Def. pdict 20 l.
eidem H. cum inde postea similiter requisite esset been and fideliter solve and
contentare vellet pd tamen Def. seperal promissiones and assumptiones suas
pdict pfat H. dum sola fuit in forma pdict fact minime curans sed machinans and
fraudulenter intendens pdict G. dum ipsa sola fuit and pdict C. and H. post
desponsalia inter eos celebrat in hac part callide and subdole decipere and
defraudare pdict separal' denariorum summas in toto se attingen ad and pfat H.
dum ipsa sola fuit aut eisdem C. and H. post desponsalia inter eos celebrat vel
eorn alter non solvit juxta separales promissiones and assumptiones ipsius Def.
nec eis aut eorum alter proinde hucusque aliqualiter contentavit licet ad hoc
faciend pdict Def. per pdict E. dum ipsa sola fuit ac per pdict C. and H. post
desponsalia inter eos celebrat scilicet tali die and anno apud L. pdict in Com
pdict requisite fuisset sed pdict libr eisdem C. and H. vel eorum alter solvere
hucusque omnino recusavit and adhuc recusat unde iidem C. and E. dic quoth ipsi
deteriorat sunt Et dampnum habent ad valentia Et inde etc.

Def. in Ejectment placitat Covert Baron.
Def. venit and petit Iudicium de brevi pdict quia dicit quoth ipsa eadem (Def.)
die impretrationis brevis originalis ipsorum ( Quer) fuit cooperta de quodam A.
B. viro suo videlicet apud S. pdict Et hoc parat etc. unde ex quo pdict A. non
nominatur in brevi pdict eadem (Def.) petit Iudicium de brevi illo etc.

Repl.
Cassari non debet quia dic quoth pdict (Def.) die impetracionis brevis originalis
ipsius ( Quer) scilicet (tali die) apud S. pdict fuit sola absque hoc quod
predict (Def.) die impetrationis brevis originalis ipsius ( Quer) fuit cooperta
de A. B. viro suo prout pdict (Def.) superius Allegavit Et hoc etc. Vnde ex quo
pdict (Def.) transgress. and ejection pdict superius cogn idem Quer petit
Iudicium and possession termini sui pdict una cum damnis etc. sibi adjudicar.

Issue sur le Traverse.
Et pdict (Def.) ut prius dicit quoth ipsa die impetrationis brevis originalis
ipsius Quer fuit cooperta de pfat A. B. viro suo prout eadem Def. superius
allegavit Et hoc etc.

Covert Baron plead post original' purchased.
Et pdict (Def.) in propria persona sua ven and petit Iudicium de brevi pdicto
etc. quia dic quoth pd ( Quer) postquam ipsa tulisset breve suum pdictn versus
eundem (Def.) scilicet (tali die and anno) apud G. pdict cepit in virum quendam
I. C. adhuc superstitem and in plena vita existen (videlicet) apud G. pd and
sic pdict ( Quer) modo cooperta de viro existit Et hoc etc. Vnde petit Iudicium
de brevi illo etc.

Cassari non debet quia dicit quoth ipsa die impetrationis brevis pdict ac semper
postea sola fuit and non cooperta de pfat A. B. prout pdict (Def.) superius
allegavit Et hoc petit quoth inquiratur per Patriam.

Qd' Quer' cepit virum post darrein continuance.
Dicit quoth post ult contin placiti pdicti (scilicet) post tale retorn ult pterit
de quo die loquela pd ult continuat fuit hic usque ad hauc diem scilicet Octab^
Hill and ante hunc die scilt primo die and ann etc. apud A. pdict pd ( Quer)
cepit in virum quendam A.B. qui quide A. adhuc superstes and in plena vita
existit videlicet apud A. pdict Et hoc etc. Vnde etc.

Cassari non debet quia dic quoth post pdict (tale retorn and ante pdict Octav
Hill ipsa ( Quer) non cepit pdict A. in virum suum prout pd Quer allegavit Et
hoc petit etc.

Aliter. Defendens placitat cooperta de Baron.
Actio non quia dicit quoth eadem D. tempore exhibitionis bille pd fuit coopert de
quodam S. adtunc viro suo qui quidem S. apud E. in Com War adhuc superstes and
in plena vita existit Qui quidem S. non nominatur in billa pd unde petit
Iudicium si etc.

Precludi non debet quia dic quoth ipsa D. die impetrationis bille sue pdicte
scilt (tali die and anno) fuit sola absque hoc quoth ipsa eodem die seu unquam
postea fuit cooperta de pd S. prout ipsa () superius allegavit Et hoc etc.

Et pd D. dicit quoth ipsa () tempore exhibitionis ville pd fuit cooperta de pd S.
adtunc viro suo prout ipsa superius allegavit Et hoc etc.

N'unque accouple en loyal Matrimony.
Actio non quia dicit quoth eadem ( Quer) nunquam fuit eidem R. legitimo
matrimonio copulat Et hoc paratus est verificare ubi and quando ac prout Cur
hic considerav. etc. Vnde petit Iudicium etc.

Repl'.
Precludi non debet quia dic quoth ipsa () apud S. in Com War in Diocese. C. and
Litchf. pfat R. in legitimo matrimonio fuit copulat Et hoc paratus est
verificare ubi and quando etc. ac prout Curia Regis hic considerav. etc. Et
quia hujusmodi cause cogn ad forum spectat Ecclesiasticum Ideo mandat est
Episcopo L. and C. loci pd Diocessano quoth convocat coram se in hac part
convocand rei veritat super pmissis diligenter inquir Et quid inde inquisit
constare fac hic Crast' Animarum per Literas suas Patentes and clausas idem
dies dat est pertibus pdict ibi etc.

De Brevi, quia matrimonium non fuit solempnizatum inter Querentem and uxorem
ejus die impetrationis ejusdem.
ss. F. E. etc. summonitus fuit ad respond R. R. Gen and A. uxori ejus
Executric testamenti W. G. Gen de placito quoth reddat eis xx l. quas eis injuste
detinet.

Et pd F. per A. B. Attornatum suum venit and petit Iudicium de brevi pdicto
quia dicit quoth matrimonium die impetracionis brevis originalis pdict R. and A.
inter eos secundum Legem Ecclesiasticam hujus Regni Anglie non fuit
solemnizatum Et hoc paratus etc.

Cassari non debet quia dicit quoth matrimonium inter ipsos R. and A. diu ante
impetrationem brevis originalis ipsorum R. and A. scilicet vicesimo die Iunii
Anno Regni Domini Regis nunc primo secundum Legem Ecclesiastica hujus Regni
Anglie fuit solemnizat videlicet apud B. pdict Et hoc petit etc.

Debt against an Executrix and her Husband for Rent arrear on a Lease made to
the former Husband.
ET unde idem R. B. per I. S. Attornatum suum dicit quoth cum ipse tali die and
anno apud etc. per quandam Indenturam suam inter ipsum R. B. ex una part and
pfat I. in vita sua ex altera part cujus alteram partem sigill etc. dimissiset
pfat I. in vita sua totum illud etc. habend etc. reddend etc. per equales
portiones solvend Virtute cujus dimissionis pdict I. in vita sua in tenement
pdict cum pertin superius dimiss. intravit and fuit inde possessionat Et sic
inde possessionat existen tali die and anno apud H. pd condidit testamentum
suum and pd M. Executricem ejusdem testamenti sui constituit Et postea scilicet
eisdem die and anno apud I. pd obiit de tenementis pd cum pertin in forma pd
possessionat post cujus mortem pd N. onus Executionis testamenti pd super se
suscepit and in tenementa pd cum pertin intravit and fuit inde possessionat and
sic inde possessionat existen apud I. pd cepit in virum pd M. N. ac pd 100 l.
de redditu pd pro uno anno integro finit ad (talem effectum) and per spacium 14
dierum prox. post idem festum eidem R. post mortem pd I. aretro fuerunt and a
huc existunt minime solut per quod actio accrevit etc.

Dett per Baron and Feme Administrat' d'Obligee versus Haeredem d'Obligor.
T. S. nuper de London Amiger filius and here is C. S. nuper dict etc. summonit
fuit ad respondend I. H. and Jane uxor ejus administrat bonorum and catallorum
que fuer T.C. Gen qui obiit intestat etc. de placito quoth reddat eis 100 l. quas
eis injuste detinet etc. Et unde iidem I. and I. per I. S. Attornatum suum
dicunt quoth cum pdict C. pater T. S. cujus here is ipse est in vita sua secundo die
Martii anno etc. apud London in Parochia etc. in Warda etc. per quodda scriptu
suum obligatorium concessisset se teneri pfat T. C. in vita sua in pd 100 l.
solvend eidem T. C. cum inde requisitus fuisset and ad eandem solutionem been
and fideliter faciend pd C. obligasset se and heredes suos per idem scriptum pd
tamen C. in vita sua ac pd T. S. filius and here is ipsius C. post mortem ipsius
C. licet sepius requisitus 100 l. pfat T. C. in vita sua seu eidem I. post
mortem ipsius T. dum ipsa sola fuit cui administratio omnium bonorum and
catallorum que fuer ejusdem T. tempore mortis sue W. D. Legum Doctorem Curie
Prerogative Cantuar Magistrum Custodem sive Commissarum legitime constitut ibi
die etc. anno etc. apud London in Parochia and Warda pd commissa fuit seu
eisdem I. and I. post disponsalia inter eos celebrat non reddiderunt sed ill
eis reddere contradixerunt ac pdict T. S. ill. eisdem I. and I. reddere
contradicit ea injuste detinet Vnde dic quoth deteriorat sunt and dampnum habet ad
valenc and inde produc sectam Et proferunt hic in Curia tam script pd quod
debitum pd in forma pd testatur Cujus dat est pd secundo die Martii anno etc.
quam Literas Administratorias pd Commissar que commissio Administrationis pd in
forma pd testantur etc.

Debt for Rent upon a Lease for years against Baron and Feme Executor of the
Lessee.
A B. Armiger queritur de I. W. and E. uxor ejus Executrice testamenti and
ultime voluntatis R. M. de placito quoth reddant ei 30 l. quas ei injuste detinent
etc. pro eo videlicet quoth cum idem A. B. die etc. per quandam Indenturam inter
ipsum A. ex una part and pfat R. M. in vita sua ex altera part factam cujus
alteram pertem sigill' pd R. M. signat idem A. B. hic in Curia profert cujus
dat est iisdem die and anno dimisisset concessit and ad firmam tradidisset
dicto R. M. totum illud messuagium etc. habend and occupand dictum messuagium
and omnia alia pmissa per Indenturam pd dimissa sive mentionat fore dimissa and
quamlibet pertem ejusdem dict R. M. Exec Administr and Assignat suis a festo
etc. prox. sequen dat Indentur pd usque plenam finem and terminum etc. extunc
etc. si idem A. B. and E. tunc uxor ejus and I. ejus filia vel aliquis eorum
tam diu viverit reddendo (prout per Lease) prout per eandem Indenturam inter
alia before apparet Virtute cujus dimissionis pdict R. M. in Crastino pd festi
etc. prox. post dat Indentur pd in messuag' pd cum pertin intravit and fuit
inde possessionat Et sic inde possessionat existen Idem R. M. postea scilicet
die etc. apud etc. condidit testamentum and ultimam voluntatem suam in scriptis
and per eandem ultimam voluntatem suam predictam E. Executricem testamenti sui
predict constituit and ordinavit Et postea scilicet die etc. anno etc. apud
etc. obiit de messuagio pd cum pertin sicut pfertur possess. post cujus morte
pd E. testament pd in debita Iuris forma probavit and onus Executionis
testamenti sui pd super se suscepit Et ut Execut and Testament pd in messuag^
pd cum pertin intravit and fuit inde possessionat ratione Executionis
Testamenti pd Et sic inde possessionat existen eadem A. postea scilicet (tali
die and anno) apud etc. cepit in virum pdict I. W. Virtute cujus iidem I. and
E. in jure ipsius E. fuer and adhuc existunt de messuag' pd cum pertin
possessionat ratione Executionis Testament pd etc. 30 l. de redditu pd pro uno
anno integro finit ad festum etc. uit pterit post mortem pdict A. B. eidem R.
B. aretro fac and adhuc existunt insolut per quod actio accrevit etc. (ut in all.)

THE TABLE.
A
Abatement.
OF a Writ or Suit in Law or Equity by Marriage or Death, pending the Suit,
Page 235, 236, 237 The Wife is put in before the Husband, it abates the Writ,
236 Feme Sole Plaintiff depending a Bill in Chancery, takes Husband, it abates
the Writ; how if she were Defendant, 237
Acceptance.
What things the Wife may make good after the death of her Husband by
Acceptance, 69 Acceptance of a Conditional Estate for a Jointure a good Bar of
Dower, 116 Remitter by Acceptance, 155 Acceptance of Rent after the Husband's
death, affirms his Feoffment of the Wife's Land, 165 What Acceptance of the
Husband shall affirm a voidable Lease, 176 By Acceptance of Rent a Feoffment
affirmed, 193
Acts.
What Acts, Charges or Forfeitures of the Husband shall charge the Wife after
his death, 58 What Acts done by the Baron and Feme shall be construed as Acts
of the Wife or not, so as to bind her after the death of the Husband, 63 For
what Acts or Torts of the wife the husband shall be punished, and e contra, 65
What Acts done or Contracts made by the wife shall bind the husband, 214 With
or for what Acts of the wife the husband shall be chargeable or not, 219
Actions.
What Things or Actions the wife shall have after the death of the husband, 66
What Actions Reals, what Actions Personals, 66, 67, 68 Actions brought by Baron
and Feme as Executrix or Administratrix, 231, 232 Actions which the husband may
have for Wrongs done to the wife, 238 Joinder in Action. Vide title Joinder.
Diversity between Actions which affirm Property, and which disaffirm Property,
242 Actions brought by a Feme Covert without her husband, 270 Chose in Action,
222 Account alters not the Action of Indebit. Assumpsit, 245 Account brought
against Baron and Feme, 298
Administratrix. Vide Executrix.
If a Feme Covert die Intestate, in what Cases Administration may be granted of
her Goods, 222 What Things the Administratrix of the wife shall have, and not
the husband, ibid. Where the husband shall be charged with the Waste of the
wife Administratrix; the manner of the Proceedings of the Sheriff in such Case,
227 Of Action brought by Baron and Feme as Executrix or Administratrix, 231
Where and how Administration belongs to the husband or wife, 233
Agreement. Disagreement.
What Agreement between the husband and wife shall stand good, or be
extinguished by the Marriage, 47 For what Things during the Coverture the wife
shall be charged after the death of the husband, by her Agreement or
Disagreement, 176
Alteration.
Alteration of the Property of Goods, how and by what Act, 226
Appeal.
Appeal brought by a Woman, 275 None but a wife de jure shall have an Appeal,
ibid. Appeal is annexed to the Widowhood, 226 It must be brought within the
Year and Day, ibid. Process in Appeal, 276, 277 Pleadings or Bars in Appeal,
ibid. Trials in Appeal, 279 In what Cases the husband shall be compelled to
appear and put in Bail for his wife, or to remain in Prison, 304
Assignment.
Assignment of Estate and Assignment of Contract, 50 Assignment of Dower, 93
Assignment of Rent out of Land pleaded in Dower, 102 Where the husband shall be
Assignee to the wife, 178
Assent.
What Is a good Assent or Claim as Executrix, and not as Legatee, 234 Assent of
a Feme Covert to a Legacy, 169, 170 Term extinct in one respect, yet remains
Assets in another respect, In Assise Baron and Feme must join on Disseisin of
the wife's Land, 246 Assumpsit. vide Action on the Case, tit. Case, 262, 263
Covenant for further Assurance, 166, 167
Attainder.
Where the wife shall lose her Dower by the Attainder of her husband, 89 By
Attainder or Outlawry of the husband, the wife's Term is a Gift in Law, 209
Attachment of the husband if the wife appear not on a Subpoena, 310 What Act of
the husband or wife shall amount to an Attornment, 141
Avowry.
In Avowry for Rent Baron and Feme must join, 248, 250, 251 Avowry for Rent out
of the wife's Land, in whose name it ought to be, 143
Averment.
Averment of a Life, 313 Averment that she is Feme Covert, 314
Award.
How and wherein the wife shall be bound by her husband's Submission to an
Award, 57 Audita Querela brought against Baron and Feme, 298
B
Baron and Feme.
WHat Acts the husband, may do to the wife, and the wife to the husband, though
they are one Person in Law, 5 Who shall be said to be Baron and Feme, 28 What
Things and Actions the husband shall have after the death of the wife, 68 What
Things the wife may make good after the death of the Baron, ibid. Where Baron
and Feme shall take by Intireties, or by Moieties, 158 Where the wife's Grant
is void when she joins with her husband, and where not, 167 How a Man may
execute an Estate to his wife, 170 What amounts to a Disposition of the wife's
Term by the husband, so as to vest the Interest in him, his Executors or
Administrators, 204 What power the husband has over the wife's Term. Vid.
Term. Where the husband shall be punished for Torts done by the wife, 219, 220
Of Actions the husband may have for Wrongs done to the wife, 238 In what
Actions husband shall be charged after the death of the wife, 300 In what Cases
the husband shall be compelled to put in Bail for his wife, 307 In mean Process
if the wife be taken before the husband, she shall be discharged; not so in
case of Execution, ibid.
Bastard.
Who shall be said to be a Bastard or not, 12 Bastard in what Court to be
proved, 13 General Bastardy, where triable, 14 Special Bastardy, where triable,
14 Bastard by the Common Law, and Mulier by the Civil Law, 15 Bastard by the
Spiritual Law, and Mulier by our Law, 16 Bastardy, where triable, 17 Of Bastard
Eigne and Mulier puisne in case of Descent, 19 How Estates may be limited to a
Bastard by a reputed name, or not, 20 Who only may write to the Bishop to
certify Bastardy, 18 Of the Bishop's Certificate to prove Marriage, 40
C
Case.
ACtion on the Case for scandalous Words spoken against Baron and Feme by Baron
and Feme, and what Judgment must be, 281, 282, 283 Action on the Case lies not
against a Feme Covert for negligent keeping of Fire, 259 Feme Covert affirming
herself to be a Feme Sole to entice another to Marriage, Action on the Case
lies not, 297
Charge.
What Acts, Charges or Forfeitures of the husband shall bind the wife after his
death, 58 How the husband may charge the Land of the wife by Rent, Statute,
Judgment, etc. 59, 60 Where the Baron and Feme shall join in Challenge, 326
Chattels.
Chattels Real, Mixed, Personal; and what Estate the Baron gains in them by the
Intermarriage of his wife, 51 Ghosts in Action, what Estates the Baron gains in
them by his Intermarriage, 222
Commissioners.
Commissioners taking a Fine of a Feme Covert, and how their Irregularity
punished, 133
Common.
Prescription for Common in jure Uxoris, 266
Conditions.
What Conditions in Law shall bind the wife or not, 25 Condition Subsequent and
not Precedent, 200 What Contracts by the husband made by the wife shall charge
the husband, or not, 214
Copyhold.
If a Surrender is a Discontinuance, 149, 155 What Acts of the husband shall
destroy or forfeit the Custom of the wife's Copyhold Estate, or the Estate or
not, 195 Feme Copyholder who has a Widow's Estate shall not avoid a Lease made
by her husband, 195 A Woman that holds durante viduitate by Custom, may make a
Lease before admittance, 196 Surrenders, Grants of Copyhold Estate by Baron and
Feme, and the Construction, ibid. The wife to join with the husband in the
Grants of Copyholds, 197
Customs.
Customs of Manors as to Wives, Widows, etc. what are good and what not, 197,
198
Covenant.
Covenant for further Assurance on Request by two Femes, and one dies before
Request, 166 Feme Covenant by Warranty in a Fine sur concessit, is bound in an
Action of Covenant, 129 Covenant where to be brought by Baron and Feme, 250
Covenants in a Deed of Separation between Baron and Feme, and for allowing
yearly Maintenance and Pleadings, 202 Costs. Vide Damages.
Coverture.
Of delivering Goods to a Feme Covert not knowing her to be so, 217 Coverture,
not to be determined by Affidavit, 332
Courtesy.
Tenant by Courtesy. The nature of this Estate, 70 Of what Estate a Man shall
be Tenant by the Courtesy or not, ibid. If one shall be Tenant by the Courtesy
of an Estate in suspense or not, ibid. In what case the husband shall be Tenant
by the Courtesy where the wife's Estate is defeasible by Condition, 72 Four
things belong to the Estate of Tenant by the Courtesy, 73 What Seisin of the
wife it must be that makes the husband Tenant by the Courtesy, 74 How a Man
shall be Tenant by the Courtesy in respect of Issue, and how he must plead the
having of Issue, 75
Custom.
Custom of London as to Goods how the wife may dispose of them, 54 Rationabili
part bonorum, according to the Custom of London, ibid. Cui in vita brought by
a Woman, 274
D
DAmages in Dower, 108 Where the husband shall recover Damages Sole, 335
Judgment that the Baron and Feme shall recover Damages, ibid.
Death.
Death after Verdict and before the day in Bank, it abates the Writ, 236
Debt.
Debt suspended, 225 Where Debt for Rent to be brought by Baron or Feme, or
both, 250 Of Baron and Feme's joining in Debt on Bond, 233, 255, 256 Debt
against Baron and Feme, how to be brought, 291, 292 Where Baron and Feme shall
join in Detinue, 268
Declaration.
Declaration of Uses on a Fine, 137 Declaration as to Wares taken up by the
wife, 217 Declaration on Devastavit against Baron and Feme Executrix, 227 Debt
by Baron and Feme on Bond made to the wife dum sola, how to declare, 254
Declaration in Trespass and Battery by Baron and Feme, 257, 258 Declaration in
Action against Baron and Feme for scandalous words, 284, 286 In Declaration he
says Baron and Feme were seized, and shows not how the Estate began; and he
need not, being but a Conveyance to an Action on the case, 313 Prescription
alleged in Baron, and Feme, 313 Averment of a Life, ibid. Averment that she is
a Feme Covert, 314
Deed.
What shall be said to be the Deed of the Baron and Feme, 164 One Deed cannot
enure from one by way of Interest, and from another by way of Estoppel, 252
Where a Descent cast during the Coverture shall toll the Entry of the wife, and
where not, 140 Where and to what purpose a Feme Covert shall be said a
Disseisoress without her proper Act or Entry, and where not, 144 Feme Covert
cannot make a Disseisin to the use of the husband, 145 Where the default of the
wife shall be the default of the husband, 301 Where the wife shall be received
on the husband's default, and e contra, 302
Discontinuance.
What Act of the husband was a Discontinuance of the wife's Land at Common Law,
Stat. 32 H. 8. c. 28. explained as to Discontinuance; in what cases the wife
may enter after the Discontinuance of the husband, 146 Discontinuance, what,
147 Discontinuance or not by the Agreement of the wife, 148
Divorce.
The nature of it, and what are good causes of Divorce, 336, 337 The several
kinds of Divorce, 337 What Divorces declare the Marriage void ab initio, ibid.
Of the Divorces causa Praecontractus, Frigiditatis, Affinitatis, Saevitiae,
which dissolve the Marriage a vinculo, 338 The consequence of a Divorce a Mensa
and Thoro, 340 Divorce pleaded, 323 By Divorce causa Praecontractus the first
Baron and Feme are complete Baron and Feme without other Solemnity, 338 If the
Parties divorced causa impotentis intermarry others, and have Issue, whether
the Issue are Bastards, 339 What Is a good ground to sue a Divorce causa
Saevitiae, 340 What Acts are done by the husband shall stand good
notwithstanding the Divorce, 341 Of Suits or Actions after Divorce, 342 Where
and in what cases notwithstanding a Divorce, the wife shall be endowed or not,
343 What Divorce shall bastardize the Issue or not, 344
Dower.
The nature of it, 78 Qualifications of the wife to enable her to Dower, ibid.
Of the Endowment of a wife de facto and de jure, 79 What Seisin the husband
must have to make the wife dowable, 29, 80 Of what Seisin of the husband the
wife shall not be endowed, 80 How she shall be endowed of an entire
Inheritance, 82 How she shall be endowed of improved Lands, 84 Of what Estate
the wife shall not be endowed, ibid. How she shall be endowed of Lands in
Mortgage, 87 For and in respect of what disability a woman shall not be
endowed, 89 Where the wife shall lose her Dower by the Attainder of her husband
or not, ibid. What acts of the wife shall bar her of her Dower, 90 What persons
may assign Dower or not, What Assignment of Dower is against Common Right, 94
What things may be assigned in lieu of Dower, ibid. Endowment by Meets and
Bounds. 95 Assignment of Dower to be made, 96 The Writ and Declaration in Dower
and Pleadings, 100, 101 What Pleas are good or not in bar of Dower, 101 What
Divorce is a good bar of Dower, 105 Judgment and Execution in Dower. 109, 110,
111
Devastavit.
Baron and Feme committed to the Fleet on Devastavit, 228 The husband charged
with a Devastavit of the Woods though no Assets come to his hands, ibid.
Devastavit returned against Baron and Feme, the Feme dies, the husband shall be
charged, 229
E.
Ejectment.
LEase of Ejectment by Baron and Feme, 177
Election.
Where it is at the Election of the husband to join the wife with him in
Actions, 244, 245 Election as to the woman's taking by Jointures or Dower, 123,
130 Elopement, 90
Emblements.
Where the wife shall have the Emblements, and where the husband, 174
Error.
Where Baron and Feme shall join in a Writ of Error or not, 268 Husband cannot
assign Error without the wife to reverse Outlawry against them, 269 Error may
be assigned that she was a Feme Covert at the time of the appearance, though
she appeared and pleaded as a Feme sole, 322 Writ of Error brought by all for
the Coverture of one, 331
Escape.
Where Baron and Feme shall join in Escape or not, 262 Debt on Escape against
Baron and Feme, 292 The Escape of the husband is the Escape of the wife, 308
Baron and Feme in Execution and the wife escapes, whether the Action lies
against the Sheriff, 334 Estoppel, 321 Where the Sheriff shall take advantage
of an Estoppel, 325
Execution.
Judgment and Execution in Dower, 111 Baron and Feme obtain Judgment in Debt in
the right of his wife, the wife dies, yet the husband shall have Execution on
this Judgment, and not the Administrator of the wife, 331 In what Cases a Feme
Covert may be taken in Execution or not, 331
Execution vide Administrator.
How a Feme Covert may make an Executor, and how she may be made Executrix, 221
If a Feme Covert dies intestate in what cases Administration shall be granted
of her Goods, 222 What things the Administratrix of the wife shall have, and
not the husband, ibid. Debt recovered by Baron and Feme Executrix, and they
have Judgment, the Feme dies, the Baron shall not have Execution. 223 Feme
Legatee and Executrix, ibid. What things Feme Covert Executrix may do without
her Husband, 224 Obligee makes the wife of one of the Obligors Executrix, Quid
operatur, 225 Obligor makes the Executrix of the Obligee his Executrix, Quid
operatur, ibid. Feme Executrix of the Debtee takes the Debtor to husband, Quid
operatur. ibid. Feme Executrix takes the Debtor to husband, Quid operatur,
ibid. Feme obligee takes the Obligor to husband. ibid. Executrix made diverse
Bonds to the Creditors of the Testator, and then marries, the husband may
release to the value of the Testators Goods. 226 Where the husband shall be
charged with the Waste of the wife Administratrix, vide Devastavit. Debt on
Bond by Baron and Feme Executrix, and they have Judgment, Feme dies, the
husband shall not have Execution, and why, 230 Actions brought by Baron and
Feme as Executor or Administrator, 231, 232
Extinguishment.
Where and by what means a Term is extinguishable, 49 Diversities between a
Feoffment and Bargain and Sale as to the Extinguishment of the Term of the
wife, 208 Extents of the wifes Term. ibid.
Exchange.
Of the husband's Exchange of the Land of the wife, and what shall be a good
confirmation of it by the wife, 167, 170 In Dower, 107 By Evidence of the wife
she and her husband were discharged of a Judgment. 326 Husband admitted to be a
witness and where not, 328, 329
F.
Feme Covert.
THE Nature of Coverture, 3 In what cases Feme Covert and Infant differ, 4 In
what case the Child may choose his own Father, 12 Privileges of a Feme Covert,
24 What privilege the wife shall have by reason of her husbands privilege in
Actions, 26 What the husband gains of the wifes Fee-simple by the
Intermarriage, 52
Forfeiture.
What Acts, Charges or Forefeitures of the husband shall bind the wife after
his death, Vide Charge, 58 What act of the husband amounts to a Forfeiture of
the wife's Land, 61 What acts of the husband amount to a Forfeiture of the
wife's Copyhold Estate, 194 Of a Feme sole Merchant, 270 Where a Feme Covert
may sue sole, 286 Of a Feme Coverts being a Purchaser, and how it shall be
good, 170 Feoffment by the husband of the wifes Land, 165 Feoffment of the
husband destroys a Contingent Use, ibid.
Fine.
The reason why a Feme Covert is bound by her Fine, 125 Of a Fine levied by a
Feme Covert as Feme Sole, 126 The operation of a Fine by Baron and Feme, 127
Stat. 32 H. 8. cap. 28. explained, ibid. Feme by Fine bars her self of a
possibility, 128 Where a Fine enures as a Release, 129 Feme Covert by a
warranty in a Fine sur concessit is bound in an Action of Covenant, ibid. Fine
by the wife docks a Trust, 131 Baron and Feme levy a Fine the Feme being within
age, the whole Fine shall be reversed and not quoad uxorem only, ibid. Entry of
the Kings-silver, 132, 133 Of Commissioners taking a Fine of a Feme Covert, 133
Where a Feme Covert shall be examined or not, 134 When and where a Feme Covert
shall be barred by Fine and Non-claim, 136 Declaration of Uses on a Fine, 136,
137 Where Baron and Feme shall join in a Forceable Entry, 268
G.
Guardian.
FEme Covert Infant levied a Fine, in Error the Court will not permit the
husband to disavow the Guardian, 132
Grant.
Where and in what cases the wifes Grant, if she join with her husband shall be
void or not, 167 Of Christian Names of Men and Women in Grants, 171 By Grant of
Omnia bona and catalla what passes, 232
I.
Indictment.
AGainst Baron and Feme, 300
Information.
Of Recusances, 229 Where and in what Cases wives are Indictable without their
husbands, 239
Infant.
Wherein Infant and Feme Cover differ, 4 The exact time for the Birth of an
Infant, 9 The Court is to judge of all the Infancy of a Feme Covert and not the
Jury, 123, 132
Ioyntures.
The nature and reason of them, 113 What Estates are Jointures within the Stat.
27 H. 8. c. 10. or not. 114 What is a good Jointure within the Stat. 11 H. 7.
c. 10. 117 What is a good Consideration within that Stat. 120 What Agreement or
Waver a Woman may make as to her Jointure, 123 Pleadings as to Jointure, 123,
124 Where Baron and Feme shall be Joint Tenants, or take by Moyeties or
Intierties. 158 What amounts to a severance of the Jointure. 163
Ioinder in Action.
Where and in what Action Baron and Feme shall join or not. 241 Set out in 4 or
5 Rules. 242, 244 In what Cases the Husband only shall have the Action, ibid
Judgment.
In Dower, 108 Judgment in case for Scandalous words brought by Baron and Feme,
284 Judgment in Trespass against Baron and Feme, quod capiantur, where good or
not. 294 By Evidence of the wife she and her husband were discharged of a
Judgment. 328 Where Judgment against Baron and Feme shall bind the husband
surviving or not, 330 Where the husband shall be charged with a Devastavit,
and so shall the wife if she survive, 331 Debt or Bond against Baron and Feme
and Judgment; the wife dies, yet the husband shall be charged, 331 If a Feme
die after a Verdict, no Judgment can be given against the husband, 332 In
Action against Baron and Feme, where Judgment shall be quod capiantur. 333
Where Baron and Feme must be both in misericordia. 334
L.
Lease, Vide. Term.
LEase by the husband of the wives Land, and how and wherein it shall bind the
wife or not, 172 Wherein a Lease enures by way of Interest and not by way of
Estoppel. 173 Of Lease for Lives made by Baron and Feme, and what shall be a
good Lease warranted by Stat. 32 H. 8. c. 28. and the Qualifications of such
Leases to bring them within the Statute, 173, 174 What Acceptance of the
husband shall affirm avoidable Lease, 176 Provisoes and Powers to make Leases,
Vide Proviso. Lease of Ejectment by Baron and Feme, 177 Leases for years made
to Baron and Feme. 178 Diversity between a Lease for Life and a Lease for Years
made to a Feme Covert, 178 When the husband shall be Assignee to the wife,
ibid. When an Estate made to a Feem Covert de novo shall vest and when a new
Lease made to a Feme who was Lessee before, 179 Lease for Life made to Baron
and Feme. ibid Lease to Baron and Feme for their Lives, the remainder to the
Survivor of them for Years, the husbands grants over the term for Years and
dies, the wife shall have it, as if the remainder had been to the Executors of
the Survivor, ibid. How if the remainder had been to the Heirs of the Survivor,
ibid. Lease for Life made by Baron and Feme. 180
Livery.
Diversity where Livery is made by the lessor in person, and where by Letter of
Attorney, 180 Livery within the view not revoked by Mortgagor, 44
Legacy.
Of a Feme Coverts assent to a Legacy, 169, 170 What is a good assent or claim
as Executrix or as Legatee. 235
M.
Marriage.
WHen the Solemnization of Marriage in the Church began. 2 Marriage out of the
Canonical Hours, and in a public House late at night; good if done by one in
Orders, 3 Libel for marrying without License, ibid. Of change of Name by
Marriage, 5, 6 Time of Agreement or Disagreement to the Marriage when they
Marry, infra annos nubiles. 29 What Marriages are within the Levitical Degrees
or not, 31 Whether if Marriage be within the Levitical degrees or not, be
determinable at Law or not, 34 Diversity between a Marriage in Right and a
Marriage in possession, or de facto, and the Consequence thereof in Pleading,
39 What alterations are made by the Intermarriage: as to Name, as to
alteration of Estates: as to Lease or Leases, Actions, vide Tit. Actions, 43
Where and in what Cases Marriage shall amount to a Countermand, Revocation,
Release, Suspension, or Extinguishment, 45, 46, 47, 48 If a Marriage be a
vinculo, of Livery, of Attornment, of a Will, of an Exchange, or of
Arbitrament, or Copyhold, 45, 46
Mortgage.
How a Woman shall be endowed in Law of Lands Mortgaged. 87 What Conditions
in Marriages shall survive to the Husband or not, 207 If the Mortgage of the
wives Term does amount to a disposition in Law, 208 Of a Feme Sole Merchant,
270 Endowment by Metes and Bonds, 95 Suit against a Woman for exercising the
Trade of Midwife, 273 Where the Baron and Feme shall take by Moyeties and
where by Intierties, Vide Jointure.
N.
OF Christian Names of Men and Women in Grants, 171
O.
Outlawry.
BY the Outlawry of the husband the wives Term is a gift in Law, 209 By
Outlawry the husband forfeits nothing of the Goods which the wife had as
Executrix. 231 Latitat against J. S. and his wife, the wife was arrested, but
the husband could not be taken; nothing can be done in this Case, without Bail
be put in by the husband, and the wife was discharged, but the Remedy as by
Outlawry, 305 But some say she shall lie in Prison till the husband appear for
her, ibid. In process of Outlawry Bail refused for the Contempt of the wife,
308 Process against them till exigent, no supersedeas shall be received for the
husband without the wife, 209 Exceptions to avoid an Outlawry of Baron and
Feme, 310 She may not plead to Outlawry without her husband, 311 Outlawry
pleaded, 324
P.
PArtus sequitur Ventrem; where the Rule holds not, 21 Praraphernalia what, 65
Perjury.
Baron and Feme convict of Perjury, 351
Pleading.
How a Man must plead the having of Issue to entitle him to be tenant by the
Courtesy, 75, 76 Pleadings in Dower, 101 Pleadings as to Jointures, 123 Plea in
Abatement by Marriage or Death, 335 Where Non est factum may be pleaded to a
Bond, 254 Pleadings in Appeal, 277 The wife cannot plead by her self, 294 Where
the wife shall plead and have the same advantage in Pleading, as if she were a
Feme sole, 315 Of the wife's Pleading without the husband, 315, 316 Of Pleading
Coverture, 317 Of the Plea, of sola and inupta, 318 Why Feme Covert may plead
Non est factum, and so cannot Infant, ibid. Conclusion of Pleas, ibid. Modo and
forma, the effect of it in Pleading, 321
Plea by Estoppel, 329 Nil detinet pleaded to Action for Arrears of Rent, 322
Marriage averred, ibid. Release pleaded in Assumpsit, 323 Divorce pleaded, 323
324 Outlawry pleaded. 324 Where the Parol shall demur for the Nonage of the
wife or not, 325 Pleadings in Divorce, 343
Possibilities.
Possibilities not vested in the husband by Intermarriage, 206 Poligamy, 346 Of
Precontract and the Effect of it in the Civil Law, 36
Prescription.
Prescription for Common in jure uxoris, 266 Prescription alleged in Baron and
Feme, 313
Privileges.
Privileges of a Feme Covert, 24 Privileges in Suits, 26 Husband may not have
Privilege as Attorney when Action is brought against him and his wife, 308
Diversity between Property in personal Goods, and a bare possession, 51
Provisoes and Powers to make Leases, 175, 177 Prohibition not to trust his
wife, the force of it, 218
Q.
Quare Impedit.
WHether Baron and Feme shall join, 279
Queen.
How she is an exempt person from the King, 22 Queen Consort or Queen Dowager
in case of Treason how to be tried, 23 The Penalty for any to marry the Queen
Dowager without the King's License, ibid. Privilege of the Queen's Tenants, 24
R.
Recovery Common.
WHether a Feme Covert to be exaimned in a Recovery, 138 The Baron only is
vouched, Quid operatur, 139 How a Feme Covert may be Tenant to a Praecipe, 138
Baron and Feme suffer a Recovery as Vouchees, it is a Forfeiture, 140 The wife
within age in a Common Recovery, how to appear, ibid. Recovery by default, 141
Custom of London as to Recoveries, ibid.
Recusancy.
Information of Recusancy against Baron and Feme, 299
Release.
What things of the husband the wife may release or discharge or not, 56
Release pleaded in Assumpsit, 323 Promise cannot be released till it come in
Esse, 323 Release of the husband of the wife's Right, 169 Release of Money to be
paid after the wife's decease, not good, ibid.
Remitter.
The nature and reason of Remitter, 151 What act shall make a Remitter to the
wife, 152 Remitter wrought by a voidable Estate, 183 Remitter to Baron and Feme
maugre the husband, ibid. Remainder expectant on Estate for Life works no
Remitter, 154 Remainders remitted, ibid. Remitter by Acceptance, 155 Where the
wife being remitted during the Coverture, may after the death of her husband
wave her Remitter, and where not, 185 Where the Feme shall be in her Remitter
nolens volens, 156 No disagreement of the husband shall divest the Remitter,
871
Rent.
Rent not to be reserved to a Stranger, 171 The husband grants a Rent out of
the wife's Term, and dies; if the wife shall hold it discharged, and why, 172
What Arrears of Rent the Stat. 32 H. c. 37. gives the husband power to
receive, 171 Feme Covert receives the Rents, the Terretenants not having notice
of the Coverture; they must be paid again to the husband, 172 Where the
husband shall be charged with the Arrears of the Rent, 173 Avowry for Rent out
of the wife's Land, how to be brought, 174 Where the Executor of the husband
shall have the Rent, and not the wife, ibid. Debt for Rent against Baron and
Feme, 272 In Replevin, if the husband may avow Sole for the Rent, 299
Request.
What is not a reasonable Request to levy a Fine, 133 Where Baron and Feme
shall join in Rescous, 267 Where the wife shall be received upon the husband's
default, and e contra, 302
S
Seisin.
SEisin in Deed and in Law, 74 What Seisin of the wife it must be which makes
the husband Tenant to the Courtesy, ibid. In what Cases a Man shall be Tenant
by the Courtesy of a Seisin in Law, ibid.
Separate Maintenanc.
Of Separate Maintenance and Disposition of the wife, 199 Separate Maintenance
on a Proviso, and the Pleadings, 200 Money saved by the wife out of her
Separate Maintenance, is to be disposed of by her, 202
Separation.
Covenants in a Deed of Separation between Baron and Feme, and for Allowance of
Yearly Maintetenance, and Pleadings thereon, 202, 203
Solvendo.
Solvendo in a Grant, how to enure, 172
Statute.
Stat. 27 H. 8. Of Jointures explained, 114 Stat. 32 H. 8. 28. explained, 146,
147, 182 Stat. 13 El. c. 2. explained. Stat. 1 Jac. c. 11. Of Stealing Women,
345 Stat. 39 El. c. 8. Concerning Rape, 351, 348, 349. Stat. 5 El. c. 9. For
Non-appearing ad Testificandum, 345 Where the husband must be joined with the
wife in Offenses against a Statute Law, and where not, 299 All Statutes which
provide for an actual Wrong, a Feme Covert shall be intended within them, 352
Spoliation.
Prohibition against a Spoliation, 229
Surrender. Vide Copyhold.
Surrender, what. Surrender by the husband of the wife's Land, how it operates,
168 What shall amount to a Surrender, ibid.
T
Term. Vide Lease.
WHat power the husband has over the wife's Term, 204 What amounts to a
Disposition of the wife's Term by the husband, so as to vest it in his
Executors and Administrators, 204, 205 Term in Interest though not in
Possession, 205 Where the wife's Term vests in the husband by Payment of Debts,
212 What shall amount to a Forfeiture of the wife's Term, or not, 212, 213
Trust.
What Trusts of the wife the husband shall dispose, or not, 209 Fine by the
wife docks a Trust, 131 The husband cannot grant or charge the Term of the wife
in Trust, 210 The husband cannot forfeit the wife's Term in Trust for Outlawry
or Felony, ibid. Annuities purchased in Trust for the wife, yet the Arrears
decreed to the husband, 212
Traverse.
Traverse where not allowable, 324
Trespass.
Where in Trespass of Battery the Baron and Feme shall join, or not; and the
Declaration how to be in such case, 276, 277 Of Trespass done to the Estate and
Freehold of the wife; how they shall join in Action, 260 Trespass brought again
Baron and Feme, 293
Trover.
Trover against Baron and Feme, and Declaration, 288, 289
Trial.
Trial of a Bastard, where and how, 17 Where it shall be by the Bishop's
Certificate, and where in Pais, 36 If the Issue be whether a Feme Sole or
Covert, where to be tried, ibid. The Issue n'unque accouple, etc. where to be
tried, 389 The Form of the Bishop's Certificate, 41, 42 Trial in Appeal, 229
Death of the husband, where triable and how.
Tithes.
In Debt for Tithes Baron and Feme may join, 249
V
VErdict on Trespass and Assault by Baron and Feme, 287, 260 Verdict in Case
against Baron and Feme, 285
Voucher.
Where a Feme shall Vouch her husband, 158 Writ de Ventre Inspiciendo. Vide
Writ.
W
Wager.
WAger of Law by Baron and Feme, 303
Warranty.
Feme Covert by Warranty in a Fine sur concessit, is bound in an Action of
Covenant, 129 Where a Warranty descending on an Infant, or a Feme Covert, shall
be a Bar or not, 157
Waste. Vide Devastavit.
Feme Copyholder takes husband who commits Waste, this shall bind the wife, 196
Of Baron and Feme joining in Action of Waste, 253 Feme Sole commits Waste, and
then marries, the Writ shall be, the Woman while Sole committed the Waste, 297
Husband seized for Life of the wife, and in her Right does waste, and after the
wife dies, no Action of waste lies against the husband in the Tenuit, 296
Will.
If a Will be countermanded by the Intermarriage, 54 Jointures devised by
Will, 122 How and in what Cases a Feme Covert may make a Will, 166 What a
Woman may not devise without the Consent of her husband, ibid. Of Declaration
made by a Feme Covert in nature of a Will, 167 Cases of the husband's being
bound to permit his wife to make a Will, 168, 169 Devises to the wife by the
husband and others, and the Construction of such Will, 184, 185 Devise by
Implication, 185 If the husband may devise the Term made to him and his wife,
170 Where the husband may plead as a Devise to him Sole, 324
Words.
Action for Scandalous Words, 280
Writ.
Writ de Ventre Inspiciendo; the Form of the Petition for such Writ, 7, 8
Writ de Ventre Inspiciendo in case of a widow, and in case of a wife, 11
FINIS.

