THE REMAINS OF Mr. Joseph Barrett Son of the Reverend Mr. JOHN BARRETT
Minister of the Gospel AT NOTTINGHAM. BEING The Second PART taken out of an
Exact DIARY written by his own Hand.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, and are to be Sold by him at the Bible and
Three Crowns in Cheapside, and John Richards at Nottingham. 1700.

TO THE READER.
IF you have conversed with the Former Volumn of this eminently holy Man's
Papers, we reckon, we need do no more to envite you to a serious delightful
Perusal of this Second, then to assure You, that they are more of Mr. Joseph
Barrett's Papers, and indeed we scarce need to certify that neither, themselves
do testify it, they have the same Rich Vein of more then ordinary
Judiciousness, Savouringness and Spirituality running through and sparkling in
them as did in the Former, the same marks of eminent Impresses and large
Supplies of God's Spirit, and the same signs of a Man very much in Communion
with God, and inflamed with Love to and Zeal for God, of one much in Heaven
during the little time he was here on Earth, his True, and somewhat peculiar
Character.

Which makes it not strange at all that he was so soon removed to Heaven, the
place his Heart was so much in, and he drove such a great Trade with, and that
he was so soon removed from Earth a place so grievous to him, by reason of
its-aboundings Iniquity, and withheld and which vexed his Righteous Soul from
day to day, in seeing and hearing its ungodly Deeds; nothing revived him more
than the Success of his Projects for Christ and Souls.

And in imitation of his Blessed Master (whom we never find weeping for any of
his own, though peculiarly heavy Affliction and sore Sufferings, but only for
either the Sins or Calamities of others) nothing grieved him more than to see
the hardness of Men's Hearts, their opposition to the Blessed Jesus, and the
sad prospect this gave of Judgment upon Them and the Nation. If an ill Spirit
broke out with any Prevalence, and the Interest of Religion seemed to give
ground; if any Adventure of Prayer, many of which he made, and put others upon
making, and blessed be God with good Success; but if at any time, any such
Adventure did not make the return he hoped for, how near did it go to his
Heart, out of his Apprehension of God's Displeasure, and fear of this precious
Duty of Prayer come into Discredit: This grived him much more than the failure
of any the greatest Adventurers in the Business of his secular Calling.
Apprehesions of God's being provoked and displeased, and fears of the
Consequences of it, sat heavy, made deep Impressions upon the Spirit of this
Josiah, whose Heart through Grace was peculialy soft and tender; the Zeal of
God's house did eat him up.

Several things of his, and (upon many Accounts we have reason to conclude)
valuable ones, are locked up from being publicly useful, by being written in
Characters: But blessed be God that so ordered it, that so much of the good
Treasure of this Scribe instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven, this well
furnished Householder is left unlocked, and stands open for public Use. The
things this Second Volumn consists of, we shall not stay you in giving you our
Judgments particularly of them; but leave you to make a Judgment of them your
Selves, when you have perused them. Only it may not be amiss to give some brief
Account of the nature and method of those Conferences, that one of these Tracts
has relation to. The Reader therefore is desired to take Notice. That in the
Congregation (of which this Holy Man was a Member,) there is a meeting of
several Christians once a Week from Five to Seven of the Clock at Night, for
mutual Edification, which is spent only in Prayer, repeating of Sermons, and
singing of Psams, on those Nights when the Ministers are not present. But
usually once in a Month the Ministers are there, and then some practical
Question or Case of Conscience is propounded and discoursed of, and every Man
present has liberty to propound his own Thoughts, and speak his own
Experience. Prayer begin and together with a Psalm or Spiritual Hymn, closes
the Exercise: The Minister opens the Question, and in the Close sums up the
substance of what has been discoursed of. These meetings this good Man was a
great Lover and Promoter of, yet such was his great Modesty, that be seldom
spoke himself, but wrote his Thought and put them into a Friends hands (with a
charge of privacy as to the Author) who read them toward the close of the
Exercise: Having thus acquainted you with what we think necessary, in relation
to these Papers, we recommend them to your serious powerful Perusal, you and
them to the Blessing of the God of all Grace, and our Selves to your Prayers,
who desire help through your Prayers, and the supply of the Spirit, he obtain
help to be

The furtherers of your Faith, and helpers of your Joy in the Lord; John
Whitlock, Jo. Whitlock Junior.
August, 22. 1699.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE first Account of Mr. Joseph Barrett's Life printed, contains Eight
Chapters, which is in several Hands single; therefore these his Remains begins
Chapter the Ninth.

BOOKS Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, the lower End
of Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel.
Books written by the Reverend Mr. J. How.
OF Thoughtfulness for the Morrow. With an Appendix concerning the immoderate
Desire of foreknowing things to come.

Of Charity, in reference to other Men's Sins.

A Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Richard Adams, M. A. Sometime Fellow of
Brazen-Nose College in Oxford.

The Redeemer's Tears wept over lost Souls: In a Treatise on Luke 19.41, 42.
With an Appendix, wherein somewhat is occasionally discoursed, concerning the
Sin against the Holy Ghost, and how God is said to will the Salvation of them
that perish.

A Sermon directing what we are to do after a strict Enquiry, whether or no we
truly love God.

A Funeral Sermon for Mrs. Esther Sampson, the late Wife of Hen. Sampson,
Doctor of Physic, who died Nov. 24. 1689.

The Carnality of Religious Contention. In two Sermons, preached at the
Merchants Lecture in Broadstreet.

A Sermon for Reformation of Manners.

A Sermon preached on the Day of Thanksgiving, December. 2. 1697. To which is
perfix'd Dr. Bates's Congratulatory Speech to the KING.

A Sermon on the much lamented Death of the Reverend William Bates, D. D.

The Redeemers Dominion over the Invisible World, being a Discourse on the
Funeral of Mr. Houghton.

A Sermon at Mr. Matthew Meads Funeral.

CHAP. IX.
QUESTION I. How may a man know that he is led, or acted by the Spirit of God?
BEfore I answer directly, I beg leave to lay down a few things, which I think
may tend a little to clear the question, and to prevent Mistakes about it; As,

1. That there must be a principial of Spiritual Life infused into the Soul in
the Work of Regeneration, before a Man can be said to be lead by the Spirit. By
Nature we are all Men and Women of another Spirit, lead and acted by that
contrary Spirit which works in the Children of Disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. Romans
8.14. For as many as are lead by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God,
Gal. 5.25. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit; There must
be Spiritual Life before there can be any Spiritual Motion.

2. That they Regenerate themselves though they are renewed in every part, yet
they are renewed but in part; They have in them while they are in this Life,
Flesh as well as Spirit; and while we have Sin in us, it will be acting its
Part, the flesh will be lusting against the Spirit; Romans 7.21. I find then a
Law that when I would do good, evil is present with me, Gal. 5.17. For the
Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the stesh; and these
are contrary the one unto the other, so that ye cannot do the things that ye
would.

3. That as men easily may, so they are very prone to mistake in this Point.

1. Bad Men; Saul when in his persecuting Course, before his Conversion, he
verily thought that he was in the way of his duty, and so following the Motions
of Gods Spirit, Act. 26.9. But we see how his Mind was changed afterward; that
which before he took for Holy Zeal, a Fruit of the Spirit, he then saw to be no
better than exceeding madness.

2. Good Men; when they seriously consider what depends upon this Point; Romans
8.9. Now if any Man has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, v. 13.
For if ye live after the Flesh, ye shall dye: And when they think of the
deceitfulness of their own hearts, Jer. 17.9. The heart is deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked, who can know it. And when they further consider
how prevalent the remaining fleshly interest is in their hearts and lives, this
makes many a gracious Soul tremble when it comes to decide the Point, and
sometimes to bring in a false Judgment against it self, unless that blessed
Spirit shine upon it.

4. That mistakes here are very dangerous and mischievous; That Man who thinks
he has, and is lead by the Spirit, and is not, woe to him, for he is a lost
Man, if he find not out his mistake before Death and Judgment undeceive him.

And then a mistake on the other hand, will cause the poor Soul to drive on but
heavily and uncomfortably in the way of its duty, though its Estate in the main
may be safe? Have none of us cause to know the Heart of such in this matter?
Now to the Case propounded I would answer in general thus.

I think that Man, and he alone is lead by the Spirit, the habitual and
prevailing bent of whose Heart, the main Scope and drift of whose Life is
Spiritual. As for particular marks, I shall content my self with a very few,
which I take to be safe and scriptural; so,

1. Such as are lead by the Spirit of God, they are by him free from the ruling
Power of the Flesh, Romans 8.1, 2. There is therefore now no Condemnation to them
who are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit;
For the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the
Law of Sin and Death. Gal. 5.16. This I say then, walk in the Spirit, and ye
shall not fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh; Walking after the Spirit, and walking
after the Flesh are directly opposed in Scripture: such, they sin still; alas,
that is a sad truth which cannot be denied, for there is not a just man upon
earth that does good and sins not, Ecl. 7.20. yet he that is born of God, he
does not, he cannot commit Sin; Joh. 1.3, 9. He lives not in the ruling Love
and practice of Sin; He can in some Measure say what the Apostle [ For that
which I do I allow not, for that which I would that do I not, but what I hate
that do I, Romans 7.15.

2. They are such as have solemnly taken the holy Spirit for their Guide, and
given up themselves to his Conduct; They were baptized into his Name, Mat.
28.19. And every time they do renew the Covenant, they do sincerely and afresh
renew their Obligations to obey and follow him. Before Conversion they rejected
him, his Counsels and Ways, and were only for following the Inclinations of
their own evil Hearts, and the Course of this World: But now they have made a
better choice; They desire he would teach, lead and guide them; such
Expressions are very frequent; And they have an Ear to hear, and an Heart to
follow him; Joh. 10.3, 4. -- And the Sheep hear his Voice, and he calls his
own Sheep by Name, and he leads them out; and when he puts forth his own
Sheep, he goes before them, and the Sheep follow him, for they know his Voice;
By the Spirit it is that great Shep-heard teaches his Sheep to know his Voice,
by him he calls them both to, and after him.

3. They are such as have chosen the Word of God for their Rule; In the Word it
is that the Spirit Speaks to the Churches, Rev. 2.7. In the Word he has
chalked out the Paths of Holiness, wherein he leads such as he has made
willing to follow him.

And they pray with David, [ Lord teach me thy Statutes, Psalm. 119.12. Let me
not wander from thy Commandments; Indeed the Flesh will be resisting and
rebelling, endeavoring to stop them in, or to turn them out of the way, which
will cause them to take many a false Step; But yet, as Romans 7.22. They delight
in the Law of God after the inward Man: In the bent of their renewed Mind and
will they delight in it, and desire to obey it perfectly, and allow not
themselves in the breach of any part thereof.

4. Such as are lead by the Spirit, their Motion is free and voluntary, not by
force and constraint; They are lead, not haled or driven; Joh. 10.3, 4. He
calls them by Name, and leads them out, and goes before them, and they
follow him; They are a willing People, Psalm. 110.3. 1 Cor. 4. Draw me, and we
will run after thee; Indeed a Partical. Unwillingness will be found in the best
while here; while we have Flesh in us, it will be drawing another way; But yet,
Holiness is this Man's choice; And when he is in a holy Frame and Course, he is
as in his Element: The habitual prevailing bent of his Heart is for a Course of
Holiness, and this appears in the main Scope and drift of his Life; and this I
think does denominate us what we are, and that therefore by it we may safely
judge of our selves.

QUESTION II. How may we come to find out and know what are our special sins,
and what means are to be used for the Mortification of them?
The question before us Consists of two Parts.

1. How may we come to find out and know what are our special Sins? 2. What
means are to be used for the Mortification of them?
As to the former of these, I shall give you my poor thoughts thus.

Though we have in our Hearts by Nature that which is the Seed and Principle of
all Sin, and though the unregenerate are under the Power and the Dominion of
every Lust, yet they, yea and the godly themselves, who sincerely desire and
endeavor to disown and renounce all Sin, yet even they as well as the former
have some one sin or more which may in a peculiar manner be called their
iniquity, their special sin; And in order to the discovery what this sin, or
sins are, I think,

1. Our work lies with God; and,

2 With our own Hearts and Consciences; and so, 1. We must be very sincere and
impornate with God in Prayer, that he would please to discover and make them
known unto us; The heart is deep, the Deceitfulness and Wickedness of it
exceeding great, who can know it? Jer. 17.9. We are naturally prone more easily
to spy out Faults in others then in our selves, and the great Traitor (our
special sin) lies closest of all, and while the Devil and our Flesh can hinder
it, we shall not find him out: And therefore we have need to pray with Job, 13.
chap. 23. Make me to know my Transgression and my Sin.

2. When this is done, we must seriously endeavor to bring our Hearts to the
test, by some such Questions as these.

1. What Sins are they that we are most strongly inclined unto, and of all
others most loath to leave or part with, our right Eye, and right Hand sins,
these are our spiritual Sins, Mat. 5.29, 30. The young Man that came to our
Lord, Mat. 19. When he brought him to that trying Point about his Master Sin,
which appears to be coveteousness or worldliness, the news of parting with that
makes him go away sorrowful, he rather choosing to take his leave of an only
Savior.

2. What sins are they that we are most frequently and violently tempted to,
the Temptations unto which we have least Power to resist, and so consequently
are oftest foiled by? The Devil studies this Point more (I am afraid) then many
of us do, I mean it mostly of my self; and when he has by diligent Observation
found out which way our Inclinations carry us most strongly, he suits his baits
thereto; And if we observe, we shall find his strongest batteries and fiercest
Assaults to be on this our blind, our weakest side; and so we may observe, that
in these Assaults we ordinarily come off worst, many times halting, if
sometimes we get not broken bones; methinks this head is clear in it self.

3. What Sins are they which we find our Hearts most prone to think of, even
when outward Objects are not before us, to prompt us to such thoughts? What
Sins are they that the thoughts that come most freely and immediately from our
Hearts are employed about? Sometimes these Sins will appear at the Mouth (For
out of the abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks,) Mat. 12.34. And as one
of Jobs Friends, charge him. [Thy mouth utters thine iniquity.] But I think
this is a more certain and constant Sign; [For as a man thinks in his heart,
even so is he.]

4. What Sins are they that we find our selves prone to entertain in our
Thoughts, with greatest Pleasure and Delight?

What sin is it that we are apt to conceive the greatest Sweetness in? we may
mark him out, or that is he; Though sin is an evil and bitter thing in it self,
and in its Effects, and though it be so to the real apprehension of a Sincere
Heart, yet in spite of it, the Flesh will be contradicting it herein,
especially in relation to its great Master Lust.

5. What Sins are they that we are prone to make most Provision for, that we
may fulfill the Desires and Lusts thereof? Though others will be craving, and e're
while crying feed me, and feed me, yet if we observe, we shall find we have the
most frequent, impetuous, imperious calls from our Master Sins; The Flesh will
be from time to time prompting us most of all to plot and contrive and drudge
for them; These will crave and expect the largest allowance, or Benjamins Mess,
and will be most unwearied and impudent in it.

6. What Sins are they which Conscience is want to give us the severest Checks
for, when it is at at any time soundly awakened either by the Ministry of the
Word, or under some smart Affliction; Conscience will speak and strike home at
such a time, and then it is most likely to hit upon the right vein; Act. 2.37.
Genesis 42.21. And they said one to another, we are verily guilty concerning our
Brother, in that we saw the anguish of his Soul, when he besought us, and we
would not here: therefore is this distress come upon us.

Now to the second part of the question, which indeed contains in it the harder
part of our work.

2. Having found out what are our special Sins, what means are to be used for
the Mortification of them.

1. Prayer is one Special means to be improved here; whatever spiritual work we
take in hand, one great End of it lies with God; And a Christian will fight
best upon his Knees; Hereby we may engage God and his sufficient grace on our
side, and so we may groundedly hope for Victory; we have the Apostle Paul's
course and success here, 1 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9.

But 1. We must see that in our Confessions here, we be particular, full, free
and open hearted with God; we must open our wound if we would have cure; while
we are for hiding and concealing them nothing will be done, as it thereby
appears we have no mind it should.

2. We must see we lay the greatest load of Sorrow upon them, and thereby
endeavor to get them more imbittered to us.

3. We must see we be very sincere and very fervent in our desires after that
Grace which alone can enable us to do the work; they will not regard the
biggest, the hardest Words that we can give them, and they would but make a
mock at such striplings as we are, if we take the Field without our Captain; if
ever we give them any killing blow, it must be by God's strengthening our Arm;
and therefore we must not Pray as if we feared least the Lord should take us at
our word, or least he should do it too soon, or like those that are indifferent
in the Matter, seeing if they die not by our hands, our life must go for their
life.

2. We should improve the Word of God here, which is the Sword of the Spirit,
turning the Edge the Point of it against our special Sins; in some Sense we may
allude to the King of Syria's Charge to his Officers, 1 King. 22.31. Fight
neither with small nor great, save only with these princely Lusts; I mean, that
we make it our particular Care both in the reading and hearing of the Word,
especially to observe, lay up, and apply home to our selves those Commands,
Reproofs, Promises and Threatenings which have a peculiar relation to our
special Sins; could we but rightly manage this weapon, it would do great
execution.

3. We should dilligently improve our covenant Transactions with God this way.
And 1. Our Baptism; in that Ordinance by the Hands of our Parents we took the
Lord's listing Money, whereby we were engaged to Fight against all his Enemies,
but especially against these his chief Competitors and grand Rebels: And this
Act of our Parents for us, we have since solemnly made our own, or at least
ought to have done it. 2. Such of us as have been made partakers of that
precious Ordinance of the Lord's Supper, we both may and ought especially to
improve it this way; O the Blood of Christ, nothing like it for the killing of
a Lust; we may say of it as David of Goliah's Sword, 1 Samuel 21.9. There is none
like that, give it me; this is a proved tried weapon.

3. When we do at any time afresh renew our Covenant with God, either in that
Ordinance, or upon other Occasions, we should do it with a special Eye to these
our special Sins. And that,

1. By laboring here especially to lay hold on, plead and improve the Covenant
on God's part; one main branch of the Covenant is, that he will subdue our
iniquity, Mic. 7.19. Lord, let these epecially feel the Weight of thine Hand!

2. By laying our selves under particular fresh and strong Engagements against
them; we shall find we need the most strong and twisted Cords, when we would
bind these Sampson Lusts.

4. We must fix and set our Resolutions as against all Sin in General, so
against these in special; as a good Soldier resolves either to win the Field,
or lay his Bones there, so we should be at a Point with them; but while we are
wavering and halting between two Opinions, there is no hope we should make any
work of it.

5. We must be careful we make no provision for them, and so as much as
possibly we can, avoid those things which we have found to be occasions of, or
temptations to them; and by this means endeavor to ruin and starve them out;
we must withdraw, withold the Fuel, if we would have the Fire out.

6. Here we must be most strict and constant in our watch; here it is that our
greatest Danger lies; here we are in most danger of being betrayed, here Satan
is most likely to make his Breach: And if we be careless and secure here, we
shall certainly be loosing ground; though we should be no where secure, because
no where out of Danger, yet we should set the strongest Guard and strictest
Watch at the weakest Part of our Wall.

7. We must labor to grow in all Grace, but above all in those that are most
directly opposite unto our special Sins; we should desire and labor hard for
some peculiar Eminency in those Graces, and could we but attain this, it would
prove an excellent Means; for this is certain, as Grace gets up, Sin must down;
as in Nature, contraries will expel each other, so it is here, the more we grow
in humility, the more that Pride will be laid in the dust; the same we may say
of any other Sin: Can none of us set to our Probatum est.

8. If ordinary Means fail, we must then betake our selves to extraordinary, I
mean to solemn Fasting and Prayer; as our Lord said of that Devil the Disciples
could not Cast-out, Math. 17.21. This kind goes not out but by fasting and
prayer, so (as some of our beloved Ministers have observed) there are some
Lusts that will not otherwise be Cast-out.

Now could we but thus do, and after all, humbly and believingly depend upon
the free and sovereign Grace of God in Christ; we might verily hope that these
Goliah's (how much soever they may have defied us hitherto) should not be able
to stand before us.

3. What Considerations should move us to endeavor the Mortification of them?
Answ.

1. The Lord does indispensibly require it, Col. 3.5. Mortify therefore your
members which are upon the earth --. This with other the like Scripture
precepts are especially applicable here; not a limb of the old Man, that by the
Lord's leave should be spared, but especially we should lay at his Heart, at
those Parts and Members of him where his life and strength mainly lies [put
away (says Samuel) the strange God's and Astaroth]; it is probable that was
one of their chief and most provoking Idols, and therefore named in particular.
And I think one may safely say, That Man who does not sincerely desire and
endeavor in Obedience to such Commands, the Mortification of his special Sins,
the putting away of his Astaroth, he does not, nor can he be said sincerely to
obey them as to any of the rest.

2. Though a single Command from God, be enough to make this or any other thing
our indispensible Duty, yet here we are under other as strong Ties and
Obligations as can be imagined; we are the Lord's by manifold Right; how many
things he has to ground a most just and unquestionable claim to us and our
service upon? And farther, we are his by our own (and I hope many of us may say
sincere and hearty) Consent; we have sworn unto the Lord, and may not go back;
now it is a thing in it self impossible that we should at the same time
habitually and prevailingly love and serve God and Sin too; no Man can Serve
two Master's so contrary; and therefore we must endeavor the Mortification of
them, as we would not be guilty of the most horrid Perfidiousness, as well as
Disloyalty and Rebellion, by siding with these Tyrannical Usurpers (which as
such we have at least in pretense renounced) against him that is our most
rightful, gracious and solemnly avowed Sovereign Lord.

3. Without this we can have no clear sound and comfortable Evidence of the
sincerity and integrity of our Hearts; this seems clearly intimated, Psalm.
18.23. I was also upright before him, and I kept my self from mine iniquity;
and it is a thing very clear in it self, for that Opposition against Sin which
is right, it is and must be against Sin as it is Sin, that is, as it is so
directly contrary to the most holy Nature, Will and Law of God, and so directly
opposite to his Glory; and so consequently it must be against all Sin, and
especially against our special Sins: and therefore we must endeavor the
Mortification of these, or in vain we hope for any well grounded Peace or
comfortable assurance.

4. These are the main Obstructers of our growth and progress in Grace and
Holiness; these are the Chief of those suckers and luxurious Branches we have
been told of so frequently of late; as a prevailing ill Humor in our Bodies,
so are these in our Souls; whatever else we do in Religion, all will prove but
to little purpose, we must never think to be any body for Christians, while we
suffer these to Lord it over us: The Devil knows this well enough, and so he
will give us leave to do almost any thing else, while we will but keep far
enough from these, but touch these; and we touch the Apple of his Eye, he
cannot endure it, knowing that if we do it in good earnest, his Interest in us
is then like to go down apace; as ever we desire to be thriving Christians, we
must endeavor to get rid of these.

5. These Sins of ours slew our Lord Jesus Christ, and then surely if we let
these go, if we let these live, we are not Jesus his Friends; this should be a
very moving Consideration to us; the pardon of any one of our Sins could not
have been obtained, but at the expense of that precious Blood of his; and if we
may suppose that some of our Sins gave him our dearest Lord a deeper Wound, a
Sore or Bruise, then others of them, they were these; and do they not deserve a
Wound from us? Should we not endeavor to give them a deadly crush for this?
Yea it was one special End of his Death to destroy these: And shall he die for
us, and (as to us) loose his labor when he has done?

6. We should be quickened to our Work here, especially at such a time as this
is, for England's sake, and for the Ark of God amongst us; Matters seem to be
at a very tickle trembling Point; what the Lord intends to do we know not, but
really many things looks very threatening, and God's faithful Ministers, who are
like to know most of his Mind, are often droping such hints as would make a
sensible Heart tremble: Now this is the best way that we can take to prevent
England's Ruin, nay if God save us not by his Prerogative Royal it is the only
way; and it is unquestionably the duty of each of us to be fighting for our
Country at home, and thus we may do it; and England has not a worse Enemy then
Sin, nor better Friends at this pinch then such as do heartily and vigorously
ply their work here; and now shall England's Ruin ly at our doors; Or shall
deliverance come, and we do nothing to set it forward on its way?

7. This work though it be hard and difficult, yet it is not impossible, nay if
we do sincerely apply our selves to it in God's way and strength, the Victory
is certain; it is very true, our Enemies are many and mighty, but its also as
true, that they are all such as have been baffled and conquered; it must be
confessed that we are poor weak things: But withal, it must be granted that our
Captain is strong; we may venture to set one Lord Jesus against them all; this
is a mighty encouragement to our work, but no argument for sloth, for he
requires we should be active in it, though in a manner he does the work to our
hands; He has overcome all the Enemies of our Souls, and has purchased that
Grace for us whereby we also shall be enabled to overcome; and how many Saints
are there now triumphing in Heaven with Palms in their Hands, who were once as
deeply engaged in the Conflict, and it may be under as discouraging
Circumstances as we can be; we have the same Captain that they had, and what he
has done in and for them he is ready to do, yea and will certainly and shortly
do for and in us if we belong to him, abide in him, and continue with him; so
that difficulties should not be pleaded by us as discouragements in a Matter of
this nature and necessity. For,

8. And lastly, There is no other way for us here, but we must either kill or
die; Sin (as some of us lately heard) is such a tyrant, all whose Laws are
written in the Blood of Souls: It is Sin that brought Death into this World,
and that has dug Hell in the next; nothing so deadly as Sin; and suppose
but one Sin allowed and spared, that one would as infallably undo us for ever
as a thousand: And farther, suppose our Hearts be sincere and so prevailingly
for God and therefore safe in the main, yet if we neglect our Duty, here those
Sins of ours will not only keep us short, both as to Grace and Peace here (as
was hinted before), but (which is a necessary consequent) they will also cause
us to fall short of those Degrees of glory, which otherwise we might hereafter
have attained unto, the least degree of which should be of more account with
us, then all our worldly Interests laid together, yea then all this whole
World, and will be so to us if we are indeed such as have laid up our Treasure
in Heaven where we are truly our selves.

QUESTION III. How is the Duty of giving and receiving reproof to be managed?
THAT it is the Duty not only of Ministers to reprove Sin in others, though to
do it Ministerially is peculiar to them by Virtue of their Office and their
Commission and Charge thereupon: But yet that it is also the Duty of private
Christians is plain, Lev. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart;
thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer Sin upon him.

Now in answer to the Question, how this Duty is to be managed, I shall give my
thoughts: 1. By laying down some things which I take to be necessary
Qualifications, in the Person that would be a right successful Reprover. 2.
Some needful Cautions. 3. Some general Rules and Directions.


The Qualifications are as follows:

1. Wisdom and Prudence; these are necessary, because the right management of
this Duty is a work of no small difficulty; and for want of these some well
meaning Persons mar the Work, and instead of doing good do harm this way;
light and heat should go together, otherwise the Motion will be irregular; we
need these to direct us in suiting our Reproofs.

1. To the Persons we Reprove. And that,

1. With respect to their different Estates: For, though we must be Faithful to
all, yet we may not use the like freedom of Expression with all, Job. 34.18. Is
it fit to say to a King, thou art wicked? Or to Princes, ye are ungodly? 1 Timothy
5.1. Rebuke not an Elder, but entreat him as a Father.

2. With respect to their Disposition and Temper: For, some are naturally more
stubborn and hard to work on, others more soft and tender, Jude, 22, 23. And of
some have compassion, making a difference: And others save with fear, pulling
them out of the fire; I know it, there are some of that temper, and especially
where any of them are also under that distemper, which renders them more
capable of impressions of this sort; take such ordinarily I say, and one shall
wound them deeper with the softest Word, nay with a silent Reproof in a look,
then some others with the most sharp and cutting Reproof.

2. We need these to direct us to suit our Reproof to the Nature of the
Offense, according as it is either more open or secret, or as it is greater or
smaller, either in its self, or in its circumstances, or in its probable
consequents.

3. As to the Time: The Preacher says, To every thing there is a season, and a
time to every purpose under Heaven, Ecl. 3.1. And so a time to keep silence,
and a time to speak, v. 7. And a wise man's heart discerns both time and
judgment, Chap. 8.5. Very much lies in the right timeing of a Reproof; such a
Word spoken in Season, how good is it? I know indeed in some Cases, the Matter
may not admit of delay; and likewise that delays sometimes may endanger a
neglect: But yet methinks where it may, we should take the fittest time, which
in General I think is, 1. When we find our own Spirits in a temper in some
measure fit to give the Reproof; if I find boistrous unruly Passions up, that
is no fit time for me to Reprove another in. 2. When the Person to be reproved
is fittest to receive it, and like to get most good by it; we may learn this
from Abigall's prudent Carriage of the matter, 1 Samuel 25.36, 37. she would not
Reprove Nabal till the Wine was gone out of him; so to reprove a Man in the
heat of his Passion, it is like to do no good, but farther to enrage him.

2. Humility and Meekness, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. I know this and some other
Scriptures produced, were spoken directly to Ministers, yet in a Proportion
they show every one of us our Duty too; and what Sin is there that we Reprove
in others, that in some respect, degree or other, we have not been guilty of
our selves? However we need not look for into our Hearts to find the seed and
root of it, and of all other Sins whatever; yea more, no thanks to the best of
us, that we are not as bad as the vilest Wretch that breaths; and sure here is
enough if duly considered, to humble and meeken our Spirits, when we have to do
with others in the way of Reproof: And as this is fitting upon our own Account,
so likewise needful upon the Account of the Party reproved, because ordinarily
he will but too hardly be persuaded, but that we are Proud and take too much
upon us, or that we bear him ill Will, and are for picking a quarrel with him;
one may believe that Man has more Grace than ordinary, that can take a Reproof
well, which is given him in a ruff, proud, and lofty Manner.

3. Love, Pity and Compassion; that general Rule, 1 Cor. 16.14. ( Let all your
things be done with charity (or love), reaches this Case; indeed we must hate
the Sin we reprove in another, and we may and ought to express our hatred of
it: But we may not hate his Person, nay we must see we love him; yea, though he
be a wicked Man, yet we must love him as a Man, and so capable of Grace, and
much more if he be one already made partaker of it; and we must endeavor by
loving Expressions to wind in our Reproof as advantagiously as may be; and so
also we must do it with much Pity and Compassion to his weakness and infirmity,
considering our selves that we also are in the Body, and have in us the like
body of Sin, and so are not yet out of the Tempters reach, or out of Danger by
his Temptations.

4. Zeal and Courage; as God's Glory is struck at, and in some sense wounded
and blemished by every Sin committed by our selves or others (though to speak
strictly and properly God is impassible, quite out of the reach of Sin and
Sinners, our wickedness may hurt a Man as we are, but not God, Job. 35.8. but
no thanks to Sin or Sinners for that; he should not be, might they but have
their Will) therefore lukewarmness and indifferency of Spirit here is a cursed
thing; a holy heat become us well here, for which we have the highest Pattern
in the World, even him who in other things was the most meek and lowly in
Heart; so when we are called to reprove those that are above us (though I think
it is not so ordinarily our Duty to reprove Superiors as others, they should
rather be dealt with by others, or by us in another way, yet where it is
plainly our Duty) we should not fear the Faces of any; so the Prophets of old,
when they had God's Commission and Charge, they spared not crowned Heads any
more then others; and New Testament instances might also be easily produced
here.

5. Intergrity and Faithfulness, and that both to God and Man; but I fear I
enlarge too much, and alas, which is worse but too impertinently.

6. Self-denial and Contempt of the World; this is a necessary Qualification,
because if we will be Faithful to God and Souls, it may so fall out, that we
may be called to reprove such as to outward things we may have most dependence
on, whose Favor of all others we are most loath to loose, which may be
hazarded by a faithful Reproof; this the Flesh knows how to improve; but here
carnal Sinful-self must be denied, the World contemned when it stands in the
way of our Duty; and if we would but be Faithful to God, we should find him so
to us: Forthwith an upright Man, he will show himself upright.

2. The Cautions are these:

1. That we reprove not that as Sin, which indeed is not so; we must take heed
of that; for it would be Sin in us, and so justly deserve a Reproof from them;
this was in some degree that good Man's Fault, 1 Samuel 1.14, 15. And so Peter's
Fault, Math. 16.22. For which our Lord gave him as severe a Rebuke as most we
meet with, v. 23.

2. That we reprove not other's for that Sin which we have not good ground to
charge them with, and are not able some way to convince them of, though I think
in this Case it may be a Duty to give some friendly Intimations of what we
either suspect or hear, in a way as inoffensive as may be, and I dare say, this
is far more Christian like, then hasty, rashjudging upon weak grounds, and its
ten to one on such as are false; by which, how much some have suffered the Lord
knows; which it is a dangerous thing I think, to give a downright Reproof upon
mere surmise, or upon bare heresay, especially in this censorious detracting
Age, when false Reports are so common in Men's mouth's, yea too often in the
mouth's of those that are Wise and Good, though alas this is no part either of
their wisdom or goodness.

3. We should beware we do not throw away our Reproofs upon such as are
unworthy of them, such as would but abuse them, and us for them; I think this
Caution is warranted by, and may be grounded upon such Scriptures as these,
Math. 7.6. Give not that which is holy unto dogs, etc. Prove. 9.8. Reprove not a
scorner, least he hate thee; though we must use this with Caution, and not
falsely call and account others so, and then think our selves excused from our
Duty.

3. The general Rules are as follow:

1. In the business of Reproof, we must not only have regard to the Matter and
Manner of it, but we must likewise take notice what are our principle Motives
and Ends, and see that they be right; in general it is the Glory of God, the
Good of others with our selves that we should aim at, a desire of promoting
which should set us on work, influence and guide us in the whole of it; should
we reprove others from a proud, envious, unquiet or malicious Spirit, merely
with an intent to provoke, disgrace them, or the like, this were to say the
Commandment backward, which would be sad work; we must be very dilligent,
watchful and careful to get rid of, or avoid as much as possibly we can, those
things in our selves which we reprove in others; want of due Care here, we
shall find exceedingly to damp our Spirits, and to be a very great obstruction
to the discharge of our Duty; so it will also cause us and our Reproofs to be
less regarded, if not despised by others, they will not have that authority in
them, but they will be ready in Heart at least, if not in words to retort that
upon us [Physician Practice will be found another thing hereafter, then many I
fear now take it for; but yet also heal thy self.] Or that, Math. 7.3, 4, 5. We
must not forget our selves so as to leave Prayer out, or rather so as to leave
God out of the business for want of engaging him by Prayer; it is by Prayer
that this word of Reproof must be sanctified: When ever we are called to this
Duty, we had need lift up a Prayer to God, that he would put suitable
Affections into our Hearts, right Words which are forcible into our mouths, and
that he would send the Arrow home to the Mark, and direct it to the White, and
that he would so influence and wind about the Heart of the Party reproved, that
our Reproof may not fail of attaining our forementioned desired end.

4. If we would be profitable and successful Reprover's our selves, we must
then learn in like manner to receive a Reproof from others; but this brings us
to the Second Part of the Case or Question, namely.

2. How we are to manage a Reproof when it is given us by others?

QUESTION IV. What must the People of God do when he is testifying against them?
AS the Carriage of God's People toward him, so his Dispensations toward them
are very various; sometimes he smiles and lifts them up; sometimes he frowns
and casts them down; a right and ready compliance with God in all his
providential Dispensations toward us, is our plain and indiscensible Duty, and
that wherein much of the Excellency of a Christian lies: Now in answer to this
seasonable Question (which I take as chiefly aiming at the Public, God's
testifying against us in his Judgments there, though withal, it with the
answers to it, may be also applied unto a private Case) take my poor Thoughts
in the following Particulars:

1. We must see and take notice of God's Hand, when it is either lifted up in
his threatenings, or laid on in his Judgments; the great God expects (as well he
may) to be heedfully noticed and observed by all, but more especially by his
own People, as in what he says, so also in what he does, as in his Mercies, so
in his Judgments; by the contrary we greatly affront and provoke him, as
thereby we put a great and unworthy Slight upon him: This the Lord takes very
ill, and by it we are like to bring more and greater Judgments upon our selves,
Isa. 26.11. Lord when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see, but they shall
see; if we will not see his Hand, we are like to feel more of it till we cannot
but see and take notice of it, Psalm. 28.5. Because they regard not the work of
the Lord, nor the operation of his hands, he shall destroy them, and not build
them up. This is One Part of our Duty.

2. An holy awful fear and dread of our incensed God, and of his Judgments; the
Name of the Lord is a glorious and fearful Name, Deuteronomy. 28.58. and as his
Attributes so his Works also are part of his Name, and therefore grounds for
our fear, and particularly his Works of Judgment: And so we read that Moses was
afraid when God's displeasure was hot against the Children of Israel, Deuteronomy.
9.19. And so 2 Samuel 6.19. When Uzziah was smitten, it is said, that David was
afraid of the Lord that day; and elsewhere its he that says, Psalm. 119 v. 120.
My flesh trembles for fear of thee, I am afraid of thy judgments. It is the
duty of all Men to fear him, who does but look upon the Earth and it trembles;
who can and shortly will with one angry Frown, make all the stout hearted
Sinners in the World fear him and tremble before him; but especially he expects
it from his own People who are better acquainted with him, and know better then
others do what the Smiles and Frowns of a God mean, and that especially when he
is meeting them in those ways of his, in which he is terrible unto the Children
of Men.

3. We must justify God in his severest Dispensations toward us; The Lord is
righteous in all his Ways, and holy in all his Works; there are great depths
sometimes, but never any the least irregularities or excesses, in any of his
Judgments; righteousness is the Habitation of his Throne, even when Clouds and
Darkness are round about him; as it is the Duty, so it has been the Practice
of God's People, when his hand has lain heaviest on them, yet to ascribe
Righteousness to him, and it becomes us to look on them and do likewise, to say
as, Ez. 9.15. O Lord God of Israel thou art righteous, Neh. 9 33. Howbeit thou
art just in all that is brought upon us, for thou have done right, Dan. 9.14.
The Lord our God is righteous in all his works that he does: Or as the Prophet
Jeremiah in the Name of the Church, Lam. 3.22. It is of the Lord's mercies that
we are not consumed, because his Compassions fail not.

4. We must dilligently search and try our Hearts and Ways; we are not now
speaking of a matter that is foreign to us; alas, it is our own Case; the
Lord has certainly a Controversy with us, if ever he had one with any People
on this side utter Ruin; and his Controversy has seemed to be very much, if
not mostly with his own People: Now methinks we should each of us be saying,
Lord, is it I? Without doubt it is Sin that has broached this quarrel between
God and us, and there is none of us without that Achan in our Tents, our
business is to search it out; this is one main Duty which both God's Word and
his Rod points us too, Lam. 3.40. Let us search and try our ways.

5. Our next duty is a free and hearty Confession of, a judging our selves for,
and deep humiliation under the sense of those sins we discover, whereby we have
provoked him; This the Lord stands upon, Lev. 26.40. If they shall Confess
their iniquity, and the iniquity of their Fathers, with the Trespass wherewith
they have trespassed against me, and that also they have walked contrary unto
me; Jer. 3.13. Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou have transgressed
against the Lord thy God; Hos. 5.15. I will go and return unto my place, until
they acknowledge their Offense; This way we are to give Glory unto him, Josh.
7.19. What large Confessions do we meet with in Scripture, made by the People
of God, when his hand has been upon them? When the Lord is testifying against
us, and laying load upon us in his Judgments, we should take his part, and this
way be laying load upon our selves, though indeed in another sense, this is the
next way to ease our selves of the burden; I confessed, and thou forgavest,
says David; so, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. If my People shall humble themselves; 1 Pet.
5.6. Humble your selves, under the mighty hand of God; When the Lord is laying
us low by his Judgments, our work is not to struggle with him, but to fall at
his Foot, to lay our Hearts low for our sins.

6. Our Sins thus discovered and confessed must be forsaken, we must turn from
them unto him that smites us; Without this the former will neither please God
nor any thing avail us; we must take things as God has laid them together, If
my People shall humble themselves and turn from their evil ways.

Let us search and try our ways and turn unto the Lord; This is the great
Errand his Judgments come to us upon; These things I think do not need so much
to be proved, as to be urged and pressed home upon our hearts; O that we could
but effectually do that? It is sin that has bread the difference between God
and us, by them we have been fighting against him, by them we have provoked
this long suffering God of ours unto his strange work, and now that his
terrible anger is thus kindled, there is but one way for us to take, that is to
submit, to lay down our Arms, unless we are resolved to try it out with him;
Nay, but let the Pot-sheards strive with the Potsheards of the Earth, but woe
to us if thus we strive with our Maker; who ever hardened himself against God
and prospered? We must therefore cast away our Transgressions from us, and with
indignation say to our sins as Ephraim to his Idols, get ye hence.

7. We must seek unto God by Earnest extraordinary Prayer joined with fasting;
It is his will that we should thus by Prayer enquire of him at all times, and
for all things that we need, and that he has promised; But especially this is
our Duty in such times as these; Call upon me in the Day of Trouble; This the
Lord expects, Hos. 5.15. In their Affliction they will seek me early; And
ordinary Prayer must not serve the turn; The Lord looks for early earnest
Prayer; And so that we spend more time then ordinary in the Duty; Not that the
Lord is wrought upon by the length of our Prayers, but the work that is to be
done upon our own Hearts ordinarily requires it; And this joined with fasting,
which God's plain and pressing Commands, and the practice of his People
thereupon in all Ages does sufficiently prove, particular instances of either
of which I think are needless here.

8. We must renew our Covenant with God, and by solemn vows bind our Hearts to
their good behavior for the future; we had need to take our Hearts at all the
advantages we can, and at such times we have them at an advantage; We too
frequently and sadly experience it how easily our Corruptions break through our
strongest Purposes and Resolutions, they are but like Sampsons green withs to
him. But now solemn Vows, and frequent renewing of our Covenants, provoided we
be serious in it, these are observed to be good means to keep our treacherous
Hearts from starting back; Though here we must be careful we do not ensnare
Conscience in matters of indifferency or impossibility; This has been and
still is the practice of Gods People; Neh. 38. And because of all this we make
a sure Covenant and write it, and our Princes, Levites and Priests seal unto
it; which we have at large in the 10. Chapter.

And so we find David speaking of the Vows that he had made in his distress,
Psalm. 66.13, 14.

9. We must be careful to pay our Vows by a resolved cleaving to the Lord,
whatever comes upon us; Vows and Covenants solemnly renewed lay us under
further Obligations; Though its true, the Lord has the highest Authority to
command, and we are bound to obedience anticedently to any such acts of our
own, by Virtue of his most Supreme and Absolute right in us, and Sovereignty
over us, resulting therefrom; yet it is as true, that we cannot after such
solemn Transactions by sin depart from God at so cheap a rate as before, no our
guilt and his displeasure will thereby be the greater; and herein if the wise
man's judgment may pass, we act the part of egregious fools, Ecles. 5.4, 5.
When thou have vowed a Vow unto God, defer not to pay, for the Lord has no
pleasure in fools, pay that which thou have vowed; better it is that thou
should not vow, then that thou should vow and not pay; Yea, we must thus
cleave unto God, all his Judgments notwithstanding; They indeed yield us a good
reason why we should leave sin, but none why we should leave him; but on the
contrary, why we should cleave more closely to him; Come on us what will, it
should be the care of our Souls, that we may be able to say with the Church,
Psalm. 44.17.18, 19. All this is come upon us yet have we not forgotten thee;
neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant; our heart is not turned back,
neither have our steps declined from thy way; Though thou have sore broken us in
the place of Dragons, and covered us with the Shadow of Death.

10. We must steadfastly hope and trust in him according to his word; He is
styled the hope of Israel in the time of trouble, Jer. 14.8. Thou art my hope
in the day of evil, Jer. 17.17. We must hope and trust in him and in his
Promises, even when his Providence seem in our shallow apprehensions to run
never so cross to them; we must hold to it as an inviolable truth, in spite of
all that sense or Satan may object against it, that if the Mouth of the Lord
has spoken it, his hand shall make it good; It is recorded of Abraham, that
against hope he believed in hope, Romans 4.18. And we find David often professing
his Resolution to trust in the Lord, whatsoever distress he was in; And so Job,
Chap. 13.15. Though he kill me yet will I put my trust in him; This is part of
that glory which we may not give unto another, when in distress we thus betake
our selves to creature Refuges, our Hearts depart from the Lord and set up such
creatures as Idols in his place, which thing the Lord has cursed, but blessed
are all they that put their trust in him.

11. We must wait patiently for the Lord and his Salvation; He that believes
makes not haste; He was quite out in his argument, and showed a wicked Spirit
who said, 2 King. 6.33. Behold this evil is of the Lord, what should I wait on
the Lord any longer; God's People should be and are of another mind: Though alas
sometimes their Hearts are ready to grow sick, and their eyes ready to fail
them when their hopes are long deferred, but that is there infirmity; But
ordinarily they are of another mind, Isa. 8 17. I will wait on the Lord that
hides his face from the house of Jacob, and will look for him, Mic. 7.7. I
will wait for the God of my Salvation, Lam. 3.26. It is good that a Man both
hope and quietly wait for the Salvation of the Lord; Once more,

12. And lastly, after all we must endeavor quietly to submit, and cheerfully
to resign up our selves to the Lords good pleasure; when he is testifying
against us, we must with Aaron hold our peace, or say with Eli, it is the Lord,
let him do what seems him good; A rare Example we have for this in the Man
after Gods own Heart, in his sweet Frame and Carriage in that, which I think
considering all the Circumstances of it, was the forest outward distress that
ever he was in, when he fled from Absolon his Son, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. And the
King said unto Zadock, carry back the Ark of God into the City: If I shall find
favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both it and
his habitation. But if he thus say, I have no delight in him, behold here am I,
let him him do to me as seems good unto him; yea, which is yet higher still,
here we have the example of David's Lord; when his holy and innocent nature
began to give back with honor and amazement at the apprehension of those
matchless Sorrows and Sufferings which were before him, he thus prayed; O my
Father, if it be possible let this Cup pass from me; but immediately he adds,
nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will, Matthew. 26.39. Wherein he has
left us the highest instance and example of Submission and Resignation to the
Divine Will that ever was, and in such things wherein he is (in our poor
Measure) immitable by us, it is unquestionably our duty to tread in his Steps.

QUESTION V. How must we carry our selves toward our afflicted Brethren?
MY time allows me to say but little to this Question. But,

1. We must take heed we no way add to their Affliction; see we fall not under
that heavy charge the Psalmist brings against his enemies, Psalm. 69.26. which
is ushered in and followed with very dreadful Propherical Imprecations;
Afflicting work is God's work, and he cannot but be highly displeased when we
are for taking this his Work out of his Hands And here, 1. We must take heed we
do it not by our Words. 2. That we do it not by our Carriage.


1. We must take heed that we do it not by our Words; we must take heed we do
not rashly and uncharitably Censure them, take heed of such Expressions, yea
and of such Thoughts too; our bad Hearts have by Nature a wretched faculty this
way; when Persons fall under Affliction, especially if their Affliction be
somewhat singular, either for kind or degree, we are ready presently to
conclude it must be for some extraordinary Guilt, whereas the Lord for wise and
holy Ends best known to himself, many times culls out his dearest and choicest
Servants as to the honest Work, so to the sorest Trials, the greatest
Susserings; as a wise Commander or General will deal with his Soldiers; but
this is the common Opinion; If an holy upright Job who was a nonsuch in his
Time, if he fall under an unusual Calamity, wise and good Men will not down
with it but he must needs be an Hypocrite; if a venomous Creature fasten upon a
Paul's Finger, the Barbarians will have it he is a Murderer, or some such like
Offender, whom Vengeance suffers not to live; this is very sinful, very
dangerous and provoking; we have something for the Proof of this, Job, 42.7, 8.
And the Lord said unto Eliphaz, my wrath is kindled against thee, and against
thy two Friends, for ye have not spoken of me the thing which is right as my
servant Job has, etc. Job's three Friends feem to have been pious good Men,
yet alas, going upon some false Notions and Opinions they had got, rigid
Censurers of poor Job in his sore Distress, and for this Sin of theirs had not
he prayed for them and the Lord accepted him, some sore Judgment had been like
to fall on them, as we may gather from the 8th verse, We must take heed of this.

2. We must take heed we do it not by our Carriage; we must take heed of a
lofty proud and scornful Carriage toward them; it is highly-sinful and
dangerous thus to trample upon those that are under God's feet already; yea, we
must take heed of a strange Carriage toward them, of any thing that looks like
unkindness or disrespect; this is one thing which is wont to add much to the
grief of the afflicted, it cuts them to the Heart; when they see their Brethren
standing at a distance from them in their Distress; we find God's People often
times complaining very heavily of this in Scripture, and such Complaints lifted
up to God are not like to fall down again very light on those that justly fall
under them; and if their Affliction come by the Oppression of Men, we must
especially take heed we no way join or take part with their Oppressors; we
must take heed we no way add to their Affliction.

2. We must do what we can, and in our places lawfully may, to ease them under,
and to help them out of their Affliction. Here, 1. We must heartily Pity and
Compassionate them. 2. We must do what we can to help them.


1. We must heartily Pity and Compassionate them, really Sympathize with them;
to him that is afflicted pity should be shown of his Friend; as we have it (to
that purpose at least) some where in the Book of Job. Principles of humanity
call for this; yea, one may see something of this in and among Creatures of a
lower Rank; but mere natural Pity is but the lesser part of that I here mean;
our pity must be a gracious Pity, we must Sympathize with them as Brethren, we
must do it for Jesus sake, if we would have him hereafter say, inasmuch as ye
did it to one of the least of these my brethren (for so the King in all his
Glory, out of his great Love and Condescension does and will own them too, how
poor, low and afflicted soever they may be at present) ye have done it unto me;
thus we must pity them.

2. We must do what we can to help them. And, 1. We must endeavor to do it our
selves. 2. We must endeavor to engage others to do that which we cannot.


1. We must endeavor to do it our selves. And so,

1. We must endeavor to inform our selves about the Nature of their
Affliction, as it is either outward or inward, together with the Grounds and
Causes of it, observing as near as we can where the Burden pincheth sorest,
and where their great weakness lies, that so we may apply our selves to them
most suitably, and so as may be with greatest probabillity of Success.

2. As we are able, and have opportunity, we should be ready to advise, counsel
and direct them how they ought to Bear, how they may improve their Afflictions,
and also how they may get holily and comfortably out of them in God's way and
time, which is ever best.

3. We must endeavor to support, cheer and comfort them, by pointing them to
Scripture promises, those strong Pillars, and full Breasts of Consolation,
especially to such of them as come nearest to their Case; first endeavoring to
clear their Right and Interest in them, if that be a Matter in Question (as
alas it is with the most), and then directing and assisting them in drawing
those Breasts which are ever full, though continually emptying themselves; and
we must also do this by imparting Experiences to them in a free but humble
Manner, experiences of our own, and also those of others that we have met with,
thus endeavoring to comfort them with the Comforts wherewith we and others
have in the like Case been comforted of the Lord.

4. If their Case be outwardly necessitous, we must actually Relieve them as we
have Abillity and Opportunity; not only draw out our Bowels to their Pity, but
also our Purses to their Relief; not only give them good Words, but also such
things as they need; thus we must endeavor to help them our selves.

2. We must endeavor to engage others to do that which we cannot.

1. Men. 2. God.
1. Men, our fellow Creatures and Brethren especially, such as either upon
temporal or spiritual Accounts, have larger Abillities and fairer Opportunities
to do it then ourselves; I can do little more then name things, and that in
have, but I doubt not these with other things will be more fully and
pertinently insisted on by others, then alas I (had I more time) should be
able to do.

2. We must especially endeavor by fervent and believing Prayer, to engage the
great God their Father and our Father to their help; He that is the Comforter
of those that are cast down; in a special manner the Orphan's God, such as are
destitute, afflicted and helpless; he that can most easily, speedily and
effectually reach both Persons and Cases which are quite out of our reach, or
the reach of any one besides bimself.

QUESTION VI. How may a Christian come to bear the greatest worldly Losses
graciously?
BY a Christian here we mean one that is so indeed; such a one is not so
secured by the Promise, or so hedged in by the Providence of God, but that
outward Losses as well as other Afflictions may sometimes break in upon him
here, yea such as are very Great, any but such as would quite undo him as a
Christian: From these indeed he is as secure and safe as Eternal Truth can make
him, and shall be so while that endures; but yet he may loose his Staff, though
he cannot loose his God.

I think it may not be amiss here to hint farther in a word or two, what we
mean by his bearing these Losses graciously.

And in general I think it is, to bear them by the special help of God's holy
Spirit, according to the Rule of his Word, aiming therein chiefly and ultimately
at his Glory.

1. By the special help of God's holy Spirit; For, mere Nature when most highly
refined and elevated, will not pass with God for Grace, though sometimes with
Men it may; and all Grace flows from the Spirit, the immediate inspirer, actor
and perfecter of it in the Soul.

2. According to the Rule of his Word; God's willing this or that shows
sufficiently that it is Good or Gracious, yea, it makes it to be so; and in his
Word it is that he has most fully and plainly told us what his Mind and Will
is; and in reference to the Case before us, the Seripture abounds with that
which may direct us in the straight Line of our Duty, warning us we turn not
aside to the right Hand or to the left: But I may not add more here.

3. Aiming herein chiefly and ultimately at his Glory; For, though we may also
look at our own Benefit and Advantage, yet not solely, seperately, or
supreamly, but as in Conjunction with and Subordination to the Glory of that
God, of, through, and to whom are all things: But to do this (I should rather
have said something like it), merely to get a Name by seeming to be that which
in Truth we are not, this is very mean and low, base hypocrisy, and that big
with several other grievous Sins.

I thought these hints not altogether impertinent to the Case, though alas,
its like the account I have laid down is very lame and imperfect.

Now in Answer to the Question, I shall lay down my thoughts under these three
general Heads.

1. We must endeavor to rid, and then keep our Hearts as clear as we can of
those things which would hinder us. 2. We must seriously ply our Hearts with
suitable moving Considerations. 3. We must diligently apply them to other
seasonable Christian duties.
1. We must endeavor to rid and then keep our Hearts as clear as we can of
those things which would hinder us, as they breed and nourish a contrary frame
in us.

To name some of the chief of them.

1. Pride; an over high opinion of our selves, a fond conceit of some Worth or
Defect in our selves; this is that which makes us so hard to be pleased when
our condition is at best, and that which breeds and feeds in patience and
discontent, when by Losses or other Afflictions our condition seems to be
changing or changed for the worse; so we must endeavor to get and keep Pride
low.

2. Unbelief; when we cannot trust God, take his word, lean upon a promise any
farther then we have sensible props to support us; it is a very sad and
dreadful Truth, that though we will trust any Man, even such a one as we know to
be an unrighteous dishonest Man so far as we can see him, yet, we have much ado
through unbelief to persuade our wretched Hearts to trust the most holy,
righteous God, the God of Truth any farther; we must strive with might and main
against this evil Heart of unbelief.

3. Worldliness; when we have too high an opinion of worldly things, when we
fancy them to be that which they are not, to have that in them which in truth
they have not; and so when our affections go out inordinately toward them, it
is because our affections toward worldly things are so strong, this is one
great reason why the Want or Loss of them is so strong and heavy an Affliction
to us, and why we are so weak and unable to bear it; was the World (instead of
being in our hearts) placed under our foot as it should be, our work would not
be so difficult; we must labor hard that it may be so.

4. Mistakes about the nature and end of such Providence; we are very apt to
misconstrue such Providence, ready to think the Lord is about to undo us, when
he is but taking another, yea, and that to the wisest and best way to enrich
us; ready to think he is about to kill us, when he is only letting us blood to
save our life; the afflictions and consolations of the Saints (as one says)
differ only in their Countenances; and as we heard not long since, there is a
vast difference between such Providence as they are dispensed to the wicked
and to the godly; as to the former, the Rod is turned into a Serpent, but as to
the latter, the Serpent is turned into a Rod: The Lord is still curiously
working about his own eternal purpose in the Salvation of our Souls, but we
misunderstand him, and that is one great hinderance of our bearing such
dispensations as we ought.

5. An over hastiness of Spirit in passing a judgment concerning such
Providence; this is one cause of our former misunderstanding of them; they are
many times very dark and misterious, and our first Apprehensions about them are
many times false and mistaken ones; If we have observed God and our selves, we
may remember that many Providence of which we have had but dismal thoughts at
first view, our thoughts have been mightily changed about them, when we have
seen the beginning and end together, and so have read such Providence
backward; but alas we are ordinarily too quick with the Lord, will not give
him time, have not patience till he has brought the whole wheel about; and
this is another thing that makes our work here so hard as it is, which
therefore must be corrected and amended.

6. The Temptations of Satan; its like he will be ready to take this
opportunity of belying God to us, and after this or some such manner to
suggest; is this the God that loves thee? Is he now fulfilling his Promises and
answering thy Prayers? See what a kind Master thou servest, and what thou
gettest by his Service: Thus its like he will be prompting us to distrust,
impatience, discontent and the like; we must see we be not ignorant of his
Devices, and as soon as we discover the Temptation, which abhorrence we must
reject it.

This to the first General.

2. We must seriously ply our hearts with suitable moving Considerations. And
so,

1. We should consider that whatever we have lost, and by what means and
instruments so ever we lost it, it is the Lord that has taken it; there is
certainly such a thing as Divine Providence, permiting, ordering and bringing
about whatever does befall us here; when Losses and other Afflictions befall us,
the Lord takes it upon himself as his own doing, and God's People have been
wont to see and acknowledge his hand, and this is that which has stilled and
calmed them, as we see in the recorded instance of Job, David and others.

2. We should consider, that whatever the Lord has thus taken, he has taken
nothing but his own; The Earth is the Lord's, and the fullness thereof; we have
nothing for enjoyment but what he gave us, and we are not properly Lord's of
what we have but Steward's; God's right in his Creatures is such, as cannot be
alienated; we eat his Bread, wear his Wool and his Flax, carry his Silver in
our purses and the like; and now, why may not the Lord do what he will with his
own?

3. We should consider, the Lord has taken nothing from us, but what we were
unworthy of when he gave it, and have since forfeited by our Sins, and but a
part of that neither; the Lord is free when he gives, and just when he takes;
we deserve not the least morsel of food, or a ragg to cover our nakedness with;
and by our Sins we have forfeited all he has thus freely given us a thousand
times over, yea, and our very beings too; and therefore we have great reason to
be patient, yea, and thankful also under all our losses here.

4. We should consider the things of this World, they are other things then the
most of Men, yea, and then we our selves ordinarily take them to be; we think
they look bravely at a distance, beholding them with a vitiated eye, and
through a false deceitful medium; but if indeed we will come near and know the
truth of the matter, we have it from him who never mis-called either person or
thing, that they are but vanity and vexation of Spirit, things that cannot
profit, yea, things that are not: And is it not a vain thing for one extremely
to disquiet himself either about the gain or loss of a little Vanity? Children
and Fool's indeed will take on mightily for the loss of a Toy, but Men of
understanding know better.

5. Take these things at best, and yet there is danger of our having too much,
as well as of our having too little of them, yea, I am apt to think more danger
of the two; more danger of our surfeiting through abundance, then of our
pineing through want; and now the Lord knows better then we do what is enough,
too little or too much for us, and we have great reason to conside in his
Wisdom, Love and Care herein, and by our Carriage should let him and others to
see that we do so.

6. Be these things as good as they will, and do what we can, we cannot long
enjoy them; Death at farthest will certainly part us and all our worldly
Enjoyments at once, and that is upon its way, and coming as fast as ever time
that flying post can bring it, and has certainly taken some steps toward us
even since we named it: Now this consideration that the Time is short, should
mightily moderate our affections toward these things both in the enjoyment,
want or loss of them.

7. We should consider others of God's People have met with, as great, yea far
greater Losses then our's are, and have born them graciously; Job what a loss
had he, who of the richest Man in all the East, in one day became poor to a
Proverb? David driven from a Kingdom, and forced to fly for his Life; yet, we
see how sweetly they took it: These and such like examples should both
encourage and quicken our endeavors here.

8. We should consider how good it is that we thus bear them; hereby we shall
please and honor God; hereby we shall credit Religion, letting the World see
that whatever they faney, yet we find something in it that is real, something
that yields us real Support: Hereby we shall lay in for our own, both present
and future sweet Peace and Satisfaction.

9. We should consider the Evil of the Contrary; as thereby we shall dishonor
God, gratisy the Devil, discredit Religion, harden the World in their Mistakes
about it, break our present Peace, and lay in for our future Sorrow, which is
the best that can come of it.

10. We should consider if we are the Persons concerned in this Case,
Christians indeed, then whatever we have lost, yet, our all is safe; the Lord
is his Peoples portion, their All; and so all that he is, all that he has, its
all theirs as they need it, and as it would be for their Good; thus it is, and
thus it shall be in spite of Sin, Earth and Hell, for the mouth of the Lord
has spoken it, [I will be their God] and the Zeal of the Lord God of Host's
shall perform this, shall make it good: O methinks there is life and soul in
this consideration, if we know but how to draw it out!

Other things might be added, but I fear least before this, I should be thought
tedious.

3. We must diligently apply our selves to other seasonable Christian Duties.

So 1. We must give diligence to clear up our special Covenant Interest in God;
I cannot reasonably think to persuade my Heart to bear such Losses as it
should, unless I can show it something that I have, or at least may have, which
is as good or better then that which I have lost; and to bare worldly Losses
quietly because I have much more of these things left, this is not right; and
the bear having an Interest in God, will not be sufficient for my Support,
unless it be in some measure known to me; but if I know that this God whose
Name is, I am, if I can make it out that he is my own God; I need not fear then
at next word to say, all is my own, and then my Work here would be easy.

2. We must exercise our selves much in lively believing Meditations on him,
and our unspeakable Happiness in him; there is certainly that in God which does
amply suit our case, and which would effectually do our work, but we must not
expect this in the way of a Charm, or that God should work Miracles for us;
though I have the best Food upon my Table, yet, it will not nourish or
strengthen me unless I open my Mouth, take, chew and digest it; so it is here.

3. We must endeavor all we can to maintain constant Communion with God; while
a Soul enjoys real Communion with God, its well with that Soul, and much at one
to it, whether it enjoys more or less of the Creature; a gracious Soul tastes
that sweetness in near and intimate Communion with God, that while this is
enjoyed, it takes little or no notice of what of the World it either has or
wants; O it finds Meat and Drink, House and Lands, Friends, Earth, yea and
Heaven too in Communion with God! Hereupon there are such ineffably swet
Communications of God to the Soul, and such mutual endearing Embraces, as
immediately fill the Soul in each corner of it, with unspeakable Satisfaction
and Joy; but I must add, there is yet something in it, which is an unutterable
Secret; such as experimentally know what it is for the Lord to deal familiarly
with them this way, such will understand what I mean; and would not this do our
business now? What think you?

4. We must endeavor to keep up every Grace in good Heart, but especially see
we nourish and cherish the Grace of Faith, and keep that close to its work;
every Grace has its proper work and office in the Soul, but among all the rest
Faith is the great doer, and not the least among the bearers of Burdens; and
in reference to this present Case, it will be well or ill with us, as our Faith
is either lively or languishing.

5. We must be much in the search and study of the holy Scriptures; the Word of
God abounds with precepts, promises, examples, very Applicable to our present
Case; some little has been hinted; I had thoughts here to have added more, but
must forbear, being sensible I have over done. Once more,

6. And lastly, We must give our selves unto Prayer; when we have done our
best, Satan will be soliciting Evil, and distempered Frames will be creeping
on us; when its thus, we must run to God by earnest and believing Prayer,
there is no way like it; if ever we bear our Losses graciously, it must be by
the special help of the Spirit, as has been hinted, and though the Lord
sometimes in the way of Prerogative, or of his sovereign Grace, is found of
those that seek him not, yet, the promise is made unto those that ask.

QUESTION VII. How may a christian improve outward Prosperity to God 's Glory,
and to his own and others Good?
TO know how to abound is as high and rare an attainment of Grace, as to know
how to want; but though few in comparison do, yet some have, and therefore we
in our advantageous Circumstances may attain to it in the strength of the same
Christ, Phil. 4.12, 13.

Now in answer to this Question, the scope and drift of which is (as I take it)
to instruct us in this Lesson.

1. We must labor to discover, and then carefully to avoid those Sins and
Temptations which this Estate does especially expose us to. 2. We must labor
to get acquainted with, and then dilligently and conscienciously to discharge
those Duties, and exercise those Graces which this Estate does especially call
us to, and gives us an advantage for. 3. As we would do thus, we must carefully
observe and follow some Rules and Directions.
1. We must labor to discover, and then carefully to avoid those Sins and
Temptations which this Estate does especially expose us to. And,

1. Those which do respect others. And so,

1. Those which more directly respect God himself; such as these,
unmindfulness, forgetfulness of God, an alienation of our Hearts and Affections
from him; a careless neglect of the Duties of his Worship, or a formal
customary dead and heartless Performance of them; O that in these things and
the like, we did not speak from so much sad experience as we do! Again,
Disobedience and Rebellion; if Jesheron be waxed fat, the next news we hear of
him is that he kicked; we must beware of these things and the like.

2. Those which do more directly respect our Brethren; and do we never in
Prosperity meet with a Temptation, and find a Proneness in our Hearts, when we
are as it were on the Top of the Hill to overlook, despise, contemn our poor
Brethren that are below us in the Valley? Job says [He that is ready to slip
with his feet, is as a lamp despised of him that is at ease] if so, we must
take heed of that: Again, Beware of unmercifulness toward them; have we a care
they do not want our Bowels, but especially that we do not hurt their's; take
we heed that when we are at ease our selves, we be not among them who are not
greived for the Affliction of others, but especially that we add not to their
Affliction; O beware we of any thing that looks like injury or oppression; and
as we must thus labor to discover and carefully to avoid those Sins and
Temptations which respect to others. So,

2. Those which do more directly respect our slves; and so take heed of Pride;
this was the Devils Sin, and his Ruin, and he would have us like him in both;
and do we not find our Spirits ready to be puffed up on this occasion; I dare
say, they are no ordinary Christians with whom its otherwise: Again, Take we
heed of Security; when our Mountain seems to stand strong, its well if our
Hearts say not next, it shall never be moved; take heed of that: Again, Take we
heed of Prodigality, an unlawful excessive wastful Spending, or spending
Wastfulness of the Creature; I remember a choice Servant of God, one that has
labored much amongst us, once when I was with him in a fit of Sickness taking
a Medicine, he called for the Spoon back to lick it, saying, Jesus Christ would
have nothing lost; in which (as I concluded), he had reference to his ordering
the Fragments to be gathered up after that large and plentiful Feast upon a few
Barly-loaves and two or three small Fishes: Again, Take we heed of Sensuality;
our Lusts will expect our Prosperity should be a Feast for them; they will
crave it, and the Devil will solicit for them, but these Beggars must be
denied; we must take heed of sensuality and of worldiness, take heed of sinful
inordinate pantings after, love to, use of, or delights in the Creature; This
as to the first General.

2. We must labor to get acquainted with, and then conscientiously and
diligently to discharge those Duties, and exercise those Graces which this
Estate gives us a special call to, and advangage for. And,

1. Those which more directly respect others. And so.

1. Those which more immediately respect God himself; and so we must own and
acknowledge God as the free and gracious author, founder, and maintainer of our
Prosperity; and then it naturally follows hence, that we be thankful to him for
it; and here a true Christian has far the Advantage of another Man, and is
thereby laid under a stronger Obligation to this Duty, for he may see his
outward Prosperity, his outward Mercies coming from that self same loving Hand
and Heart that gave him his dear Christ; O how thankful should a Christian be!
In a mercy that in it self may be but small, yet may he see and taste that which
is of more worth then a World; this is no phanatical Dream, but a proved and
experienced Truth: Again, Does it not also follow that we should love him more
dearly; Love would and should be paid in its own Coin; and by the way observe
it, if we can but find this, that we love God more for our outward Prosperity,
this would be an infallible sign that it comes from his Love, for as one says,
this is a certain Rule, that which causes love, comes from love; and then see
that we grieve more ingenuously for our Sins against him; and the consideration
of the cursed Ingratitude and Disingenuity that there is in our Sin's, sure
this will when the Spirit strikes it home, open a Vein to purpose in a gracious
Heart: Again, Let us see we learn to trust in him more steadfastly; we have
promises and experiences too; see we trust him in our Prosperity; see we trust
in him, and not in uncertain riches, friends or the like; and if he bring us
into straits again, let us now learn to trust him then; trust him for these
things if they be good for us, however that he will give us that in himself
which is infinitely better; and so lets learn to trust him for better things;
if from his Love he give us Earth, will he not much more give us Heaven, and
all that we need in the way? And then lets see we make him the chief object of
our delight and joy: Again, Let Us see we be more abundant vigorous and cheerful
in his Service, in all acts of Obedience.

2. Those which more directly respect our Brethren; and so we must see we be
humble, courtious and affable in our Carriage toward them; and that we do
heartily pity and compassionate them in their Necessities and Troubles, and
that we do actually relieve and help them, as we have abillity and opportunity,
remembering that the Lord has more backs to cloth, more bellies to fill, more
hearts to cheer with our Prosperity then our own; and as we must thus labor to
get acquainted with, and then conscientiously and diligently to discharge those
Duties, and exercise those Graces which a prosperous Estate calls to, and gives
us advantage for, with respect to others. So,

2. Those which do more immediately respect our selves; such as self-denial,
moderation, holy contentation, a grave and sober joy and rejoicing, weanedness
from the World, heavenly mindedness and the like: But I fear I have enlarged
too much, and would fain leave a little room for the last thing, and so as that
I may not streighten others neither. So,

3. As we would thus improve our outward Prosperity as has been confusedly
hinted, we must carefully observe and follow some rules and directions. To name
five or six.

1. We must labor to get thoroughly convinced of our own Impotency, and utter
insufficiency to do this of our selves; and truly we know e'ne nothing of our
selves, if we know not this, that of our selves without Christ we can do
nothing; alas, we cannot bare a Cross, no more can we handle a single Comfort
as we ought; then what shall we do in a State of full Prosperity, especially if
of any long continuance? How certainly it sinks us into security, sensuallity,
worldliness, into a neglect of God, our Souls Eternity, and the like if left to
our selves?

2. We must see to it that we be Christians indeed, that we have a thorough
work of Grace wrought in our Hearts; there are many Natural carnal Men that
know what it is to be in Prosperity, what it is to Abound, but not one of them
knows how to Abound, nor can they know any thing of it while they so continue;
in the right improving of Prosperity, there are many spiritual Acts and Motions
required (as you have heard), but this cannot be without a spiritual Principle
first infused into the Soul; without a gracious Habit, no gracious Act; without
spiritual Life, no spiritual Motion; as we were lately instructed.

3. Having Grace we must see we keep it awake, stirring, and in a growing
posture; a Man that has Life, yet if he fall asleep, and much more if he fall
into a Lethargy or into a Sound outward Motion cease, even while his Life
remains; now and then he breaths almost insensibly, and that is all; so it will
be with us here; we had need if we would have any work done, keep Grace waking,
stirring, yea and growing too; O a little Grace will be e'ne lost in a great
heap of worldly stuff! Believe me, that Christian who has a great share of
outward Prosperity, needs more Grace then his Neighbors; and alas for us
whose stock is so low, can we not bless God from our Souls, that our outward
Prosperity rises not so high as some others does? I am fully persuaded some of
us can, as I am sure there is reason we should.

4. We must labor to maintain and keep up a constant watchfulness; this is
absolutely necessary both with respect to our Dangers and our Duties, so we
must watch our Hearts, watch our Corruptions, watch our Thoughts, Affections,
and our outward Senses; and so we must watch Satan and his Temptations; and so
we must watch unto Duty; watch for Calls to seasons of, and advantages for it,
that so we may take wind and tide when they offer: And so we must watch our
Hearts in duty to see that Grace be in its lively and kindly exercise.

5. We must see we be not strangers to our Bibles; whatever our Condition be
prosperous or adverse, the Word of God, that is our Polestar to direct us how to
stear our course; this must be a lamp unto our feet, a light unto our paths,
for it is not in Man that walks to direct his steps; as some of us heard not
long since; we must therefore study our Bibles, highly prize and diligently
attend upon a Gospel Ministry, and improve that with other helps we have to get
a thorough understanding of, and acquaintance with them.

6. And lastly, We must see the Lord find us much and often upon our Knees, and
that in Prayer we be much in the actings and exercise of Faith; in this Estate,
especially if we enjoy it for any time without, some considerable
Interruptions, we must expect many Dangers and Difficulties; and upon this
ground a kneeling (I mean a praying posture) is far more safe and advantageous
then to stand upon our own Legs; and so we must be much in the lively exercise
of Faith on Christ, and the promises for wisdom and strength to enable us to
discover, avoid or crush those Temptations, and to mortify those Corruptions,
which in this Estate we are most exposed to and endangered by, as also to
discharge those duties and exercise those Graces, which it gives us special
calls to opportunities and advantages. For,

All this is soon said, but to do it will cost us some pains; but I think it is
not more then needs, and moreover this we can say, Religion is so sweet a
thing, that it will more then pay its own cost and charges even here; O then
what will a [well done good and faithful Servant] hereafter be? And this with
such an and cetera as eternal Possession can only fully unfold, sure this will
be a reward for all our pains (a reward I say, but of free Grace) heaped up and
running over.

QUESTION VIII. What is the Duty which Persons joined together in a Christian
Society, owe one unto another?
I Will not take upon me to say much to this Case or Question. But,

1. Mutual brotherly Love is one thing wherein our Duty lies; indeed though I
mention this as a particular, it is the Sum of all; if we would say all in one
Word, it must be this of Love, for Love is the fulfilling of the Law.

There is a Love we owe to all Men as Men, even to our very Enemies: Again,
There is a more special Love we owe to all the godly in general as such, and
more especially to such as excel in godliness; and farther, I think there are
some peculiarities in that we owe to such of them, as we are joined to by more
near Cohibition, and in more fixed and constant Church Communion.

That Love amongst us is a Duty, it is a thing so obvious in it self as we are
Brethren and Members one of another, and as it is the subject Matter of so
great a Part of our Bibles, that I think I need not give particular
Instanstances for Proof in so plain a case.

This Love must branch it self out into several streams, and discover it self
several ways; to instance in a particular or two here. And

1. We must express and exercise our Love one to another, in a real hearty
Simpathy one with another; weeping with them that weep, and rejoicing with them
that rejoice; as in the natural Body, if one Member suffer (be it but a Finger
or a Toe) all the rest suffer with it, and so on the contrary if one Member be
honored the other Members rejoice with it; so here we should be afflicted in
the Afflictions of our Brethren, and rejoice in their Welfare and Prosperity as
our own; in this Sense, Afflictions and Mercies should as it were lie in common
amongst us.

2. We must do it by denying our selves in many cases for their good, yea in
some cases so far as to expose and actually lay down our Lives for them; as to
preserve the Life of an eminently useful Minister or Christian, in some cases
we should be ready to Sacrifice our own; this is that which some have done, and
found great Satisfaction in; if a blow threaten my Head or Breast, which I know
not how to avoid, my Hand is presently up to receive it.

2. Another thing wherein our Duty lies (which is indeed but another way of
expressing our Love, and that is), mutual Christian watchfulness; that I mean
by it is, a concerned eying, observing, taking notice of one another Estates,
Conditions, Frames and Carriages; I do not mean a prying into these things to
satisfy Curiosity, or to furnish us with Matter for our vain, idle,
unprofitable and sinful Chat, much less to satisfy, feed and nourish a proud
and censorious Humor; no, but an endeared brotherly Love must here set us on
work, and manage the matter as a thing necessary, in order to our mutual
helpfulness, one to another. And so,

3. Another thing wherein our Duty lies is, mutual helpfulness. And here,

1. We must beware we be at no time found acting the Part of Enemies or false
Brethren, as to the outward Man and outward Concerns one of another, but
especially we must beware of doing it as to one another Souls, which were to
take Satan's part and become his Tools, a thing we were not long since awfully
warned against; O let us take heed of doing any thing at any time to cool,
chill and damp one another Graces and holy Affections, or of imitating and
provoking one another Corruptions; and we must take heed of doing any thing
that may justly grieve and sadden, or lay a stumbling block before one another;
and then on the other hand, it concerns us to take heed that we do not through
ignorance, infirmity, mistakes, but above all that we do not through prejudice
take offense where it is not justly given.

2. We must see we be positively helpful one to another; as in the natural Body
the several Members are mutually helpful and serviceable one to another, so it
should be amongst us; we must see we be so according to our abilities,
opportunities and others necessities; look what Talents any of us have of
estate, parts, gifts, graces, experiences, or whatever else is improvable for
others good, we should endeavor to make it as a Common-stock so far as with
prudence, without pride, self-ostentation, or stretching the line of our places
we lawfully may. And,

1. We must endeavor to be mutually helpful one to another, with respect to
the outward Man, the outward Conditions and Concerns one of another; we must be
ready to advise, counsel, direct, assist one another with respect to these; Oh,
base selfishness amongst us is an unnatural thing, for lo we be Brethren and
Members one of another; and then we must also relieve such of them as are in
Poverty and Want according to our Abilities and Opportunities; yea, we must
give more freely more largely to such then to others.

2. We must especially endeavor to be mutually helpful to one another Souls;
I will humbly adventure to lay down a few things here; I will do little more
then name them. And,

1. Such as have a stock of knowledge and spiritual understanding, the word of
Christ dwelling richly in them, should be ready to disperse it among those that
want, should be ready to instruct such as are more ignorant and raw, Col. 3.16.

2. It is our duty to be often jogging, exciting, provoking one another to our
Duty, when we are any of us growing dull, sleepy, careless and lukewarm, Heb.
10.24.

3. When any of us are steping aside, or are overtaken with a fault, it is our
duty to admonish, reprove, restore such a one in the Spirit of Love and
Meekness, Lev. 19.17. Gall. 6.1. such a poor distorted Member must be skilfully
and tenderly set in joint again.

4. When any of our Brethren are sad, dejected, disconsolate, of a wounded and
sorrowful Spirit, we should endeavor to comfort and strengthen such feeble
minded ones in all their Troubles, with the Comforts wherewith we have been
comforted of the Lord, 2 Cor. 1.4: 2 Thessalonians. 4.18. Chap. 5.14.

5. It is our duty to be mutually helpful one to another in the way of Prayer,
Jam. 5.16. And let the case be what it will, Prayer will reach it, because it
is the way to engage him that can; and here none of us can reasonably frame an
excuse who have found the way to Heaven for our selves.

Give me leave to say two Words more:

1. All this and more as to Particulars (as I doubt not you will hear) is our
Duty, but yet the Lord will take in good Part, will graciously accept and
reward a sincere desire and endeavor, to trade and improve our two Talents
where we have no more; it is my own case, and its likely it may as well be some
of yours; we may be ready under discouragement to complain, alas, we can do
very little, we want Abilities, want Opportunities, we can do almost nothing;
well, if there be but in us a willing Mind, witnessed by sincere Endeavors, I
think we may take this home with us for our Comfort and Encourgement (I do not
mean to be idle, sloathful and careless, but cheerfully to fall to work as the
Lord shall enable us) to wit, that we shall be accepted of the Lord according
to that which we have, and not according to that which we have not; we
unworthily belly our Lord and Master, if we say or think he is austeer; the poor
Widows mite was not rejected.

2. As for such as have much riper Parts, every way larger Abilities and fairer
Opportunities then we, they must improve them, but it must be their Care to see
they keep within the compass of their Places and Callings, and that they no way
encroach upon the Ministerial Office which the Lord has paled in by it self;
this was very dangerous, and the way to spoil all; a Person may be very useful
in a civil Society in a Kingdom or Commonwealth while he keeps in his proper
Post; but if he will needs be steping up into the Throne he spoils all: but I
do think none of us may need this Caution: And then as Moses said to his
Servant Joshua, Numb. 11.29. Would God that all the Lord's people were
Prophets, and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them; so this I dare say
for our Men of God, that it would be no Eyesore to them, but on the contrary,
the joy and rejoicing of their Hearts, to see any in their Flock striving, if
by any means they might come to be as wise and knowing in the great Mysteries
of Religion, and every way as Gracious as themselves, and then endeavoring to
make what they have (according to the Rules of Christian Prudence and Sobriety)
as a Common-stock to the glory of God, the benefit of their brethrens Souls,
and the furtherance of their own Salvation in the day of the Lord Jesus.

QUESTION IX. How must we Carry toward them that are without?
BY them that are without, I here understand, such who though they are within
the Pale of the visible Church, yet are out of Christ, and in their Hearts and
Lives strangers to the life and power of that Christianity which they some way
outwardly profess; and then I look upon the inward frame and temper of our
Spirits, as comprehended in this Case, as well as our outward Carriage and
Behavior.

So 1. We must see that we do heartily, tenderly, pity and compassionate this
their sad Case, a sadder then which I think I may say, is scarce to be found on
this side Hell, though indeed the Case of some of them is much more sad then
that of others; their Persons and Case call for pity at our hands; they are our
fellow Creatures of Adam's race, and not of the tribe of Apostate Angels:
Again, They are Men and Women upon Earth, and not among damned Spirits in Hell;
their Case is very deplorable, and such as once was our own, and though it be
not so now, yet also upon that account it may the rather be expected from us,
because we now pretend at least to know better then others do, what God's
Favor and his Wrath, what Heaven and Hell, what Salvation and Damnation mean;
it is a thing both greatly sad and strange if we do not pity them; did we see
any of them hanging by a small Thread over such a place as the mouth of burning
Etna, would not our Bowels be moved, our Flesh tremble for them? Their real
Case is sadder then so; mere Humanity would do much in such a Case, will not
Grace do more?

2. We must take great heed to our selves, that we do nothing to harden them in
this their sad and sinful Case, that we do nothing to keep them where they are;
if we pretend to pity them as without, and yet care not wilfully to shut and
bolt the Door upon them, this our pretended Pity is no better then a cruel
wicked Lie; and therefore we must take heed that by our sinful Compliance with
them, we do not confirm and strengthen them in that good Opinion which alas
they falsely have concerning their own state and way: And so we must take heed
of doing any thing that may justly prejudice them against Religion, against the
good Ways of God; particular Instances are too many to be here inserted: But in
General, every thing that is contrary to the Truth and Purity of Religion,
every thing that is contrary to the Scripture Rules of Piety, Justice, Charity
and Sobriety, is carefully to be avoided by us here.

3. We must see that we prudently, conscientiously, and diligently lay out our
selves in our places, doing what we can to bring them in. And here,

1. We must endeavor to pray them in; the word is plain here that this is a
thing according to God's will; the Lord has a wonderful great respect for and
delight in Prayer: And though he has decreed to do this and that, and though
his Providence may be big with it, yet ordinarily before it brings forth Prayer
must come in, and as it were act the Midwifes part; and this would be much to
our own benefit and advantage; Yea, though such and such we pray for should not
be brought in, yet being sincere this our adventure should not be lost, no but
should come richly home, our prayers certainly returning with a blessing into
our own bosoms.

2. We must do what in us lies that they may be furnished with, and brought
unto the ordinary necessary means of Salvation; when Persons are distracted, or
under any such raging Distempers as take away their Senses and the use of their
rational Faculties, it is then peculiarly the Part of Friends and Relations to
procure them a Physician and the necessary Means of their Recovery; why the
poor Hearts in the case before us, they are besides themselves, have this and
that Death token on them, and are not sensible of it, and so care not for to
look after the Lord Jesus, his Ministers, the necessary Means of their
Salvation, any more then a Man raging Mad in Bethlem cares for his Physician,
or for his necessary Prescriptions; and then we should endeavor to bring by
Persuasion such of them as are within our reach to the Means; and such as are
under us as Children and Servants, we may and ought to use our Authority with
them this way.

3. We should our selves endeavor to recommend Religion, its blessed Authors
ways, means and end unto them. And that, 1. With our Mouth's. 2. In our Lives.


1. With our Mouth's; as we have a call and opportunity, let us be speaking a
good Word for God and his good Ways; O they are worthy of it, and we carry it
very unworthily if we do not; and when any of them dare let fly at God and
Religion, we should with a holy warmth Vindicate them to the Faces of them
against any their false Charges, their wicked and blasphemous Lies.

2. In our Lives; here one might be large, but I shall confine my Thoughts to
five things, and that with all the Brevity I well may. And, 1. We should
endeavor in our Lives to recommend Religion to them, as a true and real thing.
2. As a practicable and feasible thing. 3. As a gainful and profitable thing.
4. As an honorable laudable thing. 5. As a cheaful pleasant thing.


1. As a true and real thing; they are ready to look upon Serious Religion as a
mere Fancy, a waking Dream of a few weak and superstitious People, others as a
cunning Plot and Design of some self-seeking Men; tell them of Fellowship and
Communion with God, they believe no such thing, though we are as sure of the
reality of it from frequent, blessed, feeling, convincing, sweet experience, as
of any thing that ever we saw with our Eyes; now let us labor to give them
some convincing Evidences and Demonstrations of it, when Moses came down from
the Mount with his Face shining, no doubt all the People that saw him, fully
concluded that the Lord and he had been together; you will apply it; We speak
of Heaven and of our great Hopes laid up there in their Hearts, they believe
there is nothing in it, but are ready to pity, or it may be sometimes laugh at
our weakness in laying so great stress upon these poor future unseen things;
now let us endeavor by our Carriage in the general Tenor of our Lives, to
strike their Hearts with this Conviction, that certainly they must be mistaken,
that certainly there must be substance, reality and life in the business, we
doing and suffering such things (when called to them) in the belief and hopes
thereof, and at such a rate as they cannot. So,

2. Let us endeavor to recommend it to them as a practicable and feasible
thing; be Religion true or false, yet however they think as these Preachers set
it forth it is Impracticable, and so are ready to look on them and us as a
company of Hypocrites for pretending to it; O that we did not give them so much
occasion here as we do! But however be it known unto them, they charge Religion
falsely, our Lord's yoke is another thing then they take it for, easy and sweet
all over; and such of us as have had to do with his Cross have said, and can
still say as much for that too, or the Fault has been our own; yea, and they
charge us falsely too, as they shall know hereafter at least, when they shall
here our Lord say that for us, which at present we have no great Mind to be
saying for our selves; but let us by taking out our Copy before their Eyes,
endeavor to convince them while it will do them any good, that to mortify
Lusts, repel Temptations, overcome the World, that to deny our Selves, forgive
Enemies, bear the greatest Afflictions from the hand of God, the greatest
Injuries, Reproaches and Sufferings from the hands or tongues of Men, that
these things and the like, with the Strength which Religion offers and actually
affords to those who do sincerely embrace it, are not such Matters of
Impossibility as they take them to be.

3. That it is a gainful, profitable thing; they think many of them that to
become seriously Religious, is the next way to poverty and ruin, the ready way
to be undone; alas, that they should be so mistaken in Religion, the thing
that makes us; Godliness bath the Promise of the Life that now is; whatever
they think, it is certainly the surest and the next way to be Rich here, if the
Lord see it good for one to be so; and God be thanked as he has formerly, so
he still does honor Religion in the face of the World, by making some that are
sincerely, yea exemplarily Good, very considerably Great in the World; but
however it does certainly bring the best Riches along with it; not the poorest
Saint in the World, but he has that which will more then weigh down all the
Riches of an Empire; its true, he has not so much lumber as many of them have,
but for all that, he has Riches which cannot be told in a pearless Pearl, in
precious Jewels, in good Bonds; and be it so, that we are most of us as Poor as
they would have or make us, and may live under much Obscurity, and be little
taken Notice of in the World, unless it be in a way of Contempt and Reproach,
yet let them know we scorn the Motion of changing Estates with the best Man of
them all; but they will never give Credit to us, or think that we really
believe our selves, if they see us as discontented and uneasy in and with our
outward Conditions, as hot and eager in our pursuit after these little trifling
Vanities, and as much dispirited, dejected and heart broken under any our
outward Afflictions, at any our worldly Losses, Crosses and Disappointments, as
they themselves in such like cases are.

4. As a creditable, honorable thing; they think that to be called Religious
under those soul dirty Terms the World has put upon it, is a real and an
intolerable Reproach; if we go to hear these pious godly Ministers, and become
serious, O then (say they), every one almost will despise, spite and trample on
us; No; no, you are mistaken; what says wise King Solomon in this Case? [ Exalt
her (that is wisdom) and she shall promote thee: She shall bring thee to
Honor, when thou dest embrace her; she shall give to thine Head an Ornament of
Grace, a Crown of Glory shall she deliver to thee.] The Lord is an Honor unto
such, as some render that, 1 Pet. 2.7. These are they whom the King will
honor, and they are honored by the wisest and best Men upon Earth, yea, by
the highest principallities and powers in Heaven, nay, they have an honorable
Testimony in the very Hearts and Consciences of the worst of Men, their
greatest Enemies so far as they are Men and not turned into mere Bruits; and as
for our parts, let them in our Life and Carriage see it clearly and abundantly,
that we are not ashamed of our blessed Master, nor ashamed of Prayer, or of any
Part of his Work, which is truly honorable, both considered in it self, and as
it is his: But let them see we are of the old Apostles mind, who when they
would make a high and holy Brag, what say they? I Paul a Servant of Jesus
Christ, Peter a Servant of Jesus Christ; and so others of them.

5. And lastly, Let us invite them in, by endeavoring in our Lives to
recommend Religion to them, as a cheerful pleasant thing; if Religion be real
and practicable, and some way profitable and creditable; yet, however for
pleasure they think they are the Men, and us, they look upon as a company of
poor sad and melancholy People, and so are afraid to cast in their Lot among
us; now let us endeavor to rectify this great Mistake of theirs also, by
letting them see, that wisdoms ways are Ways of Pleasantness; that it is no
rare thing with us to find that sweet delight, satisfaction and joy, in the
views and embraces of our Precious, though by them despised Jesus, which they
never did or can find in any things whatsoever, which they account their
topping Enjoyments; though truly where Persons are under those bodily
Distempers, which much incline them to dullness and sadness, I think as the Lord
does so, we and others should give grains of allowance; but such should be
especially afflicted with and strive against such Distempers upon this as one
main account, as some may thence take occasion to think more frightfully of
Religion; and such should be very desirous that others did but know what is
many times at their Hearts, even when they may think there is a great deal of
sorrow and heaviness in their Looks, but especially that they did but know what
there is at the heart of Religion; and be it known unto them, even to the
greatest pleasure Mungers of them all, that we have those delights, such pure,
solid, satisfying, and lasting Delights and Joys as they have none; for the
truth of which we are ready to pawn our Souls, and all that ever we are worth
in the World; yea, and moreover to give them leave to be judges in the case
themselves, if so be they will but come and make a serious trial of Roligion as
far as we have done, and yet there are far greater Matters still which many
others have attained unto, which we are in the prospect and pursuit of.

QUESTION X. How are we to manage our Spiritual watch?
IN general I Answer, we must manage it after a godly Sort, that is in such a
manner as that the great Ends of it may be best attained by us, Scil. God's
glory, together with the safety, preservation and salvation of our own and
others Souls. More particularly,

1. We must manage it obedientially; the Lord has given us many express
Commands for this Duty, Matthew. 26.41. 1 Cor. 16.13. 2 Timothy 4.5. and in many
other Places; now it is not enough barely to do the thing commanded, but we
must do it in Obedience to the Divine Command, do it because commanded, we must
also do it with respect to the Manner of it as it is commanded. So,

2. We must manage this Duty universally; watch in all things; so the Command
runs in one place. And here,

1. God is in some sort the proper Object of our watch. And that, 1. In what he
says. 2. In what he does. 3. Particularly in what Answers he is pleased at any
time to give into our Prayers.


1. In what he says; we should heedfully observe, take notice, what he
speaks to us in his Word, by the inward Motions of his Spirit, by his
Ministers, or by any of our Christian Brethren, or by our Enemies, yea though
they may be wicked Men; for sometimes the Lord may and does speak to us by them
though they think not so; whenever, or however the Lord speaks we should
endeavor to watch, so as to have our Ears ready open, so as that whatever the
Lord speaks we may have it presently; like a Person that is harkening to one who
is much his Superior, when about to speak something that does vastly concern
him, whose mind does as it were hang upon the Speakers lips, so that the Word
is hardly got well out of his Mouth but he has it.

2. In what he does; we should watch and take great notice what the Lord is
doing; observe gracious, merciful, so likewise more severe and afflictive
Providence when they come, that so we may answerably receive, entertain, and
improve them both; we should thus heedfully watch and observe such Providence
whether dispensed to our selves, or to others; to our Persons, Families,
Relations, or to other particular Persons, Families, Societies, Nations or
Churches.

3. We should particularly watch and observe what Answers the Lord is pleased
at any time to give into our Prayers; this the Lord requires of us and justly
expects from us, both upon his own Account and ours too; whatever the Answer
be, if we do not thus look up and watch after our Prayers, we provoke the Lord
who justly looks upon himself as affronted hereby more ways then one, and we
likewise wrong our own Souls, which are like by this means to suffer damage
several ways; but the contrary would both please him, and be much to our own
Advantage; this is one way whereby we may come to enjoy more in the Mercies we
so get, and also to get more of them. I know a Person whose experimental
Observation it is, that the more he does with humility and thankfulness observe
and take notice of God's gracious Answers of Prayer, the more sweet Matter of
that kind the Lord is wont to give him in for his Observation.

2. Our watch must extend it self to others, to our Neighbors, but especially
to our Christian Brethren, those especially that we are joined with in the same
Christian Society; though Christianity does not allow us to be busy bodies in
other Men's matters, yet neither does it allow us to be of that wicked Persons
mind who said [am I my Brothers keeper.] But,

3. It must especialy be exercised toward our selves; we must see to keep our
own Vineyard, and so we must watch over our Thoughts, Affections, our Words and
Actions. Or thus, we must watch, 1. Over our inward Man. 2. Over our outward
Man.


1. Over our inward Man. And that, 1. As depraved by Sin. 2. As renewed by
Grace.


1. As depraved by Sin; and here a great part of our Work lies; our worst,
most mischeivous, dangerous and deadly Enemies ly in our own Bosoms, a hellish
brood of filthy Lusts, which are ever ready to betray and ruin us; Satan
indeed has a great hand in undoing Souls, but the truth is, he might spare his
Pains, did the Lord but stand by, our own Lusts would do the work effectually
themselves; we have reason to conclude that we should go to Hell readily enough
of our selves, did but the Lord suspend, withdraw his Spirit and Grace, and so
let us go quietly; such Enemies as these sure need watching.

2. As renewed by Grace; alas, Grace in many of our Hearts (I am sure, I must
my self subscribe for one), I say it is a poor, small, weak and tender thing,
if it be not very sickly, declining and languishing; this poor thing meets with
great Opposition, a world of enemies both within and without, that it is as
strange a wonder that it should be kept alive in our Souls, as that a spark of
Fire should be kept burning in a great quantity of Water; we have need to watch
our Graces if we would have them kept alive, and much more if we would have
them lively; we must watch to the feeding and nourishing, to the preserving and
defending, to the acting and exercising, and so to the increasing and
strengthening of them in our Souls; we must watch over our inward Man.

2. Over our outward Man; over our outward Senses; O how much Sin and Vanity is
almost contiunally either coming in or going out that way unless straightly
watched! We have need to set a strict watch, a strong guard upon each of them;
and so we read of holy Job's making a Covenant with his Eyes, and of David's
setting a watch at the door of his Lips. And so we have need to watch as to the
whole of our outward Carriage and Behavior, to see that it be such as becomes
the Gospel.

4. We must watch over our two grand Enemies without us, Satan and the World;
Satan in his Temptations; He is such a subtle, powerful, cruel and malicious
Enemy, has so many Snares for us, and is so good at the choosing and at the
laying of them, that without extraordinary care and watchfulness, it is in an
ordinary way impossible that our Souls should in any tolerable manner escape
him. And so the World is a near, a present and very mischievous Enemy to our
Souls; we have need to watch the Men of the World, and the Things of the World,
both good and evil, for we are endangered by them all; thus we must manage our
watch universally.

3. Diligently; so the Charge runs, Prove. 4.13. And the truth is our Case is
such, that its absolutely necessary it should be so; without diligence in our
watch we do nothing, however that which is next to it, a Town that is closely
besieged by a potent Enemy, that has also within its Walls a strong
treacherous Party, ever watching for an opportunity to betray it to the Enemy
without; sure such a Town had need to keep a diligent watch; the case stands
thus with our poor Souls.

4. Wisely and Prudentially; one might instance here in many things, I will
hint only in a few touching the Corruptions of our own Hearts, and the
Temptations of Satan; we must watch Sin, so we must wisely observe and watch
the first motions and stirrings of it to suppress them, watch the occasions of
Sin to avoid them, watch to cut of that which feeds our Lusts; we see how
vigilant and industrious Men are to cut of Supplies from an Enemy with whom
they are engaged in War. This is a great piece of Spiritual Policy also; we
must watch all Sin in general, but above all our special Sins; so we must watch
Satan in all his Temptations, but especially in that which is as it were his
Masterpiece; we must watch at all times, but especially at such times as use
to be most critical and dangerous ones with us, with respect to the Prevalency
of Corruptions and Temptations, as such as are Persons of any tolerable
Observation, may find that there are sometimes more critical and dangerous with
them this way then others.

5. Prayer fully; the truth is, whatever Spiritual Work we take in hand,
humble, fervent, believing Prayer, must come in at one End, or we are like to
make but poor Work of it; and as to this of Watchfulness in particular; if we
do not thus engage the Lord to watch over our watchings, all will be but labor
in vain; our Lord knew full well what he did, when he linked these two together
in his Charge [watch and pray.]

6. And to add no more, it must be constantly and perseveringly; while we are
here we are in our enemies Country, and so are never out of danger, and
therefore we should never let down our watch; but here lies the misery of it
which undoes us, though at sometimes we may make Conscience of this Duty, yet
by and by, we grow careless and secure, let down our watch, and so we loose our
selves extremely, and let our vigilant Enemies get great advantage against us;
and moreover some of us may find our bad Hearts most prone to this after the
greatest enlargments in the exercise of Grace, or after the largest incomes of
the spiritual Joy and Comfort; but alas this is perfect nonsense in Religion,
for this is one time in which we are in the greatest Danger, and so a special
Season for the strictest watch; at such a time the Devil has the most aching
Tooth at us, and bears us the greatest Malice and revengful Spite.

Thus we must endeavor to manage this Duty, obedientially, universally,
diligently, prudently, prayerfully, constantly and perseveringly; this is
easily said, but not so easily done; we must remember that serious Religion is
a Labor and a Mystery, but withal for our encouragement, that it is the most
Honorable, Pleasant and Profitable one, and that in it we have not to do with
such a hard Task-master as Pharaoh was, who required full Tale of Brick, yet
would not allow the People Straw.

CHAP. X. A Preparation for Parting with RELATIONS.
I Am convinced, that an entire, humble and cheerful Resignation of my Will to
the Will of God, manifested in the all-wise and gracious Disposals of his
Providence toward me, is both my Duty and great Felicity: And that I am bound
to labor after such a Frame, when under the sadest of his Dispensations. I
have reason to conclude, that the loss of near and dear Relations will set me
hard; indeed God has hitherto wonderfully indulged me in this Matter, that I
have not yet known by Experience what such Trials are: But I cannot in the
Course of Nature reasonably expect to be long exempted from them, therefore
cannot but look upon it as a great piece of Wisdom to get armed and prepared
for them; and here I think it may not prove an unprofitable fruitless Labor,
to draw up some such weighty Considerations, as may tend to work up my Heart to
the Frame forementioned, that so I may have them in readiness against that time
when I shall find my self very unfit and indisposed for such a work; and here I
am the more confirmed, when I reflect upon the late disturbance of my Mind,
when the Lord was pleased to bring my dear Father exceeding low, even so low
that I concluded it had been just at the parting pinch, whose Death I will here
suppose; yet would I beware of the contrary Extreme, a Stoical Frame and
Disposition, being contrary both to the Principles of Piety and Humanity.

Here I would consider,

1st. The supreme, full, and absolute Right and Propriety which God has in me,
and in all which I call mine; the Earth is the Lord's, and the fullness thereof:
The World, and all they that dwell therein; a little while since I was not,
even till God made me: And every moment I should drop into my Primitive
nothing, did he not powerfully and graciously Sustain me; besides, I am by Sin
exposed to those Miseries which are more deplorable then Annihilation it self,
from which he has by a miracle of wisdom, condecension and love redeemed me;
from hence its evident, that I am not my own, but his: So neither do I enjoy
any thing, which I can strictly and properly call my own; no thing's so mine,
but that he has a clearer Right, and juster Claim unto it; I received all at
the Hands of his Bounty, and am to possess only during his Pleasure; though he
has conferred many Favors upon me, yet I am to remember this, that he has
not given away his own Right: No, his Right in his Creatures is unalienable;
has the Lord now resumed one of my dearest Comforts, taken away my Father? Is
not this one Consideration enough to justify him, and calm and quite me. May
not the Lord do what he will with his own? And was he not his more then mine?
His Creature, his Child, his Minister? O let me dread mutining against his
Providence, but be in subjection to him the Father of Spirits, and live! Let me
think with my self, it is the Lord, and let his Excellency make me afraid! Be
still, and know that he is God, be dumb, not opening my Mouth because he has
done it! For who am I, that I should stubbernly contend with my Maker, who is
the Lord of all?

2dly. The Righteousness of God in all his Dispensations toward me; though he
sometimes does Afflict, yet he does not, he cannot wrong me; had he not freely
engaged himself, he had been free from all Engagements to the most innocent
Creatures, so that he might have annihilated them, or used them at his Pleasure
without the least show of wrong or injustice: Has not the Potter power over
the Clay? But alas, I am a sinful, guilty Wretch; as I received all at the
Hands of his free Grace and Favor, so have I forfeited all into the Hands of
his Justice; has the Lord now taken the Forfeiture of this choice Mercy at my
Hands? I ought surely to ascribe Righteousness to my Maker; doubtless
Righteousness establishes his Throne; the Justice and Equity of his Laws, and
of his Providence are equally unquestionable: And therefore should I fear as by
Disobedience to reflect upon the one, so by Impatience upon the other; would
not Conscience presently step in, instead of a thousand Witnesses against me,
should I once dare to think God Unrighteous in this sad Dispensation? Will not
my Relative sins (besides an innumerable Multitude of others, together with the
Corruption of my Nature which I brought with me into the World, from whence all
proceeds) be enough to stop my Mouth? O! Have I not rather cause humbly to
admire at the abundance of Mercy that is mixed with the heaviest Afflictions,
that at any time light upon me here? Cause to stand and wonder that I am not
made as Miserable as Misery it self, as Hell it self can make me? Surely the
Lord punishes me far less then mine Iniquities have deserved, otherwise I had
long since been in Hell amongst Devils and damned Spirits; as in point of
Obedience, the Lord is now graciously pleased to accept of far less then is his
dew, so in point of Suffering I have far less then is mine: And therefore
should I patiently submit unto, humbly and thankfully accept of the present
Punishment of mine Iniquities; it is my Duty to bear the Indignation of the
Lord graciously (and good reason why I should) because I have sinned against
him.

3dly. As his Right and Righteousness are unquestionable, so his Power is
irresistible; He does whatsoever he will both in Heaven and Earth, and there is
none that may stay his Hand, or say to him what do thou? Sure then it were
folly and madness with a witness, for me to enter a contest with him. Am I
stronger then he? It is my wisdom to meddle with my Match, but woe unto me, if
thus I strive with my Maker; Ah, how easily he who could make the World with a
word of his Mouth, and does but look upon the Earth and it trembles, how
easily he could crush me! I am but a little breathing dust, he would surely
blow me away with a blast of his Nostrils; what would the combined Forces of
the whole Creation be in the Hands of the omnipotent God, to whom Power
belongs? He could frown all into a confused Chaos in a moment; how easy is it
then for him to deal with me? Let me think soberly what the Event of the Matter
will be; who ever hardened himself against God and prospered, what am I like to
get by my impatient, unsubmissive Carriage? Nothing sure, unless it be
redoubled and heavier strokes; what more like then this farther to insense him?
Will he put up so vile an Affront? Rather will he not humble me to purpose
before he has done, and make me know who I am, a silly worm, yea sinful dust
and ashes, and what it is for a Creature, yea a Hell deserving wretch to fly in
the Face of Omnipotency it self? A principle of self Preservation, is common to
the very Bruits; sure then the Rational Soul is not without it: Where is it
then, am I utterly bereaft of it? If not, methinks that should effectually
persuade me to submit, and humble my self under God's mighty Hand, as a course
more eligible by far, then by my proud and stubborn Resistance, even to force
him (as he tenders his own honor and loves me,) to spend more Rods upon my
Back; yea, to force him from Rods to Scorpions: Let sanctified Reason possess
its Throne, and lay a law of silence both upon Heart and Mouth, that so (the
disorderly Motions of my unruly Passions being regulated) I may instead of
charging God foolishly with my Lips, in this and in every thing give thanks.

4thly. This Dispensation though sad yet is the product of infinite Wisdom;
which should be a powerful Argument to move me with humble Submission to
subscribe unto it: The King immortal, is also the only Wise God; none
originally, essentially, and infinitely Wise but he: This attribute of his, he
has wonderfully displayed; have I not sometimes been filled with wonder and
admiration, at the thoughts of his Wisdom manifested in the Creation of the
World. Though I am such a poor shallow Creature, able to comprehend so little,
so very little of it; O, what a wise, intelligent Being must he needs be, who
has created Heaven and Earth, with all the Creatures their inhabitants, in
such variety, excellency and harmony! How great and mavelous are thy Works, O
Lord! Thy infinite Wisdom is Engraven in plain and legible Characters, upon the
face of the whole Creation, so that he that runs may read; and now I am to
consider, that its the same God who at first made all things, that does order
and dispose of them in his Providence, and as he has, so he does, and ever
will act like himself; all his Works are perfect, all his Ways are judgment; O,
the Divine Mysteries that are in the Works of Providence! Full little do I
think what the all Wise God may now be doing with me; my thoughts of this sad
Providence may be wonderfully altered, when the Lord shall please to open the
Matter more fully to me; O what a day will that be, when the Lord will unriddle
all his Providence to his Servants, and rectify all our Mistakes about them,
clearly discovering their sweet harmonious Contribution to his own glory and
our good? Thy thoughts are not our thoughts, nor thy ways are not our ways; O
Lord, how little did Joseph think of his high Advancement, which the Lord was
making way for, when he was sold as a Salve into Egypt, or when he was in
Prison there? He has a thousand ways to bring his own Glory, and his Peoples
Good out of the heaviest Afflictions, and most dismal Dispensations that at any
time they are under, and he not only can but will do it; its usual with him to
bring light out of darkness, good out of evil, meat out of the devourer,
sweetness out of the strong; O therefore let me stand still, and with silent
Admiration, contemplate the Wisdom of God in the various Methods of his
Providence: But let me not quarrel with him, or find fault with any of his
doings! Can I mend them? I dare not speak such Blasphemy, as to say I can: But
is not my Heart full of impatient, discontented, fretful, furious, or at least
dejected Thoughts: If so, the Lord whose sole Prerogative it is to search and
try the Heart, cannot but know it, and knowing, will certainly bring me to
Judgment for them; he is as well acquainted with my most inward, deep and
secret Thoughts, as others can be with my outward Expressions and Behavior,
being nearer to me then I am to my self: And he takes most Notice of them, they
being the truest and most certain Indication of my Mind; one may best judge of
the Spring, by the Water which does immediately issue forth; and as a Man
thinks in his Heart, even so is he: O foolish wretch! Shall I in my
Peevishnefs, enter a Dispute with Wisdom it self? Who am I, that dare thus to
darken Counsel, with Words without Knowledge? For this thing let me abhor my
self, and repent in dust and ashes: And for the future be dumb and not open my
Mouth because the All-wise God has done it.

5thly. The consideration of that amiable Attribute of God, his Goodness,
should work much upon me; God is Love, a most sweet Notification of the ever
blessed Deity; he is not a being that sporteth himself with his Creatures
Misery: He does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of Men, much
less his own Children; Judgment is his strange Work, but Mercy pleases him:
His tender Mercies are over all his Works, and I have tasted abundantly of
them; O how highly Injurious I am to so sweet and amiable a Being, if I
entertain hard and black thoughts of him! He has caused goodness and mercy to
follow me, he has done me good and not hurt all the days of my life, and shall
I now bury the grateful Remembrance of all former Mercies in my Father's Grave?
How many Mercies and Comforts he yet continues to afford me? More then I can
easily reckon up: And shall I in my Frowardness cast away all (as it was),
because he has resumed Part? O let me beware of such foolish Ingratitude!
Farther, If I take a serious and impartial view of this Affliction, I shall
find this bitter Cup is allayed and sweetened with much Mercy; it is not a Cup
of Vengance, the stroke not purely Vindictive; its not the Wound of an Enemy,
nor the Chastizement of a Cruel one: No, the Rod is in a Father's hand; he is a
God that changes not, and so a Father when he strikes, as well as when he
strokes: What is his Design in this Affliction? Assuredly he intends me Good
and not Evil; by this means he would set my Heart more against Sin, causing me
to taste of its Bitterness: And wean me more from the Creature, showing me its
vanity and insufficiency for my Happiness, and so draw up my Affections more to
himself, who is the only Soul-satisfying good; this is to mortisy, and
spiritualize me; to make me place my Happiness in God, and fetch my Comfort
from him, and those eternal Joys with him; in a word, to turn me from Sin to
God, to raise me from Earth to Heaven: And is not all this Good? Is not that
good Physic which is a means to cure such mortal Distempers, and he a good
Physician who does prescribe and give it, though in it self it be a bitter
Potion? But farther, as his Design is Gracious in sending this Affliction, so
his Providence exercised about it is very Compassionate; this stroke might have
come with many more sad and aggravating Circumstances, he might have given me a
larger Dose, but like a wise and merciful Phycian, he considers my Strength;
or, he might have left me to my self, to have sunk under this heavy Pressure:
But behold, underneath is his supporting Arm; he helps to bear the Burden
himself lays on: And when is it so well with me, when have I so much of God,
when do I enjoy such sweet incomes from the Spirit, as then, when all things
look black and dark about me in the World? Its ordinarily God's use to know me,
my felicity to enjoy him most, in the time of my greatest Adversity; O
therefore let me kiss that Rod, which is bound up with so much love.

6thly. God, even my God is all sufficient; a few serious Thoughts of this, may
tend much to my Satisfaction and Comfort; He who is the only self sufficient,
independent Being, is his Peoples Potion and enough for them all: O how happy
do ten thousand times ten thousand of his Saints justly deem themselves in him!
And is he not enough for me? Why, what is the matter? Sure either I do not know
him, or else my interest in him is doubtful, or I am inconsiderate, not truly
weighing my Happiness in him: Ah, what a poor Creature should I be, had nothing
but a God left me! Why, what would I have more? To have God, is as much as to
have God and all the World; have I him? O then I have all in him! I am ready to
cry out, woe is me, for I am broken with a grievous breach this day! Ah, my loss
how great it is? I have lost a loving, tender hearted, careful Father; one that
had not only the name and relation, but the heart and bowels of a Father as
well: How solicitous he was for my Welfare? What care he took for my temporal
Welfare, but especially, how concerned he was for my Soul? O! Methinks, I have
sometimes seen even his very Heart in his Prayers, Counsels, Warnings,
Reproofs, yea and Corrections too; but now I am at once deprived of all: O sad
loss! Why true, my loss is very Great, it pincheth sore; it is my Duty to be
sensible of it, and much affected with it: But hold, what is become of my God,
of my heavenly Father? He is yet alive, and behold he lives for evermore: Let
it be with me here, as it was with Jacob of Old; when he was convinced that his
Son Joseph was alive, the good old Man, his Spirit revived within him, and so
let mine upon this Consideration, and let me say with him it is enough: Is it
not he that has cared for me all this while, and may I not humbly and
confidently rely upon him still? Is he not the same he was? Nay, is he not in a
more especial manner the helper of the Fatherless? What, though this instrument
and the other be removed out of the way? He never wants Instruments to do his
Work; he can either make use of new Ones, or do his Work without them; when his
People are in Distress, if he see it good, he can and will create Deliverance
for them, and that is a Work done without a Tool: I, but what will become of
that poor Family? What will become of poor Relations? Why, by Faith and Prayer
let me commit them all to the same God, who will look after and provide for
them too; I have great Encouragement thus to do, whether I look at him, or
them; the little knowledge I have of him may assure me, that they cannot be in
better Hands: He wants neither Wisdom, Power nor Will to do them good; under
his Fatherly care and custody, they are sure to want no good Thing, which is
consistent with his Love to bestow, and their real Benefit to enjoy; and are
secured here from all real and destructive Evils: It seems on purpose to
strengthen the Faith, and revive the Souls of his poor Creatures under such
Trials, that he has taken upon him those sweet relative Titles, of a Father, a
Husband. -- Again, If I look at them, I have farther Encouragement, having a
comfortable Assurance of the special covenant Interest that the most of them
have in this God, and a good Hope concerning the rest; now let God alone, he
loves and will take care of his Children: Let me not at once both grieve and
dishonor him, and torment my self with my Distrust! But farther, the loss is
Public; O my Father, the Chariots of England, and the Horse men thereof! God's
poor Church has lost a judicious, faithful and painful Minister; how many poor
Souls that may want him! How will that poor Place where he lived want him?
Well, though here is a wide gap made, yet sure, such a God can fill and stop it
up; which of the Prophets live for ever? God that sends his Servants appoints
them their Work, and when they have done that, they must away and others come
in their room: He will not have all his Work done by one Minister, or in one
Generation, but by a Succession of such in his Church to the end of the World;
so this precious Servant of his having acted his Part, is gone down, to make
way for such as the Lord shall send; having dispatched the Work given him to
do, he is gone to his Great Lord and Master to receive an ample Reward: And
still God's Church while upheld (that is so long as the World stands) shall be
provided for.

7thly. The inconceivable Happiness his Soul enjoys; the Soul of Man is a
spiritual, immortal Substance, and Jesus Christ has purchased eternal Life for
all true Believers, and firmly entitled it upon them in the Gospel: So that
their Souls no sooner depart this Life, but immediately they are with him; It
is my great Sin and Misery both, that my belief of such great and comfortable
Truths as these, is no more firm and stable: And what a shame it is, that I
should be so wavering about them, who have so long enjoyed the glorious Light
of the Gospel, wherein they are so fully and plainly revealed? O this evil
Heart of Unbelief! Well, I now see a poor cold dead Carkase, but what is become
of the Soul, which did a while since animate it? No doubt it is with Christ in
Paradise; O thrice happy Soul indeed! Methinks while I am sadly lamenting my
own Loss, I should also rejoice in his Gain, which is inconceivably greater; he
is now possessed of that State of Bliss, which he has sometimes so sweetly
described to us: But how shall I proceed here? My conceptions of this blessed
State, how low, dark, imperfect and confused are they? But let not the Lord be
angry; he is now perfectly freed from all those gross Evils and Miseries which
poor we Mortals are encompassed with; he has now at once bid farewell to Sin
and Sorrow both for ever: What grievious complaints I have heard sometimes
coming from his Mouth, by reason of his Corruptions and Imperfections, though
he had comparatively so little Reason? But now I know his Note is changed; He
cries out of a naughty Heart no more, being received into the number of Just
ones made perfect; He is no more afflicted with perplexing Doubts and Fears;
His shaking Fits are all over; A sweet serenity of Mind he ordinarily enjoyed
indeed while here, but now his Peace is perfect and uninterrupted; Possession
has put his Title quite out of doubt; He is no more cast down under a Sense of
God's displeasure; He sees a Frown in his blessed Face no more, he complains
no more, the Lord is angry with me; He is no more annoyed and disquieted with
Satan's Temptations, being got quite out of his Gunshot; That old Serpent is
now trodden under his Feet, so as never to hiss, or put forth his Sting at him
more; For temptations he has an everlasting triumph; He is now got above a
vain, tempting and vexing World; How little he regards this worldly Trash, now
he is got possessed of the heavenly Treasure? How he would disdain, yea abhor
any Solicitations from the World, was he in their reach? Draw him away from his
God with a toy, a shadow? O vile and vain Attempt! He knows better things then
so; The rule of the greatest Empire upon Earth, is far below the meanest of his
heavenly Companions, thrice happy Creatures be they all! And as for a raging,
persecuting World, he fears it no more for ever; let his Enemies touch him now
with their Scorns, Reproaches and Callumnies if they can: Which of them will
imprison, impoverish or banish him now? Its a thing quite out of all their
hands; in his Conflict here, he was exemplary for his Faith, Patience and other
Graces: And now he has obtained a full and final Conquest, and with it a Crown
of Glory which fades not: He is now perfectly freed from all other sad effects
and consequents of Sin; He is no more seen in Tears, and sad Complaints: Grief
no more finds a passage into his blessed Soul; fears no more darken his
Delights: He is no more consumed with Cares; He cries out of a pained Head or
Side, of a sick Stomach, or of weak and feeble Limbs no more for ever; He is no
more heard complaining of languishing, unserviceable Weakness, which has
sometimes been so great a burden to him: All his dolourous Hours, all his weary
Nights and Day's are over and past; the Lord has wonderfully changed Cheer
with him: Behold, for paternal corrections, the highest expressions of fatherly
Love and Affection! The rod having done its work is quite laid aside, and he is
taken into the lap; and as all his personal Troubles both inward and outward
are at an End, so all relative and public ones, of which he was wont to have
no small share, being one of a truly tender, compassionate and public Spirit:
He is now no more sadned and grieved with this Friends sinful Miscariage, or
that Friends heavy Affliction; He is now got out of the sound of the Churches
Sufferings: Many a sad sight he had seen, and many doleful tideings he has
heard concerning the Church of Christ, which have deeply affected him with
Grief and Sorrow, the interest of a dear Redeemer lying very near his Heart;
but now no more of this for ever: He is otherwise now taken up; having wept
freely with those that wept here on Earth, he is now rejoicing much more
abundantly with triumphant ones above; O happy Soul indeed! But this is not
all, may I therefore proceed a little farther? And the good Lord pardon my
great Sin, the wrong I do thee in disparaging thy magnificent Bounty, darkening
rather then otherwise the Glory of thy heavenly Kingdom, and his Felicity
therein with my inadaequate Conceptions, unsuitable Affections, and low
Expressions! But what better can be expected from so sinful a Soul in Flesh?
Lord, when thou admittest me to taste of the Tree of Life my self, I shall have
other kind of thoughts, and be able to give another account of it? I am now
thinking, what a sweet Story some Angel or glorified Saint could tell me
concerning the heavenly State, who could thus speak from Experience! Well, he
is now with them made perfect; He is not only freed from sinful Imperfections,
but has his Capacity enlarged for the Reception of the heavenly Glory; we are
poor narrow-mouthed, shallow Creatures, little that we can take in or or hold:
What would Heaven be to us in our present State? But its otherwise with him,
being raised to as high a degree of Perfection as he is capable of; and
according to his Receptivety are his Enjoyments: His large Vessels are filled
brim full in the Ocean of eternal Bliss; He is got to the nearest enjoyment of
God your chief Good: And what need I, or can I say more? O that I did but know,
experimentally know what thus much means! Blessed Soul he does by sweet
Experience, being got as near him as he can well desire; He now knows God
indeed, the knowledge of whom in Christ is life-eternal: Indeed the
estrangedness which Sin had created between God and his Soul, was hapily
removed in a good-measure while here, so that he had much sweet intercourse
with him; but alas! It was but in part, but this is done away, that which is
perfect, being come; while he was here, he saw but through a glass darkly (as
poor we do) but now Face to Face: And having this knowledge of God, what can he
be ignorant of which is worth the knowing, or would any way augment his
Happiness? And doubtless it would add much to his Joys, now he is got to the
heavenly Canaan, to reflect, and look back upon the many weary turns and
windings which he had in his Passage through the howling Wilderness of this
World; but that which is sweeter still, indeed the kernel of all is, he now
enjoys God in the perfect and constant actings of joyful Love; while we are
forced to breath out many a sad complaint of the disaffection of our Souls
toward God, he is breathing out nothing but love and joy and praise; now he
had perfected Affections, and a perfect sight of his Aimableness, and
continually enjoys the sweet embraces of his Love, its a thing impossible for
him either not to love him, or to love him with such remisness, coldness and
inconstancy as poor unworthy we do; and perfectly to love God, and to be
beloved of him, this perfect, mutual and joyful Love (I think) is the highest
happiness the Creature is capable of: O blessed Soul! How pure and perfect are
his Joy's? What shall I say to these things? O that I could feel more! He has
changed his quarters indeed! Glorious Angels and Saints are now his Familiar's,
his continual Associates, which when he bears a part in those heavenly Songs
of Praise to him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever;
O blessed Place, blessed Work and blessed Company! In a few words (as he
defined it to us while here) he is now perfectly freed from all Sin and Misery,
in the fruition of all good, being perfectly restored to God's Image, and
admitted to the beatifical Vision and Fruition of him, in the most glorious
Fellowship with Christ the head of our recovery, and all the holy Angels and
blessed Saints in Heaven; O famous Description! And yet the one half is not
told us; now shall I be so unkind as once to wish him back again with me?
Should I not rather long to be with him, and in the mean time think well of the
Rod, which is a blessed means to drive me forward in Heavens way? Should I not
with humble Submission entertain this, and all other afflictive Providence,
which may exceedingly befriend me in my Preparation for that blessed Place and
State.

8thly. Death and the Grave, are quite vanquished and overcome by Jesus Christ,
and surely this is a very staying, quieting Consideration; I am ready to think
sadly of it, that his precious Soul and Body, that loving couple should be
separated, their Union dissolved; that he in whom I have so delighted, whose
company has so often refreshed me, that he should be laid in the dust, and have
worms for his Companions, while I may see his Face no more in the land of the
living; that he should consume and rot in the Grave, this goes hardly down:
But is there not somewhat of childish pity here? I am to consider that its only
the Flesh that is the looser here, and that but for a time, which loss shall be
made up with unspeakable advantage at the great Day of the Lord, which draws
on; Death to his Soul, was his present inservicable Gain, as before: And why
should I be so immoderately concerned for what the body suffers? Alas! What
was it but a lump of Corruption? Indeed while that gracious Soul of his did
animate it, it was very lovely, of much value: But now the Jewel is gone, what
is the Cabinet worth? Good reason why I should take delight in that House
though but of Clay, while the heavenly Inhabitant was there: But now its gone,
and House is fallen in, why should I so value it? And farther, what was it to
him, what an Enemy? How much care and labor, grief and sorrow it has cost
him? A log, a prison to his Soul; I may be sure he does not grieve or grudge,
that God has now by Death thus disburdened, unfettered, and released him: But
farther, I am to consider that Jesus Christ the Lord of Life, has vanquished
and overcome Death; if Death had swallowed him up, had made an end of him, this
had been sad indeed, but God be thanked it is otherwise: He had a firm Belief
of this great Truth, and the Comfort of it too, for in his late Sickness when
he called me to Pray by him, he bid me bless God for a Mediator, through whom
he could say, O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? The
Lord Jesus Christ is risen from the dead, a main part of the glad tidings which
the Gospel brings, which is good assurance of the blessed Resurrection of all
those that belong to him; let me think often of those sweet Words of his [because
I live, ye shall live also.] To be sure the Lord Jesus Christ the head of his
Church, will not have a dead Body, no nor one dead Member, while it is in his
Power to give it Life; as sure as he is risen from the Dead, and lives for ever
more (which is as sure as that God is True, who has declared it in his Word)
so sure it is that whosoever believing his shall be raised by him at the last
day, and live for ever with him: Now think, I have many a time cheerfully bid
him Goodnight, when he has been going to take his Natural rest, and why?
Because I hoped to see him again in the Morning, and that more refreshed: And
why should I grieve immoderately now? His grave is but a bed wherein to rest
his weary Bones for a while, and I may not only hope, but have a confident well
grounded Assurance, that the Morning of the Resurrection will come, when the
earth shall disclose him, and the dust cover him no more; this shall not be an
everlasting Night, an endless Sleep; No, his Body shall be raised, and that a
glorious, spiritual Body: That blessed Day will e're long dawn; and how sweet
will be the Salutation between that lovely couple, his glorified Soul and Body,
perfectly delighting in each other, without jarring in the least for ever more?
And how happy a meeting it will be for me, when I shall so meet with him, as
never to be parted from him more? O! I shall have enough of his company in
Heaven, and it will be better to me there, then it was here; if it has been so
comfortable to spend Sabbath's, and Solemn-day's of Humiliation and
Thanksgiving with him here? What will it then be to spend an everlasting
Sabbath with him in Heaven, in singing forth the high Praises of God, and of
the Lamb? Sure I should not be so dejected with the sad thoughts of parting
here, as comforted with the joyful hopes of that blessed meeting? Well, the
time is coming on a pace; the Lord Jesus Christ is risen from the dead, the
first Fruits of them that sleep, and by and by the Trumphet sounds, and that
quickening Voice which will make dead and dry Bones live [Arise ye dead] will be
heard all the World over! Then shall all the Faithful arise out of their
Graves, with Bodies made like unto Christ's Glorious Body: Now what say I to
these things? Believe I this? I have cause to be extreme jealous of this
naughty Heart of mine, which I have so often found tardy; and I may be sure of
this, that my own immoderate fear of Death, and dejectedness at the death of
Friends, if it prove not the absence of Faith, yet sadly bewrays the weakness
of it: Did I so firmly believe this great Truth as I ought to do, it would
infallibly help me, with more comfort and confidence to resign my own Soul, and
the Souls of departing Friends, into the hands of a dear Redeemer, who though
he was dead, yet is a live and lives for ever more; therefore let me frequently
and seriously think of those firm, substantial Grounds which I have for my
belief of this grand Article of the Christian Faith, and with abhorrence,
reject any vain and trifling Cavils or Objections, which may by any means be
raised in me about it, seeing the Power of the omnipotent God is here engaged
by word of Promise; and having once sufficiently cleared up the Matter to my
Judgment, let me bring it near and close unto my Heart, and take to my self the
comfort of it: and let the thoughts hereof keep me from sinking under this
heavy smarting Affliction; while with weeping Eyes I am peeping into his Grave,
let Faith the Eye of the Soul, which can see afar off, have a clear and fixed
view of the Resurrection.

9thly. My case is not singular; none other Affliction has befallen me, then
what is common unto Men; the daily Experience of the World testifies, that its
no rare thing for Children to see your dear Parents head's laid in the Dust:
And this if soberly weighed, might do something toward the mitigation of my
present Trouble, when any Affliction befalls a Man which is strange, unheard of,
this consideration puts a signal Acerbity into it, touches the very quick; as
it may possibly point at some signal Guilt in the Person on whom it is
inflicted, or may be a token of God's signal Displeasure against him; but God
be thanked, this is not my Case; I am ready in a fit of peevish, unruly Passion
to cry out, would God I had dwelt in perpetual silence! Or, would God I had
never lived to see this sad and doleful day! Has this Affliction of mine its
parallel? Is there any Sorrow like unto mine? But hold a little; what means
this great Heat? Is not this strange Language to come from the Mouth of such a
one as I profess my self to be? Would not sober Reason utterly condemn it? I am
not the first by Millions that have been in this Case; how many if I consider,
that in a short time I may reckon up, and such as upon sundry Accounts, might
have promised themselves an exemption from this trial of Affliction before me,
and yet it came upon them, and yet with such aggravating Circumstances as mine
does not; many have been snatched away suddenly, and such as they had just
cause to fear was in their natural, unregenerate Estate: But I have had a fair
time of warning to prepare my self, and as to his good Estate Godward, better
assurance I could not well desire; and what say thou? How would thou have
escaped the stroke? Why I would have gone first: By the way, I doubt my desires
after Heaven are not rightly grounded; I fear I do not truly desire Heaven, and
so am not like to come there ever the sooner for such desires, if it be only or
chiefly that I may be eased of, or escape and avoid Afflictions here; was I the
most miserable Creature in the World, yet the thoughts of being rid of
Corruption and Temptation, thus freed from Sin, this should make Heaven more
desirable to me, then the being eased of all my miseries here: But to return;
was not he more fit for Heaven by far than I, more ripe for Glory, more meet
for the Inheritance of the Saints in light? And is it not a thing very fitting
and equal that he should go first? Since he has been so hard at work, and so
quick in the dispatch of it, why should I think much that the Lord should give
this his laborious Servant a writ of ease, admitting him into his rest, before
such an idle, lazay, loiterer as I? Your young Scholars who have made some good
proficiency in Learning at your Country Schools, are sent to the University:
But what should dull raw School boy's do there? They must be whipped and whipped
again, before they will learn to say their Lessons; just so its here: The Lord
Jesus Christ the great Doctor of his Church, has kept him a considerable time
at his School here on Earth, and very teachable he was, he had learnt to take
out his Lesson exceeding well, few so good at it as he, he had learnt Christ
indeed, and so being ripe, he is gone to take his Degrees in the University of
Heaven: Whereas, such a dull, blockish, sot as I, such a loiterer, who love my
ease and my play better then my book; am like to have many a frown and many a
blow, many a whiping bout before I can follow him, or come where he is, if ever
I come there; if I hold on this idle, lazy rate, Thousands will get the start
of me, will get to Heaven before me, while I lie loitering behind, if I do not
in the end fall short of it; why true, I must grant that he was more fit for
Heaven then I, and that God's ways are equal in taking them first, who are most
speedy in their Preparations: But O that he would have spared him a little
longer! Would he but have lengthned out his Life one Year more! Yea, how
thankful would I have been for one Month, or one Week more? But one Day, one
Hour will not be granted; He is gone, so that I must never see his Face more
here in the land of the living; the dark and silent Grave has enclosed, and
shut him in; and that he should be snatched away so hastily, and at a time when
I could so ill have parted with him, is not this sad? Do I not well if not to
be angry, yet to grieve to purpose? Is not this a sufficient Apology for me,
was my Heart more imbittered with grief by many degrees then it is; let me here
a little expostulate the case with my self: And I must needs say this, that
fretful Anger and immoderate Grief, are each of them both highly sinful and
unreasonable; I beg, nay I command a true and sober Answer to these few
Queries; has not the Lord indulged me with him a considerable time, and that
since I was in a capacity to have improved him? Methinks so many years Mercy of
this Nature should seem something to me, who would now be so glad of one Day;
have I not had many and many an opportunity of geting good by him, which I have
carelessly let slip? Such a time he was preaching to me, and such a time he was
praying with me, and many a time he has been privately at work for my good,
reproving, exorting, directing and comforting me, both by word of mouth and
writing; how fain would he have had me been some body for a Christian? But
alas, I have not known the day of my visitation! O that I had been wise in
time! I may well give my self leave to grieve for my folly here in bitterness
of Spirit: And farther, had I not good reason to expect, and a fair time of
warning to prepare for that which is now come upon me? The comman fate of
Mankind, more by far dying before his Age then exceeding it, should not this
have put me in mind of his approaching change? Again, the weakness of his Body,
the many Distempers that have been almost continually preying upon him, was not
this a fair item? Has not his Body for several Years, been like a poor old,
crazy building, that must be underpropt again and again, to keep it from
falling in? How many supporters that poor tottering Cottage of his has
continually required, to make it a tolerable dwelling for his Soul? Is it not
a wonder, that so tender, neat and delicate an inhabitant has not forsaken it
before now? Many a time he has been at the Graves mouth, and seemed to have as
good as one Foot in, when yet the Lord has said return; and shall I yet have a
face to say, he was snatched away hastily (as if the Lord had taken me at an
advantage) and urge this as an excuse for my Impatience? This is shameful
Impudence indeed: And farther, how many plain hints I have had from his own
Mouth? How often has he been droping words of that nature, lest after all when
the time of his departure came I should be surprised, and so taken unprovided?
So that its evident the Lord has been no way a-wanting to me here; and let me
have a care how I reflect upon his Wisdom, in the ordering of this sad
Providence, as to the circumstance of time; He does all things well, and in
their proper Season: To preposterate and act disorderly, belongs to such as I,
but is below a Being so infinitely Perfect as God's is; speak out, is it a
fitting thing that I should be his Counceller? That my Folly should correct his
infinite Wisdom! Look back to hints of this nature given under the 5th Head,
and if they be not sufficient, thou shall have another Lecture and another
after that, till thou be forced to yield up the cause, for God will, he must
and shall have the day; and now seeing my Afflictions is rather singular for
its alleviating then aggravating Circumstances, let it be my great care and
endeavor, that my Carriage and Behavior under it, be singularly Pious and
Exemplary.

10thly. My time here is likely to be very short, with which all my Troubles
and Sufferings will expire; if I be one to whom the Lord has graciously
forgiven the everlasting Punishment, a truly regenerate, sanctified Person,
interested in the righteousness and satisfaction of Jesus Christ (as I hope I
am), I may then easily see to an end of these temporal Afflictions, Death will
put a final Period to them all; and why should these things grieve me much,
which shall not grieve me long? The length and continuance of any Affliction,
or Calamity does hughly aggravate it: This consideration does most amaze and
torment the Damned, when they think on their intolerable, insupportable
Miseries as endless; was but that one word [everlasting] out of their Sentence,
though it was inconceiveably sad to be separated from God the fountain of
bliss, and cast into the lake which burns with fire and brimstone though but
for a short term, yet methinks it was not one half so terrifying; the hopes of
approaching ease and rest, will make a Man go through present pain and labor
with Patience; in the midst of my troubled thoughts within me, when I am
poreing upon my Crosses and Afflictions here, let me think with seriousness and
delight how short lived both they and I am like to be, and of those pure and
eternal joy's that will abide me; I must expect a multitude of Calamities
constantly to attend me here, Sin and Suffering being so linked together; it is
a wonder of God's mercy that I am not afflicted only, and oppressed always!
While I Sin I must expect to smart for it; if I reckon otherwise its fond and
groundless, flat, contrary to what God in his Word, and in the constant methods
of his Providence teaches; what can the issue then be, but my most shameful
Disappointment? Let me not therefore promise my self ease and rest and quiet
here, as if this was Jerusalem, when alas it is the Wilderness; Yet for my
comfort this, though the day's of my life here are evil, full of trouble, yet
they are but few: What is my life but a vapor, which appears for a little
time and then passes away? My day's upon earth are a shadow, they are swifter
then a Post, they fly away, they are spent as a tale that is told; what are a
thousand Years to the eternal God, who knows neither beginning nor end of
Day's? Alas they are as nothing! And what are they to future Eternity? A very
small, inconsiderable thing; then why should short momentary Afflictions, make
so deep an impression upon an immortal Spirit, that has endless Felicity in
its eye? Should not the lively Contemplations of those eternal Joy's, reserved
for me in Heaven even swallow me up, and make me as it were forget my present
Miseries? Though for the present I am confined to this poor Cottage, and kept
in hold in this dark, sinful, dirty World, and am put upon many
inconveniences, and endure many hardships here: Yet I may look up and see a
glorious Mansion prepared for me, and be surveying a very large and fair Estate
indeed, Heaven a glorious Kingdom, which the Lord has made over to me by deed
of gift, sealed and ratified in his Son's blood, which I am at present Heir to
(through the abundant riches of his Grace,) and shall be put into full
possession of when once I come at Age; here is something for my thoughts to
work upon indeed! A large and pleasant Field to walk in by holy Meditation; had
I never so much time, was I as well acquainted with this spiritual Art as ever
Saint on earth was, and should I spend never so many thoughts upon this most
delightful Subject, and make use of the greatest helps that earth affords, yet
I should never be able to reckon up my spiritual Riches here, able either to
conceive or express what the Sum of all amounts to; all this World is not
sufficient to contain it! I am not able to imagine, what happiness Angels and
Saints enjoy in one single hours Communion with God and Jesus Christ in Heaven;
O then what will Eternity be! Blessed eternity! Here I am quite lost; how comes
it to pass, that I can so easily forget such things as these? How sad and
shameful a thing it is, that I should have a Heart, and find time and leisure
to think of almost any thing else, but not of God and Christ and Heaven? And
why is my Heart no more filled with heavenly Joy in such divine Contemplations?
Does Earth out-ballance Heaven? Light momentary Afflictions, weigh down the
crown of Life and Glory? Surely no; let it then be so seen in my looks,
carriage and behavior; let it appear, that I have other manner of Thoughts of
future, invisible, eternal Things than the Men of the World have, that I do
indeed look upon them as the greatest Realities, and am suitably affected
toward them; let it now be manifested to the World, that I do practically
believe the indubitable Certainty and unparalleled Excellency of the Saint's
happiness in the life to come; I should live with as much seriousness to day,
as though I was to die to morrow: And why then may I not be as cheary to day,
as though I was to go to Heaven to morrow, not knowing but I may? And what a
pleasant Life might I thus lead, let my outward Circumstances in the World be
what they will! I say, could I but live from day to day in the believeing views
of near approaching Glory, what a comfortable Life might I lead! Why is it not
thus with me? Where does the hinderance lie? Is there any defect in the Object?
No, no, its in my sight; its a carnal, unbelieving, a sloathful and negligent
Heart that hinders me; away with such a Heart! And farther, let me think how
great a part of my evil Day's are certainly already spent; now above twenty
Years are gone, and for ought I know a twentieth Part does not remain; Faith
and Patience lengthen out a while; I cannot have long to suffer here, it may be
not near so long as I think of; a few day's more and the Tables are turned, the
Scene quite altered; let me lift up my Head and hold up my Heart under present
Pressures, for the time of my full and complete Redemption draws nigh; my
Salvation is nearer then when I first believed, and every day its drawing on;
yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry any
longer; its but waiting a while and I am with him the loss of whom I am now
lamenting, in the new Jerusalem the City of our God, where sorrow and sighing
flee away, where God is all and in all to his Saints: To conclude, the time is
short, therefore let me weep as though I wept not; let me have Life with all
its Troubles in quiet, enduring Patience, and Death with its blissful
Consequents, in lively Hope and earnest Desire.

The PREFACE to his CATALOGUE of some of his dear Christian Friends and
Relations, whose Souls are now with GOD.
METHINKS the sensible decays I have found of late are a fair Item, that Death
is not only upon its way toward me, but that it may be nearer in its
approaches then possibly I am aware of, and so a loud call to me, in good
earnest to be thinking of it, and of that eternal State I must immediately
thereupon be fixed in.

Sometimes I cannot but verily hope, that the Lord has cut me out for Heaven
(though there is not, nor ever was there a wretch upon the Face of God's Earth
that less deserved it, nor can I think there is a Saint in Heaven that will
have more reason amazingly to adore such rich, free, distinguishing Grace and
Mercy then my self.) But yet though I have this Hope, that when Death turns me
out of this World, I have a better Place to go to, and though I can thereupon
sometimes rejoice and please my Self with the thoughts of its Approach, while I
look upon it at some distance, yet when I come nearer to it, I find my thoughts
and apprehensions concerning it, and concerning the separate State of my Soul
thereupon, to have much strangness and terror in them, which its like does
much arise from my Ignorance and Unbelief.

I should account it a blessed thing, could I but get to converse with these
things in my Thoughts with that familiarity and delight as I wish; and there is
one thing I have sometimes found a little to befriend me herein, which is to
think how many of my dear Christian Friends, with whom I have here had
delightful Converse and Communion, to think I say, how many of these are gone
before me, and so ready to bid me welcome to that our blessed home.

Indeed was they not with my dearest Lord, this Argument would loose its Force;
Heaven was not Heaven, was he not there; O let me live with Christ, let me ever
behold the King in his Beauty; O let me but have my fill of Christ, and then I
am content to spend my Eternity any where, was it in a Desert, in a Denn.

But yet there is methinks some additional sweetness in it, to think of
enjoying Christ in the Fellowship and Communion of the blessed ones above; and
under the present, low and languishing Circumstances of Faith and other Graces
in my Soul, it has methinks some particular sweetness in it, to think of my
old Acquaintance who are got to Heaven.

I intend therefore to have in my view a Catalogue of some of them as they come
to my Thoughts, that so I may now and then make them a Visit, and take a few
turns with them in my serious Thoughts, and this in order to the End above
mentioned.

CHAP. XI. Ten QVERIES seriously Propounded to CARD-GAMESTERS: By one who much
Questioneth the Lawfulness of that GAME.
Introduction.
I Doubt not but some Recreation is lawful, yea needful; and therefore a Duty
to some Men: But among things that go under this Denomination, there are some
utterly unlawful in their own Nature, and others which may be lawful in
Themselves, are by the abuse of them rendered sinful, or at best very doubtful;
among many other Games and Sports in common Practice amongst us, I fear upon
serious Examination, this of Card's will be found extreme Faulty; I shall give
you some of my Thoughts, by Propounding the following Queries to you, hoping I
may do it inoffensively; and if I may prevail with you so far, as to be at the
Pains to Read, and entertain a few sober Thoughts about them, I shall leave it
to your Selves to draw up a Conclusion, and pass Sentence according to the
Merit of the Cause.

Query. 1. Is it not unlawful, or highly to be suspected as such, to use Lots
in so vain and trivial a Matter as Gameing is? You will readily grant me this,
that it is a Sin of no small Magnitude to take God's sacred Name in Vain; I
mean, to do it needlessly, or but upon weighty Occasions, Exodus 20.7. You cannot
deny but God's name is used in Lots, Prove. 16. 33. The disposing of the Lot is
of the Lord. Not of Man, or of Fortune; it is an appealing to God's Sentence;
and that this Game do much depend upon Lottery (if Persons play honestly,) is a
thing notoriously Evident; I deny not, but Lot's have been, and may be lawfully
used in some Cases: we We read of Divine Lot's which have been used upon a
special Command, Josh. 7.14, 15. Acts 1.24, 26. There are also civil and
political Lot's, used in dividing Land's, deciding Controversies, etc. see Acts
13.19. Neh. 11.1. And this is a proper means to prevent, or put an end to
Contention, when Persons rest satisfied in God's Determination, Prove. 18.18.
The lot causes contention to cease; To say nothing of magical Lot's, which are
certainly unlawful; our Question is about loosory Lot's used in Games, and such
a one it is, as I think must be carried in the Negative: That is, whether you
may lawfully appeal to the special Providence of God to determine, whether your
Game shall go for or against you; has this no appearance of Evil in it? Is it
not a thing condemned, by the same Law which condemns vain Oath's? Some think
it is so, whose Judgments you and I ought to Reverence; but suppose it should
not be a taking God's Name in Vain (which yet I see no reason to grant,) I
would enquire.

Q. 2. Can you seriously and heartily Pray to God, to bless your Card's to you?
Do you, or dare you use any ejaculatory Prayer to God upon this Account, at
your entrance upon, or in your Game? On the contrary, have you not some secret
misgivings in your Mind's, as to God's Approbation of it? Which brings to my
Thoughts a Story I have read of a Poor Man, who had stolen a Calf for the
Necessity of his Family; He got part of it prepared for eating: But when he
came to crave God's blessing on it (as his use was), his Conscience smote him
so that he could not do it. Sure I am, there is no lawful Recreation, but one
may warrantably and comfortably beg God's blessing upon it.

Q. 3. Does this Game dispose and fit you for the better discharge of your
Duty? The most innocent and harmless Recreation is sinful to me, if I use it
merely to delight and gratify my carnal Fancy. Without doubt, duty is the end
of Recreation; well, I will suppose you to intend a right End; I ask now, have
you found this to be a proper Means for the attainment of it? Or, on the
contrary, does not manifold and sad Experience tell you, that it has much
indisposed you for any holy, religious Exercise, as Prayer, Meditation, etc.
And has it not sometimes unfitted you, for the duties of your particular
Callings?

Q. 4. Is it not a great Time waster? You know Time is a very precious thing;
we must do great Matters in Time, or we are undon for ever; and we have but a
very little of it; only this little inch in present Possession is our's, and
that flies away from us too; while I am writing and you are reading, it is
marching away with winged speed, to the great Creator of all things, to declare
what usage it had with us: Now you know, when we have but a little of any thing
of great Worth and Use to us, we take it very ill to be robbed of it; then why
are we not more concerned about our Time, which is more precious then Gold? Now
how many Hour's this Thief has robbed you of? More then all the World could
purchase for you, was it at your command; it should be a sad Reflection to you
and me, that we should have so strangly squandered away so much of our Time,
which can never be recalled; and now for our future Benefit, let us soberly
debate the Case with our Selves, whether the great Concernments of our Souls,
in order to another Life, does not call for all the Time we can well spare from
our necessary Employments here: And will you, the next time you are tempted to
spend it at Card's, but ask Conscience this Question, is time of no more worth
to me, who may be so near to Eternity, and must give so strict an Account of my
Hour's?

Q. 5. Is not this Game made the Exercise of Covetousness? Do you not play with
a design, and desire of gaining that from your Neighbor, which you give him
nothing for? Is not this couching? And what think you by that?

Q. 6. Is it not an occasion of much idle, foolish Talk, of whole clusters of
words about every Cast, and every Card almost? And does it not frequently
excite your Passions, and create unhappy Quarrels and Differences? I join these
two together, because generally they are one at the heels of another; now what
say you to this? What think you of idle Words, and sinful Passions; must we not
give an Account for these things? Objection.

Object. But here you will (its like) be ready to object and say, you go all
this while upon a mistake; we look upon it, and use it as a lawful Recreation;
we do not spend so much time in it as you think of; and we play only for a
Glass of Ale, which we are as willing to loose as win: And we are not for
quarelling.

Answ. If it be indeed so as you say, I am glad of it, and so far you deserve
Commendation in it; if you can clear your Selves from what I have been hinting
at, I fear there are but few Gamesters that are your Fellows: But granting
this, I have one Question in this Case to ask; that is,

Quest. Whether those you play with, be not guilty of some (if not of many) of
those things, which makes the Game unlawful to them? Whether they may not
justly be charged with Covetousness, sinful Pleasure or Passion, etc. And if
so, whether you can clear your Selves, while you take part with, and encourage
them by your Example?

Object. Are we bound to keep all other Men from sinning?

Answ. I answer, you are bound to do your best toward it, and to take great
heed that you no way contribute to their Sin.

Object. But here you may farther object and say, must we forbear every thing
that another will make an occasion of his Sin? At this rate, we must neglect a
great part of our Duty.

Answ. To this I answer, though you may not neglect a Duty, to prevent another
being scandalized or tempted to Sin; yet sure you may omit an idle Sport, and
an unnecessary Pastime: You may guess what the Apostle Paul's Judgment would
have been in this Matter from, 1 Cor. 8.13. If he would forbear eating Flesh so
long as he lived, rather then cause his Brother to offend: Should not your
Sports be subject to the like Charity?

Q. 7. Who are they that are fondest of, and most adicted to this Game? Are
they not generally, the prophanest Sort of Men, or the looser Sort of
Professors? Are not the most serious, strict and heavenly Christians generally
very suspicious of, and much weaned from it? I deny not, but there may be
serious Christians that use this Game; some that I have known, and do know: But
how do they use it? Not at the ordinary rate sure; if they do, they are
equally, yea in some Sense more culpable than others; and I would farther
enquire here, whether the greater part of judicious and pious Ministers and
Christians be not against it? I am persuaded upon Examination, it would be
found so.

Q. 8. Can it be any good Sign, if you can recreate your Selves with that which
is so great a grief and burden to your Ministers, and many of your fellow
Christians, because they look upon it as sinful? O! How tender should we be, in
this Point? How fearful should we be of grieving or offending any of our
Brethren, for whom Christ died? He is very tender of them, and so much the
more, as he sees them tender of his Honor, and grieved and offended at Sin,
whether in themselves or others.

Q. 9. Tell me truly, how does your Card's relish with you, when you are in the
most serious Frame? When you find the great things of another World impressed
upon your Spirits, in the most fresh and lively Manner? I verily think if I
should fall to Card's, one serious Thought of Death and Judgment, one sober
Glance at my eternalState, would spoil my Sport; how is it with you in this
Matter? If you must needs play on, will you make trial the next time.

Q. 10. To add no more; whether will the remembrance of so many Hours spent at
Card's, be pleasing or tormenting to you, when you come to die? And whether
will it be a comfortable or a sad hearing from your Judge, when you come to
give up your Accounts; we must account as strictly for our Time, as for any
other Talent we are entrusted with; and the Day which God has prefixed, for
this solemn and weighty Affair is drawing nigh; Death may be upon us, before we
are aware; and when we shall see our selves ready to be arrested, and summoned
to appear without delay, before God's great Tribunal: Then (if ever) Conscience
will be reflecting upon our State and Actions; and when it shall find so much
precious Time, at best but lost and trifled away, which should have been spent
in glorifying God, and working out our own Salvation, what chideing Language
may we expect to hear from it? I am ready to tremble sometimes, when I think
what my own Conscience may have upon this Score, then to charge me with! Alas,
poor Creatures! We make a shift to stop its Mouth now, or to stop our Ears: But
if the Lord awake it then, it will speak, and so loudly as shall make us hear,
whether we will or no; O Fool's, or somewhat worse that we are, thus to lay in
for our own tormenting Grief and Sorrow! Now shall we not be wiser for the
future, and live more like to dying Men? O that we could bring our Hearts to
this, before we venture upon any thing, to think seriously with our Selves,
will this be comfortable to me at the reckoning? Shall I like to hear of this
another day from my own Conscience, or from the supreme Judge of quick and dead?

Now if there be any sense or weight in the Questions I have here Propounded, I
hope you will not think it an unreasonable Request, if I again earnestly
entreat for your serious Thoughts about them: And that you would not proceed
farther, till you can answer them to God and your own Consciences; one thing
more, with which I conclude.

You cannot deny but it is doubtful and disputable, whether this Game be lawful
or no: Whereas I dare affirm, and could (if need was) sufficiently prove on the
other hand, that without doubt it may lawfully be forborne; and this is a good
Rule for your Observation here, In dubiis opportet sequi partem tatiorem. In
doubtful Cases we must take that way which is safest.

Since the writing of this, I am satisfied that a Lot may be lawfully used in
Games, as well as in any other ordinary Affair; and that your extraordinary Lot
cannot be lawfully used in any Case how weighty soever, except Persons have a
divine Warrant for it: But though I see, and am ready to acknowledge my mistake
in this Point, yet am I of the same Mind I was before in reference to my own
Practice here; and I could heartily wish that all Professors especially, would
be very wary how they meddle with a Game so ordinarily abused, and that is so
full of Snares and Temptations, that without extraordinary Caution, they may as
easily touch Pitch and not be defiled, as make use of it, and not be some way
or other ensnared by it.

PIOUS LETTERS.
LETTER I. To C. F. under her Sore, Relative Exercise, June 28. 1684.
Dear Cozen,
I Have been much concerned for you in my Thoughts since I saw you last; I
would be one of those that weep with them that weep, and remember those that
are in Adversity, as being my self also in the Body; and God forbid that I
should not tenderly Pity, and earnestly Pray for you in this your afflicted
Condition; though I have cause sadly to bewail it, that there is so much of
wretched Self in me, which goes so far with me, that while I am at ease, I am
little affected with the Hardships others undergo, which plainly shows how far
I am from the Life of holy Love: There is a saying of wise King Solomon, Prove.
27.9. Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart; so does the sweetness of a Man's
friend by hearty council: O that I was in a capacity, and had ability according
to my hearty Desire, to write or speak any thing which might tend to your
Direction, Support and Comfort; O what pains should I think too great (keeping
within the limits of my calling,) to be laid out any way to promote the good of
any poor Soul, which my Lord and Savior did so esteem as to think it worth
dying for! And seeing you have been pleased in a great measure to open your
Case to me (whom you shall ever find very faithful,) I will humbly adventure
(though I am very conscious of my own Inability to do it effectually, and
verily I think I have more need to come to you to learn, as multitudes of Years
increase Wisdom and Experience,) yet I shall give you my poor, confused
Thoughts what we should learn from, and how we ought to carry under afflictive
Providence; and I hope you will accept of my sincere Desires, though I fall
very short in Performance, in the day of Adversity consider. A day of
Affliction, ought to be a day of great Thoughtfulness with us; consider God
does not Afflict us willingly, without there be great need for it, and he has
wise and gracious End's in what he does; His Rod when ever laid upon our backs
has a loud voice in it; O that we had diligent and tractable Hearts, in
hearkening to and obeying it: Learning some spiritual Lessons from every the
least twig thereof! O what abundance of spiritual Good might we thus extract
out of our greatest Evils! And what a multitude of Strokes might we thus
prevent? And that you and I may be so wise, let us put the following
Particulars into practice. 1st. See we more and more of the evil of Sin, and
hate and mortify it; Sin is the greatest Evil, and the procuring Cause of all
those penal Evils which God inflicts upon us: Righteousness and Judgment is
ever to be ascribed to our God, and all the blame to be charged home upon our
own naughty Hearts; it is Sin which imbitters all our Comforts here; O hate
Sin, and take a holy revenge upon it; Afflictions are but the effect, Sin is
the cause; now remove the Cause and the Effects will cease: O what brutish and
unreasonable Creatures are we, who are so much in love with Sin, a thing so
odious and hateful in the sight of God, and so mischievous to our Selves? O
unnatural we, who are so in love with our own Miseries? Now that you may follow
this Direction effectually, it would be a good way seriously to endeavor to
find out what those Sins are, that have had the greatest hand in bringing this
Affliction upon you; for in many of God's strokes, his Hand his Rod points very
visibly to the Offense, I have verily thought so in several of the light
Afflictions he has laid upon me: When God afflicts us in Relations, we ought
with shame and grief to reflect upon our relative Sins; I dare not but humbly
mind you of this thing; having found out the Achans, let us dispatch them
without delay; let us humble our Souls exceedingly for them, and earnestly beg
the Pardon of them, and with all our might strive against them: O let us show
Sin no mercy! Let the Lord see that his quarrelling with us, has broached an
irreconcilable quarrel between our Souls and Sin. 2dly. Let us be led to see
more of the emptiness and vanity of the Creature; since our fall from God to
the Creature, we are very prone to place and seek our Happiness in it, whereas
our Happiness consists, and ought to be placed in God alone who is the chief
Good; and our Gracious God many times sees good to Afflict his Children, most
in those things which have got the greatest share of their Affections, and so
are likely to draw away most of their Hearts from him: O remember (dear Cozen)
our Head and Husband the Lord Jesus, has a very jealous Eye over our deceitful
Hearts, he cannot brook any adultrous Affections in his Spouse; when he sees
we are following strangers, and so growing strange with him, it much offends
him; yet so constant is his Love to us, that he takes various Methods to
recover our Affections, and if nothing else will do it, rather then quite loose
us, he will hedge up our way with Thorns, and seldom that our naughty Hearts
will be reclaimed till it comes to that; I remember an Expression of my Father,
in a Sermon of his to this Purpose, I am verily persuaded (says he) that most
of the lashes laid upon God's Children here, are to pay home and sharply to
correct them for some overloving of the Creature: As I said before, hate Sin
more, so here love the World less. 3dly. When ever we find the Devil tempting
us to hard Thoughts of God, then let us stand up and plead mightily for God's
goodness; let not our base, distrustful, unbelieving Hearts, be suffered to
entertain any such vile Suggestions; when God's providence are dark and
afflictive toward his People, then it is the Devils trick to do what he can to
possess their Minds with black and unworthy Conceptions of him, as if he had an
evil Eye upon them, and grudged them their outward Comforts, or did willingly
Afflict them, or took pleasure in their Grief; so it is sometimes with God's
Church in general: Sion's Language sometimes is [The Lord has forsaken, my God
has forgotten me.] And so it is frequently with particular Souls under their
particular Trials and Troubles here: How have poor I experienced this sad
Truth? And with what shame and sorrow may I acknowledge the too great readiness
of my base Heart, to close with such Temptations? And if you do not meet with
the same sometimes, I can assure you from sad Experience, your Case is
singularly Happy; and if you do meet with them with abhorrence, reject and cast
them out; fear, yet scorn to entertain them; labor to recollect former
Experiences you have had of the Lord's loving kindness; He is unchangable in
his Love to his: Think often what an Expression it is of his Love and Care,
that he will be at the pains to Afflict you; clearing your Adoption, you may
thence easily argue that all your Afflictions are but Fatherly Chastizements:
And O how would that sweet Promise of God's turning all to our spiritual Good
and Advantage, Romans 8.28. if frequently, seriously and believingly considered
of, make us think very well of all he does? 4thly. Live by Faith upon the
Attributes and Promises of God; it is nothing below this, that will be able to
keep up your Heart and hold up your Head above these Waters; and here I would
advise you, to seek out those Attributes of God that most suit your Case; as it
may be sometimes you are puzzeled even at your Wit's end, and know not what to
do, not what Course to take; I believe it is so with you sometimes, is it not?
Your way is made dark in this Wilderness; why then have recourse by Faith to
the infinite Wisdom of God; it may be you meet with a great deal of treachery
and deceitfulness in the Creature; in this Case, live upon the Truth and
Faithfulness of God which never fails: It may be, you may meet with cruel and
harsh Usage from such, as you have no reason to expect most of the Contrary; in
this Case, solace your Soul in the Consideration of those Bowels of
Compassions, that are in your heavenly Father; and so improve all the
Attributes of God, for they are all yours, and strongly engaged for you, if you
be his; and so as to the Promises of God, seek out those that come nearest to
your Case; promises of Support under your Affliction, and of Deliverance when
the Lord shall see that good for you, at least of a blessed Sanctification of
all to your Soul, which is ten Thousand times better then present deliverance
without it. 5thly. The exercise of Patience is another thing, wherein a
Christian Carriage under Affliction does consist; a quiet submitting unto, and
acquiessing in the good Will of God; consider God's disposing Will in his
Providence, is as really his Will, and does as firmly constitute our Duty to
Obey, as his commanding Will in his Word: And seeing it is his Will, that it
should be so with you as now it is, endeavor cheerfully to subscribe unto it;
let it appear, that you are a Practitioner, yea a good Proficient in the holy
Apostles Art, who had learnt in whatsoever State he was, therewith to be
Content; what a poor Contentment is ours, if it depends upon our Creature
enjoyments, yet, what abundant reason we should be Content with what we have,
we deserve nothing, so surely ought to be Content with any thing; and if an
ever Blessed God will not Content us, surely we are very unreasonable and
foolish: And as for Patience, O what an unreasonable thing is a fretting,
murmuring, impatient Carriage in a Creature, and much more in a Child, under
the righteous, wise and gracious Disposals of God's Providence; it is
especially unreasonable and sinful in such, who may see not only God's Hand,
but also his Heart in their Afflictions; therefore in our Patience let us
possess our Souls; let us consider our Afflictions are but the just procurement
of our Sin, and light in comparison of what we deserve, and they are but short,
for a moment, and such as we have need of, and God has gracious End's in them,
and will bring our good out of them; a gracious Design (I verily believe) he is
now carrying on upon your Soul, which could not have been so well effected
another way: And in Heaven all our sad day's will be forgotten, only so far, as
they will administer Occasion for God's eternal Praises. 6thly. Let us labor
after a joyful, thankful Frame; what abundant Cause there is, that we should
not only be patient, but in joyful Tribulation; let it be our care to clear up
our Interest in God, and then let us take a survey of the Heritage of his
People, the many glorious Privileges the Covenant of Grace entitles us unto,
and then let us live up to our Means; poor, honest Hearts are frequently to
blame here, in living below their Estates; alas, we place so much of our
Happiness in the Creature, that much of our Comfort depends upon it, but thus
it should not be; if God be our Portion, let us live upon him; let the World
see, that however some cry down a Religious Life, as a sad melancholy Life, and
however others exalt their own Fancies, Conceits and gross Delusions above it,
yet let it appear, that we find that solid ground of Comfort in it, as can bear
up our Hearts under our greatest Pressures; dear Cozen, how unlike are we unto,
and how unfit for the blessed Society of Angels and Saints above, who are
continually singing forth the high Praises of our God? Yea, how unlike we are
to those we here profess our selves to be? Is not Praise ever comely for the
upright? O what a dishonor we are to God and Religion, when every petty Cross
in the Creature can sadden and sink our Hearts, whilst we have the God of all
Consolation to live upon? O what strangers we are to our own Happiness, in
being such strangers to a Life of joyful Praise? O what merry Christians might
we be even under our saddest Circumstances, were we but duly sensible of our
highly privileged Estate even here? Lord vouchsafe unto us the joy of thy
Salvation! Finally be instant in Prayer; I bring this in last, because nothing
I have said will be of use to us without some Divine Influences be fetched in
this way; O be frequent and earnest with God in Prayer, that he would by his
Spirit teach you what is the errand of this sad Providence; that he would help
you by your Affliction, to see more of the Evil of Sin, and more of the Vanity
of the Creature, and help you under it, to keep up high, honorable and good
Thoughts of himself, and that he would help you to act Faith, and exercise
Patience, yea, and to live in his joyful Praises; And here I would promise you
my hand, the best of my assistance I can give you; that little Interest I have
at the Throne of Grace shall be employed for you: Thus I have given you some of
my Thoughts; excuse my boldness herein, I hope you will; I would have spent
some Thoughts upon the particular Nature of your Affliction, and so of your
particular Duties and Supports, but that I am deeply sensible of my own
unfitness, and consider what able experienced Ministers and Christians, you may
have opportunity to converse with; I must break of, being sensible my Pen has
been quite too nimble for me, I having been much more tedious then I first
intended: Dear Cozen, I commend you to God and the Word of his Grace: This poor
confused piece of Nonsense, the Lord was pleased to Bless; O what a workman is
he? Let me learn this, if he will undertake a Work, no matter then how mean and
sorry his Tools be,

Who am affectionately Yours, I. B.

LETTER II. To S. E. July 16. 1684.
Dr. S.
BY a hint from my F. in his last, I understand, you have received but two
Letters from me since you went to N. But either you are mistaken, or else some
of them have miscarried: but why am I solicitous about them? How little are
they all worth? How little of God in them all? Which makes me wonder, why you
should be so desirous of them: Alas, are they not as wast Paper? How much
precious Time have I thus wasted in writing a little nonsense to you? And not
only so, but I have caused you to mispend time in reading that you could get
little or no benefit by; but Sister, I would not have you think, that I have
any inclination to leave of my wonted way of Converse with you; no I intend to
be more constant than ever; only I am ashamed to think, that what I have done
this way has been to no better Purpose; O that we were but soundly Sensible of
the worth of precious Time, on which depends Eternity! How would this influence
us in the whole of our Lives here, which are but short and very uncertain? It
is not for nothing that you and I are brought into, and still kept in Christ's
School: Well, Dr. S. there is one Lesson I am very desirous to learn; I will
tell you what it is, that so you may help me by your Prayers, and also bear me
company; it is to redeem Time; a thing soon spoken, soon written, but not so
soon or easily learnt; but the advantages that would come in by it, would more
then counterballance all its difficulties: Well, will you be my fellow Student?
I question not, but you are willing; yea, I hope you are better learnt, a
greater proficient here then my self; O happy Souls, who in Time know the worth
of Time! O thrice happy Souls, that are so wise as to cut off all occasions of
those sad Reflection, which I have of my misspent Time!

-- I am your tender and loving Brother, I. B.

LETTER III. To S. E. August, 15. 1689.
Dear S.
I Received Yours, but am displeased with the Term you give my Letter; if you
have got any Good, give God all the Glory to whom its due; and for a requital,
help poor me with your Prayers; but I must earnestly entreat you, to be ever
very Cautious how you mention any thing that may be an incentive to Pride; you
would not think what a small Spark sets this base Heart of mine on Fire: O my
Pride, my Pride! Yea, I am afraid least there should be something of it, in
what I now write: O lamentable Case! O abominable Sin! And it is especially
intolerable in me; you know this Sin is most odious and unaccountable in
Beggars, and therefore in my poor, beggarly Soul: Dear S. I could tell you a
long and sad Story, of a poor young Man under twenty Years of Age, who finds
the old Man the body of Sin exceeding strong, who many Years since did
lamentably Experience the sad Fruits and Effects of original Corruption, and
that fears that to this day, his Lusts gather strength on him, instead of his
geting ground on them; finding that his natural, sinning Principles are not
idle, but ever active, and finding farther, that his frequent Acts of Sin have
greatly increased and strengthened the habit, so that now his Lusts do lord and
domineer it over him at such a strange rate, that he is ready to fear
sometimes, that in the end his Iniquities will be his Ruin, that he shall one
day fall by the hands of his Lusts, which are got to such a head now, that they
value not his Prayers, or any other Means that he can use against them of a
Rush: Do you not pity such a One? Methinks, I see you ready to weep over Him,
and engraving his Condition upon your Heart, that so you may ever remember him
when you go before the Lord; why to deal plainly with you I am he; and do not
entertain such a foolish Thought, as if I spoke worse of my self then I
deserve; indeed I do not know how to do that; I do not fear wronging this
naughty, sinful Heart and Nature of mine: O what a mirror of Sin and Impiety I
am! Yet, who in my Circumstances so senseless? Indeed I have a Hankerchief lying
by me, but God knows I have little need of, or use for it, and much more may I
say, my dear Savior has full little need of one for my Heart; though he be
willing and ready, yet I do not give him occasion for the Execution of his
Office, who is the binder up of broken Hearts; but Lord, who is it that can
break my Heart but thee! O first wound and then heal! I bless thee, for that
little, small degree of Sensibleness thou have given me, O increase it! But yet
Lord, how long shall this be the best Cheer I have to weep and mourn over my
head strong Lusts? When will thou by thy Omnipotent Grace, help me down with
them? When shall a day of triumph come? Dear Lord, after thou have got the
Victory, will thou suffer these thy Enemies to come and spoil thee, of thy
conquest in my Soul? Surely thou will not; Break not the bruised reed, squench
not the smoking flax, despise not the day of small things, say to me, thy
grace is sufficient for me; I am thine save me: But I would not be too tedious,
dear S. I beg you would go and spread the sheet before the Lord, which
represents my Condition unto you, though not so bad as it is, for indeed I want
Words to express my own Vileness by; I had almost thought to bid you take a
view of him, that is called the wicked One, if you would see a Picture of my
wicked Heart: However, think of the vilest Wretch you know on Earth, and if I
any way differ from him, no thanks to me for that; therefore think more meanly
of me, and pray the Lord to subdue my Pride, and help me to entertain low and
mean Thoughts of my Self; I do not know any Child of God, that has so much
cause to be broken and humble as my self: But I forget my self, for its time to
break of; I assure you, you have no small share in my Affections, who has
great cause to subscribe my self as one of the holy Martyrs did, a proud and
hard-hearted Sinner,

I. B.

LETTER IV. To S. E. September, 6. 1684.
Dear S.
I Received your refreshing Letter, and blessed be God-that I did so, for
verily it put a little Life and Comfort into my Soul; I hope you will excuse
the rudeness of any Expression in my last, and I return you thanks for your
good Council, not to deny the Grace of God; O I would not do so; indeed,
sometimes poor Soul, have such bleared Eyes with Sorrow for Sin; that they are
prone to overlook God's Graces O that I may never be guilty of such
Ingratitude! But no great danger of it upon this Account while my Heart is so
hard; O for more Humiliation, and more Sorrow! Alas! I am not one of those
weepers, that take on so for Sin; its true I am apt enough to overlook God's
Grace, but its from another a contrary Cause: Dear S. my Condition is really
the same as I hinted to you, and much worse: You may make your own to be
somewhat like it; bless God that gives you to think low of your Self: Well I
would say something to the Encouragement of us both; be it granted that our
Condition is such and such, yet (as you say,) there is Merit and Satisfaction
enough in Christ, and there is Mercy and Pity enough in him, and in his Father
through him, for the worst of us, even my self; our Corruptions are strong:
What then! Are they too strong for his Omnipotent Grace? O no, they cannot
stand before it; believe me Sister, though we be weak in our selves, yet we
have mighty strong Friends; God and Jesus Christ, and the holy Spirit of Grace
are on our sides; What then, shall we be afraid and utterly dejected at the
Thoughts of our Enemies? O no, for shame; they be more that are with us, then
they that are against us; God is my Covenant engaged to carry on the Work that
he has begun: think often of that sweet Place that has often revived me [I will
not break the bruised reed. -- ] He will not do it himself, nor suffer any else
to do it; yet how hard it is to believe such things, to believe them soundly I
say, when we are under our discouragements? Well, let us walk humbly, but no
longer sadly and disconsolately; it pleases the Devil, when he sees his
Design take so well with us as it does, when he can deprive us of Peace and
Comfort; but our sad disconsolate Looks are no Satisfaction or Pleasure to our
gracious Father; He is no farther pleased with our Sorrow, then as it prepares
us for the discharge of higher Duties, and the exercise of higher Graces; he
had rather see our Souls elevated in the highest strains of Love, Joy and
Praise; well, study we now in every thing to please him; and that which is our
Duty in this as well as in all other things, would be our great Privilege; I
was troubled to hear that she whom I loved was Sick, but glad to hear you are
better; my Prayer for you is, that all things may work together for your Good;
your Mercies and your Afflictions I look upon as my own: The Lord bless you
with Pardon, Grace and Peace! Farewell,

I am your truly Affectionate and Loving Brother, I. B.

LETTER V. To S. E. September, 30. 1684.
Dear S.
I Received yours, and am glad if my poor Spark added any thing to your flame;
but especially I am pleased with what you write in the Commendation of our
loving Savior; I would be grieved when any Blaspheme that worthy Name, but
methinks it sounds something like Heaven, when any are celebrating the Praises
of the Lamb; indeed I have both seen and heard that of him lately, that would
not have left me so Tongue tied in this Matter as I am, was not my Heart so bad
as it is; O the Love of Christ, methinks it should be the burden of all our
Songs; methinks I would fain be saying something, I know not how to cull out a
more excellent Heart, affecting Subject to write to you on; but I am afraid to
meddle almost, because my low and ill Management will be but a disparagement of
his matchless Love: O that I knew but what to think or write that might affect
my own Heart and Yours! But what a strange Heart have I to deal with? What can
affect me if this do not? O thou Stone, or harder if harder can be! May your
Heart be more affected in reading then mine is in writing, and when it is so, O
then remember poor me; O how should our Hearts be affected when we consider the
Person loving, the Manner how he has loved us, the rich Benefits his Love has
put him upon, procuring for us, or we our selves the Persons beloved! That he
the only begotten Son of God, who was his Father's delight from all Eternity,
ever rejoicing in his Presence, that he should have such a gracious Respect to
us, such poor, sorry, contemptible vile and sinful Wretches as we are; that he
should Love us, and that at such a rate as he has done, even to die for us,
and this when he knew before hand how disingeniously we should carry it toward
him, even returning him Hatred for his Love; O this is the most prodigious,
stupendous Act of condesending Love imaginable! And then, O think, his Love is
eternal Love; though he was not actually our Savior from Eternity, yet he was
so appointed in God's eternal Purpose and Decree; O that the ever blessed God
should have such eternal projects of Love, for such worms as we! And his Love
is to Eternity, for whom he thus loves once, he loves to the end; and should
not this stir our Hearts if we have any Life in us, to think that the Son of
God should have such a special Eye upon us, in his Death procuring the
effectual Application of that Redemption he was then working out to our Souls,
in whom there was nothing antecedently to move him to such distinguishing Love?
O what shall we think of those invaluable Benefits he has procured for us, as
reconciliation, justification, sanctification and eternal Glory? O that I could
get my Heart more affected with this astonishing Love! Lord I cannot
comprehend, I cannot reach it; no wonder it passes Knowledge, its Love in a
Mystery, but I do and will admire it, and look and long for a sight of thee in
Heaven, where I shall know thee better, with all the Heart affecting
Circumstances of thy Love, being ever under the warm and melting Influences
thereof: Has Christ so loved us, what follows but that we hate Sin more, and
love the World less, but Him more, and express our love in obedience to the
things he commands us, and in a willingness and readiness to deny our Selves,
in any thing dear to us for his Sake; well, I hope you will pick something out
of these confused hints: But my Paper begin to tell me I forget my self:

I am Yours, I. B.

LETTER VI. To S. E. October, 31. 1684.
Dear S.
YOURS I received, and to your request, that we may hence forward live a Life
of Thankfulness unto, and in the joyful Praises of God and our dear Redeemer, I
heartily desire to say, Amen: I looked upon it as a great Mercy, that the Lord
was pleased to give us to see the Faces one of another once more with Comfort;
but a greater still, that he was pleased to indulge us with another opportunity
of joining in that precious Ordinance, of sitting down together once more at
his Table; O what cause we have to love, exalt and bless the Name of our dear
Redeemer, who has I hope brought us into a special spiritual relation to
himself, and one to another! O how should we love him our Head, and one another
as fellow members of his body? I thought I had loved you as well as I could
before, but now methinks I feel a fresh and stronger Obligation, then that
which is purely Natural; shall we be fed and feasted together by our dear Lord,
and shall we be hereafter glorisied together by and with him, and shall we not
dearly love him and one another? Alas, but am I one of those blessed and happy
Souls, am I? What do I more then others, more then a mere painted Hypocrite may
do? What have I to prove my interest in Christ, my title to his precious
Benefits? Alas, my Evidences are most to seek; when I think what a difference
there is between Heaven and Hell, and so between their Inhabitants, O what
fears arise in my Soul? Ah Sister, these eternal Concerns of ours, are not
things to be left at such uncertainty by us, who are so near them; we must not
be satissfied with a [may be]. O let us go upon sure grounds for Eternity! Yet
I find (which does sometimes a little revive my Heart,) the Lord has said, he
takes pleasure in them that hope in his Mercy; and I do hope so far as I know
my Heart, that I have indeed chosen him in Christ for my Portion and Felicity,
and that I do in the main, sincerely desire and endeavor to live to him as my
ultimate End: But much ado, I have to make this out many times? Methinks, I can
plainly see a pious Principle acting you; O that I was but as sure of my own
Sincerity, as I am well satisfied concerning Yours! See if you can pray a
little more peace into my sinful, and sometimes sad, and now I fear declining
Soul, see what you can do; your Father (and I would say my Father) hears of you
daily by me,

whom am Yours, I. B.

LETTER VII. To S. E. November, 18. 1684.
Dear S.
I Received an account of your Illness last Saturday, by a Letter from my F.
and to let you see I am not unmindful of you, I here visit you with a few
Lines, though I cannot at present in Person; and O that the Lord who many times
makes use of poor, unlikely means (yet that when he pleases can do his Work
without them,) would hereby increase your Spiritual liveliness; I remember I
received a Letter from you not long since, wherein you complain much of a dead
and dull Frame, which I did not answer: Will a word or two now be acceptable?
Methought, when I read your Letter it should have been my own, only for this
difference, that you seem to be more seriously affected with your Case then I
am with mine, who have more cause; O if ever poor Creature had need to make
such complaints its I! Well, but do we not hear Persons most eminently Pious,
making such complaints very frequently? We should not be quite discouraged as
though our case was singular? How often does warm hearted David pray for
quickening, which argues a sense of his want! Sensible we should be, but not
discouraged; O that we could confess and bewail our deadness more sensibly,
more lively! But all our work lies not in complaining, but we must use the
means God has appointed for our quickening; I verily believe our greatest work
lies, in prevailing with our own Hearts, to the diligent, constant, and
believing use of the means; certainly quickening enlivening Grace is purchased
for us by the Lord Jesus; and now he has gone through the most painful part of
his Work, is he not willing to apply to our Souls what he has purchased? O let
us not once question this? O let us not wrong a dear Redeemer so much as to
think otherwise of him! O methinks was I but once made a meet recipient of
these influences of his Spirit, I should not doubt but I should have them!
Well, it is Grace that must make us so, and we have a gracious God to deal
with, who delights in Communicating of his grace and goodness to his Creatures;
let us call to mind what we heard of this Subject, when we was last together;
let us ply our Hearts with the serious Consideration of the Sin and Evil of
such a Frame, together with the necessity, reasonableness, excellency and
usefulness of the Contrary; let us pray hard for it and use other means: But
pray S. take heed of that ungrateful Partiality, as to judge and conclude from
the remainders of Sin in you, that you are in a state of Sin and Death; the
best on Earth complain of deadness, and they do not Complement, but have real
Cause for it; a perfect freedom from all Sin and its Effects, remember that is
reserved for Heaven: Have you not a principle of Spiritual life? Else whence
comes the Sense you have of your deadness? Methinks if I was with you, and you
would be faithful to your self, I should not doubt but I could convince you;
think as ill of Sin as you will, as you can, but acknowledge and honor Grace;
joyfully and thankfully entertain any quickening Motions you have, as you would
have more; what I say to you, I would speak home to my own Soul, the Lord help
me that I may! The Lord who is all perfect Spirit and Life, make us more like
unto himself:

I am your truly Affectionate, Loving Brother, I. B.

LETTER VIII. To S. E. December, 15. 1684.
Dear S.
I Received both yours, and owe you more then thanks for them, I would bless
the Lord that has directed us to this way of Correspondence by Writing, and
that about the great Concernments of our Souls, which I hope may prove
profitable to each of us, and very comfortable in the review; I am sorry to
hear of the bodily grievances you are under; but stormy and pationate at the
providential Dispensations of our wise and good God, I dare not I would not be;
certainly if there be any true rest and satisfaction for the Creature, it is in
the will of its Creator, who is goodness it self; and I am glad to hear of the
calmness of your Spirit; my daily Prayers to God are for your spiritual and
eternal Welfare, and that you may not want any good thing here, that the Lord
would rebuke Distempers, and lengthen out your Life, but in that you are
mindful of Death I rejoice, for to tell you true, I love in my Heart to read
and hear and think of Death my self; indeed I have now outlived my self, my own
expectation some Years: But O the unaccountable folly that I am guilty of in
that I am yet no more fit to die! O strange almost incredible! I Profess to
believe a Future Judgment, that there is a day wherein the great God by Jesus
Christ will Judge me with all the World, for all my Thoughts and Words and
Actions, whether they have been good or bad, and so sentence me to my final
State: But O how unaffecting are my Apprehensions of this certain, great and
dreadful Truth, and how inconsistent is my Practice to the belief hereof! I am
daily running on in my Errors, heaping one Sin upon the back of another, so
laying my self under an unavoidable necessity either of bitter Repentance here,
or else exposing my self to the condemning Sentence of a most just and
righteous Judge hereafter, to a State of inconceivable and endless Misery,
which is enough to make any Heart except such a Flint as mine, to tremble if
seriously thought of: Well, shall I go on in this careless Frame and Course? I
fear, I fear I shall, but God forbid! Well, there are two things I would
commend to my self and you, in order to our Preparation for Death and Judgment.
1st. Let us make sure of a true and thorough work of Sanctification upon our
Hearts; O how shall we dare to look Death in the Face, if found in an
unsanctified Estate? Sin is the sting of Death; but then how may we with
undanted Courage look it in the Face, and as it were play with it when the
Sting is taken out, when we are passed from Death to Life; if Sin be dead to be
sure its pardoned; so otherwise, how shall we think of Judgment, to which Death
immediately carries our Souls? Will God clear the Guilty? The turning point at
that Day will be, whether we be such as have come up to the Terms required of
us in the remedying Law of Grace; all are Sinners that is certain, but all are
not impenitent, unbelieving Sinners; O Sister, penitent, believing, holy Souls,
and they alone shall be able to stand in Judgment; shall obtain Mercy from the
Lord in that Day, and none but such have real ground of Comfort in the
forethoughts of it. 2dly. Let us labor after clear and certain Evidences, of
our sincerity; O how sweet a thing is Assurance of God's Love, peace of
Conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost? How would these cheer and revive our
Souls in a dying Hour? Sure I am, a well grounded Assurance would then pay us
our own with Interest, though we should be at never so much pains to attain it;
but how sad to be sent to bed in the Dark; it must needs be very uncomfortable
to a gracious Soul, to leave this World uncertain how it shall go with it in
the next; therefore let us study the Word more, which is the Rule by which we
must be judged, and impartially compare our Hearts and Lives therewith, by
which means through God's help we may come to know how it will go with us then:
Blessed be God for that Revelation of his Will! Well, that our mortality and
immortality may be more in our thoughts, is the Prayer of your poor Brother
weak in Grace and low in Comfort,

I. B.

LETTER IX. To S. E. January, 13. 1684/5.
Dear S.
I Received yours, and am glad to hear of the removal of that afflictive
Distemper you have of late been under, a mercy I have been often seeking to God
for, for which I am with you obliged, and shall endeavor to bless the Lord; I
am rejoiced to hear you are so much upon the praising pin; O that I could but
learn that heavenly Note: But O what a strange lumpish Heart have I? I talk of
Heaven! Of an Eternity to be spent in the love and joyful Praises of God, and a
dear Redeemer! Truly it is a shame while my Heart is so backward to, and
unskilful in this blessed Work; O had Heaven no better singers then I am, or am
like to make, what poor harmony, what harsh melody would there be among them?
But for the eternal Praise of the great Jehovah it shall not be thus; many
times when I hear the pretty Bird's singing forth his Praises in their kind, I
am ashamed of my self; I am generally secure and senseless, sometimes sad, but
seldom joyful. 1st. Oh, how secure and dead I am; many times I have scarce any
Sense, or feeling of Spiritual things upon my Heart; I have such a senseless,
benumed Conscience, through Custom in Sin, that I feel little of the weight and
burden of it, or of my need of a Savior; alas, while others are joyfully
prasing God and a dear Redeemer; I have need to pray for a more awakned
Conscience, and for more Sorrow for Sin. 2dly. When my Conscience does begin to
speak home, and my Heart does a little relent, then either my Sorrow is slighty
and superficial, not bearing a proportion to my Sins; O how many Tears I have
need to weep over, as not coming from a Heart thoroughly sensible of Sin? Or,
else I am ready to be dejected, but it is more rarely thus with me, I mostly
err on the other hand. But then, 3dly. When shall you find me in a joyful,
thankful, praising frame? The Lord has laid me (though an unworthy wretch)
under many obligations; I do not want Matter whereof to compose my Song, but
alas I want a musical Heart; well, I yet hope that in Heaven (if the Lord will
bring me thither at last,) I hope then he will change my Note: That I shall
then have no more cause to complain of this Heart of mine, but shall then with
an innumerable Company of Angels and Saints sing a new Song to him that sits
upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever, Amen.

I am your Loving Brother, I. B.

LETTER X. To S. E. February, 5. 1684/5.
Dear S.
I Received yours and return you thanks for it, and for your (I do not doubt)
hearty Prayer for me, for spiritual Joy; but O that you would help me to pray
more Sorrow into my Heart first; you tell me I know, what they shall reap that
sow in tears, to wit Joy: But if that be Scripture as I know it is, I may
expect but a small Crop; not that I think my Tears can wash away the Guilt of
the least Sin, or merit the least favorable Glance of God's Countenance; but
Repentance, of which Godly sorrow is one part, is a necessary Qualification; O
therefore pray for more of that and herein you will exceedingly befriend me; I
am afraid you are exceedingly mistaken in me; I do not wish you so ill as you
wish your self, to be in my State and Frame: Sure I am, if you did believe the
Description I have given you of it (which I do again own and acknowledge to be
worse then I did, or can discribe to you) you would not wish so; however if I
do think worse of my self then I should, which yet I am confident I do not, yet
sure I am, you err more on the other hand, in thinking better of me then I
deserve; and be not troubled at my Complaints: O will you not give me leave to
Complain? Was I under any outward Trouble I am sure you would, and that you
would gladly endeavor to help me too; and will you not give me leave to
Complain of my Spiritual wants and burdens? What, want Grace and not Complain?
Be so doged with such domineering Lusts, and hanted with such impetuous
Temptations as I am, and not Complain? Give me leave; and will you not do what
you can to help me? O if you love me, help me down with my Lusts by your
Prayers; but I will not longer detain you:

I am your Loving Brother, I. B.

LEETTER XI. To S. E. March, 8. 1684/5.
Dear S.
I Received yours, but have time to write but a line or two; I was sorry to
hear of the return of your Ague, but am glad to hear it has left you again; O
that all fatherly Corrections might leave us better then they find us? I saw my
F. lately, and was glad to here there was hopes of your getting home; I would
not have you think I forget you as to that business you hint at; I know not how
to advise you my self, but I shall endeavor to pray for you to him that can;
however, one thing I will say, acknowledge the Lord in all your ways, then take
his Word for it that he will direct your Steps: I am ready to think from some
Circumstances, that there may be something of Providence in it, but let us wait
a while and see what the Lord will do.

I am your Loving Brother, I.B.

LETTER XII. To S. E. April, 9. 1685.
Dear S.
I Received yours, and was much perplexed in my Mind, not understanding your
meaning in some Passages of it; as to your coming home, I cannot but desire it,
and methinks it is plainly your Duty, considering the Circumstances that you
are in,and considering your poor Parents, how crazy they are, and in what need
they stand of your help; Dear S. have a care of giving way to melancholy
discontented Thoughts; remember former Experiences that you have had of God's
goodness; have you not many a notable one? I believe you have, if you do but
think on them; I remember an Expression of my Father, old Sins and old Mercies
should not be forgotten, we should not give way to any more Sorrow for Sin,
than we can give a good Account of, much less then for any outward Trouble; and
what matter is it if the Lord should mark us out for Crosses and Troubles here,
if he will but mark us out for himself, mark us out for Heaven; O Sister, all
will be well in the End: How short is this Life, if we should have nothing else
but Trouble here? Then comes Heaven, the day is at hand, and then all is
forgotten; O nothing but joy, nothing but joy in Heaven, remember that Sister,
the thoughts of Heaven are my own, and as thy own what would such Thoughts do?
Would they not make all our Troubles here seem light? I will endeavor to pray
for you as hard as I can; do you endeavor to pray down more of the Spirit of
Prayer into my Heart, and then my poor Prayers may stand you in more stead; I
desire a plainer Account of your Circumstances as soon as you can:

who am your Loving Brother, I. B.

LETTER XIII. To S. E. May, 6. 1685.
Dear S.
I Received yours, and cannot but sympathize with you in your Troubles; I have
been under those inward Troubles lately, that have taken off my Thoughts from
other things, otherwise I have been and am under Circumstances much like your
own; I have more and more experience of the vanity and deceitfulness of the
Creature; O how vain a thing is Man! But I must tell you Sister (as I tell my
own Heart,) I am afraid we expect too much from the Creature; we meet with
disappointments in and from the Creature, who bid us look for better? Not our
Bibles; The Lord will sooner or later make us know the Creature as the
Creature, if we belong to him, that we place not too much of our Happiness in
it, and we have cause to bless God for the crossest Providence that are
blessed by him to that End; O let us learn to live more upon God! And let us
learn not to be too much concerned at such things; they are without us, and
unless we open them the door, they cannot get into our Hearts to sink them; God
is a true and faithful Friend remember that; indeed we live far below our
selves, as I trust we are Heirs according to the hope of eternal Life, if we
suffer such little things to distract and deject us; I had written sooner, but
that I hoped before this to have seen you; I shall be contriving for an
opportunity as soon as I can;

who am your Loving Brother, I. B.

LETTER XIV. To C. H.
Dear Cozen,
METHINKS our ill husbanding the means of Grace has brought us to this, that
we must either beg or starve; the Lord has formerly afforded us rich means to
live upon: How have we been feasted in his public Ordinances? Many a poor
hungry Soul would have got a good meal out of our livings; but now alas, we
have almost run out of all; now we have but hungry Sabbath's God knows; what
will become of our poor Souls now? Well, but here is a way whereby you and I
may get a good living still, by the right improvement of this Duty, we may be
thriving Christians still; show me a praying Soul; I dare say that is a happy
Soul, that Soul has many a sweet morsel from Heaven that others taste not of,
that Soul is growing rich; but then we must acquaint our selves with the divine
Art and Mystery that there is in this Duty; alas, our Souls cannot live upon
the Wind; words in Prayer are but wind; but in the lively exercise of Grace and
in Communion with God, there is nourishment for our poor Souls; for your help,
him accept of this small Sheet, which about two Years since I received, from
one that is as well skilled in this spiritual Mystery as any Christian that I
know; and when you are with God in this Duty, then remember me a poor wretch
that after so many years Practice of it to my Sorrow, still find many roving,
wandering Thoughts, much deadness of Spirit, and inactivity of Grace; I am
confident you are many times in my praying Thoughts, when you think not of it;
may I not beg the like from you for a requital,

Yours, I. B.

LETTER XV. To C. W.
Dear Friend,
YOUR Soul is very precious in my sight; my hearty desire and prayer for you is
that you may be saved; and O that I could do any thing to promote it; it
pleases me much to think in how hopeful a way you are for Heaven, and O how I
should rejoice to see you crowned there; but alas, we are yet but in the Fight
with our Enemies; yet faint not, hold on and the day is our own, conquer and we
are crowned; yet be we jealous of our selves, I am ready to tremble when I
think of our danger by our Enemy the World; it is a very Cheat, and how ready
we are to be imposed upon by it? For my own part, I never thought there had
been so much Carnality in my Heart, as I lately discovered; and O I am afraid
there is much more abominable wickedness that I have not yet discovered! O
methinks I would have something besides God for my Portion, I am loath to cast
all my worldly hopes over board; O my Folly! Well, my love to you inclines me
to impart some of my Thoughts to you in this Matter: God and the World are
presented to our Choice, and this is our choosing time, now that you and I may
make a wise Choice. 1st. Let us seriously consider the excellency of God; O
happy Souls indeed whose Portion the Lord is! O wonderful, wonderful! That the
ever blessed God should be wiling to become the Creatures portion, a portion
for such Wretches as we are! Let all the Angels and Saints of God, admire and
adore him for this his matchlefs Condescension and Godlike Bounty! Now think
what God is, and can we not be content with him for a Portion? What not with
God? Why what is there that our Souls can reasonably desire, that is not
eminently in him? O there is enough in God to make us completely and eternally
Happy, and what would we have more? 2dly, Think we seriously of the Vanity of
the Creature; O what trifles are these that Men make such a hurry about? Such
as are projecting most throngly for the World, alas, what have they when they
have got it but a little Vanity, for which they many time loose an eternal
Crown; O woeful Choice? When such come to die, they will put another estimate
upon the World; I dare appeal to your own Experience, when you have any serious
thoughts of Death and Judgment and the Life to come, then O how little you
regard the World? I find it thus with me; now let us learn this project to set
one Enemy against another, to set Death against the World; as one says
frequentiy lie down in our own Graves, and thence take a prospect of the World;
let us take our Coffin into the Field with us when we go to fight the World:
And farther to make us serious, let us consider it is for everlasting that we
choose here; choose God in Christ for our portion and he is our own for ever;
choose Sin and the World and we loose him, and Hell must be our portion, and
our loss herein will be everlastingly imparable; the Lord help us to act like
reasonable Creatures; but I must take leave; if I have any interest in you, I
would entitle a dear Redeemer to it; Will you choose him? I hope you have; but
will you renew and confirm your choice, and never rest till you can; my beloved
is mine, and I am his; I am one that would fain be your Companion in the path
of Holiness here, and joint Possessor with you of Happiness hereafter.

I. B.

LETTER XVI. To C. H.
Dear Cozen,
I Received yours, and the doubt which troubles you, I find to be the same
that I have been exercised with my self, so I shall give you a few of my
Thoughts, although I am under discouragements, and have much ado to persuade my
Pen to write, when I think I have more need to seek advice then to give in this
Case; so sar as I understand it, the matter stands thus with us, we fear we are
not sick enough for Christ to heal, we are not humbled enough, our hearts not
broken enough for Christ to bind them up; now its true those are deceitful
flatterers that would teach us to slight Humiliation for Sin, this is a
dangerous deceit, they will prove but unsound believers that were never soundly
humbled; but we must consider all Christ's Patients are not sick to the like
degree: The wounds of such are not all of a like depth; some the Spirit deals
more gently and tenderly with, draws them with the cords of love, when others
he snatcheth as brands out of the Fire; if the Lord has done his Work, shall
we peevishly quarrel with him because he has not done it just as we desire? O
let the Lord take his own method, so he will but save our Souls from Sin and
Wrath! But its well if there be not Pride in the bottom, when we are so
thoughtful about these preparatory Humiliations; we would fain bring something
to Christ that might make us more acceptable; O deceitful Hearts, wicked
Hearts! As one says, why do we not complain more of our want of Faith? These
preparatory Works are of no worth, but as they are means to promote a saving
closure with Christ; our business is to enquire whether our Humiliation for Sin
has attained its end; and that Humiliation is sufficient as to its End, which
prevails so far as that we cannot rest satisfied without Christ, when the Soul
is so sick that it cannot but cry out give me Christ or I die; either we see
our need of him or not; if not, why then do we complain of our selves as lost
without him? Either we are willing to be saved by him in his own way or not; if
we are, it is a great dishonor and wrong to him to doubt of his Willingness;
He is more willing to save us, then we are to be saved by him; when you object
your want of Tears, that you cannot mourn for Sin, I can tell you a sadder
Story which makes me write with wet Eyes, I say, I have more reason to complain
of hypocritical Tears, then you have for the want of them; Humiliation and
Repentance lies chiefly in your Will: I remember a saying of Mr. Baxter's,
there is more Humiliation (says he) in a base esteem of ones self, then in a
thousand Tears, more of it in a will and desire to Weep, then in the greatest
abundance of Tears that come either from the force of Terror, or from the
moistness of the Brain; could I sind more of this inward Soul humiliation, I
could take abundantly more comfort in that, then in abundance of Tears, while
my Heart is thus Senseless and feels little; when you speak of Reformation;
consider the terms of the Covenant, Sincerity is accepted instead of sinless
Perfection; and our dear Redeemer sees not only what his Servants are, but what
they should be, and what they shall be: O happy time when we shall all see him
as he is, and be like him! I take little notice of what you say of that
Expression in my last; I am still ready to say as much, subscribing my self a
Scholar in the lowest Form in the School of the Lord Jesus.

I. B.

LETTER XVII. To C. H.
Dear Cozen,
THE reading of your last, wherein you did acquaint me with the good Success of
my poor worthless Paper, did much refresh my Spirit; indeed I cannot but look
upon your Estate as you describe it to be safe and happy; O how glad should I
be many times of clear Evidences of so much? What Comfort may be safely drawn
from such Premises? As to what you say, that you fear its only a good Mood that
you are in; it must be granted that natural unregenerate Persons have their
good Moods sometimes, but I think they never come in them to a sincere
willingness and resolution, to close with a Gospel Christ on Gospel Terms; they
may have some faint Wishes and Desires, but the Mood is off them before any
change is wrought upon their Hearts and Wills, and when it leaves them they are
more hardened and secure then before; and while they are in such a Frame they
are out of their Element, like Fishes in the Air; but I am confidently
persuaded that you find it otherwise with your self, when you find your Heart
in a holy good Frame, you are where you would be, and when you find it
otherwise, it is your grief and burden; O how glad you would be, was there no
such sad and sinful interruptions in your Communion with God and a dear
Redeemer? Such a happiness as this, is well worth dying for; and why should you
be discouraged at that which is the common Case of all God's Children upon
Earth? Go to the holiest Saint you know, and I warrant you he will freely
acknowledge that he has his up's and down's; if it be not so,then woe to such
as I, who alas can seldom find my Heart in any good Frame; while we have Flesh
as well as Spirit, we must expect that-the Flesh will be acting its part, and
its well that we have a spiritual Principle to oppose it, and happy they who
have Faith and Patience to continue this Conflict, such shall certainly come
off conquerors at last; but I would not be too tedious; upon any occasion, no
Friend you have, shall be more ready to communicate Experiences, or shall more
rejoice in being any way instrumental of the Good of your Soul then my self,
who though very weak, yet am truly willing; the Lord be your Guide and Portion,

I am affectionately yours, I. B.

LETTER XVIII. To C. H.
Dear Cozen,
IN compliance with your request, I will tell you what it was that moved me to
give you those my Sentiments of your Condition; it was this,that your
Humiliation had this Fruit, that nothing could content you without Christ; and
that as far as you know your own Heart, you are willing to be saved by him in
his own Way, and in his Strength to mortify Corruption, which I am sure is more
then Flesh and Blood could teach you; I desire, you may be truly serious,
sensible and humble, but I would not have you turn an unmerciful false Accuser
of your self; Assurance is a great Mercy where vouchsafed and improved, but it
is of far greatter moment to us, that we have Grace and use and exercise it,
then that we know we have it; let the most of your time and care and thoughts,
be spent in the getting and exercising of Grace, and wait upon God for comfort
in his Time and Way; and when you want Evidences of special Grace, then as Mr.
B. advises, improve the general Grounds of Comfort, as the merciful Nature of
God, the merciful Nature and Office, and the all sufficiency of a Redeemer, the
extent of the Covenant of Grace, and so the possibility, probability, yea the
conditional Certainty of your Salvation if you come up to covenant Terms;
abundance of Comfort might be fetched in by the serious Consideration of these
things; and if you find that trying your self by Marks, be ineffectual as to
helping you to Comfort, but that you are rather more disordered by it, your
doubts increasing, would you spend your time in endeavoring to exercise Grace,
in putting forth fresh acts of Faith on Christ, and in exercising Love to God
and the like, would you I say but take this Course a while, I am persuaded you
would find it a more ready way to Satisfaction and Comfort, then by trying your
self by Marks unseasonably: Thus you might come to feel that you do believe,
and feel that you love God, etc. when you complain of the weakness of Grace and
strength of Corruption and the like, consider, you are to distinguish between
that which is matter of Humiliation and for Reformation, and that which is
matter of Doubting; the Lord when he has prepared you for it, cause his face
to shine upon you, and order it so, that the present shakings you are under may
tend to, and issue in your more firm Settlement:

I am affectionately yours, I. B.

LETTER XIX. To my M.
Dear M.
I Cannot but really sympathize with you under your present Troubles; methinks
I feel part of the burden that lies upon you, O that I could do any thing to
make it more easy and light to you! But alas I can do little more then pray
for you; well, as your Troubles abound, so may your Graces and Comforts abound
much more! May your Soul prosper indeed! May all your outward Troubles prove
spiritually Advantageous! If so, I both may and will rejoice in your Happiness;
I take it for a certain Truth, that it goes well or ill with us as Matters go
with our Souls; alas, what are those Mercies worth that do not someway reach
our Souls? And why should we not prize those Afflictions that further their
Salvation, and love that God the better that sends them? Sure I am, these sick
Souls of our's need Physic as well as Food, and why should we not bless God
for the one as well as for the other, when both tend to promote our spiritual
Health? O that we were brought to kiss the Rod, patiently, cheerfully and
thankfully to submit to the Lord's severest Discipline, who intends us good and
not hurt, and will issue all things well! Dear M. cheer up as well as you can;
labor to get above this lower Region; O what solid Comforts may be fetched
from Heaven in our darkest Hours here! O how great, how sure, how near is our
reward there! Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor has it entered into the
Heart of Man to conceive what God has laid up for them that love him; and all
this (we none of us know how much,) as sure as the decree and promise of the
Faithful and unchangeable God can make it; and near too; The Lord is at hand,
he says, behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me; dear M. Comfort your
self with these Words; be very careful of your self, least grief be added to
our Affliction: My dear F. though I have not time to write, is much in my
Thoughts; his illness has damped my Spirit in that Business you know of; many
Friends are inquisitive about him, and I hope many Prayers are going up to
Heaven for him here:

-- I am your loving obedient Servant, I. B.

LETTER XX. To S. E.
Dear S.
HAVING a little time I resolved to write a line or two, hoping they would not
be unwelcome; I have little business except Soul concerns to write about, but
indeed that is our greatest Business, these our grand Concerns, and all other
things even those we call Matters of Weight, great Concerns, they are but
trifles compared with these; it is a great Comfort to me when I think what
comfortable Evidences I hope I have of the good Estate of your Soul; I think my
self happy in having so many Relations related to Jesus Christ; O happy Family,
highly favored of the Lord, that is likely to turn out so many Souls for
Heaven! O S. make sure to be one, and pray hard for me that I may be another,
yea that there may not be one outcast amongst us; and labor to get as long an
Heaven as ever you can; O we may begin Heaven even here! O how much more of
Heaven might me enjoy then we do? Well, I will tell you what I would be
pressing after, even to maintain a constant, strict and holy Communion with God
in and through Christ; O the sweetness of Communion with God? Oh, our
unspeakable loss in having Hearts so alienated from God, and in being such
strangers to a heavenly Life? Lord, how long shall it be thus? How long e're we
may love and enjoy thee perfectly, without the least intermission, interruption
or cessation? O this body of Sin! And O this body of Flesh! Well, it is our
happiness to desire and long and wait with Patience for that, which others
(happy they are) do possess and enjoy with fullest satisfaction; may our Souls
now be following harder after God? May we now live like believers, a life of
holy Love and joyful praises? I am much concerned for poor F. but can do little
to help him, only I pray as hard for him as I can; be as careful as you can
poor M. that she be not brought down to:

I am affectionately Yours, I. B.

LETTER XXI. To my F.
Dear. F.
NOW I am beginning to write, comes to mind God's great goodness in that I have
yet a F. to write to; I have great cause to sing aloud of Mercy; the Lord
punishes less then my iniquity deserves; he does but shake the Rod to let me
see what I deserve, and he can do at pleasure, that I ly every way at Mercy,
when he might strike home indeed; O that my Heart should be no more affected
with so great Mercy! O how far the Lord will fall short of that tribute of
Praise due from me! O that he would help me, yea, O that all my Friends would
help me by their Prayers, that I may love and praise God more, who is
continually every way doing me good; O what a pity, what a shame so good a God
should be loved, saved and praised no more! Was not Earth what it is, was not
my Heart what it is, is was impossible; but I live in hopes it will be better
e're long; O happy Place, and happy Persons, whose continual Work is perfect
love, and joy and praise!

-- I am your loving obedient S. I. B.

LETTER XXII. To T. W.
My dear F.
YOUR lines were very welcome to me, both as they express your Affection to me,
your readiness to Simpathize with me, your hearty Prayers to God for me, and
likewise as they give some revival to our former intercourse, which my thoughts
were working upon a day or two since, with much desire; I can heartily bless
God for the comfortable Society I have formerly had with you; O can we not both
of us remember many an Hour with Comfort, when the Lord has been pleased to
make a Third with us? Yea, and I hope when a few Minutes of Time more are past,
we shall be removed out of this Vale of Tears, and meet upon the Mountains of
Spices; O a happy meeting that will be, will it not think you? O should we not
be looking and longing, and with Patience waiting for that blessed Day? And
should we not be quickening and encouraging one another in the way? It is my
hearty desire now we cannot so frequently pray and discourse together as we
have formerly done, I am persuaded to the great Satisfaction of us both, it is
my desire I say, that we may maintain a mutual Correspondence by writing: And
methinks I have much to tell my Friend of now, but that streightness of Time,
and some bodily Indispositions will not suffer me; the dispensations of the
Lord toward me are very Gracious; O how manifold are his Mercies? Indeed
goodness and mercy has followed me all my Days; and methinks there is so much
of Love mixed with the severest of his Dispensations toward me, that I cannot
but love him the more, and praise him the more for them; O they are not the
wounds of an enemy, nor the chastizements of a cruel one; God is all love yet,
even when he takes, as well as when he gives; O to see Love in every thing, is
not that sweet? O what is this Heart of mine made of, that it is no more
affected? O help me, love the Lord for me, praise the Lord for me, come let us
exalt his Name together; the Lord has dealt very favorable as to my F. his
Distemper not so violent as it might have been, though his Weakness has been
very great; how the Lord may dispose of him I cannot tell, he continues very
Weak, though I hope the Distemper is much abated, but this I know, God will do
all things well; pray for us still, yea and praise the Lord on our behalf:

I am affectionaly Yours, I. B.

LETTER XXIII. To S. M.
Dear S.
I Hope you will not take it ill that you have not heard from me before now; I
am sure you are much in my thoughts, and I should be glad to exchange a Letter
with you now and then; I had many affectionate concerned Thoughts about you
when I heard of your late illness, and it was not a little Comfort to me when I
heard of your recovery, much more shall the health and prosperity of your Soul
rejoice my Heart; and that it may be daily promoted by all the Methods of God's
Providence, as well as by his Ordinances, is and shall be my daily Prayer to
that God who I hope has begun a good Work there: Dear S. the near Relation I
am in to you, lays me under a strong Obligation to do the utmost I am able to
promote the welfare of your outward Man, but methinks I feel my Affections
especially working toward your Soul: Well, how is it? Is your Soul in health?
Does your Soul prosper? By nature our Souls are like Hospitals for spiritual
Diseases; O there is no sound Part left in them; but the Lord out of his Divine
pity and bounty, has provided a wife, able and tender hearted Physician for us
the Lord Jesus Christ, who has prepared a rich Medicine every way suitable to
our Diseases of his own most precious Blood; and he is daily begging for
Patients, and his great Complaint is, that Men will not come to him, who would
assuredly and freely heal them, but rather choose Death; now O that you and I
may see more of our need of him; our Souls are really, O that they were more
sensibly Sick, our Diseases are in their own Nature mortal ones, and all others
besides him are Physicians of no value; but if he undertake our Cure the danger
is over, no fear of miscarrying under his Hands; O that now we may be so
thoroughly convinced of our need of him, and of his ability, skill and good
will, that we may now look after him indeed, and no more neglect him as we have
done, but may sincerely, heartily, cheerfully and thankfully accept him, and
fiducially put our lives, our souls, our all into his Hands, confiding in him,
and in him alone, and obedientially following his Prescriptions, then our Souls
should live and not die; but I must take leave; let me hear how it is with you:
You have a daily remembrance in my poor Prayers,

who am affectionately Yours, I. B.

LETTER XXIV. To S. M.
Dear S.
I Received yours which I took very kindly; I had thoughts of writing to you
before I received it, for I shall be glad of intercourse this way, and desire
it may be so managed, as that it may prove to the great Advantage of us both;
we should ever act like Persons for another World, and should endeavor to
manage every thing so, as may help our selves and others forward in our way to
Heaven, O that we may; I have two things to advise you to, and let my Council
be acceptable; The First is, highly esteem, and accordingly improve your
precious Time; surely if we did but consider how much great and necessary Work
lies upon our hands, we could not so lightly esteem and squander away that
short and precious Time allotted to us for the doing of it in; we have much to
do for God to promote his Honor and Glory; much to do for our Selves, for our
Souls; we have our Salvation to work out, an Interest in Christ to secure and
clear, weak Graces to strengthen, strong Corruptions to subdue, many and strong
Temptations to resist and overcome, many hard and difficult Duties to
discharge, and we must expect that the task of Duties (though in another Sense
we should not look upon Duty as a task) will be increasing as we grow up; and
much we have to do for others to promote their good: We have our Generation to
serve in the places God sets us in, and all this must be done in time, and is
not that Time to be accounted Precious? And farther, it may be much shorter
then we think of; what is Man's life taken at its full length? It is but as a
Span; days and years pass away like the Wind, are spent as a Tale that is told;
but let not you and I promise our selves long Life, but be thinking of a
shorter cut then ordinary to the Grave; I question not but Death is triping up
the Heels of some young Persons about you in D. as well as here; let us take
warning by them, and learn to prize and improve our precious Time; I could wish
you knew what sad Reflections I have upon my self for the misspent of time, that
I should have lived so long to so little Purpose: Now dear S. you have several
of those years before your Face (if the Lord lengthen out your Life) which
alas are got behind my back, and cannot be recalled; O lay hold on this
advantage, and cut off the occasion of such sad Reflections now in time: My
Second advice is, That you would keep up a constant Course of religious Duties,
and labor in them for sweet and sensible Communion with God, I have suffered
much by my neglect of Duties and by trifling in them; O the long and sad
interruptions of my Communion with God! O the sad effects of this! Methinks
sloth, idleness and formality has even clothed my poor Soul with rags; Take
heed S. take heed: It can never be well with us when we are strange with God,
and live at a distance from him. To live without God in the World is an Hell
upon Earth; O keep your Heart close to God in a course of Holy Duties; be often
in God's walks, and be not contented unless you meet with him there; but alas
while I am writing this, methinks Conscience is whispering, thou do not
follow this advice thy self as thou should; I must confess this is a Truth,
and a sad one, but I think it is good Advice, and I would fain have it better
with me then it has been in these respects, or then it may at present be with
me, and besides I would have you better, much better then my self, therefore
take and follow it; my daily Prayers are for you; the Lord be your God and
Guide, and everlasting Portion!

I am affectionately Yours, I. B.

LETTER XXV. To T. W.
My dear Friend,
METHINKS its long since I saw you, and I cannot be quiet till I have imparted
some of my Thoughts to you; I doubt not but you have been wrestling with God
for us in reference to our late Exercise; methinks I feel that you and other
dear Friends have been praying for us; the Lord return your kindness and your
prayers into your bosom double; and may these lines farther engage them, and
also put a note of praise into your lips; O love the Lord, O praise the Lord
for his goodness! We can do little, help us, help us; add your instrument, say
his goodness endures for ever; surely he has not contended with his great
Power, nor withdrawn his supporting Arm; we have been afflicted, but he has
been with us in six Troubles and in seven he has not forsaken us; surely all
his Paths are Mercy and Truth; are not all things our's, if we be Christ's?
Shall not, nay is not this already working for our good? Faith should, and
Heaven will make us see and say, that God has done all things well, even just
as we would have them; trust his God; let your dependence be upon him, we have
tried him, and have found him very Faithful, yea, very Gracious and Merciful:
Blessed be the God of Patience, the God of Meekness, the God of all Grace and
the God of all Comforts; for what of these he has given in at this needful
time; help us to make his praise Glorious; and continue instant in Prayer for
us, that we may reap some special Benefit, and that our Fruit may remain: My
dear Father, besides his wonderful inward Supports and Joys, has had a greater
freedom from his bodily Distempers at this time, then he has had for some
years past; bless God for that too; I cannot tell you all, his Mercies have
been manifold, have we not been full of his Goodness! O may our hearts, our
lips, our lives be full of his Praise! Now what shall we render? What projects
for Jesus Christ now? I will tell you of one when I see you, which I would have
your Assistance in; think on me as to that great Affair of mine you know of; I
do not see but that Providence still smiles upon it, and am apt to think it may
not be long before it be put to an issue; I am often full of discouraging Fears
about it, pray for me; and if providence do not yet cross it, help me to call
our great Friend to the Marriage, him that turned their Water into Wine; O, a
good guest would he be! A guest did I say, nay let him be an inhabitant; pray
him, entreat him, beseech him, tell him I do not Complement with him: But I
forgot my self, the Lord fill your Soul full of his Goodness, and bless you in
all your Ways:

I am your real affectionate Friend, I. B.

LETTER XXVI. To my M.
Dear M.
I Have been deeply concerned for you for some time of late, upon the account
of that excessive trouble and sadness of Spirit, which has so sorely born you
down of late; and as it is my Duty, so it would be greatly delightful to me,
could I but do any thing to help you against that, which as it cannot but be
displeasing unto God, so also very Afflictive to your self, and to all that
love and tender you; I was last week casting in my Thoughts for some Cordial
for you, and I hope the good Providence of God has directed me to that, which
I have here sent you enclosed; the God of all comfort, bless and make it
Effectual; it is that which I have sometimes found a wonderful Virtue in my
self, and therefore I can the better recommend it to you; will you promise me
to read it over, and not only now when you first receive it, but whenever you
find a fainting fit of Sorrow coming upon you? Will you promise me to read it
seriously and believingly? Why then I dare give you leave to be sad, and
disconsolate if you can; O that I knew but what argument to use with you or
with God for you (for you are never out of my praying Thoughts,) I dare not be
unfaithful to you; I must tell you plainly there is more Sin in it then you are
aware of, and it is the cause of much Sin; I know it by too sad experience my
self, when I have sometimes been in your Case, though then I could not see it,
alas things were hidden from me; Again, your Sorrow makes the Devil Merry, O
it pleases him; he knows he cannot hurt you hereafter, it will be out of his
Hands, therefore he takes delight in your disquiet here; and I tell you (mark
it, for its that I have experienced) every time you indulge your self in it,
will he get the stronger hank upon you, which you will be less able to shake
off: Herein you are very ingenious to your self; you know not what inward Peace
it deprives you of; it quenches the Spirit; then it greatly injures you as to
your outward Man; and it is very Afflictive to all that love you; as for my own
part, it clouds and dasheth all my outward Comfort when ever I think of you,
and the Lord knows that is not seldom; and my poor F. is declining fast, and
your cheariness I am well satisfied, would be better to him then any Physic:
Well dear M. I am daily pleading with G. for you, as I have now been pleading
with you; I shall now wait for my Answer from you both; may it be a comfortable
one? May it, I then promise to bless G. for it, more then I ever did, for any
outward Mercy he ever gave me in all my Life; I am concerned for my poor S.
that she has learnt to bear her Trials no better; alas, we must learn to
stoop and hold our Tongues, the Lord will have us at that, before he brings us
to Heaven; I intend to let her hear from me shortly, but my Affection engaged
me to deal with you first, O that it may not be in vain! I would fain take fast
hold on you both, and engage him to drive the nail home; carry it like a
Christian an that has already a Christ in possession, and an Heaven in hope;
the God of all grace and comfort, revive and cheer you dear M. what I have
written comes from the tender Affection of

your loving obedient S. I. B.

LETTER XXVII. To my M.
Dear M.
I Was much concerned to see you so low when you was here in Town; I earnestly
beg the Lord would make your burden lighter, and in the mean time increase
your Strength to bear it; and it would much rejoice my Heart could I do any
thing to help you either of these Ways; your Exercises are many and great, and
you are one of a sorrowful Spirit, whereby all your other burdens fasten
themselves the more and deeper upon you; I can say something to your Case from
my own Experience, being many times much troubled with the same Distemper; I
will therefore tell you how I find it with my self, and what course I have
found most helpful to me; I have my exercises many ways both inward and
outward, and such as are no small ones, and when a melancholy Fit takes me, I
am many times ready quite to sink under them, and can do little else but
aggravate my Troubles, and make every little thing great, and inwardly lash and
torment my self not only with what I at present feel, but also with future
fears, being ready to conclude it will never be better, but worse and worse
with me, a thousand sad perplexing Thoughts crowd into my Mind, and I please my
self in this tormenting of my self, though when the fit is over I cannot but
condemn my self for it; yet while under it, I really think I cannot do
otherwise, nay, that I do well in it; and then sometimes I can neither read nor
hear any thing, but I must meditate Terror from it, and make nothing of
bearing false witness against my self, every thing must go against me be it
right or wrong; at other times the best Friends I have can scarce say or do any
thing to please me, but I can find something to disquiet both my self and them,
sometimes I have gone alone to think it out, but I find there is no end of
that; but now I will tell you of two things wherein I have found the most
Relief; the one is secret Prayer; when I find one of these Fits is creeping on
me, when I find my self pinched or burdened one way or other, I then take the
first opportunity I can possibly get to go alone, and there to give my Heart
free vent, endeavoring to turn my Trouble into a right Channel, confessing and
bewailing my Sins, and while I am thus endeavoring to lay this load on, my
other burdens are removed before I am aware, and moreover its ten to one the
Lord removes that burden too before I have done; believe me, I have sometimes
gone to that Duty with as heavy an Heart as I think any poor Creature ever had,
and have come away with it as light as though I had been in a corner of Heaven;
I do not say this, as though I thought you a stranger to this sweet remedy, but
to put you in mind to take it seasonably; do not defer it to your wonted times
of Prayer, but take the very first opportunity that you can; sometimes when I
have thus deferred, my Heart has been so strangely bound up, that I could
scarce pray at all; be sure to observe this, to take the remedy in time before
the Distemper has got too much hold; I believe this which follows is a very
needful piece of Advice to you (because I know you have used much to neglect
your self, and I am afraid you do so still, whereby you injure your self both
Soul and Body more then you are aware); in this case use those Creature
comforts and supports the Lord affords you, not only as a thing Lawful but as
your Duty; You assuredly Sin if you do not; I dare say it is the Lord's mind,
that you should not deny your self any thing that might make you more cheerful
in his Service, and he has so provided in his Providence, that you need not
want any thing that tends to the support or comfort of your Life, and then how
dare you deny your self? Dear M. I write not these things at random, for I know
much of your Case by my own, and having tried these things I recommend them to
you; now let my Council be acceptable to you, and that the Lord would make it
effectual, my earnest Prayers shall follow these poor Lines, and if I might
understand they are of Advantage to you, it would very much rejoice my Heart
even mine,

who am Yours I. B.

LEETTER XXVIII. To C. W. upon the Death of his Child, Sept. 13. 1693.
My dear F.
I Now understand our gracious G. has been pleased to remove your Babe, to
take away that part of the delight of your Eye with a stroke; I would endeavor
to bear a part with you, and I think my self obliged by that bond you know of
(though as I may say yet unscaled) to attempt to administer some relief to you
under your present Presures as the Lord shall enable me, for some reasons I do
it this way, and the Lord give my Pen good speed: Methinks I hear you thus
bespeaking me [have pity upon me, have pity upon me O my Friend, for the hand
of God has touched me:] Well, I would direct your Thoughts to that Scripture,
2 Samuel 12.19, 20, 21, 22, 23. and the Lord help you to take out the Copy that
is there set before you; an entire, humble and cheerful Submission and self
Resignation to the good Pleasure of God, is certainly our Duty even when we are
under his sadest Dispensations; this he stands upon, and there is the greatest
Reason in the world he should; and now my Friend to further you herein, I would
have you let your Thoughts be frequently working upon such Truths as these; the
Lord has a most supreme, unquestionable and manifold Right and Propriety in
us, and in all that we call our's, and so this little Babe it was not so much
yours as his; his it was by the right of Creation, Redemption, and by your own
free and voluntary Dedication; and now may not the Lord do what he will with
his own? the Lord is righteous in all his ways; Righteousness and Judgment are
the habitation of his throne even when clouds and darkness are round about him;
however, at any time he does Afflict, he never does, or can wrong us; the Lord
is a God of Judgment, and does every thing wisely, both as to what he death, and
as to the time, way and manner of his doing it; Our God is love, that is his
Name, that is his Nature, and however his Dispensations toward His may alter
sometimes, yet he changes not; He does dearly love his Children even when he
lasheth and strikes them, as well as when he strokes and takes them into his
Lap; The Lord sees that Afflictions are needful for-us here; we cannot but
acknowledge that, yes, but we would choose our own Crosses; No, no we are Fools
in that, for he knows better then we what Vein to strike; the Lord is gracious
in mittigating our Affliction; He is a most merciful Physician, and will not
over dose his poor Patients; think with your self though the Branch be smitten
the Root is yet spared; this and all other Afflictions come within the compass
of that sweet comprehensive Promise [all things shall work together for Good,]
consider the Lord is in himself and all-sufficient Good, and will be so for
ever to all his chosen ones; He is better then ten Children, yea then ten
Worlds, did I say Ten, yea then ten Thousand; come my Friend, let the Lord see,
and let the World see it too, that we have learnt to make a Portion of him:
These and such like Considerations, you would do well to work upon your Heart;
I will add but a few Words more; you have good ground to be satisfied as to the
Condition of your Child, that it is safely lodged in that blessed Bosom where
I trust we desire and hope to be shortly our selves; what sweetnefs may you
fetch out of that Root of promises [I will be thy God and the God of thy seed:]
And what Marrow and Fatness in that [although my House be not so with God, yet
he has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure,
which is all my Salvation and all my Desire, although he make it (that is my
House) not to grow:] As concerning your little Babe I do believe it, that it
now knows more of the great Mysteries of Salvation then all the great Doctors
in the World; and I do believe it now enjoyes more of God in one Minute, then
you and I have done since we were born; O my Friend, now you have an
opportunity for laying in for your future Comfort; a right carriage under this
Affliction, how pleasing and refreshing it would be to you hereafter in the
review; I have but a word or two more by way of Caution, and I will take leave:
Take heed (my Friend) you do not listen to the Tempter, if he should attempt to
belly and slander our good G. to you, we are not ignorant of his Devises, of
which this is usually one in a time of Affliction; is this the G. that loves
thee? Is this the G. that hears Prayer? O beware of him! We would not the
Lord should believe him when he falsely accuses us, and why should we believe
him when he deals thus with God? O endeavor to keep up good Thoughts of God!
Lord, do this, do that, do what thou will with me, I am resolved to Love thee
still! And then take heed you be not too bold in giving way to your Affections,
and imposing upon your Affliction, in doing any thing that may give your
Passions an advantage to get above you; I durst not venture my self so far as
to see my Sisters when they were Dead; those that know their own weakness
should be wary; but its time I should think of a Conclusion; the time is short,
we should therefore rejoice as though we rejoiced not, and weep as though we
wept not; O how soon it will be said of you and me, they are gone? Hold out
Faith and Patience, we have not long to suffer; Death will perfectly kill Sin,
and then farewell to all Sorrow for ever; be patient therefore (my Friend,) for
the coming of the Lord draws nigh; methinks he stands at the Door; comfort
thy self with these Words; I have much ado to break off, thought I confess I
have been tedious, but you will pardon it as an Error of Love; the good lord
be your support and stay! On him be sure you lean and rest:

I am your simpathizing Friend, I. B.

LETTER XXIX. To Mr. S. of H. upon the Death of Mr. C. in Recommendation of Mr.
B. January 12. 1693/4.
SIR,
I Received yours wherein you Advertise me of the Death of that worthy useful
Person Mr. C. the readig of which struck to my Heart; I would be concerned for
you, as now a Flock without a Shepherd, but the loss of such Men has a
further reach with it then to their private Families and Congregations even to
the whole Church; the good Lord, as he takes up our old Prophets, raise us up
young Ones in their Room with a double portion of the Spirit of our old Elijah!
And as to you, I heartily wish that he who is the God of the Spirits of all
Flesh, would find you out a Man that may fill up the Breach which by his late
sad Providence he has made amongst you; I must acknowledge my self very
unworthy and unfit to Advise you herein, and therefore need to Apology for my
self in my present undertaking, and I both desire and hope you will put a
favorable Construction upon it, if herein I give my Opinion; and truly I could
not be easy in my Mind till I had acquainted you, that a worthy Friend of mine
Mr. B. a Person of my intimate Acquaintance, one for whom I have (and that
deservedly) a high Respect, one whose Ministerial gifts, graces and experiences
I look upon as Extraordinary, will be at Liberty at L -- day next; He is a Man
of Peace, and would be for carrying on a healing Work among you; And truly if
you be not provided, or have not your Eye, upon some other Person, I am apt to
think he may be very fit to undertake the Charge of you, and would be likely to
be a blessed Instrument among you; I confess little stress is to be laid upon
my Judgment, but I heartily wish you would make means to consult some that know
him, and are able to advise you; and if upon Consultation and Advice you should
have any inclination this way, if you give me but a Line, I know at my request
he will not engage himself any where (as I am satisfied at present he is not)
till he hears further from me; the Lord direct your Choice! And if I can any
way serve you, you may freely Command me, for there is no Work in this World so
pleasing to me as that, wherein (in my place) I may be most serviceable to God
and Souls; if you should be engaged, or should dislike the Motion, or think
others would not approve of it, then keep this to your self, only give me a
Line as soon as conveniently you can for my own Satisfaction: My hearty
Respects and Service to your whole Self and other Friends, concludes this from

Sir, Your affectionate Friend and Servant, I. B.

LETTER XXX. To M. F. about Midleton Business, October, 18. 1695.
Reverend and much Honored Sir,
I Was favored with yours above a Month since, wherein you was pleased to
give me your Thoughts about a meeting they are now setting on foot at Midleton;
I. R. acquainted me with their Circumstances, and desired me to do what I could
for them; and truly the Account he gave me of the want of Means in those Parts,
and withal of the Willingness of the poor People to attend upon them as they
have opportunity, this made me look upon it as a very promising Project, in
which I was more confirmed by the Account I had in yours, as also in one I had
to the same Purpose from good Mr. Bagshaw; I was glad of them upon my own
Account, but chiefly as I doubted not, but they would facillitate my effecting
of the Business; it rejoiced me to think that the Lord should please in his
Providence to cut out such a piece of Work as this for such an unworthy one as
I, and to my further great Joy, he has been with me in it to the effecting of
it, and that with a great deal of ease; I have procured amongst my Friends an
allowance for them, to enable them to have a Minister once a Fortnight, for the
space of three Years, in which time I hope (if it please the Lord to give
Success) they may be in a better capacity to fend for themselves; I wait over
this Week to acquaint them with it, and to settle the Business; I have been a
little thoughtful how they would get a supply of Ministers, especially of such
as are right Men for them, but was more at ease-when I heard by Mr. P. that
they were in hopes of pretty much of your help; dear Sir, do what you can for
them your Self, and also direct them to such as you think fittest for them, and
the Lord give you abundant Success! And truly I am upon several Accounts
encouraged to hope that the Lord has a considerable Harvest of Souls, which he
is now about to gather in that poor Place; I thought it might be of great use
if they had some Catechisms and other good Books dispersed among them, and
accordingly I have procured something to be disposed of that way; I have
already sent for two hundred Catechisms, and intend them some of Mr. Jo.
Alleins Books of Conversion, and if you should think of any other little thing
which would be likely to do good amongst them, I beg a few Lines from you at
your first Leisure; I do not question but you will take occasion in your
Sermons, to press them to make a diligent good Use of the same, and I wish you
would please to direct the good Men about the dispersing of them when they come
to their Hands, which shall be with all the Expedition that may be, as soon as
your Answer has determined my Thoughts either to that good Book of Mr. Alleins
alone, or to some other good thing with it: The Sum I have to bestow that way
is about 4 l. 10. s. Pardon my boldness in giving you this Trouble, and let me
have an Interest in your Prayers, who am alas! An unworthy, unprofitable, good
for nothing,

Joseph Barrett.

LETTER XXXI. To Mr. W. in order to the engaging a weekly Hour of Prayer for
the Public, December 2. 1695.
Reverend and dear Sir,
IT has been much and often upon my Spirit of late, to attempt your engaging of
one Hours extraordinary Prayer every Week upon the account of the Public, and
particularly for this present Parliament during their Session; methinks there
are more then a few things which loudly bespeak, and will sufficiently warrant
such an Undertaking; if I should go about to mention them to you it would show
my weakness if not something worse, and therefore I forbear; only one thing
give me leave humbly to mention in relation to my Self, which has the rather
put me upon it; methinks I have several times found my Heart more excited,
encouraged to, and drawn out in Prayer for this, then for any Parliament of
late I know, alas, I can do very little my Self, if in this matter I be not as
a Bone out of joint; a thing I many times fear; but if a considerable Number of
such were engaged who can wrestle with G. who knows what the Issue may be;
however, this can be no Enemy to Holiness in our Hearts and Lives; as to
Circumstances, I should think it would be best to have a set Hour appointed,
for as many as can, though all cannot precisely observeit; what if it be every
Monday Morning, It was upon advice fixed for Tuesday Morning, principally with
respect to Parishoners, who either better on Monday Morning, or some of them
being engaged at Work abroad, might be from home on that Morning, and so not so
free from that Work as on other Mornings in the Weeks when at their own homes.
and to be spent by Persons apart in their Closets, unless where there is a
convenience of uniting? But excuse my boldness in mentioning these things, for
all Circumstances, and the thing it Self, I wholly leave to the Determination
of your much better Judgments: If you should approve of it, and should think a
private way of engaging Persons to it most Prudent, and have not a fitter
Person ready, I should be glad to take any pains to set the Matter on foot; I
do not question, but you will take the Matter into your Thoughts, so as that if
you approve it, another Week may not be lost: And if I have your Encouragement,
I would make use of the little acquaintance and interest I have in several
other Congregations both nearer and more remote, speedily to engage them in the
like course; I look upon my Seif as more engaged then others to promote such
Work, because I know I can do so little my Self; I beg a particular remembrance
in your Prayers, who alas am a very poor, sinful, useless, good for notning,
and so very needy though unworthy:

Dear Sir, I am very affectionately Yours, I. B.

LETTER XXXII. To I. R. Elton, about Midleton's business and praying Project,
December, 5. 1695.
Dear Friend,
I Have now sent you a hundred Catechisms, the Lord grant they may be of good
Use to many Souls! I would not have you give them away all at once, hand over
head, but as prudently as you can, not to such where you can have no rational
hope, but that they will be quite thrown away; and where you do bestow them, I
desire you would give some good Advice both to Parents and Children, and follow
it with your Prayers; and as you have opportunity, be enquiring whether they
make any use of them or no, and accordingly in the Spirit of Love and Meekness,
either reprove, oxhort or encourage as there is occasion, and the Lord crown
your endeavors that way with Succes; I received a Letter from the Reverend Mr.
F. wherein he advised that the School Dame should be encouraged by some
quarterly Pension, to teach her Scholars the Catechisms, and that some poor
Children be put to School. I much approve his Advice, and gave G. thanks for
it; if you have seen him since, I question not but he has acquainted you with
my Desire, that you would seasonably and prudently go about it; the whole
business is much upon my Heart, having a longing desire after the Salvation of
your poor Country Men's Souls; I should be glad to hear from you sometimes how
things go on; and I would fain know which is your Fortnight day, that I might
more particularly remember you then, and the good Lord give us in some early
and evident Token of his gracious Acceptance of us in this thing, in revealing
his Arm in his Word and Ordinances, he is now pleased to send amongst you, I
have not time to add more now, but intend to write to you again shortly: Let me
hear from you; give my hearty Love to good Mr. P. and accept the same your Self,

I am your affectionate Friend, I. B.
If the School Dame will undertake it, let all Her Scholars have Catechisms
given them. It has pleased the Lord to put it into the Hearts of our
Ministers, and of a great Number of serious praying Persons among us, to spend
one Hour weekly apart in our Closets in earnest Prayer to G. for the Public,
and particularly for this present Parliament, which G. enabling us, we intend
to continue during their present Sessions; the time is Tuesday Morning Seven a
Clock: As you meet with any serious Christians, endeavor to engage them to the
same Course, and send away your enclosed to Mr..B. as speedily as possibly you
can, which goes upon the same Errand.



LETTER XXXIII. To Mr. B. at Ford, about the praying Project, December, 5. 1695.
Reverend and dear Sir,
IT has pleased the Lord to put it into the Hearts of our Ministers, and of a
great Number of serious and praying Persons in this Place, to set apart one
Hour every Week, wherein, in an humble wrestling Manner to seek the Lord, as
for his Church in general, and especially amongst us in these poor sinful
Lands, so particularly for this present Parliament, which we intend to continue
(the Lord enabling us) during their present Session; we think there are many
things which loudly bespeak and will sufficiently warrant such an Undertaking
as this, but if I should go about to mention them to you, it would show my
Weakness if not something worse, therefore I forbear; I shall only in a few
Words acquaint you first with our purpose and resolution as to our Practice
(which I have indeed in part done already) and then with our humble Request
unto you; as to our own Resolution (which we shall, the Lord enabling us
forthwith the ensuing Week put in Practice, and continue during this present
Session of Parliament) it is to spend one Hour every Tuesday Morning (beginning
at Seven a Clock as near as we can) each of us apart in our Closets, in earnest
wrestling with the Lord, for his poor Church, and particularly for this present
Parliament; O that they may be a band of Men whose Hearts the Lord has
touched! O that he would make them reformers and healers to us! And now our
humble and earnest Request unto you is, that you would put to your helping
Hand, and that you would speedily endeavor (in such a way as your Prudence
shall direct) to engage as many of your serious praying People as possibly you
can, to set upon the same Work; we thought it most Prudent to engage Persons by
speaking to them privately and particularly, but that and other Circumstances
we leave to your prudent Management: Only dear Sir, let us stir up our selves
and one another, and once more see what Prayer will do! And we do further
Request, that you will use your Interest in other Ministers that are near you,
but out of our reach, to engage them and their several Congregations in the
same Work, and also to use their Interest to engage others; and when you have
an opportunity, I should be exream glad to hear in a few Lines what is done in
this Affair amongst you; I have diverse others to write unto upon the same
Account so must take leave beging a particular Remembrance of you in your
Prayers, who am one extreme needy, though very unworthy of the same; I am dear
Sir,

Very affectionately Yours, I. B.

LETTER XXXIV. To dear H. London, about the praying Project, January, 18.
1665/0.
Dear and much Honored Sir,
UPON the receipt of a considerable spiritual Mercy the latter end of November
last, as I was projecting what return to make, it pleased the Lord to direct my
Thoughts and strenuously to incline them to this, Scil. to attempt the engaging
of a weekly Hour of Prayer, by Persons apart in their Closets', as for the
universal Church of God, and especially that part of it amongst us in these
poor sinful Lands, so particularly for this present Parliament; and he has
been pleased to succeed my poor Endeavors herein, to the actual engaging of a
great Number of excellent pious praying Ministers and private Christians, as in
this, so likewise in diverse neighboring Countries, as Darbyshire,
Leicestershire, Yorkshire, Cheshire and Lancashire; my poor Thoughts have again
and again been looking toward London, where I know there are vast Numbers of
such as are Princes upon their Knees, but have had those discouragements
arising in, and from my Self, as have hitherto laid an embargo upon my Pen;
indeed I was ready all along to fear (as I had just Reason,) that this
Religious project would (if it took in the main, yet) suffer much damage by its
passing through my sorry Hands; but meeting with unexpected Success to my very
great surprising Joy, I am now encouraged to hoist the Sails and make this
further and higher Adventure (O that it may be as prosperous, yea more
abundantly so!) And I am the more encouraged, because I have your dear Self,
whose prudence, zeal and interest in the Hearts of others, I have such a full
satisfaction of to apply my self unto: And now dear Sir, my humble and earnest
Request is, That you will be please to take the first convenient Opportunity
you have, to acquaint some of your Pious, public spirited Ministers with it,
such as have the greatest Interest in, and Influence upon others, and endeavor
to engage them to the like Undertaking, and to use their utmost Endeavor to
engage the rest of their reverend Brethren in and about the City, and each of
them (in such a way as their Prudence shall direct) to engage as many of their
serious praying People as possibly they can, that (as there is great need)
there may be a confederate humble violence used, and as general an attack as
may be made upon the Gates of Heaven; Our time is Tuesday Morning Seven a Clock
as near as we can: Your Circumstances in the City may much differ from our's in
the Country, and however I well not presume to hint any thing by way of
direction here, but give me leave to renew my humble earnest Request, that you
would be please to Concur with us in the Thing, and then whether you shall
please to take the Field before upon that, or on the preceding Day, or whether
you please to follow after with your Recruits to make a fresh and more vigorous
Attack, if we have you but for our Confederates, we still have our wish; indeed
at first for some Reasons, I thought it best to engage Persons to continue this
Course out only during this present Session of Parliament, though I then had it
in my Eye, and seasonably shall (the Lord permitting and enabling me) actually
endeavor the continuance of it longer; in short Sir, either till Mercy comes,
or a prohibition of Prayer (the latter of which the Lord grant never may! If it
does, then farewell all:) Methinks there is no way like it; but if it shall
please the Lord further to smile upon me in inclining your Heart to undertake,
and in succeeding you herein, you shall hear more of that; methinks there are
many things which loudly bespeak, and will sufficiently warrant such an
Undertaking; our own Case as well as that of other poor Churches is very
pressing; verily Sir, our ordinary way of Praying will not do, will not pass
now; O that we could in good earnest fall to wrestling! Alas Sir, how the
Credit of Prayer is fallen in the World of late! Our Enemies do not fear
Prayers as they have done; and truly if my poor sad Case be that of others of
God's People, I am afraid the reason is, that neither our Graces nor our Lusts
seek our Prayers as they should do, if they did, our Enemies would soon be
taught to fear Prayer again; let us therefore stir up our selves and one
another, and once more see what Prayer will do; would it but please the Lord to
raise the old Spirit of Prayers in the Hearts of his People, and enable them
rightly to follow their Prayers in their Lives, might we not look upon this as
a comfortable Presage of some notable Appearance of his, for his Interest
amongst us! The holy fervent Prayers of his People formerly used to pass
current with him for a whole Kingdom; sure we are reduced to sore Extremities
indeed, if our Prayers be so clipped (as our Coin) that the praying Soul can now
only save One; but if I should go about to use any Arguments with you in such a
business as this, I should herein forget my self, for I question not, but you
are, and will be more ready (then poor unworthy I) of you own accord; if any
thing of this Nature be done amongst you, then take no notice of this poor
Scrible; if not, I doubt not but you will speedily and vigorously set your Self
to the promoting of it, and the Lord be with you to direct, assist and succeed
you! If you will please to conceal my Name in this Business (which can give no
advantage to it) you will oblige me; I shall impatiently long for a few Lines
from you about it, and surely good News would be to my Soul as cold Water to
the Thirsty? But I have been over tedious and troublesome, and may well reckon,
that before this I have tired your Patience, and so must think of a close; I
earnestly beg a particular Remembrance in your Prayers, who alas am still a
poor sinful, needy, unworthy, useless, good for nothing; My humble Service to
your good Lady:

I am dear Sir, your very affectionate, humble and much obliged Servant Jo.
Barrett.

LETTER XXXV. To Dr. London, about the praying Project, February, 26. 1695/6.
Dear and much honored Sir,
YOURS I received, which upon a double Account was very welcome to me; blessed
be G. since my last, there is a comfortable change in my Father (who presents
his Service and Thanks to you) the last Lord's day he was enabled for his Work
here amongst us! I rejoice in your ready compliance with my former request,
which indeed I did not doubt of; what need there is of that Duty? O how soon
may we have a loud providential Call to it! My Heart often trembles within me, I
cannot, I cannot but meditate Terror, when I seriously think of poor England's
Case; is not the Lord very angry with us? Is he not even wary with forbearing?
Is not wrath even ready to fall? I should be glad if I was alone in these
Apprehensions, or, if I durst look upon them in my self and others, as the mere
products of a melancholy Fancy; but alas its otherwise, therefore [let us
Pray] dear Sir, speed the thing all you can; O how soon it may (in some
respects) be too late! I hope some of us fined since this was set on foot
amongst us, some reviving of a Spirit of Prayer, but our fears of impending
Judgments not abated; but however, will it not be good for us that we be found
preparing to meet our G. in the way of his Judgments, and framing to put our
selves into the Gap? Will not this be more comfortable, then to be found among
those who are still further making a way unto his Anger? Since my last, I found
amongst my Papers the Cities call to Prayer in 1693; would not something of
that Nature be highly seasonable now? But with humble Submission I think and
earnestly desire, that no time be limited for the Contrivance of it; let us
Pray and not faint; let us hold on until Salvation unto our God be our Song:
But there should be some alteration of the Hour in Summer; what if it be from
six to seven in Summer, and from seven to eight in Winter; Monday Morning, does
not so well suit us here in the Country, because many of our Ministers are
forced to travel abroad to their Labors, and cannot be so free as at home; but
pardon my boldness in hinting at these things; I leave it to your Prudence
whether you will mention them or no; but dear Sir, speed the Business all you
can; I am the rather urgent with you here, because I have engaged my Friends
only during this present Session of Parliament, which I presume is not likely
to be long, and methinks I would not have one praying Hour intermitted, and yet
I am loath my Pen should go the round a second time before I have something from
you; I beg you would be urgent with your worthy Ministers for a second Call to
the whole Kingdom, which I shall in impatiently long for, not to ease my Pains,
but to do the Work much more universally and effectually; and to encourage them
to it, let them know that the Iron is now hot with many of us; by the
experiments I have made, I find a great readiness of Mind to the Duty, and dare
almost promise them a general universal Correspondence with the thing, by those
whose Prayers are likely to stand poor England in any stead at this dark and
trembling Point of Time, though it cannot be expected that all should fall in
exactly with every Circumstance; the good Lord give them an one-rest of Heart
in this Affair. and the whole Nation in complying with them! If the Lord should
incline their Hearts to do any thing this way, I shall hope for some Copies; I
shall think the time long till I hear from you; but I know not when to end; its
well I have a Man of Patience to deal with:

I am dear Sir, your very affectionate, humble and much obliged Servant Jo.
Barrett.

LETTER XXXVI. To Mr. L. May, 25. 1696.
SIR,
I Cannot but eagerly take hold of the first Opportunity to let you know, how
well I was pleased with the short hint you gave me in the close of your last;
the Lord help me to do it so as may be to your eternal Advantage! Since you
took the little good Advice I gave you, so well I am encouraged thereby to tell
you more of my Heart. I do not dissemble with you in telling you that yon have
a great share of my Affections; if you was my own Brother, I think I could not
love you better; and I am well satisfied that (as we use to say) there is no
love lost between us, that you bear the like Affection unto me; now I would
endeavor to make the best improvement of the Interest I have in you, and
surely that cannot be better done, then by doing my utmost to in-title my great
Master a dear and lovely Jesus to it; I do heartily rejoice in your outward
prosperity, but more earnestly desire the Prosperity of your Soul, and should
exceedingly rejoice, might I any way be an instrument in promoting it; the
thing I aim at, is not so much the proselyting you, the bringing you over to my
way and party, but the engaging you in a course of serious Godliness; though as
I have found G. in the way that I am in, I dare not forsake it my self so far
as I am satisfied it is according to his Word, yet I am far from thinking that
Religion lies in Notions and Opinions, and I doubt not but that there are many
serious Christians that differ from me in their Opinions about lesser Matters;
but this, all serious Christians in the World are agreed in that, without
conversion, regeneration, true repentance, faith and real holiness, both of
Heart and Life, there is no hopes of Salvation. Now this is the Business you
and I must look after, to see that we have past the new birth, are thoroughly
changed from what we were by Nature; and truly Grace makes a mighty great
Change where it comes; it is a thing above Morality, common Civillity, above a
formal Profession, above outward Attendance or Ordinances, above the common
Works of the Spirit in the Hearts of Men; it is an inward deep, powerful
abiding thing: The Lord give us to experience it, in and upon our own Souls,
without which, its impossible that all the Words in the World should make us
rightly understand it. The poor miserable deluded World, thinks all this is
mere Fancy, but assure your self its otherwise. I know you will meet with a
great many Objections arising from Satan and your own Heart, as I and all
others who have experience of a saving work of G. upon their Souls have done
before you; He will its like endeavor to make you shy of Convictions of your
sin and misery by Nature, which in some degree or other ever goes before a
sound Conversion; but as you love your Soul, when ever you feel the holy Spirit
of G. this way at work, do not stifle, but encourage them all you can; when you
feel your self pained this way, take the first opportunity you can to retire
into some private Place, and there pour out your Complaint before the Lord,
acknowledge your sinfulness, lament your misery, cry to him for Mercy, cast
your Soul at his Feet, and though you should not have ease and satisfaction at
first, yet be not discouraged, but hold on, seek him in good earnest, and my
Soul for yours he is found of you. And its like he will endeavor to prejudice
you against Religion as too strict, as a moross, dull, melancholy Thing, as
that which would deprive you of all the Comfort of your Life; but this is
notoriously False. I would not delude you, and I do, and must seriously profess
to you this, in just commendation of my dear Master and his Service, that I am
fully satisfied upon the little trial I have made, that a religious godly Life,
is the most pleasant Life in all the World again; Wisdoms Ways, are ways of
Pleasantness, and all her paths are Peace; I have now been acquainted with Him
and his Service many Years, and still the more I know of Him and his Service,
the better I am pleased with both, and that upon solid substantial Grounds;
really I speak my very Heart to you in these things, and nothing but what you
shall certainly find your Self, if you will but come and see, if you will but
make trial as I have done. Indeed Religion does forbid all beastly Pleasures,
but it does not need them, for it brings others infinitely better in their room
which are peculiar to it self, which strangers intermeddle not with; and then
as to sober manlike Pleasures, its so far from depriving of them, that it gives
the best right unto the sweetest Enjoyments, and the surest hold of them; And
the best is still behind, even those Rivers of Joys and Pleasures at God's
right Hand for ever more, where others must ly down in endless Sorrow; but I am
afraid you will think me too tedious, do not take it ill from me, I verily
think you will not; God is my witness, that love to my Master whom I can never
admire, never commend, never save so much, or so well as he deserves I should,
and love to your Soul, a longing desire, that you two may come to be savingly
acquainted together has set my Pen on work, let him give it good speed! I
greatly delight in you here, but I would very fain take you along with me to
Heaven; let us not part! But I dare not for a World delude and flatter you
here, without a sound Conversion, without true Faith in Christ and real
Holiness, this can never be. I am many times praying hard for you in my Closet
when you little think of it: I earnestly recommend to your serious Perusal,
that little Book I left for your good Wife when I was last with you, the Lord
do you much by it!

I am dear Sir, your real affectionate Friend and Servant Jo. Barrett.

LETTER XXXVII. To Mr. B. London, May, 30. 1696.
Reverend Sir,
IT pleases the Lord to make use of such a sorry unworthy Instrument as I, in
the engaging of a great Number of Ministers, and other serious praying Persons
in this and diverse neighboring Counties, to spend one Hour every Week in
extraordinary seeking I. for his Chapter in general, and particularly for these
poor sinful tottering Kingdoms, and to continue this Course during the late
Sessions of Parliament, and meeting with very encouraging Success in my poor
Attempts here in the Country, and withal observing again and again in my
Retirements still more then ordinary impressions upon my Spirit of sore
Judgments near approaching, I was thus both excited and encouraged, to
recommend the like Undertaking to a Religious Gentleman of my acquaintance in
London, Dr. H. I wrote to him again and again about it, earnestly pressed him,
if it might be to procure from you and neighboring Ministers, a printed Call
to Prayer to the whole Kingdom. I had it in my Thoughts before the foresaid
time was out, to have written to my Friends here a second time to engage the
Continuance of this needful Work, but was in hopes that a printed Call from you
might have been procured to do the Work every way much more effectually, but I
begin now to be discouraged, hearing nothing from my Friend about it; this has
occasioned my taking the boldness to trouble you with these Lines; I know your
Hands are very full, yet I earnestly beg you will take the first opportunity
you can to speak with the Dr. about it, to know what has been done in it, and
if nothing of this Nature may be expected, then I beg a few Lines from you as
soon as possible, that private endeavors may be used; alas Sir, which way can
one look and not see a pressing Call to this Duty? Indeed the Lord has lately
given us a great deliverance, but truly laying things together, for my part, I
know not whether it has more increased my Hopes or Fears; such a thing rightly
improved would have been something: But if after all God's goodness to us we
continue as bad as ever, if not worse, what may we expect then? If the Lord be
forced after all to strike, may we not fear the blow will fall very heavy?
Indeed I fear a sore Storm is hasting upon England, a Land resolvedly bent upon
its own Ruin. Does not the Lord expect something more then ordinary from us at
such a time as this? And if we generally flocked about him in good earnest, who
knows but he might yet be entreated? And however though the Storm should not be
prevented, yet would it not certainly be better for us, yea and for England
too, that it find us on our Knees? Pray Sir, let me not be long without a few
Lines from you; methinks the Business requires have:

I am Sir, your affectionate Frind and humble Servant I. B.

Letter XXXVIII. To Mr. B. London, June, 9. 1696.
Reverend and much honored Sir,
YOURS I received last Week very gladly notwithstanding some mistake; I
perceive you thought my former Letter had come from my Father; I wonder much
that my weakness did not soon make you sensible of your mistake, but your
Charity is such as made you cover it; I am not sorry upon some accounts, that
you did so mistake, though I thought it a point of Justice to him, to give you
this hint of it: Sir, I heartily rejoice and bless G. for what I understand by
yours is already done, and further intended by you in London in way of Prayer.
If you have occasion in a short time to go near Dr. H. or else if you would
please to send for him, he would fully acquaint you with my poor Thoughts about
this Affair, what has been done by us in this part of the Country during the
late Session of Parliament, and with what humble Submission I earnestly desired
might further be done: In short I was thinking that if you would please to fix
upon a weekly Hour of Prayer, and then send abroad if it was but one half Sheet
to acquaint us with your Practice, and to excite us to fall in with it, it
might do great service by the success I lately met with in these Parts, I am
encouraged to hope that it would be very taking, and generally complied with,
by all those whose Prayers are likely to stand poor England in any stead at
this needful time; I remember you did something of this Nature in 93. A
considerable Number of Copies were providentially sent to my Hand, which
blessed be I. I spread with success. But methinks the time should not be
prefixed in too short limits as to Continuance; and so if upon consulting with
your Reverend Brethren, you should think of doing any thing of this Nature,
what if you put in for the continuance of it every Campain while the War lasts,
and so as well every Session of Parliament? Or indeed, why should it not be
continued without any intermission at all, even till Mercy comes, and so our
Note be changed to that of Praise, only with some alteration of the Hour in
Winter? Who knows what the damage may be if Moses's Hands fall down, though but
for a while? Indeed such a thing would make the business Public, and to many
its like would be too ready to make an ill Use of it; but truly Sir in my
Opinion, this is not a time for us to stand upon such Points; is not our
warrant good, our call clear loud and pressing! And if we follow our work to
purpose, we need not be ashamed to let the World know what we are about, nor
need we fear but that our G. will yet again in due time own and honor Prayer,
if it be but rightly managed and followed by us; but pardon my boldness in
hinting at these things, and in detaining you so long; I shall thankfully
receive your Notes about Prayer and help my Father to them; he lives in the
Country, and though he did not know of my writing to you, yet I know his
Thoughts concur with mine herein, and had he been with me now, I doubt not but
he would have intimated so much with service and thanks to you;

I am dear Sir, your very affectionate and obliged Servant I. B.

LETTER XXXIX. To Dr. H. London, March, 14. 1695/6.
Dear and much honored Sir,
BE not angry with me that I am yet again troublesome to you; I hope you have
received my last dated February 26. I little thought what a condition you was
in in London when I wrote it; the News the next day's Post brought us was very
surprising to me; O how loath the Lord is to leave us! How shall I give thee up
O England? Methinks now here is that in this late gracious providential
Dispensation, which shall wonderfully facillitate your affecting that Business,
I have again and again earnestly recommended to your care; methinks its a very
fruitful Call to that Duty; how many Heads of Arguments it affords? Some very
encouraging, others as awakning, for (amongst other things) believe me Sir, if
this Deliverance has not a better effect upon us, and be not followed by us at
another rate then former any have been, we may well fear to think what comes
next; we are upon our good behavior, and who knows whether this be not the
last Trial the Lord will make? Your Reverend Ministers (upon whom the Eye of
the Nation is much fixed,) never had a fairer opportunity for a general and
successful Call to Prayer! To the whole Kingdom, which I sent my last to beg
for; we are now generally alarmed, a great number of pious Souls, that have for
some Months been hard at work in seeking G. in an extraordinary Manner that
way, have now I doubt not, fresh Life put into them; but your long silence
makes me fear least the Business should some way miscarry, at least that you
have some unhappy rubs thrown in your way; I beg a few lines for my
satisfaction, though you cannot give me so full and good an Account as you
would, and let me have a fuller one afterward,

who am dear Sir, your obliged Servant Jo. Barrett.

LETTER XL. To Mr. L. E. June, 15. 1696.
SIR,
YOU will understand by my former Letter that yours came safe to hand, and was
to the rejoicing of my Heart; blessed be G. for the great satisfaction therein
given of your sense of matters of the highest Concern; I hope the Lord has in
some measure made you sensible of the worth of your Soul, of your Sin and
Danger, of your need of Christ and Grace in order to eternal Life and Glory;
and that he has also inclined you seriously and presently without delay, to
mind the things which concerns your everlasting Peace; the good Lord keep this
for ever in your imagination of the thought of your Heart; and establish your
Heart unto him. Indeed as you hint sincerity and heartiness in Religion is
worth all; and mere pretenses to it how fair and specious soever, never did nor
will save one Soul, but will aggravate the Condemnation of many; when others
great care is to seem better then they are, the Lord help us that our's may be
to be better then we seem, this is right in the sight of the Lord! O that I
could find more of this temper in this Soul of mine! As to that which you hint
at, which has been a great disadvantage to you, the unsuitable Carriage of
Professors. It is a common Case and a sad one; woe to the World because of such
Offenses, and woe to those by whom such Offenses come: It does very much
prejudice the World against serious Religion and Godliness, when they see such
as are high pretenders to it, can be as loose as others; though indeed if you
observe, you will find the World watches such most critically to spy any thing
amiss in them, and sometimes they do falsely accuse, and at other times
aggravate Matters at a high rate out of an hatred (if the truth was known) of
Religion and Godliness it self; but alas its too true God knows, that many
that are high pretenders to these, are but mere pretenders, and no wonder if
these miscarry and become a reproach to Religion; and truly (though I do not
think you aimed at me in it yet) I must acknowledge that in many things I act
so unsutably to my Profession, many times that I am even ashamed the World
should know, who am I, for fear that blessed Name and Cause I bear and stand up
for, should suffer by me; but as to this, you have prevented me in saying, that
in short, that I should have done, that this should not hinder others and make
them think worse of Religion, its blessed Authors ways and end, but rather
quicken them the more to see to soundness at the bottom, that they take up a
Profession on right Grounds, that they have a right Principle within, and make
them more cheerful afterward to live up unto it, and back it with a suitable
Practice: As to what you further hint about Dissenting Ministers, if you heard
them but speak for themselves, you would soon understand that it was not a
proud, sturdy, refractory Humor that made about two Thousand of them wise,
learned and pious Persons at once quiet their Places, run the hazard of
Imprisonment, Banishment, and in all probability the utter undoing of
themselves and families as to this World, and (which was yet dearer to them)
deny themselves the public Advantage they had of doing good to Souls; but the
truth is, such things was imposed on them, which how indifferent and lawful
soever they appeared to others, after the diligent use of the best means for
Satisfaction did not appear so to them, which therefore they could not comply
with, without sinning against God, and wounding their own Consciences, which
they durst not deliberately and wittingly do, though it had been to save the
World; and their Arguments are such as their Opposers could never yet Answer
satisfactorily in the Judgment of judicious impartial Men; and sober
Conformists, though they are satisfied with the lawfulness of them, yet bear
them as their Burden, and some of them have pleaded the Nonconformists Cause:
But as I do not much trouble my own Head, so neither would I trouble yours
with matters of Controversy, though if you desire it, I will give you further
satisfaction in this Point; for my own Part, I can freely join with the Church
of England in their Worship (as our Ministers frequently do) so far as I am not
obliged to join in that which I look on as a Corruption in it, and where I can
see any of them that appears to be sincere, a truly God-fearing Man, I speak my
Heart, that Man I can put in my bosom as well as any of my own Party; we are
both agreed in the main, and I believe we shall never be all of one Mind in
every Point while in this imperfect State, where we cannot assent in Judgment,
let us dissent with Affection; O that there was more of this Disposition on
both sides! And that we could mutually study and endeavor to outstrip one
another in promoting the Common, but glorious Cause of Christ and Christianity
in the World, making Religion our Business, being careful to adorn our
Profession with suitable Conversations; then I doubt not but we shall all meet
in the same Heaven in the end, and the glorious Light which then beams forth
from the Father of Lights, will discover all our Mistakes and perfectly agree
us:

I am yours, I. B.

LETTER XLI. To Mr. F. Chesterfield, Aug. 26. 1696. about Mr. Law.
Reverend Sir,
I Am frequently thoughtful about that poor People of Elton, Midleton, etc. and
having again and again of there flocking into the outward means which the Lord
has pleased now to send among them (may they indeed flock in apace to our dear
Lord Jesus,) as also of their diligent attention, and affection under them as
to many of them, I have been encouraged to attempt doing something farther for
them, in order to their enjoying more frequent Opportunities, which blessed be
G. I have now effected; but they have been something quicker then I thought of
in fixing upon one to sit down among them, a young Man that lives some where
near good Mr. Bagshaw; I have nothing to say against their Choice, I have very
little knowledge of the Person, but it being a Matter of greater Importance
then its like they are aware of, I should desire a little satisfaction about
him, and supposing you to have knowledge of him, I entreat the Favor of a few
Lines to inform me what he is as to his Judgment and Practice, and whether you
look on him as a fit Person to fix among them. I greatly desire that they may
have one that is a plain warm Preacher, one sound in Judgment and of a strict
and holy Life, such a one I should be well satisfied in, as a likely Instrument
to do good among them, though he should come behind in other things. And I
suppose you are well acquainted with that poor Country, and so desire you would
be casting about in your thoughts, if it may be to find us out another Place
where Charity of this Nature may be duly and advantagiously placed, if it may
be obtained, as I have some hopeful prospect that it might, if I could but tell
where to fix it, and was but enabled to give some good account of it; let your
thoughts be at work for me this way (for me did I say, nay for you, and let me
also say my) dear Lord and Master, and for precious Souls that are upon the
point of perishing, whose Condition calls for our tenderest bowels of
compassion and help, though through want of Sense they do it not for
themselves. But I forget my Self in thus bespeaking you, and as to my Self,
possibly may deceive you, making you think, that my Love to Christ and Souls is
more then alas it is, a poor thing even next to nothing (sad, sad, this is but
true) and as soon as you can fix and have an opportunity, let me hear from you;
but let me have a line concerning the former Business by my Friend the Bearer
hereof, for I intend (God willing) for Elton next Week, and then it will be
expected that the business be concluded, which now blessed be G. I am prepared
for in case your character of Mr. L. encourage me: I write in have and will not
detain you longer, only in begging a remembrance in your Prayers, some of my
mistaken Friends that are least acquainted with me, may possibly think me some
body for Religion, but alas the truth is, I make even nothing on it! Help me

who am dear Sir, your very affectionate Friend and Servant,I. B.

LETTER XLII. To Mr. F. Chesterfield, September, 18. 1696.
Dear Sir,
YOURS by good Mr. P. came safe to hand and was welcome to me, indeed I would
fain be doing something and with Submission to my great Master, will have
deliberately and delightfully chosen that which is more directly Charity to
Souls, for my more especial Province desiring, herein to lay out and improve my
poor but utmost Capacities and Interest so far as I may without breaking rank,
but alas its but very little that I can do, and the best of that very poorly
done, I speak my Heart, I fear you think too well of me, as to the Substance of
your Letter, Sir, I have not at present in my Hands, any thing of public
Charity but what is already determined of, as to persons, places and uses, but
having some of Mr. Alleins Books by me, I intend to send you some of them on my
own account, as soon as opportunity offers, if you have an opportunity, first
please to send in have

I remain your affectionate Friend and Servant, I. B.

LETTER XLIII. To Mr. B. Ford, November, 12. 1696.
Reverend and dear Sir,
I Received yours by good Mr. A. but being surprised with his unexpectedly
sudden Return I had no time to Answer it. I bless the Lord who inclined and
enabled you to come to us at Midleton, so that I have once seen your Face, and
had an opportunity of joining with you in Prayer, and that in the heavenly Part
of it; O how sweet will Heaven be! You are great in the Eyes of others, but
little in your own; how happy are you in this, that your Face shines and you
know it not! Dear Sir, I thank you for your Letter. My Father and I were both
concerned that it fell out so, that we could not take the opportunity of
getting a taste of Mr. A. (one in whom methinks, one may see something
extraordinary even in his Countenance) one by appointment six Weeks before,
coming on purpose from a great distance to preach the Lecture that Day: We got
a little hold on him by promise to come again, pray Sir, put him in mind of it
when you see him. I had great hopes concerning Mr. L. from the time I first see
him, and heard how the People were generally affected under his Ministry, and
have my hopes the more confirmed by the account you have once and again given
me of him. I am sometimes in pain about them, fearing least the Adversary by
stirring up a Spirit of Division among them should much hinder the Work, we are
not ignorant of his Devices, the good Lord rebuke him: I beseech you Sir,
remember them on that account, I shall do what I can to cut off all occasion by
procuring something farther for Mr. P. to dispose of as he pleases; I am in
hopes of something out of my Lord Wharton's Charity, but cannot yet get a
possitive Answer. I wonder sometimes that the Lord should incline you to take
notice of such a one as I, to write to me so often as you have done, but will you
indeed bear me upon your warm Heart when you are at the Throne of Grace? I
seriously beg you would, surely I am greatly needy, though unworthy of such a
Favor, I have been smattering at Religion, indeed trifling with it for many
years, for alas the truth is, I make even nothing of it to this day; O what a
reproach am I to a dear Jesus, a head so full of influences, a root so full of
sap, and to his Ministers and Ordinances I sit under! Corruptions and
Temptations strong and often prevailing, Grace ordinarily low and languishing,
nay useless and unprofitable, poor, and yet upon all occasions (I should rather
say, without any thing, that looks like a Color for it) prone to be Proud!
Will you not pity and pray for such an one? Alas Sir, the Lord knows I have
told you true! And when you have leisure and opportunity, further refresh me
with a line. But I will not detain you further but conclude here remaining dear

Sir, very affectionately Yours, I. B.

LETTER XLIV. To Mr. F. November, 14. 1696.
Reverend and dear Sir,
YOURS dated the 6th came safe to hand; I have not had any opportunity of
sending any Books to you, and have been a little thoughtful, because I did not
hear from you, send with great freedom, and the Lord prosper your pious Design.
As to Midleton, my Father having an Interest in Mr. White (one concerned in
disposing of my Lord Whartons large Charity) I got him to write to him for some
help there. His answer to my Father was, that as far as his Interest would go
it should be laid out for us, at their next meeting, which would be shortly. I
also wrote to him my Self, about ten day's or a fortnight since to put him in
mind of it. I hope we shall speed, and as soon as I can hear from him Mr. P.
shall know. I wrote to him about three weeks since, but perceive by yours, that
mine was not come to his Hands. Upon your advice I wrote to them, to put Six
poor Children to School, I suppose thus is, Three at Elton, I would have them
continue and will pay for them, and when we see how we speed at London, shall
know what to do more that way. Some things have been but imprudently managed,
which has been a trouble to me, methinks if Mr. P. had concerned himself a
little more in Matters and informed me, it might have been prevented, I have
been often concerned for them of late, least our subtle Enemy should take the
advantage to make any breach to the great prejudice of the Interest of the
Gospel amongst them; dear Sir, way lay him with your Prayers and good Advice,
when you are among them, if you see any thing that looks that way: I write in
have, and will not detain you longer,

but am very affectionately yours, I.B.

LETTER XLV. To Mr. L. April, 30. 1697.
Dear Sir,
I Was in hopes to have heard from you before this, but however I make bold to
trouble you with a few lines to intimate our Friends desire at Elton together
with my own, that you would please to think of settling among them; methinks
your private Converse among them, might be many ways setting forward your
Masters work. I know it will be grievous to you, to think of loosing the
frequent advantages you now have of enjoying that holy Man's Company, who I
question not has most of your spare Hours, and possibly there may be other
Reasons too, that may be ready to cast in a vote against it, but I need not
tell you whose Interest must give way, when the great God's and our's comes to
stand in Competition, and that when we sincerely serve him at the most
self-denying rate, he will not yet see us loosers by it in the End. And I do
also with Submission heartily wish you would think of setting upon a Course of
Catechizing and Expounding it; there are diverse good things extant that may
make your Work easy; and in my Thoughts its a thing very needful, and which
through the divine blessing might be of exceeding Advantage to them. You might
these long Day's make room for it, by cutting your Afternoons Sermon a little
shorter. The Lord direct and incline you that way which shall be most pleasing
to him, and most profitable to precious Souls, and crown your endeavors with
abundant Success! I should be glad to hear from you

who am your affectionate Friend and Servant, I. B.

LETTER XLVI. To Mr. C. May, 11. 1697.
Good Mr. C.
I Must acknowledge, that I am a debtor to you of a few Lines, I have not time
now to write many, and alas it was well for me if my justly grounded fears did
not give me cause to say, that by taking up but a little time in writing, I
shall thereby occasion you to throw away the less. Its sad indeed that a
borderer upon Eternity (as I have reason to look upon my self) should have
reason to talk at such a rate; but this, though it make it more sad, it does
not make it less true. While I complain of my Self I may not flatter you, but
give me leave to say this, that both formerly, and when I was last with you, I
could not but observe that in you, which gave me cause to think you was got
before me (alas! How many could I name; and that such too as have not had my
advantages nor any thing near them, whom I once thought at least to have been
some steps behind, who are now put before me!) But I must tell you, you have
fresh ground enough before you still, therefore put on, you will have better
company then by laging behind with such as I. I am just now thinking what a
change there is in the Season of the Year since I saw you. Then one had
occasion to be thinking of that [He gives Snow like Wool, he scatters his
Hoar frost like Ashes: He casts forth his Ice like Morsels, who can stand
before his Cold] But lo, now the Winter is past, the Rain is over and gone; the
Flowers appear on the Earth, the time of the Singing of Birds is come, and the
Voice of the Turtle is heard in our Lands. O that I could say so much of my
Soul! But alas, though when I look into my Garden, or walk abroad the verdure
and fragancy of a variety of Objects, inviting to entertain my outward Senses
with delight, as also to raise my dull and heavy Heart, to much more sweet,
excellent and amiable ones, though these (I say,) tell me after another manner
then my Almanac does when I look without doors that its May, yet I am forced
to think of another Month alas when I look within, sadly to complain of a long
Winter still, at least of a very backward Spring; the Vines do not flourish, the
tender Grapes appear, nor the Pomgranets bud forth, as the Lord might justly
expect, after so much expense as he has been at with me, nor any thing near
it. When I examine Matters closly, what a poor little is that, which I have to
show for my being a Garden more then bare Enclosure? But if I should proceed on
this melancholy Subject as I might, I should weary you, or possibly tempt you
to think I do but counterfeit Complaints, or that Pride was but working in a
more close and cunning way. Indeed who knows the depths of Deceit, that there
are in such Hearts! May my Complaints be an occasion of your humble cheerful
Praises upon your own Account; may they also engage your fervent Prayers on
mine. Arise O Son of righteousness with healing in thy Wings! Awake O North
wind, and come thou South, blow upon our Gardens that the Spices thereof may
flow out: Then let our beloved come into his Garden, and eat his pleasant
Fruits. My true hearty Respects and Service to good Mr. C. accept the tender of
the same your Self. I do not forget you, and should be glad to hear how it
pleases the Lord to deal with you,

who am your affectionate Friend and Servant, I. B.

LETTER XLVII. To Mr. W. July, 20. 1697.
Dear Sir,
I Was happily surprised last Lord's day, Mr. W. going over those excellent
close heart searching Truths again, which I was not long since speaking to you
of; But I find this has not satisfied my desire, but more increased and
enlarged it; and so both by my Father and self I did earnestly request his
Publishing this Discourse, which he neither granted nor denied. Now this comes
earnestly to entreat you to take my part herein. I never begged such a thing of
him before, and shall be very loath to be denied. Indeed it would be a fond
Conceit should I imagine that my Judgment or Opinion, should any way influence
him in such a thing as this, I should be ashamed to pretend to it; but methinks
this excellent universally useful thing, does abundantly speak for it self, and
I hope he will not by withholding rob the Church of it. I hope that which set
him on work in studying and preaching, has also set me on work in desiring its
Publication. I am loath to give offense by my rudeness, and yet shall not be
easily denied; but if he will deny me, I must take leave to set others on
successively, such as I shall think more likely to speed.

I am dear Sir your very affectionate Friend and Servant, I. B.

LETTER XLVIII. To Mr. Edmund B. August 30. 1697.
SIR,
I Have received your kind Letter full of good advice relating to that Affair I
applied my self to you about, when I was in L. wherein you also put me in hopes
of some Papers in a short time which will be further helpful, for which I
return hearty thanks. Since my return from L. I have for some days been abroad
in the Country, and since have been confined by bodily Distemper, so that I
have had but little time, but have taken a few steps in that Business, and as
soon as able shall endeavor to proceed according to your direction. My
greatest discouragements are in and from my Self, when ever I set about any
piece of Service, I am such a very sorry unworthy Instrument, that I am ready
to fear that the Lord should utterly reject and throw me by, as one in whom he
has no Pleasure, though I must confess he has sometimes graciously surprised
me with the Country, and so I would encourage my Self humbly to attempt this
also, earnestly begging that you and the Society would help me by your Prayers.
Such a Master indeed deserves all the Service that we can ever do him, but such
as I (if any such be) are unworthy of the Honor of being employed in the
meanest Part of it. The first tidings I had of your pious undertaking was very
pleasing to me, and the more so, because of that happy Union of Persons of
different Persuasions in your Societies; and truly in my small observation of
the rising Generation looking toward Religion, this is one thing which
methinks looks not a little comfortably, that they seem to be laying aside much
of that narrowness of mind, which truly both sides have generally been too
chargeable with, and to be approaching to a more truly Catholic temper, a
thing which bodes no small good (I hope) to our Church and Nation. But herein
(which is a ground for a further discouragement) you have much the advantage of
us in the Country, however if the God of Heaven will but be with us to prosper
us, we may thence take Heart to arise and build, I thank you for the liberty
you give me of holding a correspondence with you about this Affair. I shall
make bold to trouble you, as no doubt we shall have frequent occasion
especially at first, and shall be glad to hear of your Affairs. But I am afraid
you will think me tedious, so heartily wishing that Heavens blessing may abide
upon your Persons and pious Undertaking I conclude remaining,

Sir, your affectionate and obliged Friend and Ser. I. B.

LETTER XLIX. To Mr. B. January, 5. 1697/8.
Reverend Sir,
AS to the Affairs of your Society for Reformation here in this place (blessed
be God) they go on pretty well, fresh Members are almost weekly added to us,
and a considerable Number of Profane Persons have been brought to legal
Punishments, the good Effects of, which do already begin to appear; we are
resolved (the Lord enabling of us) to prosecute this Matter with utmost vigor,
and hope in about a Months time to set up a public Lecture on this occasion,
designing to have eight Sermons preached to us in the Year, by Conformists and
Nonconformists in their turns, and think to have our Sermons printed, as that
may be a means further to spread and propagate the thing. And being now
(blessed be God) pretty well settled in our gears here, I look on it as my Duty
to use my utmost endeavors to promote this highly necessary good Work else
where also, and among other Places has for some time been in my Eye. Now dear
Sir, I entreat you to move this Business to some of your People with pressing
Importunity, and may they not as well hear the Lord thus bespeaking them, who
is on my side, who? And let none of them be backward to come forth to his help;
and if a few hearty, prudent, active Persons would but appear, they may promise
themselves all the brotherly Assistance that poor I am capable of, giving them
as to Rules, both for the forming and govourning a Society of this nature (with
some other things that may be serviceable to them) according to our Practice
here, and the best Instructions I have had from the Societies in London.
Formidable difficulties will I doubt not present themselves, but let not these
discourage them, hearten them on, the Lord can easily help them through them, I
speak from mine own and others experience who have adventured before them, and
I durst give it under my Hand that he will. I doubt not but to put them into a
Method, to engage both Magistrates and Clergy to own and countenance them in
it; bid them not fear, but be strong and work, for the Lord our G. is with us,
and will own and prosper us in this thing, I promise my self an easy pardon for
this Trouble, and shall hope for your speedy Answer; the Lord send a
comfortable one! And if so, I shall speedily give you my Thoughts more
particularly about this Affair. I have written to York to the same effect, and
hope I shall have a demonstration of the greater forwardness of our Friends at
Hull in a more ready Compliance. I have a Letter from Mr. Fern yesterday
inintimating their ready Compliance with the like motion at Chesterfield and
importuning help, I hope I shall be able in a short time to give you an account
of its being actually set on Foot there, and in diverse other places here
abouts, and I would not have my Hull Friends the last that engage in this most
noble Quarrel,

I am dear Sir, your affectionate Friend and Servant, I. B.

FINIS.

