THE Nonconformists VINDICATED FROM THE ABUSES Put upon them By Mr. DVREL and
SCRIVENER.

Being some short Animadversions on their Books soon after they came forth: In
two Letters to a Friend (who could not hitherto get them Published).

Containing some Remarques upon the Celebrated Conference at Hampton Court.

By a Country Scholar.

LONDON Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheap
side, 1679.

THE NONCONFORMISTS Vindicated, etc.
SIR,
THough I have of late wholly addicted my self to the Study of Practical
Theology, and spent all that time I could redeem from my necessary occasions,
in Reading such Authors as make it their business to declare unto us the
essentials of Christianity; yet it has been some delight to me, from time to
time, by your Letters, to understand what Books have been Printed about those
(comparatively) Petit controversies that have of late years so miserably
divided our British Churches. I heartily wish, you had still continued only to
be my Intelligencer, then I had been at liberty, either not to send for the
Authors you mentioned, or else when I had sent for them, to lay them aside as
soon I had enough of them: but you were ambitious to be my Benefactor, and
therefore lately sent me at your own cost Mr. Durells two Eristical Volumes,
conjuring me, by all our friendship, to read them over, and to return you my
thoughts of them: and though I have again and again importuned you to excuse me
from so unwelcome an employment, yet will you take no denial; wherefore that I
may not seem finally obstinate, I do, herewith, send you some Animadversions,
the fruit of a few leisure hours; in reading whereof, if you either increase
the itch of disputation, or be forced to abate of the esteem you as yet have of
your Author, you know where to lay the blame. I assure you, I envy not unto him
the Ecclesiastical dignities and benefices he enjoys: but I think he was as
unmeet a person, as any could have been pitched on, to undertake the Cause of
our Church, against the Nonconforming Ministers: for the grounds of this so
severe censure, I refer you to what follows, and at present shall only lay
before you three or four necessary qualifications of him that would plead for
conformity with any success, or credit to our Church.

1. He had need to be free from all suspicion of ambition, and of that, which
the Apostle calls, the root of all evil; else his adversaries will say, that in
his pleadings for the Church, he seeks not her, but hers. The Writings of Mr.
Hooker, Mr. Sprint, Dr. Burges, as they are in themselves sober, and learned,
so they are by all, or most, read without any prejudice: because they contented
themselves with such ordinary preferments, as they either had before they had
written, or might have expected though they had never written for Ceremonies.
Nay Dr. Burges professes, that he lost more by conforming, than any did by not
conforming, (by the way, whereas Dr. Heylin says Hist. of Presby. Page 327.
That King James occasioned this Doctors preferring to the Rectory of Colshill
in Warwickshire: the Reader may take notice that he was never Rector of
Colshill, but of Sutton Goldfield, unto which the King occasioned not his
preferment, for the presentation was given him without his seeking, by Mr.
Shilton, after it had been first refused by Dr. Chetwind); I therefore doubt
not but he did write for the lawfulness of Subscription, out of conscience, and
that he would have continued in that opinion, though Authority had frowned upon
it.

I dare not say so much concerning all that were, or would have been, more
highly dignified. The first English man that grated hard upon the Presbyterian
Government in the Latin tongue, was Dr. Matthew Suttliffe, Dean of Exeter, in a
Book entitled de vera, Catholica and Christiana, Ecclesia, this very man,
whether discontented, because his Book against Mr. Mountague was suppressed; or
angry that he missed some preferment he aimed at, or for some other reasons we
know not of, before his death, professed his hearty sorrow that he had written
so much against Presbytery and for the power of the domineering Prelates, as
may be seen in the Jus divinum Regiminis Ecclesiastici. Who professed a greater
zeal for Hierarchy than Patrick Adamson? But Hierarchy not being able to pay
its quarters in the worlds own coin, how poorly did he Recant all his actings
for it? Confessing Presbyteries to be an ordinance of Christ, and craving Gods
mercy that he had called them a foolish invention; bewailing his pride and
covetousness that had put him upon undertaking the office of an Archbishop, as
that wherewith justly the sincerest professors of the word have found fault,
and condemned as impertinent to the office of a sincere pastor of Gods word;
engaging also that if he had health, he would write a confutation of Sutliffes
Book. All which, and much more, is to be found in the Records of the Scottish
Nation.

2. He that would, with any advantage to the Church, undertake to confute
Nonconformists, must be one that has seen and well considered, either all, or
the chiefest of their Books, and well knows the Histories of the times in which
they were written. Else, first he may commit such foul mistakes in Chronology,
as will render him ridiculous and contemptible to all his Readers. Can the most
mortified Presbyterian choose but laugh, when he finds in Dr. Heylins History of
Presbyterians, Page 264, that about 1570. Mr. Carthwrights grace for Doctor was
denied him, by the major part of the University; which so displeased him, and
his adherents, that, from that time, the degrees of Doctors, Batchelors, and
Masters, were esteemed unlawful, and those that took them reckoned for the
limbs of Antichrist, as appears by the Genevian notes on the Revelations. How
can it appear from the Geneva notes, that from the time of denying Mr.
Carthwrights grace, degrees were accounted unlawful? when every one knows, that
many years before the denial of that grace, those notes had been both made, and
published, perhaps by such as never saw or heard of Mr. Carthwright: Nor is
that less ridiculous which occurs, Page 294. where mention being made of a
Pamphlet written by Stubbes of Lincolns-Inne, it is said, that Stubbes had
married one of Mr. Carthwrights Sisters, and therefore may be thought to have
done nothing without his privity. Mr. Carthwright indeed married one of Mr.
Stubbes his Sisters, but that Mr. Stubbes married one of his Sisters is a
falsehood; and if it were supposed to be a truth, what ground is that, why a man
should think that Stubbes did nothing without his privity? Do all writers make
their Brothers-in-law privy to their designs? I acknowledge that Thuanus says
it was found out that Mr. Carthwright instigated him to write the Libel; but
Thuanus is not to be relied on in matters relating to the English Puritans,
because in such, he follows one who was their bitter adversary; as also because
Thuanus himself was too too Antipuritanical, perfectly in Religion of the same
mind with Cassander and Baldwin, whose Character need not be given. Doubtless
had there been either clear proof, or vehement suspicion, that Mr. Carthwright
was accessory to the compiling of the gaping Gulf, he had not escaped some
signal token of the Queens displeasure; for her Majesty was so highly incensed
against the Author, Printer, and Publisher of it, that nothing less would
satisfy her, than arraignment of them upon the Statute of Philip and Mary,
against the Authors and Dispersers of seditious writings; and because some of
her chief Lawyers were of opinion, That that law was but temporary, and of no
force in her reign, she imprisoneth one of them, and turns another out of his
place, and prevailed so far, that both Stubbes, and Page (who dispersed the
Copies) had sentence passed upon them, to lose their right hands: which
accordingly were cut off in the marketplace of Westminster, with a Butchers
knife and a Mallet; but it is observed by more than one of our Historians, that
when Stubbes his right hand was cut off, he did pull off his Hat with his left
hand, and cry out, God save the Queen: and the people by a general silence gave
their Testimony, that the punishment was too severe. Nor did the Queen her self
take much pleasure in reflecting on this penalty, but rather when the heat of
passion was over, received Stubbes into some degree of favor, as is probable
from the employment that he had under Peregrine Lord Willoughby, sent by the
Queen with four thousand Soldiers to assist the King of Navar, in which
employment he ended his days, but by a natural death.

Secondly, if our Writers for Conformity know not the State of the
controversies, and the times, in which they were managed, they will go near to
contradict one another; and will it not make the Nonconformists good sport, to
see their adversaries at dissension among themselves? Could Mr. Durells English
Book have been more effectually confuted by any writing, than by Dr. Heylins
History of Presbyterians? Dr. Stradling licenseth a Book tending to prove that
the Presbyterians in England are a singular sort of men, as contrary to the
Presbyterians beyond the Seas, as to their own Bishops at home; the
Vicechancellor of Oxford licenseth a Book designed to prove that all
Presbyterians, all the reformed Churches over, are all acted by one spirit,
equally prone to sedition and schism, alike bent to destroy all Kingdoms and
Churches into which they are received. Will not the Presbyterians say Aha! so
would we have it? will they not even bless themselves in these contradictions
of their adversaries? Dr. Heylin says, Lib. 7. Page 275. Whitgift dissected
Carthwrights admonition, in a Book entitled, An answer to the Admonition.
Carthwright sets out a reply in the year following, and Whitgift presently
rejoyns in defense of his Answer; against which Carthwright never stirred, but
left him Master of the field, possessed of all the signs of an absolute Victory.
But Sir George Paul says, Mr. Carthwright (glorying be-like to have the last
word) published a second reply, fraught with no other stuff than had been
before refuted, from answering of which Whitgift was dissuaded. Will not such
sweet concord as this, make delicate Music in the ears of the Nonconformists?
Especially considering that the Letter of Whitaker mentioned by the Doctor, is
pretended by the Knight to be one of the main inducements moving Whitgift not
to rejoyn to the second reply. And let me admonish the Conformists not much to
glory in Whitakers letter, reflecting so much disgrace on Carthwrights Book,
seeing Whitaker was then, 1. Under thirty years of age. 2. Never dreamed that
his Letter should be made public. 3. Afterward married the Widow of Dudly
Fennor. 4. In those writings which were the product and issue of his more
mature judgment and study, lays down such principles as the Nonconformists
think their conclusions do naturally and lineally descend from. 5. Died in
over-straining his diligence to suppress the Pelagian notions of Peter Baro, so
much now-adays applauded and admired. Certainly if they are to be accounted
Victors who keep the field last, the Nonconformists have at least as many
Victors as the Conformists, though we should grant that Whitgift had the last
word of Carthwright, which yet is not to be granted. But does not Mr. Fuller
say in his Ecclesiastical History, he had? Answer, He does; but I have been
assured, that being before Olivers triers for a living, he ingenuously
acknowledged his error, and promised to certify it, if ever his Book came to a
second Edition, which I therefore give notice of, that it may proceed no
further, and that Mr. Isaac Walton, who is still alive, and has fallen into
the same mistake in his life of Mr. Hooker, Page 85. may disabuse his Reader.
The which if he will vouchsafe to do, we shall have encouragement to try,
whether we cannot acquaint him with some more of his mistakes, and
misadventures. In the mean time I should be glad to understand, what assurance
can be given us, that Bishop Jewel ever used such words concerning Carthwright
as those mentioned by Dr. Heylin. Lib. 7. Page 274. and elsewhere, viz.
Stultitia nata est in cord pueri sed virga disciplinae fugabit eam: for it
seems improbable, that so grave a Prelate, should give so unhandsome a
character of a very learned man, concerning whom he could make no estimation,
but by a few scattered papers, designed for a Book that saw not the light till
Jewel was entered into the chambers of Darkness. All that I can see any ground
to acknowledge, at present, is but this, that Jewel both in a Sermon at Paul's,
and in a conference with some Brethren, had declared himself to be an approver
of the English ceremonies; and that being ready to leave the world, he declared
that what he uttered in his Sermon, and conference, was designed neither to
please any mortal, nor to embitter or trouble any party that thought otherwise
than himself; but that neither party might prejudg the other, and that the love
of God by the Holy spirit which is given to us, might be poured forth in the
hearts of brethren. See his life written by the Nonconforming Dr. Humpred. Page
255. edit. Land. an. 1573. And if Dr. Heylins friends will please to consult,
Page 275. They shall find Jewel died September 23. about three in the
afternoon, not as the Doctor affirms, Lib 6. Page 270. September the 22. And
then they may also consider whether he has not erred in dating Zanchies Letter
to Queen Elizabeth, September the second; for in my edition of Zanchies Letters
put forth by his Heirs at Hannouae 1609. it bears date the tenth of September,
1571. These are small matters, it will be said; I confess they be; but if men
will write Histories, they ought to be very exact, and publish nothing that
need fear the severest examination.

Let me be excused if I here adventure to give two more instances, one of Dr.
Heylins imaginary Victories; the other of his contrariety to other writers whom
he sometimes quotes with applause. Lib. 8. Page 283. He acquaints us that Dr.
Bancroft made a most excellent and judicious Sermon (let that pass) he gives us
the heads of that Sermon, saying, page 284, That they were all proved with such
evidence of demonstration, such great variety of Learning, and strength of
arguments, that none of all that party could be found to take arms against them
in defense either of their lewd doctrine, or more scandalous Uses. All this
with bitterness and malice more than enough; but with no regard to truth: for
Dr. John Reynolds at the desire of Sir Francis Knowles, did attaque that so
much applauded Sermon of Feb. 9th. at St. Paul's Cross, and pulled down two of
the main pillars, viz. The superiority which Bishops have among us over their
Clergy, is Gods own ordinance. 2. Jerome and Calvin confess that Bishops have
had superiority ever since the time of St. Mark the Evangelist. The Letter of
Dr. Reynolds in which he does this, is in many men's hands, and the Historian
doubtless had, if not seen, yet heard of it, and therefore was inexcusable in
representing Dr. Bancroft to be so formidable an adversary, that none durst
look him in the face. Let those who account Dr. Bancrofts Sermon unanswerable,
reply to Dr. Reynolds his Letter, and if it be thought that Dr. Reynolds has
not refuted all the passages of the Sermon, let us know what the particulars be
that still remain unanswered, and yet need an answer, and if after such notice
given, such terror seize on Presbyterians that none dare appear, let the Sermon
then be carried about in triumph; till then I hope it will be no presumption to
say, that Dr. Reynolds as well understood the judgment of the Fathers,
concerning Episcopacy, as Dr. Bancroft.

The instance of his contradicting others, shall be part of the story
concerning the infamous separatist Brown: Sir George Paul in the life of
Archbishop Whitgift, Page 53, acquaints us, that Brown in the Archbishops time
was changed from his fancies, and after obtained a benefice called Achurch in
Northamptonshire where he became a painful Preacher. But Dr. Heylin, Lib. 7.
Page 297. tells us, he was prevailed with to accept a place, Achurch in
Northamptonshire, beneficed with cure of Souls; a benefice of good value, which
might tempt him to it the rather, in regard that he was excused as well from
Preaching as from performing any other part of the public Ministry. Certainly,
if he became a painful Preacher, there was no need of excusing him from
Preaching.

But who is in the truth? I think neither the Knight nor the Doctor; painful
Preacher to be sure Brown never was, after his presentation to Achurch; nor is
it probable that he was excused from Preaching, any more than from living
quietly with his Wife. Bishops have strained their power very high, but I am
unwilling to believe that any Prelate since our Reformation would institute a
man healthful and able to Preach, into a cure of Souls, and yet excuse him from
all parts of the public Ministry.

Nay, thirdly, If men take the field against the Nonconformists before they
have sufficiently tried their strength, they may chance to be mastered by these
arguments they imagined themselves able to master; and so even face about in
the day of battle, fighting against those from whom they received their first
pay. Mr. Henry Jeanes had never seen a Nonconformist using his own weapon, and
therefore thought him contemptible, and adventured to defy him in a Printed
Treatise upon 1 These. 5.22. But when he came to Read the very Books of the
Nonconformists themselves, he found himself no longer able to withstand the
dint of their arguments, but went over to them, and died their Convert, as all
know who were his Neighbor Ministers: some Papists by reading Protestant
Books, with an intent to confute them, have been converted by them; and
therefore the Grandees in the Roman Church, will not give leave to one of a
thousand, to Read all manner of Books; nay in some places they will scarcely
permit Bellarmines works to be commonly sold, lest that little which is in them
of Calvin should purge all Catholocism out of their young Students. I wish the
Prelates of our Church would consider how far the prudence of Papacy is
imitable; certainly every one who is willing to have a Prebendship from them,
is not able to stand under the weight and burden that is laid upon Episcopacy.
If our Church must be vindicated, let it be vindicated by another Hooker, made
up of learning and modesty; as for Mr. Durel, if he have got a lask, and must
needs ease himself in the Press, it may be worth consideration, whether he be
not fit to succeed to Tom Nash, whose scoffing Pen was not altogether useless
in Queen Elizabeth's days.

I had almost added, that he who will to purpose defend our Church, must not be
a Jersey man; not only, because such a one can scarce be supposed sully to know
the intrigues of our differences; but also because it can scarce be thought,
that he should be conscientiously a friend to our Hierarchy: for we are not now
to be told, that the Episcopal Government settled here in England, could not get
into Jersey, but by wile, if not force. Jersey, Guernsey, etc. are the only
remainders of the Crown of England in the Dukedom of Normandy, and in former
times belonged to the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Constance, but were
governed immediately by a subordinate Officer mixed of a Chancellor and
Archdeacon; they entertained the Reformed Religion in King Edwards time, and
some of their Inhabitants suffered for it in the time of Queen Mary; Queen
Elizabeth reigning, by the help of some French Ministers, the generality were
again brought to seek after Reformation; but withal Petition the Queen for an
allowance of the Presbyterian Discipline, Anno 1563; and Anno 1565, obtain it
for all, or some part of the Islands: on which allowance they adventure to put
it in execution, and hold a Synod in the Isle of Guernsey, Sep. 2. 1567. Nor do
I find that they had any considerable disturbance in it, till Sir John Peiton
was made their Governor, who with the Kings Attorney protested against that
choice of Mr. Brevin, which was made by the Colloquy, upon the decease of the
Curate of St. John's: the ground of the Protestation was the prejudicialness of
such Elections to the Rights and Profits of the King, deprived thereby of
Vacancies, and first Fruits. This Protestation, though overruled for a season,
wrought so effectually, that about 1615, the Governor presented one Mr.
Messering to the Parish of St. Peter's; this Messering had been ordained Priest
by Dr. Bridges Bishop of Oxford, but his presentation was so offensive to the
Colloquy, that Governor and Ministers appear before King James, referring the
whole concernment to his Majesty's final Judgment; and the Ministers for ought
I find, had continued in Statu quo, had they been unanimous; but Monsieur De la
Place being brought into a golden dream, that if a Dean were again established
in the Isle, he, and no other should be the man, betrayed his brethren, and
violated the Oath he had before taken, so as it was at length ordered by the
Council of England, That an Officer invested with the authority of the ancient
Dean, should again be established in the Isle of Jersey, and that the Bishop of
Winchester should by Commission under his seal give authority unto the said
Dean, to exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the said Isle: but not
Monsieur Place, but Mr. Bandinel, an Italian, is put into the Deanery; which
Mr. Places high stomach not digesting, he retires into Guernsey, breathing out
nothing but disgrace to the English Liturgy, and the Change of Government made
in Jersey, by his own Treachery. The sum of all is: The Islanders of Jersey had
the English Liturgy translated into their own Language in the reign of King
Edward the sixth; in Queen Elizabeth's reign, they forsook it, aesired the
Presbyterial discipline, and by Oath bound themselves to keep and observe it.
The Episcopal Government was obtruded upon them, through the perjury of an
Ambitious Minister who declaimed against it as soon as he saw he could not
serve his own ends by it. Does any Law oblige us to believe that any Natives of
this Isle heartily embrace it? I think it will be no uncharitableness to say --
Timeo Danaos, and dona ferentes.

A fourth qualification required in him that will go a warfare for our Church,
is a good knowledge of all the rules and forms of Argumentation; he that wants
such knowledge, will no more be able to manage the Churches Arguments, than
David was to use Saul's Armor; nay, he will be a stumbling block and stone of
offense to our young students. When Dr. Heylin's Certamen Epistolare came
abroad, I had spent Three years and no more at Cambridg; yet I must needs buy
the Book, because the Author was famed for his Geography, and had been
represented to me as a very living Library; thought I, Si pergama dextra
Defendi possent, certe hac defensa videbo. But reading his Answer to Mr.
Baxter, I found my self quite frustrated in my expectation; for whereas Mr.
Baxter had made a conditional Syllogism, and instead of assuming the words of
the antecedent at large, had used an allowed brevity, But the antecedent is
true: The Dr. tells him Page 80. That it was a strange piece of news to him, to
read any one making use of that brief form of conditional Syllogism. This
startled me, for I was sure that almost every System of Logic, that fell into
the mention of conditional Syllogisms, not only allowed, but commended it to
us, for brevity sake, after a conditional major to proceed thus, But the
Antecedent is true, Ergo, so is the Consequent; or, but the Consequent is
false, Ergo, so is the Antecedent: I was as sure that those Schoolmen (in whose
Logicks and Metaphysics I had wasted too much time) did usually so argue, and
I had read that long before them, the Stoics were much pleased with this form
of Argumentation, and called it (...); how then (said I within my self) comes
it to pass, that an ancient Dr. in Divinity, who has combated not only
Puritans, but also Bishops and Heads of Houses, and sometimes nibbles at
Bellarmine himself, should upon the reading of such a Syllogism fall into such
a fit of admiration? What Answer I gave my self, is not material; but I
resolved to lay aside my opinion of the Doctors abilities; but rather to hope
that he would make known some mystery that was bid from Duncan, Burgesdicius,
Isendorne, etc. till I came to his 8, Page, where I met with these words, The
Antecedent in all Hypothetical propositions being conditional, imperfect, and
of no full sense, cannot be said to be either true or false. When I had read
them, I then concluded the Dr. was void of all rational learning, and perhaps
did not know what hypothetical signified; for certainly every hypothetical
Proposition is a compound Proposition; and if it be compound, it must consist
of Two Propositions, and one of those Propositions must needs be the
Antecedent: Now if the Antecedent be a Proposition, it must needs be either
true or false. I know that sometimes the Antecedent, as well as the Consequent,
is not formally a Proposition; but it is evermore, at least virtually a
Proposition, and therefore may be said to be true or false; if it could not,
why do our Logicks so carefully tell us, that we must not estimate the verity
or falsity of a conditional, from the verity or falsity of its parts, but from
the true or false connection that is betwixt them? It were perfectly needless to
tell us, that we are not to estimate the verity of a conditional, from the
verity of the Antecedent, if the Antecedent neither can be said to be true nor
false. Besides, if there may be affirmation and negation in the Antecedent,
then may the Antecedent be either true or false; but there may be affirmation
or negation in the Antecedent, Ergo. The minor I prove from the common rule
given for the right making of those conditional Syllogisms, in which the major
only is Hypothetical; the Rule is, That we must either proceed from the
position of the Antecedent, to the position of the Consequent; or from the
destruction of the Consequent to the destruction of the Antecedent; if we
proceed not thus, we may from true premises infer a false conclusion: Now what
is it to put ponere the Antecedent? Why, it is to bring it into the minor, with
the same quality it had in the major; That is, if it were affirmative in the
major, it must be affirmative in the minor; if negative in the major, then
negative in the minor: Ay, but whatever dull Logicians prate, is not the
Antecedent in every Hypothetical, conditional, imperfect? Answ. Certainly it is
not; for the [if] which is commonly prefixed to the Antecedent, is no part of
the Antecedent; but it is the copula that converteth the Antecedent and the
Consequent, just as the Verb [is] in a Categorical, coupleth the subject and
predicate. Let this be the example, if the Sun shines, it is day; here be two
propositions, the Sun shines, it is day, both are joined into one compound
proposition by the Conjunction if; and the plain meaning is, if the first
proposition be true, the second is also. No less ignorance does the Dr. bewray,
when he says, In every hypothetical Syllogism, the major proposition
consists of two parts, or branches, whereof one is called the Antecedent, the
other the consequent: For I can make him an Hundred Hypothetical Syllogisms, in
which the minor only and conclusion shall be Hypothetical, and the major a
plain Categorical. It may be Mr. D. will say, this shakes not his Corn; and
indeed it does not: but he also might have done well, before he dabled in the
Printers Ink, to read over some Compendiums; then would he have amended the
Title of above Fifty Pages in his Book, not writing The Conformity of the
Reformed Churches, with the Reformed Church of England; for this Enunciation,
There is a conformity betwixt the Reformed Churches, and the Reformed Church of
England in the things of present controversy, cannot be proved, but by an
Induction, showing, that all, or the most, or the most famous Reformed
Churches, agree with the Church of England in all, or most, or the chiefest of
those matters the present Nonconformists scruple. Has he showed this? he does
as good as confess he has not; for Page 53. Sect. 63. giving us the summa
totalis of his achievements, he plainly says, it amounts but to thus much,
There is hardly one of the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England that
is not used in some one Reformed Church or other. Which suppose he had proved
(as he has not) he is, many stages off from the conclusion he propounded to
infer; if he deem he is not, let him write a Book to prove that the Language of
the Matachuses is conformable to the English Language, because there is some
one word in which both languages do agree, and see whether he will not be
laughed at to purpose.

But I will free my mind from all prejudices that may be taken against Mr. D.
on the account of his Country; nor will I create him any odium from the high
elogiums he bestows on the Earl of Clarendon, sentenced by King and Parliament
to perpetual banishment, as unworthy to live in England, (though I wonder Mr.
D. does no where bewail his sin or misery in heaping so many praises on him who
deserved so few) It Is not the man, but his Book I am to undertake, and in it I
will show,

1. Where there is a real controversy betwixt Episcoparians and Presbyterians,
he quite mistakes it.

2. That he takes a great deal of pains to prove that which was never
questioned by any sober man among us.

3. That he defiles his Paper with many untruths and falsehoods.

4. That he has let fall not a few passages which are manifestly prejudicial
and destructive to the Church of England, as it is now established.

As to the real controversies now on foot, the principal of them may be reduced
to three general Heads, Episcopacy, Liturgy, Ceremonies.

The Presbyterians say, that if they conform, they must receive Episcopacy as
an order by Divine Law, superior to Presbytery, and invested with sole power of
order and jurisdiction: Search Mr. Durell's Book with Candles, and if there be
in it any one Line tending to prove that either there is any such Episcopacy in
any one reformed Church, or that any one Reformed Church, if her judgment were
asked, would approve such an Episcopacy, and I will confess my self mistaken.
He reckons himself most secure of the Lutheran Churches, and among the
Lutherans, especially of such as are governed by a Monarchy, particularly he
tells us, That in Denmark they have Bishops, and Arch bishops, name and thing,
Page 5. How much he is mistaken in this, will soon appear, if we consult the
History of the Reformation of that Kingdom. About the year 1537, Bugenbagius is
sent for into Denmark, where the Twelfth of August, he performed all the
Ecclesiastical part of the Kings Coronation; and Fourteen days after that
Coronation, he ordained Seven Superintendents, to be keepers and executors of
all Ecclesiastical Ordination, and to do the office of Bishops: Now I ask,
seeing Bugenhage was but a Presbyter, whether he put the Superintendents into
an order higher than his own? if he did, who gave him an authority so to do? If
he did not, then are there no Bishops properly so called in Denmark. Melchior
Adam, who relates this of Bugenhagius, relates also in the life of Luther, that
he, calling Three other Presbyters to join with him in laying on of hands,
ordained Nicholas Amdsorf Bishop, repudiating one chosen by the College of
Canons, and very dear to the Emperor; That is, he ordained one by the name of a
Bishop, but he was only a Presbyter, and could not think himself to be of an
higher Order, being ordained by Luther that was but a mere Presbyter.

Gerhard acquaints us, That the Papists, or at least some of them, did proclaim
the Ordinations in their Churches to be void and null, because performed by
Luther who was no Bishop; but that ever any Lutheran thought their Ordinations
less valid on that account, will never be proved. I have read Hunnius his
Demonstration of the Lutheran Ministry; and though he were himself a
Superintendent, yet he so little magnifies his Office, that he sticks not to
affirm, That he who ordains, ordains only as the Officer of the Church; and
that any one whatever that should by the Church be set to ordain, would ordain
as validly as a Bishop does. And, if it will do Mr. D. any kindness, I can, and
will on his desire, direct him to a Lutheran, who calls us Anglos Papizantes,
for straining Episcopacy so high, and appropriating Ordination to that Order:
Chemnitius had occasion to examine the Anathematizing Decrees of the
Conventicle of Trent; one of them was, If any one shall say that a Bishop is
not superior to a Presbyter, let him be Anathema. There he was necessitated to
show the judgment of the Lutheran Churches, and yet he there delivers
nothing, but what the English- Presbyterians can subscribe to; and though the
incomparable Philip Melancthon was blamed for giving more to Bishops than was
meet; yet he has not given more to them, than what the English Nonconformists
are ready to give them.

Thus of the Lutheran Churches. It will not be so difficult for me to find out
the judgment of the Churches more strictly called Reformed, because I shall
find the most famous of them except the Gallican, meeting together at the Synod
of Dort. Of the Gallican therefore by themselves; and I say, that the Writers
of those Churches have done more against our English Hierarchy, than the
Writers of any, or all Reformed Churches besides. For,

1. Some of them have made it their business to overthrow the credit of
Ignatius his Epistles, from which, more than from any writing whatever, our
Hierarchy does strengthen it self. Did not Salmasius and Blondell strain their
diligence, to prove that even the most correct Copy of Ignatius is spurious?
And when our learned Hammond had taken some pains to vindicate the Epistles,
Maresius quarrels with B^ondell, because he did not presently all other
business laid aside) take the Doctor to task, and maintain against him the
Apology he had made for St. Hieroms opinion; yet Dally tells us, that Blondell
had intended to answer for himself, had he not been prevented by death. Because
death did prevent him, therefore his friend Monsieur Dally has done that work
for him; and it is said, that Dr. Pierson has news sent him, That if he think
meet to reply upon Dally, he shall not long want a rejoinder.

2. Those that have defended our English Hierarchy, have not been more
uncivilly dealt with by any, than by learned Frenchmen. I will not now
(because indeed I am ashamed) tell what language Danaeus gave Saravia, because
of his Book De diversis Ministrorum gradibus. Salmasius imagining himself
disparaged by a word never intended as a disparagement, could not forbear
calling Dr. Hammond Knave. Maresius (in the first question he handles against
Dr. Prideaux) not so bluntly, but more virulently, tells us, That Dr. Hammond
had proceeded to such a degree of fury, as that he did professedly propugne the
cause of the Pope; not content to spit in a single Doctors face, he thus
censures all our Bishops, Melius suae (...) consuluissent Praesules Anglicani,
si and moderatius in ea egissent, and illam cum reliquis Protestantibus
maluissent agnoscere juris ecclesiastici, quam mordicus asserere juris Divini.
Nam ut arcus nimia intensione frangitur, sis and illi nimium intendentes suam
authoritatem, and dignitatem ea penitus exciderunt, instar Cameli in fabula,
qui quod cornua affectasset, etiam auribus multatus fuit, page 68. And then
page 70, speaking of some mischiefs that had befallen the Bishops, he thus
expresses himself, Ipsimet Praesules Angli, fuissent ea declinaturi, si
fortunam suam magis reverenter habuissent, neque ex part collimassent ad
Papismi restitutionem, jure postliminii, licet majorem aut saltem meliorem
partem little haec iniquitatis mysteria latuerint. Quare nobis eminus hanc
catastrophem spectantibus; id solum dicendum restat, domine justus es, and
justa judicia tua. And then page 111, speaking of our Bishops arrogating to
themselves temporal jurisdiction, he dreads not to let fall these Lines; Haec
defensio Jurisdictionis temporalis pro Ecclesiae Ministris portio aliqua est,
illius fermenti Papistici, quo Hierarchiae Anglicanae massa, paulatim se infici
passa fuit, dum magis ambit typhum saeculi, ut loquar cum patribus Africanis,
quam humilitatem crucis meditatur: potuissent forte Episcopi Anglicani suam
(...) and sua rura retinuisse, nisi vo^uissent penitus suum Episcopatum ad
modulum Romanum componere.

3. But above all, let that be considered which is laid down by Peter Moulin in
his Letter to the Bishop of Winchester, Where to excuse himself for not making
the difference betwixt Bishops and Presbyters to be of Divine appointment, he
pleads, that if he had laid the difference on that foundation, the French
Churches would have silenced him.

Will the French Churches silence him that should assert the jus Divinum of
Episcopacy? and yet will Mr. Durell go about to persuade us, that they do not
condemn our English Hierarchy, which asserts it self to be Divine, and cares
not for being at all, if it be not such? The Two Archbishops in Dr. Bastwicks
Case, did protest even in open Court, That if they could not prove their
Episcopal Jurisdiction and Function, which they claimed and exercised over
other Ministers, and themselves as they were Bishops, to be superior in power,
dignity, and degree to other Ministers, Jure Divino, they would forthwith cast
away their Rochets off their backs, lay down their Bishoprics at his Majesty's
feet, and not continue one hour longer Bishops. If therefore Mr. D. can bring
any eminent French Divines that found Episcopacy, as distinct from, and
superior to, Presbytery, on any Divine Law, he will do something to stop the
mouths of Nonconformists; but such he will never be able to bring, unless he
first cause the Golden Ball to run before them, or fill them with that which
blinds the eyes of the wise. Certain I am, that Dr. Andrew Rivet, in his
summa Controver. Second Tract. 22. Quest. thus states the question: We dispute
not whether Bishops be, de facto, above Presbyters; but whether they be so, de
jure; nor is the question of Humane, but Divine Law: We deny that Bishops by
Divine Law have any pre-eminence above Presbyters. This is the more
considerable, because it is dedicated to four great Protestant Divines, Peter
Moulin, William Rivet, John Maximilian Langle, Samuel Bochart; and because it
is again repeated in Rivets Writings against Grotius. When some Ministers were
by the Assembly employed to get foreign Divines, by some Letters, to signify
their minds in the controversy of our Episcopacy; among others, the said
Ministers went to this Dr. Rivet, then at the Hague, desiring him, that he
would be pleased to signify his mind: He excused himself from Writing, because
of his relation to -- but took down one of his Books, in which he denied the
Divine Right of Episcopacy; delaring, That was his judgment, which he would
never deny. This I had from the mouth of a very Reverend person still alive,
who was one employed to discourse him.

But I have a later testimony; when the Scots went to Breda to treat with their
King, Dr. Rivet put a Preface to Bodius his Comment on the Ephesians,
commending it to the World, and I am sure in that, the English Hierarchy is
sufficiently beaten down. I have said all that for the present I intend to say
about the French Churches; of other Reformed Churches I may speak more briefly,
because most of them met together in a Synod at Dort, to put an end to the
differences about the five points: What was done in that Synod? Why, says Mr.
Mountague in his Appeal, page 70, In it, and in other Dutch Synods, the
Discipline of the Church of England is held unlawful. At this Mr. Durell had
need to bestir himself; for either Mr. Mountague, or he will be found to be a
Liar: I shall not determine who is to blame; but by reading the Acts of that
Synod, I do find, that Session 144, notice was given, That it was the will of
the States, that the Confession of Faith of the Belgic Churches, should be
read and examined by the Synod, the Exteri being also present. The One and
thirtieth Article of that Confession, when it comes to speak particularly of
the Ministers of the Word, says, That in what place soever they be, they have
the same power and authority, as being all the Ministers of Christ, the only
Universal Bishop, and only Head of the Church. These words would not down with
our British Divines, because directly opposite to government by Archbishops and
Bishops in England: Whereupon the Lord Bishop of Landaff, in his own name, and
the name of his Brethren, made open protestation, That whereas in the
Confession there was inserted a strange conceit of the Parity of Ministers to
be instituted by Christ, he declared his own and his brethrens utter dissent in
that point. Now hence, I thus argue, either the words in that Article do
condemn our Government in England, or they do not; if they do not, why did our
British Divines concern themselves to make protestation, open protestation
against them? If they did, then all at once down falls the one half of Mr.
Durell's Book: For then the Holland Churches in their very Confession of Faith
condemn the Discipline of the Church of England; and if the Holland Churches do
so, other Churches do so also: For by the Divines of no other Church besides
the English, was any dislike shown to those words, asserting the parity of all
Ministers. As for the Deputies of the Gallo-Belgick Churches, they declared,
That the French Churches, though not there present, had before, in a National
Synod held in the City of Vitriack 1583, declared solemnly, their approbation,
not only of the Doctrine, but also of the Discipline of their Holland Brethren:
No wonder they so readily consented, for an Egg is not more like to an Egg,
than is the Gallican Confession to the Belgic, in the matters of Ministers and
Discipline; both of them are a note above the Ela of many, who have the ill hap
to be called Presbyterians, and lose their livings here in England: both say,
That this is one part of the Polity taught in the word, that there should be in
the Church of Christ, Pastors, Elders, Deacons. To this it is like that Mr.
Durell himself has subscribed; for he somewhere tells us, That he had for some
years a place among the French Protestants; and he tells us, page 54, That no
man is to be ordained a Minister, or admitted to any other office in the said
hurc^es, but he must subscribe, besides the public Confession of their Faith,
the Canons and Constitutions agreed on at Paris, commonly known by the name of
their Discipline. Now if a man should go to him, and ask him whether he
believes it to be any piece of Christ's Polity, that there should be in his
Church Elders, Ruling-Elders, distinct from Preaching Elders or Pastors, he
would either say no or say nothing. Why did he with his hand subscribe to that
which he did not with his heart believe? Perhaps he is a Latitudinarian, or
has a Sluice in his Conscience. But the simple Nonconformists in England dare
not say they assent to all, and every thing, if there be something unto which
they do not unfeignedly assent; they say, they can promise not publicly to
contradict any thing delivered in the Liturgy or Book of Ordination; and some
who are beneficed and dignified, tell them, they mean no more, by professing
assent and consent. But Nonconformists cannot bring themselves to imagine, that
form of words imports no more. What a misery it is, that so many Families
should be ruined for want of a distinguishing faculty! Episcopius has
prescribed a Receipt, which if they can but take, may cure them of their
scrupulosity; (but let them fear lest it purge them of their Conscience also:)
For thus he, What if the Magistrate require words and forms of speaking, by
which an opinion directly contrary to our faith and opinion is wont to be
expressed? Answ. As long as my opinion is not known, if those forms be such, or
conceived in such words which admit a true sense, though a false be wont to be
expressed by them, I allow them for peace sake. Respon. ad 64. Quest. Page 54.

My Lord of Landaff's Protestation has set my Pen a running further and faster
than I designed; yet I will not give it check, until I have also taken notice
of something else, which his Lordship relates in his Book against Mountague,
viz. That he told some Divines of the Synod, the cause of all their troubles
was, because they had no Bishops amongst them, who by their authority might
repress turbulent spirits, that broached novelty, every man having liberty to
speak or write what they is it. It seems his Lordship was of opinion, thas if
Holland had but been blessed with Bishops, Arminianism had never come to such
an Head in the Low Countries; and so the Papists tell us, That if we would but
submit our selves to the Bishop of Rome, we should then have no differences
about the sense of Scripture; yet never any Pope of Rome has set out any
infallible Commentary upon the Bible; nor has any Episcopal authority in
England proved sufficient to root up Arminianism among us. Mr. Mountague when
he first sowed the seeds thereof, was of Bishop Carleton's own Diocese, why did
he not prevent his innovations taking root? Why could he not keep his own Book
against them, from being suppressed? What was the matter that no Convocation
ever decided so important a controversy?

I find indeed His Majesty ( Mountague having been much vexed by the Commons)
about the year 1626, commanding all the Bishops to come before him,
reprehending such as appeared, for not making known to him what was meet to be
done about the Five points that made such a noise: but Bishop Andrews and
Bishop Laud laying their heads together, thought it was not safe to adventure
the determining of those points to a Convocation, till they could get a
Convocation more of their own minds; wherefore after all expectations, nothing
came forth, but a Proclamation from His Majesty, Charging his Divines not to
vent their heats, by raising any doubts, or publishing and maintaining any new
inventions or opinions concerning Religion: Much like to an Order, the
Remonstrants by means of Barnevelt procured from the States of Holland, on
purpose to prevent the calling of a Synod. Of late indeed, I find Arnold
Poelenberg, in a Preface to the 2d Volume of Episcopius his Works, boasting of
the great favor that the Remonstrant opinions and Authors, find with our
Prelates, and with the leading men in both Universities; but perhaps he
reckons, as the Proverb is, without his host. All experience tells us, that
Episcopacy without the Assistance of the Civil Magistrate, will not put an end
to our strifes and contentions; and with the assistance of the Civil Magistrate
Presbytery may do it. But I return to Mr. D. whom I opposed with an Argument
drawn from the Synod of Dort; I must not forget that he also takes notice of
the Synod of Dort, and from the civil and respectful language given in it by
Bogerman to the Bishop of Landaff, concludes, That Holland condemns not our
Hierarchy. And look how many Transmarine Divines he finds dedicating Books to
our Bishops or Archbishops, and giving them the titles by which they are
commonly called among us; so many good mediums he conceives he has found to
prove that beyond the seas the office of a Bishop or Archbishop is liked and
honored. I only desire him, if he can, to be as good natured to our
Englishmen, and to believe Thomas Cartwright was a Convert, because writing to
the Archbishop he gives him his Titles; and that Mr. Prynne had no design to
unbishop Timothy and Titus, because he dedicates his book to the right reverend
Fathers in God, William of Canterbury, and Richard of York, Primates of all
England, and Metropolitans. And if his heart do not fail him, let him also
infer, That Francis Mason had no dislike of Popish Hierarchy, because in a
Dedicatory to Henry Bishop of Paris, he calls him Amplissimum Praesulem, and
Antistitem Clarissimum, and Virum Reverendissimum. Dr. Heylin was not Master of
so much charitable Logic; for speaking ( Hist. of Pres. p. 282.) of Bishop
Grindals holding correspondence with Calvin and Beza, Zanchy, Bullinger,
Gualter, and some other of the chief Divines among the Switzers, he concludes
at length, That they all had their ends upon him, for the advancing of
Presbytery and Inconformity in the Church of England. And really I have
observed, that most of the Divines that have by their Letters stroaked our
Bishops, have in some places of their Writings given a shrewd knock to the
Cause defended by them. Mr. Durell, p. 281. tells us, That Danaeus his calling
the Archbishop Reverendissimum in Christo Patrem, etc. is as much as can be
wished to testify his good liking of the Church of England as it is by Law
established: And yet John Can a very troublesome Separatist, makes use of a
passage in Danaeus to justify his separation from the Church of England. Mr.
Ball clearly proves that the passage does not warrant separation; but yet
Dan^us might have written more moderately: for these are his words on 1 Timothy 5.
Ex his omnibus apparet quam nulla sit, vel non legitima eorum verbi D^i
ministrorum vel Ecclesiae pastorum vocatio, qui solius Regis, vel Reginae, vel
Patroni vel Episeopi vel Archiepiscopi authoritate diplomate, bullis, jussu and
judicio fiunt vel eligun tur. Id quod dolendum est, fieri adhuc in iis
Ecclesiis, quae tamon purum Dei verbum habent, and sequuntur, veluti in media
Anglia. Nan Anglos homines alioqui sapientissimos, acutissimos, and
pientissimos, in istis tamen Papisticae Idololatriae, and tyrannidis reliquiis
agnoscendis, and tollendis, scientes prudentesque caecutire mirum est. Itaque
praeclare sentiunt, qui omnem illam chartulariam, and Episcopaticam Curionum
and pastorum Ecclesiae ereandorum rationem, item ex solo Episcopi consensu and
diplomate ministrorum verbi coelestis vocationem, approbationem, and
inaugurationem damnant, tollendamque ex reformata ad Dei verbum Ecclesia
censent: quod ordo Dei verbo praescriptus in ordinatione hujusmodi personarum
sit praetermissus, ac violatus, sicut perspicue apparet. Denique and senatui
Ecclesiastico, and populo Christiano insomne suum atque suffragium misere sit
hac ratione, and in he genere vocationum Ecclesiasticarum ademptum, and in
unum quendum Episcopum magna tyrannide atque abusu translatum. Dominus Deus
talibus corruptionibus, quae adhuc in Ecclesiis ipsius supersunt, and
defenduntur, mederi magna sua misericordia dignetur, and velit, quae tandem
certe magnam Ecclesiae Dei ruinam secum trahent, and ipsum sacrosanctum verbi
Ministerium reddent efficientq. vel mercenarium, vel omnino contemptibile and
abjectum. Quod Dominus avertat.

Certainly this is not as much as can be wished to testify Danaeus his good
liking of the Church of England as it is by Law established. Friderick Spanhem
is another whose complaisant Dedicatory to the great Usher seems to Mr. D. a
sufficient argument to prove that the Reformed Church of Geneva is no enemy to
the Bishops of the Church of England; and yet Spanhem in that very third part
of his Evangelical Doubts, which he dedicates to the Archbishop, determines it
lawful for the innocent person after divorce to marry another wife; quite
contrary to Ecclesiastical Laws still unrepealed in the Church of England.
Well, that is but a Peccadillo, because many of our own Conformable Divines are
of the same mind, and as I suppose, some of our Bishops also. Dr. Abbot
answering Bishops Second part, p. 315. says, That the limitation of divorce
which our Savior gives, makes it lawful for the party innocent to marry
again, the delinquent being left to the censure of the Church, until
satisfaction be given of true repentance for so heinous a sin. The Church of
England notwithstanding, for the preventing of some mischiess that by the
wickedness of men do arise by the abuse of the liberty of marriage upon
divorce, uses a restraint of that liberty, that the parties divorced shall put
in caution not to marry again as long as they both live. As for the Authors of
the reformation of our Ecclesiastical laws de Adult. and divort. c. 6. they
determine plainly, Cum alter conjux adulterii damnatus est, alteri licebit
innocenti novum ad matrimonium (si volet) progredi: and c. 7. Judex quoties
alterum conjugem adulterii condemnat, alteri sincerae personae libertatem
denunciare debet ad novum matrimonium transeundi. And cap. 19. Mensae societas
and thori solebat in certis criminibus adimi conjugibus, salvo tamen inter
illos reliquo matrimonii jure; quae constitutio cum a sacris literis aliena
sit, and maximam perversitatem habeat, and malorum sentinam in matrimonium
comportaverit, illud authoritate nostra totum aboleri placet. But this, it
seems, is not current doctrine now, and so let it pass. The aforesaid Friderick
Spanhem makes Ruling-Elders to be one of those orders of Officers that are
designed by Christ for the ruling of his Church, and affirms them to be
grounded on Scripture, 1 Cor. 12.8. 1 Timothy 5.17. So I find him quoted by
Hornbeck Institut. Theol. p. 523, 524. And it will be difficult for Mr. Durell
to prove that he can approve the divine right of Episcopacy, who makes
Lay Elders (commonly so called) a divine institution.

Leaving Episcopacy, let us come to Liturgy, that we may see whether Mr. Durell
be any more happy in managing that Controversy. I do easily grant, that he
has by a whole cloud of witnesses proved,

1. That set-forms of prayer are lawful.

2. That most Churches reformed do use set-forms of prayer.

3. That the old English Common prayer book was not so corrupt, as that a man
could not without defiling his conscience, join with those who made use of it
in the service of God. But all these things had been proved many years before,
by an old Nonconformist (who died about the beginning of the late Wars) Mr.
John Ball, both in his trial of the grounds tending to separation, and in his
answer to Mr. Cann and others.

If Mr. Durell will do any thing to purpose in this Controversy relating to
Liturgies, he must prove,

1. That it is lawful for any Church so strictly to tie up her Ministers to a
form, as not to allow them to make any use of their own gifts in prayer in
public.

Or else, 2dly, That our Church has not so tied up her Ministers, but that
they may still, any Rubric or Canon to the contrary notwithstanding, use their
own prayer at some times, and upon some occasions in the public.

If he will endeavor to prove the first, the Presbyterians will be concerned
to answer him. If the second, there are many of his Conforming brethren will
soon be upon his bones; but for ought I see or can find, Mr. D. never goes
about either to prove the one or the other proposition; and therefore I might
be excused if I did wholly dismiss him, and leave him to some of his friends to
reconcile him to his own shadow; yet because he swaggers, and accounts that he
has by one thrust left the Assembly of Divines, and the two Houses of
Parliament weltring in their blood, I will try quid tanto dignum feret hic
promissor hiatu.

The things laid to the charge of the two Houses, and the Assembly chosen by
them, are manifest untruths, and those uttered in an Ordinance, and in a
preface to a Directory for the public Worship of God throughout the three
kingdoms, vid. p. 3. If any manifest untruths are delivered by them, let them
(for me) lie down in their own sorrow and shame, till they have made reparation
to the parties injured. But first, we must see whether this heavy charge can be
made good against them, else the penance must be laid on him that brought in
the charge. The first untruth is, That the book of Common prayer had proved an
offense to the Reformed Churches abroad. Is this an untruth, and a manifest
untruth too? Why, are not the Walachian Churches in Zealand, Resormed Churches?
and was not the Liturgy used in the Church of England, an offense to them? Let
Mr. D. read what Apollonius in the name of the whole Classis has written
against it, and then tell us his mind; let him also read the several Letters
written by Calvin and Beza touching our Liturgy, and it will be very evident,
that some things in our English Liturgy were offensive at Geneva; and a man
would think something in it was offensive to the Protestant Churches in France,
or else certainly they would have used their interest with the French Churches
here in England to receive it from Bishop Laud, who labored with all his might
for many years to impose it on them, but could not prevail at last. Lastly, for
ought I know the Scottish Churches may properly enough be called Churches
abroad, and Mr D. will not sure deny but that our Liturgy was offensive to them.

The second manifest untruth is, that the two houses did take away the book of
Common Prayer to answer the expectation of other Reformed Churches. If there
were other Reformed Churches besides those, for which the Directory was
appointed, that expected the two Houses should take away the Common Prayer Book
used in England, then was there no manifest untruth in the beforementioned
expression: Let us see whether there were not. The abolishing of the
Common Prayer Book was forth Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales. Can Mr.
D. imagine that no other Churches reformed, expected the taking away of the
English Liturgy? What thinks he of the Reformed Churches of Scotland? The
Churches of New England? those English and Scottish Churches that were planted
up and down the Low Countries, and other places of Traffic? Will he nullify
all these Churches? or had they not desires as well as expectations that the
Liturgy should be removed? Did he never read with how great regret that Liturgy
was obtruded upon those English that trafficked in foreign Nations? If he have
not, let him vouchsafe to read over the History of Archbishop Laud, written by
Dr. Heylin, and then tell us whether he was not too rash to give so many
Nobles, Gentlemen, and Divines the lie. If that History bring him under no
sense of his temerity, then I entreat him to enquire of the Assembly-men still
alive, whether they cannot help him to a sight of the Answers of Foreign
Churches, returned to the Latin Letter of the Assembly of Divines; and by most
of them he will find, that the designed Reformation was not disgusted by them.
Till he have such an opportunity, it will be wort his while to bestow a little
time in reading Apo lonius his printed Epistle.

Mr. D. again falls upon the two Houses, p. 14. thither I will follow him;
where conceiving wrath and fiery indignation against an expression in the
Ordinance of the two Houses, he makes a Manifesto, That there was never, nor is
yet any one Reformed Church, that has only a Directory, and not a book of
Common Prayer for the public worship of God. To which Manifesto I say, That
the Church of Scotland had, when the two Houses made that Ordinance, no Book of
Common Prayer for the public worship of God, but what was in the nature of a
Directory; and that the Church of Scotland was principally in their eye in the
management of their Reformation; and I also say, that the Dutch Liturgy is but
in the nature of a Directory, for so I understand those words, cap. 11. art.
11. in the Harmony of the Belgic Synods, Minister preces vel dictante spiritu,
vel certa sibi proposita formula concipiet. It may be Mr. D. will put another
construction on them, for he seems to have used other Dictionaries than those
we have opportunity to consult in England. In one of the French Rubricks it is
said, that upon Sundays in the morning the following form is commonly used; he
tells us, p 17. the meaning is, That that form is to be used always, and no
other. Could any Presbyterian have thought of such a meaning? or how can any
one of them be convinced that commonly and always are all one? why, he may be
convinced by constant and uniform practice, so he tells us, ibid. But I say,
constant and uniform practice will never make commonly, to be always. I have
been a member of the Church of England for these Thirty years, and my occasions
have called me to be in most Counties of the Nation, and in all these years I
never heard any Minister, whether Prelatical or Presbyterian read King James
his Statute against Swearing, and yet the words of the Law are plain, That it
shall be read twice every year, were I not a wise man if I should say, the
meaning of the Law is, that the Statute shall never be read, as constant and
uniform practice does show? Thus have I examined what Mr. D. had to say against
the Two Houses, and the Assembly, and must now try not the words, but the power
of Ludovicus Capellus a man of great Learning; but which in his later days
especially, he made use of, to the disturbance of the Church: better had it
been for the Christian world, that Saumur had never had a professor of Hebrew,
than a Professor that took so much pains to make the Hebrew Points, or Vowels,
and Accents, a late invention of the Tiberian Massarites, long after sundry
Translations were extant in the World. All his Theses will not do so much good,
as his Arcanum punctationis revelatum, and Critica Sacra have done hurt. Let us
notwithstanding hear what he has concerning Liturgies, Mr. D. himself being
Translator.

A Hundred and forty years ago, when the separation was made from the Church
of Rome, and that the Christian people, coming out of Babylon, did cast off the
Popes tyranny, the sacred Liturgy was purged of all that Popish superstition
and idolatry, and all such things as were over-burdensom, or which did little
or nothing contribute toward the edification of the Church; and so were framed
and prescribed in several places, diverse set forms of holy Liturgies by the
several Authors of the Reformation that then was, and those simple and pure in
Germany, France, England, Scotland, the Netherlands, etc. differing as little
as possible from the ancient set forms of the Primitive Church: which set forms
the Reformed have used hitherto with happiness and profit, each of them in
their several Nations and Districts: Till at last of very late, there did arise
in England, a froward, scrupulous and overnice (that I say not altogether
superstitious) generation of men, unto whom it has seemed good for many
Reasons, but those very light, and almost of no moment at all, not only to
blame, but to cashier, and to abolish wholly the Liturgy used hitherto in their
Church, (together with the whole Hierarchical Government of their Bishops)
instead of which Liturgy they have brought in their Directory as they call it.

Mr. D. tells us, page 15. That from hence the Reader may observe five things:

1. That all reformed Churches have Liturgies; but I say, That from no words of
Capellus, any such observation can be collected; if Mr. D. think otherwise, his
Logic is his own, let him make use of it.

2. That the Liturgy of the Church of England is judged by this great man, not
only simple, and pure, and free from all Popish Superstition and Idolatry; but
also from all such things as were over onerous and troublesome, or which did
contribute but little to the edification of the Church. No such observation can
be made from Capellus his words, for he only speaks of the Liturgies that were
introduced by the first Authors of our Reformation, betwixt which and the
present Liturgy there may be, for ought Mr. Capell says to the Contrary, a
vast difference: But I believe this great man commended he knew not what, and
talked at an high rate of confidence concerning Liturgies of the first
Reformers which he never saw. A Papist will not desire greater advantage
against the Praeses in Saumur, than to have it granted, that in the Liturgies
made by the Authors of Reformation in all the places Capell mentions, nothing
was contained onerous, or of little edification. The Divines of King Henry the
8th were Authors of a Reformation, their Liturgy had something in it
superstitious, idolatrous, less profitable. So had also the first Liturgy made
by our Divines in King Edwards time, else we must count it profitable to pray
for the dead, and to commend our Prayers to be presented by the holy Angels,
etc. And if we speak even of the present Lutherans Liturgies, every thing that
has little or nothing of profit in it, is not taken away; for what is the
profit of Latin Cantions? or where is the advantage of Exorcisme? What good is
to be got by the Doctrine of Consubstantiation? I might urge other questions
which no friend of Capellus would much care for answering.

3. If Liturgies ought to recede as little as possible from that of the
Primitive Church, as he does intimate, undoubtedly the Liturgy of the Church of
England is the best, and most perfect of them all as coming nearest unto it.
How the Reader should be able to observe this from any words of Capellus cannot
I divine; it may be Mr. D. heartily thinks that our Liturgy comes nearest to
the Primitive Liturgies, and so is the most perfect, because primum in
unoquoque genere est mensura reliquorum: But Capellus neither did think so, nor
could think so, without egregious contradiction to his own Principle; for he
had said just before, That from the beginning the Formula's were most brief,
and most simple, which without pomp and train, and manifold variety, consisted
of a few Prayers, and Lessons out of the Psalms and other Scripture: Now
certainly if our Liturgy be most simple, yet it is not most brief, nor does it
consist of but a few Prayers; let Mr. D. read all that by the Liturgy is
appointed to be read without defalcation, and I will undertake he shall be
under no temptation to make his Sermons tedious.

4. That of all men who call themselves Reformed, the Presbyterians are the
first that ever left the use of set forms of Prayers. Capellus uses not the
word Presbyterians, and if he had used it, it would have been a very blind. Mr.
D. seems by Presbyterians to mean the major part of those Divines, who by
virtue of an Ordinance of Parliament did meet to give advice, concerning
Doctrine, Discipline, Worship: If Capellus say, that these were the first that
left off the use of set forms of Prayer, he was much mistaken; set forms of
Prayer had been long before laid aside and condemned as unlawful, by such as
were as little in love with Presbytery as Hierarchy; he may know whom I mean,
if he will enquire who they were that left old England. Dr. Heylin has written
the History of Presbyterians, under which name, he seems to bring all those
Protestants who are not Lutherans, nor satisfied with the Reformation of the
Church of England: This History his Son has dedicated to the Two Houses of
Parliament now sitting. In the 2d Page of that Book it is said, The Zuinglian
Reformation was begun in defacing Images, decrying the established Fasts and
appointed Festivals, abolishing set forms of worship, denying the old Catholic
Doctrine of a Real Presence, and consequently all external reverence in the
participation of the blessed Sacrament; which Luther seriously labored to
preserve in the same estate in which he found them at the present. And page 89.
speaking of the Palatine Churches, he would have us take them for Antilutherans
in defacing Images, abolishing all distinction of Fasts and Festivals, and
utterly denying all set forms of public Worship. I know a great deal of this
is false, maliciously false, as is almost every thing in that Book which
relates to the foreign Churches; and therefore I hope the Bishops, or others
that have Authority, will either call in the Book, or some other way discover
how much they abhor the design of it; in the mean time, here is work for Mr.
Durell's Pen, if he will not be partial, and respect persons; if he have any
zeal left for Zuinglius, Calvin, Beza, let him wipe off the aspersion of
Rebellion, Schism, Aerianism from their faces, or else let him know, that
seeing Dr. Heylins Book came out last, his will be thought sufficiently
confuted.

5. Mr. D. tells us, we may observe that the many reasons for which the
Presbyterians have rejected the Book of Common Prayer, are very light, and
almost of no moment at all. Capell says not so, but that the Reasons for which
it seemed to some scrupulous men, that the Liturgy used by their Church was not
only to be disapproved, but also to be plainly abrogated, and wholly to be
abolished and obliterated, were light and almost of no moment; so that if any
man do only, improbare, having no design plainly to abrogate and wholly to
obliterate the Liturgy composed by our first Reformers, he may have Reasons
good enough, for ought Capell affirms to the contrary.

6. That as for the Presbyterians ( who are the known Authors of the Directory)
they are in Capell 's judgment a froward, peevish and superstitious generation
of men. Capell was indeed a man who was free enough in his censures, of any one
whether Presbyterian or Episcopal that stood in his way, not searing to throw
dirt in the face of the great Hooker himself, as appears in his Theses about
Feasts or Holy days: But I would fain understand how the Presbyterians are the
known Authors of the Directory; most of those who were called to give advice
about the Directory, were when called to give their advice. Readers of the
Liturgy, and had subscribed to the Three Articles in the 36th Canon: When His
Majesty was restored few of them were alive, of those few, some at this day are
Conformists; let Mr. D. ask them whether they were Presbyterians when they
consented to the laying aside of the Liturgy? and how they came to widen their
Throats so, as to be able to swallow the present Declarations, much bigger than
any heretofore enjoined.

And now I will try whether I can make some truer observations upon Capellus
his Theses about Liturgies; in doing which I shall follow the edition of
Saumur, 1651.

1. He says it is certain that the Apostles and Apostolical men had no
prescript form of Liturgy, and that they never did write, and leave or
prescribe to their successors any such; for the Apostles needed no such form,
nor did those need any whom they made prefects of the Church, and that
prescript Liturgies were not necessary, till persecution ceasing, the number of
professors much increased, and Piety began to grow cold, and Teachers waxed
lazy, so as there could not every where be had Pastors sufficiently learned,
and Heresies began to multiply; and that the first prescript forms that were
made, were made for the sake of unlearned and simple Pastors, page 706.

2. That Liturgies first began to be made in the more famous Metropolitan and
Patriarchal Churches, and that in the Countries called by the name of Gallia,
there were several Liturgies in almost every several famous Bishopric, and
that every several did contain something proper and singular, and different
from the rest, until at last by the tyranny of the Pope, the Roman Liturgy
obtained through all the West.

So that it seems, with him, Liturgies are no older than Metropolitan and
Patriarchal Churches; how old such Churches were in his judgment, and upon what
occasion first erected, is at large declared in his Theses, 337, 338, 339, etc.
little as I suppose to the gust of Mr. D.

3. He does, Page 707, plainly mistake the meaning of the Directory, and the
Composers of it, when he suggests that by it, it is left free to Ministers to
pray and administer the Sacraments in what words they please; for the Directory
tieth Ministers to a certain form in the administration of Baptism and the
Lord's Supper, as also in the solemnization of Marriage. Throughout the whole
Directory there are, though not Prayers prescribed to be used totidem verbis,
without any variation, yet such Heads of Prayer, as that he who needs greater
help and furniture to enable him for Confession, Petition, Thanksgiving, may
well be thought unfit for the Office of a Pastor. And I observe, That the
Directory orders Ministers in Prayer before Sermon, to commend to Gods blessing
the Parliament if sitting, and the Universities, and all Schools, and Religious
Seminaries of Church and Commonwealth, but in no Liturgy besides this last,
was there any Prayer for the High Court of Parliament; nor in this last is
there any Prayer for the Universities or Schools of Learning; yet in the
Constitutions of 1603, In all Colleges and Halls in both Universities, order,
form, ceremonies are to be observed, as they are set down, and prescribed in
the Book of Common Prayer, without any omission or alteration. Is not this in
effect to tie the Universities never publicly to pray for themselves? If any
one should prescribe a Family a form of Prayer, in which was no mention of a
Family, it would be thought a strange form.

The said Capell, page 708. tells us, That sacred Sermons to the people, and
exhortations, should be made and composed by the Pastors themselves, and
recited to the people either by heart, or out of a Paper, if they can do no
other. Postills and Homilies as much as may be are to be driven out of the
Church; yet it is better, says he, that men should hear one reading another
Sermons, than hear none at all. In this the Nonconformists thoroughly agree with
him, but some of them will not stick to say, that if some in authority had been
as zealous for Sermons as they might have been, we needed not before this time,
have wanted for any Cure, a Minister able to make a Sermon of his own: And
whereas Capel says, That Homilies should not be read, lest they prove,
pulvinar ignaviae and socordiae, and fomes ignorantiae, they are wont to urge
the same Argument against set forms of Prayer; he might have done well to show
that the Reason is not alike forcible in both.

He says, ibid. Those he had to deal with, deny not but that Lessons, Psalms
and Hymns may be read out of a Book to the people, recited and sung; only Hymns
and Songs composed by others than men divinely inspired, he says, they allow
not to have any use in the public Congregation. Therefore, say I, he did not
intend to deal with the Presbyterians, who will never be found any where to
have said, that no Hymns may lawfully be sung, but such as are composed by men
divinely inspired; I my self have heard some of them sing others, without blame
from any of their brethren, nor is there any one tittle in the Directory to the
contrary. Let me here enquire whether the English Church has taken any care to
have any Psalms sung in the Congregation; translation of the Psalms into meter
we have none generally known, but only that composed by Hopkins, Sternhold,
etc. It Is said that Translation is allowed (allowed, not enjoined) to be used
in the Congregation; but Dr. Heylin again and again, denies that ever there
was any allowance of it given by any lawful authority; so that the whole
service of God with us may be performed, it seems, without any singing at all;
for though the Common Prayer Book has sundry parts in it which may be sung,
yet it has nothing that is appointed to be sung, but indifferently, either
sung or read. I believe in this we are a singular Church, there being no other
that I ever heard, or read of, that has not enjoined her Congregations to sing
some Psalms. Mr. D certainly can either prove that our Church has allowed, and
enjoined us to sing Psalms, or else he can show us some Reformed Church, that
does not enjoin Psalmody. But such is my weakness that I cannot.

6. Capellus asks us, p. 709. Whether it were not better wisely to prescribe
certain forms of Prayer, fit for the public edification of the Church, than to
permit them to the liberty of many Pastors, unlearned and unexercised, where
others cannot be had? The Presbyterians will answer yes; but they think, in a
wealthy Nation, where the King is a Protestant, there is no necessity to take
any into the Church for Ministers, if they be unlearned, and unexercised.

7. Page 100. He asks whether in all the Prayers that are to be made in the
Church, Pastors can perpetually vary them, or express themselves in diverse
Words and Phrases concerning the same Argument; yea, he asks what Prophet or
Apostle can do this with edification? Sure he forgets himself, for he before
told us, Apostles could and did do it, and I am sure we have had ordinary
Pastors here in England that have done it, and we have still hundreds and
thousands that can, and would do it, might they be permitted: Nor can I
understand how it can be difficult to any one who has well studied the
Scriptures, and observes the Providence of God, and is affected duly with his
own and peoples wants and necessities. I in my Family find it not difficult to
vary as I please.

8. Page 710, 711. He contends that the Creeds are to be recited in a certain
form of words; but adds, those whom he dealt with did bewray a manifest hatred
against certain forms of Symbols, Confessions and Catechism. Whence again I
infer, that he dealt not with the Directorians, for they liked the use of
Confessions and Catechisms in set forms.

9. Page 713. He thinks the Apotomy and rigor of those men worthily to be
condemned, who under pretext of certain and prescribed forms of Liturgy, do
study to eliminate out of the Church all use of Prayers conceived by Ministers
themselves. This will touch Mr. D s Copyhold, unless he can prove against Dr.
Heylin and others, that some Prayers, besides those prescribed in the Liturgy,
are allowed to Ministers in public ministration.

10. Page 716. He determines, that it is better by much, and more convenient
and safe, that those writings only should be publicly read which are truly
Canonical, and divinely inspired. What will the peremptory enjoyners of the
Apocryphal Chapters say to this?

11. Page 719. Drawing up the sum of all his conceptions, he says, 1. That
forms are not simply and absolutely necessary. 2. That they are not commonly
necessary, but only for order and decorum sake. 3. That they are plainly
necessary, where we cannot have learned Ministers. 4. Where there are learned
and skilful Pastors, a public form of Liturgy is very useful and necessary to
the common edification of the Church, in the same communion of Divine worship.
5. The use of Liturgies cannot of right be condemned or disallowed. To all
these Propositions there are Hundreds of Non-conformists can subscribe, and are
ready to subscribe, the two last only being qualified with such distinctions,
as I believe, were not either against, or besides the mind of this Professor.
The Arguments of the Brownists and others which he scatters up and down, were
fully propounded, and clearly answered by Mr. John Ball, before his Theses saw
the light. Let Mr. Baxters propositions concerning Liturgies be read and
weighed, and it will be found, that they come very near to these of Capellus.

I must now come to Ceremonies: The first I mention, is the use of a Surplice;
concerning which, the Nonconformists say, That if they receive it, they must
receive it not only as serving to a decent order and godly discipline; but as
apt to stir up the dull mind of man to the remembrance of his duty to God, by
some notable and special signification, whereby he might be edified; but they
have never found any such aptness in it to stir up their dull minds to the
remembrance of their duty, and that they dare not pretend to use a thing in
order to such an end, as they never expect to attain by it. I my self have
talked with some conformable Ministers, and asked them, whether they ever found
their dull minds stirred up by the use of it? they have been loath to give me
any answer, but what moved on the Latitudinarian hinge: One indeed told me, he
did verily believe there was a wonderful virtue in it to excite his dull mind;
but asking him further, whether it was apt to excite him as a man, or as an
English man, or as a Minister? He gave me a reply, which for Friendship sake, I
will not here insert; but such it was, that I easily saw the Surplice had not
cured him of all his dullness. Nor can I choose but wonder why they who pretend
to be stirred up to a remembrance of their duty by a Surplice, do use it so
seldom: there are but few that use it constantly, some use it not above once a
quarter, few use it in the Pulpit, yet I suppose their minds are apt to be as
dull in the Pulpit as in the Desk; and the Church as much requires them to use
the Surplice at all times of their Ministration, as at any time. Perhaps we
must say of Surplices, as of pleasure, commendat rarior usus.

Well, but how does Mr. D. discourse of Surplices? Truly very innocently: He
tells us, Page 23, 24. That in Aquitan when a Minister is buried, the neighbor
Ministers that be present must all have their Gowns, if Gowns can conveniently
be had (that was wisely put in). Now this changing of apparel for divine
service (it seems burving of a Minister in France is Divine Service) is the
very same thing for which the Church of England is by some men reputed Popish
and superstitious, when she will have her Ministers to wear Surplices on the
same occasion. It should seem with him the Surplice is no Symbolical Vestment,
and that he reckons all those who put on their solemn apparel and best Clothes
do the same thing that he does, when he puts on significant Garments: But he is
so kind, that lest this should not satisfy, he will find out some of the best
Reformed Churches, that count it no superstition for their Ministers to wear a
Surplice, and he instanceth in the Bohemians, Polonians, Lithuanians, who did
put on the surplice as often as they preached in the Churches of the Augustan
confession: But it seems they lost nothing by this condescension, for the
Lutherans officiated in their Churches without a Surplice. To requite him for
this discovery, I will tell him of some Lutheran Ministers ( viz. the Lutherans
in Holland) that do not use a Surplice, no not in their own Churches; so little
do they find it to contribute to edification, that they forbear it, where they
would not be blamed if they should use it: So the Presbyterians are out of his
debt.

A second Ceremony controverted is kneeling at the Sacrament; about which, I
may say, [Iliacos extra muros peccatur and intra] I cannot by all that I have
read, see any unlawfulness in it, and I hope the Presbyterians, if they should
be asked by any, whether they had better forbear the Sacrament than receive it
kneeling, would well bethink themselves what answer to give. I find not that
ever any of our authorized Liturgies did allow any other gesture; yet I have
read in a Book, called Treasure out of rubbish, That some Commissioners of Q.
Elizabeth did about the beginning of Her Reign, at Coventry, and other places
appoint, not kneeling, but standing to be used at the Lords Table: The Book was
Printed by the Reverend Mr. Simeon Ash since His Majesty's return to his
Throne; and I hear that many conforming Ministers are so compassionate, as to
deliver the consecrated Elements to those who do not kneel; how they can so do,
non violata fide quam dederunt ecclesiae, I understand not, they themselves I
hope have satisfied their own Consciences, and can give a reason of their
practice to their Governors though I cannot. The Church in the 2d Book of King
Edward inserted a Rubric against Transubstantiation, unhappily left out in the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, King James, King Charles the 1st, but through the
goodness of our present Sovereign, now again put into the last Edition of our
Liturgy; may it never more be left out, but continue to the shame of those who
feared not to say, we left it out, because it seemed too much to favor the
Sacramentarians. The Church also appoints the Minister to use a kind of a
Prayer, in delivering the Eucharist, whilst he uses that Prayer, the
Communicant is to kneel meekly; but when he has taken the Bread into his own
hands, he may then sit and eat it, or stand and eat it; I wish this could
satisfy private Christians, but there are Hundreds that cannot so quiet their
own minds; and yet if you discourse with them, they can make Syllogisms, and
they live peaceable and godly lives: Now here the Shoe pincheth the
Nonconformist Minister, whether he can promise never to give the Sacrament to
any one who scrupleth kneeling?

Had Mr. D. clearly and solidly determined this question, or had he strongly
proved that the Church could not without dishonor allow more than one gesture
in receiving the Sacrament, I could easily have forgiven him all the raillery
of his book; but he thought he could get preferment at an easier rate, and
therefore contents himself, in a few lines ( p. 46, 47.) to instance in a very
^^w Reformed Churches that receive the Sacrament kneeling: First, he instanceth
in the Reformed Churches of Bohemia, Reformed above two hundred years ago; the
remnant of it now left, says he, receive it kneeling. This instance little
ava^leth our Church, because from the beginning it was not so; the Ancestors of
the Bohemians did at first, viz. 1494, use standing; but being persecuted on
that account, were compelled to leave it off, as Comenius tells us; so that Mr.
D. by this only proves the conformity of our Church with the Popish Church, in
persecuting those who will not kneel at the Sacrament. Nor is he more lucky in
his other instances of Polonia major, and Lithuania, for which he refers us to
the Consensus Poloniae. What a Character Dr. Heylin gives of the Reformation of
Poland, let him that loves railing see, Hist. of Presb. 31, 32, 33. Indeed the
Consent of Poland does not much hit our humor here in England; for in the
Cracovian Synod, 1573, all Choreae are condemned as dishonest. A question being
moved, Whether the rites in the use of the Lords Supper ought to be uniform?
It was concluded, That according to the custom of the Primitive Church, men
should be left to their Christian liberty, yet with admonition to the brethren,
that if any used sitting, they should leave that proper to the Arrian
Anabaptists. In the Petricovian Synod, Anno 1578, it is determined, That
uniformity in the rite of receiving the Lords Supper, should not be pressed,
lest it should happen that there might be occasion to exercise Ecclesiastical
Discipline upon any of the common people, who are not easily brought to unusual
ceremonies; whereas the Synod judged it neither agreeable to the will of the
Lord, nor the custom of the Christian Church more pure, to strike Christian men
with the rod of Discipline for external rites, yet so as the gesture of sitting
at the Lords Table is rejected for a reason I shall more speak of by and by.
It Is the Synodus Wlodislaviensis congregated 1583, that Mr. D. pitcheth upon,
in which Synod the matter of sitting at the Lords Table is again debated; and
there it is determined, that sitting is as free as any other gesture; which
being brought in by way of Parenthesis, Mr. D. never Englisheth or takes
notice of; for he had called it an unmannerly and irreverent gesture; and it
was no wisdom to touch a knife that would be sure to cut his fingers; but there
also it was determined, That sitting should not be used at the Lords table in
any of the Churches of Poland or Lithuania, for this ceremony is not used in
Christian Churches, and Evangelical Assemblies, and is only proper to the
unbelieving Arrians placing themselves in a seat or throne equal to Christ.
Seeing therefore sitting crept into some of their Churches, especially by
occasion of those who denied the Lord that redeemed us; they desire and exhort
all their assemblies and brethren in the Lord, that they would change sitting
into standing or kneeling. Mr. D. translates potissimum first; and I believe he
was the first that so translated that word. Not content to make so bold with
Priscian, he rises to greater impudence, saying that what they observed about
the first bringers in of sitting into Poland, may be our observation also, if
what Dr. Owen have said be true, as it is very likely, That there is not a
city, a town, scarce a village in England, but had some of the Miscreant
Socinians. Whether Dr. Owen has any words of this import, I know not; if he
have, it is like he referred them to the time in which he did make his book,
which was many years after that sitting was brought into the English Churches
by the two Houses. Too many there were in the two Houses, no doubt, that sought
their own things more than the Nations peace; but they never had among them any
Socinian that ever I did hear of, but only one Fry, who was also expelled when
he discovered his blasphemies: Nor do I find that these Heretics do abound in
those places of the Kingdom where I have been, but Papists abound extremely; so
as the same thing that moved the Polonians to forbid sitting, may move us to
forbid kneeling, and leave it proper to the wretched Papists, who worship a
piece of bread instead of their Savior.

But this gesture of kneeling would be a little better considered: The Fathers
of the before mentioned Synods seem to say (not indeed in that Meeting which
Mr. D. quotes, but in the Meeting of 1578.) That those who fell off to
Arrianism, were the first that were authors of sitting in their Churches. If I
mistake their meaning, detur venia; but if I do not, I humbly conceive they
were themselves mistaken. John Alasco, a Noblemen of Poland, was upon
Cranmer's persuasion sent for into our England by King Edward the sixth, about
the year 1549. and permitted to have a Church of strangers, especially of
Dutch, whom he brought up to receive the Sacrament sitting; and also during his
abode here, put forth a book to prove the lawfulness of that gesture: After
many troublesome wanderings from place to place, at last being invited by at
least forty Letters, he returned to his own Country, and no question
administered the Sacrament to his flock sitting, and taught others on whom he
had influence so to do: Now this Alasco never fell off to Arrianism; perhaps
this was the reason why in the Meeting 1583. it is not said, that the Arrians
first brought in sitting, but that it was chiefly brought in by them. The
aforesaid Fathers seem also to affirm, that sitting had not been used by any
Evangelical Churches in Europe, at the time of their meeting; but if they so
meant, they were greatly mistaken; for sitting was brought into the Church of
Scotland by authority, as the most proper and convenient gesture, 1560. and our
Confessor Mr. Thomas Beacon, in an authorized Catechism 1563. speaks of sitting
as a gesture used in certain Reformed Churches, and which he himself could best
allow, if it were received by public authority and common consent. Who the
Arrian-Anabaptists were, that had caused such a detestation of themselves among
the Polonians, I cannot certainly know; but by such stories as have come to my
hands, I guess they were Georgius Blandrata, and Franciscus Davidis and their
Spawn, who both denied the Divinity of Jesus, and also his adorability. Socinus
and his followers held the Principle, That Jesus is not God, and yet denied the
conclusion that naturally and lineally descended from it, That Jesus is not to
be worshipped; for they had found out a distinction of Deus natus and factus.
The former would not stick to say. That Jesus was one of their brethren and
fellow servants; so would the latter: for they ascribed unto Christ a dignity
and excellency nearly approaching unto the dignity and excellency of the
Creator, but conferred on him by the singular bounty and good will of him who
created him. Wherefore the Socinians properly so called, could not use sitting
at the Lords Table as a token of their equality with Christ, nor indeed do they
much concern themselves what gesture is used in Sacramental Communion.
Volkelius says, They use sitting; but yet so, that they damn not those who had
rather use standing, so as there be no appearance of idolatry. They would have
us believe they hate the very appearance of Idolatry, and yet they commit
Idolatry: for what greater Idolatry, than to worship him that by nature is not
God, as they blasphemously say Jesus is not, (...).

The last Ceremony, but about which there is the greatest Controversy, is the
sign of the Cross. Nonconformists say this sign is made a Sacramental sign,
because it is used as a token that the child shall not be ashamed to profess
Christ crucified, etc. and also as a ceremony by which it is dedicated unto
God. In clearing this ceremony therefore, Mr. D. should have taken most pains;
but in this he is slightest of all. He gives us not an instance of any one
Reformed Church that has appointed the sign of the Cross to be used either in
Baptism or in any other Ordinance; only he tells us of Bibles printed at Geneva
for the use of the Church, and that before them, Christian Religion is
represented in an Emblem as leaning upon a Cross, and that some Reformed have
Crosses upon their Churches, and that some Ministers in Prussia, to humor the
Lutherans, will make a Cross in the Air with their hand when they say, The Dord
be with you. All this is to as much purpose, as if he had told us, that the
Rumpers did use the sign of the Cross in the Flags of their Ships, and put it
on the money which they coined, or that some Nonconformists have it in their
Coat of Arms, as I am sure they have.

I believe there is not a Nonconformist in England, that questioneth the
lawfulness of making the sign of a Cross upon any thing he uses: And if the
sign of the Cross were made so, as that it remained, and were visible after it
were made, then perhaps it might have an aptitude to occasion a good thought
concerning a crucified Savior; but what can be the benefit of a Cross that
leaves no impression on the forehead? I know the Baptismal water being applied
to an infant, leaves no such mark on the flesh as it can take notice of at
years of discretion; but the Spirit, if he be not grieved, will bring our
Baptism to our remembrance, and he has so done to many in the hour of
temptation; but how shall a man be secured, that the blessed Spirit will engage
himself to bring our being crossed to our remembrance? I have made observation,
and could never find any difference betwixt us that were crossed, and those who
were not crossed; Do we confess the Faith of a crucified Savior? so do they;
do we fight under his Banner? so do they; do we join our selves to Christ's
flock? so do they; the things that we know, they know also; so that they are
under a temptation to think that the Cross is an useless sign.

I must not dissemble that Mr. D. takes on him in his Sermon, page 29 to
explicate and show the usefulness of this sign. As when the King having created
those noble Knights of his Order bestows on them the Garter and the Blew
Riband, as Badges to be known by of others, and to put them in mind of the
great honor done unto them: In like manner, when an infant has by Baptism
been enrolled in the Militia of the King of Glory, Jesus Christ our Lord; this
sign of the Cross is made upon his forehead, to declare unto all such as are
present, and as many as shall thereafter know it, that he has received it, and
to himself when he comes to years of understanding, that he was consecrated to
Christ crucified, that he has put on his Livery, and wears his Badge, that he
is bound to crucify the old man, and to bear the Cross, that to this he is
called by our Savior; that he ought in all places, and in the most dangerous
occurrences, boldly and openly to own the name of his Redeemer, without ever
being ashamed with bearing his reproach. As the Barrels go rumbling up and down
the Streets, so my Lord Mayor owes me a Groat. The King, the founder of this
noble Order, gives the Knights created by him a Garter and a Blew Riband, as
Badges to be known by others, but would not be pleased if they should among
themselves invent other badges and cognizances of their Order. Christ also has
instituted Baptism to distinguish Christians from those who are no Christians;
How do we know whether it will like him, that we should appoint a Cross to
distinguish us more, especially seeing thereby we shall be distinguished from a
great number of our fellow Christians. Again, the Garter and Blew Riband are
things to be worn, and that may be seen, and occasion spectators to enquire
what they mean, but so is not the Cross that was made on our foreheads after
Baptism; the Pagans that any of us have been among, could take no notice of it;
and if our Parents did at any time admonish us of our engagement to crucify
the old man, they put us in mind, not of being crossed, but of being baptized
with Water, to signify the not only death, but burial of the old man; nor have
our Kings of England been so fond of all the Rites and Ceremonies used at
making of Knights of the Garter, but that they have allowed some of them to be
omitted, where they have conceived they might be less acceptable. King James
being much pleased with the valor and piety of Maurice Prince of Orange, sent
him a Garter, appointing his Ambassador Sir Ralph Winwood to confer the honor
on him freely, and without any Rites or Laws, but what the Prince himself would
spontaneously undergo. And the Ambassador in a French Speech declared, that the
Rites wonted to be used in creating Knights of the Garter, did seem somewhat
abhorrent from the Discipline of the Reformed Churches in Holland, and not
altogether congruous to the polity of the Republic; and that therefore the
King to avoid offense had appointed it to be conferred without pomp and
external magnificence. I suppose Mr. D. thinks there is no Rite used in the
creation of the Knights of St. George, that is contrary to the Discipline of
the Dutch Churches; but the King was of another mind, and chose rather to
confer the highest honor without the wonted Ceremonies, than not to confer it
upon one who was like not to disgrace it. And shall Ministers of the Gospel so
stiffly stand upon Ceremonies, as rather not to administer baptism, than to
administer it without the sign of the Cross?

I must follow Mr. D. who tells, us, That several reformed Churches have a
Ceremony, of which, Presbyterians ought to have as bad an opinion, as of the
Cross in Baptism: The Ceremony he means is Trine aspersion, page 42. Why
ought they to have as bad an opinion of Trine Aspersion, as of the Cross in
Baptism? is there any Law either of God or man, that tieth them to have as bad
an opinion of the Trine Aspersion as of the Cross? or do their Principles lead
them to have as bad an opinion of one Ceremony as of the other? I verily
believe they do not; for they say, that Christ has commanded Baptism, and has
not strictly determined whether it shall be administered by Aspersion or
Immersion, nor whether by trine or une aspersion or immersion; therefore the
Church has power to choose the Rite, that to her, having consulted the general
rules of Scripture, and practice of the Primitive Churches, shall seem best.
But they also say, that God has no where commanded that a Child shall be
crossed, or any where appointed his Church to institute any symbolical,
teaching signs at all; if Mr. D. can show them any command that a Child should
be crossed, they will not stick to grant, that it is in the Churches power to
order, where the Child shall be crossed, and how often, and what kind of cross
it shall be: But it is to be feared he can show no such command, at least none
such is showed by him; and yet he says, he is confident that if the trine
aspersion were used, or if we had retained the trine immersion, as at the
beginning of King Edward the sixths reign, it would be accounted a gross
superstition. How may a man do to free him from this uncharitable confidence so
contrary to Christianity? I dare undertake to give it him under the hand and
seal of as many as I am acquainted with, that if the Church shall think meet to
use trine aspersion, or trine immersion, she shall not be accounted either
grossly, or at all superstitious, provided she declare that she does not use
either rite as necessary. If by trine either aspersion or immersion she should
prejudice the Babes in their health, that would be a sin, but not the sin of
superstition. But how does Mr. D. prove, that the Church has not retained
trine immersion? Immersion it is plain she has enjoined, unless the Sureties
certify that the Child be weak (yet never any Minister of the Church, in my
hearing, demanded such Certificate; never did any Parents bring their Child in
a dress fit for dipping, that ever I could observe, and yet I believe that I
have seen as strong Children Baptized as are in most places of England) and she
no where says it shall be dipped but once, as neither does she say, that it
shall be sprinkled but once; so that Bishop Mountague in his Visitation
Articles positively asserts, That the Child is to be thrice aspersed with water
on the face; it may be some other Prelate of that age did as positively assert
that the Child was to be sprinkled but once, for those who have been most
zealous to press Conformity, have been at Daggers drawing about the meaning of
some passages in that Liturgy, to which they required subscription. In the
Hampton Court Conference, the Metropolitan told the King, That the
administration of Baptism by women and lay persons was not allowed in the
practice of the Church, but enquired of by Bishops in their visitations and
censured; neither do the words in the Liturgy infer any such meaning: But the
Bishop of London replied, That those learned men who framed the Book of
Common Prayer, intended not by ambiguous terms to deceive any, but did intend a
permission of private persons to baptize in case of necessity, and withal
declared that the same was agreeable to the practice of the ancient Church,
urging both a place in the Acts, and the authority of Tertullian and St.
Ambrose plain in that point: (What could a man have done that had lived in
those days to know the meaning of the Church?) But however King James being
clear in his own judgment, that a Minister is of the essence of the right and
lawful ministry of the Sacrament, carried it, so as the words thereafter did
run thus, That private Baptism should be performed by the Minister of the
Parish, or in his absence by any other lawful Minister that can be procured:
Now any man would think Lay persons are not allowed to Baptize; but Dr. Heylin
in his introduction to the life of Archbishop Laud, page 27. says, That the
alteration was greater in sound than sense, it being the opinion of many great
Clerks, That any man in cases of necessity (that is extreme) who can but
pronounce the words of Baptism, may pass in the account and notion of a lawful
Minister. A prodigious assertion! for a Turk or Jew may pronounce the words of
Baptism, Is he a lawful Minister of Baptism? did ever any that pretended to
reverence the authority of the Church thus wrest her words?

But to return to the rite of Baptism; we have got a trick to sprinkle, or to
let water fall by drops, but the Church allows no such rite, but most expressly
requires pouring, even when the Child is at the weakest; and seeing in the
Baptism of Infants the Administrator is required to dip them if they may well
endure it, how comes it to pass that in the Baptism of Adult persons who are
appointed by fasting and prayers to prepare themselves for the receiving of the
Sacrament, it is left indifferent to the Ministers either to dip them in the
Font, or pour water on them, though there be a moral certainty, that they may
endure dipping well enough? And what Prayers must these adult persons use to
prepare themselves for Baptism, must they make them themselves, or must they be
made by the Bishop or Priest? or are there any preparatory Prayers to that
purpose made already? I wish Mr. D. would answer me these questions.

Object. Well, but what say you in the excuse of the Presbyterians, who as Dr.
Heylin tells us, page 293. would not have their Children Baptized by the names
of their Ancestors, Richard, Robert, etc. but by some name occurring in the
Holy Scriptures, especially in the Old Testament, becouse merely Hebrew, and
not profaned with any mixture of the Greek or Roman. Did not Snape and
Cartwright in the Book of Discipline agree that the Minister in Baptizing
Children, should not admit of any such names as had been used in the time of
Paganism, the names of Idols and the like? Did they not also take an bumor of
giving such names unto their Children, as many of them when they came to age
were ashamed of, Accepted, Deliverance, Discipline, Praise God, Reformation,
Tribunal, Thankful.

Answ. As for the Discipline of Jersy and Guernsey, made by Mr. Cartwright and
Snape, I never saw it but once, when I minded not what was in it; now I know
not where to get it, and therefore leave it to Mr. D. to answer for his
forefathers and neighbors. The Presbyterians have not hired me to be their
Advocate, I am only for peace, and would not have men made worse than they be:
It Is doubtless an unjust scrupulosity for any man to question the lawfulness of
calling his Child either Robert, or Richard, or Arthur, or William; but if the
Question be not what is lawful, but what is expedient, I say, caeteris paribus,
it is more expedient that Children be named by the names of such persons as
were famous in their generations for piety and learning.

Dr. Rivet tells Baily, Tractatu 3. page 33. Quest. 8. That they used diligence
to bring Parents to give to their Children names borrowed from them whose life
was laudable in the Church, that they may be stirred up to the imitation of
those whose name they bear, for such better agree to Christians, than either
the ambitious or superstitious names of Heathens. He also tells us, that in his
remembrance a vainglorious fellow whose name was Le Grand, would needs name
his Child Alexander, but the Ministers refused to gratify his ambition, they
would not have a mean fellows Child called Alexander the Great; but that ever
any Presbyterian refused to Baptize a Child because it was to be called
Richard, may well pass for a Story of Dr. Heylin's (which many times are none
of the truest) As for the reason he gives out of his own head, of the
Presbyterians choosing Old Testament names, because the Old Testament is merely
Hebrew; it argues his great ignorance, some of the Presbyterians Children,
before they come from School, know that the Old Testament is not merely Hebrew.
Where our English Tongue can afford happy compositions, I should think such a
composition in a Child's name would not make Baptism contemptible, nor the
Imposer ridiculous; yet I confess I should never advise any man to name his
Child Praise God, nor, The Lord is near, for though he may excuse himself, by
the names of Quod vult Deus, A deo-datus, usual in St. Austin's time, yet it
savors of affectation to give such names, and it may occasion the taking of the
Lords name in vain, nor do I find that Presbyterians have delighted themselves
in such names. Accepted was the name of Dr. Frewen late Archbishop of York, was
he ever ashamed of it? or had he any reason to be ashamed of it? or was his
Father a Presbyterian? Let the Church Books from 1582 be searched, and it will
be found to the shame of this Historian, that Presbyterians have given such
names to their Children as other people did, and that none of their Children
are called by such uncouth names as are mentioned in the Objection.

My next task is to give in a Catalogue of Mr. D's impertinencies, which are
indeed many, and too many to be insisted on particularly.

Page 51. He gives us some sayings of some Churches against Sacriledg: A thing
that has been done more copiously by Dr. John Hoornbeck in his examination of
the Popes Bull, sent forth to nullify the peace of Germany; and if Mr. D.
please, he may read a very smart Discourse against the sin of Sacriledg in Mr.
Baxters defense of the Worcestershire Petition. If Ancestors through mistake
have given maintenance to Idolatrous uses, Magistrates may convert that
maintenance to uses truly pious. If there be a true superfluity of Church
revenues for some one good use, Magistrates may out of that superfluity provide
for some other good use. If the Sovereign power please in cases of true
necessity, to make use of Church-mens Lands, as well as others, to maintain the
Nation against foreign Invasions, etc. what is there in such an action
blameworthy? These and such like cases excepted, I profess I know not the
Presbyterian alive or dead, that was not against the alienation of
Church Lands. Mr. D. tells us, he saw some Presbyterian Ministers made nothing
of purchasing and detaining Church Lands, and in his Margin names Dr. Burges;
so that it seems, Dr. Burges is some Presbyterian Ministers: But he ought
before he so called him, to prove that he was so much as one Presbyterian
Minister; he was not that Dr. Burges, of whom we heard before, that made the
Book against Dr. Ames his reply to Dr. Morton, but he was the Dr. Burges that
oversaw that Book in the Press, and adorned its Margin to make the reading more
pleasant and delightful; and he was that Dr. Burges who did write for Baptismal
Regeneration (a Doctrine distastful to the Presbyterians). He took the Covenant
indeed, but not (as I have heard) till he was like to be turned out of the
Assembly for not taking it. It is true, that once he made a Speech against the
continuance of Deans and Chapters, but in that Speech he declared the utter
unlawfulness of converting their Lands to any private man's use; it seems that
he himself afterward purchased something belonging to the Dean of Wells,
intending to settle it on his Children; how he could satisfy his Conscience so
to do I know not; perhaps when he saw that that part of the House of Commons
which favored Presbytery was secluded, and that Deans and Chapters Lands
designed to mend poor Livings, must be sold for other uses, he resolved to do
as Luther says a Dog which he knew at Erford did, when he could defend his
Masters dish of meat from other Dogs no longer, viz. got as good a share of the
prey as he could. He has given his accounts to his Master, I am not to judge
another Servant, and therefore I should tremble to write that which Mr. D.
has written, viz. That a loathsome sore which brought him to his Grave, was
sent to punish him for his Sacriledg; neither dare I say, for all the world,
that the Disease that befell Bishop Gauden (and of which he died) besel him for
his fierceness against the Bresbyterians; and yet, it was the very disease unto
which he had compared the Presbyterians Sermons, and it befell him not long
after he had made that odious comparison.

England has suffered much by men's undertaking to fetch their Divinity out of
the Providence of God, which are always righteous, but sometimes hidden.

A greater noise is made in some Books, on the account of the Assemblies
Annotations; in the which, or in the first Edition of which, it is said,
Nothing is to be found against Sacriledg; and it is easily acknowledged, that
in the Assemblies Annotations nothing is to be found against Sacriledg, for the
Assemblies Annotations are not to be found: But as for the English Notes made
by sundry Divines, who were all of them before the Wars, Conformists, and
commonly miscalled the Assemblies Annotations; and for the Assembly it self,
hear an ingenuous, but cordial and through-paced Son of the Church, in a
Discourse entitled, Church Lands not to be sold, printed Anno 1648. he quotes
with approbation the Note on Romans 2.22. p. 14. having spoken p. 27. of honest
Mr. Geree, who avers, That to abolish Prelacy, and to seize the Lands of the
Prelates to any private or civil interest, undoubtedly could not want stain nor
guilt: he adds, I am confident, by the discourse I have had with the most able
of the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, that at the least three parts, if
not all of them, are of the same judgment; and that they would openly profess
as much, if they were put to answer the question. The same Author quotes with
approbation the Note on Genesis 47. and on Mal. 3.8, 9. I will not go off from
this subject of Sacriledg, till I have also observed, That some, considerable
for Learning, and of no small authority, have not feared to say, That
Impropriations are sacrilegious. I have not much studied the point, and
therefore interpose not my own judgment; but it looks very ugly to take away so
much of the tithes and profits of any parish, as not to leave a competence for
him who has the cure of souls in that parish: yet it has been observed, that
no Parishes have so sorry and pitiful an allowance for the Preaching minister,
as those of which Clergy men are the Impropriators; if the Kings Letter since
his return has so kindly operated upon our Cathedralists, as to make them more
bountiful to the Incumbents, it is well; but if it have not, Mr. D. may do well
to consider whether he and his brethren be without fault, before he throw
stones at the head of others, else he may chance to have such an answer as the
Bishop of Scotland, who having objected Sacriledg to the Presbytery of that
Nation, is told by Mr. Baily in his Historical Vindication, p. 26, 27. That the
Bishops when they professed their greatest zeal to recover all the Church out
of the hand of the Laity, were found to be but too ready to dilapidate unto
Noblemen, and others too much of the Churches Patrimony: you your self may
remember what bargain you made, as I think with the Earl of Seaforth, which you
know was the first occasion of diminishing your reputation with your great
Patron Land of Canterbury, I am sure your Colleague Spotswood did sell the
whole Abbacy of Kilwinning to the Noblemen and Gentlemen of Guningham, to the
great prejudice and grief of the University of Glasgow, and the Ministers of
the bounds, who had great interest therein. At the Parliament of Lithgow, 1606,
our good Bishops for their own base ends did consent in the name of the Church
(though they never consulted her in that business) to the greatest dilapidation
that ever was heard of in Scotland, the Impropriation to Noblemen and Gentlemen
of no fewer than sixteen Abbacies, every one whereof had incorporate the Rents
of a number of Parish-Churches.

A second impertinence relates to Confirmation, which Mr. D. p. 43. says, he
finds used in almost all Reformed Churches, in some with greater, in some with
lesser solemnity. To what purpose does he tell us this? Would he have the world
believe, that the Presbyterians are against Confirmation? or that they do not
earnestly desire it? Have not Mr. Hanmer and Mr. Baxter written books to show
the usefulness and necessity of it? Do not some of them ground it on Heb. 6.2.
and draw thence an argument for Infant Baptism? Mr. Tombs knows they do, and so
do many others of the Antipaedobaptists. For my part I bless God that has put
it into the hearts of the Convocation, to insert into this last Edition of the
Liturgy, a question to be propounded to those who are confirmed: let conscience
be made never to confirm any but those who are well instructed in the Church
Catechism, and are well reported of for their conversation, and I shall think
then that nothing is to be blamed in our order for admission to the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper. But if men will pretend a great reverence to Confirmation,
and yet suffer the far greatest part of the Nation to communicate unconfirmed;
and if Bishops will confirm persons grossly ignorant and scandalous in the
highest degree, and never require Certificates from the Ministers of those
Parishes to which they belong, God forbid that I should justify them.

The only question considerable about Confirmation, betwixt those called
Presbyterians, and their adversaries, is concerning the Minister thereof:
Presbyterians say. That no Law of God has appropriated it to a Bishop strictly
so called. If Mr. D. can show us any such Law, or if he can prove that in all
or in any Reformed Church, a mere Presbyter is not accounted to have power to
confirm, as well as to baptize, he shall do something; let him therefore show
himself a man, and undertake this work, and when he has his hand in, let him
also wipe off a blot thrown upon the Church of England and Geneva by Dr.
Heylin, with the Pen of a virulent Papist, William Reynolds, History of
Presby. page 283. viz. That, 1576, the Common Prayer Book was Printed by
Richard Jugg the Queens Printer, the whole order of private Baptism, and
confirmation of Children being omitted, which omission was designed to bring
the Church of England into some Conformity to the desired Orders of Geneva.

Page 47. he is so prodigal of his Ink and Paper, as to tell us, That in all
reformed Churches Matrimony is celebrated in the public Congregation, and by
the Minister. This may be true of all reformed Churches in reference to their
own Members, at least I hope it is; but if he should intend to assert, That
Reformed Churches allow not that any who are constant livers in the same Cities
with them, shall be married otherwise than by the Ministers, and in the Church,
he is mistaken. Yet let it be supposed, that Papists, dwelling with
Protestants, are forced to marry in the Church, and to make use of a Minister;
what is this to the Presbyterians? The composers of the Directory say, We
judge it expedient that Marriage be solemnized by a lawful Minister of the
word, that he may counsel them and pray for them; In the said directory, care
also is taken, that before any marriage the persons intent of marriage be
published by the Minister three several sabbath days in the congregation at the
place, or places of their most usual and constant abode respectively, and all
Ministers are to have sufficient testimony of this publication before they
proceed to solemnize Marriage. By the Liturgy also sufficient provision is made
that of all that are to be married, the Bannes be published in the Church,
three several sundays, or Holy days in the time of Divine service, but any one,
that has money may have a license to be Married without any such publication of
Bannes, by which means great inconveniences have arisen in Church and State.
Care also is taken by the 62 Canon of 1603. That none shall be married, unless
the Parents, or Governors of the parties to be married being under the age of
twenty one, shall either personally, or by sufficient testimony, signify their
consent given to the said marriage. The directory is somewhat more strict,
requiring, that persons though of age shall be bound to have a Certificate of
their Parents consent, if it be their first marriage: And really it seems but
rational, that a man and a woman, though of the age of Thirty, if never married
before, should be bound to signify their Parents consent, before any Minister
adventure to marry them.

The greatest differences I find among Protestants about Marriage, are
reducible to Two Heads:

1. We say here in England, That though Children he bound to ask the consent of
Parents, yet if the marriage be made, no such consent asked or obtained, the
marriage is valid; fieri non debet, factum valet, is our Rule; but beyond Seas,
such marriages are by many held to be void and of no effect. Mr. D. has so
many obligations laid on him by our Church, that it would be but gratitude to
take her part, and to answer the Arguments of Dissenters.

2. Our Church has thought meet to prohibit marriage for certain times and
seasons, which are particularized in our common Almanacks. Other Churches leave
it free to persons to marry all the year about, to these the Presbyterians join
themselves, they say marriage is not to be forbidden at any time, unless on
such days, in which God calls to fasting, weeping, mourning; to confirm them in
this opinion, they had the judgment of a whole Convocation in England assembled
in the year 1575, agreeing, That Bishops should take order that it be published
and declared in every Parish Church within their Diocesses, that marriage might
be solemnized at all times of the year; but though the Church thought meet to
put this Article into the Book, the Head of the Church, Q. Elizabeth, did not
so think, and therefore suffered it not to be Printed. Dr. Heyl. Hist. of
Presb. 282, 283.

Object. Ay, but there are some who scruple the Ring in Marriage, which Mr. D.
says is used in Hessen, Poland, Lithuania.

Sol. If there be any such, the more is the pity, for rational ground of
scruple there is none, any more than there is to scruple taking seisin by a
Turf: Nor do I know any one Presbyterian now living, that does scruple the use
of a Ring in Marriage.

Page 48. we are informed by Mr. D. That in most places of the Reformed
Churches, they have Funeral Sermons, in Hungary and Transylvania, two or three,
in Bohemia but one, and that at the Grave. As if he would suggest to us, that
either Presbyterians are against Funeral Sermons, or the Episcopal extremely
for them; whereas the truth is, there never were more Funeral Sermons than in
those days, when the Presbyterians had their Churches and Pulpits; and now that
they are thrust out, when any one of them dye, it is seldom but some body is
hired to Preach a Sermon, I say, hired, for they are as rare as Black Swans,
that will Preach a Funeral Sermon under an Angel or a Noble. And whereas he
tells us, ibid. of the Minister with singing Boys going before the Corpse; he
knows, that in England we have singing Boys but in few places, scarce any where
but in Cathedrals, which do not use to send their singing Boys to go before the
Corpse at every Funeral. Civil respects, or differences at Burials may be suited
to the rank and condition of the party deceased, whiles he was living; as for
the Religious part of Funerals, why should it not be alike to all that have
attained like precious faith? Does Mr. D. know any Churches where only the
moneyed Christians are honored with Sermons; the poor being laid in their
graves without any? If he did not, why would he lay open the nakedness of his
Fathers, why would he tempt strangers to think, that with them there is respect
of persons? The Scots say, Either let us have Sermons at all Funerals, or at
none, so say the Hollanders. so I suppose the French either say or think: But
Mr. D. Page 49. quotes a scrap of a Letter from Monsieur Drelincourt saying, I
am so far from allowing the custom of the Reformed Churches of this Kingdom,
where the Ministers are silent at dead men's Burials, that I would think it
unsufferable were it not for the condition under which we live. I believe Mr.
Drelincourt, if he be still alive, thinks Mr. D. dealt not civilly with him, in
publishing this piece of his Letter, for he sure took no delight to let the
world know, that he accounted the custom of the Holland Churches unsufferable,
especially seeing the French Churches in Holland comply with them, and yet
cannot plead that they fear persecution. The same Drelincourt, if we may
believe Mr. D. said, that he found upon perusal of the Common Prayer Book
office for Burial of the dead, nothing that was contrary to piety, or pure
Doctrine, and the service of God.

Is not this a rare commendation of the Liturgy, that it has nothing in it
contrary to piety, etc. But what Common prayer Book did this learned Divine
read over? in all but this last there were expressions to be used at Burials,
that were apt to harden men in their impenitence, which therefore are now
either changed, or left quite out. At present I know little liable to
exception, save only, that Burial seems appropriated to a Priest: may a Deacon
Baptize and Preach, and may he not bury our dead out of our sight? In the Old
Liturgy, it was said, the Minister meeting the Corpse at the Church style shall
say; in this last edition of the Liturgy it is said the Priests and Clerks, and
so throughout the whole Office we have no other word but Priest, which is never
applied to any that are but Deacons; there is some mystery in this which Mr. D.
can expound, or else take no notice of. 2. By the Liturgy the form of Burial is
not to be used for any that dye unbaptized. What Is the meaning of this? If
Christian Parents lose a child before they can get it to be baptized, must
they, to all other their sorrow, have this also added, That their child shall
not have Christian b^rial? Shall the Idolatrous Papists child be buried, and
shall the child of the Antipaedobaptist not be buried according to the Liturgy?
How will Mr. Tombs, after all the pains he has taken to desend the Liturgy,
brook this? 3. Seeing the Office is to be read at the burial of all baptized,
being neither excommunicate nor murderers of themselves, why is the Priest
appointed to say, His ^ope is that every one who is buried, rests in the Lord.
What if a man be killed in bed with another's Wife? What if he be killed in a
Duel, or in an Alehouse half drunk? What if he be by God struck dead with an
oath or blasphemy upon his tongues end? must we use the very same words for
him, that we use for one that led a most Christian life, and died a comfortable
death? I have much more charity for some that laid violent hands on themselves,
than for those who contrary to all laws of God and man, do dye in Duels by the
sword of another?

Page 50. he has other words of Drelincourts as little to purpose, If we were
permitted, says he, to preach at Paris, and there to minister the holy
communion, I am of this persuasion, that it would be a pious and charitable
work to give that comfort to those poor sick persons who have kept their bed
for many years, and are not able to go as far as Charenton, which is the place
of our ordinary exercises of Religion. This is a mavelous wary speech, 1. If
they were permitted. 2. If they were permitted both to preach and administer
the Sacrament. 3. Then, it would be pious and charitable to give the Communion
to such as have kept their beds for many years. Can Mr. D. think that the
English Presbyterians will be offended at a persuasion thus qualified? It may
rather be questioned, Whether some of them would not judge it charitable and
pious to administer the Sacrament in such cases, though they had no permission
from the King; at least it may be conceived, that they would adventure, if they
should be permitted only to administer the Sacrament, though no leave were
given them to preach; for a Sermon is not of the essence of a Sacrament; and I
deem they would perform this act of charity and piety to such as had been
confined to their beds, though only for one or two years, which are not many.
There is not one word in all the Directory against private Communion.

P. 40. Mr. D. gives us notice, That in the Bohemian Churches, the people do
always say Amen at the end of the Prayers, in the same manner that we do here in
England. Which is so far from crossing the Presbyterians, that they, as many
think, by their good will, would have the people say nothing but Amen.

P. 39. he fancieth he may put the Presbyterians to silence, by telling them of
Churches that sing Hymns and spiritual songs, besides Psalms. But he may know,
that Presbyterians are as much at liberty to sing any godly Hymn or spiritual
Song, as he himself is. Let him but procure the Te Deum or the Lords prayer to
be set to ordinary times, and then he shall see whether the Presbyterians will
make any scruple for conscience sake to sing those forms, or the three Creeds
which are said to be set with musical notes in the French and Dutch Churches,
but not sung by the French Churches, by reason both the Rhyme and the language
are something course and old. Presbyterians are not so dainty, they continue to
sing the old Psalms, though the language and rhyme be odd and uncouth in many
places.

P. 183. he goes about to stab the Presbyterians with a declaration of a
National Synod met at Figeac 1579. What is the declaration? Why, it is a
declaration against reading verses aloud before they be sung, as being inept,
threatening censure to such Churches as used it. The Presbyterians think this
custom unfit, and therefore exhorted all Congregations to get Psalm-books, and
to learn to read; they allowed reading of Psalms line by line, only for
necessity, when ignorance had prevailed so far, that many in most Congregations
could not read at all. Let Mr. D. but take care that all be taught to read, or
learn the psalms without book, and I dare half undertake for Presbyterians,
they shall leave off so inept or unmeet a custom. Till then, they, and
Episcopal men too, must do as they can, and remember that they are debtors to
the unwise as well as wise.

P. 22. Mr. D. makes mention of Churches, whose Ministers wear commonly either
a long cloak, or a gown and long cap; nay, Calvin (says he) did wear a gown
and a cap, as often as he taught either in the Divinity-School, or in the
Church at Geneva. If Presbyterians do not wear a cap when they teach in the
church, they may easily be pardoned by Mr. D. As for a gown, let him but get
them liberty to preach, and they will promise never to need his pardon for want
of that. I am sure I have seen those whom the Parliament sent down to Cambridg
into the places of such as were ejected, preach both in gowns and hoods, and so
I have heard they did at Oxford when they preached Latin Sermons; for which
they have been scolded at by filly women, as Calvin was by the Wife of
Frumentius.

I had almost forgot another Impertinence, p. 37. The French Churches require
that the Ministers, who ought to use Imposition of hands, upon those that are
to be admitted to the ministry among them, should pray standing on that
occasion, the new received Minister and the Congregation kneeling at the same
time. This was the constant practice of the Presbyterians, as to Ordainers and
Ordained, in all places where I have been, or of which I have heard. As for the
people, they were commonly so numerous at Ordinations, that they could not
without huge inconvenience kneel. I also find that I have passed over
something, page 32. They have the Ten Commandments in Letters of Gold upon two
great Tables where they are able to be at the charge of it; and in some places
they have also the Creed and the Lords Prayer in the same manner, conformable
to one of the constitutions of the Church of England to the same purpose. Who
are meant by they, I cannot tell; the precedent words were, in Princes Chapels
in Germany, and other parts they have them ( i. e. Chalices) gilt. Are there
any Princes in Germany or other parts who cannot be at the charge of having the
Ten Commandments in Letters of Gold upon two great Tables? Or does Mr. D. mean
the French Churches, as many as have ability, do set up the Commandments in
Letters of Gold upon two great Tables? If so, I doubt he wronged his
Conscience. But let it be supposed that in all French Churches that are not
very poor, the Ten Commandments are set up in Letters of Gold, what mean those
words, in some places they have also the Creed and the Lords Prayer in the same
manner, conformable to one of the constitutions of the Church of England? Have
the rich French Churches, the Lords Prayer and Creed on two Tables, and in
Letters of Gold? If they have not, why is it said that they have the Creed and
Lords Prayer in the same manner? The Churches of France I am certain may be
conformable enough to the constitution of the Church of England, and yet not
have either the Commandments in Two Tables or in Letters of Gold; for all the
constitution requires, is but that the Ten Commandments be set upon the
East End of every Church and Chapel, where the people may best see and read
the same, and other chosen sentences written upon the walls of the said
Churches and Chapels in convenient places. Here is no mention of two great
Tables, no mention of Letters of Gold, no mention of Creed or Lords Prayer.

But why did Mr. D. trouble himself to bring in all, or any of this Stuff? Did
Presbyterians ever deny the lawfulness or expedience of having either the
Decalogue, or Creed, or Lords Prayer, set upon conspicuous places in the
Temple? I know an eminent Nonconformist now living, who was wont to rejoice
that the Painter had set the Lords Prayer just over against his Pulpit, that if
it had happened he had been out, he might by his eyes help himself. Had the Creed
been so placed it had been well for Mr. D. for they say, that not long since,
he was horribly out in repeating the Articles of Faith after Sermon.

I shall conclude this Catalogue of Impertinencies with Mr. D's stories
concerning reformed Churches, that ^eep the very same Temples that were used in
time of Popery, page 28. so did the Presbyterians, and Mr. Paget has defended
the lawfulness of using such places against the frivolous exceptions of Mr.
Ainsworth; and now let the world judge, whether Mr. D. deserve not to be called
and accounted Mr. Impertinent.

I must come to a third part of my task, which will be perhaps necessary, but
is somewhat more unpleasing than any of the other, viz. to muster up some of
those Speeches of Mr. Durell, which Countrymen call Wiskers, you may call them
by another name, but will not know how to excuse, except by the English
Proverb, that Travelers may -- by authority.

Page 8. Bellarmine was an eyewitness in his time, much against his will, of
Oecolampadius his being called Bishop of the Church of Basil: Oecolampadius on
his Tomb in Basil, is called Templi hujus verus Episcopus. Bellarmine in his
fourth Book, De notis Eccle. cap. 8. says, That when he was at Basil, he read
him, called on his Tomb, the first Bishop of that City, which is a Lie; but
then he also faith, that he read this, non sine risu, if these words do not
signify, much against his will, where is Mr. D's veracity?

Page 13. All understanding men amongst the French say plainly, That if God
Almighty were pleased, that all France should embrace the Reformed Religion, as
England has, the Episcopal Government must be established in their Churches.
Do all understanding men say this, and say it plainly? I shall manifest the
contrary ere I have done, and indeed have manifested it already.

Page 16. He dreads not to affirm, That Smectymnuus and all Smectymnuans being
bound most of them by their Oath to use set forms, never use them. S. M. T. Y.
when Mr. D. Printed this, were dead, and so not bound by Oath to use set forms;
as for E. C. M. N. W. S. who were then alive, how will it be proved that either
they were bound by Oath to use set forms, or that they never used them?

The Smectymnuans, if by them he mean the Nonconformists (and whom else can he
mean) were never the most of them by Oath bound to use set forms, and yet
sometimes some of them have used them, yea did use them at that very time when
Mr. D. was hammering out this Book.

Page 18. There is not one Minister in all France, but has made unto himself a
set form which he uses always and no other. What confidence is this! has he
received Letters from every Minister in France, or spoke with every Minister in
France? Has he certain knowledge that every Minister made a form unto himself?
did never any use a form that he had learned from another? did never any make
to himself above one form? I must needs doubt there is untruth in this, till I
see the thing proved under the hands of all Ministers in France.

Page 22. In Hungaria and Transylvania, Ministers never go abroad without their
long Cloak and Cassock just as here. Here, I am sure, Ministers go abroad
without long Cloak and Cassock, and are by the Canons of the Church allowed so
to do. Si non cast, tamen caute.

Page 26. speaking of the fratres Bohemi, and the Moravians it is said, that
they have days for commemoration of the Blessed Virgin, and of the Holy
Apostles, and other Saints and Martyrs, as also one for the commemoration of
all the Saints; all which days they keep after the same manner, that they are
kept here in England according to the Ecclesiastical constitutions, and common
use of the Church. I suppose the Bohemians and Moravians were to have Sermons
on Holy days, are we bound to have any? They are not appointed to fast the Eves
of any Saints days, but so are we; they are not ordered on the Saints days to
cease from the works of their callings, but so are we, and are punishable with
severity enough if we do not.

Page 27. mention being made of the Helvetick confession, and of the Holy days
commended by it, it is said it was subscribed by the Kirk of Scotland, 1566. The
Ministers of that Church being then of a different judgment from what their
successors have showed of late years, which is a most egregious falsehood, for
the Kirk then discovered her dislike of the festivals appointed, or commended
in the Confession of Helvetia, and so have the Ministers of late years, so as
they concur in judgment fully as to this matter, and I believe in every thing
else.

Page 28. Crosses have not been pulled down from the top of Churches unless in
some popular tumults. The Latin Apologist has shown the falsity of this.

Page 29. The fratres Bohemi have their solemn dedication of Churches, which
ceremony is to be performed with them by the Bishop, in the same manner, as
with us here in England. The manner of dedication of Churches is not here
agreed upon in England, nor is there any Law that requires dedications, and
some places we have that never were dedicated, and the ceremonies used in
dedication with us are such as are not used in Bohemia.

Page 30. At Basil, and Breme, they have their Fonts of stone and use them for
the Baptism of Infants; by which we see, that they are not of the same judgment
with the Directorians who find Popery and Superstition in the very placing of
them. All the Directory says is, that Baptism is to be administered in the face
of the Congregation, where the people may most conveniently hear, and see, and
not in the places where Fonts in the time of Popery were unfitly, and
superstitiously placed. Are the Fonts at Basil, and Breme, placed where the
people cannot hear and see? Are they placed unfitly, as in times of Popery? if
they be, I see not how they can justify themselves; if they be not, how can we
see that the Divines of Basil and Breme are of a different mind about the
placing of Fonts, from the Directorians?

Page 31. I know none that did ever so much as move the question in what place
and which way the Communion table ought to stand, (so it be seated where the
people may see and hear) except the new Scotch and English Presbyterians.
Either his knowledge is very small, or else he did write this against his
knowledge, and conscience.

Page 30. In all Reformed Churches men use to enter into the place of public
Worship with their Hats off. If this be meant of such times in which the
congregation is performing public Worship, the Presbyterians do so, and are
enjoined by the Directory so to do; but if it be meant, of entering at all
times, and upon all occasions, it is known to be an untruth to all that have
been in Holland. The Divines there would laugh to see any so superstitious as
to pull off his Hat every time he has occasion to go through one of their
Temples.

Ibid. In France the women that are persons of quality unmask themselves, and
the devoutest sort both of men and women use to kneel and make a short Prayer
for Gods blessing on the service they come to perform, before they fit down;
yet the Directory though it pretends conformity with them, prohibiteth these
very things. If the French Ladies unmask themselves to show that they are not
ashamed to be seen at Protestant Assemblies, what Directorian is he that will
blame them? But if by so unmasking themselves they design to show their beauty,
etc. then there is something in the 1 Cor. 11. that they may do well to think
of. The Directory forbids not private Prayers for Gods blessing, unless any
come in when the service of God is begun, and if the devouter sort of men and
women in France are wont to fall on their knees, when the congregation is
singing, etc. the Directory pretends not conformity with them, they may do well
to consider, that God is the God of Order, and not of Confusion; an ejaculation
in such cases, is as much as can be needful, provided it be joined with shame,
or trouble for coming so late.

Page 37. In the Churches of Poland and Lithuania, and likewise in them of
Transylvania and Hungaria the people uses always to say the Prayers aloud after
the Minister just as we do in the Church of England. Such was also the use of
the Churches of the Unity of the fratres Bohemi.

Our people do not much use to say the Prayers after the Minister, that is
certain, except the Clerk be the people, and there are but few Prayers they are
enjoined to repeat after him, the Lords prayer is appointed to be said not
after, but with him. What the use of the fratres Bohemi was, I do not well
know, nor has Mr. D. directed me how I may inform my self. But I have met with
something in Bishop Amos Comaenius which I commend to the diligent
consideration of Mr. D. and all others that are zealous in this matter; it is
in his Annotations on the Ratio Disciplinae Ordinisq, etc. Page 100. The Ritual
Books (the forms of performing the sacred Ministries which they call Agenda)
are not with us appended to the Catechetical Books, so as to come into the
hands of the Common people, but being put forth by themselves, are given only
to the Pastors, not privately in a corner, but in the sight of the Church.
After the death of the Pastor the same Books are put into the hands of the
Seniors. Some one will say what superstition is this? Ans. Let others have their
liberty of judging: I do not think things are so to be managed, that nothing
mystical (to be rather adored by the people, than proudly to be looked on, and
afterward vilely esteemed) should be left to the Priests. Religion rejoices
in veils: And our chief Master himself was wont to speak some things to his
disciples by themselves. The Apostle when he commands Bishop Timothy to commit
some things to faithful men who are apt to teach others, 2 Timothy 2.2. does he
not intimate a certain difference, betwixt these things that are given to all,
and those that are given to the Teachers of others? Certainly the word (...),
which he uses signifies, to commit or concredit some thing singular. And when
we read it written of Christ, that having read the sacred Text, and laid aside
his Book, be began his speech so, that all fixing their eyes on him, admired
the words that flowed from his mouth; do we think these things happen otherwise
to others? viz. If words flow from the mouth of Gods messenger not seen before,
that the hearers are rendered more attent and more profound admirers of the
grace of God. For if prescribed things only be always recited, what will there
be to excite attention? Curiosity rather will be excited, whilst this and the
other by beholding the same things in his Books attends whether they be
accurately read, what place is here for devotion? Neither is it to be thought
that ours are bound to the Books delivered to them, to words and syllables, it
is free to them to use any thing drawn out of the treasures of mystical wisdom
which make to excite zeal according to variety of occasions. Whence it comes to
pass that Godly hearers are scarce ever present at Sacred mysteries without new
motion of heart.

Page 61. It is said that the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, take those
things in which they differ from the Reformed Church of England, to be sinful,
and that therefore they would have her conform to them.

By whom is this said in such indefinite terms as are here made use of? I doubt
it will be found that none have so said, at least none that are called or
accounted Presbyterians; and if none can be found, what opinion will the world
have of Mr. D's veracity? But if any have said that some reformed Churches
abroad have accounted some things in which the English Church differs from them
to be sinful, it is a thing so manifest that I wonder Mr. D. can find a
forehead to deny it. He mentions in this place the Reformed Churches in the
Electorate of Brandenburg, and I do not observe him to have mentioned them any
where else, I suppose (by the Churches he joyneth them with) that he means
such as close with that Reformation that the Elector himself affects, and
would fain have introduced, and it will not be amiss to let our Countrymen
understand what that is. The heads of it are recited in the Continuation of
Thuanus at the year 1614. Page 396, 397. Edit. Francof. 1628.

1. Images, Crosses, Statues, are to be removed out of Churches.

2. Altars remaining since Popery, and built to perform the Sacrifice of the
Mass, are to be taken away, and in place of them are to be put oblong wooden
Tables covered with black cloth, a linen cloth when the Supper is to be
administered, being put upon it.

3. Instead of Hosts, Wafers are to be used, which being cut into long pieces,
should be received and broken by the hands of those who come to the Lords Table.

4. That instead of Chalices used in Mass, Cups should be used in the
administration of the Lords Supper.

5. The Casiolae (which may very well signify the Surplice, as well as other
Vestments) are to be left to the Popish Priests.

6. No linen is to be put under, or offered to those who come to the Lords
Table; nor are they to kneel as if Christ were corporally present.

7. The sign of the Cross is not to be added at the end of the benediction.

8. The Ministers of the Gospel are not to turn the back to men.

9. Prayers and Epistles are not to be sung before Sermon, but read.

10. Auricular Confession is to be left off.

11. At the Name of Jesus knees are not to be bowed, or head uncovered.

12. Prayers in the Pulpit are not to be muttered, but pronounced with a loud
voice.

13. The Supper of the Lord is not for fear of danger to be administered to sick
persons, especially when the plague is abroad.

14. Stone-Fonts are to be removed, and Basins substituted in their rooms.

15. The Decalogue is not to be recited imperfect, but entire.

16. The Catechism in some things that are exroneous, is to be amended.

17. The Sacred Trinity (a mystery to be adored, and ineffable) is not to be
represented by any images either carved or painted.

18. The words of the holy Supper are to be interpreted by Sacramental analogy,
and collation of other places of holy Scripture.

19. To the Gospels and Epistles which are explicated on Lords days, and yearly
repeated, Ministers ought not so to be bound, that they may not instead of
them, read and preach upon any other notable Text of the Bible.

Dr. Heylin has exemplified the heads of this designed Reformation, on purpose
to show, as he tells us, Hist. of Presby. 412. how Calvinian and Lutheran
Churches differ, and how near ours approaches to the latter; and I have
exemplified them to show, that if Ceremonies be but gnats, English
Presbyterians are not the only persons that do strain at them; declaring also
my just abhorrence of the Historians impudence in ascribing the designment of
this Reformation to the plots and practices of a subtle Lady.

P. 85. Mr. D. having before recited a Letter of Mr. Chabrets, in which he
makes a question whether the Liturgy received at the Savoy Congregation, be the
same that was used in Q. Eliz. King James, or King Charles I.'s time, or
another compiled by Archbishop Laud, that had been occasion of much trouble,
adds words of great reproach against those who accused the late Lord Archbishop
of making a new Book of Common Prayer, other than those that were used in the
times of our last three Sovereigns: this he makes a thing that never was.

But he is now to know, that Archbishop Laud did make, or cause to be made, a
Common Prayer Book for the Kirk of Scotland, different in many things from any
that had been used here in England, in any of the three last Sovereigns Reigns;
which Common Prayer Book, among other things, occasioned great disturbances
betwixt the two Kingdoms: nay, he made some alterations in the Liturgy for
England, that were not very pleasing to some palates among the sons of the
Church; what they were, if Mr. D. pleases he may see in Mr. Prynnes Epistle
Dedicatory to his Quenchcoal. It is not for such a poor creature as I am, to
blame or find fault with those alterations, which I find imitated in our last
edition of the Liturgy. Only I wonder why in the Office for the Fifth of
November Ministers are not directed to read the Statute for the observing of
that day, seeing it is by law appointed to be read.

Ibid. He complains that our Convocations are beyond seas represented to
consist only of Archbishops and Bishops; and that the inferior Clergy is not
permitted to sit and vote in them. Really if any gave such information, he was
but too like to Mr. D. speaking of that which he either did not, or would not
understand. The Convocations of England do consist of an upper and lower House;
and though the Upper House consists but of Archbishops and Bishops, yet the
Lower consists of the inferior Clergy, Deans, Prebendaries, Archdeacons and
Proctors of the Clergy. P. 116. Mr. D. calls our Convocations a Council
consisting of above sixscore reverend, grave, and learned Divines, chosen out
of many thousands, whereof twenty-six are Archbishops and Bishops, a greater
number Deans, and Prebends, and Archdeacons: Which shows he understands not
the frame and constitution of our Convocations, though they be the
Church-Representative, that he pretends to write for. The Convocation for the
very Province of Canterbury, (besides which, there is one for the Province of
York) consists of an Archbishop, twenty-one Bishops for the Upper House; the
Lower House consist; of Deans twenty-two, Prebendaries twenty-four. Arch
deacons fifty-four, Clerks representing the Clergy, forty-four; so that the
very Lower House for this one Province, consists of One hundred forty-four
persons. But how these are chosen out of many thousands, they are men of rare
faculties that can understand. If we speak of the members of Convocation,
neither Bishops, nor Deans, nor Archdeacons, are chosen to it, but come of
course, just as Peers do to the House of Lords. As for the Prebends, they are
chosen only by the Chapters, which I hope are not many thousands; the Diocesan
Clergy may be said to be chosen out of many thousands; but they for the
Province of Canterbury are but forty-four. It may be Mr. D. meant that these
Divines are chosen to their Dignities out of many thousands; but that will be a
grosser untruth than the other: for Bishops are chosen by the Dean and Chapter
of that Church to which they are sent, but they have not many thousands to
choose out of; there is but one nominated to be chosen, and him I believe the
Dean and Chapter must choose, and return his Election; and the Election being
returned and ratified by Royal assent, the Metropolitan must either consecrate
or confirm, as occasion requires. That which the Puritans were wont to
complain of, was the inequality of the Representative; they say for example, If
all who are chosen by the Diocesan Clergy for the whole Province of Canterbury,
should desire a Reformation, yet they could not carry it; because the
Archdeacons who are the Bishops creatures, as being chosen solely by them, are
ten in number more than they; and they also were wont to say, That the Bishops
would take on them to nominate the two Clerks for the Diocese; and if it be so,
they said it was in effect all one as if the Convocation had consisted only of
Bishops. This notwithstanding, Dr. Tailor in his Episcopacy asserted, seems to
envy the Presbyters so much as sitting in Councils: It Is evident, says he,
Episc. assert. p. 283.) that the Laws of Provinces, and of the Catholic
Church, were made by Conventions of Bishops, without the intervening or
concurrence of Presbyters, or any else, for sentence and decision; the
instances of this are just as many as there are Councils. The parishes of both
Provinces in England, are above nine thousand two hundred; the pastors of these
parishes send about Fifty-two to represent them and in the very House where
they sit, there are above twice as many (in whose election they were no way
concerned) that have equal votes with them; and besides, there is an Upper
House of Bishops. Mr. Durell would exceed Plutarch himself, if he could find in
any Reformed Church a parallel. Let him try how such a Synod as this will hit
with that which the Theses of Saumur say concerning Councils.

But I have almost forgotten my self. Let Mr. D. go on to wipe off false
aspersions cast on our Bishops. P. 86. Men beyond the seas are told that every
one of our Bishops is a Pope, nay more than a Pope in his Diocese; prescribing
and imposing of himself what he pleases to his Clergy; whereas every Bishops
authority is limited by his subscription to the 39 articles, etc. by the
Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical, and by the Laws of the Land, according
to the prescript whereof he is to rule his diccess, and no otherwise; calling
always to join with him in imposition of hands, and other matters of weighty
concernment, some of the Prebends of his Cathedral, or other grave Ministers of
the Diocese. Certainly this Preacher knows not what a Pope is, if he think that
what these calumniators report of the Bishops, makes them worse than Popes. But
let them deserve to keep the Whetstone for their tale, Mr. D. will have it from
them again; for nothing is more false, than that by any Constitutions or Laws
Bishops are bound to call unto them either Prebends or grave Ministers to join
with them in imposition of hands, and in all other weighty matters. The Bishops
lay on hands in confirmation of children, who is to join with him in that
Imposition? They lay on hands when they ordain Deacons, are they to call any to
join with them in that imposition of hands?

Ay, but they cannot ordain a Presbyter regularly, unless some Presbyters join
with them in laying on of hands.

Really they cannot: but now the question is, What the hands of the Presbyters
signify? And truly if we ask those that stickle for Hierarchy, they will say,
they signify just nothing, or next to nothing: this conjunction of Presbyters
is not ad essentiam operis, but ad dignitatem sacerdotii. The Presbyters hands
confer nothing of the power of Order upon the party ordained, but only testify
their consent unto the business, and approbation of the man. So Dr. Heylin
History of Episcopacy, p. 162. and to the same purpose Dr. Tailor in Episcopacy
asserted. Is not the Presbytery fairly advanced? it may do what the Laity did,
or at least may do, testify consent and approbation of the man? Again, the
suspension of a Minister is a weighty thing; who is appointed to join with the
Bishop in this? Excommunication also is a weighty thing; Who must join with the
Bishop in that? Finally, Mr. D. would oblige me greatly if he would fully
satisfy me what Canons and Constitutions the Bishops are to govern their
Clergy by. I hope no Canons are in force but those of 1603. which I am sure are
more than be well observed; but there were Legatine Canons in number
Seventy-seven, made by Otho and Othobone; and Provincial Canons made under
Stephen Langthon and Henry Chichly Archbishops of Canterbury, digested into a
body by William Lindwood, as the former were by John Mon, Canon of Lincoln; and
some say, that so much of all these Canons as is not contrary to the Laws and
Customs of the Land, is still in force; if so, as so it may be for ought I
know, then I am sure a great many of the Clergy know not how they are to be
governed; but if any should know all Canons and Constitutions, and understand
that the Bishop prescribes things contrary to all Law and Canons, what then?
Why then there lies an Appeal, or a Prohibition may be obtained, to the cost of
neither of which a poor Countrey-Vicar can easily raise his purse.

P. 87. Mr. D. is at his old trade of overreaching: for he describes Monsieur
Goyon to be a man as well versed in antiquity, as is possible.

Yet neither he nor I can tell the bounds of possibility in the skill of
antiquity; and perhaps both of us can tell of some that are more skilful in
Church History than this Monsieur.

P. 103. The Church of England is be-lied, for of her it is said, that she
holds subordination of Ministers in the Christian Church, to be of
Apostolical, nay of Divine Institution, having (as she conceives) for grounds
of this her judgment, beside Scripture, the practice of the holy Apostles in
their times, of the Universal Church ever since, until this latter age; and
which is more, of Christ himself, who ordained the Apostles and the Seventy, in
an imparity, as two distinct Orders of Ministers in his Church; yet
notwithstanding she does but simply assert the lawfulness of her own
Government.

Certainly this man does not pretend to know the conceptions of our Church,
till they be discovered; and the Church has no where declared her conceptions
to be these, That subordination of Ministers, beside Scripture, is grounded on
the practice of the Apostles, and of Christ himself. The practice of the
Apostles, and of Christ, is not beside Scripture, but recorded in Scripture;
nor does the Church any where say that Christ instituted the Apostles and the
Seventy as two distinct Orders of Ministers in his Church; if she do, then Dr.
Hammond did not know her mind, or else plainly contradicts her.

P. 144. contains no fewer than four calumnies against Presbyterians, which
must be manifested in their order.

1. The Presbyterians had no set-forms, nor indeed would receive any, whether
for Common Prayer or for administration of Sacraments, Matrimony, etc.

I believe some Presbyterians had set-forms for all these; and I am sure they
do not account it unlawful to receive set-forms for any of these, only they
may, and some of them do judge it inexpedient to have Ministers so tied up in
all these, as never in the least to vary, either by addition or substraction. I
never heard of Presbyterian that administered Baptism in any other form of words
than those appointed in the Liturgy. I baptize in the Name of Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; nor the Lords Supper in any other form of words but what is
Scriptural; nor Marriage but in a set-form, either that in the
Common Prayer Book, or that in the Directory.

2. For a long time many of them had left off the use of that very form our
Lord has taught us, p. 37. He had said, That most, if not all Directorians,
had left out of their Service, for a long time, that most complete, most divine
form of prayer.

Mr. Paget, Mr. Ball, Mr. Hodges, have printed Apologies for the use of the
Lords prayer; hundreds of those who now suffer deprivation, have thousands of
witnesses that they have used it in their Churches and in their Families, on
Sundays, on Fasting-days, and yet they must have this filth thrown into their
dish. However, on this occasion let us try what Mr. D. can say: Suppose some
Presbyterians had never used this prayer in the Pulpit, but only at the Lords
Supper, had they not president in the ancient Church to justify them in so
doing? yea, suppose some should say that it were no sin never to use this
prayer, provided a man took it as the pattern of his prayer, how would Mr. D.
stop their mouths, and prove them transgressors? In his Sermon p. 26. he brings
the words Luke 11. When ye pray, say; and this place is commonly urged, but
perhaps is not so strong as some imagine it to be, at least when managed as
they manage it: for I ask, What is the meaning of, When ye pray, say? Is the
meaning, When ye pray, say after this manner, or say these words? (...) but
after this manner, then the sword is not long enough to reach Mr. Ainsworth and
his disciples, for they pretend to say after that manner, (and not to conceal
any part of the truth, the Syriack translation in Luke requires it to be
rendered, sic, or ad hunc modum estote dicentes), but let the words mean, say
these words, then I ask, Whether the words in St. Matthew, or St. Luke? If the
words that occur in Luke, then we have no precept for the Doxology, as it is in
Matthew. And really I have wondered what they meant, who were wont to say at the
conclusion of their Pulpit-prayers, In his name and in his words we further
pray, saying as he has taught us; and yet had never satisfied themselves, that
the Doxology which they constantly in that case used was of our Lords own
inditing. There is reason (says Dr. Hammond) to believe that the words of
Doxology came in out of the Greek Liturgies; and that the ancientest Greek
Copies have them not, Pract. Cat. lib. 3. sect. 2. Grotius had said as much
before. Those who believe these two Learned men, had need alter the form of
words with which they usher in the Lords Prayer. It Is not safe to ascribe to
Christ any thing but what is his; but how shall a man know that the copies in
which the Doxology is wanting, are the most ancient?

Erasmus says he found the Doxology in all the Greek Copies: Lucas Brugensis,
that it was in all the Greek Parisian Copies but one. And if one look into the
various readings collected in our late Polyglot Bibles, he shall find the
Copies that want these words of Doxology, to be but few; wherefore Grotius has
got no credit by saying, Seeing that they are not extant in the most ancient
Greek Copies, but are extant in the Syriack, Arabic, and Latin Context, we may
learn not only that the Arabic and Latin Version, but also the Syriack, was
made after that the Liturgy of the Churches was brought into a certain form.
For the Doxology is not in some Arabic Versions, not in that which is inserted
into the Polyglot Bibles. If the Syriack and Arabic (which Grotius saw) had
put in the Doxology out of the Greek Liturgies, why did they not also put it in
in the Gospel of Luke? unless it could be made appear that the Greek Liturgies
varied, I know not how he can answer this question. Let me add this caution to
young Scholars, that they be not too hasty to give credit to every Copy that
some men magnify. That Syriack Translation which is followed in the New
Testament in our Polyglot Bibles, if it were the ancientest, would be a good
argument of the Antiquity of Festivals or Holy Days; but the Translation which
Immanuel Tremelius followed, for ought I know may be much ancienter; and in it
there appears no such distinction of days. To return to St. Luke, if his
(...) import that we must use his very words in Greek, or words in our language
as near as may be to his, then must we not follow our Liturgy; for though it
sometimes inserts the Doxology, and sometimes omits it, yet it never
translateth the Lords Prayer according to St. Luke; Give us this day our daily
bread, and forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against
us; is not to translate, but paraphrase on St. Luke. It is a little odd, that
in the whole Liturgy the Lords Prayer should never be put in the same words
that are used in all our Translations of the Bibles that were authorized,
whether new or old. Will Mr. D. say, If Christ bid us use these very words,
that we may use other of like nature and import; and yet that if the Church bid
us use her words, that we must use them and no other? The Brownist will say the
Church may well allow as much liberty as she takes. Besides, what assurance
can Mr. D. give the Brownists what words the Lord Jesus used when his disciples
desired him to teach them how to pray? Grotius the great, says, It is
credible, that several things are thrown into the Greek copies of St. Luke, out
of St. Matthew; and the things he supposes to be thrust in, are all that are
left out of the old Latin copies; if so, the Lords Prayer must be made much
shorter than ever it is made in our Liturgy; we must not say which art in
heaven; nor thy will be done as in heaven, so on earth; nor, but deliver us
from evil. The Brownist has not yet done with Mr. D. but will ask him how
often he is bound to say the Lords Prayer by virtue of the (...): p. 27. of his
Sermon he tells them, that this and another reason by him there mentioned,
obliged those Protestants which follow the Augustane Confession, and those of
the Reformed Churches of Holland. to say it ordinarily before and after meals,
at the end of their Graces. Had these men reason to think themselves obliged to
this custom? If they had, then is Mr. D. obliged also, and sins every time he
does not use the Lords Prayer before and after meals: if it were their mistake
to think themselves obliged, how will he give security that he is not mistaken
in counting himself obliged to say a Pater noster every time that he bends his
knee to God in prayer, either in the beginning, or middle, or end of his
prayer? If he plead a command of Christ, as he does in that Sermon, he must
prove the quoties, which it will be hard for him to do; and if he talk of
Christ's sanctifying a form with his own mouth, he must give us either the very
words Christ spoke, or else a juster translation of them than any he will find
in the Common Prayer Book.

Finally, If we have not received the grace of the Gospel in vain, we must look
on Christ as risen from the dead, ascended into heaven, confirmed the Universal
Priest, Intercessor, and Advocate; so could not the Disciples look on him when
Christ taught them to pray; which may be the reason why he told them, that
hitherto ye have asked nothing in my name, Joh. 16.24. wherefore though it be
lawful and expedient to use the Lords Prayer, as we commonly use it; and though
the things to be prayed for, cannot be better summed up, or more briefly
comprised; yet vulgar people will be in great danger not to say the Lords
Prayer in the Lords name; not to think of his merit and intercession, unless
they have prayers so formed as to force them to a more distinct apprehension of
Christ's propitiation, than the Lords Prayer does. Let it be observed whether
the Doxologies made, or mentioned to be made after Christ's ascension into
heaven, do not lead us distinctly and particularly to offer and ascribe praise
unto God, in the name of Christ, or by Christ; or unto God and the Lamb, or
unto Christ, Ephesians. 3.2^. 1. Tim. 6.16. Rev. 5.13. The more pains that Dr.
Lightfoot and others do take to show us the Lords Prayer in the Jewish
Liturgies, the more do they unawares strengthen men in a persuasion that it was
not intended to be a pattern to us to form our prayers unto, any more than as
to the matter, or things to be prayed for. It cannot be that the Jewish and
Christian Liturgy should not differ much in the manner of our addresses unto
God: it will be hard to find the Holy One called the God and father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, or his God and our God, his father and our father, by any Jew;
and yet no expressions more meet for the mouth of a Christian.

I pass to the third calumny in Mr. D.'s p. 144. Most of them wholly neglected
the Lords Supper for many years. Neglect is when a Minister has opportunity to
administer, and does not administer; Did most of the Presbyterians thus neglect
the administration of the Eucharist? Who does not know that many of them
administered it oftener than by the Liturgy is required? Has Mr. D. never heard
of their Associations either printed or not printed, in order to the exercise
of discipline? Does not the Directory say, The Lords Supper is to be
administered often? If any secluded any one from that Ordinance who was of an
orderly life, and understood the first principles of the Oracles of God, he did
it not from Presbyterian principles; but I remember that p. 44. he taxes the
Universities of this Kingdom, and says, That the University of Oxford had no
Communion for above twelve years. Yet the Ministers are known, who did
frequently administer the Communion in the Churches and Chapels of that
University, in those twelve years. But it may be he meant, that in twelve years
time the University as an University had no Communion. To which I say, If that
were a fault, it will not much concern the Presbyterians; for the four
Vicechancellors of Oxford during those twelve years, were not Presbyterians;
and perhaps the University as an University, is not a Church: for if it be, who
is Pastor of it? or who has power to censure those who be disorderly? Both
Chancellor and Vicechancellor may be laymen. The Communions appointed to be at
St. Mary's at the beginning of the Terms, were lately appointed, and the
penalties appointed for those who neglect to come to them, are not
Ecclesiastical penalties, and I believe the twentieth part of the University
never was at any one of them: was it meet to make such a clamor about the
omission of them?

A fourth Calumny is, That in the Presbyterians Congregations, there was a
great irreverence at prayer, very few kneeling, many not so much as pulling off
their hats. Of this irreverence he says he is an eyewitness. Was he not well
employed the mean while? Could he find nothing else to do when in a Christian
Congregation, but only to tell how many kneeled, and who had their hats quite
off, and who half off, and who never uncovered their head at all? In how many
Congregations was he to make this observation? if (as is probable) but in a
few, what unrighteousness is it to measure all Congregations by a few? And is
he sure that the men whom he observed to be so irreverent, were Presbyterians?
Why might they not be some of his own persuasion who did come to put an affront
on Presbyterians Prayers? Either kneeling, or standing Presbyterians commended
to their people, and never practiced (unless in case of infirmity) any other
gesture in praying that ever I heard of, and yet I have made enquiry. But it
was necessary that Mr. D. should draw them like Devils or else he could not
have made them abhorred.

Could a man but obtain leave of his conscience to lay open the irreverence of
the Episcopal Assemblies, what stories might he tell? More I am sure than Mr.
D. would be willing to hear. I believe there is not an honest heart but aches to
consider the rudeness of the admirers of our Liturgy in their addresses to God
whether in the Church or in their own houses. I speak of the vulgar sort of
them; put on their Hats they do not, but they usually sit on their seats, at
public Prayer, and which is worse stare up and down to see who comes in, and
who goes out of the Church, if their Landlord chance to come in, in the midst
of their Devotion up they rise and make their obeisance. Follow them to their
Houses there you may observe them to truss and pray, to wash their Faces and to
say their Prayers. I once met with an old man who had been bred up to Liturgies
all his days, dealing with him about his Soul, I found he never prayed any
thing at home but the Lords-Prayer, and that he never repeated that Prayer till
he was first got into his bed, and he told me he thought no man in England used
any other posture in saying his Prayers. And I was told by a Minister whom I
dare believe, that he happened at an Inn, to lie in the same Chamber with a man
of a good estate, who waking in the morning and thinking the Divine to be
asleep, gets out of his bed, takes his Doublet and Breeches, falls to dressing
himself, but whilst he dressed himself he said the general confession and the
absolution in the Common Prayer Book; when he was beginning the Lords-Prayer,
then he took the Chamber Pot into his hand, and did it may be imagined what.
Here Is irreverence with a witness, I charge it not on Episcopacy, yet I may
with a better conscience than Mr. D. charge the not putting off of Hats at
Prayer on Presbytery, or Presbyterian Nonconformists. He that would know what
outward reverence they require in the worship of God, and upon what reasons
they build it, and how necessary they account it, and what thoughts they have
of those who use it not, may inform himself from Mr. Arthur Hildershams plain
but very solid discourse on the fourth of St. John. He that has not the Book
by him may find much quoted out of him by Dr. Nicholat Bernard in his discourse
of a set form of Prayer, Printed, 1659.

And now that I am fallen upon Mr. D's forty fourth page, it may not be amiss
to advert that he fears not to say, all the Reformed world over no man that is
not a notorious ill-liver, is debarred from the Sacrament; what will he be
afraid to say that fears not to say this? Is there no reformed Church that
debars any but a notorious ill-liver from the Sacrament? Certainly it is not
necessary that he who danceth should be a notorious ill liver? and yet Mr. D.
knows where any that can be proved to have danced, would be kept from the
Sacrament. He that should turn Pelagian may be no notorious ill-liver, yet such
a one would be kept from the Sacrament in most if not in all reformed Churches,
so would he also that should not be satisfied to bring his Child to Baptism;
and yet I imagine such a one need not be a notorious ill-liver. Suppose an
English Protestant should think it irreverence to receive the Sacrament not
kneeling, such a man if Mr. D. be to be believed cannot be admitted to the
Sacrament in France, yet such a one may lead a life not notoriously scandalous.
By a Canon of our own Church, the communion is to be administered to none but
such as kneel, nor to any but such as be present at public Prayers, according
to the orders of the Church, yet I know some such who are far enough from being
notorious ill livers. I am almost certain that there is scarce a reformed
Church whose Principles and Rules of discipline do not debar such from
Sacramental communion as are no notorious ill livers, I wish I were as certain
that no Reformed Churches did contrary to their own Rules of discipline, admit
such as are notorious ill-livers, then I should promise my self that Christ
would with more delight walk among his golden Candlesticks.

P. 185. Whatever be the reason of it, Our Liturgy has no other Enemies abroad
where it is well known, but the Papists. This is an untruth as might be proved,
by a thousand instances. But let us see the occasion of it, that we have in the
same Page. The Magistrate of Paris his stopping the Printing and forbidding the
publishing of the English Liturgy, ( whereas that of Geneva is daily Printed
and sold there) the reason he thinks could be no other, but a fear that it
would be better liked by most Christians, that have either judgment, learning
or true piety, and are void of superstition, peevishness, extravagant zeal, and
profaneness, be they of what persuasion soever. This is not very charitable,
all or most that are not either superstitious, peevish, extravagantly zealous,
and profane will better like the English than the Geneva Liturgy. If after
this the French Ministers do not Petition their King that they may exchange the
Geneva for the English Liturgy, they know their doom.

Perhaps Mr. D. will plead that the French living in France, would be denied
the use of the English Liturgy Translated into their own Language though they
should desire it. But what will he say to those French Churches that are
scattered up and down in this Nation, they are not sure quite void of judgment,
learning, true piety, yet it is known, that they when they might have had
thanks from Archbishop Laud, if they would have received the English Liturgy
for the French, which they had been accustomed to, did not care for receiving
of it, but used all possible endeavors to keep themselves in statu quo. Dr.
Heylin relates the History of their wrestlings against the introduction of our
Liturgy among them, from him Mr. D. may take it at his leisure. If I have not
forgot since I read it, one argument made use of to keep the Metropolitan from
pressing them to Conformity, was drawn from the just fear there was, that by so
rigorous calling for Uniformity, the Christian King might be moved to persecute
his Protestant Subjects; for Cardinal Richlieu had given out such a speech, If
the King of England being a Protestant will not suffer two disciplines, why
should the King of France being a Papist suffer two Religions? A shrewd speech
and well to be thought on by any Metropolitan that shall go about to bring all
foreign Churches to comply with our own, or else to dissolve them.

I take no notice of the High commendations given of our Liturgy, by the noble
Princess of Turenne, and the Duchess of la Force her own Mother, he that will
may see them Page 78, and 186. I only wish that if the English Liturgy be of so
great force to edify people in the Protestant Religion, it had been put into
the hand of the Noble Marquess of Turenne to prevent his revolt to Popery, for
it is said that he is grown a Roman Catholic.

In his Sermon P. 20. He is not ashamed to say that whosoever has devotion and
leisure enough to come to the Church, and be present at Divine Service every
day morning and evening may hear the whole Bible read every Year, the old
Testament once, and the new no less than thrice, and the Book of Psalms no less
than twelve times.

This can only be practiced by those who live near to Cathedrals, let us
imagine that any so living, had devotion, and leisure enough, to come to his
mother Church, from the first of January, to the last of December, this man
would not hear the whole Bible, neither the Old Testament once, nor the New
Testament thrice. The Liturgy says so, yet Mr. D. in a pang of zeal, dare say
otherwise. Whether the Church do well to leave out 188 Chapters of the Old
Testament, and to appoint 121 of the Apocrypha, is not the question, we are on
a matter of fact, and I say Mr. D. has falsified in that, and will have no
thanks for his falsification, the Church not desiring him to lie for her sake.

Another tale in P. 23. of his Sermon. It is required of the People that they
repeat aloud the confession of Sins, that they may be more sensibly affected
therewith.

This is just like giving a reason why the Swan sings just before her death
whenas we know that she does not so sing. The people are not required to repeat
aloud the confession of sins, rather they are exhorted to repeat it with a
submiss, or lowly voice. But now we are fallen on this word Loud, I would fain
know what the meaning of it is. In the first Book of Edward the sixth the
Priest being in the Quire was appointed to begin the Divine Service with the
Lords-Prayer, using a loud voice; in the late Liturgies he is appointed after
the Absolution, to begin it with a loud voice; in this last with an audible
voice, the people kneeling and repeating it with him; in the Precatiuncles
after the Creed, the Minister, Clarks, and People are ordered to say the
Lords-Prayer with a loud voice, in former and later Books. But in K. Edward's
first Book the people were not to speak till deliver us from evil; at evening
prayer t's appointed that the Minister shall kneel, and say the Lords-Prayer,
the people kneeling, and repeating it with him, no mention being made of the
kind of voice to be used, yet after the Creed at evening prayer, all are to say
the Prayer with a loud voice. I never observed any Minister or people to speak
louder, in repeating the Lords Prayer at one time than at another, nor know I
what is meant by a loud voice, or whether there be any difference betwixt it
and an audible voice, nor if there be none, what is meant by an audible voice,
for to whom must the peoples voice be audible, to those that sit next to them?
or to the Minister? or to the whole congregation? Mr. D. does converse with
great personages, and he knows the meaning of these terms.

P. 265. In the reign of Queen Elizabeth before the making of the Act of
Uniformity, those that did not love white, made a great noise within and
without this land, and bestirred themselves on all sides that they might be
dispensed with for wearing the surplice. Among other means used by them to come
to their ends, they applied themselves to some in the reformed Churches beyond
the Seas, and persuaded them that if the surplice was imposed, huge numbers of
Ministers, nay many of the Bishops themselves, would leave their Ministry.
Whereupon the Prince Elector Palatine that then was, commanded Zanchius to
write to the Queen, to dissuade her Majesty from imposing the use of such
Vestments, which he did accordingly; but the business not succeeding according
to their desires, and the Nonconformists giving out still that there would be a
great dissipation in this Church by the desertion of so many Bishops and
Ministers, what did Zanchius thereupon, etc.

Such an Harangue of impertinence and falsehood have I seldom or never met with;
and yet we are in the Margin directed to Zanchy's Epistle to Juel, as if thence
all the materials of it had been fetched. In my books Zanchy's Letter to Juel
bears date just the very day next to that written to Q. Eliz. so that in twenty
four hours time the Nonconformists of England must know that a Letter came from
heidelberg to London, was received by the Queen, and proved not effectual with
her, and thereupon give out stories of Bishops that would leave their Sees, and
hope for another Address to be made on their behalf; if so, they must needs
have the Intelligences that move the Primum mobile for their Secretaries and
Messengers. Zanchy's Letter to Juel I am sure does not in the least intimate,
that the English Nonconformists made any applications to some in the Reformed
Churches beyond the Seas; all that can thence be collected, is but this, that
the June before he did write his Letter, one called Montius returned out of
England, and told him besides others, that a great difference was stirred up in
the English Church about Vestments, and therefore desired him that he would by
a Letter both admonish the Queen of her Office, and also write to those Bishops
that were known to him, and especially to Juel. Upon his and others entreaties,
and his Princes command, Zanchy did write to the Queen a Letter, as he was
confident, not evil, (which is to be seen) and not knowing what the Queen would
do, he writes also to Juel, That he would by his Authority, Learning and
Prudence, endeavor with the Bishops not to leave their Sees, rather than wear
linen; yet so, that they must know that the Queen is inexorable; and also when
they wear linne, make a protestation.

This Letter, it is like, never came to Juel's hands, he dying about twelve days
after it was written. Nor need it trouble us, that Juel never saw it, seeing
there was no Bishop then in any danger to lose his Place for not wearing
linen; nor can I think there is any one Minister now so much out of love with
white, as rather to leave his Ministry, than put on a Surplice, provided he may
but make lawful protestation how and on what accounts he uses it. Indeed the
(...) of some Nonconformists in the late times was this, that they loved white
too well; for their woollen clothes were white, or next to white; their locks
were powdered with white powder, their white Halfshirts were very visible, to
the great offense of some serious persons both in Country and University. But
let not Mr. D. rejoice because some Nonconformists did thus habit themselves;
for these Nonconformists were not Presbyterians, but either inclined to ways of
separation, or else such as had new^y laid by their Canonical dress, and were
resolved no longer to be called black-coats. Here therefore let me beseech all
who would not be deceived in reading our Histories concerning the disorderly
carriages of Ministers in the late times, well to consider who they were that
were so disorderly; and if they find that any of them were of the old
Nonconforming Presbyterians, I am much mistaken: if they find none were such,
how unreasonable is it to charge on Presbyterians the faults of such as
returned to Conformity so soon as His Majesty required them; and left not off
to conform till they could not keep their Conformity and Livings too?

Too too long I have been in detecting falsehoods, had it not been necessary to
try whether I could put Mr. D. to some shame. I am now to show you, as briefly
as I can, in how many things he has wronged his Munificent and Bountiful
Mother of England.

P. 10. He takes pains to tell us of an Oath of Canonical obedience sworn by
Ministers in Hungary to the Bishop and to the Seniors: in the Oath he that
swears, acknowledges himself to receive his Ministry from both Bishop and
Seniors. These Seniors are but a more eminent sort of Presbyters, as his
quotation p. 11. intimates. What is this but to bring in Hungary's witness
against the sole power of Order and Jurisdiction of the English Bishops?

P. 12, 13. He relates a tedious story of the fratres Bohemi, and the care that
they took to preserve a succession of Ministers. They sent Michael Zambergius
and two more to the poor Waldenses (who never had a Bishop among them but in
title only) and two titular Bishops, with some that had not so much as the
title of Bishops, made Zambergius and his two Colleagues Bishops, giving them
power of Ordination. This is manifestly to put a weapon into the Presbyterians
hands; they were wont only to quote the story of Pelagius the Pope being
ordained by a Presbyter with two Bishops, now Mr. D. has afforded them another
Story, to prove that a Presbyter may lay hands on, and ordain Bishops; Is this
his kindness to the Prelates?

Another prejudice and mischief he designs to the Church is as he tells us,
Page 14. To set forth a Collection of the several Liturgies of all the
Protestant Churches. This may please him, because it is the brat of his own
brain, but will not sure please the Reverend Fathers of the Church. Does he not
know that Archbishop Laud did put a stop to the Letters Patents, for a
Collection for the Palatinate, because it was said in them, that the Palatinate
Religion, and ours was the same, and that Popery was an Antichristian yoke?
Does he not also know that when a Book was Published here in England entitled
a Declaration of the Faith and Ceremonies of the Palsgraves Churches,
Archbishop Laud took a course to call it in? I advise him, if he love his
preferments, no more to meddle in this kind. Had Dr. Peter du Moulin any thing
bestowed on him since he answered Philanax Anglicus?

P. 45. He quotes Calvin saying that the custom of distributing the Sacrament
but thrice a year is vicious, and yet that is the custom of our Church, and
that not observed in all places neither, for the generality communicate but
once a year, and so follow, if Mr. D. be in the right, the Devils invention.

P. 53. He says by just and evident consequence that there is not a wise
understanding Christian in our Church, for these are his words: That every
national Church ought to have Uniformity within it self, has always been the
judgment of all sober Christians: I assume, That every national Church should
have Uniformity within it self, has not been the judgment of the Church of
England. I tremble for Mr. D's sake to infer the conclusion. The Minor I prove
from the Canons of 1640. where a difformity is allowed, and the Apostolical
rule commended to dissenters, not to judge, not to despise.

Follow him but to P. 93 and there you shall have him charging Rebellion and
Schism on the major part of his Conforming brethren. For there he tells us of
a great persecution against all Ministers who adhered to the King and Church of
England during the late troubles, this persecution was so gentle to some as
only to plunder and turn them out of their livings, but cast others out of the
Land, or forced them to a voluntary exile. Thus therefore I argue:

All Ministers that adhered to the King and Church, were either turned out of
their livings or banished, or left the Land.

The major part of the Conforming Ministers did neither lose their livings, nor
were banished, nor went into voluntary exile.

The^^^^re the major part of the Conforming Ministers neither adhered to King,
nor Church, and by just consequence were Traitors and Schismatics.

The Minor is as clear as the Sun, to all that observed the management of
things in England, he that Licensed Mr. D's Book had the same Fellowship in All
Souls, at his Majesty's return, that he had at the decollation of his Father.

P. 95. He tells us, that he and some others were admitted to livings in
France, the Synod desiring them only to conform to their Rites, Ceremonies, and
Orders, for the time they should live amongst them, (for a Nonconformist
Minister is a thing unknown and never suffered in those Churches.) This is
nonsense to an English ear, for the Church may be full of Nonconformists if men
are admitted into livings, being desired only and not enjoined to conform to
Rites and Ceremonies and Orders. But he told us P. 54. All admitted to livings
must subscribe to the confession of faith, wherefore we may think he subscribed
to the parity of Ministers, and by an order passed at Charenton all are to
swear they will propugne the Canons of the Synod of Dort, if that order be not
rescinded, then it is like he is under Oath to defend a Doctrine which most of
the Fathers of this Church think, if not against our own Doctrine, yet
subversive of the Doctrine according to Godliness.

P. 96. He says that it is a principle common to all reformed Churches in the
World, That every national Church has power to make Laws for her self, in all
such outward things as are not either expressly commanded, or forbidden in the
word of God.

God forbid that any such principle should be maintained, by all or by any
Reformed Church in the whole world. There are many outward as well as inward
things not commanded nor forbidden expressly, but only by just and necessary
consequence, about which the Church has no power to make Laws to her self any
more than about those things that are expressly either commanded or forbidden,
else there would be mad work in the World. Where does Mr. D. find family
Prayer, or infant Baptism, or the observation of the Lords days expressly
either forbidden or commanded in Gods word? He will say that the Church may
make Laws about these, I grant she may, but no other than what she can make
about things either commanded or forbidden expressly. So that he wrongeth not
only our own Church, but all Reformed Churches in affixing such a principle to
them. Dr. Heylin ascribes to Calvin a quite contrary principle. Hist. of Presb.
238. That in carrying on the work of a Reformation, there is not any thing to
be exacted, which is not warranted, and required by the word of God; that in
such cases there is no Rule left for worldly wisdom, for moderation and
compliance, but all things to be ordered, as they are directed by his will
revealed.

Page 241. He makes this Calvin's rule, and Martyrs judgment to be grounded on
it, That nothing should be acted in a Reformation, which is not warranted
expressly in the word of God. Are East and West more opposite than Dr. H. and
Mr. D. yet neither truly represents the opinion of the Reformed. I beseech
those who are at leisure, and have well studied the point, to state plainly and
clearly unto us the due matter of Ecclesiastical Laws, and to show us the
meaning of the term, indifferent, so frequently made use of in this
Controversy: for it seems somewhat an uncouth assertion that Church governors
may command all things that are usually called indifferent, for then many of
their Laws would be very contemptible. The old definition of things Adiaphorous
was, that they were things neither commanded, nor forbidden; this definition
seemed to me innocent enough, but of late there are Divines sprung up, that
say, the highest acts of love to God are not commanded, neither I trow are they
forbidden, must we call them then things indifferent? And has the Church power
to determine who shall put forth those Acts, and how often they shall be put
forth? It may be Mr. D. thinks the highest acts of love are commanded, (and so
do I) but he had best not to be too forward in publishing that notion.

P. 99. He falls into an high commendation of the Bohemian Churches, as he does
also in many other Pages of his Book; this is little to the advantage of our
Church; for if that Church be to be imitated, we must have lay Presbyters and
lay Presbyteresses also, Pastors of Parishes must confirm, people must come
under examination every time they receive the Sacrament, we must have no
dancings, and we may have particular Synods without a Bishop, if we communicate
the acts thereof presently to the absent Bishops, and we must have none brought
into Communion but those who are willing, and yet we here can by censures, if
we please, make Papists communicate with us, or else have them excommunicated
and clapped into Prison.

P. 107. He gives the Presbyterians lame Cause a cruth. For he says, God only
has power to bind the Conscience immediately; ask him when men's Consciences
are bound immediately, he tells you, when humane Laws and Constitutions are
thrust upon men, as if they were Divine.

Here will the Presbyterian say, Episcopacy which is but an humane institution,
is thrust on us as Divine, and not only as good and profitable; therefore
unless we will give men jurisdiction over our consciences, we cannot conform.
Mr. D. cannot bring himself off here, but by maintaining that Episcopacy is a
Divine institution, and it would be too great impudence to say that in so
saying he should not contradict every reformed Church almost besides our own.

P. 118. He mentions the sending of a Printed Copy of the Acts of the Synod of
Dort to King James, Prince Charles, Archbishop of Canterbury by Festus Hommius,
this is to rub a sore place, and to tell the World, that we who now suffer our
Divines and Students to bespatter that Synod, did once well approve of its
decisions.

P. 126. He mentions a Letter of Monsieur le Moine, out of which he says he
will set down as much as fits his present design: what does he set down? Why
Page 136. That the English have a natural fierceness, and withal a natural
inclination to superstition. Is this for Mr. Durells design, to blaft the
people of that nation where he has been so highly preferred? Are we indeed
fierce and superstitious? Naturally fierce, and naturally Superstitious? What
kind of superstition is it to which we are so naturally inclined, that so we
may know how to enquire after the cure of so dangerous a disease? It is no
matter if we may believe Mr. Moine to enquire further, let but Episcopal
Authority be established, that will keep us from going beyond our bounds. Very
good, but by whom shall this Episcopal Authority be managed? By English men I
hope, but how then can we be assured that their natural fierceness and
inclination to superstition will not remain in them? We never could observe
that a man's being constituted a Bishop did make him less fierce or
superstitious, any more than less an English man. Perhaps this Learned
Predicant would have all our Divines come and study in France, that they may
lose their disease of superstition, as sometimes they do their Consumptions in
so refined an Air, but that Plot will not take. He has another argument for
Episcopacy, it cannot enter into a rational man's imagination, that a great
Kingdom should come by custom to be content to see its Bishops no more, having
honored and reverenced them for the space of 1400 Years. If this be so, then
may the Bishops be secure, we are so accustomed to love them, that we cannot be
content to be without them, and have been a great Kingdom and honored and
reverenced them 1400 Years. Where may we that live in England find these things
recorded concerning our selves? for the Histories we read usually, do not make
us a great Kingdom, but many petty Kingdoms 1400 Years ago.

If ever any made their ungratefulness notorious, certainly they are the
English opposers of Episcopacy, who will not consider that they owe their
Reformation to the care and zeal of their Bishops, who did so wonderfully well
repurge the Church of England an hundred years ago, and so happily set up the
holy truth again, in its genuine luster. But this is not all they owe unto
them: they owe them also their Christianity. For whether it was brought over
into England by Joseph of Arimathea, or by Simon Cannaeus, or by St. Paul, or
by St. Peter, or by Luke disciple of Philip, or by Phaganus and Perusianus, in
the time of King Lucius, it is constant that it was done by the Ministry of
Bishops, and that they are endebted to their charity, zeal, and abilities, for
the holy Reformation they now enjoy.

Do we indeed owe our late Reformation from Popery unto Bishops? Wickliff the
day star of our reformation, was no Bishop; those that suffered in King Henry
the eighths time were no Bishops: Cranmer when he first set himself to dispute
against the Marriage was no Bishop, when under that King he obtained to be a
Bishop he had his hand in the blood of the Saints. Yet we honor his memory,
for what he did toward Reformation in King Edward the sixth's time, and for
what he had begun to do in his fathers reign, we can easily forgive him his
Petitioning the King for liberty for his sister Mary, and his fierce opposition
to Mr. Hooper; but we should be against the truth, if we do not say, that our
Reformation had been very imperfect, if not strenuously promoted by the
Presbyters and Nonconformists of that age. We must need say, that Cranmer did
recant, and that Bishop Ridly had begun in the Tower to go to Mass, and left
not off, till reclaimed by the Letter of his Nonconforming friend and Pupil Mr.
John Bradford. Those that least loved ceremonies did least love their lives
when they were to lose them for Christ's sake. I take no pleasure in this
comparison, nor had I made it, but that Mr. D. ascribes a strange weakness to
Mr. Hooper, and makes Peter Martyr to scruple a Cap because it was too
Mathematical. As for our first conversion from Paganism, Mr. Moine writes very
strangely about it.

P. 40. Else he would not saint Peter and Paul, and not Joseph of Arimathea,
nor Philip, nor Simon Cannaeus. Nor secondly would he have left out Aristobulus
whom some have affirmed to Preach the Gospel among us, and to be Bishop of
Britan, and to have ended his days in Britan, and instead of him put in Luke a
disciple of Philip: for what considerable Author ever ascribed the first
bringing of Christianity among us unto Luke a disciple of Philip? We have
indeed a story that St. Philip, (but whether the Apostle or Evangelist none can
tell) sent over twelve Preachers into Britan perhaps Mr. Moine has met with
some Autho, who tells him that one of their names was Luke, but the chief of
them being Joseph of Arimathea, as all agree, unto him we must ascribe the work
under God.

But he will scarce be proved to be a Bishop, or to have left any Bishop behind
him. It may be in the reign of King Lucius we shall meet with Bishops. The
story of him runs thus; That about the year 160 he began to have a good liking
of Christianity, being convinced by the Miracles he saw or heard to be wrought
by the Christians of that age. He had with him, Elvanus, and Medvinus two holy
men, and well versed in the Scripture whom he sends to Eleutherius (or as some
would have his name written Eleutherus) Bishop of Rome, desiring that by him he
might be made a Christian, that is Christened or Baptized, for he is conceived
to have believed with the heart before. Why did he send so far to procure
Baptism? had he no Ministers in that Island over a part of which he was an
under King? Perhaps he had, but thought it more Royal to send to Rome for
Ministers; from Rome he had two sent him, the Roman Martyrology calls them
Fugatius, and Donatianus, alias Damianus, others write them Faganus and
Derwianus or Dunianus, others Phaganus and Duvianus, (none I think Phaganus and
Perusianus but M. M. and D.) That either of these was a Bishop there is no
evidence, Mason says plainly, neither of them did ever attain that dignity.
Elvanus some say was made a Bishop, and Medvinus a Doctor or Presbyter.
Hitherto we have but a Bishop, no Bishops, to whose zeal we are endebted for
our Christianity. And I am of opinion that as Elvanus was as much a Doctor as
Medvinus, so Medvinus was as much a Bishop as Elvanus, and that there never was
Bishop properly so called among us till Austin the Monk was sent hither from
Rome. The stories of 28 Bishops made in the room of 28 Flamens, and 3
Archbishops made in the place of 3 Archflamens, seems to me as well as to Mr.
Fuller, Flammes, and Archflammes. I know that at the Council of Ariminum,
Sulpitius makes three Bishops out of Britan, to be present, Anno 259. As also
that Athanasius speaks of British Bishops at the Council of Sardis, Anno 347.
Nor will I deny that Restitutus Bishop of London is reported to have subscribed
to the Council of Arles in France, Anno 314: but if he and others subscribed to
the determinations of that Synod, how comes it to pass that the Churches to
which they belonged did not account themselves concerned to leave off their
old, and almost singular way of observing Easter? surely it must be because
Bishops were not then thought to have so much authority over their Churches as
now they would be thought to have. When Austin the Monk had got entertainment
in the Kingdom of the Mercians, and was made Archbishop of Canterbury, he calls
a Council to be made up of British, and Saxons, and now if ever, we shall find
what the Government Ecclesiastical of the British was, and pity it is we must
fetch our account of it, only, or principally, from Bid, a venerable man
indeed, but a Saxon, and professed enemy to the British.

Two Meetings Austin and the British had: To the first came certain Bishops,
says Bid, lib. 2. c. 2. but let his phrase be observed, Episcopi, sive
Doctores being come, Austin lays to their charge, That they practiced many
things contrary to the unity of the Church. But they continuing to prefer their
own rites to those that Austin would have commended to them, the crafty
Archbishop persuades them to refer the decision to God himself, but so that the
British who were in possession, must first try whether God would work a miracle
in favor of their opinion; not being able to cure a blind man brought before
them. Austin falls on his knees, praying the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that by restoring sight to that one blind man, he would enlighten the eyes of
many; and forthwith the blind was enabled to see. What was the effect? the
British ought to have condemned themselves for consenting to tempt God; but if
we may believe Bid, they acknowledge that Austin declared the way of
righteousness (as if the way of righteousness had consisted in rites and
ceremonies); but that they could not without the consent and leave of theirs,
depart from their old customs. It seems these Bishops did not think that their
consent could conclude their Presbyters and people. Well, another meeting is
agreed on, to which came no fewer than seven Bishops and many very learned men,
especially out of the famous Monastry now called Bangor, but anciently
Bancornaburgh; these, before they came to the place appointed, ask counsel of a
wise and pious Anchoret, whether they had best desert their Traditions upon the
preaching of Austin: If he be a man of God, quoth this Counceller, then follow
him; and if when you come into the room, he rise up to you then take him to be
a servant of Christ. Austin not rising up to them when they came into the place
of conference, they contradict him in every thing he propounded. In three
things at last, says Austin, if you will comply, I will bear with all other
your diversities; 1. You must celebrate Easter as we do. 2. You must administer
Baptism according to the manner of the holy Roman Church. 3. You must preach
with us the Gospel to the English Nation. Of the many other things in which the
Britans differed from the Romish, I conceive this was one, that they left both
Ordination and Excommunication to a Presbyter as well as to a Bishop. And this
Austin would have tolerated. The reasons of this my opinion are many, and
probable, grounded on the Histories of those times; one I shall mention, viz.
that the Scots were mingled with the British when they had these meetings; now
that the Scots did originally commit acts of order and jurisdiction to
Presbyters, is a thing well known; if any doubt concerning it, he may receive
satisfaction from the large Preface of Mr. Seldom to the Histories published by
Mr. Be not twenty years ago. I am the more confident in this my opinion,
because I find that when our British Churches had thoroughly imbibed the Romish
modes and customs, then at a Synod held at Celichyth A. D. 816. it was decreed,
That none of the Scottish Nation should be permitted to use the sacred Ministry
among us.

This was all I had intended about our old British Churches when lo there came
to my hands the History of Mr. Petry quoted by the Latin Apologist; that
Historian goes a little more confidently to work, than I have done; for thus
says he, Century 11. Page 282, 283.

As for England since the Saxons, or Englishes receiving the faith by
Augustine, they had always Bishops; for they had their Pattern from Rome as it
was then: but if we look up to the Ancient Britans in that Land, we shall find
it otherways. I have said in Century 7. Chap. 4. that seven Bishops and one
Archbishop, came from the Britans unto Augustine: and there I followed the words
of Bishop Juel, in the defense of the Apology, Page 14. An. 1520. where he
quoteth Bid, His. lib. 2. cap. 2. and in the same Page he quoteth Galfred,
lib. 8. cap. 8. repeating the same words. What I wrote then upon trust, I have
afterward examined: and I find that Bid speaks not so: for in the Edition in
Fol. Camb. An. 1643. he says, Austin called the Bishops or Doctors of the
nearest Province of the Britans; and in the same Page, he, speaking of the same
persons, says, a blind English Boy was brought unto the Priests of the
Britans, and again they said they would not depart from the Ancient Customs,
without the consent and license, suorum. In the Margin it is said, in the Saxon
Language it is said, without the permission, and license of their Nation. Then
speaking of their second conference, he says, then came seven Bishops as they
said, and more very Learned men, especially of that Famous Monastry, of which
the Governor at that time was Dinooth. In a word, Beda has not one word of an
Archbishop; nor in all his History names he one Bishops-See, nor any Bishops
name: and whom he calls Bishops of Britan, he calls them Doctors, or
Teachers, and Priests, yea he calls them oftener Priests; nor calls he them
simply Bishops, as he calls them simply Priests, but Bishops, as they say, or
Bishops, or Teachers. Yet Beda could distinguish between a Bishop and a Priest
-- What can be concluded from hence, but that no Bishop or Prelate was among
the Britans other than Priests? As for Galfrid, it is no marvail that he wrote
according to the style of his own time, that is the year 1150. The said Author
also quotes Gildas a Britan Presbyter distinguishing Churchmen into Bishops or
Priests, and the Clerks, but naming no other degree of Churchmen, calling the
first sort oftest Sacerdotes simply, but never Episcopos, unless he adds sive
Sacerdotes.

What think I of all this? truly whatever I think, I will not say very much,
for I have not by me either Juels Apology, or the Cambridg Edition of Bid, or
Galfrid, or Gildas. Only thus much I may say, that if Gildas who lived before
Austin was sent to us, and Bid who was born as Thomas Stubbes computes but
Anno 677. can give us no tidings of any Church Officers above Presbyters among
the Britans, it will not signify much that Jeffry Monmouth who lived but in
King Stephens time makes mention of Bishops. To put an end to this matter.

1. He who first converted this Island to Christianity was no Bishop.

2. Those two whom Eleutherius sent (upon the Petition of Lucius) to instruct
us, were no Bishops.

3. Austin himself and his associates when they first attempted the conversion
of the Mercian Saxons were no Bishops but only Monks.

4. Wickliffe and his followers were no Bishops, but being Presbyters were wont
to ordain Presbyters.

5. No one Bishop ever suffered death in England for striving against Popery
till Queen Mary's Reign.

6. Of those Bishops who suffered in Queen Mary's Reign the Nonconformists may
lay claim to as many at least as the Conformists can do, and perhaps there was
not one Martyr in all her Reign that afferted the Jus divinum of Episcopacy.
Now if all these things be true, what means the clamor of ingratitude against
Presbyterians, for not owning those to whom they owe the Nations Reformation
from Popery yea and its Christianity also? But let us view more of Mr. Moines
Letter. Page 139. If the French had kept Bishops, and as many Ceremonies as
would serve to fix the attention of the people without superstition, they
should have seen for certain, far greater progress of Reformation, and the
resistance of a great many persons overcome who are frighted from their
communion by the irregularity of their government and the bareness of their
service. If this were certain I could wish that they had Bishops and Ceremonies
among them to morrow, but we in England have not been able to observe that the
number of Papists is lessened since the restitution of Bishops and Ceremonies,
nay since that some among us have fallen off to Popery who before professed the
Reformed Religion. It is not any form of Government, or external mode of
worship, that must put the Papists to shame, but the exemplary lives of
Ministers and people who separate from them. When men once feel in their hearts
the power of Godliness, they are in no great danger to turn Roman Catholics.
He has another conceit, P. 139, 140. that the not receiving of Episcopal
Government, may hinder the much desired union with the brethren that do follow
the confession of Auspurg. In this I do vehemently dissent from him, for the
yielding to Episcopal government would rather alienate them from us. Tell them
that the ordinations made by Luther are invalid because he was but a mere
Presbyter, or that as many of them as come over hither, must be reordained
before they are capable of any Ecclesiastical preferment, unless they have been
ordained by Bishops properly so called, they will quickly let you see that no
reconciliation is to be hoped for. I dare boldly say the generality of
Presbyterians in England are against no Episcopacy but what the Lutherans
themselves abhor.

There are sundry other things in Mr. Moines Letter for the which I could
expose him, but I forbear, and desire English men not to estimate him by this
Letter, which is so interpolated that he need not own it as his. I undertake at
any time to bring a credible witness, that shall swear, that Mr. Moine has
both by word of mouth, and also by Letter under his hand declared that his mind
about Episcopacy is not truly represented by this Letter, as Printed by Mr.
Durel, many things being left out that would as much have crossed his design,
as those which he has published, do further it.

I come now to the Assembly that Mr. Durell has called to decide our
controversies for us, he will have Joannes Amos Comenius the only surviving
Bohemian Bishop permitted to speak first, and the Presbyterians desire nothing
more, they have some of them translated a great deal of his Book into English,
they refuse not to stand or fall by his Paraenesis directed by name to the
Church of England, when it seemed sollicitous concerning the best form of
Church Government. Had not Mr. D. picked and culled out of the writings of the
Divines whom he quotes just so much as would serve his turn, he had manifestly
betrayed the cause of those who have preferred him, in the judgment of
uninterested men; he has done it consequentially by referring Scholars to the
Books of the Authors themselves. For let a man go to the Letter of Monsieur
Bochart written to Dr. Morley, and there he shall find that Presbytery is
Ancienter than Episcopacy. The Reader also is directed to go to a Letter of
Monsieur Vauquelins to prove that he thought the Book of common prayer very far
from Popery and Superstition, Page 278. but if he go to Page 189. he shall find
he says only that there is not in the Book any formal superstition, which
certainly is not to say it is very far from superstition.

I profess I know not any one Member of that Assembly Mr. D. would have called,
that has not in his writings said more against the Church of England in the
Controversies now on foot than for it. Of Danaeus I have spoken before, and
suppose Mr. D. will be willing enough to have him left out of the Synod; if he
will not, let him at his leisure read what he says of Aerius in his Comment
upon St. Augustine de Haeresibus. I shall enquire into the mind only of two or
three more, and they shall be such as I suppose he will have no quarrel
against, because they are Frenchmen, viz. Capell, Rivet, Casaubon. Capell tells
him his mind plainly, in his Theses de divini verbi necessitate, Parag. 29. he
says, that there were by the Apostles themselves instituted Churches, and in
every one of them before their death, there was constituted by them a College
of Presbyters, by whose Labor, Ministry, and daily Preaching, the Doctrine of
the Gospel might be propagated to the end of the World. In his Theses about the
vocation of Evangelical Ministers, Parag. 11. The ordinary power of Preaching
the Gospel is that which by the Apostles is committed to their successors,
Presbyters being by them appointed in every City, in the Churches founded by
them. In his Theses de diversis Ministrorum Evang. Ordinibus and gradibus, He
vohemently contends that the Ministry was properly instituted by God to procure
the eternal Salvation of men, and that the order of Presbyters alone may
suffice to that end, and that the dignity and superiority of Bishops above
Presbyters is merely of humane constitution, and that there was no cause why
the Bishops and their Patrons should so much on this cause and account, insult
and wax insolent against those whom invidiously they call Puritans, and
Presbyterians. In his Theses of the various Regiment of the Church, Parag. 15.
He severely censures the pompous mode of worship used in our Cathedrals, but
Parag. 24. he says plainly, that the English- men did not do unwisely who
threw the yoke of Episcopacy off their necks.

Ay, but in his Theses about Liturgies he retracts what he had written about
abolishing Hierarchical Government. Ans. No man can see such retractation but
Mr. D. himself, who sees by extramission and not by intramission, as we may
observe, Page 193, 194. Had Capell intended any retractation he would have used
plain words importing a revocation, or retractation of what he had before
written, but he uses no words but what may well consist with what he had
before said. When the same Capell comes to deliver his judgment about
festivals, he even laughs at the reason or argument used by our great Hooker,
to prove them by. But go we from Capell to Dr. Andrew Rivet, whose engagements
and obligations to our Bishops were perhaps greater, for that he was civilly
treated by some of them, as he does somewhere acknowledge; as also that at
Oxford he had the Honorary degree of Doctor conferred on him. His judgment
about Episcopacy we have seen before; about other things let him now have leave
to speak. First, it is like enough that at the University be might observe that
form of Oath, Ita me Deus adjuvet, and sancta Dei Evangelia, whether that Oath
stuck in his stomach or no, I cannot tell, but in his explication of the
Decalogue, he puts this question, What is to be thought of that custom which
obtains in some Churches that have in other things thrown off the Popish
superstitions, that he that swears should touch the Holy Bibles, or the
Gospels, or some part thereof. And answers, if the words be conceived as
among the Papists, so God help me and these Holy Gospels, I see not how the
relics of superstition can be excused. In the same explication of the
Decalogue putting the question concerning the Saints days observed here in
England, he says he cannot approve the judgment of those who accuse our Church
of Idolatry on that account, but wishes withal the custom were amended,
because of the peril of Idolatry. Just as our Presbyterians are accustomed to
say. In his Comment on Exodus cap. 28. He handles a question about the special
and peculiar vestments of Ministers, and has these words. Whereas in England
Ministers put on linen vestments, it were not to be endured, if they did this
in imitation of the Jews, or for any mystical signification. But how if they do
it only for some distinction, yet still we must be afraid of Gideons Ephod.

Of the novelty of Organical Music, he speaks expressly and largely, especially
in his Preface to his comment on Hosea, and in his Catholicus Orthodoxus
against Baily. Where also he may be seen decrying the observation of Lent if it
pretend to be Apostolical. He is indeed a most professed Champion of the
Presbyterian cause in almost every thing under debate.

As for Isaac Casaubon he was indeed a very Learned Critic, and for ought I
know a person truly pious. Mr. D. accounts him his own, and therefore in the
very title Page of his Vindiciae brings in his testimony to the Church of
England, out of an Epistle written to Claudius Salmasius, Quod sime conjectura
non fallit, totius Reformatoinis pars integerrima est in Anglia, ubi cum studio
veritatis viget studium antiquitatis.

These words are indeed found in an Epistle written raptim hastily, by Casaubon
to Salmasius much about that time when some of our Bishops had declared their
approbation of some of Casaubons Theological Essaies, which sundry Divines both
from Holland and France had disliked. In this good mood Casaubon commends the
English for the study of Antiquity, but at other times he grievously complains
to Thuanus and Heinsius that we encourage no study but Theology. In the 604
Epis. he asks what good could come of instructing his two sons in learning.
Medicina hic sane non viget. Jurisprudentia illa vetus and vera plane jacet,
vix de nomine paucis nota. Epistle 799. he intimates his design to send his son
Merick to Heinsius, because he desired to have him well exercised in Greek,
Latin, Hebrew, and could not hope that should be done in England. Is not the
study of Antiquity like to be carried on well where a young man cannot he
trained up to any eminent skill in Hebrew, Greek or Latin?

I suppose we had not in this last Epistle been so extremely undervalued, had
not the learned man been exasperated by Mr. Mountague, whose endeavors against
Baronius, he judged very injurious to his own credit and reputation, as may be
seen Epistle 717, 718. This may suffice to make us not to be proud of Casaubons
commendation; if I thought it not sufficient, I could go near to prove, that
Casaubon judged men more or less studious of antiquity, according as they were
more or less zealous against the Arminians.

But I let pass his synodical determinations, and come to his Sermon where I
find him, Page 16. giving leave to Rome to rank our Reformers among the
Contentious, if it can be found that either they have laid aside, or taken up
any one thing whereof it may be said that the Holy Apostles, or Apostolic
Churches had or had not such a Custom: he adds indeed, Rome was never able to
do it, nor never shall. But she knows well enough that she can, for she knows,
that we have taken up Surplices which were not used by the Holy Apostles or any
Apostolic Churches, and we give Baronies to our Bishops which neither the
Apostles nor any Apostolic Churches did, and we place our Baptisteries in our
Temples, which was done neither by Apostles nor Apostolical Churches. On the
other side we have left off Unction, and Love Feasts, and the Holy Kiss, all
which were used by the Apostles, and Apostolical Churches. So that Rome by Mr.
D's carelessly worded proposition has leave to reckon our Reformers among
contentious ones.

P. 17. He uses a plain Turkish Argument to confirm and uphold the cause of
the Church, for he says, that the miraculous manner whereby it has pleased
God to raise her up ought to be to all an evident proof that she is her
beloveds, and her beloved is hers, and an argument that her Reformation is
certainly the work of God, and his Counsel which shall stand. Just thus the
Papists were wont to prate when Popery was restored by Q. Mary, and just thus
also did the Fanatics argue when they were permitted by God to conquer three
flourishing Kingdoms, and to put all the Nations round about into a pannick
fear. Let us not be high minded, but rejoice in trembling. God has pleaded
with us by his strange judgments since Episcopacy was re-established among us,
we have had a sharp war, a dreadful fire, a sweeping Pestilence; I do not say
because Episcopacy is restored, but because sin does abound, and profaneness
runs like a river and mighty flowing stream; if we do not soundly humble our
selves, God may soon take from us, his worship, our Ministers, and all that
Reformation in the which we glory, and yet his Counsel will stand nevertheless.

Page 22. He perfectly affronteth the express words of our Church in the
Liturgy, for there it is said, that the commination of sinners is used until
the Primitive discipline of putting persons convicted of notorious sins to
penance at the beginning of Lent, and only until that discipline can be
restored which is much to be wished. But Mr. D. says, there can be nothing
more powerful to touch sinners to the quick, and to draw them from their evil
courses, than the Commination to which the whole Congregation is bound to say
Amen, after every particular denunciation of Gods curse, upon all sorts of
sinners who persist in their sins. And indeed it is meet he should say so, for
he had before given Rome leave to call us Contentious, if we had left off any
custom used in the Apostolic Churches, and we here do confess, that we have
left off one that was very godly; indeed we say, it is to be wished it were
restored, but who hinders the restoring of it but our selves? Have other
Churches power to enjoin Penance, and have we none? Or will other people submit
to that discipline and not ours? Are not fornicators put to open penance, and
why may not other sinners be so punished too? But not to multiply
interrogatories, the Church holds penance would be more powerful than the form
of commination she uses; Mr. D. says, nothing can be more powerful than the
commination; he will sure impose some penance on himself for this boldness,
and watch his Pen better for the time to come. Perhaps he will say his meaning
was honest, and wholesome, viz. that the form of Commination is very powerful
to touch sinners to the quick, if so, he may do well to consider, 1. Whether it
be conducible to tie Ministers never to use it but on Ashwednesdays unless they
have particular order from their Ordinaries, for why should so powerful a
preservative against sin be used but once a year, especially seeing the use of
it but once a year is found insufficient to reclaim profaneness cum primis
saluturis est caeremonia, sed non video cur debeat exhiberi solum uno die, and
non saepius, said the Great Bucer when he saw it restrained by the first Book
of K. Edward to one day, thereupon it was altered in following Liturgies to
diverse times in the year. Grindals Articles enjoined it to be used on some
Sunday near the three great feasts of the Church, Easter, Pentecost, Christmas,
Ashwednesday not excluded, but now no day is allowed but Ashwednesday, unless
there come an order from the Ordinary, which I have not heard that any Ordinary
has sent since the return of his Majesty. 2. What means that mincing of the
commination, Deuteronomy. 27.16. the Text says, Cursed is he that sets light by
Father and Mother, we say Cursed is he that curses Father and Mother, what if
any should from this take occasion to think that there is no great danger in
setting light by Father and Mother, provided they do not rise so high in their
impiety as to curse them, (an iniquity that I hope few are guilty of) and what
means that addition to the curse of the man that makes any carved or molten
image, viz. to worship it. In the Text there is no such addition, and the
Church did afterward in the last commination curse the worshippers of images
though now it be changed into Idolaters. The very making of some images, viz.
of God, the Trinity, etc. does entitle to a curse whether they be worshipped or
no, and what hurt were it if people were made to know so much. 3. Why have we
no curse against profane swearing so common among us, nor any against
Rebellion? The Scripture affords plenty of such curses.

But as the Comminations is now ordered, I can say Amen to it, taking Amen not
only as it signifies, so it is, but as it usually signifies so be it, so run
the words in the Bible, Deuteronomy. 27. so also, Jer. 17.5. And he is unworthy to be
continued a Church member, who is like to curse himself by any such
imprecation, nor shall any man that so prays sin against another that is
guilty of those sins, for when we say Cursed is such a sinner, our meaning is
if he continue, and whilst he continues such, and with that restriction we
may say cursed be, as I doubt not but the Israelites did as often as they used
this ceremony appointed by God, so thought the Septuagint; else they would not
have Translated (...).

The Lords-prayer few scruple to say, yet he that uses that form does
virtually curse himself if he have any malice reigning in his heart.

P. 23. He says we are appointed to be confirmed, to receive the blessing from
our Pastor (as if none were our Pastor but a Bishop) and he gives it with the
Imposition of hands, and with prayers, without Chrisme, or any such
superstitious or superfluous Ceremony. What words are these? they do indeed
directly only reflect on the ancient Church and our first Reformers, and the
compilers of the first Liturgy of Edward the sixth, by which chrism was
appointed at Baptism, though not that I find in Confirmation, by the Ancients I
am sure it was used in Confirmation; Mr. D. dare adventure to call it
superstitious and superfluous. But his words will by just consequence reach the
cross in Baptism, used also in confirmation by the first Reformers, for why
should chrisme be accounted a superstitious and superfluous Ceremony, rather
than the cross, the one is as Ancient as the other, and as innocent as the
other, both were equally abused in Popery, of the two the Cross may seem more
superfluous, for in Baptism, we have an outward rite signifying the same thing
that the Cross is pretended to signify; but to signify our unction by the
Holy Ghost, which was in the first Liturgy prayed for, and ought still to be
prayed for, we have no outward rite at all; Nor do I fee why unction may not as
well be used to certify confirmed persons of the unction from the Holy one, as
imposition of hands, to certify them of Gods gracious favor and goodness
toward them, which is made the end, in the Office of Confirmation.

P. 26. If the several repetitions of the Lords-prayer, which are to be found
in our Liturgy, were made immediately one after another, or within a short
time, etc. I say upon such an account we might justly be censured for using
vain repetitions. This wounds the Liturgy sorely if it do not strike it to the
very heart, for not to say that it does appoint several Lords-prayers to be
said within a short space, (which may truly be said) it manifestly appoints
repetitions of gloria Patri within a short space, and this will bring us within
the guilt of vain repetitions, unless a reason can be given why gloria Patri
may be repeated within a short space, and Pater noster may not, which reason
Mr. D. will give ad Graecas Calendas.

Thus have I given you an account of Mr. D's English Book under four heads, and
now you will expect to have my judgment as touching his Latin Book called
vindiciae sacrae Ecclesiae Anglicanae. I say first that I know not what he
means by his Ecclesia Anglicana, does he mean the company of true believers or
good Christians (really or reputatively so) in England? if he do, quis
Lacedaemoniorum vituperat? why does he make a vindication of that Church which
none went about to accuse? does he mean by it the Bishops of the several
Diocesses in this Kingdom of England, it is like he cannot mean them, for they
call themselves the Sons of the Church, and we look on the Church as that to
which the last complaint must be made, for so our Savior directs, if thy
Brother offend first tell him, then take with thee two or three, then tell the
Church, now if any one should injure a Bishop (as for my part I judge Mr. D.
has grievously injured every one of them by dedicating such a Volume of
raileries to them) the Bishop must first tell him by himself, and then take
with him two or three, and if he regard not them, then he must tell the Church,
that is himself if a Bishop be the Church. It Is like by the Church he means the
Church representative, or Convocation, now there is a Canon, that denounces an
heavy penalty against those, who deny the Convocation to be the Church of
England by representation, and I am fully resolved not to come within the reach
of that Canon, I love not excommengement. But if Mr. D. will take up the
patronage of this Church Representative, his best way had been first to prove
that it is the Church Representative, or else the Presbyterians will say that
his whole discourse is de non-ente.

Mr. Henry Jeanes had before he knew how things went in the world set forth a
treatise (which it was my hap to read over) asserting the obligation that lay
upon English Divines, to comply with the Church: but in his retractations and
repentings, thus he recalls himself, I wonder upon what account I or any man
else could think the Convocation to be the Church of England; if in any sense
it can be called the Church of England, it was because it represented the
Ministry of England, and that it did not, because the far major part of it were
Cathedral-men, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, and such as were chosen by the
respective Chapters of each Cathedral: it might then be a Representation of the
Cathedral Ministers, but not of the Ministry of England, and that I make good
by two Parallels. The first shall be betwixt our Convocation, and the Council
of Trent: many sober and moderate Papists accused this to be a packed Assembly,
a Representation of, not the Catholic Church, but the Court of Rome, because
the greatest part of it were of the Popes Faction, and depended wholly upon
him: So the major part of our Convocations were of the Bishops Faction, and
minded chiefly the interest of Cathedrals: and therefore were not a
Representative of all the Ministers in England. I shall exemplify this by
instancing in the Diocese of Bathe and Wells, wherein I lived: In this there
were Members of the lower house of Convocation, one Dean, three Archdeacons,
and one chosen by the Chapter of Wells: and to balance these, there were but
two Clarks chosen by the Ministry of the whole Diocese: Now what impartial man
but will determine that these seven could be no due representation of the
Ministers of the Diocese of Bathe and Wells, as long as five of them were
Members of the Cathedral, in whose Election the Ministers of the Diocese had no
hand at all? A second parallel shall be betwixt our Convocation and a civil
Assembly, wherein we will suppose that the Prince chooses three hundred, who
are his Courtiers, or else such as have their dependence, either wholly, or in
great part upon him, and the Nation choose only a hundred: you may call this
Assembly a Parliament, or what you will; but surely no rational man can think
it to be a representation of the Nation, and as irrational, were it to call the
Convocation a representation of the Ministers of England, seeing those chosen
by the Ministers were an inconsiderable part of the Convocation. Mr. D.
belongs to a Cathedral, nay as report goes to several Cathedrals, and
therefore he had done but a piece of gratitude, to vindicate the Church from
the Arguments of a backslider from Conformity. Well, let him mean what he will
by his Holy Church of England, we are told that he himself is Presbyter of this
Holy Church of England, and that is a strange and very unusual phrase. Dr.
Hammond, who deserved well of the Hierarchy, in his Title page of his
Dissertations, calls himself, Presbyterum Anglicanum, and yet he was born in
England, and ordained in England, and by an English Bishop, John Durell was
born in Jersey, ordained in France, and by a Scottish Bishop, and yet he calls
himself Ecclesiae Anglicanae Presbyterum. I doubt if things were thoroughly
searched into, he would appear to be no English Presbyter, for we admit no
Presbyters, but those who are canonically ordained, i. e. by a Bishop; you will
say Mr. D. was ordained by a Bishop, and he tells you the name of the Bishop,
and his title: I know he does, but I ask who made him a Bishop and a Presbyter?
I much fear we shall find him one that was never ordained Presbyter but by
Presbyters, or by those who had been themselves created Presbyters by mere
Presbyters, though consecrated in England by Bishops; and if so, then vitium
primae concoctionis, non corrigitur in secunda aut tertia. Let him well
consider this, and if occasion be, get himself re-ordained by some Bishop of
English Blood and Ordination, else any one who envies him his preferments may
chance to pick a hole in his coat. If he know not the Pedigree of the Scottish
Bishops, it is in brief thus. In the year 1610, King James sent for Mr. John
Spotswood, Mr. Gawen Hamilton, Mr. Andrew Lamb into England, that an Episcopal
Character might be imprinted on them; to that end he issued out a Commission
under the great Seal of England, to the Bishops of London, Ely, Wells, and
Rochester, requiring them to proceed to the Consecration of three Scotch-men
designed to be Bishops, which Consecration they did perform accordingly, October.
2^, 1610. But Bishop Andrews moved a scruple how the persons to be consecrated,
were capable of Episcopal Consecration, seeing none of them had been formerly
ordained Priests. Dr. Heylin tells us Hist. of Pres. p. 387. The scruple was
removed by Archbishop Bancrost, alleging, that there was no such necessity of
receiving Priesthood, but that Episcopal Consecrations might be given without
it; but he neither tells us the Objection nor Answer aright: the Objection was,
That the three Scots could not be consecrated Bishops, because they had never
been made Presbyters, but by Presbyters; to which Bancroft replied, That the
Ordination of Presbyters by Presbyters was valid. But our present Bishops are
not of the same mind, and therefore before they would consecrate Mr. James
Sharp, they first ordained him Deacon, then Priest, and this they did not out
of a pike or spleen against the man, but from judgment, conceiving he would
not ordain others legitime, unless he were so ordained; such as are by him
ordained are capable regularly of preferment among us, but so are not any of
the former brood of men, that were ordained by Scotch Bishops. This discourse
is only designed to keep Mr. D. from despising the Presbyterians too much, to
which he would be tempted if he should conceive himself to stand on a basis as
firm as some of his fellow Prebends. I advise him also not to be too forward to
publish to the world how he has let the Ministers of foreign Churches, Preach
in his Church at the Savoy, for doubtless it is against the Act of Uniformity
to let them Preach, though but occasionally in that Church, unless they have
been ordained by some Bishops, because that Church at the Savoy has submitted
to the Bishop of London as Pastor, and so has not the immunities, that other
French Churches may claim, and do claim.

As to the Book it self, common fame spreads abroad, that an Answer in Latin is
preparing for it. We must expect and see what kind of thing it will be; for we
may well conceive it will discover Mr. D. to be John Lack-truth, John
Lack-modesty. Certain I am, there be Schoolboys in England, that can discover
him to be no familiar of Priscian; we laymen can manifest that he had no
regard to truth; and for modesty, he does all-along bid defiance to it. The
Reverend Gisbert Voet, Professor of Vtrecht, of eminent learning and piety, the
only surviving member of the Synod of Dort, is with him but a pitiful fellow.
He dares venture to censure Thomas Gataker, than whom England scarce ever had
either a more exact Critic, or accomplished Divine. Nay, that you may see his
pride to the full, he was not ashamed to tell an Honorable person of this
Nation, that one reason which moved him to fall upon Mr. Baxter was, because
the Latin Apologist for the Nonconformists, had represented him as no equal
match for Mr. Baxter. Could you think it possible that Mr. D. should conceit
himself meet to cope with such an Antagonist, whom the Reformed Divines (who
can understand the language in which his books are written) admire; to whom
Amyrald not long since sent a Letter on purpose to let him know that he had
never spoken contemptibly of him. Mr. Gaches is sufficiently depredicated by
Mr. D. as an Eloquent Preacher, and as one of the best men living His Letter to
Mr. B. is printed; by that let the world make estimation of him: or if Mr.
Gaches testimonial can be discredited, then let the Saints everlasting rest,
the Treatise against Anabaptism, and whatever else he has written, be read and
meditated upon seriously, there will scarce be found a Divine in whom there was
a more happy conjunction of eloquence and judgment, of holiness and
peaceableness. Not to detain you long, I shall make a few general animadversion
on the Book, and so put an end to these papers which are grown too big.

1. The Author of the Vindiciae egregiously violates the Act of Indemnity and
Oblivion, that buried all former miscarriages, he rakes them all out of the
grave, as if he had no belief of the general judgment. If any Presbyterians
made any application to such as in the late times took upon them supreme
authority, he scores that up as an argument against Presbytery. Could any
Presbyterian be so vile as to imitate him, how easily might he tell him of a
Primate of England, and Metropolitan, who took up arms in the cause of the two
Houses, and had a great sum voted him for his good service: Of a Conformist who
was the prime Author of Jus Divinum regiminis Ecclesiastici: Of an Episcopal
Divine now enjoying a good Living, who did write Politica Sacra and Civilia: Of
sundry dignified men who came into sequestered places, and versified in behalf
of the Protector. The late Wars began when I was a Child, and were finished
before I was a man; but I have made the best enquiry that I could, and do find
that sundry of the most eminent Nonconformists were always unsatisfied about the
Parliaments War, and did not stick as occasion was offered to declare their
dissatisfaction. I have found also, that the Divines most busy to bring about
the late unhappy and deplorable changes, were such as had been of the most
rigid Sect of the Conformists; Mr. Edwards in his Gangraena has named some of
them: I must not without leave from those who sit at the Stern, do so; but I
profess I know not that Theologue who did either speak or write for putting of
the King to death, that had not been a Conformist before the Wars. The men now
in place who lost any thing for refusing the Engagement, will be found to be
very few; some will be sound to come into the places of those who were turned
out for not engaging. Dr. Heylin himself (as hot as he is against those who go
by the name of Presbyterians) did Anno 1657. put forth his Ecclesia vindicata,
much of such a strain as Mr. Durell's Vindiciae; in the general Preface to that
Book, he addresseth himself to those who were then in power, and pleads for the
men of his persuasion, by this argument, That they lived so peaceably and
inoffensively in their several stations, as that they could not be reproached
with any disaffection to the then present Government in word or deed. Had some
eminent man called a Presbyterian, said so much for those of his persuasion,
what would Mr. D. have made of it? But the Reformed Religion may say, All these
things are against me. Mr. D. makes the Principles of the English Presbyterians
to lead to Rebellion. Dr. Owen long since equalized the Puritans beyond the
seas, with the Jesuits, in point of disloyalty. Dr. Heylin in his History of
Presbyterians, has driven the same nail further and deeper; nothing is wanting
but some hotheaded fellow among the Protestants to lay Treason at the door of
the Lutherans, and then the cry of the Romanists will be fulfilled. But still
the English Protestant will be white as snow; in vain is it so to think. The
Parliament of England has determined the matter of the Militia, and declared
it unlawful on any account whatsoever to take up Arms against the King. Men
will acquiesce in this Declaration, if not for Conscience Sake, yet at least
for fear. I know no Book put out since his Majesty's return, that has asserted
the lawfulness of subjects rising against their Sovereign, but one set forth as
Mr. Rich. Hookers, and dedicated with the rest of his Works by Bishop Gauden to
the King himself. Mr. Isaac Walton would have us think the Book is not his; and
I wish he had brought better arguments to bring us to that persuasion. But I am
sure that Bishop Bilson has left things upon record which may vye with any
thing quoted out of Calvin or Beza, by Dr. Heylin.

2. This Vindex when he meets in the Apologist with that he dares not justify,
presently puts it into his Catalogue of Legends, yet brings no probable
arguments to prove it a Legend. The Apologist, whoever he was, seems to have
written his Book under much bodily weakness, and has pleaded for his brethren
in Nonconformity rather honestly than fully; but as for the things that Mr. D.
calls sables, I my self know many, if not all of them, to be true, and dare
undertake to produce those who will attest them upon oath; yet if I could meet
with the Apologist handsomely, I would severely rebuke him for putting some of
them into print, for all truths are not to be published at all times. I
remember I once heard him that is the reputed Author of the Apology, say in a
Sermon, A man can scarce do a worse office to the Church, than to render
Pastors despicable in the eyes of those whom they are to govern.

3. This Vindex when he falls into the mention of any Controversy that should
be debated by him, takes his heels, and runs away from it, and drops some
question about the which there was never any dispute. Twenty and ten instances
might be given of this kind; I only take notice of one; he has a Chapter utris
magis faverit Calvinus, etc. Whether Calvin most favored the Schismatical
Presbyterians, or Prelates? If this be to answer the Apologist, then let some
one that replies, put a question, Whether Calvin most favored Arminian
Prelates, or Presbyterians? What has Schism to do in the Controversy about
Nonconformity? The greater part of Nonconformists cannot be guilty of Schism,
except they were guilty of it in their mothers womb, or when they sucked, or
whilst they were Schoolboys: for thus the case stood with them; they were by
their Parents sent to the University when Bishops were inter non-entia, or
inter non apparentia. By study they came to acquire those gifts that were
supposed to qualify them for the Ministry; to the work of the Ministry they
were separated by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery; yet many of
them never declared dislike of Episcopacy, nor opened their mouths against
Ceremonies; never took the Covenant nor Engagement; were presented to vacant
Livings by the true and undoubted Patrons: By Gods blessing they added to the
Church such as should be saved. His Majesty's return they defired so as none
more; yet they must not be suffered to continue in an Ecclesiastical Benefice,
unless they will submit to a thing scarce ever heard of, Reordination. It may
be their mistake that they do not judge Ordination by Presbyters to be a
nullity; but what is this to Schism?

Obj. I may expect you will thus accost me: If Mr. D. be so easily mastered,
why do you not pay a debt of love you owe? why do you not write in Latin as
once Mr. Nichols did in English, A Plea for the Innocent?

Resp. Verily for this reason, because I love not to have to do with those, who
when they are put to silence, know not how to be ashamed; such a one this
Monsieur is; for not long ago he met with a Noble Gentleman of this Nation, who
hearing him say, That all the Divines beyond seas condemned the English
Nonconformists, told him plainly, That he knew it was not so; and that some in
France looked on him as an apostate for complying so far as he had done; and
when he replied, These are only some unwise hotheaded men; the honorable
person rejoined, Nay, they are worthy and well tempered Ministers. Yet did not
Mr. D. change the copy of his countenance. Is it possible then that I should
bring him to repentance? In a word, if you account Mr. D. an Author any way
considerable, you have near you our old friend S. E. let him cull out of the
Vindiciae what he esteems most strong, that do you send to me, if I do not by
the first return of the Carrier send you a satisfactory answer (provided it be
directed not against persons, but the Cause) then account me a very
vainglorious animal. In the mean time listen not to those who are given to
vain jangling, and false-witness bearing, but put on charity the bond of
perfection, so shall an abundant entrance be administered unto you into that
Kingdom, where there are no perverse disputers; to that Kingdom that we may be
both brought, is the sincere prayer of,

SIR, Your humble servant, W. B.

LOng time after I had written the Appendix against Dr. Heylin, I was informed,
that something else was come abroad in Latin, in the which the Nonconformists
were concerned. I could not think any thing was said in it, that had not been
said before, and therefore I had once some thoughts, never so much as to look
into it, but being told that the Author of it was Mr. Matthew Scrivener,
reputed at Cambridge (while he there resided) a close Student, and great
Scholar; I resolved, to cast my eye upon some Pages of it, that so, if it
seemed written with any candor and judgment, I might either give an answer to
it, or tell such Nonconforming friends, as I was acquainted with, that I found
it unanswerable. But looking into it, at the Stationers shop, I soon found it
to be made up of little besides scurrility and calumny. Monsieur Daillees Book
of the Right use of the Fathers, which I thought no Protestant had looked on
without admiration, nor Papist without terror, this English Presbyter
undertakes to answer, endeavors first of all to make it appear, that the Book
deserved not the Elogiums that some of great name and esteem among us had
bestowed upon it, and that Mr. Daillee was but a Cham, taking delight to lay
open the nakedness of the Fathers. Then proceeds to give him a general and
particular answer. I confess I was moved not a little, to see a writer that had
deserved so well of the Reformed Religion, so unworthily dealt with, by one
pretending to be a Protestant. For what one thing has Mr. J. D. said more or
less about the Fathers, than what had been said many years before by some of
our most eminent Divines in England? It must be acknowledged, that he has
handled the point more copioufly, than any who went before him; and the heads
of his discourse are exemplified with a most admirable collection of
particulars; but that he has brought the Fathers any one peg lower than they
had been brought by Juel, Humfred, Whitaker, Rainolds, Dr. George Abbot, Down,
etc. will never be proved. Bishop Cosins has put together all the reasons that
were scattered and dispersed in other men's writings, to prove the
Non-canonicalness of the Apocryphal Books; now it would be no wonder if a
Protestant in some writing should obiter take notice, that the Bishop in some
particular had mistook himself; but he that should professedly undertake to
answer him, would scarce be accounted other than a Papist. e. c. The Bishop
says, p. 18. All the Canonical Books of the Old Testament were originally
written in Hebrew ( except etc.) but these other books (he means those
canonized at Trent) were all confessedly first written in the Greek tongue,
etc.) I may doubt whether all the controverted books were first written in the
Greek tongue, I may confidently affirm this is not confessed concerning all the
controverted books (for who knows not that Ecclesiasticus is generally affirmed
to be written first in Hebrew, to say nothing of other books) and yet not be
thought spightful nor Popish; but if I should publish a whole book against the
Bishop, laboring to lessen his reputation and esteem, to weaken the
authorities by him produced, would not any man say, that either I was a Papist,
or that I cared not how much I gratified the Papist, so I could but show my
teeth against Bishop Cosins? yet just such a game it is that Mr. Scrivener
plays.

Obj. But if what he has said against Daillee be truth, if his answers to him
be rational, is it not meet he should be honored? Will it not be for our
credit and reputation, to let the Papists know, that we will not spare our own,
how renowned soever, where they exceed the bounds of modesty and sobriety?

Ans. If any one through a zeal (without knowledge) against Popery, shall say
those things against the Fathers that may discourage those who have leisure and
money from buying and reading of them; or so weaken their authority, as to
prejudice the interest of Christianity; he does deserve praise and commendation
who shall endeavor to bring the Fathers to their due esteem. But neither has
Mr. Daillee wronged the Fathers, nor Mr. Scrivener righted them: but because
Mr. Scrivener heard a Presbyterian in a Sermon put off an objection taken from
the authority of the Fathers by referring his hearers to Mr. Daillee, therefore
he resolves to encounter Mr. Daillee. And as spleen seems to be the chief thing
that put him on this undertaking, so in the managing of it he has discovered
more of petulant spleen, than of judgment. This censure I had some purpose to
make good, but that 1. I am assured that Daillee is like in a short time to be
vindicated by some of his own. 2. I am now also fallen into a place where I can
have no books but what my own Library affords; and though I have most of the
ancient Fathers of some Edition, yet in a matter of this nature, I shall
neither be able to satisfy my self nor others, unless I had opportunity to
consult all the Editions of them, or at least the most renowned. For it often
happens, that when a man thinks he has the Fathers on his side, and has
brought their testimonies too plain to be eluded for his opinion, he reapeth no
benefit thereby, because those who differ from him, deny the copies according
to which he proceeds, to be such as are to be relied on. It was my hap not
long since to read Dr. Waltons Prolegomena, that I might see what he could say
for the comparative novelty of the Hebrew Letters that we at present use; among
other arguments I found him to make use of the authority of Eusebius his
Chronicle ad annum mundi 4740. the words quoted out of him are these, Fuit
Esdras eruditissimus legis divinae, and clarus omnium Judaeorum magister, qui
de captivitate regressi suerunt in Judaeam: affirmaturque divinas Scripturas
memoriter condidisse, and ut Samari. tanis non miscerentur literas Judaicas
commutasse. What is his collection hence? why this, Hic videmus Eusebium non
tantum hanc literarum mutationem diserte asserere, sed etiam ejus causam
adferre; ut sc. Judaeicum Samaritanis non miscerentur. I could see no such
disert or manifest assertion of the change of the Letters in this testimony of
Eusebius. He that only says affirmatur, cannot be concluded so much as to
deliver his own opinion. Many Historians and Chronographers use affirmatur, or
some word of like import in such matters as they themselves do not believe, and
I hope for the credit of Eusebius that he did not think Esdram divinas
scripturas memoriter condidisse; and if so, it is not like that he believed the
other part of the affirmation neither. But Mr. Baily, a learned and industrious
Scotch-man, in his lately published Historical and Chronological Work, lib. 1.
p. 197. tells me, That he had read over and over Eusebius his Chronicle, as
well the Greek as the Latin Copy set forth by Scaliger, with great care out of
the best Manuscripts, and could not find one word in them concerning this
change of Letters by Esdras; and yet if Scaliger had in any Copy of good repute
found any thing that might have confirmed this change of Letters, he would no
doubt have inserted it, because he does with so much passion take upon him to
defend that change. Now if this be true, as I doubt it is, that Dr. Walton in
his prologue to so renowned a Work as the Polyglotts, followed a Translation of
Eusebius that was corrupted, I may well be affrighted from examining
testimonies of Fathers, till I be where I may be assured that the testimonies I
am to examine are not counterfeited. In the mean time I shall lay down some few
things concerning the Fathers.

1. Many times the usefulness and almost absolute necessity of being acquainted
with the Oriental Languages and the Writings of the Fathers, is most cried up
by those who themselves are but strangers to them. It is not many years since a
son of the Church at a Lecture in the Country, Preached up the necessity of
the knowledge of the Original Hebrew, affirming that they were not worthy the
name of Divines who did not well understand it; but this pert young man being
at Dinner taken to task about his own skill in Hebrew, it was found that he
could not so much as read Hebrew; yet he was outdone by the bold Jesuit, who
(as Melchior Adam relates the story in his life, page 845.) in a Dispute with
Graserus about the Hebrew Text of the Bibles, made boast of his skill in
Hebrew; but this Father of the society having an Hebrew Bible without points
put into his hands, knew not which was the top, which was the bottom of the
Pages, which occasioned Graserus his Scholar to laugh at his daring ignorance;
so that the Nobleman who brought this Father, withdrew, and wished him, so
ignorant, to be gone. They who have read the reasons of Edmund Campian, cannot
but know how much he boasted of the Fathers, as if they had been all his own
from first to last, even as much as Gregory the 13th: on this account he
earnestly desired to be admitted to dispute with our Divines. Quo quo se
moverit adversarius, feret incommodum: Patres admiserit captus est; Excluserit,
nullus est. But when this vainglorious creature came to be disputed with, it
was found that he could not understand a Greek Father, and that it might well
be questioned whether he could so much as read Greek. Dr. Fulk plainly tells
him in the third days conference, that it was not above a dozen years since he
heard him at Oxford ask a Stationer for Irenaeus's Epistles. In the fourth days
conference, when Mr. Clark brought Tertullians Book against Hermogenes to prove
the Scriptures sufficiency, he knew of no such book; and yet when he was
convinced that there was such a book, then he could answer, and pretended to
know upon what account Tertullian argued against Hermogenes? And he pretended
in the same days conference, that he knew the meaning of St. Basil, and yet
would not, or could not read the place in Greek, though it were easy, and the
sentence short, and though he knew not where to find it in the Latin book. So
it seemed not improbable to some that Campian made not that confident Pamphlet,
but only turned it into good Latin. Thompson also in his Treatise de Amissione
and Intercisione justificationis, and gratiae, musters up the testimonies of
many Fathers; but when his book was only manuscript, one who knew him, asked
him this question, Vnde tot Patrum testimonia usurparet, qui patres vix quidem
attigisset? I could show the like ignorance and confidence in another Arminian,
who troubled Mr. Robert Baily of Scotland, with testimonies of Fathers against
Predestination, but such as were all taken out of Vossius, and concluded them
with an Item, that Beza and Calvin acknowledged the Fathers to be against
themselves, quoting as Vossius through an oversight had done, Beza on Romans
9.39. when as that Chapter has but 33 Verses in it. And Calvin's third book of
Institutions 33 Chapter, when there be but 25 Chapters in that whole book. I
could also discover a great many now living who carry it in their Sermons and
Discourses, as if they followed the ancient Fathers, when indeed they follow
none but Hugh Groot. But would I by all this insinuate, that Mr. Scrivener is
not well versed in the Fathers, for whom he Apologizeth? I answer, I would
insinuate no more, but that it is possible that all his pretended zeal for the
Fathers may be without any great knowledge of them. What the course of his
Studies has been, I know not, his friends were wont to think, that his genius
led him rather to Schoolmen, than Fathers (if it did so, he is not the worse
to be liked; for of the two, a Minister who has the cure of souls, may better
want Patristical than Scholastical Theology); I suppose it would a little
discompose his gravity to be catechized any whit strictly concerning the age,
style and design of some of the Fathers whom he undertakes to defend; if in
this I be mistaken, the matter is not great, for I design it only to keep our
Priests from boasting of a false gift.

2. I never yet in all my life met with any person of any persuasion
whatsoever, that would recede from any opinion he had at first imbibed, because
one or more Fathers were against him. We all first take up our opinions from
the Catechisms, or Confessions that are authorized in those Churches of which
we are members, and many, that I say not most, go all their days by an implicit
faith, believing as the Church believes, and as their Ministers do Preach,
never taking pains to search whether they agree to the Canon of Faith. Popish
Divines think that their Church cannot err, and so strain all their learning
and diligence to defend what she has determined; all that call themselves
Protestants, say they ought to use their judgment of discretion, though they
may be bound, if in some comparatively less matters, they have knowledge
different from the Church in which they are Ministers, to have it to
themselves. This is truth, but the men who do conscientiously and impartially
make use of their judgment of discretion, are not very many, they are very
soon tied up by subscriptions, and account it not for their credit to recede
from them; if in disputation they be pressed with the authority of the Fathers
or ancient Doctors, they either bluntly declare that they little regard them,
or else find out some plausible salvo, or (...) to elude them.

1. Some will flatly declare that they do not much matter what mind the Fathers
are of. The great Patron of Ubiquity Jacobus Andraeas is reported by Scultetus
in his Nuncupatory to his Medulla, not to value the Fathers at all, Athanasius
with him was Sathanasius, Vigilius, Dormilius, and all the Patres he would in
contempt call Matres, that is, I suppose, weak and silly creatures, unfit to be
used as guides and directors in matters of Religion. The Papists themselves, as
great a show as they sometimes make of Fathers, do at other times use language
not much more civil concerning them. Was it not a Pope of Rome that declared
his esteem of the learning of Thomas Aquinas to be so great, that he doubted
not to give unto him the first place after the Canonical Scripture? Such a
Speech is fathered upon one of the Innocents by Augustine Hunne, if I may credit
Dr. G. Abbot against Hill, Page 426. and I suppose I may well credit him,
because I find as much in Alvarez de Auxiliis, lib. 1. page 52. Indeed to
almost all truly and thoroughly Popish Writers, the Fathers are but Children,
his Holiness, as they call him, is all in all with them. Suarez in 3. Com. 1.
qu. 2. not. 2. disp. 42. sect. 1. says, The definition of the Pope is
altogether true; and if it should be contrary to the sayings of all Saints, it
were to be preferred to them. Bellar. lib. 4. de Pon. cap. 5. If the Pope
should err by commanding vices, or prohibiting virtues, the Church would be
bound to believe vices to be good, and virtues bad, unless she would sin
against her conscience. Cornelius Mus in his Comments on the Romans, p. 606. e.
g. I, to confess ingenuously, would more believe the Pope alone in those things
which concern the mysteries of faith, than a thousand Austins, Hieroms,
Gregory's, etc. because the Pope in matters of faith cannot err. Much such
ranting stuff I could quote, did I count it needful; but indeed it is not
needful, for his Holiness takes upon him to have a power to correct Fathers,
that they may just fit and suit the present state of his Church. By the
Constitution of Sixtus the Fifth, care is taken to set out Fathers free from
the corruptions they have contracted by coming through the hands of Heretics,
but with this proviso, That if any more weighty doubts and difficulties shall
happen in the authority of old Books, in the correction and emendation of
books, things being first examined in the Congregation, they should be referred
to him, that in variety of readings he might determine that by a special
privilege granted to his See, which was most consonant to orthodox verity: and
lest we should think that the Pope must determine nothing of his own head, but
after he has taken great pains, hear Gregory de Valentia Analysis fidei, lib.
8. p. 70. Non est ratio ulla firma quamobrem existimare debeamus, studii
diligentiam Pontifici esse necessariam, sive in definiendo studium adhibeat
sive non adhibeat, infallibiliter certe definiet. But this it may be is said
but by one, and a long time since; not so, we shall find our Countryman
Thomas Bacon, or Southwell in his Analysis fidei saying as much.

But do not Calvinists as much set at naught the Fathers when they make not for
them?

Ans. So they are charged to do by Papists, and the Remonstrants, and their
adherents. Campian says, Causaeus called Dionysius the Areopagite a doting old
man; but Dr. Humphred denies him to have used any such broad language even of
the pretended Dionysius, De Patribus, p. 520, etc. Grotius also gives them such
a bob page 15. Piet. Illus. Ordin. Hollandiae, but quoteth no Author that gave
him any occasion to vent such a reproach.

2. Some hating to speak contemptibly of the Fathers, will civilly put off
their authority, either by putting another sense on their words than is
commonly given, or by blaming the edition, or the translation, or by opposing
one Father to another, or the same Father to himself, or by saying that he
relates the opinion of others: So that they do by them, just as they do at
Oxford by Aristotle, his authority must not be denied in disputations under a
penalty appointed by the Statutes, yet any one in Paervisiis, or
Augustinensibus holds the opinion that he best likes, how contrary soever it
be to Aristotle; and if Aristotle be urged against him, Loquitur ad modum
vulgi, disputative, non doctrinaliter, etc. serves well enough to put him by,
and shift him off.

The day is yet, I suppose, to come that ever any Scholar in disputation said,
I find that Aristotle is against me, and therefore I do revoke and recall my
opinion, promising to be of another mind for the future. If the Roman
Catholics do not use the Fathers just so, then let me be accounted to bear
false witness against them. In the general that caution of the Belgic Censors
is well known, and extant in the Chapter concerning Bertram. In veteribus aliis
plurimos ferimus errores, and extenuamus, excusamus excogitato commento,
persaepe negamus and commodum eis sensum affingimus, dum opponuntur in
disputationibus aut in conflictionibus cum adversariis. This affixing of a
commodious sense to the Fathers, is a shield that will quench all darts; by
help of this, Bellarmine thought himself able to avoid the general Propositions
of the Fathers, concerning the extent of Original sin, so as to leave room and
place for the immaculate conception of the Virgin Mary, De Amiss. Great. Lib. 4.
cap. 15. I wonder, having found out such a shield, he would ever part with it.
What need he say de Sanct. Beat. 1. Cap. 6. concerning Justin, Irenaeus,
Epiphanius, Oecumenius. I see not how I can defend them; or concerning
Lactantius, that he fell into many errors, especially about the age to come,
being more skilful in the books of Tully than in the holy Scriptures; or
concerning Victorinus, that he wanted learning, but not a will to learning,
Lib. eodem cap. 5. Why are Procopius, Eucherius, Isidorus branded to be
uncertain Authors, or obscure, Lib. de Purg. 2. cap. 6. Why is it said of
Origin, that his words on the 14th Homily on Luke do not bear a commodious
exposition, de Pur. lib. 2. cap. 1. p. 630. Origin was one of the first that
brought in Purgatory fire; and could Bellarmine find out no commodious sense of
his words concerning those that are to be purged by it? Could he not say that
he related only the opinion of others, as he does concerning Hierom? Lib. de
gratia primi hominis, cap. 11. or that he spoke hyperbolically, as he brings
off Chrysostom, lib. 2. de Miss. cap. 10. or that he did write after the manner
of Poets, which he says about Prudentius, lib. 2. de Purg. cap. 18. Why could
he not say, that writing against one extreme, he fell into the other extreme; a
salvo often brought when some of the Fathers sayings are brought, that seem to
favor Manichaeism or Pelagianism, Arrianism or Sabellianism. If no such thing
would serve the turn, why then it might have been said, that he spoke (...), a
distinction used by St. Basil to fetch off Gregory, Epis. 64. but made use of
by more than one Papist; or rather than fail, it might have been said, that
Origin was abused and corrupted.

Q. What then, is no authority to be ascribed to the Fathers?

A. There may be authority enough ascribed to them, notwithstanding any thing I
have said; for I have only related how men deal with the Fathers, not how they
ought to deal with them. Yet I confess I am somewhat to seek how to draw such
an argument from the authority of the Fathers, as none but desperate persons
will think invalid. Should I, meeting with an Adversary that differs from me,
argue thus, Austin says it is so, therefore so it is; or Austin says it is not
so, therefore it is not so: My antecedents I may chance to prove, if I have
such an Edition of Austin by me, as is liable to no exception; but my arguments
to be sure would be denied, and how shall I prove them, by asking him whether
he account himself wiser than Austin? he will, if he be wise, ask me, whether I
will subscribe to every thing that he can bring a place of Austin for? and I,
if I be not a fool, shall not promise so to do; so is our argument at an end.
But perhaps if I had argued from consent of Fathers, then he must when I had
proved: such consent, have yielded to me, or else he might justly be reputed
contentious and self-conceited. I must needs acknowledge that the testimony of
many Fathers to a point, is more considerable, than the testimony of any one
Father to the same point. And yet sometimes one may so practice upon many, that
those many who join with him, may justly be reputed to signify no more than
himself alone, or rather not so much as himself alone; for he that goes about
to trapan others into a consent with him, may well be thought not to be
himself; there may be a good appeal from a man engaged to make a party, and
carry on a design, to the same man under no such engagement. Sometimes also it
is too too apparent, that after one Father had written his opinion upon a
matter, others have chosen rather to follow him, than to be at the pains to
enquire whether he was to be followed. But be this as it will: when is it we
may reckon our selves to have the consent of Fathers? I suppose when we hold
that which all or the most of the Fathers did hold manifestly, frequently,
constantly, no others contradicting them. If such a consent as this be not
almost impossible to be had in the questions now disputed among Christians,
then must I needs confess my self much mistaken in the collections I have made
out of the Writings of the Fathers. But it will be good for the further
clearing of this business, to instance in particulars, that we may know how
much we are bound to follow Fathers.

1. There be some matters purely philosophical; how much is to be attributed to
the consent of the Fathers in these? Must we concern our selves before we come
to be of any opinion about them, to enquire what their sentiments concerning
them were? Had the Fathers such clear conceptions in Physics, Metaphysics,
Mathematics, that he who departs from them, must needs be thought to be in an
error? If so, I know no Sect of Philosophers that must not be judged to abound
with errors. Cornelius a Lapide tells us, that Basil, Theodoret, Nazianzen, did
all hold that Light was created by God out of any subject, and thence notes
against Heretics, That accidents can in the Eucharist exist without a subject.
As for Basil, I think notwithstanding all the pains Bellarmine takes De Euch.
lib. 3. cap. 24. to make him of that opinion, he is well enough brought off by
Scultetus. Theodoret I have not by me, and will not guess what his mind was.
Nazianzen in his 43. Orat. (...), etc. has these words concerning that Light,
(...), some of which words sound suspiciously, yet perhaps do not necessarily
infer, that he conceived Light to be a quality existing without a subject; if
they do, he says plainly it was but his own private opinion. But now suppose
all these three, and three and twenty more Fathers had been of this mind, must
I be thought proud if I did not forthwith allow the possibility of an
accident's subsisting without a subject? If I must, jacta est alea, I am
resolved in all such cases not to purchase a reputation of humility by
disclaiming my reason. Lactantius and Austin do with some zeal oppose the
Antipodes, and laugh at the assertors of them. Venerable Bede treads in their
steps. As for Pope Zachary who got into the Chair about the year 750. his zeal
against the Antipodes was so furious, that nothing Iess would satisfy it, than
the condemning of Virgilius, a Bishop in Bavaria, as an Heretic, because he
adventured to assert, that there were men whose feet were opposite to ours.
Fromund in his Anti-aristarchus is troubled at this story, and takes some pains
to qualify it so, as that it may not derogate from the Popes infallibility.

I shall not be offended with any man that can prove there never was a Pope who
thought it heresy to hold the Earth to be round. And I am glad the Church of
Rome nowadays allows her followers more liberty in matters of Philosophy,
than formerly; for the more liberty is allowed to men of that persuasion,
though but in Philosophy, the more hopes may we conceive of their coming over
to us.

But I see plainly that the ancient Fathers did look upon the roundness of the
Earth as a paradox; and it is not many years since a Divine in England writing
against the morality of the Sabbath, laid down abundance of propositions which
were every one of them false, the plainness of the earth not being supposed.

However, I am resolved to adhere to demonstration and history, say the Fathers
and their admirers what they will to the contrary. To be short, so far as I can
judge, the Fathers were not the best Philosophers that ever the world enjoyed.

2. What is to be attributed to the consent of Fathers in matters of
Chronology? Surely not very much: for being generally unacquainted with the
Hebrew, and following none of the best Copies of the Septuagint, they miserably
failed in the Age of the Antediluvian Patriarchs. All good men can easily
pardon that their error; some of late have gone about to justify their
account, but upon such weak grounds, that I should much wonder if among
Scholars they should have many followers. The Learned world will not easily
yield that all the Hebrew Copies we now use, are corrupted, Genesis 5. and to be
amended by the Septuagint.

3. What is to be attributed to the Fathers in matters Historical? To answer
this it would be enquired, 1. How far they thought themselves concerned to
report truth. 2. Of what prudence they were. For if any of them thought an
officious lie lawful, there is no relying upon the History written by him; and
that none of the Fathers thought an officious lie lawful, I am not he that will
affirm; I rather fear that some of them did make no scruple to use pious
frauds, the more to set off Christian Religion to those Heathens against whom
they did write. He that has any nose may smell something of this officiousness
in sundry of those miracles that are left on record by Ecclesiastical Writers.
2. If any of them did think that they might not lie, no not (...); yet if they
were credulous, and apt to be abused by cunning men, they might report things
far from truth, which yet upon their credit and reputation would be taken for
true in succeeding generations. What an incredible story does Justin Martyr in
his Exhortation to the Greeks tell us, concerning the 72. Interpreters, viz.
That the King who sent for them, appointed them to be kept in distinct Cells,
not suffering them to speak with one another, and yet that their interpretation
at last was sound not only to agree in sense, but in every word. This he
relates to the Grecians not without great confidence, saying that he had seen
some footsteps of the Cells in the Island where they were first built, and
referring himself to Josephus and Philo, and other Historians. And yet Philo
makes no mention of these Cells into which they were severally put; and
Josephus speaks of their conferring together, as Aristaeas had done before him.
It Is like some Jews had abused honest Justin into a belief of this figment; and
that Irenaeus, Clement of Alexandria, Cyrill, Hilary, securely followed Justin.
Nor is this the only instance of false stories transmitted to us by the
Fathers. Mean time it is a piece of Justice due to the Fathers that follow
Justin in the matter of the Cells, and the Interpreters consent to a word, to
Iet my Reader know that they do not follow him in his stupendous Anachronism of
Ptolemies sending to Herod King of the Jews (as he reports) when the
Translation was to be made. The Learned Francis Junius in his Animadversions on
Bellarmine, endeavors to salve Justin's credit in this matter; but whether Mr.
Scrivener will like his salvo, he best knows.

4. What is to be attributed to the Fathers in expounding of Scripture? Must we
not take that to be the true sense of a Text, which they have generally pitched
upon? Ans. To find out the true sense and meaning of the Spirit of God in any
Text not very obvious, in an ordinary way it is necessary that a man should have
a good skill in Logic, so as to be able to analyze well; and that he should be
well seen in those Languages in which the inspired Penmen did write. As for
knowledge in Logic, the most of the Fathers did not abound in that; I could
instance in one Modern Logician, from whom a Scholar may have more help for
analyzing Scripture, than from all the Fathers put together. And for skill in
the Oriental Languages, every one will acknowledge that most of the Fathers had
but little. Origin and Hierome understood Hebrew, so did few of the Ancients
besides; and it will be no disparagement to Origin or Hierome to say, that
there are hundreds in the world at present that understand that Language far
better than either of them ever did, or were in any near capacity to do.

The Greek Fathers must needs be supposed well to understand the Greek Tongue
in which the whole New Testament was written; but so did very few of the Latin
Fathers. I will not say who it was that derived (...) from (...) and (...). So
gross ignorance do not all the Latin Fathers bewray; but they who have Erasmus
his Commentaries by them, will find quickly that the Fathers of the Latin
Church are not the best guides to follow in interpreting Scripture. One
Exposition of Austin not taken notice of by Erasmus, I will here mention. The
Apostle says Romans 3.27. that boasting is excluded; that is, has no place; but
that Learned Father finding the word exclusa, runs away with it till he has
quite lost the Apostles sense, Exclusa, non ut abscederet pulsa, sed ut
emineret expressa.

5. What is to be attributed to the Fathers in matters of Doctrine or Faith?
Ans. 1. I shall readily grant that to be no fundamental Doctrine or Article of
Faith which is denied by many Fathers. 2. If I find any doctrine pretty
unanimously asserted by Fathers, though I see no foundation for it in
Scripture, I shall not think my self concerned to oppose that doctrine, till I
find something in Scripture that it contradicts. But I am also certain, that
most of the Fathers (that I say not all) had their errors, and some of them so
gross, that he who should now hold them, would scarce be thought meet to be a
Church Officer. Therefore I am resolved to study Scripture with care and
conscience, and on that to build my faith. In so doing I shall be sure to obey
my Saviors precept; and I may promise my self the assistance of the Spirit,
whose office it is to lead me into all truth. And if those doctrines that I
have good assurance be grounded on Scripture, be charged with novelty and
singularity, then shall I rejoice if I can find the Fathers consenting with me.
Other good ends I can propound to my self in reading of the Fathers; but the
main end I aim at, is to stop the mouth of gainsayers, especially those who
glory in Antiquity, and make consent of Fathers their rule. I will not reject
any truth because it is but newly discovered, nor yet embrace any error because
it is of long continuance, or because some great and good man had the ill hap
to be the first Author of it. Never shall any Socinian have occasion to say of
me, as I find it by one of that Sect objected to the Reformed, Scripturam
sacram ex illorum (Patrum Conciliorumque) mente explicant. Ab illis doctrinae
capita repetunt. Illorum auctoritate confirmant. Neque adversus Pontificios
tantum, sed and adversus eos disputantes, qui a Patribus se dissentire non
inficiantur, perpetuum illum Patrum Conciliorumque consensum perpetuo crepant;
Eosque qui Patribus illis olim Conciliisque contra dixerunt, tanquam Haereticos
merito damnatos esse censent. Neque Patres propterea recipient, quia cum
scriptura consentiunt, sed scripturam eo intelligendam modo censent, quia
Patres ita explicarunt. Ideoque prius de unamini Patrum Conciliorumque
consensu, quam de vero scripturae sensu sunt solliciti. Nec desunt qui
affirmare non dubitant, etsi sacrae literae illorum adversari sententiae
manifest viderentur: si tamen Patres Conciliaque secus eas intellexerint,
malle se Patribus istis Conciliisque adhaerere, quam privatum suum, uti vocant,
de scripturis sequi judicium. Neque illi e faece sunt; sed qui ad summum in
Theologia gradum conscenderunt. I will judge from Scripture what is truth, and
unto what degree any truth is necessary; but when I have found any opinion to
be contrary to Scripture, I shall be the more confident that I was not mistaken
in accounting the opinion erroneous, when I have found it condemned as such by
many or all the Fathers that speak of it.

3. There are but few against whom the Fathers are so frequently and fiercely
quoted, that need fear trial by the Fathers.

By saying there are but few, I intimate there are some; in that number I place,

1. The Socinians, against whom I conceive the whole stream of Antiquity does
run very strongly; for though some would have the doctrine of the T^inity as it
is commonly delivered in Christian Churches, to be no older than the Nicene
Council; and though it cannot be denied but that diverse of the Fathers who
flourished before that Council, have left in their Writings sundry ill sounding
propositions; yet if a man interpret their sayings heartily, and remember that
the signification of some Theological terms is somewhat varied since their
times, he shall be forced to acknowledge that they all agreed in this, That the
Father is God, the Son God, and the Holy Ghost God, and all three but one God.
To demonstrate this consent against a late wretched discourse called Historia
enucleata, would be an employment well worthy Mr. Scriveners pains, if he be so
well versed in the ancient Fathers as he makes show; till he or some other will
be at that pains, the English Reader may help himself sufficiently from Mr.
Estwick.

The greatest doubt seems to be about Origin, whom sundry of the Church of Rome
make an Arian. Bellarmine mentions out of Pratum Spirituale, a vision, in the
(...) was seen in hell with Arius and Nestoriu^ (...). de Purg. lib. 2. c. 8.
where he also affirms, that the fifth Synod condemned him as an Heretic.
Aquinas in his 1a. quaest. 34. calls him the fountain of Arianism, but without
any cause. The Heresy of Arius for which he is most infamous in Ecclesiastical
History, is the denying of Christ's Divinity. He granted that Christ had a being
before he was born of the Virgin Mary, but withal said, he was created by God,
(...), so as there was a time in which it might have been said (...) he was
not. That Origin ever held any such opinion, I am not convinced. Certain I am,
that in the Homilies ascribed to him, I have observed most clear passages for
the Deity of our Lord Jesus. In his Books against Celsus he most strenuously
defends his Divinity against that Sophister.

But are there not other places in his Writings in which he makes Christ (...),
a man, and no more than a man? Ans. So say some of the Ancients; as also the
wretched Transylvanian Ministers in their Books concerning the original and
progress of the Trinity; on which account they call him the most learned of the
Fathers. But when we have given him as many grains of allowance as must in
charity be given to one who writ much, and in great haste, and whose Writings
have fallen into false hands, and by them been transmitted to us, we need not
say that he was an Arian, or had any favorable thoughts of Arianism. The
Vision related by Bellarmine will not, I suppose, move any wise man. As for
Thomas Aquinas who would (...) Origin to be the fountain of Arianism, (...) on
those words John 1. In the beginning was the word, he says, Verbum in divinis
metaphorice dicitur; I must needs say, it is a weak foundation to build so
heavy a charge upon. That great School-man does thus put his 34. question,
Vtrum verbum in divinis sit personale? (an obscure question I wot) he
determines it affirmatively; but first brings this as an objection against
himself, Nomina personalia proprie dicuntur in divinis, ut pater and filius,
sed verbum metaphorice dicitur in divinis, ut Origenes dicit super Joannem. A
doughty objection, no question, and worthy to have a place in a sum of
Divinity. Personal names are used properly in the Mystery of the Trinity; the
word, according to Origin, is not used properly, but metaphorically, ergo it is
not a personal name. Because the minor could not be denied, Origin must be
accounted the fountain of Arianism. First, the whole perhaps would be granted
by Durand, who says that the title of [Word] properly imports something
essential and not personal. I think the Scriptures (which in speaking of this
Mystery I would follow) always appropriate the title of Word to the second
person; but that he is called the Word properly and not metaphorically only, I
cannot as yet find in Scripture. I believe according to Scripture, that the
Father begat the Son, but that he begat him as affected with an act of
understanding, not as understanding is common to all the three persons, but as
he has it from himself, is not I hope a necessary Article of Faith; if it be,
I have not all the faith that is necessary to salvation. Nor can I obtain of my
self to think, that the Son of God is any otherways called the Word, than
because he resembles that either Oral or Mental Word that is formed by us men.
And were it not that the general stream of Interpreters carries the
resemblance to a Mental Word, I should be easily inclined to believe, that as a
vocal word serves to disclose the mind of a man, so Christ is called the Word,
because he discovers the Mysterious Will and Counsel of God.

If Origin did not lay the foundation of Arianism, much less can the Photinians
(whom the Socinians now follow) pretend to be his offspring, for they denied
Christ to have any being before he was conceived by the Holy Ghost in the womb
of the Virgin Mary, differing from the Ebionites only in this, that they did
not hold him to be begotten by Joseph, as well as born of Mary. Socinus against
Vniebus is so ingenuous, as to confess that he and his continually dispute
against the Fathers that flourished after the Nicene Council, and declares
plainly, that he did not think any of his party had in their writings asserted,
that any of the Writers before the Nicene Council, now extant, were of their
mind: Yet certainly he knew that the Writings of Origin were extant, and
therefore was conscious that it was in vain to father his heresies upon him.
The truth is, we need not be afraid lest our young Divines should grow
Socinians by reading the Fathers, or those who profess themselves to be
Socinians, the great danger is from Erasmus and Grotius who never professed
Socinianism; but yet in their Commentaries, especially on the Epistles, do most
unhappily, by the various readings which they have, as they pretend, met with,
or some plausible expositions of their own, endeavor to enervate the places
that are brought to prove the Deity of Christ Jesus. One I will here take
notice of, 1 Timothy 3.16. God manifest in the flesh, is a place brought to prove
the Divinity of Christ, and is the more considerable, ad hominem, because the
word (...) does occupy the place of the Subject in the proposition. Smalcius,
de Incarnatione Christi, Cap. 18. acknowledges, omnia exemplaria graeca
hactenus constanter vocem Dei habent. And indeed to this day there is not a
Greek Copy to be found of any good esteem that does not read (...). What now do
these two learned Dutchmen say? Erasmus prefers the vulgar Latin, which reads
(...) instead of (...), and suspects (...) was added against the Arians. But
Grotius takes more pains to avoid that reading which is so commonly received,
(...), suspectam nobis faciunt hanc lectionem interpretes veteres, Latinus,
Syrius, Arabs, and Ambrosius qui omnes legerunt, (...), addit Hincmarus
opusculo 55. illud (...) hic positum a Nestorianis: And after strains his wit
to find out a good sense of (...), throughout the whole Verse. If this be
allowable to forsake the Greek, where the vulgar Latin, Syriack and Arabic
differ from it, how shall we know where to fix our feet? And let the Learned
judge, whether the Syriack and Arabic Translations that we have in the
Polyglott, did read, (...): if they did, those who translated them are much to
be blamed. It is also untruly suggested, that Hincmarus says, (...) was put in
by the Nestorians: But if Hincmarus had so said, Grotius might, if he had so
pleased, have acquainted his Reader, that Chrysostom read (...), who was older
than Nestorius himself: And he could also have told us, that Cyril and
Theodoret made use of this reading, (...), against Nestorius; and therefore
sure neither he nor his followers did first frame this reading, which is so
perfectly destructive to their heresy. Another place we bring to prove Christ's
Deity, is, Romans 9.5. Mirum est (says Bellarmine Praef. ad libros de Christo)
quid non agat Erasmus, quo se non vertat, quid non moliatur ut hoc telum de
manibus nobis extorqueat. Erasmus does indeed take two much pains to make this
place useless against the Arians; yet which should have assuaged Bellarmines
wrath, he adds like a good Son of the Church, that if she say we must not
interpret these words, but of the Divinity of Christ, she is to be obeyed. As
for Grotius, he first tells us, that it is manifest from the Syriack, that
(...) was wanting in the ancient Greek Copies. There is not a Greek Copy of any
note now extant, in which the word (...) occurs not; and yet if the Syriack
express it not, then it must be thought it was absent from the ancient Greek
Copies: what will such an opinion as this lead us to? Secondly, he refers us to
Erasmus, who has noted, that the words are read without (...) in the ancient
Books of Cyprian, as also in Hilary; and that St. Chrysostom seems to have read
so too. But Erasmus speaks not of the ancient Books of Cyprian, in which, or
sundry of which, the word Deus is to be found; and Grotius could not but know
that those Copies of Cyprian must needs be corrupted in which Deus is wanting;
for no Scripture, but that in which Christ is called God, could serve Cyprians
turn in that place, as any Reader may discern. Hilary left not out the word
Deus, but his Scribe, as Erasmus almost acknowledges, and Hilary, to be sure,
in his Books, de Trinitate, cites this place with the word Deus. Chrysostom,
indeed, does not expound (...), nor yet does he expound (...); but he reads
just as we read. By this we may see how little zeal Grotius had for the
Divinity of Christ, and what danger they are in, who will take his quotations
in his Annotations upon trust.

2. In this number I must needs place the Papists properly and strictly so
called. A Papist strictly and properly so called, is with me not one who holds
the most of those doctrines which the present Romish Church holds; but he who
holds them solely or principally on the account of the present Churches
Infallibility: More particularly, I do not say he is a Papist who holds
Transubstantiation, because as he thinks the Scripture teaches it; but he who
therefore believes the Scripture to teach Transubstantiation, because the Pope
in or out of a Council has decreed or warranted the same. Should I deny the
Popes Infallibility in a cause of faith, I were to a Trent-Papist a Heretic,
as well as if I denied all the Articles of the faith, because I deny the formal
reason upon which all are to be believed. Should I hold the Popes Infallibility
as the ground and foundation of my faith, then I were to him a good Catholic,
though I were mistaken in many of the things to be believed, because I am upon
the true and sure foundation of faith. Now if any one can show me any whole
ancient Church, or any one ancient Doctor of the Church who believed the
Article of the Bishop of Romes Infallible Supremacy, and made that the ground
of believing all other Articles, I will be his Convert, if he will promise to
be my Convert provided I can show him ancient Doctors and Councils that have
either not acknowledged or denied this foundation of the Papal faith. And if we
speak of the things believed by Papists, the most of them are utterly destitute
of all primitive Antiquity.

But there are others in the world generally decried as despisers of the
Fathers, who had they but men among them able and willing to search the
Fathers, might from them say more for themselves, than would easily be
answered. I instance:

1. In the Anabaptists, or Antipaedobaptists, (as they had rather be called)
some of great esteem among the sons of the Church, have said that the opinion
of these men cannot be confuted by Scripture, at least not by Scripture alone.
In this they give these men as much as the generality of them desire or care
for. But of late one of good learning has espoused their Cause; and finding it
granted by too too many, that Infantbaptism cannot with sufficient evidence be
proved from Scripture alone; he enquires what it is that together with
Scripture will prove it? Being referred to the Ancients, he there joins issue,
and has so acquitted himself, that for my part if I were not persuaded from
Scripture that Infants are to be baptized, I should hardly be brought to be of
that persuasion by any thing quoted from the Fathers.

One deservedly dignified in the Church, has suffered it to be printed as his
opinion, that there is neither precept nor practice in Scripture for
Paedobaptism, nor any just evidence for it for about two hundred years after
Christ. The first who bears witness to Infant Baptism practiced in the Church,
is Tertullian; but so, as he expressly dislikes and condemns it as an
unwarrantable and irrational custom; and Nazianzen a good while after him
dislikes it too, etc. with much more of that nature. Really were I of this
learned persons judgment, that there is neither precept nor practice in
Scripture for Paedobaptism, I should much haesitate in the matter: for if there
be no precept or example of Paedobaptism in Scriptures, I ask whether the
Church succeeding the Apostles had any reason or authority to take up that
custom? if she had, then the present Church also has authority to take it up,
though it had never before been taken up; for the Church has now the same
authority that the Church succeeding the Apostolical times had. It will be
said, that the Church succeeding immediately to the Apostles, had better
opportunity to know the practice of the Apostles, than the present Church has.
Ans. That must needs be granted; and if the Church succeeding the Apostles have
given any undoubted testimony that the Apostolical Churches practiced
Infant Baptism, her testimony cannot be refused; but that that Church has
given any such testimony, is easy to say, but not so easy to prove. Nothing
out of Ignatius, or Clemens Romanus, is produced to such a purpose. The Author
of the Questions and Answers to the Orthodox, does indeed, qu. 56. plainly
insinuate, that in his time (...) were baptized, and gives some account what
difference should be in the resurrection, betwixt those who were baptized, and
those who were not baptized, and of the reason why the (...) are accounted
worthy of Baptism, viz. the (...): And were this Author Justin Martyr, the
testimony were considerable, not to prove that Infant Baptism was practiced in
the time of the Apostles, but that Infant Baptism was soon practiced; but the
Author of those Questions and Answers must needs be some one that lived long
after Justin Martyr. Origin I believe will be found to be the first that speaks
of Infant Baptism as an Apostolical tradition, in his Com. on Romans But the
Antipaedobaptist to him and all others may say, It is manifest from the
Ancients, that diverse children of Christian Parents were not baptized in their
infancy, nor till they were come to maturity of judgment; and that it was
accounted no (...), no bar to their preferment that their Baptism was so long
deferred, that they were not before their baptism looked upon as unclean: now
if this be so, how comes it to pass that in a Church professing to follow and
reverence Antiquity, they are excommunicated and thrown into prison if they do
not bring their children to be baptized. Let any man prove out of Antiquity,
that Nazianzen and his father were accounted Heathens and Publicans till the
Son was baptized, which was not till he was about thirty years old.

2. I hear there are sundry among us here in England, that refuse to take an
oath, judging any oath unlawful in Gospel Times. The opinion of these men is
very pernicious, manifestly tending to perpetuate strifes and contentions,
which cannot in our Courts of Judicature be ended but by an oath; and I doubt
not at all, but that the opinion may be clearly refuted out of Scripture, where
the present Patrons of it especially seek to shelter themselves: but if from
the Scriptures we remove their Cause to the Fathers, among them I doubt they
will find more friends than adversaries. For that an Oath is not, at least in
any secular matter, to be required or taken, seems clearly to have been the
opinion of Athanasius, Nazianzen, Chrysostom, Isidore Peleusiota, Theophylact,
Hilary, Ambrose, Hierom; and I think, to the Greek. Fathers I might have added
Basil. Artifices I know are used to evade their testimonies, but such as will
not hold when they are examined by those who can understand the languages in
which those ancient Doctors did write.

3. Men usually exclaim against the Presbyterians, as persons who forsake all
antiquity to follow Calvin who is but of yesterday; and I think, if any of them
say that Calvin affords a student more light to understand Scripture than most
of the Fathers put together, they are not much to be blamed. But I must needs
say, that Presbyterians is now become a term that I understand not; every
Nonconformist who is not Congregational, is in some men's mouths a Presbyterian,
though he never declared any dislike of Episcopacy; yea, though he vehemently
protest that his judgment is for Episcopacy, even for all and every part of
Primitive Episcopacy. In Dr. Heylins late History of Presbyterians, a
Presbyterian is sometimes one that would have the Lords day observed as a
Sabbath, one that thinks election and non election to be absolute; and if a
Presbyterian be such a one, sure it would be no difficult task to prove that
there were such men in the world long before Culvins name was ever heard of.
With other m^n, a Presbyterian is the same with the old Non conformist, and
against such a Presbyterian it is that Mr. Scrivener seems to have laid his
action; but besides that he has laid his Action coram non Judice, I think,
that when the merits of the cause come to be examined, he will quickly be
nonsuited: For it will be impossible for him to prove either that such a
Presbyterian is a Schismatic, or that if he be a Schismatic, his Schism is
novel. The old Nonconformist was one that could not think a Bishop to be by
Divine institution, an Officer of a superior Order to a Presbyter, sole power
of Jurisdiction and Ordination was the block he could never get over. In matter
of worship, he could not satisfy himself to practice the Ceremonies retained
and prescribed in the Church of England. That the Ministers ordained in England
were not true Ministers, or that they might not be submitted to as such, he
never thought. He could and did give, and receive the Sacrament, only sometimes
he both Preached and Administered the Sacrament in private, to such as were of
his own opinion and persuasion. If every such man must be accounted an Arian
and a Schismatic, he may comfort himself in this, that he has many among the
Ancients, who if they had lived in these days, must needs have been called by
the same name. If such a one decline trial by the Fathers, it is only because
he has not had the good hap to read the Fathers, or because he foresees the
trial will be too tedious and chargeable, and might sooner be ended, if only
Scripture were made the Rule. Mr. Scrivener is not sure such a stranger in our
Israel, as not to know how hard the Diocesans are put to it, when the Fathers
are brought against them. He can tell, no doubt, who they be that are wont to
call St. Hierom a discontented Presbyter, and St. Cyprian, a Popular Bishop. He
knows who they be, that have undertaken to ruin Diocesan Episcopacy by Clement
and Ignatius. And it is possible he has heard of those, who did undertake to
overthrow our English Hierarchy, by Dr. Hammonds dissertations for Episcopacy.
He knows, that when two were appointed to dispute against Dr. Preston in the
five points, the Dr. presently divided, and set them at variance betwixt
themselves; and cannot choose but think it very easy for the present
Non-conformists, if they were brought to a conference with the Prelatical, to
make them do execution one upon another.

To deal a little more closely with Mr. Scrivener, he has in the name of the
Church of England and his own, laid an action against a Novel Schism: If the
Non-conformists upon summons made, shall think meet to appear to this Action,
doubtless they will plead not guilty; they will not confess themselves guilty
of causing any new schism, but will averr, that they proceed upon the same
Principles, that were laid down by the great instruments of our reformation
here in England. It will be replied, that they oppugn Bishops, they will
rejoyn in the words of Dr. Stilling fleet, Iren. p. 385. That they doubt not to
make it evident that the main ground for settling Episcopal Government in this
Nation, was not accounted any pretense of Divine right, but the convenience of
that form of Church government, to the state and condition of this Church, at
the time of its Reformation; and that they for their parts were never asked
whether Episcopal government was suitable to the condition of this Church when
it was at first reformed; but whether it be founded on Divine Right. Now to
answer them here, the words of the declaration they are to make must be
scanned, and the particulars of those Books they are to assent and consent to
must be searched; if from them it do appear, that he who does without quillets
declare assent and consent, must receive Bishops as an higher order of Officers
than Presbyters, and that by Christ's institution, how will they be found guilty
of Novellism or Schism, unless Wickliff and Cranmer, etc. be found guilty also?
But perhaps it will go harder with them in the matter of Ceremonies. Really it
will, and if for these they separate from the Church, I am content they be
cast; for certainly it is against the whole rule of charity and humility to
break off communion in all Ordinances, because some one Ordinance is
administered with some such ceremony as I account inexpedient or unlawful. If
any Church make the approving of the expedience or lawfulness of that Ceremony,
a necessary condition of my holding communion with her, then she, and not I
causes the Schism. But to speak to the matter in issue. The present
Non-conformists are not the first that scrupled the use of the English
Ceremonies. Sundry of those who were martyred in Queen Mary's days would never
be brought to use them, most of those who then fled into foreign parts both in
their exile, and at their return, either durst not, or did not care to use
them. Some of them for Nonconformity refused preferment, some were turned out
of that they had, some took up with very small preferment, where no eye could
envy them. I have sometimes thought upon it, who they were, that in Queen Eliz.
Reign did the Church most service in disputing and writing against the Papists,
and I find them to have been such, as either did not conform, or conformed
heavily and by halves. I have heard it censured as an error in policy, for a
Court not to regard those in a time of peace, whom they were forced to make use
of in a time of war. Let Mr. Scrivener consider whether the Conformists have
strength and number sufficient to look the Papists and other adversaries in the
face, unless they take in the Non-conformists; if they have not, is it
prudence, to be at odds with those that must join with them in the day of
Battle? If he say they have number and strength enough, let him then consider
whether it may not be, that some of them will prove false and treacherous, or
at least, make a dishonorable peace. I could here show that sundry of them,
who most rigorously pressed conformity in Q. Elizabeth's days, did in Q. Mary's
days either recant, or play the Nicodemites. But this is a performance that I
have no mind to be put upon; how soon some other may put himself upon it I
cannot tell.

Here I might with credit enough take my leave of Mr. Scrivener; yet because
there be two particulars in his Book, that have not in these Papers been
accounted for, I will, before I conclude, essay whether the Non-conformists
cannot be acquitted therefrom. The first is the Hampton Court Conference: The
second is the matter of Ruling Elders: About both Mr. Scrivener is full of
confidence and triumph. If a good account can be given of these, I may think
the reproach to be rolled away from the Nonconformists; for as for railing
invectives against particular persons, I need only say, Lord lay them not to
his charge.

Concerning the Hampton Court Conference.
1. I say, we have little reason to believe that it is impartially related:
for, 1. We have some ground to think that Dr. Barlow who drew up the Relation,
did before his death profess himself troubled that he had abused Dr. Reynolds
and those who were joined with him. This sorrow of the Doctor is I know denied
by many, by none more than by Dr. Heylin against Mr. Hickman: but I have enough
to clear Mr. Hickman from being the inventor, or feigner of that story; for he
had it from Mr. Noel Sparks, a learned and pious Divine, and of the Episcopal
persuasion, who died but few years before his Majesty's return, by him he was
allowed to put it in print, as told him by one who would not on slight grounds
either raise or receive a report against a Bishop, viz. Mr. Henry Jackson,
sometime fellow of Corpus Christi College in Oxford. That all this is true, Mr.
John Martin, now a Conforming Minister in the Diocese of Hereford, can, and if
asked will, I suppose, witness.

2. Dr. Sparks though he spoke not a word in the Conference, and after it (if I
mistake not) printed a Book for Uniformity; yet told his son (sometimes a
Minister in Buckinghamshire, and Divinity-Reader in Magdalen-Colledg) That Dr.
Barlow in summing up that Conference, had very much injured Dr. Reynolds, and
those other that then appeared in the behalf of the Millenary Petitioners. This
I had from his kinsman before mentioned.

3. I am also pretty well assured, that upon the first coming out of the Sum of
that Conference, Dr. Reynolds himself lighting upon one of the Books at a
Stationers near St. Mary's Oxford, was found reading of it; and being asked by
a friend what Book it was he read? answered, It was a Book in which he was
concerned and wronged. If any doubt of this, he may (I suppose) receive
satisfaction about it from Dr. Henry Wilkinson, resident at or about Clapham
near London. Yea, I persuade my self, that no man who reads that Conference,
can be seriously of opinion that Dr. Reynolds argued with no more strength than
is by Dr. Barlow represented in his Relation.

2. If the Conference should he truly reported, little or no damage could
thence accrue to the Nonconformists; for as is said in the Christian and Modest
offer of a most indifferent Conference or Disputation printed Anno 1606. page
29, 30. Most of the persons appointed to speak for the Ministers, were not of
their choosing nor nomination, nor of their judgment in the matters then and now
in question, but of a clean contrary. For being entreated at that time by the
Ministers to dispute against these things as simply evil, and such as cannot be
yielded unto without sin; they professed unto them, that they were not so
persuaded, and therefore could not so do. Being then requested to let his
Majesty understand, that some of their brethren were further persuaded touching
the unlawfulness of these things, than they themselves were; they refused that
also. Lastly, being entreated either to give them in writing their reasons to
prove these things indifferent, or to give them an answer in writing to such
reasons as they would give them in writing to prove them simply evil; they
would do neither the one nor the other.

Obj. Will Nonconformists then lose so considerable a person as Dr. Reynolds?
and are they content the world should look upon him as no Nonconformist?

Ans. No doubt he was one that was loath to be made unuseful in the Church, and
loath that others should make themselves unuseful; and therefore when any
Minister professing himself dissatisfied with Subscription, came to ask his
advice, he would (as I have been credibily informed) desire him to give him the
grounds of his dissatisfaction, and if he found them weighty, then he would
leave him settled in his Nonconformity; but if he found them not weighty, then
he would let him know that those reasons notwithstanding he might conform. As
for himself, he was satisfied to do all that was incumbent on him, as President
of the College, but thought our Church needed a further Reformation, and that
the Ceremonies were unprofitable; and prayed that in a due and orderly manner
they might be taken away: yet would not peremptorily say, that a man should
lose his Ministry rather than not use them. And of this mind were most of those
who had in those times the honor to be called and accounted Puritans. And let
me here propound it seriously to the consideration of present Nonconformists,
whether it be not possible for them to be over zealous in pressing others not
to conform. Sure I am, that the learned and godly Mr. Anthony Wotton did flatly
deny to tell Mr. Will. Brice still alive, the grounds and reasons of his Non
conformity, telling him, That he would not in such matters put scruples into
those in whom he found none. And really, may not a Conformist save his own
soul, and the souls of those that hear him? may he not keep his eyes open, and
yet not have light enough to see the unlawfulness of our Ceremonies? If so, as
doubtless so it is, why should Non-conformists think so ill, as some do, of
their conforming brethren? why should they be so restless, till they have made
them their proselytes? why may they not acknowledge and rejoice in their gifts
and graces, and yet peaceably persevere in their own Nonconformity, only
wiping off the aspersions that are thrown on themselves, and heartily
representing their principles, and practices, that so the present and
succeeding ages may see, they do not suffer out of humor and fancy; and that
they err not (if they be in an error) without authority and reason.

3. If we should grant that the published Conference were in all things true
and impartial, yet have the friends of Episcopacy, and sticklers for
conformity, but little reason to boast or triumph. This must be made out by
some brief reflections upon the conference.

The first day none of those who desired Reformation, were permitted to be
present at the Conference, nor indeed all that were summoned to appear as
defenders of the then established doctrine and discipline, but only the Bishops
and five Deans; why neither the Dean of Christ-Church, nor the Dean of
Worcester, nor the Dean of Windsor were admitted, nor yet Dr. Field, nor Dr.
King, I find no reason assigned; nor will I guess, at so great a distance, what
might be the reason: but why none of the Plaintiffs (as they are called) were
admitted, His Majesty gave this reason, That the Bishops might not be
confronted by the contrary opponents; and that if any thing should be found
meet to be redressed, it might be done without any visible alteration. I
suppose King James thought the things he mentioned in that days Conference,
were too too liable to exception, and was resolved to take course with his
Bishops and their adherents to have some little amendment, that if they should
happen to be mentioned in the next days designed Conference, they might answer
they had already considered them, and would have no more done or said about
them.

The particulars of that Cabal-Conference, are said to be touching the
Common Prayer Book, Excommunication, providing of fit and able Ministers for
Ireland. How the providing of fit and able Ministers for Ireland, could be
proper for this days Conference, I understand not. Dr. Barlow says, p. 9. it
was referred to a consultation; if so, and that consultation produced any good
effect, all good Christians are to rejoice, for doubtless that Nation then
wanted Ministers. But the Millenary Petition pretended to be the occasion of
this Conference, touches not upon Ireland; if any thing was meet to be done
about that Church, in this Conference, reason rather required that the Council
for Ireland and the Irish Bishops should have been summoned to debate and
conclude concerning that affair. Perhaps the Doctor mistook Ireland for
England, or was willing to have us believe that there was no want of a Learned
Ministry here in England; but we shall hear more of this in the second days
Conference.

As to the Common Prayer Book, the King desired satisfaction about
Confirmation, Absolution, Private Baptism.

Confirmation we shall find mentioned in the second days conference, and
thither I refer my considerations concerning it.

Absolution, His Majesty said, he had heard likened to the Popes Pardons; If
any one had informed His Majesty, that Absolution as used, or at least, as
prescribed in the Church of England, had any thing in it resembling the
abominable pardons of the Pope, I know not how he can be excused from bearing
false witness against the Liturgy. The Millenarian Petitioners only pray, that
the term Absolution, might be corrected, which His Majesty was willing to
gratify them in, appointing Absolution to be explained by remission of sins.
There is, that I know, no real difference betwixt those that are called
Presbyterians and Episcopal Divines about Absolution: Both allow a general
Absolution, and a particular Absolution. Dr. Heylin charge Bp. Usher, with
utterly subverting, as well the Doctrine of the English Church, as her purpose
in absolution; but from that charge, the Primate is acquitted by his Chaplain
Dr. Bernard.

Baptism, King James thought, was not to be administered by private persons, in
any case whatsoever; and therefore propounded it to the Bishops, that the words
in the Book purporting a permission, and suffering of women and private persons
to baptize, might be altered: And here it is pretty, or rather sad, to observe
how the Prelates contradicted one another; Whitgift said, The administration of
Baptism by women or private persons, was not allowed in the practice of our
Church, but enquired of by Bishops in their Visitation, and censured, and that
the words in the Book did not infer any such meaning, as that they were
permitted to Baptize: But the words of the Book being pressed by His Majesty,
Bp. Babington confessed that the words were doubtful, and might be pressed to
such a meaning; but yet it seemed by the contrary practice of the Church
(censuring women in this case) that the Compilers of the Book did not so intend
them, and yet propounded them ambiguously, because otherwise, perhaps, the Book
would not then have passed in Parliament. But on the contrary, Bp. Bancroft for
his part declared, That the Compilers of the Book of Common Prayer, intended
not by ambiguous terms to deceive any; but did indeed, by those words, intend a
permission of private persons to Baptize in case of necessity, as appeared by
their letters, some parts whereof he read, declaring that the same was
agreeable to the practice of the ancient Church, urging to that purpose, Acts
2. where Three thousand were baptized in one day, a thing which could not
possibly, at least probably be done by the Apostles alone, and besides the
Apostles. there were then no Bishops nor Priests. He also alleged Tertullian
and Ambrose plain in that point. The Bishop of Winchester also spoke learnedly
and earnestly to the same purpose, affirming, that the denying of private
persons to baptize in case of necessity, were to cross all antiquity; and that,
it was a rule agreed upon among Divines, That the Minister is not of the
essence of the sacrament: But King James persisting in his opinion to have the
alteration made, says the Relator, page 19. it was not so much stuck at by the
Bishops; it seems that to please His Majesty, they did not much stick to have
all antiquity crossed, and a Rule among Divines overruled. Had the
Presbyterians in a point of so great moment, showed themselves so facile, what
a noise would have been made?

But seeing the alteration is made, and Baptism restrained to Ministers, we may
now without offense, I hope, enquire what is to be said in this controversy,
and whether other Churches do well to allow that, which we see not meet to
allow.

And first, I would know whether Christ the confessed institutor of Baptism,
has any where commanded lay-persons, in the absence of those to whom the word
of reconciliation is committed, to administer Baptism; if he have not, then
their not administering it can be no sin, because no transgression of a Law: And
how can we think that the party who dies unbaptized shall fare the worse, for
not having received that which no one was bound to give him? If it be said he
has laid commandment on lay-persons, where a Minister cannot be had, to
Baptize; I desire to see where that command is recorded.

2. I demand whether a lay-person, male or female do sin in Baptizing? If so,
no power on earth can authorize him or her to Baptize. If it be said, there is
no sin in the case; then again I demand where is the permission of Christ
granted to him or her? for certainly that must needs be sin, which is not
allowed by Christ the author of the Sacrament.

3. How can we in faith expect that any lay-person should convey, rem
Sacramenti, that is, be the Minister of Sacramental grace? Is it any where
revealed in Scripture that he does any more than the outward act (which of it
self avails nothing); if it be not, why might we not as good trust God that
he will save the sick child without the outward act, as think and hope he will
regard the outward act, when we cannot be assured that any more than the
outward act is done?

Lastly, When lay persons are allowed to administer Baptism, who can say to
them, ne plus ultra, hitherto you have proceeded, but further ye shall not
proceed, other parts of the Ministerial function you may not meddle with?

But it is said that we have great authorities, and the practice of the
Universal Church to warrant Baptism by lay-persons in case of necessity.

Ans. This is confidently affirmed; but he who will not believe every confident
affirmation, may find some of the Ancients either condemning, or not justifying
Baptism by lay-persons. As for the instance Acts 2. of the three thousand
baptized in one day; besides what is said by K. James, that the example was
extraordinary, and therefore not to be argued from with any security; we may
say further, 1. That there is no consent that at that time there were no more
in the Ministerial Function besi^es the twelve Apostles. Bishop Bancroft indeed
affirms, that then there were neither Bishops nor Priests besides the Apostles;
but if we should grant him that, there might be Deacons, and according to his
principles they might baptize; no need therefore of flying to lay-persons; it
is not improbable that the Seventy Disciples were then present, and who can
assure us that they had no ministerial character on them? 2. The Twelve might
if they saw meet Baptize Three thousand in one day. 3. It cannot be proved that
all those souls were Baptized in one day: added to the Church they were in one
day; but that they were solemnly entered into the Church by baptism in one day,
the Text does not prove. Perhaps not any one that heard the words of Peter
gladly, was baptized either the same day, or in the same place in which he
heard; but all went to some other places where there was much water, and there
were baptized; for that they were baptized in the same place where they heard,
is not probable, at least not certain.

Obj. Is it not a rule agreed upon among Divines, That the Minister is not of
the essence of a Sacrament?

Ans. The word Essence is an ambiguous term, and so acknowledged to be by
Philosophers; and it is not worth while to distinguish it, and so return answer
to this question, in distinct propositions. King James answered, that the
Minister is of the Essence of the right and lawful ministration of the
Sacrament. Till that answer be overthrown, it will not be safe to commit the
administration of Baptism to lay-hands; nor wisdom for any man to doubt
concerning the salvation of his child, because he died unbaptized, when he
could get none to baptize him whose authority to baptize is not questioned.

Obj. But will not this bring in rebaptization, so much abhorred by the Church?

Ans. It cannot bring in rebaptization; for if baptism by Laics be only nomine
tenus baptism, the baptism that succeeds it, will not be the second, but first
baptism, especially if it be administered in the conditional form, Si non sis
baptizatus, etc.

The next point his Majesty propounded to his Bishops, related to
excommunication in causes of lesser moment; asking, Whether the name might not
be altered, and yet the same censure be retained? Or 2dly, Whether in place of
it another Coercion equivalent thereunto, might not be invented and thought of?

The Relator says, This was a thing very easily yielded to of all sides (and
yet there was but one, or at least but two sides there) because it has been
long and often desired, but could not be obtained of her Majesty, who resolved
still to be semper eadem, and to alter nothing which she had once settled, page
19.

I am here at a great loss; for I cannot believe that Queen Elizabeth, so much
famed for piety and judgment, was so resolved not to alter any thing she had
once settled, as not to yield so much as to the alteration of a name, if she
were long and often desired by her Bishops. Nor do I find that her Bishops long
and often desired her, that excommunication for lesser matters might not be
called Excommunication, or that instead of it some other Coercion equivalent
thereunto, might be thought on. Nor do I understand to what end any such thing
should be so long and so often desired. What desirableness is there in this,
that men for small matters should be excommunicated, but not under the name of
Excommunication? ^r that they should not be excommunicated, but suffer some
Coercion equivalent thereunto? Those that fear the Lord, do account no Coercion
that man can inflict, equivalent to Excommunication duly pronounced. As for
those who do not fear the Lord, if they should chance to be excommunicated for
a small matter, they would make but a small matter of Excommunication, or
rather count it a privilege to be freed from the trouble of going to the
public assemblies. For such, if they should owe 4 d. to their Minister, and
refuse to pay it, an Attorney may sooner force them to be just, than an
Apparitor. All this while I have not touched on the chief ground of my
admiration, which is, how it came to pass (if the thing which his Majesty
propounded about Excommunication was so easily yielded on all sides) that no
alteration ensued thereupon? How comes it to pass that Excommunication, name
and thing, passes upon men in matters of small moment, and no Coercion
equivalent thereunto is as yet devised in the room of it?

This is all I have to advertise about the first days Conference.

In the second days Conference, omitting all Prefatory Speeches, I take notice,
that Dr. Reynolds reduced all he and his Brethren had to say, to four heads:
The first related to doctrine, praying that the doctrine of the Church might be
preserved in purity, according to Gods word; and to that end, that the Articles
concluded 1562. might be explained in places obscure, and enlarged where some
things were defective. Particularly, the Dr. moved something about the 16. the
23. the 25. Articles; and being about to move more, the Bishop of London cut
him off, and kneeling down, prayed the King, that the ancient Canon might be
remembered, Schismatici non sunt audiendi contra Episcopos, and that if any of
the four Plaintiffs had subscribed the Communion-Book, and yet lately exhibited
a Petition against it, they might be removed and not heard, according to the
Decree of a very ancient Council; providing, that no man should be admitted to
speak against that whereunto he had formerly subscribed. 3dly, He put the Dr.
and his associates in mind, that the King was very clement, who permitted them
to speak contrary to the Statute of 10 Eliz. against the Liturgy and discipline
established. Lastly, He desired to know the end they aimed at, alleging a
place out of Mr. Cartwright, affirming, that we ought rather to conform our
selves in Orders and Ceremonies, to the fashion of the Turks, than of the
Papists, which position he doubted they approved, because contrary to the
Orders of the Universities, they appeared before His Majesty in Turkey Gowns,
not in their Scholastical habits sorting to their degrees.

Musa mihi causas memora, quo numine laeso,
-- Tantaene animis coelestibus irae?
So much wrath at the first dash? when men are summoned by the King, and bid by
him open their grievances, must they as soon almost as they have opened their
mouths, be thus schooled and terrified? are the Articles of our Religion so
sacred, that to propound a doubt about them, is no less a crime than schism?
May not a man think that the Bishop feared he should not be able to answer the
Doctor, who took so much care that he might not be put to answer him at all? Is
this to show forth meekness of wisdom?

Let us a little reflect on the particulars of this great Diocesans passion.

1. He would have the ancient Canon remembered, Schismatici contra Episcopos non
sunt audiendi. This Canon might have been kept in store, till Dr. Reynolds had
been condemned for a Schismatic, or till the Bishops had said something which
he contradicted; but seeing it is now brought into the field we may be allowed
to view it, and see what metal it is made of. May not a King so much as hear
what Schismatics can say for themselves? Must it be taken for granted, that
Bishops are not culpable causes of the Schism that is made in a Church? Such a
Canon as this would have done excellent service at the Council of Trent.

2. So would the other Canon, That no man should be admitted to speak against
that whereunto he had formerly subscribed, have done the Popish Bishops
excellent service in Queen Mary's Reign; by it, I suppose, Bishop Cranmer and
Bishop Ridleys mouths might have been quite stopped; for I doubt they had
subscribed to something they were to speak against.

3. The Statute 10 Elizabethae did not make it penal for any man having leave
from the King to propound his objections against the Liturgy or discipline of
the Church of England.

4. Dr. Reynolds his Turky-Gown was not a Turkish habit, nor was his University
habit conformable to the habit of the Papists; nor does any order of the
University require, that a Doctor should have on his Doctors habit every time
he appears before the King. So that all this passionate harangue of words might
have been spared. It may be we may meet with more reason in the answers to what
the Doctor moved.

1. He moved the 6th Article; After we have received the Holy Ghost we may
depart from grace, might be worded so, as that it might not so much as seem to
favor the Doctrine of the Saints Apostasy; and that therefore the words
neither totally nor finally might be added.

What replied the Bishop of London to this? why, that too many in these days
neglecting holiness of life, presumed too much of persisting in grace, laying
all their religion on Predestination, If I shall be saved, I shall be saved;
which he said was contrary to the true doctrine of Predestination, wherein we
should argue rather ascendendo, than descendendo; thus, I live in obedience to
God, and therefore I trust God has elected and predestined me to salvation:
not thus, which is the usual course, God has chosen me to life, therefore
though I sin never so grievously, yet I shall not be damned; for whom he loves,
he loves to the end. And then showed his Majesty the doctrine of England
ouching Predestination, We must receive Gods promises, etc.

But under favor, these words do not contain the doctrine of Predestination,
but are only a caution against the abuse of the doctrine of Predestination laid
down in the foregoing words. As for those who did usually argue descendendo, I
suppose they were only men of wretched and profligate lives, and we must not
bauk a truth lest they should stumble at it; or if we must, then must we also
forbear to say, God is merciful, and Christ died for sinners, lest men should
thence conclude, Therefore I shall be saved, though I live in many sins; for so
it is argued usually. Wherefore the Bishop has showed no reason why the
Doctor's addition might not be made for the comfort of the trembling penitent;
and more full and apert confutation of those who assert a total apostasy from
grace received. Yet I confess Dr. Reynolds needed not to have made this motion,
because the seventeenth Article clearly enough asserteth perseverance.

The second thing moved by the Dr. related to the 23d Article, in which it is
said, That it is not lawful for any man to take upon him the office of
preaching or administering the Sacraments in the Congregation, before he be
lawfully called. What could Dr. R. take exception at in this Article? why,
says the Relator, at those words, In the Congregation; as implying a
lawfulness for any man whosoever, out of the Congregation, to preach and
administer the Sacraments, though he had no lawful call thereunto. He that can
think the Doctor argued at this rate, must think he was not the Dr. Reynolds,
whose praise is in all the Reformed Churches. I should rather conceive the Dr.
took exception at the words in the Congregation; as not sufficient to express
(what was needful to be expressed in all Articles of Religion) that men may not
in private preach and administer the Sacraments, though they have no lawful
call thereunto. This sure was the Doctors arguing; but was not to be so
propounded, lest it should have been thought necessary to say more for the
perfection of the Churches Articles than could well be said. But supposing Dr.
R. to have disputed as the Relator has reported, what was answered to him?
Why, that it was a vain objection, because by the doctrine and practice of the
Church of England, none but a licensed Minister might Preach, nor either
publicly or privately administer the Eucharist or the Lord's Supper, page 30,
31. We are not told by whom this was answered, if we had, we might have been
apt to think they were not the profoundest men in the world; for the rejoinder
is easy, that the Church of England owned another Sacrament besides the
Eucharist. Here, (...), the King must be brought in to answer for those who
were not of one mind to answer for themselves; and what is he said to have
answered? why, that he had taken order for private baptism with the Bishops
already. I ask, had the Doctor a spirit of divination to know what had been
ordered in the first days conference? If he had not, this answer of the Kings
proved not the Doctor's objection to be frivolous, but rather handsomely
implied it to have some weight in it.

The Doctor being already acquitted of vanity, let us now see what the framers
of the Article might mean by inserting the words in the Congregation. King
Edwards Article was thus worded, It is not lawful for any man to take upon him
the office of public preaching, or ministering the Sacraments in the
Congregation, before he be lawfully called, and sent to execute the same. And
those we ought to judge lawfully called and sent, which be chosen and called by
men who have public authority given them in the Congregation, to call and send
Ministers into the Lords Vineyard. And the present Article does not differ,
unless it be altered since Mr. Rogers his time. Out of the last clause of the
Article I argue thus: Those ought to be judged lawfully called and sent, which
be chosen and called to the work of the Ministry by men who have public
authority given unto them in the Congregation, to call and send Ministers into
the Lords Vineyard. Some not ordained by Bishops have, etc. ergo. This
syllogism might, if urged, make some work and stir, and therefore I do not so
much as form it in words at length. Still I am unsatisfied why the words [in
the Congregation] are added either in the first or second clause of the
Article; but at adventure I am glad they are added, until it be in some public
Record of our Churches doctrine defined what preaching is; for if Reading be
Preaching, then I should not be over-forward to subscribe that it is not lawful
for Laics to preach privately.

About Confirmation the Doctor observed (as the Relator tells us, p. 25) a
contradiction betwixt the 25th Article, and the words used concerning it in the
Collect for Confirmation in the Communion-book; and therefore desired that both
the contradiction might be considered, and the ground of Confirmation examined.

In this we are told, p. 31. was observed a curiosity or malice; for the
Article insinuates, That the making of Confirmation to be a Sacrament, is a
corrupt imitation of the Apostles; but the Communion book aiming at the right
use and proper source thereof, makes it to be according to the Apostles
example; and his Majesty comparing both places, concluded the objection to be a
mere cavil.

Seeing the Article is by all Ministers to be subscribed, I shall be glad if it
can be made appear that the meaning is only, that the making of Confirmation to
be a Sacrament, is a corrupt following of the Apostles; but that it seems to
insinuate something more, can hardly be denied by any one that reads the whole
syntax. But the Bishop in the Collect for Confirmation, says inter alia, We
make our humble supplications unto thee for these thy servants, upon whom,
after the example of thy holy Apostles, we lay our hands. In which words I
would fain know who are included in the [we]; for I take it, that the Bishop
alone lays on hands; and let no Minister desire to join with him in imposition
of hands for confirmation, if he must be supposed to say that he does it after
the example of the holy Apostles; for that ever the Apostles laid hands on any
that had been duly baptized in their in^ancy, to confirm them, may be sooner
said, than firmly proved; yet if it can be proved that they did, I shall
heartily rejoice; for the more apostolical Confirmation proves to be, the more
easily and cheerfully I hope it will be submitted to. This I find, that in the
old Liturgy no one question was to be propounded to the Confirmand; in the new
there is one to be propounded, and it is such a one as may make all ungodly
wretches afraid to have it propounded to them: sure I am, without horrible
hypocrisy they cannot answer to it affirmatively. But then the new Liturgy
has chopped off two of the Considerations for which, in the old,
Confirmatition was said to be appointed; the reason whereof, as I cannot
certainly tell, so I will not uncertainly conjecture; though I have heard
stories about this affair, that startled me.

Bishop Bancroft says, Confer. p. 32. That Confirmation was not so much
founded upon the places in the Acts of the Apostles, which some of the Fathers
had often showed; but upon Heb. 6.2. where it is made a part of the Apostles
Catechism: In the first days Conference he had said, It was set down and named
in express words, Heb. 6 2. and affirmed it to be an Institution Apostolical,
p. 11.

Here I may, I hope, enquire what the Bishop meant by saying, Confirmation was
not so much founded on the places in the Acts, which some of the Fathers had
often showed. What does which relate to? Have some of the Fathers often showed,
that Confirmation is not so much founded upon the places in the Acts of the
Apostles? If they have, down falls presently much of many of our Episcopal
brethrens building concerning Episcopacy, if they have shown no such thing; I
cannot make sense of the Bishop's saying concerning the places in the Acts. As
for Heb. 6.2. I am willing to think that by laying on of hands there, may be
signified Confirmation: but I cannot much blame those who differ from me in
expounding that place; for I find Bishop Usher referring the laying on of
hands, to the ordaining of Ministers; others refer it to that and sundry other
things performed by imposition of hands; these would count themselves wronged,
if one should say, That they deny that which is set down and named in express
words.

The Bishop of Durham (I must not forget that) is related p. 11. to have noted
something out of the Gospel of St. Matthew, for the imposition of hands upon
children. He might out of that Gospel have observed many things concerning
Christ's laying of hands on the children brought to him. But the difficulty will
be, how to make those things pertinent to the laying on of hands upon those who
are too big many times to be called little children, and are already baptized,
and desire to be orderly admitted to the Lords Supper; and when these are made
appear pertinent, then it will be worth consideration, whether the Bishops
should not rather say, We lay on hands in imitation of Christ, than in
imitation of the holy Apostles.

Obj. But all this while the main Controversy about Confirmation is not
touched, which relates to the Minister of Confirmation, which Dr. Reynolds and
his party would have had in their own hands, whereas none of all the Fathers
ever admitted any to confirm, but Bishops alone, as said the Bishops of London
and Winchester, p. 34, 35.

Answ. To me this is not the main question, let our Bishops censure those who
admit to the Sacrament such as can neither say Lords-Prayer, Belief, Ten
Commandments, nor answer the questions in the Common Prayer Book Catechism, nor
are either confirmed or desirous to be confirmed; let also the Bishops
themselves ride through their Dioceses, and confirm all that are unconfirmed,
and suspend such from the Sacrament as either are unwilling or unmeet to be
confirmed, and I persuade my self, the Presbyters will not be vexed that so
much work is taken off their hands.

As for what His Majesty is made to say, page 36. That it suits neither with
the Authority, nor decency of Confirmation, that every ordinary Pastor should
do it and that there was as great reason that none should confirm without
license from the Bishop, as none Preach without his license. I doubt the
Relator has both wronged the King and the Bishops cause; The King, for we can
scarce conceive he should have such high thoughts of the Authority or decency
of confirmation, as to imagine, that either was lessened by being administered
by those by whom Baptism is administered. And the Bishops cause also, for it
will not serve their turn that Presbyters should not confirm without their
License, as they do not Preach without their License, unless it be also made
appear that none can be licensed to confirm but themselves. Before I pass from
this, I must also advert, That the Relator makes the King to tax St. Jerome for
asserting, that a Bishop is not Divinae ordinationis; and the Bishop of London
to insert, That if he could not prove his ordination lawful, out of the
Scriptures, he would not be a Bishop four hours. Wherein I observe the policy
of the Bishop, who reserved power to himself to continue a Bishop if he could
prove his ordination lawful by the Scriptures; he knew well enough that his
Ordination might be lawful, and vet a Bishop not be Divinae Ordinationis. That
is lawful by Scripture, which no Scripture Law condemns, or forbids; but he
that should say, that every thing not prohibited, is Divinae ordinationis,
would have much a-do to prove that he himself had any meetness to be
consecrated a Bishop. I suppose I can prove that it is lawful for me to wear a
Beaver; but when I had so proved, should I not be ridiculous, if I should say
that a Beaver was Divinae ordinationis? Besides, if Dr. Reynolds had chanced to
gravel the Bishop with an argument about the lawfulness of his Ordination he to
keep his Bishopric, would presently have replied that he was ordained to be a
Presbyter, but he was only consecrated to be a Bishop, and by that means he
might have kept his lands and his credit too.

Let us now proceed with Dr. Reynolds, who is made to say, that the words in
the 37th Article, The Bishop of Rome has no authority in this land, be not
sufficient unless it were added, nor ought to have. It is like the Doctor had
observed that the Oath of Supremacy runs to that or the like effect.

And he had never heard, it is as like, that the King and his Council heartily
laughed at the framers of that Oath, and therefore scarce expected to be told,
that a Puritan was a Protestant frighted out of his wits, for propounding that
the Article might be as fully worded as the Oath; yet it seems he had the hap
to be laughed at for his honest well-meant motion; so the Relator acquaints us,
p. 37.

P. 38. The Dr. moved that this proposition, The intention of the Minister is
not of the essence of the Sacrament, might be added unto the Book of Articles,
the rather, because some in England had preached it to be essential. Had it
been told him that if he would name those men who so Preached, they should be
suspended, till they had recalled so false and uncomfortable an opinion, or
that there was enough in the Articles to infer that the intention of the
Minister is not essential to the Sacrament, it had been sufficient; but to say
that His Majesty utterly disliked this motion for two reasons, and to name but
one of the two, and to stuff up that with a story concerning Mr. Craig, was to
put the world under a temptation to think too meanly of their King. It is unfit
to thrust every position negative into the Book of Articles, for that would
swell the Book into a volume as big as the Bible, and also confound the Reader;
therefore I may not insert this short position, the Ministers intention is not
of the essence of the Sacrament, into the English Articles. This is made to be
the Kings argument; to which, whether Dr. Reynolds could reply nothing, others
may judge.

Here we might also speak of the Nine Articles of Lambeth, put into the Irish
Confession, not long after this Conference, but never put into ours, though it
seems the Doctor moved twice they might be put in. For my part I am not sorry
they are left out; for some honest men may question the truth of them, and not
be able in faith to subscribe them, and so the Church lose the benefit of their
parts: As for Latitudinarians, they would have subscribed them in a sense of
their own devising, though they had thought them false in the sense of the
framers and imposers of them; or they would have said, that by subscribing they
did not declare the assent of their minds to the truth of the Articles, but
only their purpose not to publish their dissent to them, so as to make a
disturbance in the Church about them. A Jesuit Papist, and a Latitudinarian
Protestant will stick at no subscription whatsoever.

As for the Dean of Paul, his discourse to vindicate himself, I am not
concerned to contradict him in it; but I think he contradicts himself, if Dr.
Barlow does him no wrong, p. 41, 42.

The motion made by the Dr. and related p. 43. concerning a Catechism, produced
a very considerable addition to the old Catechism, which was all he aimed at in
it; also he succeeded in his motion, that a straiter course might be taken for
reformation of the general abuse and profanation of the Sabbath day; for that,
the Relator says, found a general and unanimous assent. So that the Bishops
then did not think it Judaism to call the Lords day Sabbath, nor to provide for
its sanctification.

Nor did he miscarry in his motion for a new Translation of the Bible; for not
long after the Conference, a new one was published, which has been generally
used ever since, to Gods glory, and the Churches edification.

As for his Majesty's profession that he could never yet see a Bible well
translated into English, and that the Geneva Translation was the worst of all;
I believe his Majesty repented of it, or else he had not given leave to Dr.
Morton to defend the two places in the Geneva Notes, that he took particular
exception to.

Dr. Reynolds for conclusion of what concerned doctrine, moved, That unlawful
and seditious books might be suppressed, at least restrained and imparted to a
few. This a man might think would have been entertained with a general assent
and consent, but contrariwise, the Bishop of London supposing himself to be
principally aimed at, answers to what he was never accused of, and says, but
without any proof, That the Book, De Jure Magistratus in subditos, was
published by a great disciplinarian, but named him not; and the King is said to
tell the Doctor, that he was a better Colledg-man than Statesman; and by this
means no course was taken to prevent such Commentaries both in Philosophy and
Divinity as came into England from beyond the Seas to the corrupting and
poisoning of young students in the University.

The motion about Pastors resident and learned, page 51, 52, 53, is handsomely
avoided by the King, with an answer, that he had consulted with his Bishops
about that, whom he found ready and willing to second him in it, etc. yet all
that Kings days, and ever since, the Nation has groaned under the burden of an
unlearned and non-resident Ministry; if the Law of the Land admit of very mean
and tolerable sufficiency in any Clerks, why have not the Bishops petitioned
that the Law be altered so as to require greater sufficiency? And if the
Lay-Patrons are to blame, who present very mean men to their Cures; are
Ecclesiastical-Patrons to be excused, who present Clerks every way as mean?

Now come the Bishop of Londons motions to be considered, in number Three:

1. That there might be amongst us a praying Ministry; he meant a Ministry that
might read the Common Prayer Book, to which very little learning indeed would
suffice; but I suppose there was then no want of such a Ministry, nor is there
now; so that the motion might have been spared.

The Second motion was, that till a sufficient and learned Minister might be
placed in every Congregation, godly Homilies might be read, and the number of
them increased. This motion sure was not liked, for unto this day neither is a
learned Minister settled in every Congregation, nor the number of Homilies
increased.

His last motion was, that Pulpits might not be made Pasquils, wherein every
humorous fellow or discontented, might traduce his superiors.

This the King graciously accepted, and so did the complaining Ministers, as I
suppose; for that the Pulpit should be made a Stage is certainly a very lewd
custom, but obtains too too much among I know whom.

Proceed we with Dr. Reynolds to Subscription, as to which, we find him only
desiring, that Ministers might be put upon it, to subscribe according to the
Statutes of the Realm, viz. to the Articles of Religion, and the Kings
supremacy; to subscribe otherwise they could not, because among other things,
the Common Prayer Book enjoined the Reading of some Chapters, in which were
manifest errors directly repugnant to Scriptures, instancing particularly in
Ecclesiasticus 48.10. where the words infer, That Elias in person was to come
before Christ; and if so, Christ is not yet come.

Now let us take notice of what is answered:

1. Bishop Bancroft answers, That the most of the objections against the Books
of Apocrypha, were the old cavils of the Jews, renewed by St. Jerome in his
time, who was the first that gave them the name of Apocrypha; which opinion,
upon Ruffinus his challenge, he, after a sort, disclaimed; the rather, because
a general offense was taken at his speeches in that kind.

This, I must needs say, was a politic answer: for first we are told, that not
all the objections, but some of the objections against these books, are the old
cavils of the Jews renewed by St. Jerome. 2. We are told, that St. Jerome was
the first that called these Books Apocryphal; which opinion after a sort he
reclaimed upon Ruffinus his challenge.

What can any man reply to such an answer? should one bring an objection
against these books, that the Jews never would have brought, he would have been
told, That not all objections against them, but only some, are Jewish cavils:
Should one say that Jerome disclaimed not his opinion concerning books
Apocryphal, he would be told, That he did not indeed disclaim his opinion
absolutely; but yet after a sort he did; and how far (...), or after a sort,
may reach, no one can tell: Nor have we the least reference to any place of
Jerome's Works in which this disclaiming of his opinion is recorded (whether
St. Jerome disclaimed his opinion, he who has not St. Jerome's Works by him,
may find discussed in Dr. Cosens his Scholastical History of the Canon of
Scripture): I say, it cannot be imagined why the Jews should less esteem the
Apocryphal books than they deserved; they retain the Canonical books of the Old
Testament, which make more against them than the Apocrypha. Nor is St. Jerome
the first who called the Apocryphal books by the name of Apocrypha; others
before him had given them that name, or one equivalent, as I can make appear.
Indeed the Ancients of the Church have so blasted some especially of the
Apocryphal Writings, that I cannot but wonder how they came to be read in our
Churches. The History of Susanna was accounted a Fable even by Julius
Africanus, contemporary to Origin; and yet our newest Calendar appoints it to
be read, as also the story of Bell and Dragon. There is a common saying in men's
mouths, that these books are Canonical, not for the confirming of our faith,
but the regulating of our manners; but he who shall make all Apocryphal books a
rule for his manners, may chance to set more on his Doomsday-book than he will
quickly get off again. As for him who shall make them a rule of Faith, he will
undoubtedly become a Heretic.

Dr. Reynolds his instance the Bishops would not meddle with; but the King, who
was not in conference to be contradicted, p. 62. is made 1. To argue and
demonstrate, That whatsoever Ben Sirach had said, Ecclus. 48.10. of Elias,
Elias had in his own person while he lived, performed, and accomplished. 2. To
check Dr. Reynolds for imposing on a man that was dead, a sense never meant by
him. 3. To use a pleasant apostrophe to the Lords, What trow ye makes these
men so angry with Ecclesiasticus? By my soul I think he was a Bishop, or else
they would never use him so. 4. Yet after all, to will Dr. Reynolds to note
those chapters in the Apocrypha-books that were offensive, and bring them to
the Lord Archbishop on Wednesday following.

Had the Relator consulted the Kings honor, he had not inserted one of his
Jeers managed with an Oath, into a Conference concerning Religion; nor would
he, had he regarded his own reputation, have called a sarcasm, in which was an
oath, an unnecessary oath, a pleasant apostrophe. To the place it self, I say
the Greek copies, ( Ecclus. 48.10.) much differ among themselves, and as much
from the Latin Translation; our English Translations also greatly vary; but I
could never yet meet with any Copy or Translation from which at least an unwary
Reader or hearer would not ^ollect that Elias was to come before the day of
(...) Lord, either first or second. Junius says the place argues the
ignorance of the author, blind in the promises concerning the Kingdom of
Christ. Grotius acknowledges little less. The Syriack and Arabic Translatour
carry it clearly for Elias his being to come before the day of the Lord, to
turn the hearts of the children to the Parents, as may be seen in the
Polyglotts. So that if the Doctor was mistaken about the meaning of
Ecclesiasticus, his mistake was common to him with many more of great esteem,
and deserved not to be put off either with a check or a flout. Whether D. R.
ever brought in a list of the offensive chapters in the Apocryphal books, I
cannot tell; but I can find, that since King James his time, the people have
had in Parochial Churches less Apocrypha, and more Canonical Scripture; perhaps
at last the divinely inspired Writings that have in and on them so many express
signatures of Holiness and Majesty, shall prevail to have the sole honor of
being read in the Churches for Christians instruction.

As to the next scruple about subscription, grounded on, Jesus said to his
disciples, when he spoke to the Pharisees; it seems the King took order to have
the Translation reformed.

Now must Dr. Reynolds for a season give way to Mr. Knewstubbe a Cantabrigian,
and a very eminent Divine, though not much known by any writings he left behind
him. He is said by Dr. Barlow to have objected against the Interrogatories in
Baptism propounded to Infants; but what it was he said against propounding
those Interrogatories to the Infants, we are not told; but rather made believe
his discourse was so perplexed, that the King professed he understood it not.
The Bishop of Winton aiming at his meaning, showed the use of such
Interrogatories out of St. Austin, adding his reason, Qui peccavit in altero,
credat in altero. Glad am I to find that one English Bishop, without
contradiction from any other joined with him, did allow St. Austin's saying
that an Infant may peccare in altero; I hope if any now laugh at the notion of
our sinning in Adam, they will acknowledge themselves to have embraced an
opinion quite different from the opinion of those to whom they succeed. In the
mean time I shall be glad to hear it proved, that a child can credere in
altero; for I rather opine, that a Parents Faith is so far accepted by God, as
to entitle his child to Baptism, than that the child of a believer does believe
in his believing father: for if he believe in him, he must be saved in him, if
he dye in his Infant-state; and I would give all I am worth to hear it proved,
that all the Infants of godly Parents dying in their Infancy, are saved. But of
this no more. Our new Liturgy has almost taken away the ground of the dispute
concerning these Interrogatories; for it orders that the first Interrogatory
should be thus propounded: Do thou in the name of this child, etc. which
words I have not observed in the old Liturgy. But yet I would fain know why we
may not as well ask the Father, Will thou that this child be baptized in this
faith?

Pass we from the Interrogatories, to the cross in Baptism, which Mr.
Knewstubbe took exceptions to, in number two: First, the offense of weak
brethren, grounded on the words of St. Paul, Romans 14. and 1 Cor. 8. viz. the
consciences of the weak are not to be offended. These places being the chief
seat of the doctrine of scandal, deserve a most serious consideration; for
certainly we should take heed not to destroy those for whom Christ died.

And this care is principally to be taken by the Church in making Canons; if
she only command things which Christ has commanded, who is he that can blame
her, or think she exceeds the bounds and limits of the power given her? but if
she command that which she confesses she need not command, and which she
cannot but know many account unlawful; and if she command such a thing under
the highest penalty; then has she reason to consider whether such precepts
will be pleasing to her Lord? It will signify little to ask how long people
will be weak? for no doubt they will be weak while the world stands. As little
will it signify to say, Subscriptions are not required of Laics and Idiots,
but Preachers and Ministers; for it is notorious that Subscriptions are
required of Fresh-men at their matriculation in the University, when to be sure
they are Laics, and not acquainted with Controversies in Religion. As for
Ministers, they should not be weak in faith, but they must consider that they
have under them such as are weak; and not suddenly engage never to administer
necessary Ordinances unto them, unless they will receive them with disputable
Ceremonies. If a single Minister were left to his own choice either to cross
the child he baptizeth, or not to cross it, ought he not to say, If by crossing
I shall scandalize my brother, I will not cross a child while the world stands.
It will be said, that a single Minister is not left at his liberty. True; but
the Church was at liberty to make or not to make a Law about crossing. Had she
made no Law to cross children that are baptized, then I suppose no Minister
would have crossed any child; and what damage the child would have sustained by
not being crossed, it is past my skill to imagine; by making a Law that all
children that shall be baptized publicly, shall be also crossed, many learned
Ministers are put out of Livings, many are made to lay aside the thoughts of
being Ministers, and divert to Law or Physic, a bone of contention is cast
among the common people, etc. What ought the Church to do in this case?

Mr. Knewstubbe's second Argument is said to have consisted of three
interrogatories:

I would ask one question that was not then by him asked, viz. Whether it will
be as profitable for the Child to be signed with any other sign, as with the
sign of that Cross upon which our Savior did suffer death? If it will not (as
no doubt, most will say it will not) then we must be first informed what figure
our Saviors Cross was of, lest in going about to make the sign of it, we
should make the sign of somewhat else. And how shall we know what figure our
Saviors Cross was of? The New Testament will afford us little light in this
matter; for the word (...), though affirmed by a great Critic, first to
signify the same with Furca, then with Crux, yet is known by those who have
observed its use in Hemer and other Authors, to have no other original
signification than of a Stake. If we betake our selves to the Fathers, they
speak strangely and variously concerning the figure of the Cross: Origin and
Jerome say, that the Samaritan letter Tau represents the figure of a Cross,
than which says Scaliger nothing is more false; nothing more true, says Dr.
Walton in his Prolegomena; yet the character of the Samaritan Tau, now in use,
has no resemblance with a Cross, what character it may have in old medals and
moneys, sober men will not much regard. Justin Martyr, dealing with Trypho the
Jew, will find figures and types of the Cross in the Old Testament, where the
Spirit never intended any. Yea, in his second Apology for Christians, he bids
the Heathens consider, whether without this figure, men could administer any
thing, or have any converse with one another. The Unicorns horn, as he
describes it, does indeed fairly represent such a kind of Cross, as it is most
probable our Savior suffered on, for that seems to have been made of a piece
of wood fixed in the earth, with a transverse beam fastened unto it toward the
top, and another piece of wood infixed into, and standing out from that which
was erected and straight up; but that Moses thought of any such thing when he
blessed Joseph, Deuteronomy. 33.17. or that the Psalmist aimed at any such thing,
Psalm. 22.21. is so improbable, that it is well we have other types and
prophecies of the Old Testament, to produce against the Jews, to whom a
crucified Christ is a stumbling block. But now, which of our Deacons or Priests
does, in crossing a Child, represent the five extremities of the Roman Cross?
The aforesaid Justin Martyr in his Apology suggests, that Philo having read the
story in Moses concerning the Brazen Serpent, and not understanding that it was
the sign of a Cross which he made, but rather a decussation, said, (...). Yet I
believe it were no hard matter to find some Christian Writers that make the
Roman X to be the Cross, and that is crux decussata, or an Andrews Cross, as I
think we were taught to call it when we learnt Arithmetic. To be brief, I
think that if Christ had intended his Picture should have been set up in
Churches, he would have left us some sure way to know his visage. 2. If he had
designed the Cross on which he suffered, any honor, he would have taken care
that it should be preserved. 3. If he had ordained to teach his Church by the
sign of the Cross, he would have left us at no uncertainty how to make it. As
for the visage of our Savior, that that is unknown, I would fain think that no
man now doubts. For though it be reported by Damascen and Evagrius, that our
Savior sent his Picture unto Abgarus Prince of Edessa; yet it is by them
reported on the credit of they tell us they know not whom, and neither of them
describe what a kind of man he was: Besides Eusebius who wrote the story of
matters supposed to pass betwixt Christ and Abgarus out of the Records of
Edessa, has not one word of this Picture. Of another image of our Savior made
by Nicodemus, mention is made in a piece attributed to Athanasius, but falsely,
as the more ingenuous Papists acknowledge. Nicephorus Calistus also, Lib. 10.
cap. ult. has given us a very particular account of Christ's face and body, as
to figure and form. James Nailor, as I have been told, when brought to give an
account of his blasphemy in making himself Christ, had, as near as he could,
made himself to look like such a man as Nicephorus has described; but as I
suppose that no man in his wits took that blasphemer to be Christ, so no man
that has much wisdom will believe, that Nicephorus, at above a Thousand years
distance, is to be much credited concerning our Saviors feature and
complexion, especially, till he have named the authors whom he follows. The
Cross of Christ, we are told, was found by Helena the Mother of Constantine the
Great, Three hundred years after his sufferings: but the Story appears to
have little probability in it. We must suppose that there were in that place
just Three Crosses and no more, and that by a miracle those Three Crosses were
preserved from putrefaction; now if any man can think that our Saviors Cross
was so miraculously preserved, yet to what end should the two Thieves Crosses
be preserved, unless it were to trouble and perplex those, who should be so
simple as to look after that which was nowhere to be found? But how did the
seekers after this Cross, distinguish it from the Crosses of the two Thieves?
were the Crosses only found, and not the Titles signifying what the crime was
for which they were crucified? St. Ambrose says the title was found; yet Queen
Helen not trusting to that, by the counsel of the Bishop of Jerusalem expects a
miracle, applies the Crosses of the two Thieves to a dead man taken out of the
Bier, but they put no life into him, which the Cross of Christ, as soon as it
touched him, presently did; others say, that the Cross at that time did not
restore a dead man to life, but only recovered a Jerusalem woman that lay sick
of a very desperate disease: and Sozomen, as I take it, reports it to have
wrought both these miracles at one time. O! how little sound knowledge was then
in the world, when Christians of prime note took such pains to find out that
which no way cooperated to our redemption, but was only a passive instrument of
our Saviors sufferings materially considered? Is that Cross of wood, if it
could now be found, a meet object of religious, or so much as civil honor?
What use could it be of, unless there should appear something in the make of
it, that would serve to illustrate some form of speech in sacred or profane
Authors? As for stirring up of sorrow, the Word and Sacraments are much more
apt to do that than any sight of the Cross on which our Savior did hang. But
great miracles have been wrought by the Cross, and fragments or pieces of it,
yea, by the sign of it. I must not deny but that many things very wonderful are
reported to be done by the Cross. But perhaps sometimes these wonders were
wrought by the Devil, to deceive inordinate worshippers of such images, God
permitting, and the infidelity of men necessarily requiring it, that I may make
use of Biels words. 2. If God at any time did do a miracle, the Cross it self
being applied, or the sign of it made, it must be the Faith and Prayer of the
person using the Cross, that God respected in putting forth his power, and not
the Cross. 3. I do much doubt that the one half of those things which are
reported to be done by the Cross, were never done at all. The highest story
that ever I read concerning the effects of the Cross, and which is made use of
by almost every Popish Writer in this matter, is the delivering of Julian the
Apostate from the spirits with which he was frighted, upon the making the sign
of the Cross, though he had before renounced it. Such a thing I find indeed in
Nazianzen's first invective against Julian. But the Father reports it only on
hearsay, (...), but I would fain know how the report was first raised, none
pretended (that we find) to have had it either from Julian himself, or from the
Conjurer that was with him; yet if men had it not from them, they must needs
feign it themselves. The same Father had before told us, that when Julian was
sacrificing, the intrails of the Beast showed him a crowned Cross; but he
prefaceth that Story thus, (...), closes it thus, (...), etc. by which it may
appear, that this Father did not stick to put into his writings, such stories
as he would not averr to be true, when he conceived they might serve his turn.
Had all that have reported as strange matters concerning the Cross, been so
ingenuous, as to let us know that they went but upon common fame, Staurolatry
had not proceeded to such an height as it has now attained in the Romish
Church. But let us now consider Mr. Knewstubbes questions:

1. Whether the Church had power to institute an external significant sign?

For answer, it might have been expected that the Churches charter to institute
such significant signs should have been produced and read to the Questionist;
but instead of doing so, it was replied to him:

1. That he did mistake the use of the cross with us, which was not used in
Baptism any otherwise than only as a ceremony. Which was a pretty reply indeed,
and implies that a ceremony cannot be an external significant sign, or else
was a most insignificant answer.

2. That they themselves made imposition of hands in their ordination of
Pastors, to be a sign significant. Which Reply supposes, 1. That they ordained
Pastors (the which I never heard they did.) 2. That there is the same reason of
a ceremony used, and perhaps commanded by the Apostles, that there is of
ceremonies never used nor commanded by them.

3. The kneeling on the ground, the lifting up our hands, the knocking of our
breasts, are ceremonies significant, and yet are and may lawfully be used, said
the Bishop of Winchester. But he might as well have held his peace; for though
these be significant ceremonies, yet they are not of that class of significant
ceremonies which Nonconformists scruple; for the scrupled ceremonies are such
as have humane institution, ordained signification, mystical signification,
appropriation to Gods solemn Worship and Service. And the ceremonies the Bishop
instanced in, though lawful, are none of them commanded by the Church, nor will
be (I suppose) in haste.

4. Dr. Montague Dean of the Chapel, remembered the practice of the Jews, who
unto the Institution of the Passover prescribed unto them by Moses, had, as the
Rabbis witness, added both signs and words, eating sour herbs, and drinking
wine, with these words to both, Take, eat these in remembrance, drink this in
remembrance; upon which addition and tradition of theirs, our Savior
instituted the Sacrament of the last Supper, in celebrating it with the same
words, and after the same manner; thereby approving that fact of theirs in
particular, and generally that a Church may institute and retain a significant
sign. Which satisfied his Majesty exceeding well.

Here is a foundation laid, and then a superstructure raised on it. The
foundation is, that the Jews unto the institution of the Passover prescribed
unto them by Moses, had added both signs and words, etc. but is not this
foundation laid in the sand, depending on the testimony of later Rabbis, whose
testimonies are by wise men esteemed lighter than vanity? The apostate Jews
were no doubt grown wretchedly superstitious; but I am loath to believe, unless
I needs must, that they used all the fopperies their Rabbis mention as in use
with them. But be this as it will, I wonder what made the Reverend Dean say,
that the eating of sour herbs was an addition to the Paschal Institution; sour
herbs were as much commanded as unleavened bread. The Jews had indeed of their
own heads added to the Paschal provisions a dish of thick sauce made of Dates,
Figs, Raisins and Vinegar mingled together (as some Authors say) to put them in
mind of the clay in which their fathers labored.

Allowing them to have used this sauce and wine, and whatever else superstition
could dictate to them, how appears it, that upon any addition or tradition of
theirs Christ instituted his Sacrament? or that he had not instituted the
supper before the Jews made these additions? If we look upon Christ in the days
of his abode here on earth, we find him to have showed no great respect to the
traditions and ceremonies of the Jews that had no Divine institution, as may be
made appear by many instances, if it were worth while; so far was he from
allowing his Churches to add any thing to his own institutions that nature did
not call for.

We are told by the Relator, p. 68. That here the King desired to be acquainted
how ancient the use of the Cross was. Dr. Reynolds confessed it to have been
ever since the Apostles times (mark, he did not confess it to have been used in
the Apostles times, nor did the Bishops or any of their adherents say it was
used by them) but the difficulty was, whether it were of that ancient use in
Baptism? To remove this difficulty, the Dean of Westminster produces
Tertullian, Cyprian, Origin, saying it was in use in immortali lavacro. The Bp.
of Winchester added, it was in use in Constantines time, page 69. whereupon the
King concluded, If then it were used, I see no reason, but it may still be
retained.

As for the antiquity of signing with the sign of the Cross in Baptism, the
Nonconformists may reply, That it was as ancient to use the sign of the Cross
when people went abroad, or entered into the Church, or prayed, as when a child
was baptized. If we may leave off the frequent use of crossing upon other
occasions, without any dishonor to the Fathers, why may we not also leave off
crossing in Baptism? Anointing also was used in Baptism by the Fathers; yet it
is accounted a piece of our Reformation not to use anointing; what
disparagement to the Reformation would it be to leave off crossing also?
Besides, there was an use among the Fathers of the sign of the cross, which
holds not for our times; and sundry effects they expected from it, which we
cannot, dare not expect from it, because we cannot find in Gods word a promise
that any such effect shall follow upon the crossing our selves. All along Queen
Elizabeth's reign it was customary for the Queen to apply the sign of the cross
to the tumor of the Strumosi; King James discontinued that ceremony; and yet
we do not find that he had less success in the curing of the strumous disease,
than the Queen. So that the strange and wonderful things pretended to be
wrought by the sign of the Cross in the days of our ancient Doctors, were
either not wrought at all, or if they were wrought, the sign of the Cross
nothing contributed to the working of them. Finally, I marvel why the Dean of
Westminster, to prove the antiquity of the Cross in Baptism, did rise no higher
than Tertullian, Cyprian, Origin; they are not the ancientest Fathers that
speak of Baptism; the two first erred in the very point of Baptism; the last
(if his Translators have not abused him) was scarce sound in any thing.

But the Cross was used in Constantine's times, and why may it not now be used?
shall we accuse Constantine of Popery and Superstition? Thus is the King said
to have argued in the Conference; and by his argument he gave us to understand,
that he liked not that any one should charge Constantine with Popery or
Superstition; I therefore will lay neither to his charge; but yet his purpose
not to be baptized till he might be baptized in the same River where Christ was
baptized, viz. Jordan, if it did not proceed from superstition, proceeded from
a very odd humor. God crossed him in that his design, and put him under a
necessity either to receive Baptism in another place than Jordan, or not to
receive it at all. (In this I follow Ensebius, for whom should I rather follow
than him who so well knew Constantine, and has transmitted his History to
posterity? If any man incline to those who would have Constantine baptized many
years before at Rome, I leave him to Scultetus in his Medulla, who defends
Eusebius against Baronius.)

Mr. Knewstubb's second question was, supposing the Church had power to add
significant ceremonies, whether she might there add them where Christ had
already ordained one? Which he supposed was no less derogatory to Christ's
Institution, than if any Potentate of the Land should presume to add his Seal
to the Great Seal of England.

To this Dr. Barlow says, p. 70. the King answered, That the case was not
alike; for that no sign or thing was added to the Sacrament which was fully and
perfectly finished, before any mention of the Cross is made.

I dare not think this was King James his answer: for it is only fitted and
suited to our own Church as then it was ordered, and still continues. In the
first Book of King Edward, crossing was appointed before Baptism could be
pretended to be perfected, or indeed begun; which was also the usage of the
ancient Churches. 2. I conceive the presumption of any subject would be great,
if he should add his own seal to confirm or signify any thing that the King's
Great Seal was appointed to confirm and signify, though the Great Seal had
been set before he set his Seal. 3. Methinks the argument stands still in its
full force; If applying of water to a believer in the name of Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost do signify all that the Cross signifies, to what end is the Cross
used? The child that is baptized with us, is obliged by Baptism obediently to
keep Gods holy will and commandments, and walk in the same all the days of his
life; what can the Cross oblige him to more? Is not confessing the says of
Christ crucified, one of Gods commandments? I know a learned man has replied,
that constancy is not distinctly signified in being baptized, as it is in being
crossed. But I ask, Is it any benefit to a man to have some ceremony used that
does more distinctly mind him of his constancy than Baptism did? If it be none,
then such a ceremony is needless; if it be some benefit, how came it to pass
that no Apostle ever used any such ceremony? and why do we not excogitate other
ceremonies to admonish us as distinctly of other duties?

Mr. Knewstubbes third question was, In case the Church had power to institute
such a sign, how far such an Ordinance was to bind them without impeaching
their Christian liberty?

The King charged him never more to speak to that point. And therefore I will
not speak to it at all, but must needs say it was an odd question if it were so
propounded as the Relator has worded it.

Dr. Reynolds is again brought on the stage, p. 71. objecting the example of
the Brazen Serpent stamped to powder, because the people abused it to Idolatry;
wishing the Cross, because superstitiously abused, might be abandoned also.

To this the King is made to say, 1. If it were abused to Superstition in the
time of Popery, that plainly implies, that it was well used before Popery. As
if nothing had been abused by the Papists in Divine Worship, but what had been
once well used. 2. That there is no resemblance between the Brazen Serpent, a
material visible thing, and the sign of the Cross made in the air. As if a
thing made in the air, might not be abused to superstition as well as a
material visible thing. 3. That the Papists themselves did never ascribe any
power or spiritual grace to the sign of the Cross in Baptism. Whether they did
or no, their Writings will best testify. 4. The material Crosses, which in
time of Popery were made for men to fall down before them, to worship, are
removed, as they desired. Whereas most present at the Conference knew that in
many places they were not removed.

The next thing objected, was the wearing of a Surplice, a kind of Garment
which the Priests of Isis used to wear.

To which His Majesty answered inter alia, That if Heathens were commorant
among us, so as they might take occasion to be strengthened or confirmed in
Paganism, then there were just cause to suppress the wearing of it. A notable
answer, and which the Nonconformists may do well to treasure up, as like to
stand them in good stead in these controversies.

With my body I thee worship, is an old and odd phrase; and if it may not be
altered, it must be explained, and then Mumpsimus may do as well as Sumpsimus.

The Ring in Marriage Dr. Reynolds approved, and the cornered cap. Committing
of Ecclesiastical censures unto Lay-chancellors, the King promised to take
order to reform, p. 78. And Archbishop Grindal's prophesyings it is like enough
His Majesty would not have disliked, if he had not misunderstood the design of
them.

And now I would fain know whether what the Bishops got by this Conference, may
not be put in a man's eye, and he never see the worse. Dr. Reynolds got a great
deal by it, viz. a new Translation of the Bible, such an explication of the use
of the Cross, as (if the story be true) he did acquiesce in; a large addition
concerning the Sacraments in the Church-catechism, etc. so that Dr. Heylin in
his History of Presbyterians, quarrels with King James for giving any way to
the Conference.

There is but one thing more I will concern my self to take notice of in Mr.
Scrivener's Action against the New Schism; he desires to have one place in
which Presbyter signifies a Layman. Though I think I could satisfy his desire
in this, yet I find not my self on any account obliged so to do; for the
English Nonconformists are not over-fond of Ruling-Elders; those Churches that
retain such Officers, will not acknowledge them to be laymen; nor indeed have
they any reason to acknowledge them to be such. For why should Church Officers
chosen by the Church, and commended to the grace of God by prayer, be called
laics? because they labor at some employment to keep themselves from being
chargeable to the congregation? why then the Apostle Paul was for some part of
his time a Laick, for he labored. And in later times I could instance in men
that for their Learning and Piety deserved to be Metropolitans, who yet were
fain to preach and work.

It were to be wished, that many in England to whom the care of souls is
committed, were permitted and enjoined to follow some calling in the weekdays,
for by that means they would be less scandalous than now they are. Why should
men that know not what it is to study, be forbidden to dig?

Are they Laics, because they do not preach? Many we have in England who would
think scorn to be termed Laics, that never did preach, never had license to
preach.

Are they Laics because they are not ordained by laying on of hands? It will
be hard to prove that that ceremony is essential to make a man a Church Officer.

But yet Mr. Scrivener has good leave to fall upon these Ruling-Elders, to
bring them into any Court by a Quo VVarranto; and if he do chance to cast them,
there be but few Nonconformists that will be at cost to bring the business to a
new Trial. These Elders in some places are made the more pert, because of the
multiplicity and variety of answers that the Prelatical give to those places of
Scripture on which their divine institution is pretended to be built. It would
tire an ordinary patience to reckon up the various expositions that are given
of 1 Timothy 5.17 Scultetus censures the answers given by Bilson, another condemns
the answer given by Scultetus; others confute all the answers given by Mr.
Mede. Among all that have written against Elders, whether unlearned or learned,
I have not met with any that have satisfied me (yet I can satisfy my self)
about this place. For those Churches that argue heartily for these Elders, do
argue from the general word (...), from the two participles (...), and (...),
from the two articles (...), from the two species or kinds of Elders, from the
two participles, two articles, two special Elders divided and separated (...)
by the discretive particle (...). Let Mr. Scrivener face this argument with
some of the old answers, and see what will come on it. And let him take heed
how he strikes at these Lay Elders, as he will call them, lest he wounds those
among us known by the name of Lay-chancellors. In the mean time I beseech him
to commune with his own heart, and to consider with what spirit he writ his
books against Daillee and the English Nonconformists; by so doing he will be
brought, I doubt not, to take shame unto himself, and so prevent the far
greater shame of having his railings and calumnies laid open by others. Quod
erat exorandum.

FINIS.

