A SERMON Preached at the Assizes AT HERTFORD. July 10th. 1684.

By MILES BARN, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY, and Fellow of St
Peter's College in Cambridge.

Tu ne cede Malis.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by J. Hayes, Printer to the University; for R. Green,
Bookseller in Cambridge. 1684. And are to be sold by Walt. Davis, at
Amen-corner, in LONDON.

To the Right Worshipful St THOMAS FIELD, High SHERIFF, and one of His
MAJESTY'S Deputy Lieutenants, and Justices of the Peace for the County of
Hertford. AND To all the rest of His MAJESTY'S LOYAL Deputy Lieutenants, and
Justices of the Peace for the said County.
GENTLEMEN,
THis Sermon which was first Preached at the Desire of Mt High Sheriff, being
now made Public in compliance with His and Your unanimous Request, Sues to You
for Your acceptance, and challenges Your Protection: Not that the Author is
conscious to Himself of speaking falsehood, but because He has written too
Bold Truths for some tender Ears. The Men of Moderation will accuse Him of
Intemperate Zeal; The downright Fanatic of Popery. In Their abusive sense of
the words, He owns both parts of the Accusation. By Intemperate Zeal,
understanding a Constant, Hearty, and unreserv'd Affection for the KING and
Government; and by Popery, a steadfast unfeigned adhesion to the Church of
England in all Her Heights, and under the greatest Discouragements, which He
thanks God He always has, and ever will be Guilty of. He has already tasted
of Their civility in several Scurrilous threatening Anonymous Notes, for His
Thanksgiving Sermon on the 9th of September, which nevertheless in spite of
Envy and Obloquy shall stand a lasting Record of a most Hellish Fanatic
Conspiracy: And when Authority shall think fit, the 9th of September may become
a day of Anniversary Thanksgiving, as well as the 5th of November; since the
Deliverance of our Present Sovereign from the Rye Assassination, must be
acknowledged as Great and Miraculous as that of His ROYAL Grandfather was from
the Gunpowder Treason. What entertainment this is like to meet with from them,
he knows not, neither does he much care, being well assured could he either
have digested the gainful Art of Trimming, or Debauched himself into a
Fanatic, He might then have Commenced either a Moderate man or a Gifted
brother; And consequently thriv'n, as well as some of them have done; but He
chose rather to enjoy His Intemperate Zeal (knowing it has been serviceable to
the Public) in an humble contented State; than Rise to great Preferments with
a Guilty Conscience, or Shipwrack'd Reputation; yet He wishes this may prove as
successful as the other did; That having undeceived very many, who were misled
in the simplicity of their Hearts; and He has received their Grateful
acknowledgements, the best Reward He could expect. But Gentlemen, I must not
turn a Dedication into a Preface, and represent my own case, when I should be
reciting Your Merits, which are so great and well known, that His MAJESTY takes
Notice of You in a particular manner; and therefore 'twould be a diminution of
Your worth, for me to panegyrize on Your constant unwearied endeavors for the
Service of your KING and Country. Happy KING! in such Subjects, whom Loyalty
has united into an Entire Friendship; and Conformity to the Church, made
unanimous: which I could not but take notice of then, and now Publish to the
World for an Example to others. Whatever be the Fate of this Sermon, I can
willingly undergo it, since 'twas the occasion of bringing Me into the
knowledge of so many Loyal Gentlemen, for whom I shall always preserve an
unfeigned Esteem and Veneration, and account it an Honor to subscribe My self,

GENTLEMEN, Your most Obedient servant, MILES BARN.

2 Cor. 7. 2. Receive us, we have wronged no man, we have corrupted no man, we
have defrauded no man.
AMongst several other excellencies, which did at first recommend Christianity
to the unconverted world, these Three at least may challenge our approbation;
the purity and simplicity of its Doctrines; the integrity and sincerity of
those who first delivered them; and their exact compliance with all the
conveniences and necessities of humane affairs. As for their purity, they
flowed from the fountain of all truth, and therefore without any the least
mixture of fraud or falsehood; they were neither seasoned with secular
interest; leavened with the vanity of Philosophical pride; nor in the least to
be suspected of any mean design of gaining popular applause, or praise amongst
men: As for the integrity of the first Deliverers, I need say no more than that
they were persons so mean and despicable in the esteem of the world, so
altogether incapacitated both by birth and education, that though they had had
a mind, yet they could not either have altered the Doctrines which they had
received, or invented new; for the world was scarce ever yet so credulous as to
be imposed upon [especially in affairs of the greatest importance] by any but
those whose acquired abilities, reputation and success gave them great
advantages over the rest of mankind. In the propagation of the Gospel, they
were as far from corrupting the pure word of Truth, as they were from
defrauding those whom they had made proselytes to it: that which they chiefly
aimed at was the imprinting upon men's minds a lively hope of a resurrection to
bliss and immortality, and the convincing them, there was no way of coming to
the fruition of their Hopes, but by conforming their lives to the purity of the
Gospel. In order to this end they did indeed in some sense become all things to
all men, but 'twas still out of a generous design to gain the more. In
reference to the Jews they cried up Abraham for the Father of the Faithful,
that so they might make his infidel children believe in the only begotten Son
of God; they extolled Moses and the Prophets, that they might the better
recommend Christ and his Apostles; they approved whatsoever was excellent in
their Law, that they might with more ease win them into a compliance with the
Gospel. In reference to the Gentiles they laid upon them no other burden than
was necessary, and were so far from siding with those troublesome Pharisees who
would needs have had them circumcised, and brought under that heavy Yoke, which
neither they nor their Fathers were able to bear; that, after the most mature
deliberation, they only commanded them to abstain from gross pollutions; so
far from any rigorous impositions, that they studied to bring them over by the
most suitable and endearing methods. Witness that sermon which St Paul preached
to them at Athens, where finding an Altar dedicated to the unknown God; from
this their sottish superstition he presently takes occasion to instruct them in
the knowledge and worship of the True: From the confession of one of their own
Poets that they were all his Offspring, He demonstrates how unreasonable it was
for them to imagine that the Great Creator of the Universe could be confined
within the narrow compass of a shrine; and now lest a sad reflection upon their
former Idolatries should create a despair of pardon, in the close he tells them
that at the times of their former ignorance God would wink, provided they would
now repent and turn unto the Lord their Creator. By this their warrantable
Court, and prudent condescent, they captivated the stubborn Jews, and humbled
the prouder Greeks. They brought Christianity into the Synagogues, and turned
Idolatry out of the Temples. But notwithstanding this their prudent Execution
of that great Commission their Lord and Master had entrusted them with, there
soon arose false Teachers and false Prophets, who debauched men of unstable
minds, either by intermixing Judaisme with Christianity, or else what was far
worse, persuading them that an impure conversation was not destructive of their
hopes of a blessed Resurrection. And so they would have made them swallow the
most palpable contradictions: as that justice and unrighteousness were
consistent, a communion might be held of Light with Darkness, a concord
effected between Christ and Belial, an agreement between the Temple of God and
Idols, that they might be Partakers of that Celestial. Banquet the Lords
Supper, and yet not sin in Epicurizing upon the Relics of those impure Beasts
which had been offered unto Devils. And consequently by a most malign influence
they poisoned the Sovereignty of Christianity, and under pretense of advancing
Christ's Kingdom, promoted that of the Prince of Darkness. In short they either
wronged men in their Estates, whilst they pretended the welfare of their souls;
or else under color of furthering their interest in this world, they infected
their minds with such pernicious Principles, as did certainly cut off all their
Right to an Inheritance in the world to come, and so under show of instructing
they made a prey of their Auditors, and by a most unparalleled piece of
cruelty endeavored at once to destroy both their souls and bodies. In
opposition to these false Teachers, St Paul; Courts his Corinthians to receive
the true ones, and one would think his Address should easily prove successful,
especially considering how mightily it tends to the advantage of those to whom
'twas made, which is plain enough from the Address it self. Receive us, we have
wronged no man, we have corrupted no man, we have defrauded no man. Setting
then aside the particular occasion St Paul had thus to accost the Corinthians,
and taking the words in their extended sense, as they concern all those who are
liable to be seduced by false Teachers, as the Corinthians were, they afford
these three following considerations.

1. That it is the duty of all men, but especially of those in authority to
receive all such, and only such, as preach the word in sincerity and truth.

2. The danger of tolerating those who do not preach the word in sincerity and
truth.

3. The surest expedient to prevent the mischiefs which are sure to arise from
such a toleration.

I. That it is the duty of all men, but especially of those in authority to
receive all such, and only such, as preach the word in sincerity and truth.

That Religion is absolutely necessary to the more orderly Government of the
world, is so undeniable a truth, that they who have been its greatest Despisers
as to the concerns of the other world, have been forced to own themselves its
greatest Votaries for the acquiring and promoting Empire in this; and a man may
as soon hope to reconcile the greatest contradiction in nature, as blot the
sense of Religion out of the minds of the people, who rather than have none at
all, will debase themselves to the worship of the meanest of Creatures, even
stocks and stones. Now since amongst the almost innumerable opinions, which
through the malice of the enemy, and the perverseness of men have arose
concerning the very fundamentals of Religion; the people are not capable of
themselves to judge which are true and which false, but are herein wholly
influenced and guided by their Teachers. Nay such is the pravity of humane
nature, such its affectation of novelty, and desperate obstinacy against the
truth, that it is odds but the false Teacher gains the greater number of
Disciples. For instance should an Arian or a socinian be permitted publicly to
preach and teach the people; I am afraid the Divinity of Christ would be much
endangered, and the merits of his Passion soon rendered ineffectual; the case
will be much the same, though we mould instance in any other Sect, which stands
in opposition to the Religion by Law established, suppose either in the
independency of Jeroboam, or the Presbytery of Corah. What outrages would not
these restless Sectaries commit, were they once established by Law, who had
like to have brought an utter desolation upon this our Israel, for want of
putting the Laws in Execution against them? Since the case stands thus, does it
not mightily concern those who are in Authority, to see that the Doctrines and
Practices of such as inform the people, are conformable to the established
Religion, and to be well assured, that that be no other than what the Apostles
taught the Church, than what Christ taught the Apostles, than what Christ
received from God the Father, That such is the Religion of the Church of
England, we dare appeal to our greatest Adversaries to allege any one
considerable argument to the contrary. Let them if they can convict Her of
Heresy or Error in Doctrine, of Disorder or Tyranny in Government, of
Indecency or Superstition in Her public forms of Worship.

I am not altogether ignorant of the several Reasons which have been formerly
alleged for Toleration, i. e. in effect for indifferency in Religion. But that
which is most material and is at this day chiefly insisted on, is, that by this
means all heats about Religion would be allayed, the discontents of the people
appeased, and consequently the Government secured from those Broils and
Commotions which do arise from a restraint put upon men in the worship of God.
I cannot but with horror and amazement reflect upon those dismal Desolations
which Beautefeus in Religion have occasioned in all parts of Europe, and
particularly in this Nation. But that this is not a means to prevent the like
outrages, is most apparent to all that are not wilfully blind: for was it not
Toleration that gave life, strength, and maturity to the late Fanatic
Conspiracy? and so long as there is a Conventicle left in England, so long will
there be a seminary of Schism and Sedition.

But the Religion which we contend for, and that which St Paul would have
received is altogether consistent with the civil Powers, and has asserted the
Rights of Government, beyond any Systeme of humane Politics whatever; for
therein we are taught that the seat of all Dominion is originally in God; there
is no Power, no (...) but of God, which is implied in the very word (...) all
along used in the new Testament to signify lawful Power, for that comes from
(...) who is Lord of Lords and King of Kings. To secure obedience to this Power
it has made Rebellion no less a crime then fighting against God, and entailed
Damnation upon the Rebel; He that resists the Power resists the ordinance
of God, and they that resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation. And for
the support of this Power, it has commanded men to pay tribute and give unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's. On what a sandy foundation does the
Malmesbury Politician set his Almighty Leviathan, when he makes love of ease,
and the fear of Death and wounds the Principle causes which dispose men to
obedience; Princes would be in a very uneasy condition, did not Religion tie
up men's hands more then their natural dispositions; for if this were all they
had to trust to, they must expect assistance from none of their subjects, but
such as are altogether useless, viz. Sluggards and Cowards.

Conformable to this Doctrine of the Scriptures was the practice of the best
and most primitive Christians, when they lived under the most persecuting
Emperors, and then too when they were numerous enough, to have made the Roman
Eagles stoop to the Cross of Christ by force of Arms; had not they had other
motives for their obedience besides those of the aforecited Author, they must
have been Chronicled for the very Princes of Rebellion; for they were so far
from the love of ease, that they voluntarily enured themselves to all kind of
hardship, so far from fear of wounds, that they courted Death in her most
terrible shapes. No they had learned obedience from a higher and more divine
principle; they knew that Emperors were by Gods appointment, and therefore
solely accountable to him, a quo sant primi, post quem secundi, they knew that
to them belonged the sole Power and use of the sword, and therefore that it was
not lawful upon any occasion to unsheath it against them, and therefore they
condemned Rebellion, not only as inconsistent with the Imperial Laws, but
moreover destructive of the Doctrine of the Cross, and thereupon instead of
raising a band of Rebels to dethrone their persecuting Emperors, they raised
an Army of Glorious Martyrs, who resisted unto blood striving against sin, and
conquered their enemies by dying for the Truth.

Conformable to the Doctrine of the Scriptures and the practice of the
Primitive Christians, is both the Doctrine and the practice of the Church of
England: She dares not own them any longer for Her Genuine Sons, whom either
ambition, avarice, or any allurements whatsoever can tempt to a disloyal
thought, much less to an Actual Rebellion. Then as to Her constitution, does
not Hierarchy in the Church agree well with Monarchy in the State? on the
contrary, may not a Presbyterian parity endanger it? Independency quite
overthrow it? and what hopes that he should ever become a good subject, who
disputes the lawfulness of his Superiors commands, till he finds himself free
to obey? If then we respect the peace and prosperity of the nation, regard that
beauty, order and unity which ought to be preserved in the Church, if we
consider that tranquillity and happiness which will necessarily follow from the
maintaining the established Religion in its Just Rights and Privileges, or
would avoid those miseries and confusions, which will arise from a Toleration
of different Religions under the same Monarchy, then certainly it is the Duty of
all men, but especially of those in Authority, to receive all such, and only
such as preach the Word in sincerity and truth, i. e. those who can come up to
all the Heights of the Discipline, Doctrine and Public Worship of the Church
of England.

And so I come to consider in the second place the Danger of Tolerating those
who do not preach the Word in Sincerity and Truth.

And the danger will appear to be very great, First, from their numbers:
Secondly, their Principles: Thirdly, their Zeal in propagating, and resolution
to put their Principles in Execution.

First from their Numbers, where we are to reckon all those who profess and
openly avow a dislike and hatred to the Government; those who are secret
Friends and well Willers to these bold Professors: And Lastly, Those who steer
the whole course of their Actions by a cowardly treacherous Neutrality; And we
are to look upon all these as one united Interest, When ever they get an
advantage against the Government. They have often boasted of, and threatened the
Government with their Numbers, and a late dying Enthusiast, In the Name of the
Party pronounces, they conceived three Parts of the City would have been
concerned in the Insurrection; I hope he has much overshot himself in his
account, but at present let us take him at his word, and esteem their Legions
as Formidable as they would make us believe they are; But though they were less
numerous, yet their Principles render them very dangerous, which must respect
either the Church or the State.

If the Church, they have made so many and such deadly wounds in that seamless
coat, that perhaps Epiphanius his censure of the old Heretics will be found
defective, both as to the Number and the Malignity of our Modern Schismatics.
Later ages increasing the Number, and this last still improving the filthiness
of these filthy dreamers, who defile the flesh, despise Dominion, and speak
evil of Dignities. Aetas parentum pejor Avis tulit, nos nequiores: but I shall
instance in two, and those very obvious, yet such as charge the whole Party of
Dissenters with a dangerous Separation; First, their aversion to all
Ecclesiastical Order and Discipline, their irreconcileableness to Episcopal
Government; with public solemn Forms of Worship, administration of the Holy
Sacraments, all prescribed decent Ceremonies; without which it is impossible to
maintain that one Holy Catholic and Apostolic Faith, which was once delivered
to the Saints, that Christ's Spouse the Church, should become all Glorious
within according to his own promise, or that the peace of Jerusalem and the
prosperity of sion should be lasting and undisturbed.

2. That though they are multiplied into several almost innumerable Sects, yet
each would be thought the Elect of God, the Peculiars of Heaven to the uttter
exclusion and reprobation of the rest, and so 'twill be I Saint, thou Reprobate
to the end of the Chapter, and yet this Cadmean Progeny always agree in a
cursed Conspiracy to perplex and destroy the Religion by Law established.

Secondly, If we consider their Principles relating to the State; whatever
Rebellious Antimonarchicall positions have been forged in the Schools, by the
subtle Disciples of Ignatius Loyola, broached by the more Factious Offspring of
the Factious Calvin, practiced by the Holy Leaguers of France, the Diabolical
Covenanters of Scotland, have been all of them faithfully transcribed and
improved by our late Atheistical Associators, who are so far from owning the
Divine Right of Kings, that they account Monarchy an Antichristian Institution,
and Monarchs qua Monarchs, the worst of Tyrants. And there are three Positions
as much believed by them, as any Article of their Creed, which makes it
dangerous for any Kingdom to entertain them. First, That Dominion is founded in
Grace, the avowed Doctrine of all Enthusiasts. Secondly, That the original of
all Power is in the People, the received Tenet of all Republicans. Thirdly,
That it is Lawful to resist in the case of Religion, a most Dangerous and
Impious Doctrine, and yet seems to be maintained with the last breath of that
unfortunate Gentleman, who deservedly fell an early Sacrifice to Justice in the
late Horrid Conspiracy. And are we not arrived to a fine pass in Divinity, when
the Doctrine of resistance contrary to the Express letter of the Text, shall be
fetched from the Holy Scriptures: that of Passive Obedience laughed at as the
Doctrine of the Bowstring, and impudently exploded, as if condemned by the
practice of the Primitive Christians, contrary to the whole current of
Antiquity. By the help of these Devilish Principles they can despise
Dominions, overturn Kingdoms, and trample upon the necks of Imperial Princes;
for what King can defend his Dominions against such Saints, as claim under the
Title of irresistible Grace, for if they alone have a right to possess the
Earth, it were great Injustice not to surrender at their demand? what Prince
can be secure of the fidelity of His People, when a fawning Demagogue shall
come and tell them, the Power which is exercised over you was originally yours;
you passed it over conditionally with a Power of Revocation, and since it is
abused you are the betrayers of your own Rights, if you do not resume? What
villainies will not they attempt, who can derive arguments for Tumult and
Rebellion from the Gospel of Peace and Obedience, turn Prayers and Tears, the
only weapons of the Primitive Christians, into Swords and Blunderbusses, and
make the Cross of Christ the Standard of Rebellion?

Thirdly, The Danger appears as from their Principles, so from their Zeal and
Industry in propagating, and their resolution to put their Principles in
execution; and here to give them their due, they have stoutly born the heat and
burden of the day, they have been very laborious and left no stone unturned to
carry on the good Old Cause; and to make the work sure, they raise the
superstructure of a Fanatical Conspiracy upon the Foundation of a Popish Plot,
which though in all the parts of it (those only excepted which have undergone the
Test of Authority) most Saltem accurate.
inartificially laid, in most attended with so great improbabilities, and in
some with such notorious contradictions and Moral impossibilities, that the
most fabulous Legend might have seemed a less fiction; was nevertheless through
the fears, prejudice, or popularity of the disaffected Laity; the credulity,
indiscretion and intemperate Zeal of such Pulpiteers as styled themselves the
men of Moderation, carried on to that height, that both King and People, Church
and State were brought to the very brink of Destruction. For 'twas this Monster
of a Plot, that deluded and frighted the unthinking multitude out of their Wits
and Allegiance; afforded a clear Stage for designing Republican Gladiators once
more to play a Prize for the Crown and the Mitre; This gave an advantageous
opportunity to discarded and discontented Statesmen, to wreak their Malice upon
their Injured Sovereign, to destroy those Councils which they could not govern;
and hopes to old cashiered Officers to regain their Commands, and govern by
Martial Law; This put the whole Nation into such a distraction and
consternation, that we became a most Mysterious Riddle to our selves, and a
laughing stock to our Neighbors. Being thus affrighted and acting like men in
a dream, what wonder if we became an easy prey to our watchful Adversaries?
Hence Sons of Perdition, the Destroyers of the Innocent, were past upon us for
the Saviors of the Nation, and to carry on the Blasphemy of the Metaphor,
these Sons of Belial became so much the Idol of the Faction, that in their
Opinion 'twas less criminal to deny an Article of the Christian Faith, than
disbelieve the deposition of a paltry lying Narrative. Hence they who refused
tumultuous Petitions were voted Abhorrers, Loyal Addressers made Papists and
Pensioners, and under those Titles exposed to Contempt and Danger. Hence it
became safer to Libel, than Act in defense of the Government, to talk and write
Treason against the King, than oppose the Arbitrary Tyrannical proceedings of
the Commons. In short 'twas this Hellish Plot that set up Republican Clubs, and
licens't popular Tumults, that gave Birth to Sheriffs cases, Guides to Juries,
and raised such a cursed Band of Ignoramus's, as were sure to call light
darkness, and darkness light, to find the Innocent and acquit the Guilty: by
this they wickedly assault the Succession, associate, erect themselves into
Treasonable Councils, and deliberate upon the Methods of such a Diabolical
Assassination, as would have exceded the cruelties of either the Irish or the
Parisian Massacres. In one word 'twas this that consecrated Subornation
Perjury, Schism lying Visions, Rapine Blasphemy, Tumult Rebellion, and made all
manner of Villainy meritorious. And now certainly after so many and dire effects
it may well be called a Hellish Popish Plot. You have heard how great their
Zeal was to propagate their Designs; and their Resolution to Execute will
appear no less: Else what makes them even to this day deny, lessen, palliate or
excuse the late Horrid Conspiracy, which has been so signally proved by a
Judicial stroke from a self-murdering hand, by the Trials, Condemnations,
Confessions and Executions of so many of the Conspirators, by the flight and
Outlawries of the rest. If they would have us believe that their Resolutions
are changed, and their Judgments altered, why do they not give us some signs
of true Penitents, confess the severalShams they have put upon the Nation, take
upon them that Public shame which is due to such Notorious Offenders, and make
satisfaction for five years Oppression and Confusion, and let their Zeal appear
as beneficial, as it has been prejudicial to the Government? Why do they yet
Justify the Treason, by protecting and concealing the Traitors? But alas!
what hopes is there, that they should change their Practices, when the Chief of
those who have hitherto suffered for the Conspiracy, have encouraged the living
to persevere in it, showed a greater Affection for the Cause, then for their
own Souls. And have appeared more sollicitous for the procuring an Act of
Oblivion for their accomplices, than pardon of God Almighty for those crimes
which they were to answer for the next moment. Else why did they trifle away
their last precious minutes, in advising or threatening the Government? or why
has one of them, transcribed the very cause and Principles of the Faction into
his Bible, and left it as a Legacy to his beloved Sister. Good God! that that
inestimable Jewel should be thus profaned and trampled upon by an
Enthusiastic swine.

Having shown the danger of Tolerating Dissenters, from their Numbers,
Principles, Zeal and Resolution, I come in the last place to consider the best
expedient to prevent the mischiefs which are sure to arise from such a
Toleration; Which is in short a constant, vigorous and resolute Execution of
all the Laws which are in force against them; which I shall leave to those
whose proper Province it is, the Honorable my Lords the Judges, and the worthy
Ministers of Justice, hoping that woeful Experience has at last convinced us
that all other methods will prove vain and ineffectual; for had the Bill for
uniting Protestant Dissenters past into an Act, like other projects, it might
have looked plausibly in the Theory, but would certainly have failed, when
reduced to practice: And suppose out of a Balsamic Temper, and wonderful
tenderness to our scrupulous Brethren, we had resigned the Cross in Baptism,
Kneeling at the Holy Eucharist, the use of the Surplice, etc. This would have
been so far from giving satisfaction, that I fear we had afforded them too Just
an occasion of Insulting over the nakedness of their Mother the Church, which
in all the heights of Her present state, is so far from being too Gorgeously
apparelled; from having too many, or those too Pompous, superstitious
Ceremonies, that She has retained no more than what serves to keep Her decent
and cleanly. He knows nothing of the Genius of our Puritans, who does not know
they always grow Insolent and presumptuous by concessions, dangerous by
Toleration, Intolerable by Indulgence, cruel and Ingrate under M^rcies, and in
a true Protestant way of civility, always improve Graces and Favors to the
disgrace and ruin of the State that bestowed them. But in this critical minute,
a bare suspension or relaxation would prove Fatal, for though they are disarmed,
yet they are not subdued, their practices are restrained, but their
Inclinations are the same; And should they be admitted to another Trial,
they would be for a quick dispatch; former disappointments would put them upon a
sudden Revenge, and like provoked Furies, they would make you severely account for
the blood of their Martyrs, and persecution of their Confessors, for so they
blasphemously call those Miscreants, who for Treason have been Justly condemned
to the Ax and the Gibbet; or high Misdemeanors sentenced to the Pillory, Fined
or Imprisoned. They are at present Mastered by the Laws, and the Laws will for
ever keep them under, and I hope the Justice of the Nation will prevent them
for ever saying, this is our Hour and the Power of Darkness, for if that should
ever happen, we can expect nothing but the Abomination of Desolation.

And now instead of applying my self to my Lords the Judges (who know their
Duty's much better then I can inform them) The Council, the Jury, or the
Witnesses (the usual Formality of this exercise) before I conclude this
imperfect Discourse, give me leave to make this one Remark; That when ever
these true Protestants cry out for Liberty and Property, that then they are
contriving to bring upon us slavery and oppression; When ever they Alarm us
with the fears of the Growth of Popery, that then they are setting up a
Fanatical Licentiousness, upon the Ruins of the Church of England, the best and
purest Church in the world; whenever they pretend an extraordinary Zeal and
Tenderness for the Safety of His Majesty's Sacred Person, the Preservation of
His Crown and Dignities, that then they are Plotting the Destruction of His
Person and the subversion of His Government.

And now in the Close of all, let us pray that we may never live to see those
days again, when the lives of the Innocent shall lie at the Mercy of the
stinking Breath of every mercenary, abject Wretch, that there may be no more
raking of Goals, and compassing Sea and Land, to gain an incoherent
contradictory Evidence, to take off, after a Tedious Imprisonment, an aged
unbefriended Noble: and God reward that Honorable Bench who had the Courage to
do Justice to his Fellow Prisoners; whom the crafty Managers, discouraged and
affrighted at the Deformity of their own proceedings, (though often pressed to it)
never durst bring to Trial: To see Majesty affronted by Insolent Petitions and
Seditious Votes; Tumults give Law to Courts of Justice; Juries threatened for
giving in their Verdicts according to the Truth and their own Consciences;
Judges arraigned and told of Writs of Ease for not believing Impudent,
Notorious contradictions; and riotous Conventicles more frequented than our
consecrated Churches.

And finally, let us bless God that we are alive to behold our Gracious
Sovereign in the quiet Possession of His Imperial Rights and Prerogatives,
restraining the madness of the People and the fury of their Leaders, Delivered
from the intended Execrable Parricide of the Rye Assassins., and the wicked
Designs of the Council of Six; secured, as in His own Innocent Breast, so in a
well chosen Loyal Guard, and the Hearts and Affections of His Dutiful
Subjects: To see the Lawful Heir excluded by a Vote of the Factious Senate,
Established in His Just Rights of Succession, the Injured Prince restored to
His former Greatness, and once more become (next under God and the King) the
Support of our Present, and the Pledge of our Future Happiness. To see the
Caytiff Traitor dragged to the Place of Execution, the Laws triumphing over
Schism and Faction, the Bench Honored with Upright Loyal Judges, and inspired
with Courage and Noble Resolution; to see Rewards and Punishments, the due
distribution whereof is the very Soul of Government, run in their Proper
Channels; to see our Religion, our Monarchy, our Liberty secure, and in a word,
the Public Administration of all our Affairs in such Hands, as will neither
Rob God of His Honor, Defraud Caesar of His Dues, and scorn to wrong or
corrupt His Faithful Subjects.


