A REVIVING CORDIAL FOR A Sin-sick Despairing SOUL,

In the Time of TEMPTATION THE Same being an Extract of the unworthy Authors
Experience of the Particular following.

I. The miraculous Preservation of his Bodily Life, from the many Deaths and
eminent dangers which threatened it, while in a state of Nature.

II. The Method God took with him in awakening him to look into, and to mind
Soul concerns, when about Fourteen Years of Age.

III. How the Spirit of Bondage took him, and what fearful Work it made in his
Soul.

IV. How the Spirit of Adoption succeeded the Spirit of Bondage, healing and
binding up the deep Wounds Caused in his Soul thereby.

C^^^, and hear all ye that fear God, and I will declare that he has done for
my Soul, Psalm. 66. 16. I will Praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully
made, marvelous are thy Works, and that my Soul knows right well, Psalm. 139.
14. By Ja. Barry, an unworthy Minister of the Gospel.

London, Printed for the Author. 1699.

To his very much Respected, and highly Honored Friend, Mr. Nicholas Skinner,
Merchant of London.
Worthy and Honored Sir,
THE laudable Character given you by some Ministers of Christ: and other good
Souls, now (I Charitably hope and believe) Praising God in Glory: Especially,
the experimental taste I my self have had of your goodness, (since Providence
made me so happy in your Acquaintance;) has Encouraged me to prefix your
worthy and deserving Name to this small Tract; whose design and chief tendency
is, to encourage poor dejected Souls (under the hidings of God's Face,) to cast
themselves on that (never failing) goodnss of God (in Christ,) until God's set
time for Deliverance comes. And also, to stir up experienced and grown
Believers, to a becoming Adoration, and Praising of that Adorable Name, and
Wonder working Providence of the Glorious and Tremendous Jehovah; which has so
conspicuously appeared, in the Deliverance wrought for me, his poor nothing
Creature, (both for Soul and Body,) and who am to this very Day) kept alive,
and upheld by that Divine Manutenency of his own, to the great Admiration both
of my self and those godly Souls who know my present Circumstances; and Gods
dealing with me. I have been (for several Years past) more than ordinarily
Importuned, both by godly Divines, and such Zealous working Christians as your
self, to Publish, what (now) I have presumed to Dedicate, to so dear and well
deserving a Friend, as you are well known to be, both to God's Truth, and such
(as in any measure) bear the Blessed Image of his Son. The principal Motive of
their importuning me to Publish this, was the strange Influence, the Relation
hereof (from my own Mouth) had upon their own Spirits, the effects whereof they
were not able to hide; the Tears of Joy gushing out (surprizingly) from their
Eyes; with both Eyes and Hands lifted up to Heaven, wondering at, and Adoreing
the Wonders of God, in my Case: Professing and declaring, that (in all their
time) they had neither heard, nor known, so much of the goodness and Grace of
God, vouchsased to a poor lost and undon sinner, as was shown and vouchsafed to
unworthy me; Which occasioned several of the godly Ministers, especially, Mr.
Noah Bryan, Mr. Timothy Tailor, Mr. Samuel Mather, and the dear Mr. Nathaniel
Mather, (all now with Christ) to profess, that they never heard of, or knew any
Sinner come so near to Paul (as touching God's method, and way; of Working
upon, and dealing with him, in, and after his Conversion) as I did. And
therefore they (unanimously) agreed (in Judging) that to Publish the same, was
my Duty. The which, they doubted not; would be greatly useful, and that both to
Saints and Sinners on sundry accounts. The sincere and upright Hearted
Nathaniel Mather (late of Pinners-Hall,) has (several times) chid; me for my
backwardness to so necessary and useful a Work; and a little before his Death,
he at me again about it, examining into the Grounds of my backwardness herein.
To whom I replied, Sir, There are two things which (hitherto) have kept me back
from Publishing this my experience, and how much of Satan there may be in it, I
cannot determine.

The First is, The difficulty which attends my setting down (in Writing) the
working of the Spirit of Adoption, in doscovering and applying Christ unto me,
the Remembrance whereof, does so swallow me up, and melt me, that I am not able
to see my Paper for the Tears of Joy, which obstruct my Visive Faculty. To
which he Replied, that it was pity any thing should hinder me in so good (and
useful) a Work. The Second is, the fear Lodged within me, of Peoples not
Crediting the Relation I shall give hereof, in case it were Printed; For, (said
I) the greatest part of Professors are so great strangers to the nature of true
Regeneration, (especially when wrought in a Sinner, in the way and method God
took with me) that they will rather suspect, and question the truth of what I
relate, than Praise God, (or improve the same for their own good, or Spiritual
advantage) for the same. To which, Reply was made, That Satan was always ready
to obstruct any good Work which has the least tendency to God's Praise, or the
good of Souls. Since his departure, the fresh Remembrance of the Importunities
of the Worthies above Named, together with the repeated Solicitations of
several godly, zealous Christians (yet living,) have prevailed with me, to beat
my way through those Difficulties which lay before me, leaving the Issue (of my
present undertaking) to the powerful Providence of God, to make the same
successful, in what it is designed for. And begging (most heartily) your
Pardon, for the method I have taken, in acknowledging the great Kindness, and
Respect shown (by your Religious and truly Generous self) to the meanest and
most unworthy of Christ's (Despised) Ambassadors; the which (I doubt not) you
will find Recorded in Heaven (by my Lord and Master,) as an evident proof of
your Faith in, and unfeigned Love to Him, and his Cause and Interest, here on
Earth. Let not (Dear Sir) the disadvantages under which I lie (on account of
the slanderous Reproaches heaped on me, by malicious Spirits, lessen your hope
of the glorious Recompense (of Reward) promised (by him that cannot lie) to all
your Works and Labors of Love expressed to me, and others of Gods Children, for
the Sake of Christ. He that will take notice of a cup of Cold Water given to a
Disciple, in the Name of his Disciple, will (I question not) Record in Heaven,
the refreshing Wine I have drank at your Table, (more than once) and the Silver
and Gold sent me, and given me by your self, whereby both I and my distressed
Family, have been kept from sinking into the Dust.

And albeit, I should (at the great day of Judgment) appear to be a Cast away
from Christ, of which (through Infinite Grace) I am no more afraid, than I am
afraid that God can cease to be, what he is.

Yet your Integrity and Uprightness (in what you have done to me, for Christ's
sake) will be, not only made known, but graciously and abundantly Rewarded.
(and if I mistake not the design of Providence, which has put me upon fixing
my thoughts on your self, as the fittest and most deserving Person to whom, to
Dedicate this small Extract, of the large experience I have had of God's
Incomprehensible goodness, and Infinite All Sufficiency, in saving a lost
Sinner). I look on this Dedication to be (as it were) a (...), or forerunner
of Christ's (openly) acknowledging and rewarding those your Acts of Love, and
Pity so secretly done to him, in the Person of me the poorest and unworthiest
of his Representatives here on Earth, according to Prove. 19. 17. Mat. 6. 4.
Mat. 25. 45. Heb. 6. 10.

The Searcher of Hearts, knows I am far from flattering you, in what I say (of
you) in this Dedication. He who has so (abundantly) blessed you with a
comfortable Estate here, and has enricht your brave and generous Soul with
such a Stock of Heavenly Wisdom, and saving Grace, as keeps you from swelling
with Pride and Conceit, of what he has made you, Perfect his own Blessed work
begun in you, to the Day of Christ. And that the same may be the Portion of
your Virtuous and Religious Consort, and your Dear Offspring, is the Cordial
wish, and shall be the hearty Prayer of (Dear and Honored Sir) your (dearly
Loving, and highly obliged) Friend and Servant, in the best and strongest of
Bonds ( viz.) Gospel Love.

James Barry.

A Reviving Cordial, FOR A SIN SICK DISPAIRING SOUL, In the time of TEMPTATION,
etc.
CHAP. I.
Sheing the strange Works of Providence, in preserving me from the mauy Deaths
which threatened me.
THE First of the many Wonders which the Adorable Providence of God effected,
in preserving me from Death was, as follows. Being put out to Nurse, to an
Irish Papist, in the times of Trouble, before Ireland was Reduced. My Nurse
about the latter end of the Month of January, (fearing (as she at least
pretended) the Rage of the Irish Soldiers, least they should Inhumanly Butcher
me; or rather, kill her self; and Husband, for offering to Nurse a Heretics
Child, (as they called me) cast me out upon a Dunghill in a great Snow, where
I had (undoubtedly) Perished, had not Providence sent Relief in the very nick
of time, which was thus effected. At the same time, when I lay in that most
deplorable Condition in the Snow, no (Eye pitying me,) there was a Servant of
my Fathers down in the Country about Concerns of my Fathers, who as he was
returning Home, declining the Road, which was his proper Way; takes another
way, which directly led him through the Village where I was, he not (in the
least) knowing any Ground, or Reason why, or wherefore, he should leave the
High and Common Road, to pass through that Village; but finding in himself a
strange Impulse upon his Spirit, he gave way. And as he passed through the
Street, between the House from whence I had been Cast, and the Dunghill where
I lay; hearing a most Lamentable and Piteous Cry of a young Infant, (as he
apprehended) out of Doors, stops his Horse to see where the Infant lay, but the
Snow being deep, and it Snowing a pace, he could perceive nothing. But
following the Voice of the Cry, he was led to the place where I lay; he
forthwith knocks at the Door next to the Dunghill, to enquire after the cruel,
and unnatural Mother of that poor dying Infant on the Dunghill, or to entreat
somebody, to take Pity on so despicable an Object. On this, my Nurse informs
the Man whose Child I was, with the whole of my circumstances, no sooner had he
understood whose I was, but he runs to the place where I lay, takes me up,
lapping me in his Cloak, and brings me Home to my Parents, fifteen long Miles,
without the least Nurture either of Breast or Spoon, (for the support of
decaying Nature): All that fifteen Miles, besides the space I lay on the
Dunghill, which (as my Nurse her self confessed to the Man) was about five
hours, I continued to make sad complaints, by abounding in Heart moving
Skreeks, and piteous moans all the Day; the Man expecting every moment when I
should expire. In this condition, he presents me a sad spectacle to my Parents,
acquainting them where, and how he found me, and how that he was (he knew not
how or wherefore) turned off from his Road to go that way, where he met with
me. Forthwith an Express was posted away, for three or four of the Chief
Physicians who were then in Dublin, who immediately hastened to my Fathers,
(being about two Miles and a half from Dublin,) the utmost of their Skill and
Judgment was Improved for my present help and relief, but all in vain. The
Intricacy of my state and Condition of Body being such, as sufficienly nonplust
and Baffled all their Skill, finding no probability (in a rational way) of
Recovering me, they gave me up, assuring my Relations that I was a gone Child,
(as to this World.) The Doctors forsaking me; other means were applied by
Ancient Men, and Midwives; who seemed to have good Judgment and long
experience in curing Children; neither availed this any thing, God having
blasted all that men could effect (as Instruments) to make way for his Blessing
on that means, which he himself had singled out for my effectual cure, that the
same might be Recorded to the Eternal Praise of his own Wonder working
Providence, as will afterward appear. All means applied for my cure and
recovery, were (by the powerful Providence of God), made effectual Food, to
nourish, and feed the Distempers which threatened the Life of my Body; until I
was at length taken by all for Dead. No motion of Life appearing in me, I was
stretched out, put into the Winding Sheet, and Nailed uy in my Coffin. And as
Frinds and Neighbors were just going out of the Door, to accompany me to my
long Home, the Person who carried the Coffin, both perceived me to stir, and
also heard me to cry in the Coffin: At which, all were not a little amazed, and
some so affrighted that they Run awy.

About near two Months after this escape, I was a second time taken for Dead,
in the opinion of all the Family, stretched out and wraped in a Winding Sheet,
and least they might be over hasty in Burying me, it was judged expedient to
wake with me, which is the manner and Custom in Ireland, by People sitting up
all Night with many Lights in the Room where the Corpse lies. It pleased God,
that about Midnight, they who Watched me, saw me lift up the Sheet, to their
great Astonishment.

Notwithstanding these strange and unexpected Revivals, I was no small grief
and burden to my Parents, and other Relations in the Family, and that on the
account of my continuing so Long in Pain and Misery, no endeavors of Creatures
likely to do me good.

As I grew in Age, so my Distemper waxed and grew at such a rate, that my
little Body waxed very big, and misshapen: my B^lly was as big as an ordinary
Tubb, or Drum, My Legs no way able to bear, or carry my Distempered body. Thus
was I a burden not only to others, but also to my self, until it pleased God
to check and control the Humors and Distempers in my Body, which else had
Checked me into the Dust.

The means of my Recovery was, as follows, ( viz.) On a certain Day, as I was
in the Arms of a Maid Servant, whose only Work it was, to attend on and
Minister unto me, I beheld on the ground, before the Door, some speckled Shell
Snails, which dropped out of the Load of Furze that came to the Door, these
Snailes I Cried to have them, the Maid willing ^a gratify my desire, picked up
as many as she could see of them, with these I pleased my Fancy, playing with
them till weary: After which I motioned to put the Snails into the Fire, and
after a little while, when I apprehended they were Roasted, I cried to have them
again, the Maid and all others that beheld me, wondered greatly what I designed
to do with them, no sooner had I cleared them from the Shells, but (to the
great amazement of the Spectators) I fell to Eat them, and to such
satisfaction, that (having once tasted of them) I could not for some
considerable time, be prevailed with to Eat any other Meat except Snails. This
new Diet (to which neither entreaty, nor yet example of any Mortal moved me
(did by the Blessing of God, prove both Food and Physic; for by them I was (to
the great astonishment of them who knew me) greatly nourished, and apparently
advantaged in point of Health: For in a short time after I had taker to Eating
Snails the Swelling of my Body assuaged, and the use of my Limbs I recovered:
As I began with this new Diet, so I continued until I was perfectly cured, to
the great admiration and wonderment of all sorts, who both saw and heard of my
Practice herein. Many (both Friends and strangers) did come from City and
Country to see and hear of me, hearing the strangeness and rareness of my case:
Among these were my Physicians, who formerly gave me up for a dead Child; they
at the first hearing of my being in a hopeful way of Recovery, could not
credit the News, till hearing it with great Confidence affirmed; they set a
time for coming to my Fathers to see, and enquire whether what was storied
about my Recovery were true; they finding it so, both by their seeing and
handling my Body; as also the information they received from my Parents
concerning the means of my cure, together with the manner of my making use of
such means of my own accord. They exceedingly admired at it, concluding with
one accord, that it was immediately from the Spirit of God, and was certainly
Miraculous. This account I had from my Friends and Relations, who were both Eye
and Ear Witnesses of what I have here Related. But least any should doubt the
truth of this Relation, I shall briefly add Two things, which fully satisfies
my own Soul of the truth hereof.

The first is, The perfect Remembrance I have of my Eating Snails frequently,
when a little one.

The second is, The frequentness of the Scorns and Mocks wherewith I have met,
even from my own (since our difference about Religion) who (when discoursing
about my leaving the Church) have many times, and often hit me in the Teeth (by
way of Reproach) with what I was, when an Infant, How that I was cast out on a
Dunghill, and afterward nailed up in a Coffin, my Grave made, and a carrying
away to be Buried: And alas! The greatest grief of all was, that I was not at
that time Buried alive, rather than I should live to be a Phanatick, and (on
that account) such a stain and blemish to the whole Family, There never having
been a Phanatick of the Family before me

And thus, I have (as briefly as I could) given an Impartial Account of the
first strange Deliverance wrought for me, by the Holy, and All-Working
Providence of God.

The Second escape from Death, when a Babe; was as follows. Being one Night
fast a sleep in Bed, the Maid who tended me, and constantly lay by me,
neglecting to Extinguish her Candle when she lay down; the Candlestick being so
placed by the Maid, that the Candle burning down near the Socket, or by some
accidental motion of hers (when asleep) throwing the Candle down into the Bed,
the Sheets and other Bed-Cloaths took Fire, which prevailed so far, that the
Bed, Sheets, Rugg and Mat, were spoiled and unfit for use afterward. The Maid
and I fast asleep, both insensible of the apparent danger we were in. It
pleased God that my Father (being awakned in Bed) smelt the scent of burning,
which was so hot in his Nose, that he feared danger by Fire, it being in the
dead of the Night. The whole Family Buried in Sleep (except himself) he could
not rest, but gets up in his naked Shirt, goes from Chamber to Chamber, to
search out where the Fire should be; and coming at length to the Chamber where
I lay, he finds the Room all in a Smother, the Bed and Cloths all on Fire, and
the Maid and I fast asleep. The first thing that my Father did, was to snatch
me out of Bed, and by the suddenness of the wakening me out of Sleep, and
seeing the Fire; I was frighted, and began to Cry; my Father fearing least harm
should thence ensue to my Mother, who was at that very time near the time of
Travel, he claps his Hand on my Mouth, and in his Arms carries me out to the
Malt House (very near the house) where lay a Family of English People, who
managed the Malt House, he throws me hastily into Bed to them, charging them
to keep me warm, and to quiet me. Having thus secured me, he forthwith returns
to the Fire, where he found the Maid still fast a Sleep, and by all he could
do, he could not awake her, until the Fire Burning her Flesh, she at length
starts up, and in an amazing Surprise, seeing her self compast with Fire, and
missing me in the Bed, and finding my Father be-labouring himself in quenching
the Fire, she begins to raise the shout, my Father presently stops her Mouth,
and made her sensible how things were, and that the Child was safe; and being
come to her self, she arose, and helped my Father to put out the Fire; that no
farther harm was done. Now how near I was to Death, I leave every sober Reader
to Judge.

A Third Deliverance wrought for me by Divine Providence was, his saving me
from perrishing by a Dog. The manner whereof, was thus, One Morning, standing
besides a Table, in the Common Hall, where a Gentleman (who was Caterer to my
Fathers Family) was at Breakfast, in order to a going to Market, to Buy
Provision for the House; I perfectly Remember the Meat he had, was Buttered
Fish; I expecting and hopeing, he would give me some part of the Fish; stood
over against him, peeping up at him; with my little Fingers on the edge of the
Table: The Gentleman perceiving the posture I was in; hands out his Plate to
me, with some of the Fish; the which I readily embraceing; the great Mastiff
Dog (a greater and fiercer than which I never saw) lying under the Table; and
seeing me stretch out my Hand, to reach the Plate; bounc'd out of a sudden,
lays hold on me, and pulled me to him, under the Table; Catches hold of my
Head, the which he had wholly in his Mouth at one bit, up to my very Throat.
The Gentleman astonished hereat, and well knowing the disposition, and
uncontroulableness of the Dog (there being but one in all the Family, ( viz.)
the Cook, of whom the Dog stood in fear,) runs forth, cries out, for Richard the
Cook in all haste; for the Dog, Lion, was worrying the Child in the
Common Hall. The Cook at length entering the Room, to which the Gentleman
directed him, Tingled a Bell, which he always used to do, when he corrected
that Dog, when a Puppy, crying out (vehemently) Lion, come off, Sirrah. The
great Dog, which had almost made an end of me; goes off, leaving me weltering
in my Blood: My Head (especially my Face) all over Died in Blood; which caused
great and amazing Fear in all that saw me in that sad Condition, that my Eyes
were Gnawed out; until they Washed my Face, the which when they had done; they
perceived that my Eyes were untouched: The reason of which (as was Judged by
all) being that the Dog, had gotten my Head so far into his Mouth, that his
Teeth could not reach my Eyes. Thus did God keep and preserve me, in this
apparent and eminent Danger, there being no other harm done me, save that there
remains still several holes, or impressions made by the Dogs Teeth, in my Nose,
and other places in my Face, the which, nothing but the Grave can deface and
wear out.

A Fourth Deliverance effected for me (by Divine Providence) was, saving me
from Drowning. The manner of it was thus, As I was in Company with one of my
Aunts, in the Park, where stands a great Pool of Water, called the Horse Pool,
where the Horses used to be Watered. My Aunt earnestly employed, about some
fine small Clothes (a Suit of Childbed Linen, if I forget not) and leaving me
to my liberty, to ramble while she managed her own Business; I drew near to the
Pool, and lying down on the Banks brink, with my Face to the Water, and seeing
some Living Creatures, as small as a Horse Hair, crawling in the Water, and
within my Arms reach (as I thought) I longing to catch some of them, put my
Hand into the Water, and pursuing them, forced my Body forward, that I could
not recover my self again, before I sunk down from the Bank into the Water,
with my Head down, and my Heels up, the Water entering into my Body at my Mouth
and other parts. My Aunt missing me, she looks about and call for me, but
neither seeing nor hearing me, she leaves her Clothes; and runs to the Water
Pool, (of which she was jealous), and there she finds me with my Heels up in
the Pool, gone almost out of her reach into the Depth, she in an exceeding
fright, about me, takes the Water (to her own great hazard) and catching fast
hold by one of my Legs, she pulls me to her, and so brings me out of the Water,
but with very small hopes of my Life; for I had been so long in the Water, and
the Water having gotten in such abundance into my Body, that for a considerable
time, she could not perceive the least breathing in me, which made her conclude
I was Dead; but it pleased God that I Revived again. Now Reader, think
seriously with thy self, how near I was to a passing from one deep, to another,
( viz.) from that deep Pool of Water, into the bottomless depth of an endless
Eternity. Oh! The Adoreable and unfathomable depth of Gods Incomprehensible
Providence. Oh! Think of this Providence, and give the Glory of the Deliverance
to God.

Another strange and wonderful escape I had, was from a dangerous Boar. It was
thus, One day, my Eldest brother (afterward a Counselor at Law, but now in
Eternity) and I walking down to the Seaside, with a Gray-Hound along with us,
designing our Sport by Coursing Rabbets. In the way, the Gray-Hound meeting
with a little Pig, which belonged to my Fathers Herd of Swine. This Pig running
away from the Gray-Hound, the Gray-Hound follows, takes hold of the Pig, the
Pig cries out, (all the Herd which was near Fourscore) comes in to the relief
of the Pig; I hastened to get the Dog off, by calling and beating, but the more
I belabored me, in getting the Dog off, the faster the Dog held his hold; the
whole Herd in a Ring about me, and the Gray-Hound with open Mouth, which caused
some fear in me, at the length while I was beating off the Dog, the great Boar
with open Mouth makes at me, mounting up with his Fore-Feet on my Breast,
throws me on my Back, between two Furrows: The Boar thus on the Top of me, with
his Snout and fearful Tushes, belabouring himself, to rent my Bowels out; the
Gray-Hound which before I could not for my Life get off from the Pig) of his
own accord, lets go the Pig, and comes in to my Rescue; laying fast hold of the
Boar, which was at top of me, the Boar feeling the Dog pinch him, he turns
furiously about to the Dog, quitting the hold he had of me, only one side of my
Coat, he tore clear away, and had it in his Tushes when he turned from me to
the Dog. As soon as I felt the weight off my Body, I got up in a great and
amazing Fright, I made my escape, by running, leaving the Boar and the Dog to
Fight it out. Thus was I preserved by the Providence of God; ordering that the
Dog (which before, I with all my Skill and Strength, could not get off) should
quit his hold of the little Pig, and fall on the great Boar, upon me; who
otherwise (undoubtedly) had torn out my Bowels. Oh! Wonderful Providence.

Another Eminent Deliverence wrought by Providence for me, was by preserving me
from perishing by a Horse. Which take thus, I being once chosen to ride a
Horse, which was to run a Race, the Ground was singled and measured out, all
other matters relating to the Race being agreed on between the two Parties
chiefly concerned; when we came to start, the concernedness of each party
appeared in striving to get, and keep the start, the which happened to succeed
well on my side, as touching getting the start, and making good my Ground, till
I came to the Goal, which Issued in great and high Acclamations of Praise to
me; which did not a little fill me with vain glorious conceit, of some Personal
excellency of my own; to which the Victory obtained, was Attributed. But my
Pride was soon stained: for, there being a River between the Town and the
Place, where the Race was Run; my Horse being very hard mouthed, and withal
fiery and fleet (though small) I was not able with all the skill and strength I
had, to bear him, after I came to the Goal; but in full Speed makes straight to
the Town, taking the River, which lay between him and Home: As soon as he came
into the deep, he was taken off his Speed, and fell into such a jumbling Trot,
that being almost spent, and wearied in all my Senses, he throws me out of the
Saddle, and being cast on the left side of the Horse, my Foot slipped into the
Stirup, and by the Foot was I held; the Horse finding himself past the River,
sets to running with full speed, my Head touching the Ground, and as he run, my
head was still a tossing and beating between the Horses Feet, and the Stones
and Gravel of the hight which he run up from the River, toward the end of my
Fathers Mault-House, which may be about Sevenscore Yards; all which Ground he
trail'd me after him, with my head as already mentioned. The Shout and Cry was
raised from the other side of the River to the Town (and the Horse still in his
full Speed) it pleased God, that the Neighbor who lived next house to my
Fathers, hearing a vehement and continued Cry; arises from his work within,
opens his Door, street way, to see what the Matter was, and Just as he looked
out of his Door, he sees the Horse in full Speed, with his Rider a Trailing
along, just passing by the Door, the man Immediately runs before him (the
Passage being narrow) useing his best endeavors and skill to stop the Horse;
the which he (through Mercy) he Effected, or else that Race had been an end of
my Race, the Horse stood stock still while I was released from that sad
Confinement. All who saw me, cried out, he is gone! he is gone! there is no hope,
nor expectation of his Life, the Hair of my Head all in one lump of clotted
Blood, nothing to be seen of my Face or Hands, but Blood, and a matter of
astonishment it was to all, that my Neck and Limbs were not broken.

Another strange Deliverance I had from a Horse, was thus, Riding one day on
the Chief and Fleetest Race Horse, which was known to be in the Kingdom of
Ireland: As I past through a Gate, in the High-Road, just as I opened, and
entered in at the Gate, a little Bird flies out of the Hedge, within side of the
Gate, at which the Horse started, Beginning at the same time to bounce, and
plunge, striving all he could to throw me off; I Riding bare Backed, without a
Saddle, and having a large Lanthorn under my left Arm; knowing the Horse to be
very high Mettled, and about Fifteen Hands High; I I began to apprehend some
danger, of his getting me off; because, I could not so well Command and Manage
him, by reason of that Lanthorn, and wanting a Saddle, I did what I could by
fair; and gentle means, to take him off those his unruly, and skittish tricks,
but to small purpose. Then I resolved to use another Method, ( viz.) By giving
him a loose Rein, and a Spur in his sides, with both Heels, hoping by that
means that he would cease pluneging, and fall to running, but nothing would do.
The thing (I doubt not) being determined in Heaven's Council; that this narrow
escape, might be Recorded among the rest of his Wonders shown in, and about the
preservation of so Poor, and Inconsiderable a Creature as I am, to the Eternal
Praise of Gods Sweet and Unsearchable Providence. Off he would have me, in
order whereto, he mounts up with his Fore Parts, throwing me backwards on his
Hinder Parts, and from thence to his Fore Parts again, at least ten or twelve
times, in a most furious, raging manner; at length finding that he could not
get me off, by his tossing and throwing me backward and forward) he rears and
mounts up with all four together (a considerable height from the Earth) and by
that unexpected motion, threw me a good height above himself, and falling to
the Ground, standing upright on my Feet, as I fell, with my Lanthorn under my
Arm, the Horse perceiving himself Conqueror, fetched a stroke at me (standing
where I fell, just behind him) with his Heels; which (but a day or two before)
had been Shod with Frost-Nails (the Weather being Frosty) and in the Cap, which
I at that time wore, he leaves the Print of the Frost-Nails, within the
thickness of a Half Crown of my Forehead, never touching my Head nor any part
of my Body: Nor in the least prejudicing my Body, by those tossings and
throwings he gave me. Oh! That I might be duly sensible of, and Constantly
affected with, the consideration of Divine Providence.

Another escape I had by the good Providence of God, was from an English Man,
who had laid a Conspiracy with some Irish Papists, to swear me out of my Life.
It was thus, This English Man (by Name Evan Grundy a Lancashire Man) being some
Years Employed in the Service of John Preston of the City of Dublin, Alderman,
a good and gracious Man, lately Deceased; from whom the above Named Evan Grundy
had run away, at several times, and with considerable Sums of Money: by reason
of his dishonest and knavish Pranks, Alderman Preston, not daring to trust him
any further with the Receiving of his Rents, which were considerable (his
Estate being nigh two thousand per Annum.) The Alderman being hard set for one
whom he could trust with the management of his Estate: and knowing me, my
Family, and the present Circumstances I was at that time in; proposed to me
considerable encouragement, on condition that I would undertake (as his Agent)
to manage his Estate, which I did, for between four and five Years, not without
many difficulties, (occasioned chiefly by the said Evan Grundy, who was
restless Day and Night, contriving how he might set the Alderman and me at
variance, hoping (by that means) to supplant me, and to Succeed me in the
Employ.) This Evan Grundy being much Indebted to the Alderman, I had orders to
take him, on a Writ out of the King's Bench, and to Seize (for the Aldermans
use) all the Good and Chattels the said Evan Grundy was actually Possessed of.
This piece of Service I would fain have declined, entreating the Alderman to
put some other upon it, and that, because of the ill Aspect which I foresaw it
would have among the Gentlemen of the Country; who (knowing the Peaks and many
Bickerings between the other and me) would be very apt to conclude, that I had
Acted this, in a way of Revenge against him, who daily strove to Supplant me in
that Employ: and then I concluded all the Black-mouthed Justices, and other
Gentlemen in the Country, who were known Enemies to the Name and Power of the
Gospel Purity, would unanimously open against Religion, and Improve that Action
to the utmost, to the Reproach of Dissenters. The which, afterward fell out as
I feared: The Alderman refusing, to comply with that my (but reasonable)
Request, he alleging, for his noncompliance with me, that he had none but me
whom he could trust in an Affair of that Nature.

Finding the Ineffectualness of my Endeavors, to prevail with the Alderman, to
Excuse or Exempt me from that Service; and his strict Commands being Instant
upon me, a Writ was taken out, of which the said Grundy having notice he
Absconds (for a time,) on this, I took the two special Bailiffs, who were to
Execute the Writ) with nine or ten of the Village he lived in, into the House,
along with me, to Witness that I Seized those Goods, which were Visible in the
House, for the use of Alderman Preston, and that for the non-payment of Rent: I
moved no Goods, but left them, where I found them, leaving them to the Disposal
of the Alderman. Immediately, on this, the wretched Man contrives with some
Papist Russians, to lay a Plot against me, the Substance of which was, that on
a Day I entered his House, to Distrain for such a Man, naming Alderman Preston,
and meeting with a Cabinet, I forced the Lock, and Stole Three Pound Fifteen
Shillings, which he said his Witnesses would positively Swear they saw me to
Reckon and put into my Pocket: forthwith he Rides to a Justice of Peace, for a
Warrant to Bind me over, acquainting the Justice with the whole of the concern
(in all its Circumstances.) The Justice (though Enemy enough on the Account of
Religion,) told him plainly, that he would not grant a Warrant against me, if
he would give him Five Hundred Pounds. He goes to a Second, to a Third, and to
a Fourth, about the same Errand, but from none of them could he get a Warrant
to Bind me over, they being all afraid to meddle at that time with me, whether
for fear of my Uncle, who was at that time Lord Chief Justice of the Kingdom of
Ireland, or from any restraint from God on their Spirits, I do not know. He
finding all his Hopes (of having me for ever disgraced, if not Arraigned for my
Life,) frustrated, Prepares a Bill of Indictment to Arraign me at my Uncles
Bar the Term next ensuing,. This Assault (I confess) was a great Trial of the
little Faith, and Patience, which the Gift of God handed out to my Poor Soul,
in the instant of Regeneration, as ever I have since met with. I have sometimes
(with Holy David thought, that my Mountain (in respect of Inward and Settled
Peace of Concience) should never be shaken or moved, till this Storm arose. And
albeit it did not influence my Soul inwardly, to shake my Comfort and
Confidence in God, God and my own Conscience, knowing mine Integrity, and
Innocence, in the thing laid to my Charge. Yet Considering the Reproach, which
I apprehended would hence arise, to the Name, Gospel, and People of God; the
Stain and Scandal it would be to my whole Family:) no Man can fully conceive
the disquietude and shame, which took up its Lodging in my Breast. Oh! the
tossings and workings of my Spirit: Lord think I! What will this come to? Thou
know mine Innocence in this Matter. But the World will readily Believe I am
Guilty. Blasphemy, and sad Reproach, will hence Redound to thy Most Holy, and
Tremendous Name and Gospel; which I value (unspeakably) more than my Life, and
all the World. The truly Godly and Religious, (the only Men of my delight) will
(with sad Hearts) often think, how sadly they were mistaken in me, what to
apprehend this Storm would Issue in any other, than what I have already
expressed, I could not Imagine. The guiltless Blushes which daily on this
occasion appeared in my Countenance, I concluded would be to all that saw me,
an Argument of my Guilt. The thoughts of the Term approaching increased the
Inward Preturbation of my Mind; and the Blushings of my Face, to think I must
stand Arraigned for Felony before a Judge, and all my other Relations who but a
few Years before, had unanimously Censured, Condemned, and cast me out of their
Favors and Affections, for being a Phanatick, (as they term True and Gospel
Religion.) Oh! How close this went; secretly wishing (but still with humble
submission to God) that he would please either to break that horrid Plot,
before I came to be publicly Arraigned as a Malefactor, or else call me off,
by Death; which I did unspeakably prefer before living to be a cause of
Reproach and Blasphemy, to the Name and Religion of the Most High God. As the
Term drew very near, and the various and restless tossing of my mind on that
Account increased, God (Infinitely Wise, and ever faithful to his Word) who
best knows how to time Deliverance, and break those Nets, in which the Enemies
hope to catch the Innocent He (a very short space before the Term) lets loose
the Reins to this wicked Man's Guilty Conscience, which wrought so violently
with him, that all the strength of Reason in him, yea, the hopes he inwardly
cherished, of seeing me brought to perpetual Disgrace, (if not cut off) were
not able to restrain him from treading the Foot steps of Judas. A Rope he gets,
out he goes to his own Garden in the dusk of the Evening, and having fastened
the Rope about his Neck, just as he was drawing the end of the Rope through the
Arm of a Tree, on which he designed to Hang himself, his Wife and his Man
happened to discover what he was about: On this, the Shout was up, and such a
Cry made, as did presently bring about him all the Neighbors, who (over
powering him) prevented his intended design. But notwithstanding their cutting
the Rope, yet could they have no access to that Guilty Conscience of his, to
assuage or allay the horrible and self Condemning Agonies; which like restless
Waves and Billows did distract and torment his Soul. He being by force
stretched on his Bed, and with the same Rope he attempted to Hand himself,
being fast bound to the Bed, he fell into raging and desperate Fits, like to a
Demoniack, dashing his Head with all his force against the Bed-Stock, Foaming
at the Mouth, uttering these Words, as fast, (and with a strange vehemence,
which Frighted all the Bystanders) as he could, ( viz.) I drive away Cows, I
Sell Cows: No, I drove away no Cows, I Sold no Cows: Roger Eckersley, and
Captain Stopford, will give under their Hands that I am an honest man And so in
raging Madness, expired his last Breath, with these Words in his dying Mouth, I
drove no Cows away, I Sold no Cows; which were the last Words he spoke. The
Reader must know, that before this Plot designed against my Life and
Reputation; the same Poor Wretch Commenced a Law Suit against me, or which he
had not the least appearance of Reason; save, what he, and some others (as
desperately Wicked as himself) had contrived, and which was stoutly sworn, by
an Irish Papist Witness, for but one poor Quart of Ale) against me, at the
Assizes held in the County where he and I Lived. God knows, I no more knew any
thing of what he Charged against me in his Civil Bill, then I knew of the Three
Pound Fifteen Shillings, for which he designed to Arraign me. But so it was,
that upon the Evidence possitively Swearing, a Decree was Granted for Seven
Pound, which was the Sum mentioned in his Bill: The Decree (contrary to
promise) being on a sudden, (while I was from Home, about Business) Executed,
Seven Prime Milch Cows of my Stock where taken away, and in half an Hours time
Appraised, and Sold for Seven Pounds; though the Cows in the Judgment of all that
knew them, and who understood Cattle, were really worth Thirty Pounds between
Brother and Brother. And thus it pleased God, in the Wonder working Providence
of his, to break these Nets, which the Devil (by his Instruments) laid, not
only for my Life, but also for my Credit and Reputation. I do not in the least
doubt, but the great Advantage which the Devil proposed to himself) by putting
those Miscreants on Work to bring my Name and Person into the blackest
Contempt, was to overthrow the efficacy of my Ministry, when I should be
thereto called: For the Devil knew very well, how importunate Godly Ministers,
and others were with me, to take on me that great Work of the Ministry: And
sore guesses (no doubt) he had, how greatly I should be Employed in disturbing
his Kingdom, being in a great measure made acquainted with his Lion and Fox
like Devices, several Years before I was prevailed with to adventure on so
Great and Sacred a Work.

Many more Strange Deliverances has the Providence of God wrought for me, his
Poor unworthy Creature: The which, I am Necessitated to Omit, fearing my Book
should Swell to too great a Bulk. I heartily wish that both my self, and
others, who Read what I have Faithfully and Impartially Related, of the Wonders
of Divine Providence toward me, might be so rightly Affected with what I have
Related, as to give God the Glory and Praise of his own Works: And be (by
Reading these things) stirred up, and Encouraged for ever, to trust in that
Adorable Providence of Heaven, which never fails them who belong to Christ.

CHAP. II.
An Account of God's Woderful Dealings with me, about the Concerns of my Soul,
some Years before the Spirit of Bondage took me.
WHen I was between Fourteen and Fifteen Years of Age, or thereabouts, (as near
as I can Remember) the Lord was pleased to dart some beginnings of Convictions
into my Soul. Which was after this manner, One Lord's Day, as I was in the
Height of Vigor, in Profaning God's Holy Day; with the Rude and Ignorant
Papists, there was darted into my Conscience (like an affrightning flash of
Lightening from above) this Apprehension, and Thought, ( Viz.) That I must be
either Converted, or else sent to Hell to be Damned. This Arrow being Shot out
of his Bow, who never misseth the Mark at which he Shoots; took up its Lodging
within me: But what to make of it, or what the meaning of it should be, I was
as far to seek as a Beast; so Ignorant and Brutish was I, the Lord knows. But
though I knew not from whence it came, or what its Tendency would be; yet,
being a Messenger from God, it maintained its Ground, stuck close by me,
accompanied me wherever I went, putting me sometimes into a Sweat, sometimes
into inward Shiverings of Soul, sometimes into distracting and perplexing
Cogitations and Thoughts, what it should be. Be sent to Hell (think I) Lord!
What Is that? And be Damned, Bless me! (think I:) What Is this to be Damned? Dear
Reader! Believe me, I had Read in Scripture the Words Hell, and Damned, with
the term Converted: But no more did I understand the Sense, or the meaning of
the one or the other, of those three Words, than a Beast. At length, I began
(in my Thoughts) to fix on something, what this strange thing should be, or
mean. And the Result came to this, I did Conceive, and strongly Apprehend, that
Hell and Damned, were some ugly, frightful, and dangerous thing, to the which,
should I be brought, I should be a sad, and undone Creature for ever. As for
the other, ( viz.) Converted, I did verily think, it meant no more, than the
leaving off, or ceasing from, those Mad and Youthful Pranks, of Profaning the
Sunday, (as I then called the Lord's Day), with several other Immoralities to
which I been exceedingly and wretchedly adicted: and in the stead or room, of
those vain and wretched Practices, to fall upon a serious, and sober Living.
Both of which, I fully concluded, lay within the compass of my own Free Will,
and Natural Power to effect.

Accordingly, I fell to Work; Deserting and throwing off, both my Wicked
Companions, and also my dearly beloved Sports and sinful Pastimes. To the
Bible, and Practice of Piety, (a Book I dearly Loved) I Adrest my self, with
all Imaginable Devotion, and Seriousness. And being fully resolved on a through
Work of Conversion, that so I might shun and escape Hell; and being Damned. I
became very Bookish, Looking into (almost) every Book, where ever I came; to
try, whether I could meet with any help; which might forward me in my new Trade
of Religion: Among other Books, wherewith I met, Mr. Baxter's Call to the
Vn-Converted came into my Hands, the which I did no sooner open, but its Title
Page invited my Fancy, to make choice of it, for my chief Companion; the which
I also did, Blessing my self in that Book, more than with any other wherewith I
had met; the more, and oftener I Read it, the more was I Enamored with it: even
to a preferring it before Gods own Sacred Book. So suited, was it, to the
Purpose I had then Engaged in, ( viz.) to Work out (of my self, and in my own
Strength) that great Work of Conversion. To my course of Reading and Praying
(by those Forms of Prayer in the Common Prayer Book, and Practice of Piety,) I
joined very strict, and severe Fasting. Taking up a Resolution that I would in
a most Solemn manner, observe two Days in every Week ( viz.) Wednesday and
Friday, for my Fasting Days: The which I also did; even to such a degree of
Pharisaicall severity, that I almost rendered my Body unfit for any Service. But
Converted I must be, and Converted I was Resolved to be, whatever it cost me;
in order whereto, I kept my Religious doings of Duty both Negatively and
Positively, with such a Constant and Zealous elaborateness, that I verily
believe, it would be hard to find one, among the Romish Monks, who could (in
all respects) match me, or out do me, at the Trade of Serving God, in that way
I fell in with.

It can hardly be told, (much less believed) how great Zeal I had for God, and
how restless my Active, and Working Spirit was, to be with him in Heaven. Though
I neither knew God (according to Truth) nor the way to him, no more than a Poor
Pagan, who never heard of him. I had such low, gross and carnal Thoughts, and
Apprehensions of the Deity, that I am very apt to conclude, the very Heathen
had far Higher and more Sublimate Conceptions, of their Fictitious Gods; that I
had of that Tremendous, and unconceiveably Glorious God, whom I so Ignorantly
Worshipped. I was wonderfully Zealous, in all Religious Performances wherein I
did (at any time) Engage; both in Private, and also in the Public. In my
Private Duties, I was Marvelously Retired and Secret. Being full of
Apprehensions how ill Constructions would (by all sorts) be put upon my so
Severe and Strict way of Living: and for better accomplishment whereof, I
singled out a very convenient place; then which I thought no place better for
my turn and purpose. It was in a little Room, on the Top of the Castle, wherein
my Father Lived. In that Room I spent the most of my time, in Fasting, Praying,
and Reading my Books; especially, my Darling, and chief Admired and Beloved
Book, ( viz.) Mr. Baxter's Call to the Vn-Converted. When I found my self much
wearied with Reading, I would sometimes divert my self, by walking on the Topp
of the Castle; during which diversion, I did often hear the Shouts and enticing
Calls of my Wicked Companions, to bring me back again, to my newly forsaken
Sports, and sinful Pastime. It was no small Matter to encounter with the
workings of Nature, and the violent Temptations of the Devil, both joining
together, in Suggesting and Framing Arguments to induce, to a willing and ready
compliance, with those Calls and Invitations, to what I Loved and liked, as
dearly as the daily Food I Lived by. Oh! the strange workings which I found in
my self, during those Combats. The Ungodly (whose Company I had Loved and
delighted in so dearly) Calling and Enviting: The strong Bent and inclination
of the Flesh drawing: And a subtle and violent Devil Tempting, and Persuading
to return. What! Forsake thy dear Companions, and thy sweet delightful Sports,
and Pleasures at this Rate? What! To Game or Sport no more for ever? Alas!
Poor Wretch: What good will thou get by betaking thy self to this Pensive, Sad,
and Melancholy kind of Life? Thou have had Experience of the Sweetness and
delightfulness of that way of Living, which thou art now forsaking. The many
and sore Miseries, and Troubles attending this new course of Life which thou
art so fond of, and on which thou art so resolutly bent, do not yet appear in
their black and formidable Colors; therefore be wise in time, go back to thy
deserted Companions, and freely Embrace thy forsaken Sports and Pleasures,
before thou be'st too far gone, in this fond and dangerous way thou art gotten
into: Or else, thou will Repent when it is too late. Besides these assaults
from the Devil, and the continual ebullitions of my stinking and vile Nature,
which did frequently surround me, with new and fresh Attacks, to draw me back
again. I met with new (and unlookt for) Discouragements, from my Relations; who
(taking notice of the great and strange Change, which evidently appeared in me)
frequently assailed my weak and poor beginnings, in Piety and Religion, with
hard Speeches and unbecoming Language against that precise and severe course of
Life, I had so lately embraced, telling me (with great asseverations) that I
should most certainly, bring my self to downright Madness; by Reading the
Scriptures so much.

Note Reader, and Oserve, (by the way) how great an Antipathy there is in the
Devil, and in Unregenerate Sinners, to the Sacred Scriptures, a sure Argument
that they are the Pure, and Infallible Word of God. These things (accompanied
with innumerable Mocks, Taunts, and Jeers, which on all occasions were heaped
on my Name, and Practice proved some occasion of startling and discouragement
to me.

But the fixed apprehensions I had of being sent to Hell, to be Damned, in Case
I became not, and continued a Convert; did abundantly outdo, all the
oppositions which lay (or met me) in my way of strict and Religious Living. On
I went (notwithstanding the many and great oppositions, I found my self
encompassed with) abounding and increasing, rather than (any way) declining or
abating: either in Duties or Ardent Zeal in doing them. My proficiency in
Morality, and the advances I made in Zeal fo the Church and the Liturgy, and
Service thereof; were so Conspicuous and manifest, that I became the talk of
almost all sorts, especially those who stood Related to my Family. Letters and
Persons, who past to and fro; giving an Account (in City and Country) what a
strange alteration, and admirable change appeared in their Cosen J. B. and
what a great and wonderful Practiser of Piety he was become. This was so noised
abroad, that I could scarce look, or speak; or pass in, or out where People
were, but I had somewhat or other, brought into Discourse concerning my
forwardness, and Zeal in Religion. And notwithstanding I was (at that time) but
an Hypocritical Formalist, and a Painted Legalist, (knowing nothing of Jesus
Christ, and the Covenant of Grace, not so much as in the Notion) yet I was
frequently troubled, and exceedingly ashamed, to hear mention made of my
Activity, and Zeal; in Serving and Worshipping God. So far was I from either
designing or desiring to make the World privy to my Intentions of Going to
Heaven.

And that which speaks the thing the more strange, is, to consider the
Circumstances of Time and Place; neither of which afforded any thing, that
might contribute the least part of a Motive, or an Inducement, to put me on
looking toward, or so much as thinking of Conversion: there being no Preaching
in those parts, (the ordinary means by which Convictions in order to Faith and
Conversion, are effected.) Nor yet the Example, or Advice and Council of any
Person, which might occasion in me, such thoughts, or workings of Soul.

In this way, I contined for about Six or Seven Years, after my first
awakenings, frequenting the Church, and its appointed Service: and growing
blind in Pharisaical Zeal, for the Moral Law, and Divine Service Book: Until I
had (in my own apprehension and conceit) arrived at a high pitch of Confidence,
that I was (beyond all dispute really Converted, and that (consequently) I
should go to Heaven, and be Saved. Yea, I did frequently reckon and account,
with my self, that if but two in the World, should go to Heaven, I should
certainly be one of the two. And that, because, I was certainly Converted; and
had taken so much, and great pains, in doing Good, and shunning Evil. I had no
Fear or Jealousy lodged in me, about Gods accepting my Person: And his having
regard, to my numerous, and zealous Performances of Duty; both Private and
Public.

My Extraordinary Inclinations to the Ministry; and that matchless Zeal which
appeared in me, for the Church; that Love and Veneration I had, for its
Liturgy, Ceremonies, and Clergy, especially its Prelacy; gave my Father and
other Relations, great hopes that I should be an Honor to the Family: and a
Man of no ordinary Figure, in the Orb of the Church.

CHAP. III.
Seting forth the Spirit of Bondage seized me, in the very height of my
Confidence, of being in a good and sure state of Salvation: What sad work it
made with me, and what means I used for Help and Relief, under its killing, and
sinking Weight.
WHen I was about Twenty One Years of Age, in the very heat and height of my
Zeal, in Prosecuting that Righteousness (consisting of that Negative, and
Positive Obedience) which the Law Moral enjoins and requires; as the condition
of Life, and Salvation. It pleased God to send forth the Spirit of Bondage to
Seize me; to the end I might be Instructed, and fully convinced, how vain my
Confidence of being Saved, and going to Heaven, in that self pleasing way of
Legal Righteousness was. The manner of it was thus, being on the Day, called
Easter Monday, at my Cathedral Devotion, in the Place called Christ Church in
Dublin, (a Place I constantly frequented, to Morning and Evening Service: and a
Place, which I more Zaelously Loved and Venerated; than any Place in the World
besides; For that I verily conceited (in my self) it was as the very Entrance
into Heaven it self.) After the Service was ended, one Dr. Golborn Preached,
his Text was in Ephesians. 5. 14. Wherefore he says, Awake thou that sleep, and
arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light.

A Good and Choice Text, but how well, or ill Handled; I must acknowledge my
self to have been (at that time) a very incompetent Judge, to say, or
determine. About the middle of the Sermon, as near as I could guess; there was
darted into my mind, this sad and killing Thought, ( viz.) that I had (the day
before) Received the Sacrament unworthily; which sad Thought was backed with
that of, 1 Cor. 11. 29 For he that Eats and Drinks unworthily, Eats and
Drinks Damnation to himself, not descerning the Lords Body.

This sad, and dismal Thought, (backed (as I said) with that Scripture just now
Quoted). Not any Word spoken by the Preacher, was that which seized my Mind,
and let in the Spirit of Bondage upon me.

No sooner had I looked this (...), o^ ^ore-runner, of the Spirit of Bondage in
the Face, compareing it with the place already mentioned, but I concluded my
self, a lost and an undone man. My Spirit was in such an amazing Fright, and
over whelming consternation, to think, that I was (most certainly) Damned, to
all intents and purposes: that indeed, I verily thought, all the People in the
place, were a swarm, or a Legion of Devils, which God (in revengefull wrath)
had sent from the Bottomless Pit, to guard, and attend my Guilty Soul thither.
The apprehensions I had of being Damned, and sent to Hell; so racked, and
tormented my Spirit, that I found my self unable to stay, till Sermon was
ended. Away I ran out of that Place; to shun (as I then thought,) those swarms
of Devils, which I strongly conceived, were to guard me to Hell. As soon as I
came to my Lord of Santry's (where I then Lived) I entered my Chamber, with a
sad, and heavy Heart (God knows;) to my Knees I go, with an intent to Pray, if
so be, there might be any scrap of Hope, of my escaping being Eternally Damned.
But alas! What Tongue or Pen can Relate, the Pass, and condition I was then
at: My Reason, my Conscience, and my very Speech, were, as it were Plunged and
Drowned, in the Gulf of Despair; so that I could neither utter a Word in
Prayer, nor yet consider what I should do, to Relieve my Bleeding Soul, in that
sore distress. I durst not abide in my Chamber; fearing to see and feel the
Devils (actually) to Seize me. To the Minister of the Parish I went, (from
whose Hands I Received the Sacrament but the Day before,) not knowing but that
he might Administer some kind of Relief, to one in my condition. He observing
the gastliness of my Looks, and taking notice that somewhat ailed me, he asked
me how I did; to which I could not Reply. He pressing to know what the matter
was; I at length, in a very abrupt and broken manner, told him, that I was full
of the apprehensions and fears, that I was a Damned Man; and that there was no
hopes of Mercy, for such a one as I was.

The Minister somewhat surprised, at so sudden, and so great a Change; since,
but the Day before, he began to Examine what great and heinous Sins, one of my
Age, and one in so encouraging Circumstances, (as I was in) could be guilty of;
which should occasion such sad Despair: He mentioned some Texts of Scriptures,
thereby hoping to have given some Relief, to my weary gasping Soul, but all in
vain; God's time of Healing me being not yet come. And finding by my frequent
coming to him, for Ease and Comfort, to how little purpose he had labored with
me; he (at length) advised me, to Ride into the Country, to Visit my Father and
other Relations; and by that means, as also by Exercising my self, with such
Exercise as I formerly delighted in, as Shooting with the Gun, and Angling, to
divert my Melancholy Thoughts. This I was glad to hear of, my own Inclinations
leading so strongly to it: in order to the effecting of which, I Addressed my
self, to my Lord's Housekeeper, entreating her to acquaint my Lord, that in
regard, of some present Indisposition, under which I labored; and in order to
my Health, I had not only an inclination, but was advised, to Visit my Father,
in the Country: in order whereto I thought it convenient to acquaint his
Lordship therewith, to the end, I might obtain, not only his Lordships free
consent, but also the liberty of a Horse, to perform my intended Journey. The
Housekeeper, no sooner delivered my request to my Lord, but my Lord Commands
her to call me up into his Chamber. As soon as I received the Command, I fell
(immediately) into a great Sweat, and sore Trembling, up I went, and being
entered into the Chamber; my Lord Locks the Chamber Door, and laying his Hat on
a Cabinet, sits down in his Chair, and with an earnest and piercing Eye, looks
on a pretty while before he Speaks, I all the while sweating and quaking. At
length my Lord begins, with. James what ails you? What is the matter? I hear
you go (privately) to Ministers, there is somewhat ails you. What is it? I
perceiving (by my Lord's Discourse) that the Minister of the Parish, had
acquainted my Lord, with my Case, I found my self far more uneasy, than
before. My Sweat and Trembleings of Soul increasing upon me: My Lord continued
querying, What ails you James, tell me what is the matter? I was so overwhelmed
in my Spirit, that my Speech was swallowed up, as Job says, Job 6. 3. But my
Lord not letting me alone, but (with earnest Importunities) pressing to know
what I ailed; I at length, as a poor Condemned Caitiff, hanging by a twine
Thread over Hells Mouth, Roared out, as if my Bowels had burst out of my Body:
Crying with great and unutterable Groans and Tears. My good Lord, Dear my Lord,
I am afraid, I am an undone Creature, I am a Damned Man, there is no Mercy for
me. My Lord perceiving (by my Looks and Speech,) that I was in good earnest
wounded, with Tears in his Eyes, and with the greatest concernedness for me;
began to play the Spiritual Physician, asking me, with great earnestness, what
gross, and crying Sins, as Adultery, Murder, and the like, could one of my
Years, be guilty of, as to occasion my falling into Despair of Mercy. And (said
my Lord) admit you were guilty of such, and greater abominations, what Reason
have you for Despair; you must know that Jesus Christ the Son of God, came
into the World, not to lay a Load on you, but to take your Load off you.
Quoting, Mat. 11. 29. Come unto me, all ye that are weary, and heavy Laden, and
I will give you Rest.

With many other Texts of Scriptures, and comfortable Expressions, he labored
to Relieve and Ease my burdened and sinking Soul, but all in vain, (God's time
of curing my deep and desperate Wound, being not come.) As touching my purpose,
of going into the Country, My Lord told me, I might use my freedom, but that
his Judgment and Advice was, that it were better for me to stay, than to go
into the Country: and that because, of the great Disadvantage, which by going,
would accrue to me, in my Studies. My Lord, having declared his Judgment, what
had been best for me to do, I told his Lordship I was resolved to take his
Advice, what ever came of me: and accordingly I did.

My Sore continually raw, Day and Night, and ceased not. Yea, my Soul refused
to be Comforted. According to that of the Psalmist, in the like Case, Psalm. 77.
2. In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord, my Sore ran in the Night, and
ceased not: My Sold refused to be Comforted.

I seemed to follow, and to ply my Studies, rather for Fashion sake, and for
fear my Lord, and my Father, should suspect that I Loved Idleness, rather than
any Love I had thereto: or hopes that ever it would turn to any Account, for
good; to my self, or others.

When at any time I looked into a Book, instead of heeding, or minding what was
in the Book, the Eye of my gnawing, guilty Conscience, was fixed on the many
Sins I had committed against God, insomuch, that all the Sins of my Youth, were
in all their black and aggravating Circumstances; laid, and held before me, as
a Looking-Glass, to show me, what a monstrous Sinner I was. According to that
of David, Psalm. 51. 3. For I acknowledge my Transgressions, and my Sin is ever
before me.

Endless were the Tossings, and Rowlings of my weary Soul, from one sad
confusion and despairing Thought, to another. Innumerable (almost) were the
sorry Prayers (such as they were) and other Duties, which I daily Performed; to
Keep, and Relieve my Despairing Soul with; but all in vain. Which caused me to
conclude, that I had been much wanting in the Trade of Works, and that, had I
not been so, I might have been acquainted with Peace, and Comfort, before now.
To the Trade of doing, I again addressed my self; resolving not to omit, or leave
undone any thing: which I understood, (by Reading or Hearing) to be matter of
Duty. Praying (understand by the Book, for I knew no better) Reading, Fasting,
and attending the most lively Preachers, frequenting Sacraments, giving Alms to
the Poor, of what Money my Lord, and other Relations Handed out to me. That
Place in Dan. 4. 7. was often in my Thoughts, according to which I gave away
whatever I got: yea, so addicted to Relieve the Poor and Needy, was I, that I
would give away my very Apparel, when I had no Money. And all this, from a
Pharisaical and Superstitious conceit, that by those Acts of Duty and Service,
I should Recompense God, for those Sins, which (like a Millstone on the Back
of a Man) were sinking my Soul, into the Gulf of Desparation.

I did abound more and more, in Strict and Circumspect Walking, according to
do, and Live, the Condition, and Tenure of the first Covenant of Works, under
which I was Laboring for Life: The more I wrought at the Trade of Duty, the
further I found my self from Peace: which did cause me to Conclude, that my
Case was certainly desperate, and that it was peculiarly my own: and that none
that belonged to God, was ever in such a condition, as I found my self to be in.

I then renewed my old practice, of going to Ministers; acquainting them, with
the deplorable, and wretched State, and Condition I was in; and earnestly
begged their Advice and Council; what one in my sad Circumstances had best to
do, in order (if it were possible) to escape Eternal Damnation? Oh! that
killing Word Damnation! When ever I Heard, Read, or Thought of it, how did it
Rack, and Torment my Spirit? As fearing it would be my Portion for ever.

As the Principle from which I Acted, in order to healing, and cure; was, Do
and Live. So those Spiritual Physicians, to whom I Addressed my self, for Council
and Comfort, in this Despair of Soul; (being as ignorant in the Mystery of the
New Birth, as ever was Nicodemus,) Joh. 3. 4. They put me on doing those
Duties, in and about which, I had Labored before, even to weariness. The Names
of those Dignitaries of the Church to whom I Applied my self, together with
what their sayings were, are too Tedious to Relate; and therefore, I here pass
them by. Only I think fit, to Acquaint the Reader, with the great and
superlative Ingenuity, and dexterous Skilfulness, in healing a Sin-sick Soul;
which one of them (above the rest) had attained to, to his Everlasting Fame be
it Spoken. The Thing is thus.

After I had acquainted the Bishop, (for of no lower a Degree was he) with the
sad, and lamentable Condition, my Soul was in, but he forthwith exhorts me, to
get a Book (Styled, The whole Duty of Man,) and when I had got it, I should
come to him for further Instructions. The Book I forthwith procured, and to his
Lord Bishop I repaired, who finding that I had got the Book: Takes it out of my
Hand, and turning to a Prayer appointed for one of the Nights in the Week; with
great earnestness charged me, that when I was ready to go to Bed, that I be
sure to kneel down by my Bedside, and say that Prayer, the which was done
according to his Lordships Directions. But to how great purpose, I leave the
Judicious, and Experienced Christian to Judge.

Having thus applied my self, to seven or eight, of the Ablest, and most Famed
of the Fathers, and Dignitaries of the Church of England, (then in Dublin) and
finding by woeful and sad Experience, how little they understood my Case, and
how vastly short they proved in helping me, in my Extremity, I concluded my
Case to be altogether desperate and hopeless.

It is not to be told by Tongue, or Pen, what Soul Conflicts and Agonies
accompanied me, wherever I went, and whatever I set about. Insomuch that they
became frequent and Familiar to me, in the very Night Visions. The Devil, Hell,
Damnation, with the manner how the Wicked are handled in Hell; were things very
often presented to my Fancy, in those short and Tormenting Slumbers, whereinto
I fell. Yea, I have sometimes Dreamt, that I have seen, and felt my self in
Hell, among the Damned, tumbling and sinking down deeper and deeper, feeling no
Bottom. Which has occasioned me often to think of Job's Case, of which he
bitterly complains. Job. 7. 14. Then thou scarest me with Dreams, and
terrifiest me with Visions.

As it was with Job, so it was with me, when I had been even spent, with the
Conflicts, and Temptations of the Day. I thought sometimes, and hoped at least,
that my Bed and Sleep, would something ease, and lessen my Pain, and inward
horror of Mind. But woe, and alas! I was never wearier of the Fatigue of the
Day, than I was of the restless Tossings of the Night. And that because, of
those Dreams and Visions, which (did as it were) realize the things themselves,
to my Mind. The consternation, into which those Soul afflicting Visions did put
me, did often startle me out of my Sleep, and caused in me restless longings
for Daylight: and that because, I could not employ my Thoughts about any
thing, but what had a Tendency to augment my Despair and Misery. My Thoughts
running out, and Fixing upon the Sins of my Youth, thinking how many, and Black
they were: Calling to Mind, the Advances I had formerly made in the way of
Strict and Zealous Religion; and what Methods and Ways I had used, to get
Healing and Comfort, and all in Vain, and to no purpose. And that because (as I
concluded) God had given me up, to be a Prey to the Enemy. Sometimes in the
Night when I could not Seep, I heard Dogs howl, and cry Pittiously, in the
Cold Weather, this I apprehended was a lively Representing to the Ear, the
Skreeks and Roarings of the Damned in Hell. Thus are they, in those Eternal
Flames, and so shall I, e're long. Oh! That I could but see one glimps of the
Morning Light! But woe is me, (Deserted and Forsaken of God,) I shall be with
the Damned, in that place of Torment, before Morning. I shall never see Light.
Well, when (contrary to my foolish and wicked Thoughts and Expectations) I had
Lived to see the Morning Light; I would then begin to Reason and Query with my
self, what I had so earnestly desired the Day for? My Day of Grace is certainly
past, and gone: there is no Mercy in store, for such a one as I am. All the
helps and means of Grace, which have had a Blessing attending them, for special
Good to others; are attended with a Curse to me; I am a Reprobate; in vain it
is to Pray any more; or spend any more time in the Duties of Religion. I have
had sad experience of that, under this Weight would I lie in my Bed, concluding
it altogether in vain, to arise to engage in any Duty. This Temptation so far
prevailed, that I did (for a time) Refrain Prayer; and neglect other Duties of
Religion. From my concluding, that I belonged not to God, I found my self like
a dead Log, as if I had neither Life, nor Soul left in me. I expected certainly
(every Hour; nay, each Minute; nay, every Breath I fetched) to be hurried away;
into the Place, and Company of the Damned; which caused in me, such amazement
and unusual horror; that I would creep like a Condemned Malefactor, into the
Chimny corner, among the Company, there resolving to stay, while any stayed
there: On purpose to avoid and shun those Damned Spirits, whom I expected
(every twinkling of an Eye to see.

Among my sad and despairing Thoughts, concerning the ineffectualness of all
Means, and Duties, to do me good; there did come into my Thoughts, a Passage
which I had Read in some Author, whose Name I have forgot, it was this, ( viz.)
That there are different Degrees of Torment, among the Damned in Hell. This
thing I Fixed my Thoughts on so long, till I did hence Infer, and Conclude,
that seeing there are different Degrees of Torment among the Damned in Hell,
and that the Damned exceed each other, in the Degrees of Sin, must
(necessarily) be the Ground and Foundation, of such a difference: I concluded
that the less Sin I committed, the less would be my Torment in Hell. Now every
omission of Duty, (think I) as well as doing what is Possitively forbidden, in
the Moral Law, is a sin against God; and therefore, to make my Chain the
lighter in Hell; I am resolved against all known Sin. And accordingly, I fell
to Works again, perceiving in my self, no other Motive or Inducement (hereto)
but merely expecting, and hoping, that by this means, my being in Hell, would
be made more tolerable and easy, than that of other Reprobates. By this very
thing, it will (easily) be understood, how near I was to final Despair, in my
own Thoughts and Apprehensions.

But among all the Combats, and Conflicts, I met with in the time of my
Bondage, none more Rackt and tormented my Spirit, than those hideous and
abominable Thoughts, which by the Devil were like Fiery and Poisoned Arrows
Injected into my Mind; sometimes against the Holy Scriptures, as that they were
not the word of God, but the Cunning and Politic Inventions of Men; devised
and contrived by some, to Awe, and keep others in Subjection. This Temptation
caused no small Anguish, and Perturbation in my Mind: but did not continue
long; for (though sad and desperate I thought my Case to be) I was enabled to
Consider, what a mighty Power went along with the Scriptures, in discovering my
most Secret Corruptions; and putting my Conscience and Spirit into such fear,
of what would ensue, in Case I did not cofess and forsake them. This very
Consideration ( viz.) that the Word, which discovered to me, my vain, and
sinful thoughts, and Condemned the ill Life, I had led; and that laid me under
such Captivating horror and fear, for the same, must needs be the Word of an
Infinite, All-knowing, and powerful God: did foil and repel that Temptation.

No sooner had the first Temptation been over, but a Second immediately ensues;
which was, That there is no such thing as a God, in Nature, and that Men's
Believing, and Professing the Being of a God, was more from use of Custom, and
from the strong Workings of Fancy, than from any real Truth, grounded on
sensible Experience.

Oh! The sad Concussion this Temptation gave to the Powers of Nature. I was so
strangely influenced by it, that I solemnly Prosess, I felt my self sinking and
and just tottering, to fall off my Feet: All over in a Muck Sweat, with a
strange Shivering, and Trembling, in all the Powers, and Parts of Soul and
Body. But making to a Window, looking into a pleasant Garden; I leaned on the
Window, with my Elbows, and so bore up my Body, from falling, which otherwise,
had (undoubtedly) sunk down under its present Load and Weight, occasioned by
that Temptation. Remaining for some little space, in a horrible Trembling, and
amazing Consternation of Spirit. I (looking out into the Garden) began began to
consider, and Reason with my self, thus, How came these Trees to grow thus
orderly in this place? Who Reared or Built these Sumptuous Buildings? Surely,
not themselves: why then (think I) if not themselvess; then (of necessity) they
must Spring from some Cause, Higher and more Noble than themselves ( viz) Man.
Then, from the Consideration of the Trees, and the Buildings; I began to
Exercise my thoughts about Man, and other Living Creatures, thinking thus: And
how came Man, and these other Living Creatures, to have a Being; surely (think
I) they could neither Form nor Quicken themselves; and if so, then of
necessity, there must be some Cause of their Being and Living, which is Higher
and more Excellent than they; which can (thinks my Reason) be no other but an
Infinitely Glorious God. And this (said Reason in me) might be Evinced; not
only by considering the Particulars already mentioned; but, by considering the
Frame of the World, and the strange Preservation of all things therein; and the
wonderful Government of the Second Causes, wherewith the World abounds.

These, and sundry others of the like Arguments, proved so Strong, and Nervous,
to convince me, that of necessity there must be a God, that that Temtation
vanished.

The Devil perceiving himself foiled in this attempt; he sets furiously on me,
with Blasphemous Thoughts: Representing God in such vile shapes, and hideous
and base Ideas, to my Mind; that were I to undergo, the utmost of Misery, that
Creatures are capable of Inflicting, or I capable of Suffering: I do (humbly)
hope, in Christ's Strength, I should unspeakably choose rather to be Racked to
Death: than (but once) to Name them; so vile, hideous, and horrible were they:
Proceeding rather from the Enraged and Revengeful Malice of the Devil, against
the Majesty of God; than from the Corruption, and Pravity of Nature. These
things, I do but glance (or touch) at, not from any delight I take in the
Remembrance of them: But rather for the Relief of some poor Tempted Despairing
Soul; who (probably) may be conflicting with the same Fiery Assaults;
concluding within themselves (as I often did) that none belonging to God, could
ever be possessed, with such black and dismal Thoughts. Oh! the gastliness and
fearful Tremblings. Oh! the Sweats and Weariness, of my very Life, which these
Satanical Injections caused in me; a sure and convincing Argument, they were
(immediately from the Devil, and none else. The Sins flowing from the Pravity
of Nature, being (commonly) rather Pleasing and Delightful, than Amazing and
Terrifying to Nature.

In this sad Condition, I continued so long, till my very Animal Spirits, were
even drunk up: and the Radical moisture of my Body, wasted by that Burning
Inflammation which I (sensibly) felt, invade and possess my Body. The pitiful
and deplorable State I was in, both in respect of my Soul, which I found was
Invaded by the Terrors of God, for the breach of his Royal Law; and (as I
verily concluded) given up to Satan, by God, in a Judicial way, to be possessed
by him. As also, in respect of my Body, in which the sad Symptoms of my
approaching Doom, did as I verily thought, hourly appear: such as the growing
and increasing of that Burning Inflammation, (already mentioned.) Decay of my
Sight, which necessitated the use of Spectacles, at the Age of 25 Years: the
loss of my Smelling, and Tasting, for about three Months, with a great decay of
my Hearing: So ghastly a sight was I, to behold, that I became a Spectacle of
wonderment to all the Family, where I Lived; some concluding, that I was
Starved, by my frequent Fastings: others (verily) concluding, that Spirits
haunted me; which caused (in me) such ghastly looks; and caused my Body to bend
and bow, toward Crookedness; so heavy and Insupportable, was the Load I lay
under.

CHAP. IV.
Discovering how the Spirit of Adoption Succeeded the spirit of Bondage. And
what Glorious effects ensued thereupon.
THE last Day of my Bondage State, when I looked for nothing, but a going down,
to the nethermost Hell: In the unconceiveable Horror, and amazing Consternation
of my Spirit; there was a place of Scripture which run in my Thoughts, from
Morning to Bedtime. The Place of Scripture was, Esa. 43. 25. I even I, am he,
that Blotteth out thy Transgressions for mine own sake; and will not Remember
thy Sins.

This Scripture got such hold of my Mind and Thoughts, that (albeit, I no more
understood the Sense, or meaning of the Spirit of God in it, or how it came
into my Mind that Day, than a Pagan, that never knew any thing of the True God.
I could not possibly keep my Thoughts fixed on any thing (all the Day) but on
that very Scripture. Rolling and Tumbling, the bare Words in my thoughts
incessantly; thus, I, even I, am he, that blotteth out thy Transgressions, for
mine own sake; and will not Rememberthy Sins. I, even I, am he, that blotteth
out thy Transgressions, for mine own sake; and will not Remember thy Sins. And
so all the Day till Bedtime. I was somewhat astonished at the Change, which I
found in my self, (in reference to my Thoughts about the Scriptures:) for,
whereas before, during the State of my Spiritual Bondage, which was between
three and four Years) I could think of no Scriptures, but such as Treated of
Damnation, of Falling away, and of Sinning against the Holy Ghost, always
applying the same to my self, desperately concluding, that my own Doom was, in
those Terrible Scriptures set forth, and discovered. I (that Day) forgot those
Terrifying Scriptures; and could (as I said) think of nothing, but that Place
in Esa. 43. 25 above mentioned. And that without the least apprehension, what
the Sense of the Spirit (in these Words) should be; or how, or wherefore that
Scripture should make such a forceable entry on my Mind and Thoughts; as to
Eject, and Banish from my Thoughts and Remembrance, the other Terrible
Scriptures: By the wrong Application of which, my State and Condition, became
(as to my own Sense and Thoughts,) equal to that of the Damned.

At Night after my Lord had Supped, and while the inferior of the Family, were
(Actually) at Supper: I stole my opportunity, Resolving (in my self,) that none
should know where I was; or suspect what I was about; up Stairs I got, without
a Candle, (the Night being Moonshine) I was all of a Sweat, and a strange
Horror fell on me, occasioned by the Conceit, and Apprehension I had, that the
Devil accompanied me, (as a Man) up Stairs, whose Steppings (along with mine) I
strongly imagined I heard, which caused me to keep my Eyes closed, for fear I
should see the Devil, in a visible Shape. While I was unlocking the Chamber
Door, I found the Horror, and Fright, under which I Labored, greatly to
increase, the Devil suggesting, that he would either pull me back, from entering
into the Chamber; or else, that he would enter along with me, to hinder (or
distract) me, in my (intended) Devotion. All this while the place of Scripture,
above mentioned, ran still in my Thoughts, as before. Being entered into my
Chamber, all in a Sweat, and unusual Consternation of Spirit, I stood before
the Bedside, where I used to kneel, in Praying; and with my Eyes closed (as I
was taking my self to Task, endeavoring to Recollect my Memory, where I had
been all that Day? With what Company I had Conversed? What Duties I had
(knowingly) omitted? And what Immoralities, I had any ways consented to?) All
on a sudden, I found the Eyes of my Understanding so clearly Enlightened, that I
was enabled to know and understand the meaning of that Place of Scripture,
which run all that Day in my Thoughts. A Scripture, than which, The whole Book
of God, could not afford a more suitable Text for the design therein; which
was, to debase the Creature; and to Extol and to Advance the Grace, and Mercy
of the Most High Jehovah; who (alone) Excluding all others) is God (over all)
Blessed for Evermore.

I was from the time of my first awakening (as above mentioned) possessed of an
Opinion; that Conversion consisted in an External (or outward) Reformation of
the Life, and that it was in the Power of the Creature to effect the same. And
that by Repenting of the bypast Follies of Youth; and by a Strenuous, and
Zealous Constancy, in walking strictly according to the Precepts of the Moral
Law; both negatively, and possitively, for the time to come. I was then under
the Predominancy of a legal Spirit: and acting under the Covenant of Works:
looking (with the Bond-Womans Children) for Justification, and Life Eternal in
the way of Works; Reckoning it the only sure and safe way, to expect Salvation:
by performing the Conditinal Covenant of Works; and abounding in such personal
Qulifications as might render me acceptable to God. Of which (I have often
thought) I had as great measure as any he, I knew Living. I shall not Insist on
the Particulars of those Inherent Qualifications; wherein I am apt to believe,
I did match (if not out strip) the strictest Moralist I know, who is yet in his
Natural State. In short, I was exceeding Zealous in the Law; not (in the least)
understanding the Spiritual meaning thereof, or how miserably wretched I was,
by reason of its Condemning Sentence, against not only my worst, but also
against my most Refined Acts of Morality. I did then, as too to many do at this
Day of Gospel Light, ( viz.) set up the Letter of the Law, in opposition to the
Spirit of the Law.

But so it pleased God, that by his enabling me to understand the Mind of his
Spirit, in that Text; I soon became convinced, that I had taken wrong Methods,
in order to get from under the Laws Curse, and to have a Settled Peace in my
self. The Course I had taken for Relieving my wounded and sinking Spirit, I
perceived to be directly contrary to the Gospel way, of saveing lost Sinners. I
was all for Doing and Working; and the more Works I did, the farther I found my
self from true Peace and Comfort. My Chief and only Work (now) was Believing in
the Son of God, in whom (alone) that Righteousness is to be found, which
Reconciles a Sinner to an offended God. From that Text (above mentioned) the
Covenant of God's Free Grace (in Christ) was Explained, and laid open, before
the Eyes of my Enlightened Understanding: the Terms whereof (I found) were as
far wide of (or contrary to) the way to which the Covenant of Works directs,
for attaining Life Eternal, as the East is from the West, or as Heaven is from
Hell.

The Work of the Spirit in discovering Christ to me (from that Text) and his
drawing me to close with Christ (so discovered) was so full of amazing, and
astonishing Wonderment, and surprising Ravishment of Soul, that I am no mroe
able to Express or Relate the same, than I am able to find out the Dimensions
of the Sun, or to give an exact account of the Number of the Stars.

There was held (as it were) a Court of Enquiry in my Soul. The Holy Ghost,
which (before) was the Spirit of Bondage, wounding and killing me, by the
Terrible Sentence of the Law. He is become the Spirit of Adoption, to
Consummate a Sweet, and Blessed Marriage, between the Lord Jesus Christ, (God's
only Son, by Eternal and Ineffable Generation) and a poor lost and undone
Prodigal, who (as Adam's Child) was Born Heir of the Curse, Partaker of a
Nature as Vile and Poluted, as Hell it self could make it; and whose Case and
Condition (in respect of inward Horror, and Despair of Soul) differed but
little (at least as I thought and believed) from that of the Damned in Hell.

Six Things this Blessed Spirit of Adoption did effect, in order to Consummate
this Match.

First, He discovered and made known to me, who the Lord Jesus (held forth in
the Gospel) was; from whence he came; and to what end the Father sent him.

Secondly, He made plain Discoveries to me, of Christ's Almightiness to Save,
and Reconcile to God, the worst and most wretched of Sinners: and that the
Righteousness, which (he as Mediator between God and Sinners) has wrought, is
the alone Righteousness, by which a Sinner is to be Saved. And that in a way of
Believing (though not for Believing) that God, for the sake, and merit of his
Sons obedience, to the Law, (both Active and Passive) does Frankly and Freely,
Pardon and Forgive the Poor Rebels Transgressions committed against the Moral
Law, as if he had never committed them; and accounting the whole of that
Righteousness of Christ, (both Active and Passive) as truly the Sinners; as if
the Sinner had (Personally) performed the same himself; and that in a way of
free Imputation.

Thirdly, He persuaded my Heart, that God the Father, (against whose Law I had
Sinned, and whose Anger and Curse (for the same) I feared) was really willing
and desirous, that I should be Reconciled to himself, by the Virtue of his Sons
Mediation; and that by my betaking my self to him; and casting my weary and
sinking Soul on him, to be introduced into his Presence; and by his Spotless
Comeliness (put on me) I might be made Amiable, and Acceptable in his Sight.

Fourthly, He Discovered to me, (and Persuaded my Hearts of) the Full, and
Complete Provision, made by God, (and made known in the Covenant of Grace for
the making Completely (and Eternally) Happy, those Souls who are by Christ his
Son (Believed, and Relied on for Salvation) Reconciled to his Majesty.

In Respect of these, and the like Discoveries, which the Holy Ghost makes to
the Elect (in effectual Calling.) And between that and their Arriving at Glory,
he is Styled the Spirit of Manifestation, and of Revelation. 1 Cor. 12. 7. Jo.
16. 14. Jo. 17. 6. Ephesians. 1. 17.

Fifthly, He Interrogated, (or Queried) of my Soul, as follows.

1. Art thou become truly and thoroughly sensible, and convinced that thou art,
by Departing from (and Sinning against) God, an undone, miserable, and guilty
Creature; having lost his Blessed Image stamped on thee, in Adam thy Natural
and Faederal Head, in the First Creation. And being now become obnoxious to
God's Curse, and the Wrath to come, and Partaker of such a Spiritual Impotency,
as Renders thee (utterly) incapable, of doing any thing, whereby thou may be
Delivered out of thy present folorn condition: Art thou Conviuced, that this
thy Misery, is of thy own bringing upon thee?

Sinner Answers. O thou Most Holy, Just, and Tremenduous God! By the Light now
Sprung from thee, (the Fountain of all Light) into my Dungeon-like Soul: I
plainly see what a wretch I am become, no way like what thou (at first) made
me, in Adam. I am likewise fully Convinced, that this my Misery, was brought on
me, by my (every way) voluntary Defection, and Apostasy, when (in Adam's Loins)
I first yielded to the Motion of the Tempter.

2. Art thou Convinced of what the real Desert and Merit of thy Sinning against
a Holy and Righteous God is? What can thou say against Gods Casting thee into
Hell: for that Hellish Rebelon of thine, against his Holy and Righteous Law?

Sin. Ans. O thou Most Holy; and Everlastingly Righteous God, who can not
possibly Act amiss, in any thing thou do, with thy Creatures. I am (by the
Convincing Power of thy Holy Spirit) made Sensible, that by my Departing from,
and Rebelling against thy Majesty, I have forfeited that Right, I had (in Adam)
to all Good, Spiritual and Temporal. And should thou Cast me into Hell, and
Assign me my Portion, with the Apostate Angels, whose Conduct and wretched
Example I followed, when I turned my Back on thee, thou art, and wilt (for
ever) be, and remain; a Just, a Holy, and a Most Righteous God my Misery is of
my own Procurement; and so far am I from reflecting on thee (as unjust)
should thou throw me from thee, for ever, that I am amazed and astonished to
think, I should be so long out of Hell. The Place where I (sometimes)
evenlong'd to be, to try whether there was any specifical Difference, between
the Torments and Miseries of that Place, and what I felt in my self, while shut
up in thy Laws Prison, under the sharp and killing Pedagogie thereof.

3. Have thou Viewed and taken notice of that Mediator, which I have proposed
and discovered to thee, in the Gospel? Do thou think, or, can thou be
persuaded, that he can do thy Work for thee, ( viz.) Save thee, from Curse and
Wrath to come? and not only so, but to Restore thee, and bring thee back again
to the Favor and Fellowship of God? Do thou see in him, an Adequate,
suitableness to Answer all thy Necessities?

Sinner Answers. O Lord! My Eyes are so intent and fixed on that Mediator, that
I can have no leisure, or spare time, to look on any other object in Heaven, or
Earth; never did, (neither can) Men or Angels, behold or see, such an object,
except himself. The Angels, and all the Glory of the whole Creation, are but
Darkness and Deformity, when compared, to his Surpassing and Incomparable
Amiableness, and Loveliness, since I had the first glimps of him; as held forth
and discovered, by thy Divine and Efficacious Manifestation. I have forgotten
my Misery; and the fearful Thoughts of Hell, and Damnation, are swallowed up,
of the Thoughts and Apprehensions I have of his suitableness, to Answer the
necessitous Condition of such a Sinner as I am.

4. Have thou Viewed, and Observed him so, as to like him, and choose him, for
thy Reconciler and Savior? What say thou Poor Sinner! Will thou have him,
for thine own? It Is Personal Propriety in him, that makes the Thoughts, and
Sight of him Ravishing, and Enriching for ever.

Sinner Answers, O Tremendous, and Astonishing Mystery! of Divine Grace, in
sending forth (from the Father, and the Son) that Holy Spirit of Promise; that
by his Illuminating Virtue, and quickening Power, I might have such a saving
Sight, of Christ, the Savior; as should both beget in me, a likeing to his
Person, and likewise cause in me, a burning desire to be United, and Married to
him: I am indeed sick of Love to him; and filled with such desires, after him,
as nothing short of a Mystical Union, to his Most Holy and Glorious Person; can
satisfy my thirsting Soul.

5. Art thou willing that this Mediator, shall have the whole Honor of Saving
thee, by his own Mediatorial Righteousness. For, As no Righteousness (of a mere
Creature) can stand before the Bar, of Gods Infinite, and Incomprehensible
Holiness; and to abide such a Trial, as to be Judged fit and sufficient, to
Justify a Sinner, before God, (seeing that the Righteousness to which such
Honor is Reserved, and Assigned, must be the Righteousness of God. And also
the Righteousness of a sinless Man) so this Mediator will become a Savior to
none who will mix, (or join) any thing of their own, or other Creatures, with
his Immaculate, and All-sufficient Righteousness. The whole and entire Work of
Reconciling, and Saving Sinners, is Devolved on him alone. He will admit of no
Competitor, in this Work, to which the Father has Called and Anointed him. And
the which he himself (as Vademony, and Surety for God's Elect) has undertaken
to go through and Perform. What say thou Sinner? Art thou willing to this?

Sin. Ans. O thou Holy of Holy's! I see, and find so little need, of joining
any Righteousness of my own, or other Creatures to the Complete and Perfect
Righteousness of this Mediator, that I am resolved to look no where else for a
Righteousness whereby to be Justified, and Saved. I am fully Convinced, that as
he needs no Coadjutor, to help him out, in this Work of Saving Sinners (seeing
he is the Holy and Almighty one of God: able to Save to the uttermost) So I see
nothing like a Legal Righteousness, which can Answer the Demand of the strict
and Righteous Law of God; either in my self; or any other (mere Creature)
whatsoever. Whatever, therefore is (or can be) Suggested or Objected, by the
Devil or Carnal Reason, against this Righteousness of his, (as Insufficient to
Save) I am (by Strength from above) fixedly Resolved, to cast my Weary Bleeding
Soul thereon, come Life, come Death.

6. There is a thing called the Cross, which thou must expect, and look to meet
with, if thou resolve to Live and Reign with Christ in Heaven hereafter. Thou
must look to Part with all that (in this World) is Near and Dear to thee, for
his sake, and the Gospels. Thou must Sacrifice thy Reputation and Credit, among
Men. Thou must become willing to be accounted a Fool, a Madman, a Turbulent
Fellow, an Enemy to Caesar, a Separatist from the Church. Thou must not think
(or look) to be advanced to Worldly Wealth, and Honor: If thou tread, in those
Steps (of Christ) which leads to the Heavenly Glory. He went to Heaven:
Antipodes to this vain World, wherein thou art: So must thou, if thou desire
to meet him in Heaven. Thou must expect, and look to have all the World set
against thee, for thy Witnessing to the Truth, and condemning the Errors, and
Wickedness of the World. Thou must expect, and look to be Cast off, by Father
and all Fleshly Relations, for his (and the Gospels) sake. Thou will (for
following Christ, in the ways of Holiness) be accounted an Hypocrite, a self
conceited, and a self Justifying Precisian, and proud Pharisee; and that by the
greatest Pharisees of the Times. The Powers of Darkness will all Combine
against thee, to Besiege and Fight against thee: And yea, the very Face of
Providence shall seem to Frown and look black on thee; to try, whether thou will stick faithfully, to Christ, and the Gospel. And, finally, If God call
thee to leave all; and rather to lay down thy Life; than to leave, and lose
Christ: Thou must Trample them all under thy Feet, preferring Christ before
Father, Mother, Brethren, Wife and Children, (tho never so Dearly Beloved) yea,
and thy very Life too. What say thou to this Sinner? will thou venture on
having or taking Christ, on these Terms?

Sin. Ans. For ever Blessed and Holy Lord God! Thou know how hard this Task
is for Flesh and Blood; and not only hard, but even Impossible: yet considering
the absolute Necessity of the Choice, now laid before me; and in regard of that
Divine Power, whereby I find my Heart made willing, to make Choice of Christ,
on the Terms (now) mentioned. I desire to Choose and have him, let God do with
me, and all that is Dear to me, what he Pleases, so he give me his Christ: I
am so apprehensive of the Sweet and Soul Enriching Advantages, which accompany
the Cross, that I am very unwilling to be Exempted from it, if I may have my
own Choice. I therefore, (through the Divine Spirits Gracious Power enabling me
hereto, do yield my free and full consent, to this matchless Match: Casting my
self on him (when actually Married to him, in a way of humble dependence) for
Strength and Power, to Act and Suffer (a in way of Duty) whatever becomes his
Disciple and Follower. And, oh! that God above (with Christ and the Holy Ghost)
might say, Amen to it.

Matters being thus Proposed (by the Holy Ghost) and I, the worst, and most
unworthy of Sinners (to be Saved;) being endued, with Power (from him) to close
with the Proposals made. I (immediately) felt my whole Heart, and Soul,
quickened within me, and drawn out to an effectual closing with Christ, in the
offers of the Gospel. Like a Ship sticking in the Sand, which no Strenght or
Art of Men, can set a Float, till the full Spring Tide come, and set her a
Float, carrying her forth into the Broad Ocean. The quickening Virtue of the
Holy Ghost, and the Attracting Power of the Lord Jesus, drew me to believe in
him. My Soul Crying out (with a silent and a still Voice) my Lord, and my God;
thou art mine, to Save me; and I am thine, to Serve thee. Hereupon, I felt (as
it were) another Spirit put into me, whereby I was enabled, to understand, and
know, the design of the great God, in causing so great a Change, to pass upon
me.

The Holy Ghost (within me) Witnessing to his own Work (now wrought in my
Soul.) And Sealing me to the Day of Redemption (in Believing,) I felt a Torrent
of unspeakable Joy, come from above, flowing in upon me, in such manner, and
measure, as I believe no Saint, or Angel in Heaven, can set forth or express,
as I felt it.

Hereupon, I fell into an Holy Ecstasy, and Divine Rapture, of unexpressible
Joy, with these Thoughts and Expressions within my self.

Oh! What a Change is this which I now (sensibly) feel? A Dead Sinner brought
to Life again; a Rebel and a Fugitive from God; brought Home, and Reconciled,
by the Blood of the Lamb. A Prisoner, and a Captive, held so long under the
killing Terrors of the Law; and unmerciful Usurpations, and Infernal Assaults,
of the Powers of Darkness, set Free; and Manumitted by the Deliverer of Gods
Elect.

An undone forlorn Sinner, shut up under the Power of Unbelief; who (a while
since) would shun and fly from God (if he knew how) for fear of his Frowns; and
the Curse due, for the breach of his Law: Now ready to shoot himself into
Heaven, and Whimper, and Cry (like a Child) till he be Lodged in the Bosom of
God's Love.

Oh! My Soul! Who could have thought of this! When the Irons of the Laws
Severity, had pierced thee so deeply? And when the Apprehensions (lodged in
thee) of thy being a Reprobate, and forsaken of God, delivered thee up to
Desparation? The very Portal or Entrance into Hell it self. Where am I? What is
the Matter? What am I doing? What such a one as I Saved? Is it possible? Can it
be? Am I not under a Satanical Dream, or Delusion? Lord help me, to know if it
be a Delusion, and undeceive me.

Here I was at a stand for (but) a little space; it was occasioned by my
calling to Mind, what a deceitful Enemy the Devil is; and how near he can go in
imitating the Spirit of God; in causing flashes of Joy in the Soul, of an
Awakened Sinner. And thinking (at the same time) whether mine was not so?

The Spirit of Adoption, who began his Good and Blessed Work in my Soul; did
not leave me in this Cloud. But by his own Elucidating, and Heart Searching
Virtue, and Power: brings to my Thoughts, and Consideration, all the
Objections, which either Devil or Carnal Reason, could (possibly) make against
my being Saved by Christ; and by manifesting the Fathers Decree and Purpose
(concerning me) in Eternity. And laying open the Nature and Design of the
Covenant of Grace. And the every way Alsufficiency of the Lord Jesus, to go
through with the Work he has undertaken for me. He fully Answered all
Objections, and Confuted the False and Sophistial Reasonings, brought in by
Satan; and Corrupt Reason, against my being Saved. As he most Powerfully
convinced me of Sin. And the misery which (thereby) I brought upon my self. And
that when he became a Spirit of Bondage, to fit me for the Great Physician: So
likewise (now) he is become a Spirit of Adoption; he as Powerfully convinced
me, of that Spotless and Everlasting Righteousness; of the Mediator (God-Man,)
by (and for) which I was Justified in the Person of my Surety, when (at his
Resurrection) God the Father Justified and Acquitted him, from all charge of
Sin, whereto he became liable and obnoxious, when he Struck Hands with the
Father, (as a Surety) for me; and the rest of the Elect.

The Twelve Things here following, he (Particularly) assured me of; and that as
fully and sensibly, as ever I was sensible, that I saw Natural Light, or
Darkness.

1. He assured me that I was one of that Number, whom God the Father Elected,
and Chose to himself (in Christ) out of the Corrupted Mass, of Fallen Mankind.
And that before Time began; and that my Name was Recorded in Heaven, in the
Lambs Book of Life.

2. He assured me, that my Sins and Transgressions (committed against the Law
and Majesty of Heaven) were all laid to the Score of Christ, by God the Father.
And by him (as my Vademony, and Surety) Born and Satisfied for.

3. He assured me, that the Debt which I had Contracted, both in Adam (my
Natural and Faederal Head) and in my own Person; was fully Paid, and (Actually)
Discharged, by my Sponsor, and Surety, Christ: by his Obeying and Keeping the
Law (perfectly) for me: and his bearing, and undergoing (in my Nature) the
Curse and Wrath of God; to which (by Sin) I became Obnoxious.

4. He assured me, that God the Father, is fully Satisfied, with that Obedience
(Active and Passive) of his own Son: and that it is, for the Worth and Merit of
that Obedience, that God Justifies and Accepts (as Pleasing to him) both me,
and the rest of his Elect, for whom (alone) that Obedience was Performed.

5. He assured me, that all my Sins (how many, and great soever) are Frankly
and Freely Forgiven, and Pardoned, as if they had never been committed: and
that, not for any Act done by me, whether Believing on Christ, or Repenting for
Sin: nor yet, for the Sorrows and Miseries I underwent while under the Spirit
of Bondage: or for any Service, to which I should be Called, while in a
Militant State: but for his own Name, and Glory sake; and on the Account of
what his Son (my Mediator and Surety) had done and suffered in my behalf.

6. He assured me, that God the Father Loved me, with a Real and an Endeared
Love; before I was Called out of a State of Nature. And that the Reason why he
handled me so roughly (by the Spirit of Bondage) was not, because he hated me,
(as the Devil and Carnal Reason suggested.) Or, that he might (in any measure
satisfy his Vindicative Justice, for my Sins: that being done (long) before I
had a Personal Being. But that he might make me the more sensible how hateful
Sin is to him (being so Contrary to his Pure, Spotless, and Blessed Nature: and
so Repugnant and Contradictory to his Holy, Just, and most Righteous Law. As
also, so Destructive to his Elect, whom he so Dearly Loves. Also, that I might
know, and become (for ever) sensible, how unspeakably Wretched and Deplorable
that State and Condition is; into which (by Sin) Man has brought himself: and
out of which, no Created Power could (possibly) Save, and Deliver him. That I
might (for ever) hate and loath Sin (as the worst of Evils) and become (for
ever) sensible, of the Greatness, Goodness, Love, Mercy, Wisdom, and the
unconceivable, and Infinite All Sufficiency of the Glorious, and Tremendous
Jehovah, Father, Son, and Blessed Spirit; who himself (without the Counsel, or
help of Creatures) has contrived, and found out, such a way of Restoring (to
his lost Favor) his Elect, and Chosen in Christ: as neither they themselves,
nor the Angels could ever think of. And (finally) that by his so sharply
handleing me, way may be made (into my Soul) for the Manifestation of his Great
and Unexpressible Love (wherewith he Loves me) in Christ) to Enter and make its
Abode for ever. And that from the Experience, I have now gotten, both by God's
Wounding me by the Spirit of Bondage; and his Healing and Comforting me, by the
Spirit of Adoption. I might be fitted, to speak (Experimentally) both to the
Terrifying and Awakening Secure and Presumptuous Sinners. As also, to Heal and
Comfort, (Instrumentally) Poor Wounded and Bleeding Sinners, when Sinking into
those Depths of Despondency, and Despair; out of which, the Outstretched Arm,
of God's Grace, and Almightiness, has Delivered, and Rescued, poor Sinful
Nothing me.

7. He assured me, that I am now in a Justified, Sanctified, and Adopted State;
The lost Image of God, being (by his Sanctifying Operation) Recovered in my
Soul in measure.

8. He assured me, that I shall be made to Persevere, and hold out in a State
of Grace; and that I shall be continued in the Love and Favor of God, for
ever, and ever. In despite of all, that the Powers of Darkness, can Contrive,
or Act against me.

9. He assured me, that the Eye of Divine Providence, should be (Everlastingly)
fixed on me; and the Right Hand of God's Righteousness (Everlastingly) kept
under me, for my Security, from being in danger (at any time) of finally
Miscarrying or Perishing.

10. He assured me, that the very Indwelling Corruption (in my Nature) and
whatever Falls, or Miscariage, which should (at any time) be occasioned
thereby, in my Life and Conversation: Should (with all the Afflictions
attending me for the said Miscarriages) most certainly, and (infallibly) Work
for my Eternal Good, and Welfare: whatever I my self, (or others) should Judge
to the Contrary.

11. He assured me, that I should meet with great Opposition, and Tribulation,
in the World; But that all mine Enemies, should find, they Labored in vain:
For, that God was on my side, to take my Part, against them. And who will (most
certainly) Crown all my Streights and Troubles with a happy Success.

12. He assured me, that God's Special Presence, should be so with me, (in
every Change of Condition in this World) as that nothing should harm, or spoil
me. Yea, that Death (it self) the last Enemy of Nature) should neither Terrify
nor Hurt me. The Mortal Sting thereof, being (by the Death of My Redeemer)
unstung, and divested of its Power, to harm me, or any of Christ's Redeemed ones.

These Particulars Discovered, and set home (by the Holy Ghost) on my Trembling
Panting Soul. He Working me (Powerfully) to a Believing each Particular, with
Application to my self. I was (immediately) surprised, with a more Astonishing,
and overcoming Rapture of Inexpressible Joy, than before. I had clear
manifestations of the Love of God, to me (in Particular) and of the great
things done, and Prepared for me, to make me (Everlastingly happy; in the
Beholding and Enjoying himself, as my God, and my Father, and Portion, in
Christ, for ever. According to the Unconditionate Free Covenant, of his own
Grace, Made and Establshed in, and with Christ (his Son) in the behalf of me,
and the rest of his Elect.

No sooner did I look up to God, and behold his Reconciled Face, Smile on me,
(in the Face of Jesus his Son) but I felt such inward, Soul Inebriating Joy; as
I verily thought, would cause my very Soul to Fly out of my Body, and my Body
to burst in sunder. The hardness of my Heart (under which I Labored, all the
time of my Bondage State; and which I sensibly felt to grow and increase; as I
called to Remembrance the many Follies of Youth; and the Holy Law of God;
whereof those Follies were so many Breaches; each Folly Deserving (if it were
Possible) a Thousand Damnations) was Melted and Thawn (like a lump of Ice,
before the warm Sun) By the Sense, and Perception, I had of the Love of God
(vouchsafed) to such a base, and deformed Sinner, as God knows I was, and still
am. I felt the Servile, and Mercenary Frame, and Disposition of my Spirit, take
Wing: and that Filial Child like Frame and Disposition of Spirit, (which is
suited to a Gospel Dispensation) Succeed in its Room. And looking up to Heaven
(with the Tears flowing from me, so extremely fast; that I heard them drop,
drop upon drop, on the Floor, where I stood, continuing so long, that I
(sensibly) felt my Cheeks to Burn and Scald me). My Soul (in a strange Ecstasy)
running over those Particulars, which the Holy Ghost had assured me of. Here Is
the Second Rapture of Joy.

What Joy like to this I now feel? Who can (possibly) Relate or express it?
What! Has God Elected me? even me? Sinful and Vile me? And has he done it
before time? And notwithstanding he (perfectly) knew, what I should prove in
time? Oh! Wonderful Love! Why me Lord? Why me? And not one of the Reprobates in
Hell, who never Sinned against thee, to that Degree that I have?

And has God laid mine Iniquities, even all my Iniquities, on the Back of
Christ, and Charged them to his Score, as my Surety? Oh! Amazing Mystery of
Divine Love, and Grace. Who is able to know, whether the Father or the Son
Loves me Most? The Father in Laying my Sins on his own, and only Son, tho
Innocent and Harmless. Or the Son, in Condescending to Bear them, as his own
Sins? And are all those Sins of mine Discharged, and satisfied for, by the
Active and Passive Obedience of Christ my Surety; who has kept the Law for me?
Oh! Wonderful Condescension, both of Father and Son!

Is it so, (as I feel it is) That God the Father, is fully Satisfied, with that
his Sons Obedience? And that I am now Justified (in his Sight) by the Virtue
thereof? Oh my Soul! What Cause have thou to Rejoice and Adore God for ever?

And was the Love of God set on me? Even when in a State of Unregeneracy? Who
but a Mercenary Legalist will not be (hence) Convinced, of the Orthodoxy, and
Soundness of that Distinction. Which differenceth between the Person of an
Elect Sinner; and the Sinful Pravity of Nature; which Cleaves to him? Surely my
Soul! If God had really hated thee, and had he been Wrath with thee, as he is
with all the wicked Reprobates, who have no share in the Redemption of his Son:
Even then, when thou wast un-called, he might have sent thee to Hell. Who could
have hindered him? And were the Reasons, wherefore he handled thee so roughly,
(by the Spirit of Bondage) as have been discovered by the Holy Ghost: And not
because he hated thee, or (any way) designed to satisfy his Vindicative Justice
for thy Sins. What Cause have thou to Reflect on, and Abhor thy self, for all
thy hard Thoughts, and unbecoming Apprehensions, which were lodged in thee, of
God, and his Dealing with thee?

And is it certain, (as most certainly it is, seeing God cannot Lie) That I,
Poor Sinful I, shall be made to Persevere, and hold out, in a State of Grace;
and continue in Gods Favor for ever. Oh! What unspeakable cause, have thou, to
Adore, Love, and Praise Jehovah to all Eternity? And what little Reason have
thou to be discouraged, to think of what the Powers of Darkness can do to
hinder thy Perseverance?

And will the Eye of Divine Providence be on me; and the Right Hand of God's
Righteousness, kept under me; to Secure me (for ever) from (finally)
Miscarrying, or Perishing?

How great Encouragement is this to thee, my Soul; to have the Eye of Faith,
and Hope (Dependingly) fixed on the Faithfulness, and Almightiness of God;
seeing the End, and the Means, are ever Inseparable?

And has God (that cannot Lie) Promised, and Engaged, that the very Being of
Indwelling Corruption, with all the Out-breaking thereof, in my Conversation.
As also, the many Afflictions attending the same, shall (infallibly) Work, for
my Eternal Good. What Reason have I to Cry out, and say (with astonishment of
Soul) Who is a God like unto thee, who Pardonest Iniquity, and Passes by the
Trasgression of the Remnant of thine Heritage? Who out of Darkness producest
Light; and out of the greatest Evil, can bring the greatest Good.

And is it so, That notwithstanding the many, and great Oppositions, and
Tribulations, I am to meet with, in the World. I shall (through Christ
(accompanying, and strengthening me) be brought through them; and made a
Complete Conqueror in the End? How greatly Zealous, ought I to be, in Loving
and Lauding, the True and Living God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost? whose
Tremendous and Glorious Name, is Infinitely Transcending, all Praises, which
Saints or Angels, are Capable of giving.

And seeing that (from henceforth, till I come to Heaven) the special
Providence of God will be with me (in every Change of Condition) so as nothing
shall be able to do me Harm. What unspeakable Cause have I to fear (with a
Reverential, Holy, and Filial Fear) the Glorious Name: and Infinite Majesty of
the Great God? And how unbecoming me (for whom God has done so many, and
wonderful things) will it be; to Fear, either Devils or Men, who set themselves
against God, and his Sons Interest? O my Soul! Rejoice (now) in God, who is
become thy Salvation; and Fear nothing, but what may (any way) grieve his Holy,
and Tender Spirit.

Marvelous, and unutterable, were those Manifestations of Gods Love, let out
upon me (his poor nothing Creature) in that Moment of his Spirits Sealing me,
in Believing: and by the Sense whereof; the Holy Ghost filled up those Vallys
and Bottoms, in my Soul, and Conscience; occasioned, by the sharp and terrible
Workings of the Spirit of Bondage. And as the Manifestations (but now)
Mentioned, were (in themselves) Marvelous, and Astonishing: so were (also) the
Sensible Effects they Produced in me, Wonderful and Ravishing.

Those Effects, I Reduce (for Orders sake) to Six Heads.

First, The Horror, and Guilt of my Conscience, was gone; which was Succeeded,
by the Answer of a good Conscience, (toward God) which did (inwardly) Suggest*
and Dictate to me: That my State and Condition (Godward) is truly Safe, and
most Happy.

Secondly, The Spiritual Vail; which Covered my Heart and Mind; and which kept
me from seeing into the Mystery of the Gospel, was taken off, like Scales, or a
Web, off the Eyes of a Blind Man. Whereon, I was enabled to See, and Behold,
who, and what, Jesus (held forth in the Gospel) is to me.

Thirdly, The Affrighting Distractions, and Overwhelming Hurricanes of my
Despairing Soul (occasioned by my continual expectation of being sent to Hell)
were turned into an unexpected and Soul surprising Calm, and Sedate Frame of
Spirit.

Fourthly, The Spirit of Slavish Fear, which (on every occasion) Tormented and
Rackt me, vanished; and the Spirit of Power, of Love, and of a sound Mind, was
given me.

Fifthly, The Joy* and Comforts of the Holy Ghost, were Communicated to me, in
such a manner and measure, as (unspeakably) passes my Frail Capacity, to tell
forth, or express. Which occasioned me, to call to Mind, my former Wondering;
and Musing (while going on, in the way of my Ignorant, and Blind Zeal (in
Serving God) before the Spirit of Bondage visited me) to think, what the Joy of
the Holy Ghost should mean? Whenever I did Read of the Joy of the Holy Ghost:
Or, did hear any mention thereof. Joy of the Holy (think I) Lord what is that?
What is the meaning of it? I cannot tell; or apprehend what this Joy of the
Holy Ghost should be?

Sixthly, The Spirit of Adoption was given me, whereby I was enabled to come to
God's Throne of Grace; and with a Holy, and Humble Boldness; to call him my
God, and my Father. The Instinct in the New Creation wrought (by the God of all
Grace) in me; led me to God, as the Fountain of all Good.

The Spirit (given me) putting into my Mouth, Words of Solemn Thanks, and
Praise; for the Greatness, and Strangeness of my Salvation.

To my Knees I betook me, Adoreing and Worshipping (with my Spirit) That Holy
Jehovah, Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity; Father, Son, and Holy Ghost;
the True and Eternal God. Whom all the time of my Blind Zeal, and during the
time of my Bondage State) I had so Ignorantly Worshipped. I was now (and never
before) Enabled ( Jacob like) to catch hold of, and to Wrestle with a
Reconciled God. The Greatness, Holiness, and Infiniteness of his Majesty,
(which before I knew him in Christ terrified, and affrightned me, with a
Witness) Animated and Encouraged me, in Praying to him. It is not to be Expressed
(in Words) with what Alacrity, and Cheerfulness of Spirit, I approached the
Throne of Grace; and with what Enlargedness, and inward Meltings of Heart, and
Soul, I called on God. When I did but mention this, My God, and my Father; Oh!
what Ravishment of Soul, did I (Experimentally) feel, Overflowing and Drowning
my very Spirit?

To my Bed I went, with a Glad, and Ravished Heart. Christ knows, The Burning
Inflammation, which the Horror, and Bondage of my Wounded Despairing Conscience
caused in my Body, was gone; and my Bodies Disposition to Crookedness (thought
the sinking weight which lay on my Spirit within) was Instantly Rebuked, and
caused to Retreat, by the Glad, and Joyful Tideings of Gospel Peace; which
(that Night) took up its Lodging within me; Succeeding, and Powerfully
Supplanting that Spirit of Bondage, which made me so hopeless, and (as I
thought) Past all possibility of escapeing Hell.

No sooner was I stretched in my Bed, but Swooning and Fainting Fits of Love
Sickness seized me: I was Inwardly (and Spiritually) so Apprehensive of the
Mysteriousness of Christ's Incarnation, his Humbling himself (even to Death) his
lying Confined (as a Prisoner) in the Grave; and his being Raised therefrom;
(again) his Ascending to Heaven, (from whence he came) and his Sitting down at
the Fathers Right Hand; to Enter on the Work of Intercession with God. And that
as my Surety and Mediator, and all for me; that I verily thought my Body was
near its Dissolution. A thing, which the clear and certain assurance (given me)
of my being an Adopted Son of God; made me (even) Long and Pant after. My
Thoughts, and Meditations, were (now) wholly Employed about Christ, and that
Blessed Change which I (Sensibly) felt, was Past on me. The sweet and Soul
Ravishing Communion, I had with Father, Son and Holy Ghost; was (to me) instead
of Meat, Drink and Sleep, and that the most Pleasing and Satisfactory, that I
ever Enjoyed. The Actings and Sufferings of Christ (in the assumed Nature) for
me, were so realized, and the Virtue, and Reconciling Efficacy, of the same, so
(sensibly) set home, on my Wounded and Bleeding Soul, by the Spirit of
Adoption, that I thought I had the Person of Christ claspt in my Arms in the
Bed. Oh! The sweet Intercourses, which (by the Operation of the Holy Ghost)
passed between Precious Jesus and my Languid Soul. Then was I made to know
(Experimentally) the meaning of Rev. 3. 20. While I was Wakeing, I was
entertained with strange variety of Interlocution (or Discourse) which Passed
between Christ and me, which did Explain and Unfold to me, that in Prove. 6. 22.
During this, I continued in such a Melting Frame; that the very Pillow-beer
under my Head, was, as if dipped in a River, through the great abundance of Tears
(of unconceivable Joy) which the Sense, and feeling of Christ's Love,
constrained me to shed. When I found a necessity of turning in my Bed, I could
not turn without my Dearly Beloved, and (Incomparably) Loving Jesus, in my Arms
with me.

When I Slumber'd, and Slept, I was soon visited with most Joyful, and
Ravishing Dreams, of God, Christ, Holy Ghost, the Glory of Heaven, and the
unutterable Bliss, and Felicity, of those Souls, who are Reconciled to God, by
Christ. This was very Frequent, and common when Sleep came on me, after I had
been Sealed in Beleiving.

And albeit, I never durst to heed, or mind Nocturnal Dreams; yet they have
(sometimes) had such a strange Influence on me, that I have felt such
delightful Joy and Comfort in my Spirit, that (sometimes) I have been at a
stand, to think; whether I had been asleep, or awake.

It was a frequent Practice (with me) for some considerable time (how long I
cannot now Remember) to arise in my Bed; (when I awaked out of My sleep) to
Bend my Knees, and lift up my Eyes, Hands, and Heart to heaven, to Land, Praise
and Magnify, Father, Son and Holy Ghost; for the greatness, and strangeness, of
my so unexpected, and unlooked for Salvation. Being but the Night before (yea,
and every Morning) ready to Drop into final Desparation, of ever being Saved.
Oh! What a loss was I at, in my self? Not knowing how (sufficiently) to Extol
and Bless God; for what had now befallen me. I was (even) ready to quarrel with
my self; because of the narrowness, and streightness of my Soul, which hindered
that I could not take in more of God: and go out in more enlarged Expressions
of Love, and Praises to him. For above six Months (together) I could neither
lie down, nor arise; go down, or come up Stairs; pass in or out, from one place
to another; but I strongly Conceited that I perceived a Guard of Angels
attending my Person.

It cannot be Expressed, with what scorn, and abhorrence; I looked on the Pride
and Gallantry of the Family where I Lived. Their Changeable Suits of Rich and
Glittering Apparel, with their Choice Meats, and sweet Music, with other
delightful Pastimes, I looked on, and accounted them, but as Smoke and Dust.
The Titles of Worldly Honor, wherein the Rest of my Relations did (not a
little) Glory; I accounted the same, but a mere empty Vanity.

Oh! (think I) That my Poor Relations could see, taste, and feel, what I do:
how would they disrelish, and be ashamed, and weary of these Poor, perishing,
sensual Delights; wherein they Place their Delight, and Felicity.

When (at any time) I heard them talk (boastingly) of the Honor and Credit of
the Family; I could not forbear, expressing my Contempt, of the same: Telling
them (to their very Face) that the Blood of Jesus; not the Blood of my
Progenitors (according to the Flesh) was that which made me Noble, and truly
Honorable. And that he, or she, who were advanced to the Highest Degree of
Honor, whereto an Earthly King, could (possibly) advance; and were not washed
in the Lambs Blood; the Higher their Honor and Greatness is; the greater, and
more Intolerable, would be the Doom, and Condemnaton of such, when (by Death)
they go hence.

Now I began to disrelish, and discover what small esteem I had, of the Liturgy
and Ceremonies, of the Church; of which I had (formerly) been so (extremely)
Zealous.

Three Things (chiefly) occasioned this. First, The apprehension I had, of the
Purity and Holiness of God's Nature; which requires a Worship suited to his own
Pure, and Spiritual Being, according to that in Joh. 4. 24.

Secondly, I Considered, that no Worship could (possibly) find acceptance with
God, but such a Worship as is stamped with God's own Institution: which I was
(then) apprehensive (and am now more fully convinced) the Liturgy, and
Ceremonies of the Church are not, the same being Devised by Men: and Imposed
(by Human Authority) without any the least Warrant from the Word of God.
According to Esa. 8. 20. Esa. 29. 13. Mat. 15. 8. 9.

Thirdly, The sad Experience I had, of the uusuitableness of such a Worship to
an Awakened, and a Renewed Soul, while I was in a Natural State, Ignorant of
God, and the Nature of my Soul, and things truly Spiritual. I was exceeding
Zealous in doing and Performing that Service, which (now I find) is of little
avail; either to a Pleasing God, or profiting an awakened Conscience. The
Spirit of God having (in effectual Calling) Taught and Convinced me, that no
Worship or Ordinance (in Religion) can be Food to Nourish, and Satisfy, a
Hungry Soul; But such Worship, as is Instituted by (and suited to Please) God.

God will be found (Savingly) of none, but those, who seek him in the Ways of
his own Institutions. According to Prove. 8. 32. 1 Pet. 2. 2.

Soon after this, The Care and Providence of Christ (my Chief Sheppard)
directed me to attend the Ministry of Mr. Samuel Mather, with whom, I
(afterward) sat down (in full Communion) to my Souls great Comfort, and
Edification, in the Knowledge of Christ.

Notice being taken (in the Family, where I lived) that I discontinued going to
the Cathedral Worship (the which I commonly attended, with a more than ordinary
Zeal, sometimes three times, and sometimes four times in the same Day) And that
I was not seen at the Parish Church, on Sabbath Days, or at the Sacrament; as I
used to do, the Eyes of mine Observers, were upon me, to watch me what ways I
took in Religion. Innumerable were the Taunts and Scoffs cast on that way of
Worship, which I had Espoused and closed with; thorough all which I was carried
with invincible Courage: Many and sharp were the Combats wherewith I
Encountered, from my own Relations especially, the Lord of Santry (in whose
Family I then lived) and my Father, (his Brother) who by their Authority over
me, and the greatness of their Learning and Parts, (between which and mine,
there was no more compare than between the Sun and a little twinkling Star) did
(frequently) attack me, to bring me back to the (forsaken) Chruch of England,
but all in vain.

One time (above all others) my Lord observing, that I absented, not only the
public Worship, but that of his Family also, sent up his Secretary (another
Brother's Son) to call me to Prayer, in the Family, on Night. My Cousin
delivering my Lords Command; I replied, that I was under some Indisposition;
and therefore, Prayed my Cousin to excuse me to my Lord: down he goes, and no
sooner had he delivered my Answer, but up he comes again, with the same
Message, from my Lord. I threw him off the Second time, with the same Excuse,
alleging, that I could not come. This Answer brought to my Lord, the Second
time. He (in a great Rage) sends up my Cousin, with a Peremptory Command, that
I must come to Prayer: my Cousin stood some considerable time, expecting that I
would Answer my Lords Peremptory Command, but my Answer was, that seeing my
Lord had so plainly imposed on my Conscience, in Commanding me to Act against
my Conscience, I thought it was my Duty to declare, that until I better
understood it to be my Duty, to Obey his Lordship (in a thing of this Nature)
than as yet I did, I neither could, nor would go to join in Prayer, with the
Family. This Reply coming to my Lord's Ear, he let me alone, for that Night.
The next Day my Lord took me to Task, Examining (very strictly) and Demanding
of me, a Reason, wherefore I came not to Prayer, with the Family seeing they
never used the Common Prayer in the Family?

To whom I made this Reply. My Lord, It is not from any Aversion I have to
Prayer, that keeps me Back, from coming to Prayer with the Family: But the
great Dissatisfaction Lodged in my Conscience. For, my Lord, ( said I) should I
(under my present Light, and Conviction) go on my Knees, to join in such a
Service, where God is so notoriously Dishonored, and his Glorious Name so
greatly Profaned, my Conscience would (like a Flame of Fire) fly in my Face.

The Lord then Demanded of me, what I could Object against the Service
Performed in the Family?

To whom I Replied, That the Chief Objection I made, was against the Person,
who Performed the Service.

The Lord Demanded, what I had to Object against the Person, who Prayed in the
Family.

To whom I Replied, That I Objected against him, for Two things. First, that he
was a Rotten Arminian, denying the Doctrine of Election, and Justification, by
the alone Imputed Righteousness, of the Son of God. And that he also Held
falling from Grace.

Secondly, For that he was in his Life and Conversation, a notorious Drunkard,
and a common Curser and Swearer, etc.

My Lord then Demanded, Why I did not come to Family Prayer, when his Son James
said Prayers? Reader, thou must know; That when the Chaplain would be Drinking,
and Ryotting abroad, sometimes my Lords Son would be Commanded to Read one of
the Evening Prayers at the end of some Bibles.

To this I Answered, That his Son was but a Child, and did not understand what
he Read.

Lord have Mercy on me (said my Lord) who would you have Pray in my Family?

My Lord (said I) I Humbly conceive, no Man Living is fitter for a Service of
this Nature, than your Lordship. The Great God having made your Lordship, King
and Lord over your own Family, and has Endued your Lordship with such
Incomparable Gifts of Knowledge, and Learning, and (I hope) of Grace too.

And Pray Sir! (said my Lord) How would you have me Pray?

My Lord (said I) I Humbly Conceive, that you are to Pray, according to the
present Condition, of the Souls of your Family.

Pray Sir! (said my Lord) How is it Possible for me to know the Inward Thoghts
and Condition of my Families Souls, so as to Order my Prayers accordingly?

My Lord (Replied I) albeit your Lordship, cannot (possibly) Acquaint your self
with all the Secrets of your Family, yet you may by Catechizeing your Family,
and frequently Examining them, about the State of their Souls, and Gods Dealing
with them; find Matter enough, to Enlarge on, in Putting up Prayers to God for
them, in the General: which is, as much, as the Rule of Duty directs (or
obliges) to.

My Lord finding that the Truth I was called to Vindicate, and the Spirit by
which I spoke, to be too Powerful for his Great Learning, he let fall the
Dispute; which I am very sure was his Wisdom, and his best Advantage, so to do:
Considering, that none ever yer prospered who continued to fight against God.

My Lord (by this means) found how I stood affected in Religion; and
(accordingly) Communicated to my Father, his Judgment and Apprehensions of me.
Immediately, a Consultation was held (about me) to Consider what Methods were
most proper to take; not only to prevent my farther Advancing, in that way (of
Religion) which they Accounted Phanaticism: But also, to bring me Back to the
Church of England, whereon I had turned the Back.

The Result of their Consultation (as soon afterward appeared) Issued in a
fixed Resolution to carry it toward me with all the Urbanity, and Gentleness
imaginable. My Relations considering, and knowing (full well) that my Temper,
and Spirit, was to be drawn, and won by Fair and Gentle means; not to be
Forced, by Violence.

According to the Methods agreed on; I was (at a strange and unusual Rate)
Treated by my Father, my Lord, my Grand-Mothers, my Uncles, and Aunts, with the
Rest of my Relations; in such ways of Kindness and Love; as caused in me, some
hopes, that the Love and Kindness they showed, and Expressed in their Dealing
with me, had Sprung from an Apprehension (or Conviction) in them, that the
Principles (in Religion) which I had Embraced (in opposition to theirs) were
the Truth. But I (soon) found that I was (herein) mistaken. For, It was not
long before great offers were made me, of making a Purse, to Set me up in the
World; On condition I would desist going to Meetings; and return apain to the
Church (wherein I was Born, and Baptized:) And not bring such disgrace on the
Holy Church, of which my Ancestors were such Noted, and Eminent Members. And
besides, That I might not stain my Family, by occasioning Peoples saying, that
a B -- (and, one who was Son to a Father in the Church) was turned Phanatick.
To which they Added, The Consideration of what a hopeful Prospect there was
before me, of Advancement to Worldly Greatness, in Case I did not hinder my
self, by Continuing a Dissenter from the Church.. And what hardship, and
Poverty, I must expect to Wrestle with, to my own Ruin, and the great Disgrace
of the whole Family, in Case I refused the Offers made me, and the Advice, and
Counsel given for my own good.

To all which, I was enabled (with an Holy Magnanimity, and becoming Fortitude)
to Reply, that the Sight and Sense I had of a Future Happiness (with God in
Heaven) had Blunted, the Edge of my Appetite, to these Poor, Low, and Empty
Vanities, which (I question not) will prove unspeakably more Vain, Empty and
Tormenting to me then they are in themselves) should I (for the Love of them)
loose my Soul.

In Case (said I) my Friends and Relations, who seem so greatly concerned, for
my Good, can procure (from Heaven) an Infallible Certificate, that my Closing
with the Present offer (on such a Condition, as is now laid before me) will not
provoke the Holy Trinity, and prove a Snare to my Immortal Soul; I shall
readily comply: But if they cannot, it will (said I) Prove your Wisdom, to let
me alone, to Rejoice in the Choice I have made Had my Relations felt, what I
have felt for Sinning against God; and could they taste the Joy, and Sweet
Comforts of God, which have put me out of Conceit, and Love, with the present
World. They would (I question not) be not only unwilling to Blame, and Censure
me, for the choice I have made; but they (themselves) would readily, and
Heartily, make the same Choice, for which I am now slighted and judged to be
Miserable.

My Relations finding how ineffectual their Methods proved to gain me, they
soon turned their Smiles into Frowns, and their kind Speeches, into
Discourageing Menaces, what severe Courses should be taken with me, to reclaim,
and reduce me to Obedience.

My Lord threatened (severely) that he would have me bound with Ropes on a
Porters Back, and brought into the Church, in the time of Divine Service.

To this I Replied, That if his Lordship did not as well Gag my Mouth, as Bind
my Hands and Feet, I would (certainly) Roar out, and Disturb, all the People at
their Devotion. For fear of which, no Force (of that kind) was offered me.

After some considerable time, My Father, and Lord, finding that neither Fair
and Gentle means, would Allure, and Draw me to the Lyturgy, in their Church;
and that no Severity (wherewith they threatened me) could Drive me from the
Pure Worship of God, in the Meetings. I was soon Attack't with greater, and
sharper Opposition, than I had (before) met with from them.

First, By my Father, Who (in the Presence and Hearing, of at least Forty of
our Family) took me to Task about my Principles, and in regard of the small
hopes he had of Convincing me, by the Arguments he used: He openly declared,
his Resolution, never to own me, for his Son; Unless I forsook the Meetings,
and came to the Church and Service again, as formerly. And this Sir! (said my
Father) I think fit to tell you, before all these Friends, to the end you may
take it into Serious Consideration, whether of the Twain, you Judge more
Eligible; to forsake your Fanatic Opinion, and Schismatical Companions; or, to
be deprived of the Love, and Affections of a Father. And know it Sir (said he)
that I do, by the Authority of a Father, Command and Require you to fix on,
whether of these two, you intend to Choose, and that within a Week: If you
resolve to hold your New Opinion, I charge you, to quit my Lords House, and
Provide another Lodging; and as for me, I charge you, that you come not near my
Doors, or any of your Brethren, or Sisters Doors. I Will see (said he) which of
your Holy Brethren or Sisters will take you in.

To this, I was enabled to Reply thus, (viz.) Sir, Though you Resolve
(according to your present Declaration) to cast me out of your Paternal (or
Fatherly) Affections, and to disown me for your Son (merely) for my Conscience
to God, because I cannot (without greatly offending against God, and Wounding
my Conscience) Conform to those Inventions of Men, in God's Worship, for which,
I can see no Warrant in all the Scripture. I think (and Judge) it my Duty, (now
the Providence of God calls me to be Tried) to be as open, free, and plain, in
declaring to you (in the Presence, and Hearing of the same Relations who have
heard yours to me), these Two things. First, That I hope better Things of you,
than to see you Act so unnaturally in letting your Child Perish for want of
Necessaries for Life, And that because, I dare not Act against my Conscience.

Secondly, That in Case, you do Resolve, to Persist, in this your Resolution, I
am as (fixedly) Resolved, in Casting my self; on the Promise, and Providence of
God, what ever comes of me, in this World.

And before I will Act (herein) against the Light of God's Word, and the
Dictates of my Conscience within, I hope I shall be Enabled to Choose rather to
Dye (with Lazarus) on a Dunghill, for want of Bread. My Father (to his Death)
kept his Resolution: and I (through the special Grace of God) have been Enabled
to keep mine, and (I hope) ever shall.

After this (about three Days) I had a great and sharp Dispute with my Lord,
which Continued three Hours and a half (by my Lord's Chamber Clock.) The
Subject of our Discourse, was about Set Forms of Prayer: Whether the Word of
God, would Warrant ordinary and fallible Men, to Compose Set Forms of Prayer,
and by Humane Authority to Impose the same, on the Consciences of the People.

My Lord peremptorily Affirmed that Gods Word did Warrant this. And I as
stiffly denied that it does.

For Proof of the Affirmative, my Lord Quotes Luke 11. 2. When ye Pray, say,
Our Father, etc. Sir (said my Lord) here is a Positive, Command to prove what I
have Affirmed.

To this, I shall (Humbly) offer Two Things to your Lordships Serious
Consideration.

First, The apparent differnece between the Two Evangalists, in Setting down
the Words of this Prayer: Luke saying, When ye Pray, say, Our Father, etc.
Matthew, (as appears, Mat. 6. 9.) says, After this manner therefore Pray ye,
etc.

I cannot understand (said I) how your Lordship can Reconcile these Two
Evangelists; so as (Peremptorily) to Conclude, from the Place now Quoted, that
it is the Mind of Christ, that these Words are to be Imposed on Believers, as a
Prayer, or as their Prayer.

Secondly, By way of Humble, and Submissive Enquiry; Does your Lorship firmly
Believe, that the Form (now Quoted) to Prove the Affirmative is (in it self) a
Complete and Perfect Prayer, containing all the parts of Necessary Prayer?

I Grant it Sir, (Replied my Lord) I believe it is a Complete, and a Perfect
Prayer, containing (in it) all the Parts of Necessary Prayer.

I likewise (Humbly) Presume, That your Lordship takes it for Granted, that it
is the Mind of Christ, that this Form of Prayer is to be Imposed on Believers,
as their Prayer?

I Grant it Sir, (said my Lord) I take it for Granted, that it is the Mind of
Christ, that that Form, should be Imposed on Believers, as their Prayer.

Then, my Lord (Replied I) If the Form (now mentioned) be a Complete, Perfect
Prayer; to which nothing need to be Added; and that the same is to be Imposed
(on Believers) as their Prayer, and that by Christ's own Authority. To me it is
very plain, that for any men, to Make, or Impose, any other Prayer, on
themselves, or others, it is a manifest Breach, and Violation of that Command
of Christ.

I will Instance in a Plain Case (for Illustration sake) The Ten Commandments,
in the Law Moral, I doubt not but your Lordship owns them to be a Most Perfect,
Complete Rule of Righteousness; containing all the Parts of our Duty to God and
Man.

I Grant them to be so (said my Lord).

In the next Place (said I) I Question not, but your Lordship (as readily)
Grants, That this Perfect Rule of Righteousness; is Commanded, and Enjoined, by
God's own Authority.

I Grant that also (said my Lord) They are Commanded, and Enjoined, by God's
own Authority.

Then (said I) the Case is Plain, and cannot be denied, That for any, to
Command, or Appoint, any Rule of Righteousness: besides those, which (in
themselves) are Complete and Perfect; and which are Enjoined, and Commanded by
God's own Authority; it is a manifest Breach, and Violation of the Supreme Law:
to which, nothing may be Added; and from which, nothing may be Detracted;
without Incurring the Displeasure, and Curse of God. Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and 12. 32.
Pro. 30. 6. Rev. 22. 18. 19

From Prayer, My Lord fell off; to Discourse of the Liturgy, and Ceremonies in
General, the which he Handled, almost, in all the Particulars of them: And with
such Advantageous Success (on my side) that my Lord (at length) grew weary, and
lest off: he having (I doubt not) found that Scripture in Psalm. 8. 2. made good
that Day. But whether he became sensible thereof, yea, or not; sure I am, that
I found that sweet Promise, in Luke 21. 15. made good to me that Day. Of which
such notice was taken; that hardly any of my Relations durst Attack me any
more, except, in a way of Reproach; and Railing against the Phanaticks, and the
New Religion I had espoused, since I left the Church. The Good Lord be (for
ever) Exalted, and Praised, for his Mercy, and faithfullness, to his poor, and
despised Children in a time of need.

This was the last Encounter I had with my Lord, about Religion; for that very
Night I took my Leave of my Lord, rendering humble and hearty Thanks to his
Lordship, for all his Expressions of Love and Kindness, wherewith I met under
his Roof, since I became a Member of his Family.

It were endless to Relate, the many and sharp Trials, to which the Providence
of God called me, (that I might be brought up in in the School of the Cross,
and fitted for the Service, to which I was afterward Called) out of all which,
his (never, never failing) Providence brought, and delivered me.

Should I Expose in Print the many streights and difficulties, wherewith I have
(occasionally) been Exercised, from the time of my closing with Christ (in the
Gospel) to the time of my Call to the Ministry. (Together with the Methods
Providence took to bring me off; and working mine Escape and Deliverance) I
believe it would be Matter of Joy and Rejoyceing, to humble and (seriously)
Religious Souls. But my intended Brevity forces me to omit many Particulars,
which would (I do not question) be of great use, both to my self, and others.

From what I have here Published, concerning God's Dealing with me: Let the
following Observations, be (Practically) Improved, to God's Eternal Praise.

OBSERVATION. I.
See, and take Notice, What a Sweet and Harmonious Concurrence there is,
between God's Electing Purpose of Grace, and his Providential Dispensations.
The Foundation of all God's Gracious Dealings with an Elected Sinner, is his
own Gracious Purpose, fixed in Eternity. Jer. 31. 3 The Lord has Appeared of
old unto me, saying, yea, I have Loved thee with an Everlasting Love; therefore
with Loving Kindness have I drawn thee.

Here Note, That Everlasting Love (in the Hebrew) signifies a Love of Eternity.
From whence I make this Observation, ( viz.) That God Loves his Elect, from one
Eternity to another. With this agrees that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 4.
According as he has Chosen us in him, before the Foundation of the World. This
Discovery of God's Love to his Elect, is as a Millstone laid on the Back, of
that Popish, Arminian Doctrine; of a Temporary, and Conditional Election, to
sink it into the Bottomless Depth, of the Eternal Abhorrence, and Loathing of
God, the Elect Angels, and all Saved Sinners.

Therefore from hence Learn, What to think, and say, when the Devil, and thy
vain Heart, Suggest unto thee. (Upon thy doing, and Performing any Duty and
Service) now the Lord has Elected (or will Elect me; because I have done thus,
and thus. Reader! The Devil (who seeks thy Ruin) is (cordially) Reconciled to
such an Election, as this: because, he knows it will end in thy Eternal Ruin,
if God leave thee here.

Therefore, Repel, and Stave off, this Cursed, Popish, Arminian Dream, by
(steadfastly) Believing, and Affirming, that God's Electing Love Embraced me in
its Arms; and Registered (or Enrolled my Name in the Lambs Book of Life, before
I had a Personal Being; or any Capacity, to do or perform any Duty, which could
move God to Elect me.

Then, when the Devil, and thy remaining Unbelief, suggest unto thee (upon any
personal miscarriage, or fall into new Provocation against God) now God has
cast me out of his Love, and Rejected me, because I have broken Covenant with
him. Repel this Temptation, by considering, and (steadfastly) Believing, that
the Electing Love of God, which Embraced me, and Enrolled my Name in the Lambs
Book, (before the Foundation of the World) it is a Love, like God himself: As
without Beginning of Time, so also without End, or Change, Mal. 3. 6.

OBSERVATION II.
See hence, and Observe, the Impossibility, of frustrateing Gods Decrees, and
his Working Providence. The Deaths, and Dangers, to which I have been (so
often) exposed, have been so many and greatly dangerous; that had not Gods Love
to me, and his Providence over me, preserved me, I had (certainly) perished.
The Snow in which I lay, for Four or Five Hours, (at so tender an Age, as but
three Months old) was as powerful to have killed me (by the Extremity of its
peircing Cold) as it was to destroy the vast Numbers of Men and Cattle, which
have often Perished by its Strength.

The Element of Fire, which surrounded me in my Bed, (when buried in Sleep, and
no way able to help my self) it was of as devouring a quality, to destroy me,
as the Fire that heat Nebuchadnezzar's Furnace, was to destroy those faithful
Worthies Cast into it; had not God's Providenc restrained it in my Case, as it
did in theirs.

The Feirceness, and Teeth, of the great Mastiff-Dog, which had my Head in his
Mouth, up to the Throat; was as ready, and able, to crush me (to Death) as the
Lions (in the Den) were to crush Daniel; had not the Care and Providence of
Daniel's God, which Restrained his Lions, watched over me, and restrained my
Dog.

The Element of Water, in which I was (several times) a Drowning, and (to all
appearance) past Recovery; It was as powerful to swallow me up, and to stop my
Breath, as it was to over-whelm, and choke Pharaoh and his Host; had not God
restrained it, in my Case.

The great Boar, How strong and ready was it, to rend my Bowels, when (on the
Top of me) making Search (with his frightful Tushes) to come to my Belly? had
not Divine Providence (so strangely, and seasonably) sent the Gray-Hound, in to
my Rescue. My Clothes rent, and carried away in his Tushes. My Belly untouched.
Oh Amazing Providence!

The Two Horses (mentioned in the beginning of the Book) how near were they to
putting a Period to my Life? The one by his great Strength, in throwing me, and
striking at my Forehead (with his Frost Nails) leaving the Print of the Nails
in my Cap; within the thickness of Half a Crown piece, to my Scull. And the
other, by running me fo far, out of Breath, that no motion of Life conld be
perceived in me, for so long a time as caused all the Spectators to cry out, he
is killed, he is gone, had not the Providence of Heaven watched over me, (then)
where had I been?

When the Bloody Papists had lain in wait to Murder me in Dublin (several
times) there being several Parties of their Soldiers appointed to way lay me,
to kill me, of which designs I knew nothing till afterward. Who (or what) kept
me from Ruin (then) but the never failing Providence of God?

When my Life and Reputation, were both (equally) struck at, by the Hellish
Plot laid against me, by that Man, who (instead of Hanging me) would have
Hanged himself. Who wrought my Escape, and Deliverance from that Destroyer, but
the Wonder Working Providence of Jehovah?

Such Plots, as the Two (last) mentioned, have proved successful, to the
destroying Thousands of other Men. But me they could not reach: Because, I was
hid in the Hollow of God's Providential Hand?

That Sinful Desparation, and Unbelief (while under the Terrors of the Law)
which sent Cain, Judas, and Innumerable Millions of Adams Reprobate Posterity,
to Hell (the place of the Damned) What hindered, that it did not Fix me in the
same place, and condition of Misery? When (by the rageing power thereof) I was
brought so near Hell (in my own apprehensions) As that I looked on my self as a
free Denizon of that Place? What (I say) kept me back; from descending into
that place; but the Providence of God, discovering, and applying to me, (by the
Saving Operation of the Holy Ghost) the Almighty Savior held forth in the
Gospel?

OBSERVATION III.
See, and Learn (hence) How like an Absolute and unlimmited Sovereign, the
great God, did Work in my behalf. And that in behalf of my Soul, as well as of
my Body.

He who by the Ministry of Man; has (by his own Blessing accompanying, that
his own Ordinance) Converted innumerable Thousands of the Elect; it pleased him
Convert and Call me, out of my Natural State, to a State of Grace, without the
Ministry of Man. And that, both by awakening, and wounding me, by the Spirit of
Bondage, setting home (by the Law) the Sight, and Sense, of my Lost Estate. And
by Healing, and Curing the Bleeding Wounds, of my Despairing Soul, by the
Spirit of Adoption: Discovering, and Applying to me; the Merit, and Saving
Virtue of Christ's Mediatoral Righteousness. Which has occasioned my often
thinking, of what is Storied of Achilles, a notable Archer among the Heathen:
who gave such Wounds by the Arrows he Shot, as no Hand (but his own) could
Cure. Vna Eademque Manus, Vulnus, Opemque tulit. The self same Hand, which gave
the Wound brought the Cure.

How true this is of Achilles, I am uncertain: but in this, of the Wounding,
and Healing of my Soul. I am not more certain of any thing in Nature, than I
am, that the Spirit of Christ, which Wounded me, by the Law, did also Heal me
by the Gospel. Job 5. 18. For he makes Sore, and Binds up: He Wounds, and
his Hands make whole.

OBSERVATION IV.
See, and Learn (hence) How steadfast, and faithful, God is, to his Word of
Promise* When for Christ and the Gospel, was forsaken, and cast off, by my
Father, and all other Fleshly Relations (being turned out, empty handed to the
wide World, and not knowing whether to go, or what to do) God took care of me,
and provided a Lodging, and Friends, for me, which (with the Peace of my
Conscience) gave me more satisfaction, and comfortable content, than all the
Gallantry and Greatness of my Fleshly Relations. Those sweet Promises, Recorded
in the Scriptures, and made good by the Providence of God, have oftentimes
Refreshed, and Ravished my pensive, and weary Soul. Psalm. 27. 10. When my
Father and my Mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me up. Mat. 19 29. And
every one that has forsaken Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or
Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands, for my Name's sake, shall Receive an
Hundred fold; and shall Inherit Everlasting Life. Heb. 13. 5. Let your
Conversation be without Covetousness, and be content with such things as ye
have: For he has said, I will never, never, never, never, never leave thee,
nor forsake thee. The Greek has (no less than) five Negatives, in this one
Scripture, to assure the true Believer, that God will in no wise forget, or
forsake him.

I have been forsaken of my Nurse, when but three Months old; but I was taken
into the Nursery of God's Providential Care, which causes in me (often) to
think (with Comfort) of that in Psalm. 22. 10. I was cast upon thee from the
Womb: thou art my God, from my Mothers Belly. The same Providence, which took
Care of the Head, takes Care also of the Members.

I was forsaken of my Bodily Physicians, But the Great Physician of Soul, and
Body, Cured me, by poor Contemptible Snails.

I was forsaken of my Earthly Father, and all Fleshly Relations; But God is
become (by Grace and Free Adoption) my Father, who will never forske me
Totally, or Finally.

I was forsaken, by my Brethren, and Sisters; But those who are the Sons and
Daughters of God, they are become my Brethren, and Sisters. And albeit, many of
them, who know me not, are (on Malicious Reports) prejudiced against me; yet
others of them (who know me, and Gods dealing with me) they Love me dearly.

I have been forsaken, by several of my Church Members, in Ireland and England,
Christ my Lord and Master has been so before me. Jo. 6. 66. From that time
many of his Disciples went back, and walked no more with him. Yet God is my God
still.

I have been forsaken of My Brethren in the Sacred Office, and left to stand
alone, when Popery and Quakerism, were coming in like a Flood; None stepping
in, to help or Encourage me, against those Adversaries of Gods Religion. But he
that stood by Paul (when all other Preachers (in his day) forsook him) stood by
me, and emboldned me against their Threats, and Malice.

I had Thoughts of Printing the most material Objections, brought in by Satan,
to distress, and distract a poor Sinner, to keep him from Christ. And how the
Spirit of Grace, Taught and Enabled me, to Answer them all. But my intended
Brevity has Prevented me therein. All Glory, Honor, and Eternal Praise, to
the only Wise and Glorious God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Amen, Amen.

Postscript.
LEst Satan should get an Advantage, by this Relation, of God's strange and
wonderful dealing with me, in bringing me Home to Christ (in such an unusual
manner) and his Handling me so sharply, by the Spirit of Bondage. As also, his
Bountiful dealing with me, in making my Soul, the Receptacle, of such Ravishing
Joy, and unutterable Consolation, upon Believing (in Christ) in Effectual
Calling. I thought it may be seasonable, to give the present Caution, to the
Poor Doubting, Tempted Believer; who (through Satan's Subtilty Tempting) will
find him (or her) self wretchedly Prone to Conclude (from what they read of my
Conversion) That the Work of true Conversion, was never yet (effectually)
wrought in themselves. And that because, they were never under such Terrible,
Bondage of Soul. Neither (ever yet) were lifted up so near Heaven as I was.

Such Poor Tempted Believers, are to consider, the Particulars following, for
their help, and relief, against the Tempter in this Case.

First, Consider, That as in Nature, there is a vast disparity, or difference
between Persons, in the Natural Birth; so there is as vast a difference, in the
Spiritual Birth. Some Women go through (abundantly) more, and sharper Pains,
and Throws in Travel, than others meet with. Some Babes, meet with greater
difficulties, and dangers in the Birth, than do others. The causes whereof (in
Nature) tho they appear not to us, yet it is most certain, that so it is.

So in Conversion, some Souls pass through greater Horror and Bondage (in the
Consciences than others do. Some are brought (as it were) through the very Jaws
of Hell, and desparation (as I was) others are dealt more easily and gently
with, Being sweetly allured, and (as it were) insensibly Transplanted into
Christ, they not well knowing what is done to them. Paul and the rugged Jailer,
were handled more roughly, their Conscience were more deeply Wounded, with the
frightning Terrors of God's Law (set Home by the Spirit of Bondage) than Lydia,
whose Heart the Lord opened, with more gentle Touches of his Spirit. Acts 9. 6.
Acts 16. 15, 29.

That Woman who is safely Delivered, without any danger or great difficulty to
herself, or her Babe, has no reason to question, whether she be indeed
Delivered, because she went not through such danger, and difficulty as her
Neighbor did, who narrowly escaped with her Life: neither has she any Cause,
of being Jealous with her Neighbor, because her case or condition, was more
dangerous and desperate in Travel than was her own. Thou who art brought to
Christ, by the gentle Drawings of the spirit of Grace; and not brought so nigh,
to the affrightning sight of Hell. And to such a Sense, and feeling, of the
Pains of the Damned: As have caused some to think themselves (actually) in
Hell. Admire at, and Bless God, for his Condescension toward thee, in bringing
thee through the New Birth so easily.

Secondly, Consider, That albeit, the truth of thy Conversion, be not so
sensibly discerned, as the Conversion of that Person is, who is brought Home in
the way of Legal Terror. Yet thou art bound to Bless God, for the smallest
measure of Grace, bestowed on thee, as the smallest Spark of Fire (though it be
hid under a great heap of Ashes) is as truly Fire, as the greatest Fire in
Nature. So thy small Grace, which (in comparison of some others Grace) may be
so weak, and little, that it can scarcely be discerned, yet Grace it is, though
thou know it not to be so. And he who bestowed it on thee, and wrought it in
thee; he will never reject or neglect thee, because of thy little Grace, while
he sees thee Constant and Diligent, in the use of means Laboring to grow in
Grace. Esa. 42. 3. Mat. 5. 6. Esa. 41. 17. Phil. 1. 6.

Oh! But I do not find, that I am brought to Christ, and which is far worse, I
fear, I never shall.

To this, I Answer, in Two Particulars.

First, Thy very fear, about this (greatest of Concerns) is an Argument of thy
Translation from the First Adam, to the Second Adam, Christ Jesus the Lord. If
the Spirit of Grace, had not given thee, some Sight and Taste, of the
Excellency, and Sweetness of Christ; thou could never prize, or desire after
him. It Is only the Child that has Tasted the Honey or Sugar, that Longs, and
Cries for more.

Secondly, If thou find a fixed Resolution in thy Soul, in going on to seek
the Lord. And his Strength, by Prayer and Supplication: and other means of
Grace, not resting in, or depending upon them, but on Christ (alone) for Life
and Salvation. My Life for thine, come Death, when God Pleases to send it: it
will end all thy fears, and put thee beyond the reach of all thine Enemies. Thy
frequent Crying to God, (in Prayer) for Christ, and Saving Grace: is the Echo
of Christ Praying (for thea) at the Throne of Grace. And thy going on, and
continuing to Watch at Wisdoms Gates, could not (possibly) be, without
invisible Supplies of Spiritual Strength, Communicated to thy Soul, by the
Spirit of Christ.

THE END.

