From a-board the Van Herring THE ANSWER TO THE LETTER from LEGORN Answered: In
a Third Letter to a Merchant in London.
SIR,
SINCE my Last, I have somewhat to communicate to you, more than what formerly
I sent you: And knowing you to be a Person of Trust and Integrity, and withal
desirous to know how Squares go, to the Intent you may assist us in all
Lawful ways (if occasion presents) I am willing to give you this farther
satisfaction.

SIR,

Upon occasion of an Extraordinary, or rather Customary Solemnity (in respect
it happens annually aboard our ship) Our Captains Son was thought fit to be
invited to the Entertainment, which accordingly was done with the mature
Deliberation and Advice of the Principal Officers, at whose Charge this
Customary Solemnity was to be defrayed: It seems our Captains Son was so modest
at the first Invitation as to give a refusal to the same, showing them several
reasons to justify his absence: but being over importuned he came out of his
Cabin incognito, to avoid those Acclamations the Mariners were accustomed to
Salute him withal: but it seems his Privacy was discovered, and the whole
Company rang him such a Peal as he went* that he was forced to clap both his
Hands on his ears, and desire them to forbear. This is seems is (since come to
our Lieutenants ears, who though he knows not which way to help himself, yet
storms like wild but the honest Mariners take so little Notice of the same,
that it is e'n indifferent whether he be pacified or not.

Sir. The night after this entertainment happened an occational accident worth
your serious remark: which was this, There was a kind of a buzzing about the
Ship, That a certain Mohammedan a-board had a parcel of Arms in his Cabin, with
which he designed to do the Ships company a mischief, if occasion served: but
upon notice thereof given to our Captain he issued out an express Order to
search for the same, (as indeed all the Ships company know him to be a person
extraordinary careful in such Cases.) The person ordered to make search was
reputed an honest Quarteer; but whither for gain or otherwise, I cannot say, He
had no sooner received his Order: but contrary to the same, gave private notice
to him, That next Morning he must make a strickt search for Arms, and withal
desired him to consult his own Interest. The Mohammedan thereupon puts all
things out of the way, and desired him to come as soon as he pleased, which the
next Morning he did, and was gratifyed with a pair of old rusty Pistols, which
the Mohammedan pretended had formerly been his Fathers: our Searcher being so
much a Knave as to take his Word for the rest. But a more narrow inspection
being made into the business by an honest Mariner, he has since informed our
Council of Officers of the same (who still fit, pray God they may continue) who
have thereupon issued forth an express Order to bring the Delinquent before
them with all expedition, who doubtless will be sent to keep company with the
rest of his f^llow Criminals in the Ships hold.

Sir. This Business appeared with so foul a Face, That our Council of Officers
taking particular Notice of this Action, as well as of several others too
tedious here to relate) made these several Proposals following; Resolving to
second them with their Lives and Fortunes, as themselves have expressed; with
their utmost Integrity and Affection: viz.

That they will assist our most beloved Royal CAPTAIN, as far as Fortune, Life
and Estate goes, against the Mahometans, and that they will testify their
readiness and hearty good will upon the first Occasion that offers,

That if any Mohammedan, Algerine or other disaffected Person should but make an
Attempt against our CAPTAIN: (though without Success) to do him prejudice, as
well the Officers as the honest Mariners protest Solemnly they would not leave
a Bone of the Mahometans or Algerines above board to report their Treachery.

Nay that which you can hardly believe, and we with Admiration hear; is this
(to our unspeakable joy and Comfort be it spoken) That our Lieutenant shall be
disabled from ever bearing a Captains Command a-board this Ship; thus much as
to our own Ship.

The Lion Rampant (where our Lieutenant is a-Board) seems to be weary of their
Officer, though they dare not scarce say so; yet by several Passages betwixt
them and us we are apt to believe it. The Truth of it is, The Ship is a good
Ship, pray God grant her as good Officers: as for the Captains Care it is
beyond measure circumspect: Without doubt were our Lieutenant a man as careful
for the Ships Good and Interest; the Sailors would not complain as now they do.


Sir,
IN my last I gave you a small Account of the Golden Harp (now in company with
us) to say the Truth, I verily believe the Algerines designed first to lay her
a-board by several Conjectures that I have not thought fit here to be
mentioned: but let me tell you I know this from my own Experience, as well as
from the Relation of several of our Officers a-board. That neither the
Mohammedan nor Algerine can do us the least Damage unless our Council of
Officers disagree (which God forbid) as yet they are unanimous, and for ought I
know will continue so: Out Captain resolving to dye in our Quarrel rather than
submit one Tittle to these Mahumetans, encourages us beyond Expression: And if
the Ships Company do not stand by Him with their Lives and Estates never
believe man more for my sake:

In a Word, The CAPTAIN, is so well beloved on Board, It Is impossible for me to
express it, unless I should write it in Characters with my Heart-blood: which I
am ready now to do for our CAPTAIN and his Ships Company.

Sir, In my next expect a farther Account, from Your Cordial friend (in haste)
J. B.


FINIS.
London, Printed for T. Davies. 1681.


