

SERMONS PREACHED UPON SEVERAL OCCASIONS,

BY ISAAC BARROW, D.D. late Master of Trinity College in Cambridge, and one of
His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons over against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1679.

To the Right Honorable, HENEAGE Lord FINCH, Baron of Daventry, Lord High
Chancellor of ENGLAND, and One of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
My LORD,
I Take the boldness to present your Lordship with some of the First Fruits of
my deceased Son's Studies in Divinity. And since it has pleased God, to my
unspeakable grief and loss, to deprive me of so great a blessing, and comfort
of my old age; it is no small mitigation of my sorrow, that whilst he lived, he
was not unprofitable to the world, and that now he is dead, he has left those
monuments of his piety and learning behind him, which I am told are generally
thought not unworthy to be imparted to the public.

If these Sermons be such, I have no cause to doubt but they will easily obtain
your Lordship's Patronage, who are so known a Favourer of all that is virtuous
and worthy, especially of Religion and the Ministers of it. Of which I had
particular experience upon the death of my good Son, when your Lordship was
pleased, with so much humanity and condescension, to send to comfort me under
that sad loss, and to express your own resentment of it.

But whatever these Sermons be, since I have no other way to acknowledge my
great obligations to your Lordship upon all occasions, I hope your Lordship
will please favorably to accept of this, how small soever, yet sincere
testimony of my dutiful respects and gratitude. I am,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most obliged and most obedient Servant, Thomas Barrow.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
THE Author of the following SERMONS was so publicly known, and so highly
esteemed by all Learned and Good men, that nothing either needs or can be said
more to his advantage. Not but that I think it very fit, that the Picture of
this truly-great Man should be drawn at full length, for the knowledge and
imitation of posterity; and it will, I hope, be done hereafter by some more
skillful hand: However, I shall not within the narrow limits of a Preface, so
much as attempt the Character of him; of whom, either not a little, or nothing
at all ought to be said.

And the Sermons themselves do as little need commendation, as the Author;
their own excellency and eloquence will praise them best. I shall therefore
only advertise the Reader of some few things concerning them.

The Design of the Five first is, to recommend Religion to our esteem and
practice, from the consideration of the manifold excellencies and advantages of
it. The Four next do treat of the two great Duties of Religion, and parts of
Divine Worship, Prayer and Thanksgiving; and contain likewise a very powerful
persuasive to the practice of them. The Three last were preached upon three
solemn Occasions: The First of them upon the 29. of May, 1676. the Anniversary
of His Majesty's happy Restoration: The Second upon the 5. of November, 1675.
in commemoration of our great Deliverance from the Powder Treason: both in the
year of his Vice-Chancellourship: The Last at the Consecration of the Bishop of
Man, (the now Lord Bishop of S. Asaph,) his Uncle; in which he pleads for the
due Respect and Revenue of the Clergy with so much modesty, and yet with so
great force of reason and eloquence, that the whole Profession may justly think
themselves for ever indebted to him.

Some of these Sermons were the very first that he made; by which we may judge
with what preparation and furniture he entered upon this Sacred employment. The
first of them was preached at S. Mary's in Cambridge, June 30. 1661. and was, I
think, the first that he ever preached. Those two excellent Sermons of
Thanksgiving were, as I am informed, the next. The fourth in order, was the
first that he preached before the King's Majesty. In the placing of them as
they now stand, I had very little regard to the order of Time, but rather to
some small reason taken from the Subject matter of them, not worth the
mentioning; any reason almost being good enough in a matter so indifferent, and
where none is necessary.

Besides these, the Author has left many other excellent Sermons, upon the
most important and useful Subjects in Divinity; particularly, upon ail the
Articles of the Creed: and several other very learned Discourses and Treatises,
Theological and Mathematical: which may, God willing, in convenient time be
communicated to the public, to the great advantage and furtherance of Religion
and Learning.

In the mean time, I heartily recommend these Sermons to thy serious perusal;
and shall only say this of them, That as they want no other kind of
excellency, so particularly they are animated throughout with so genuine a
spirit of true Piety and Goodness, that he must either be a perfectly-good, or
prodigiously-bad man, that can read them over without being the better for
them.

THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I.

Prove. 3. 17.

Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. Page 1.

SERMON. II. and III.

1 Timothy 4. 8.

-- But Godliness is profitable for all things. Page 34, 72.

SERMON IV.

1 Samuel 2. 30.

For them that honor me, I will honor. Page 116.

SERMON V.

Prove. 10. 9.

He that walks uprightly, walks surely. Page 161.

SERMON. VI. and VII.

1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.

Pray without ceasing. Page 195, 223.

SERMON. VIII. and IX.

Ephesians. 5. 20.

Giving thanks always for all things unto God. Page 258, 297.

SERMON. X. On May 29.

1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.

I exhort therefore, that first of all supplications, prayers, intercessions,
and giving of thanks be made for all men;

For Kings, and for all that are in authority. Page 348.

SERMON. XI. On November. 5.

Psalm. 64. 9, 10.

And all men shall fear, and shall declare the work of God; for they shall
wisely consider of his doing.

The righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and shall trust in him; and all the
upright in heart shall glory. Page 403.

SERMON. XII. At the Consecration of the Bishop of Man, (the now Lord Bishop of
S. Asaph.)

Psalm. 132. 16.

I will also cloth her Priests with salvation. Page 461.

LIber hic (cui Titu^us, Sermons preached upon several Occasions, by Doctor
Barrow,)

IMPRIMATUR.

Ex Aedibus Lamb. 1. Nov. 1677. Geor. Hooper, Rmo Dno Dno Gilberto, Archiep.
Cant. a Sacris Domesticis.

The First Sermon.
PROVE. 3. 17. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.
THE meaning of these words seems plain and obvious, and to need little
explication. Her ways, that is, the ways of Wisdom. What this Wisdom is, I
shall not undertake accurately to describe. Briefly, I understand by it, An
habitual skill or faculty of judging aright about matters of practice, and
choosing according to that right judgment, and conforming the actions to such
good choice. Ways and paths in Scripture-dialect are the courses and manners of
action. For doing there is commonly called walking; and the methods of doing
are the ways in which we walk. By pleasantness may be meant the joy and delight
accompanying, and by peace the content and satisfaction ensuing such a course
of actions. So that, in short, the sense of these words seems simply to be
this, That a course of life directed by wisdom and good judgment is
delightful in the practice, and brings content after it. The truth of which
Proposition it shall be my endeavor at this time to confirm by diverse Reasons,
and illustrate by several instances.

I. Then, Wisdom of it self is delectable and satisfactory, as it implies a
revelation of Truth, and a detection of Error to us. It Is like Light, pleasant
to behold, casting? sprightly luster, and Veritatis luce menti h^minis nihil
dulcius. Cic. Acad. 2.
diffusing a benign influence all about; presenting a goodly prospect of things
to the eyes of our mind; displaying objects in their due shapes, postures,
magnitudes, and colors; quickening our spirits with a comfortable warmth, and
disposing our minds to a cheerful activity; dispelling the darkness of
ignorance, scattering the mists of doubt, driving away the specter of delusive
fancy; mitigating the cold of sullen melancholy; discovering obstacles,
securing progress, and making the passages of life clear, open, and pleasant.
We are all naturally endowed with a strong appetite to know, to see, to pursue
Truth; and with a bashful abhorrency from being deceived, and entangled in
mistake. And as success in enquiry after Truth affords matter of joy and
triumph; so being conscious of Error, and miscarriage therein, is attended
with shame and sorrow. These desires Wisdom in the most perfect manner
satisfies, not by entertaining us with dry, empty, fruitless theories, upon
mean and vulgar subjects; but by enriching our minds with excellent and useful
knowledge, directed to the noblest objects, and serviceable to the highest
ends. Nor in its own nature only, but,

II. Much more in its worthy consequences is Wisdom exceedingly pleasant and
peaceable: in general, by disposing us to acquire and to enjoy all the good,
delight and happiness we are capable of; and by freeing us from all the
inconveniences, mischiefs and infelicities our condition is subject to. For
whatever good from clear understanding, deliberate advice, sagacious
foresight, stable resolution, dexterous address, right intention and orderly
proceeding does naturally result, Wisdom conferrs: whatever evil blind
ignorance, false presumption, unwary credulity, precipitate rashness, unsteady
purpose, ill contrivance, backwardness, inhability, unwieldiness and confusion
of thought beget, Wisdom prevents. From thousand snares and treacherous
allurements, from innumerable rocks and dangerous surprises, from exceedingly
many needless encumbrances and vexatious toils of fruitless endeavor, she
redeems and secures us. More particularly,

III. Wisdom assures us we take the best course, and proceed as we ought. For
by the same means we judge aright, and reflecting upon that judgment are
assured we do so: as the same arguments by which we demonstrate a theorem
convince us we have demonstrated it, and the same light by which we see an
object makes us know we see it. And this assurance in the progress of the
action exceedingly pleases, and in the sequel of it infinitely contents us. He
that judges amiss, not perceiving clearly the rectitude of his process,
proceeds usually with a dubious solicitude, and at length, discovering his
error, condemns his own choice, and receives no other satisfaction but of
repentance. Like a Traveller, who being uncertain whether he goes in the right
way, wanders in continual perplexity, till he be informed; and then too late,
understanding his mistake, with regret seeks to recover himself into it. But he
that knows his way, and is satisfied that it is the true one, makes on merrily
and carelessly, not doubting he shall in good time arrive to his designed
journey's end. Two troublesome mischiefs therefore Wisdom frees us from, the
company of anxious doubt in our actions, and the consequence of bitter
repentance. For no man can doubt of what he is sure of, nor repent of what he
knows good.

IV. Wisdom begets in us a hope of success in our actions, and is usually
attended therewith. Now what is more delicious then hope? what more
satisfactory then success? That is like the pursuit of a flying enemy, this
like gathering the spoil; that like viewing the ripe corn, this like the joy of
harvest it self. And he that aims at a good end, and knows he uses proper means
to attain it, why should he despair of success, since effects naturally follow
their causes, and the Divine providence is wont to afford its concourse to such
proceedings? Beside that such well-grounded hope confirms resolution, and
quickens activity, which mainly conduce to the prosperous issue of designs.
Farther,

V. Wisdom prevents discouragement from the possibility of ill success, yea
and makes disappointment it self tolerable. For if either the foresight of a
possible miscarriage should discourage us from adventuring on action, or
inculpable frustration were intolerable, we should with no heart apply our
selves to any thing; there being no designs in this world, though founded upon
the most sound advice, and prosecuted by the most diligent endeavor, which may
not be defeated, as depending upon diverse causes above our power, and
circumstances beyond our prospect. The inconstant opinions, uncertain
resolutions, mutable affections, and fallacious pretenses of men, upon which
the accomplishment of most projects relies, may easily deceive and disappoint
us. The imperceptible course of nature exerting it self in sudden tempests,
diseases, and unlucky casualties, may surprise us, and give an end to our
businesses and lives together. However, the irresistible power of the Divine
providence, guided by the unsearchable counsel of his will, we can never be
assured that it will not interpose, and hinder the effects of our endeavors.
Yet notwithstanding, when we act prudently, we have no reason to be
disheartened; because, having good intentions, and using fit means, and having
done our best, as no deserved blame, so no considerable damage can arrive to
us: and though we find Almighty God has crossed us, yet we are sure he is not
displeased with us. Which consideration, wherewith Wisdom furnishes us, will
make the worst success not only tolerable, but comfortable to us. For hence we
have reason to hope, that the Allwise Goodness reserves a better reward for us,
and will sometime recompense not only the good purposes we unhappily pursued,
but also the unexpected disappointment we patiently endured; and that however
we shall be no losers in the end. Which discourse is mainly fortified by
considering how the best and wisest attempts have often miscarried. We see Moses,
authorized by God's command, directed by his counsel, and conducted by his
hand, intended to bring the Israelites into the land of Canaan; yet by the
unreasonable incredulity and stubborn perverseness of that people he had his
purpose frustrated. The holy Prophets afterward earnestly endeavored to
contain the same people within compass of obedience to the Divine commands, and
to reduce them from their idolatrous and wicked courses; yet without
correspondent effect. Our Savior, by the example of his holy life, continual
instruction, and vehement exhortations, assayed to procure a belief of and
submission to his most excellent Doctrine; yet how few believed his report, and
complied with his Discipline? Yea, Almighty God himself often complains, how in
a manner his designs were defeated, his desires thwarted, his offers refused,
his counsels rejected, his expectations deceived, Wherefore, (says he
concerning his Vineyard) when I Isa. 5. 4.
looked it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes? And again,
I have Isa. 65. 2.
spread out my hands all the day to a rebellious people. And again, I have even
sent Jer. 7. 25.
unto you all my prophets daily, rising up early, and sending them; yet they
hearkened not unto me. Wherefore there is no good cause we should be
disheartened, or vexed, when success is wanting to well-advised purposes. It Is
foolish and ill-grounded intentions, and practices unwarrantable by good
reason, that make the undertakers solicitous of success, and being defeated
leave them disconsolate. Yea farther,

VI. Wisdom makes all the troubles, griefs and pains incident to life, whether
casual adversities, or natural afflictions, easy and supportable; by rightly
valuing the importance, and moderating the influence of them. It suffers not
busy fancy to alter the nature, amplify the degree, or extend the duration of
them, by representing them more sad, heavy and remediless then they truly are.
It allows them no force beyond what naturally and necessarily they have, nor
contributes nourishment to their increase. It keeps them at a due distance, not
permitting them to encroach upon the Soul, or to propagate their influence
beyond their proper sphere. It will not let external mischances, as poverty and
disgrace, to produce an inward sense which is beyond their natural efficacy;
nor corporeal affections of sickness and pain to disturb the mind, with which
they have nothing to do. The region of these malignant distempers being at
most but the habit of the body, Wisdom by effectual antidotes repells them
from the heart, and inward parts of the Soul. If any thing, sin, and our
unworthy miscarriages toward God, should vex and discompose us; yet this
trouble Wisdom, by representing the Divine Goodness, and his tender mercies in
our ever-Blessed Redeemer, does perfectly allay. And as for all other
adversities, it abates their noxious power, by showing us they are either
merely imaginary, or very short and temporary; that they admit of remedy, or at
most do not exclude comfort, not wholly hindering the operations of the mind,
nor extinguishing its joys; that they may have a profitable use, and pleasant
end; and, however, neither imply bad Conscience, nor induce obligation to
punishment. For,

VII. Wisdom has always a good Conscience attending it, that purest delight
and richest cordial of the Soul; that brazen wall, and impregnable fortress
against both external assaults, and internal commotions; that continual feast,
whereon the mind, destitute of all other repast, with a never-languishing
appetite may entertain it self; that faithful witness, and impartial judge,
whoever accuses, always acquitting the innocent Soul; that certain friend, in
no straight failing, in no adversity deserting; that sure refuge in all storms
of fortune, and persecutions of disgrace. Which (as Solomon here notes) renders
a man's sleep sweet, and undisturbed with fearful phantasms, his heart light,
and his steps secure; and, if any thing, can make the Stoical paradox good, and
cause the Wise man to smile in extremity of torment; arming his mind with an
invincible courage, and infusing a due confidence into it, whereby he bears up
cheerfully against malicious reproach, undauntedly sustains adversity, and
triumphs over bad fortune. And this invaluable treasure the Wise man is only
capable of possessing, who certainly knows, and heartily approves the grounds
upon which he proceeds; whenas the fool, building his choice upon blind chance,
or violent passion, or giddy fancy, or uncertain example, not upon the steady
warrant of good reason, cannot avoid being perplexed with suspicion of mistake,
and so necessarily is deprived of the comfort of a good Conscience.

VIII. Wisdom confers a facility, expert readiness, and dexterity in action;
which is a very pleasant and commodious quality, and exceedingly sweetens
activity. To do things with difficulty, struggling, and immoderate contention,
disheartens a man, quells his courage, blunts the edge of his resolution,
renders him sluggish and averse from business, though apprehended never so
necessary, and of great moment. These obstructions Wisdom removes,
facilitating operations by directing the intention to ends possible and
attainable, by suggesting fit means and instruments to work by, by contriving
right methods and courses of process; the mind by it being stored with variety
of good principles, sure rules, and happy expedients, reposed in the memory,
and ready upon all occasions to be produced, and employed in practice.

IX. Wisdom begets a sound, healthful and harmonious complexion of the Soul,
disposing us with judgment to distinguish, and with pleasure to relish savoury
and wholesome things, but to nauseate and reject such as are ungrateful and
noxious to us; thereby capacifying us to enjoy pleasantly and innocently all
those good things the Divine Goodness has provided for, and consigned to us:
whence to the Soul proceeds all that comfort, joy and vigor, which results to
the Body from a good constitution, and perfect health.

X. Wisdom acquaints us with our selves, our own temper and constitution, our
propensions and passions, our habitudes and capacities; a thing not only of
mighty advantage, but of infinite pleasure and content to us. No man in the
world less knows a fool then himself; nay, he is more then ignorant, for he
constantly errs in the point, taking himself for, and demeaning himself as
toward another, a better, a wiser and abler man then he is. He has wonderful
conceits of his own qualities and faculties; he affects commendations
incompetent to him; he soars at employment surpassing his ability to manage. No
Comedy can represent a mistake more odd, and ridiculous, then his: for he
wanders, and stares, and hunts after, but never can find nor discern himself;
but always encounters with a false shadow in stead thereof, which he
passionately huggs and admires. But a Wise man, by constant observation, and
impartial reflection upon himself, grows very familiar with himself: he
perceives his own inclinations, which if bad, he strives to alter and correct;
if good, he cherishes and corroborates them: he apprehends the matters he is
fitting for, and capable to manage, neither too mean and unworthy of him, nor
too high and difficult for him; and those applying his care to, he transacts
easily, cheerfully, and successfully. So being neither puffed up with vain and
overweening opinion, nor dejected with heartless diffidence of himself;
neither admiring, nor despising; neither irksomely hating, nor fondly loving
himself; he continues in good humor, maintains a sure friendship and fair
correspondence with himself, and rejoices in the retirement and private
conversation with his own thoughts: whence flows a pleasure and satisfaction
unexpressible.

XI. Wisdom procures and preserves a constant favor and fair respect of men,
purchases a good name, and upholds reputation in the world: which things are
naturally desirable, commodious for life, encouragements to good, and
preventive of many inconveniences. The composed frame of mind, uniform and
comely demeanor, compliant and inoffensive conversation, fair and punctual
dealing, considerate motions and dextrous addresses of Wise men, naturally
beget esteem and affection in those that observe them. Neither then these
things is there any thing more commendable to humane regard. As symmetry and
harmony to the animal senses, so delectable is an even temper of Soul and
orderly tenor of actions to rational apprehensions. Folly is freakish and
humorous, impertinent and obstreperous, inconstant and inconsistent, peevish
and exceptious; and consequently fastidious to society, and productive of
aversation and disrespect. But the Wise man is stable in his ways, consonant to
himself, suting his actions to his words, and those to his principles, and all
to the rule of right reason; so that you may know where to find him, and how to
deal with him, and may easily please him, which makes his acquaintance
acceptable, and his person valuable: beside that real worth of it self commands
respect, and extorts veneration from men, and usually prosperity waits upon his
welladvised attempts, which exceedingly adorn, and advance the credit of the
undertaker: however, if he fail sometime, his usual deportment salves his
repute, and easily makes it credible it was no fault of his, but of his
fortune. If a fool prosper, the honor is attributed to propitious chance; if
he miscarry, to his own ill management: but the entire glory of happy
undertakings crowns the head of Wisdom; while the disgrace of unlucky events
falls otherwhere. His light, like that of the Sun, cannot totally be eclipsed;
it may be dimmed, but never extinguished, and always maintains a day, though
over-clouded with misfortune. Who less esteems the famous African Captain for
being overthrown in that last fatal battle, wherein he is said to have shown
the best skill, and yet endured the worst of success? Who contemns Cato, and
other the grave Citizens of Rome, for embracing the just, but improsperous
Cause of the Commonwealth? A Wise man's circumstances may vary and fluctuate
like the floods about a rock; but he persists immovably the same, and his
reputation unshaken: for he can always render a good account of his actions,
and by reasonable apology elude the assaults of reproach.

XII. Wisdom instructs us to examine, compare, and rightly to value the objects
that court our affections, and challenge our care; and thereby regulates our
passions, and moderates our endeavors, which begets a pleasant serenity and
peaceable tranquillity of mind. For when, being deluded with false shows, and
relying upon ill-grounded presumptions, we highly esteem, passionately affect,
and eagerly pursue things of little worth in themselves, or concernment to us,
as we unhandsomely prostitute our affections, and prodigally miss-spend our
time, and vainly lose our labor; so the event not answering our expectation,
our minds thereby are confounded, disturbed, and distempered. But when, guided
by right reason, we conceive great esteem of, and zealously are enamoured with,
and vigorously strive to attain things of excellent worth, and weighty
consequence; the conscience of having well placed our affections, and well
employed our pains, and the experience of fruits corresponding to our hopes,
ravish our mind with unexpressible content. And so it is; Present appearance
and vulgar conceit ordinarily impose upon our fancies, disguising things with a
deceitful varnish, and representing those that are vainest with the greatest
advantage; whilst the noblest objects, being of a more subtle and spiritual
nature, like fairest Jewels enclosed in a homely box, avoid the notice of gross
sense, and pass undiscerned by us. But the light of Wisdom, as it unmasks
specious imposture, and bereavesit of its false colors; so it penetrates into
the retirements of true Excellency, and reveals its genuine luster. For
example, Corporeal Pleasure, which so powerfully allures and enchants us,
Wisdom declares that it is but a present, momentany and transient satisfaction
of brutish sense, dimming the light, sullying the beauty, impairing the vigor,
and restraining the activity of the mind; diverting it from better operations,
and indisposing it to enjoy purer delights; leaving no comfortable relish or
gladsome memory behind it, but often followed with bitterness, regret and
disgrace. That the Profit the World so greedily gapes after is but a possession
of trifles, not valuable in themselves, nor rendering the Masters of them so;
accidentally obtained, and promiscuously enjoyed by all sorts, but commonly by
the worst of men; difficultly acquired, and easily lost; however, to be used
but for a very short time, and then to be resigned into uncertain hands. That
the Honor men so dote upon is, ordinarily, but the difference of a few petty
circumstances, a peculiar name or title, a determinate place, a distinguishing
ensign; things of only imaginary excellence, derived from chance, and
conferring no advantage, except from some little influence they have upon the
arbitrary opinion and fickle humor of the people; complacence in which is
vain, and reliance upon it dangerous. That Power and dominion, which men so
impatiently struggle for, are but necessary evils introduced to restrain the
bad tempers of men; most evil to them that enjoy them; requiring tedious
attendance, distracting care, and vexatious toil; attended with frequent
disappointment, opprobrious censure, and dangerous envy; having such real
burdens, and slavish encumbrances, sweetened only by superficial pomps,
strained obsequiousness, some petty privileges, and exemptions scarce worth the
mentioning. That Wit and parts, of which men make such ostentation, are but
natural endowments, commendable only in order to use, apt to engender pride
and vanity, and hugely dangerous if abused or misemployed. What should I
mention Beauty, that fading toy; or bodily Strength and activity, qualities so
palpably inconsiderable? Upon these and such like flattering objects, so adored
by vulgar opinion, Wisdom exercising severe and impartial judgment, and
perceiving in them no intrinsic excellence, no solid content springing from
them, no perfection thence accruing to the mind, no high reward allotted to
them, no security to the future condition, or other durable advantages
proceeding from them; it concludes they deserve not any high opinion of the
mind, nor any vehement passion of the Soul, nor any laborious care to be
employed on them, and moderates our affections toward them: it frees us from
anxious desire of them; from being transported with excessive joy in the
acquisition of them; from being overwhelmed with disconsolate sorrow at the
missing of them, or parting with them; from repining and envying at those who
have better success then our selves in the procuring them; from immoderate toil
in getting, and care in preserving them: and so delivering us from all these
unquiet anxieties of thought, tumultuous perturbations of passion, and tedious
vexations of body, it maintains our minds in a cheerful calm, quiet
indifferency, and comfortable liberty. On the other side, things of real worth
and high concernment, that produce great satisfaction to the mind, and are
mainly conducible to our happiness, such as are a right understanding and
strong sense of our obligations to Almighty God, and relations to men, a sound
temper and complexion of mind, a virtuous disposition, a capacity to discharge
the duties of our places, a due qualification to enjoy the happiness of the
other World; these and such like things, by discovering their nature, and the
effects resulting from them, it engages us highly to esteem, ardently to
affect, and industriously to pursue; so preventing the inconveniences that
follow the want of them, and conveying the benefits arising from the possession
of them.

XIII. Wisdom distinguishes the circumstances, limits the measures, determines
the modes, appoints the fit seasons of action; so preserving decorum and order,
the parent of peace, and preventing confusion, the mother of iniquity, strife
and disquiet. It Is in the business of humane life as in a building: a due
proportion of bigness, a fit situation of place, a correspondency of shape, and
sutableness of color, is to be observed between the parts thereof: a defect in
any of which requisites, though the materials hap to be choice and excellent,
makes the whole fabric deformed and ugly to judicious apprehension. The best
actions, if they swell, and exceed their due measure, if they be unskilfully
misplaced, if in uncouth manner performed, they lose their quality, and turn
both to the disgrace and disadvantage of life. It Is commendable to pray; but
they that would always be performing that duty, by their absurd devotion
procured to themselves the title of Heretics: and they that will stand praying
in places of public concourse, deserved our Savior's reprehensions: and those
men who, against the custom and ordinary use, would needs pray with their faces
covered, you know S. Paul insinuates of them, that they were fond and
contentious persons. Friendly admonition is very laudable, and of rare use; but
being upon all occasions immoderately used, or in public society so as to
encroach upon modesty, or endammage reputation; or when the person admonished
is otherwise employed, and attent upon his business; or being delivered in an
imperiously-insulting way, or in harsh and opprobrious language; it becomes
unsavory and odious, and both in show and effect resembles a froward malicious
exceptiousness. 'Twere infinite to compute in how many instances want of due
order, measure and manner, do spoil and incommodate action. It Is Wisdom that
applies remedy to these mischiefs. Things must be compared to, and arbitrated
by, her standard, or else they will contain something of monstrous enormity;
either strutting in unwieldy bulk, or sinking in defective scantness. If she do
not fashion and model circumstances, they will sit ugly on the things that wear
them; if she do not temper the colors, and describe the lineaments, the
draught of practice will be but rude and imperfect, and little resemble the
true patterns of duty: but if she interpose, and perform her part, all things
will appear conformable, neat and delicate.

XIV. Wisdom discovers our relations, duties and concernments, in respect of
men, with the natural grounds of them; thereby both qualifying and inclining us
to the discharge of them: whence exceeding convenience, pleasure and content
ensues. By it we understand we are parts and members of the great Body, the
Universe; and are therefore concerned in the good management of it, and are
thereby obliged to procure its order and peace, and by no irregular undertaking
to disturb or discompose it; which makes us honest and peaceable men: that we
proceed from the same primitive stock, are children of the same father, and
partake of the same blood with all men; are endowed with like faculties of
mind, passions of Soul, shape of body, and sense of things: that we have
equally implanted in our original constitution inclinations to love, pity,
gratitude, sociableness, quiet, joy, reputation: that we have an indispensable
need and impatient desire of company, of assistence, comfort, and relief: that
therefore it is according to the design of nature, and agreeable to reason,
that to those, to whom our natural condition by so many bands of cognation,
similitude, and mutual necessitude, has knit and conjoined us, we should bear
a kind respect and tender affection; should cheerfully concur in undergoing
the common burdens; should heartily wish and industriously promote their good,
assist them in accomplishing their reasonable desires, thankfully requite the
courtesies received from them, congratulate and rejoice with them in their
prosperity, comfort them in their distresses, and, as we are able, relieve
them; however, tenderly compassionate their disappointments, miseries and
sorrows. This renders us kind and courteous neighbors; sweet and grateful
companions. It represents unto us the dreadful effects and insupportable
mischiefs arising from breach of faith, contravening the obligations of solemn
pacts, infringing public laws, deviating from the received rules of equity,
violating promises, and interrupting good correspondence among men: by which
considerations it engages us to be good citizens, obedient subjects, just
dealers, and faithful friends. It minds us of the blindness, impotence and
levity, the proneness to mistake, and misbehaviour that humane nature
necessarily is subject to; deserving rather our commiseration, then anger or
hatred, which prompts us to bear the infirmities of our brethren, to be gentle
in censure, to be insensible of petty affronts, to pardon injuries, to be
patient, exorable, and reconcilable to those that give us greatest cause of
offense. It teaches us, the good may, but the evil of our neighbor can in no
wise advantage us; that from the suffering of any man, simply considered, no
benefit can accrue, nor natural satisfaction arise to us; and that therefore
it is a vain, base, brutish and unreasonable thing, for any cause whatsoever, to
desire or delight in the grief, pain or misery of our neighbor, to hate or
envy him, or insult over him, or devise mischief to him, or prosecute revenge
upon him; which makes us civil, noble and placable enemies, or rather no
enemies at all. So that Wisdom is in effect the genuine parent of all moral
and political virtue, justice and honesty; as Solomon says in her person, I
lead in the way of righteousness, and in the midst of Prove. 8. 20.
the paths of judgment. And how sweet these are in the practice, how
comfortable in the consequences, the testimony of continual experience and the
unanimous consent of all wise men sufficiently declare. But farther,

XV. The principal advantage of Wisdom is, its acquainting us with the Nature
and reason of true Religion, and affording convictive arguments to persuade to
the Practice of it; which is accompanied with the purest delight, and attended
with the most solid content imaginable. I say, the Nature of Religion, wherein
it consists, and what it requires; the mistake of which produces daily so many
mischiefs and inconveniences in the world, and exposes so good a name to so
much reproach. It shows it consists not in fair professions and glorious
pretenses, but in real practice; not in a pertinacious adherence to any Sect or
party, but in a sincere love of goodness, and dislike of naughtiness,
wherever discovering it self; not in vain ostentations and flourishes of
outward performance, but in an inward good complexion of mind, exerting it self
in works of true Devotion and Charity; not in a nice orthodoxie, or politic
subjection of our judgments to the peremptory dictates of men, but in a sincere
love of Truth, in a hearty approbation of and compliance with the Doctrines
fundamentally good, and necessary to be believed; not in harsh censuring and
virulently inveighing against others, but in careful amending our own ways;
not in a peevish crosness and obstinate repugnancy to received laws and
customs, but in a quiet and peaceable submission to the express Laws of God,
and lawful commands of man; not in a furious zeal for or against trivial
circumstances, but in a conscionable practicing the substantial parts of
Religion; not in a frequent talking or contentious disputing about it, but in a
ready observance of the unquestionable rules and prescripts of it. In a word,
that Religion consists in nothing else but doing what becomes our relation to
God, in a conformity or similitude to his Nature, and in a willing obedience to
his holy Will: to which by potent incentives it allures and persuades us; by
representing to us his transcendentlyglorious Attributes, conspicuously
displayed in the frame, order and government of the World; that wonderful
Power, which erected this great and goodly fabric; that incomprehensible
Wisdom, which preserves it in a constant harmony; that immense Goodness, which
has so carefully provided for the various necessities, delights and comforts
of its innumerable inhabitants. I say, by representing those
infinitely-glorious Perfections, it engages us with highest respect to esteem,
reverence and honor him. Also, by minding us of our manifold obligations to
him, our receiving being, life, reason, sense, all the faculties, powers,
excellencies, privileges and commodities of our natures from him; of his tender
Care and loving Providence continually supporting and protecting us; of his
liberal Beneficence, patient Indulgence, and earnest desire of our good and
happiness by manifold expressions evidently manifested toward us; it inflames
us with ardent love, and obliges us to officious gratitude toward him. Also, by
declaring the necessary and irreconcilable contrariety of his Nature to all
impurity and perverseness, his peerless Majesty, his irresistible Power, and
his all-seeing Knowledge, it begets an awful dread and a devout fear of him.
By discovering him from his infinite Benignity willing, and from his unlimited
Power only able to supply our needs, relieve us in distresses, protect us from
dangers, and confer any valuable benefit upon us, it engenders Faith, and
encourages us to rely upon him. By revealing to us his supereminent
Sovereignty, uncontrollable Dominion, and unquestionable Authority over us;
together with the admirable excellency, wisdom and equity of his Laws, so just
and reasonable in themselves, so suitable to our nature, so conducible to our
good, so easy and practicable, so sweet and comfortable; it powerfully
inclines, and by a gentle force as it were constrains us to obedience. By such
efficacious inducements Wisdom urges us to all duties of Religion, and withal
surely directs us (as I before said) wherein it consists; teaching us to have
right and worthy apprehensions of the Divine nature, to which our Devotion (if
true and good) must be suited and conformed: and so it frees us, as from
irreligion and profane neglect of God, so from fond superstitions, the sources
of so much evil to mankind. For he that wisely has considered the Wisdom,
Goodness and Power of God, cannot imagine God can with a regardless eye
overlook his presumptuous contempts of his Laws, or endure him to proceed in an
outrageous defiance of Heaven, to continue hurting himself, or injuring his
neighbor; nor can admit unreasonable terrors, or entertain suspicious
conceits of God, as of an imperious Master, or implacable Tyrant over him,
exacting impossible performances from, or delighting in the fatal miseries of
his Creatures; nor can suppose him pleased with hypocritical shows, and greatly
taken with superficial courtships of ceremonious address; or that he can in any
wise favor our fiery zeals, fierce passions, or unjust partialities about
matter of opinion and ceremony; or can do otherwise then detest all factious,
harsh, uncharitable and revengefull proceedings, of what nature, or upon what
ground soever; or that he can be so inconsistent with himself, as to approve
any thing but what is like himself, that is, Righteousness, Sincerity, and
Beneficence.

Lastly, Wisdom attracts the Favor of God, purchases a glorious Reward, and
secureth perpetual Felicity to us. For Wised. 7. 28.
God loves none but him that dwells with wisdom. And, Glorious is the fruit
of good 3. 15.
labor: and the root of wisdom shall never fall away. And, Happy is the man
Prove. 3. 13.
that sindeth wisdom: and, Whosoever finds 8. 35.
her, finds life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord. These are the words of
wise Solomon, in the Book of Wisdom, and in the Proverbs. God loves her, as
most agreeable to his nature; as resembling him; as an offspring, beam and
efflux of that Wisdom which founded the earth, and established the Heavens; as
that which begets honor, love, and obedience to his Commands, and truly
glorifies him; and as that which promotes the good of his Creatures, which he
earnestly desires. And the paths she leads in are such as directly tend to the
promised Inheritance of joy and bliss.

Thus have I simply and plainly presented you with part of what my meditation
suggested upon this Subject: It remains that we endeavor to obtain this
excellent endowment of Soul, by the faithful exercise of our Reason, careful
observation of things, diligent study of the Divine Law, watchful reflection
upon our selves, virtuous and religious practice; but especially, by imploring
the Divine influence, the original spring of light, and fountain of all true
knowledge, following S. James his advice, If any man lack wisdom, let him ask
it of God, who gives freely. Therefore, O everlasting Wisdom, the Maker,
Redeemer and Governor of all things, let some comfortable Beams from thy great
Body of heavenly Light descend upon us, to illuminate our dark minds, and
quicken our dead hearts; to inflame us with ardent love unto thee, and to
direct our steps in obedience to thy Laws, through the gloomy shades of this
world, into that region of eternal light and bliss, where thou reignest in
perfect Glory and Majesty, one God ever-Blessed, world without end.

Amen.
The Second Sermon.
1 TIMOTHY 4. 8. -- But Godliness is profitable for all things.
HOW generally men, with most unanimous consent, are devoted to Profit, as to
the immediate scope of their designs, and aim of their doings, if with the
slightest attention we view what is acted upon this Theater of humane affairs,
we cannot but discern. All that we see men so very Prove. 14. 23.
serious and industrious about, which we call business; that which they trudge
(...); Aristoph. Plut.
for in the Streets, which they work or wait for in the Shops, which they meet
and crowd for at the Exchange, which they sue for in the Hall, and solicit for
at the Court, which they plow and dig for, which they march and fight for in
the Field, which they travel for at Land, and sail for (among rocks and storms)
upon the Sea, which they plod for in the Closet, and dispute for in the
Schools, (yea, may we not add, which they frequently pray for, and preach for
in the Church?) what is it but Profit? Is it not this apparently for which men
so eagerly contest and quarrel, so bitterly envy and emulate, so fiercely
clamor and inveigh, so cunningly supplant and undermine one another; which
stuffeth their Hearts with mutual hatred and spite, which tippeth their Tongues
with slander and reproach, which often embrueth their Hands with blood and
slaughter; for which they expose their Lives and Lims to danger, for which they
undergo grievous Toils and Drudgeries, for which they distract their Mind with
Cares, and pierce their heart with sorrows; to which they sacrifice their
present Ease and Content, yea, to which commonly they prostitute their Honor
and Conscience? This, if you mark it, is the great Mistress, which is with so
passionate rivality everywhere woed and courted; this the common Mark which all
eyes aim, and all endeavors strike at; this the Hire which men demand for all
their Pains, the Prize they hope for all their Combats, the Harvest they seek
from all the year's assiduous Labor. This is the Bait, by which you may
inveigle most men any-whither; and the most certain sign, by which you may
prognosticate what any man will do: for mark where his Profit is, there will
he be. This some professedly and with open face, others slily and under thin
veils of pretense; (under guise of friendship, of love to public good, of
loyalty, of religious zeal;) some directly and in a plain track, others
obliquely and by subtle trains; some by sordid and base means, others Prima
fere vota, and cunctis notissima Templis,

Diviti ut creseant, etc. Juv. Sat. 10.


in ways more cleanly and plausible; some gravely and modestly, others wildly
and furiously; all (very few excepted) in one manner or another, do clearly in
most of their proceedings level and drive at.

This practice then being so general, Omnes ad affectum atque appetitum
utilitatis suae naturae ipsius ma^isterio atque impulsione ducuntur. Salv. ad
Eccl. Cath. 2.
(and seeing that men are reasonable creatures, that it is so cannot surely
proceed from mere brutishness, or dotage,) there must be some fair color or
semblance of reason, which draws men into, and carries them forward in this
way. The reason indeed is obvious and evident enough, the very name of Profit
implies it, signifying that which is useful, or conducible to purposes really
or seemingly good. The gain of money, or of somewhat equivalent thereto, is
therefore specially termed Profit, because it readily supplieth necessity,
furnishes convenience, feeds pleasure, satisfies fancy and curiosity,
promoteth ease and liberty, supporteth honor and dignity, procures power,
dependencies, and friendships, rendereth a man somebody, considerable in the
world; in fine, enableth to do good, or to perform works of beneficence and
charity. Profit is therefore so much affected and pursued, because it is, or
does seem, apt to procure or promote some good desirable to us.

If therefore a Project should be proposed to us very fecible and probable to
succeed, in pursuance whereof assuredly we might obtain great Profit; methinks,
in consistence with our selves, and conformably to our usual manner of acting,
we should be very ready to embrace and execute it. Such a Project it is which
in my Text, by a very trusty Voucher, and skillful Judge of such things, and
one who had himself fully experimented it, is proposed; which in it self is
very practicable, so that any of us may, if we have a mind to it, and will be
at the pains, thoroughly compass and carry it on; which will exceedingly turn to
account, and bring in Gains unto us unspeakably vast; in comparison whereto all
other designs, which men with so much care and toil do pursue, are very
unprofitable or detrimental, yielding but shadows of profit, or bringing real
damage to us.

It is briefly this, to be religious or pious; that is, in our minds steadfastly
to believe on God, (such as nature in some measure, and revelation more clearly
declares him,) in our hearts earnestly to love and reverence him, through all
our practice sincerely and diligently to observe his Laws. This is it which
Saint Paul affirms to be profitable for all things, and which it is my
intent, by God's help, to recommend unto you as such; demonstrating it really
to be so, by representing some of those numberless benefits and advantages
which accrue from it, extending to all conditions and capacities of men, to all
states, all seasons, and in effect to all affairs of life.

It has been ever a main obstruction to the practice of Piety, that it has
been taken for no friend, or rather for an enemy, to Profit; as both
unprofitable and prejudicial to its followers: and many semblances there are
countenancing that opinion. For Religion seems to smother or to slacken the
industry and alacrity of men in following Profit, many ways: by charging them
to be content with a little, and careful for nothing; by diverting their
affections and cares from worldly affairs to matters of another nature, place,
and time, prescribing in the first place to seek things spiritual, heavenly,
and future; by disparaging all secular wealth, as a thing, in comparison to
Virtue and spiritual goods, very mean and inconsiderable; by checking greedy
desires and aspiring thoughts after it; by debarring the most ready ways of
getting it, (violence, exaction, fraud, and flattery,) yea, streightning the
best ways, eager care and diligence; by commending strict Justice in all cases,
and always taking part with Conscience when it clasheth with Interest; by
paring away the largest uses of Wealth, in the prohibition of its free
enjoyment to pride or pleasure; by injoyning liberal communication thereof in
ways of charity and mercy; by engaging men to expose their goods sometimes to
imminent hazard, sometimes to certain loss; obliging them to forsake all
things, and to embrace Poverty for its sake.

It favors this conceit, to observe, that often bad men by impious courses
do appear to thrive and prosper; while good men seem for their goodness to
suffer, or to be no-wise visibly better for it, enduring much hardship and
distress.

It furthereth the prejudice, that some persons, void of true Piety, or
imperfectly good, (some Dabblers in Religion,) do not from their lame, slight
and superficial performances feel satisfactory returns, such as they did
presume to find; and thence, to the defamation of Piety, are apt to say, with
those men in the Prophet, It is vain to serve God, and what Mal. 3. 14.
profit is it that we have kept his ordinances, and that we have walked
mournfully before the Lord of hoasts? Yea, that sometimes very pious men, being
out of humor, and somewhat discomposed by the urgent pressures of affliction,
the disappointments and crosses incident to all men here in this region of
trouble, are apt to complain, and express themselves dissatisfied, saying with
Job, It profits Job 34. 9.
a man nothing, that he should delight himself with God. What advantage will it
be unto me, and what profit shall I have, if I 35. 3.
be cleansed from my sin? or, with David, Verily I have cleansed my heart in
Psalm. 73. 13, 14.
vain, and washed my hands in innocence: For all the day long I have been
plagued, and chastned every morning.

To these considerations, disadvantagious in this respect to Piety, may be
added, that the constant and certain profits emergent from it (although
incomparably more substantial, and to the mind more sensible then any other)
are not yet so gross and palpable, that men, who from being immersed in earth
and flesh are blind in error, dull of apprehension, vain and inconsiderate in
their judgments, tainted and vitiated in their palates, can discern their
worth, or relish their sweetness. Hence it is, that so many follow the judgment
and practice of those in Job, who say unto God, Depart Job 21. 14, 15.
from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. What is the Almighty,
that we should serve him? and what profit should we have if we pray unto him?

For voiding which prejudices, and the recommendation of S. Paul's project, I
shall (as I said) propose some of those innumerable advantages, by considering
which the immense profitableness of Piety will appear. And first, I shall
mention those Considerations which more plainly do import Universality; then
shall touch some Benefits thereof, seeming more particular, yet in effect
vastly large, and of a very diffusive influence.

1. First then we may consider, that Piety is exceeding useful for all sorts
of men, in all capacities, all states, all relations; fitting and disposing
them to manage all their respective concernments, to discharge all their
peculiar duties, in a proper, just and decent manner.

It renders all Superiors equal and moderate in their administrations; mild,
Ephesians. 6. 9.

Col. 4. 1.


courteous and affable in their converse; benign and condescensive in all their
demeanor toward their Inferiors.

Correspondently it disposes Inferiors Ephesians. 6. 5.

Col. 3. 22.

1 Pet. 2. 18.


to be sincere and faithful, modest, loving, respectfull, diligent, apt
willingly to yield due subjection and service.

It inclines Princes to be just, gentle, benign, careful for their Subjects
good, apt to administer Justice uprightly, to protect Right, to encourage
Virtue, to check Wickedness.

Answerably it renders Subjects loyal, submissive, obedient, quiet and
peaceable, Romans 13. 1.

Tit. 3. 1.

1 Pet. 2. 13.


ready to yield due Honor, to pay the Tributes and bear the Burdens imposed,
to discharge all Duties, and observe all Laws prescribed by their Governors
conscionably, patiently, cheerfully, without reluctance, grudging, or
murmuring. 1 Pet. 4. 9.

Phil. 2. 14.




It makes Parents loving, gentle, provident for their Childrens good
education, Ephesians. 6. 4.

Col. 3. 21.

1 Timothy 5. 8.

Ephesians. 6. 1.

Col. 3. 20.


and comfortable subsistence; Children again, dutiful, respectfull, grateful,
apt to requite their Parents.

Husbands from it become affectionate Ephesians. 5. 25.

Col. 3. 19.

1 Pet. 3. 7.

Ephesians. 5. 22.

Col. 3. 18.

Tit. 2. 5.

1 Pet. 3. 5.


and compliant to their Wives; Wives submissive and obedient to their Husbands.

It disposes Friends to be Friends indeed, full of cordial affection and good
will, entirely faithful, firmly constant, industriously careful and active in
performing all good offices mutually.

It engages men to be diligent in their Calling, faithful to their Trusts,
contented and peaceable in their Station, and thereby serviceable to Public
good.

It rendereth all men just and punctual Gal. 6. 2, 10.

Phil. 4. 8.

1 These 3. 12.

2 Cor. 9. 13.


in their Dealing, orderly and quiet in their Behavior, courteous and
complaisant in their Conversation, friendly and charitable upon all occasions,
apt to assist, to relieve, to comfort one another.

It tieth all Relations more fastly and strongly, assures and augmenteth all
Endearments, enforces and establishes all Obligations by the firm bands of
Conscience; set aside which, no Engagement can hold sure against temptations of
Interest, or Pleasure. Much difference there is between performing these Duties
out of natural temper, fear of punishment, hope of temporal reward, selfish
design, regard to credit, or other the like Principles, and the discharging
them out of religious Conscience: this alone will keep men tight, uniform,
resolute and stable; whereas all other Principles are loose and slippery, will
soon be shaken and faulter.

In consequence to those Practices springing from it, Piety removes
oppression, violence, faction, disorders and murmurings, out of the State;
schisms and scandals out of the Church; pride and haughtiness, sloth and
luxury, detraction and sycophantry, out of the Court; corruption and partiality
out of Judicatures; clamours and tumults out of the Street; brawlings, grudges
and jealousies out of Families; extortion and cozenage out of Trade; strifes,
emulations, slanderous backbitings, bitter and foul language, out of
Conversation: in all places, in all Societies it produces, it advances, it
establishes order, peace, safety, prosperity, all that is good, all that is
lovely or handsome, all that is convenient or pleasant for humane society, and
common life. It is that which (as the Wise man says) exalts Prove. 14. 34.
and 16. 12. and 20. 28. and 29. 14. and 8. 15. and 29. 8.
a nation; it is that which establishes a throne.

It is indeed the best prop and guard that can be of Government, and of the
Commonweal: for it settleth the Body politic in a sound constitution of
health, it firmly cementeth the parts thereof; it puts all things into a
right order, and steady course. It procures mutual respect and affection
between Governors and Subjects, whence arises safety, ease and pleasure to
both. It renders men truly good, (that is, just and honest, sober and
considerate, modest and peaceable,) and thence apt, without any constraint or
stir, to yield every one their due; not affected to needless change, not
disposed to raise any disturbance. It puts men in good humor, and keeps
them in it; whence things pass smoothly and pleasantly. It cherishes worth,
and encourages industry; whence Virtue flourishes, and Wealth is increased;
whence the occasions and means of disorder are stopped, the pretenses for
sedition and faction are cut off. In fine, it certainly procures the
benediction of God, the source of all welfare and prosperity: whence, When it
goes well Prove. 11. 10.
with the righteous, the city rejoices; and, When the righteous are in
authority, the Prove. 29. 2.
people rejoice, says the great Politician, Solomon.

It is therefore the concernment of all men, who (as the Psalmist speaks)
desire to live well, and would fain Psalm. 34. 12.

1 Pet. 3. 10.


see good days; it is the special interest of great Persons, (of the
Magistracy, the Nobility, the Gentry, of all persons that have any considerable
interest in the world,) who would safely and sweetly enjoy their dignity,
power, or wealth, by all means to protect and promote Piety, as the best
instrument of their security, and undisturbedly enjoying the accommodations of
their state. It Is in all respects their best wisdom and policy; that which
will as well preserve their outward state here, as satisfy their Consciences
within, and save their Souls hereafter. All the Machiavilian arts and tricks,
all the sleights and fetches of worldly craft do signify nothing, in
comparison to this one plain and easy way of securing and furthering their
Interests.

If then it be a gross absurdity to desire the fruits, and not to take care of
the root, not to cultivate the stock, whence they sprout; if every Prince
gladly would have his Subjects loyal and obedient, every Master would have his
Servants honest, diligent and observant, every Parent would have his Children
officious and grateful, every man would have his Friend faithful and kind,
every one would have those just and sincere with whom he does negotiate or
converse; if any one would choose to be related to such, and would esteem their
relation a happiness: then consequently should every man in reason strive to
further Piety, from whence alone those good dispositions and practices do
proceed.

II. Piety does fit a man for all conditions, qualifying him to pass through
them all with the best advantage, wisely, cheerfully and safely, so as to
incur no considerable harm or detriment by them.

Is a man prosperous, high, or wealthy in condition? Piety guardeth him from
all the mischiefs incident to that state, and disposes him to enjoy the best
advantages thereof. It keeps him from being swelled and puffed up with vain
conceit, from being transported with fond complacence or confidence therein;
minding him, that it is purely the gift of God, that it absolutely depends on
his disposal, so that it may soon be taken from him, and that he cannot
otherwise then by humility, by gratitude, by the good use of it, be secure to
retain it; minding him also, that he shall assuredly be forced to render a
strict account concerning the good management thereof. It preserves him from
being perverted or corrupted with the temptations to which that condition is
most liable; from luxury, from sloth, from stupidity, from forgetfulness of
God, and of himself; maintaining among the floods of plenty a sober and steady
mind. It fenceth him from insolence, and fastuous contempt of others; renders
him civil, condescensive, kind and helpful to those who are in a meaner state.
It instructs and inciteth him to apply his wealth and power to the best uses,
to the Service of God, to the benefit of his Neighbor, for his own best
reputation, and most solid comfort. It is the right balast of prosperity, the
only antidote for all the inconveniences of wealth; that which secureth,
sweetneth, and sanctifies all other goods: without it all apparent goods are
very noxious, or extremely dangerous; riches, power, honor, ease, pleasure,
are so many poisons, or so many snares, without it. Again, is a man poor and
low in the world? Piety does improve and sweeten even that state: it keeps
his spirits up above dejection, desperation, and disconsolateness; it freeth
him from all grievous solicitude and anxiety; showing him, that although he
seems to have little, yet he may be assured to want nothing, he having a
certain succor and never-failing supply from God's good Providence; that
notwithstanding the present streightness of his condition, or scantness of
outward things, he has a title to Goods infinitely more precious and more
considerable. A pious man cannot but apprehend himself like the Child of a most
wealthy, kind and careful Father, who although he has yet nothing in his own
possession, or passing under his name, yet is assured that he can never come
into any want of what is needful to him: the Lord of all things (who has all
things in Heaven and Earth at his disposal, who is infinitely tender of his
Childrens good, who does incessantly watch over them) being his gracious
Father, how can he fear to be left destitute, or not to be competently provided
for, as is truly best for him?

This is the difference between a pious, and an impious man. Is the pious man
in need? he has then an invisible refuge to fly to, an invisible store to
furnish him; he has somewhat beyond all present things to hope in, to comfort
himself with: whereas the impious person has nothing beside present
appearances to support or solace himself by; the which failing, down he sinketh
into dejection and despair. Is the good man in affliction? he knows that it
comes not on him without God's wise appointment, nor without good intention
toward him, for probation, exercise and improvement of his Virtues, or for
wholesome correction of his bad dispositions; that it is only Physic and
Discipline to him, which shall have a comfortable issue; that it shall last no
longer then it is expedient Scimus amicos Dei ab amantissimo, misericordissimo
Patre Deo mala ista poenalia recipere non ut poenam seu vindictam iracundiae,
sed magis ut correctiones and medicamenta stultitiae, and adjumenta virtutis,
ut malleationes, sive fabricationes, and tunsiones, sive ablutiones, and
candidationes. Guil. Par. de Sacram.
for him that it should: wherefore he patiently submits to it, and
undergoeth it cheerfully, with the same mind wherewith a Patient swalloweth
down an unsavory Potion, which he presumes will conduce to his Health. Never,
indeed, has any man enjoyed more real content, or has been more truly
satisfied, then good men have been in a seeming depth of adversity. What men
ever upon earth have been more sorely afflicted, have underwent greater losses,
disgraces, labors, (...). Eusebius. 5. 1. Mart. Lugd.
troubles, distresses in any kind, then did the H. Apostles? yet did they most
heartily rejoice, exult and triumph in them all. Such a wondrous virtue has
Piety to change all things into matter of consolation and joy. No condition in
effect can be evil or sad to a pious man: his very sorrows are pleasant, his
infirmities are wholesome, his wants enrich him, his disgraces adorn him, his
burdens ease him; his duties are privileges, his falls are the grounds of
advancement, his very sins (as breeding contrition, humility, circumspection
and vigilance) do better and profit him: whereas Impiety does spoil every
condition, does corrupt and embase all good things, does embitter all the
conveniences and comforts of life.

III. Piety does virtually comprise within it all other profits, serving all
the designs of them all: whatever kind of desirable good we can hope to find
from any other profit, we may be assured to enjoy from it.

He that has it is ipso facto vastly rich, is entitled to immense treasures of
most precious Wealth; in comparison whereto all the gold and all the jewels in
the world are mere baubles. He has interest in God, and can call him his, who
is the All, and in regard to whom all things existent are less then nothing.
The infinite Power and Wisdom of God belong to him, to be ever, upon all fit
occasions, employed for his benefit. All the inestimable treasures of Heaven (a
place infinitely more rich then the Indies) are his, after this moment of life,
to have and to hold for ever: so that great reason had the Wise man to say,
that In the house of the righteous is much treasure. Piety therefore is
profitable, Prove. 15. 6.
as immediately instating in wealth: and whereas the desired fruits of profit
are chiefly these, honor, power, pleasure, safety, liberty, ease, opportunity
of getting knowledge, means of benefitting others; all these we shall see do
abundantly accrue from Piety, and in truth only from it.

The Pious man is in truth most Honorable. Inter homines pro summo est
optimus, says Seneca; whom Solomon translateth thus, The righteous is more
excellent Sen. Ep. 90.
then his neighbor. He is dignified Prove. 12. 26.
by the most illustrious titles, a Son (...). Aristor. Eth. 3. 3.
of God, a Friend and Favorite to the Sovereign King of the World, an Heir of
Heaven, a Denizon of the Jerusalem above: Titles far surpassing all those which
worldly state does assume. He is approved by the best and most infallible
judgments, wherein true Honor resideth. He is respected by God himself, by the
H. Angels, by the blessed Saints, by all good and all wise persons; yea,
commonly, by all men: for the effects of genuine Piety are so venerable and
amiable, that scarce any man can do otherwise then in his heart much esteem
him Prove. 12. 8, 4.
that works them.

The Pious man is also the most potent man: he has a kind of omnipotency,
Tantum quantum vult potest, qui se nisi quod debet non putat p sse. Senec. Ep.
90.
because he can do whatever he will, that is, what he ought to do; and
because the Divine Power is ever ready to assist him in his pious enterprises,
so that He can do all things by Christ that strengthens him. He is able to
combat and vanquish him that is (...), the stout and might one; to wage war
with happy success against principalities and powers. He conquereth and
commands himself, which is the bravest victory, Prove. 16. 32. 25. 28.

Vide Sen. de Ben. 5. 7.


and noblest empire: he quelleth fleshly lusts, subdueth inordinate passions,
and repelleth strong temptations. He, by his faith, overcomes the world with a
conquest far more glorious then ever any Alexander or Caesar could do. He, in
sine, does perform the most worthy exploits, and deserves the most honorable
triumphs that man can do.

The Pious man also does enjoy the only true Pleasures; hearty, pure, solid,
durable Pleasures; such Pleasures as those of which the divine Psalmist
sings, In thy presence is fullness of joy, at Psalm. 16. 11.

Romans 15. 13.

Heb. 3. 6.

Phil. 4. 4.

Psalm. 43. 4.

Psalm. 112. 1. and 1. 2. and 119. 16, 24, 47, 70, 77, 92, 143, 111.

Psalm. 100. 2. and 21. 6. and 94. 19.

Isa. 29. 19.

Joh. 16. 20, etc.

1 Pet. 1. 8.

Romans 14. 17.


thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. That all joy in believing,
that gayety of hope, that incessant rejoicing in the Lord, and greatly
delighting in his Law, that continual feast of a good Conscience, that serving
the Lord with gladness, that exceeding gladness with God's countenance, that
comfort of the Holy Spirit, that joy unspeakable and full of glory; the
satisfaction resulting from the contemplation of Heavenly truth, from the sense
of God's favor, and the pardon of his sins, Quid enim jucundius, quam Dei
Patris and Domini reconciliatio, quam veritatis revelatio, quam errorum
recognitio, quam tot retro criminum venia? Quae major voluptas, quam faflidium
ipsius voluptatis, quam seculi totius contemptus, quam vera libertas, quam
conscientia integra, quam vita sufficiens, quam mortis timor nullus, etc?

Tert. de Spectac. 29.


from the influence of God's grace, from the hopes and anticipation of
everlasting bliss: these are Pleasures indeed, in comparison whereto all other
pleasures are no more then brutish sensualitys, sordid impurities, superficial
touches, transient flashes of delight; such as should be insipid and unsavory
to a rational appetite; such as are tinctured with sourness and bitterness,
have painful remorses or qualms consequent. All the Pious man's performances
of duty and of devotion are full of pure satisfaction and delight here, they
shall be rewarded with perfect and endless joy hereafter.

As for Safety, the Pious man has it most absolute and sure; he being guarded
by Almighty power and wisdom; resting under the shadow of God's wings; Psalm.
17. 8. and 36. 7. and 57. 1. and 61. 4. and 91. 4.

Psalm. 37. 24. and 119. 117.

Psalm. 37. 23, 31. and 119. 133.

Psalm. 66. 9.


God upholding him with his hand, ordering his steps, so that none of them
shall slide, holding his soul in life, and suffering not his feet to be moved;
he being, by the grace and mercy of God, secured from the assaults and
impressions of all enemies, from sin and guilt, from the Devil, world and
flesh, from death and hell, which are our most formidable, and in effect only
dangerous enemies.

As for Liberty, the Pious man most Psalm. 119. 45.
entirely and truly does enjoy that: he alone is free from captivity to that
cruel Tyrant, Satan, from the miserable slavery to Sin, from the grievous
dominion of lust and passion. He can do what he pleases, having a mind to do
only what is good and fit. The Law he observes is worthily called the perfect
law of liberty; the Lord he serves pretends Jam. 1. 25.
only to command freemen and friends: Ye are my friends, said he, if you do
whatever I command you; and, If the Joh. 15. 14.

Joh. 8. 36.

(...). Chrysostom. ad Theod.


Son set you free, then are you free indeed.

And for Ease, it is he only that knows it; having his mind exempted from the
distraction of care, from disorder of passion, from anguish of Conscience, from
the drudgeries and troubles of the world, from the vexations and disquiets
which sin produces. He finds it made good to him, which our Lord inviting
him did promise, Come unto me, all Matt. 11. 28.
ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest: he feels the
truth of those Divine assertions, Thou will keep Isa. 26. 3.
him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee; and, Great peace have they
which Ps. 119. 165.
love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them.

As for Knowledge, the Pious man alone does attain it considerably, so as to
become truly wise, and learned to purpose. Evil men (says the Wise man
himself, who knew well,) understand Prove. 28. 5, 7.
not judgment: but they that seek the Lord understand all things. It is the
Pious man that employeth his mind upon the most proper and worthy objects, that
knows things which certainly best deserve to be known, that has his Soul
enriched with the choicest notions: he skilleth to aim at the best ends, and to
compass them by the fittest means; he can assign to each thing its due worth
and value; he can prosecute things by the best methods, and order his affairs
in the best manner: so that he is sure not to be defeated or disappointed in
his endeavors, nor to mis-spend his care and pains without answerable fruit.
He has the best Master to instruct him in his studies, and the best rules to
direct him in his proceedings: he cannot be mistaken, seeing in his judgment
and choice of things he conspireth with infallible Wisdom. Therefore (...),
Trismeg.
the pious man is the exquisite philosopher. The fear of the Lord Job 28. 28.
that is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding. The fear of the
Lord Prove. 9. 10. 1. 7.

Ps. 111. 10.


(as is said again and again in Scripture) is the head (or top) of wisdom. A
good Ps. 119. 34, 99, 104, 130.
understanding have all they that keep his commandments.

Farther, the Pious man is enabled and disposed (has the power and the heart)
most to benefit and oblige others. He does it by his succor and assistence,
by his instruction and advice, which he is ever ready to yield to any man upon
fit occasion: he does it by the direction and encouragement of his good
Example: he does it by his constant and earnest Prayers for all men: he does
it by drawing down Blessings from Heaven on the place where he resideth. He is
upon all accounts the most true, the most common benefactour to mankind; all
his neighbors, his Country, the World are in some way or other obliged to him:
at least, he does all the good he can, and in wish does benefit all men.

Thus all the fruits and consequences of Profit, the which engage men so
eagerly to pursue it, do in the best kind and highest degree result from Piety,
and, indeed, only from it. All the Philosophical Bravado's concerning a Wise
man being only rich, only honorable, only happy, only above fortune, are
verified in the Pious man: to him alone, as such, with a sure foundation,
without vanity, with evident reason those Aphorisms may be applied. They are
Paradoxes and fictions abstracting from Religion, or considering men only
under the light and power of nature: but supposing our Religion true, a good
Christian soberly, without arrogance, in proportion and according to the
measure of his Piety, may assume them to himself, as the H. Apostles did; I
posses all things, I can do all things, he may in a sort say after S. Paul.

As for all other Profits, secluding it, they are but imaginary and
counterfeit, Sen. Ep. 59.
mere shadows and illusions, yielding only painted shows in stead of
substantial fruit.

If from bare worldly wealth (that which usurpeth the name of Profit here) a
man seeks Honor, he is deluded, for he is not thereby truly honorable; he
is but a shining Earth-worm, a welltrapped Ass, a gaudy Statue, a theatrical
Grandee: with God, who judges most rightly, he is mean and despicable; no
intelligent person can inwardly respect him. Even here (in this World of
fallacy and dotage) the wisest and soberest men, whose judgment usually does
sway that of others, cannot but contemn him, as Master of no real good, nor fit
for any good purpose; as seeing that in the end he will prove most beggarly and
wretched.

If a man affects Power thence, he is grievously mistaken; for, in stead
thereof, he proves exceedingly feeble and impotent, able to perform nothing
worthy a man, subject to fond humors and passions, servant to diverse lusts and
pleasures, captivated by the Devil at his pleasure, overborn by temptation,
hurried by the stream of the World, and liable to the strokes of fortune.

If he propounds to himself thence the enjoyment of Pleasure, he will also
much fail therein: for in lieu thereof he shall find care and trouble,
surfeiting and disease, wearisome satiety and bitter regret; being void of all
true delight in his mind, and satisfaction in his Conscience; nothing here
being able to furnish solid and stable pleasure.

If he fansieth Safety, he deludeth himself: for how can he be safe, who is
destitute of God's protection and succor; who is the object of Divine wrath
and vengeance; who is assailed by many fierce and powerful enemies; whom the
roaring Lion is ready to devour; whom Death and sudden destruction are 1 Thessalonians.
5. 3.

Prove. 10. 29.


coming to seize upon; whom Guilt threatens, and Hell gapeth for; who without
any guard or fence stands exposed to such imminent, such horrid and ghastly
dangers?

If he thirst for Liberty, he will be frustrated: for he can be no otherwise
then a slave, while he continues impious; servus tot dominorum, quot vitiorum,
August.
a slave to so many masters as he keeps vices; a slave to himself, and his
own Prove. 25. 28.
lusts; carrying about with him the fetters of unsatiable desire, being
hampered with inconsistent and irregular affections.

Ease he cannot obtain, being oppressed with unwieldy burdens of sin, of care,
of trouble; being tossed with restless agitations of lust and passion; being
like the troubled sea, which cannot rest, Isa. 57. 20.
whose waters cast up mire and dirt.

If he means to get Wisdom, he is out; for Wisdom and Impiety are
incompatible things. All his knowledge is vain, all his speculations are no
better then dreams, seeing he erreth in the main point, and is not wise to
salvation.

He is, in fine, extremely mistaken, and in all his projects will be lamentably
disappointed, whoever fansieth any true profit without Piety: he never can
attain to be so much as wealthy; but drudge and plod what he can, must be a
beggar, and a forlorn wretch. For how can he be any wise rich, who does want
all the best things, the only valuable things in the world, which any man may
have, which any good man does possess? How can he be rich, who is destitute of
the most needful accommodations of life; who constantly feeds on the
coursest and most sordid fare, (the dust of pelf, the dung of sensuality;) who
has no faithful or constant friends; (nothing earthly can be such;) who is
master of nothing but dirt, or chafe, or smoke? Whereas also Riches do
consist, not in what one enjoys at present, (for that can be little) but in a
presumed ability to enjoy afterward what he may come to need or desire; or in
wellgrounded hopes that he shall never fall into want or distress. How can that
man be rich, who has not any confidence in God, any interest in him, any
reason to expect his Blessing? yea, who has much ground to fear the
displeasure of him, in whose hand all things are, and who arbitrarily disposes
of all? Piety therefore is the only profitable thing, according to just
esteem. She is more Prove. 3. 15.
precious then rubies, and all the things we can desire are not to be compared
to her. Upon this account it is most true, what the Psalmist affirms, A
little that the Psalm. 37. 16.
righteous has, is better then great riches of the ungodly.

IV. That Commendation is not to be omitted which is nearest at hand, and
suggested by S. Paul himself to back this assertion concerning the universal
profitableness of Piety; For (says he) it has the promise of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come: that is, God has promised to reward it
with Blessings appertaining to this mortal life, and with those which concern
the future eternal state.

As for the Blessings of this life, although God has not promised to load the
godly man with affluence of worldly things, not to put him into a splendid and
pompous garb, not to dispense to him that which may serve for pampering the
flesh, or gratifying wanton fancy, not to exempt him from all the
inconveniences to which humane nature and this worldly state are subject; yet
has he promised to furnish him with whatever is needful or convenient for
him, in due measure and season, the which he does best understand. There is no
good thing which a man naturally desires, or reasonably can wish for, which is
not in express terms proposed as a reward, or a result of Piety.

In general, it i^s declared, that Blessings are upon the head of the just;
that, Prove. 10. 6.

Deuteronomy. 28. 8. 30. 9.

Psalm. 84. 11.


No good thing God will hold from them that walk uprightly; that, whatever
otherwise does fall out, it assuredly shall be Eccles 8. 12.

Isa. 3. 10.

Ps. 128. 1, 2.

(Prove. 8. 35.)


well with them that fear God; that, Blessed is every one that fears the
Lord, that walks in his ways: -- happy shall thou be, and it shall be well
with thee; that, There shall no evil happen to the just; Prove. 12. 21.
that, All things work together for good to Romans 8. 28.
them that love God.

Particularly, there are promised to the Pious man,

A Supply of all Wants. The Lord will not suffer the soul of the righteous of
famish. Prove. 10. 3.
The righteous eats to the satisfying of his soul. There is no want to them
Prove. 13. 29.
that fear God. The young Lions do lack, Ps. 34. 9, 10. and 33. 19. and 37. 3,
19.
and suffer hunger; but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing.

A Protection in all Dangers. The eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him,
Psalm. 33. 18. and 34. 20. and 112. 7. and 37. 28.
upon them that hope in his mercy; to deliver their soul from death, and to
keep them alive in famine. There shall no evil Ps. 91. 10, 11.
befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling: He shall give
his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways.

Guidance in all his Undertakings and proceedings. The steps (...) good man are
Ps. 37. 23, etc.
ordered by the Lord -- none of his steps shall slide. -- In all thy ways
acknowledge Prove. 3. 6.

(Prove. 11. 3, 5. and 16. 3.)


him, and he shall direct thy path.

Success and prosperity in his Designs Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also
Psalm. 37. 5.
in him, and he shall bring it to pass. -- Whatsoever he does, it shall
prosper. -- Thou shall decree a thing, and it shall Psalm. 1. 3.
be established; and the light shall shine Joh 22. 28.
upon thy ways. The Lord shall command Deuteronomy. 28. 8, 12.
a blessing upon thee in thy storehouses, and in all that thou set thine
hand unto. Thine expectation shall not be cut off. Prove. 23. 18.


Comfortable enjoying the fruits of his industry. -- Thou shall eat the labor
Psalm. 128. 2.
of thine hands. --

Satisfaction of all reasonable Desires. The desire of the righteous shall be
granted. Prove. 10. 24.
Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall Psalm. 37. 4.
give thee the desires of thine heart. He Psalm. 145. 19.
will fulfill the desire of them that fear him; he will hear their cry, and
will save them.

Firm Peace and quiet. The work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect
Isa. 32. 17.
of righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever. Great peace have they
which Ps. 119. 165.
love thy Law. The fruit of righteousness Jam. 3. 18.
is sowed in peace.

Joy and alacrity. Light is sown for Psalm. 97. 11.
the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart. In the transgression of
an evil Prove. 29. 6.
man there is a snare: but the righteous does sing and rejoice.

Support and comfort in afflictions. He heals the broken in heart, and
binds Psalm. 147. 3.
up their wounds. Be of good courage, Psalm. 31. 24. 27. 14.
and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the Lord.

Deliverance from trouble. Many are the afflictions of the righteous, but the
Psalm. 34 19.
Lord delivers him out of all. He keeps all his bones, not one of them is
broken. Psalm. 37. 39.


Preservation and recovery from mishaps, or miscarriages. Though he fall, he
shall not be utterly cast down: for the Psalm. 37. 24.
Lord upholdeth him with his hand.

Preferment of all sorts, to honor and dignity, to wealth and prosperity. Wait
upon the Lord, and keep his way; and he shall exalt thee to inherit the land.
Psalm. 37. 34.
By humility and fear of the Lord are riches and honor. Blessed is the man
that Prove. 22. 4.
fears the Lord -- wealth and riches are Ps. 112. 1, 3.
in his house. The upright shall have good Prove. 28. 10.

(Job 36. 7.)

Job 36. 11.


things in possession. If they obey and serve him, they shall spend their days
in prosperity, and their years in pleasure. The tabernacle of the righteous
shall flourish. Prove. 14. 11.


Long life. The fear of the Lord prolongeth Prove. 10. 27. 9. 11.
days. By me thy days shall be multiplied, and the years of thy life shall be
increased. Let thine heart keep my commandments: Prove. 3. 1, 2, 16.
For length of days, and long life, and peace shall they add unto thee.

A Good name enduring after death. The memory of the just is blessed. Prove. 10.
7, 25.

Psalm. 37. 26. 112. 2.

(Exo. 20. 6.)

Prove. 12. 3.




Blessings entailed on posterity. His seed-shall be mighty upon earth; the
generation of the upright shall be blessed. The root of the righteous shall not
be moved.

Thus is a liberal dispensation even of temporal goods annexed by God's
infallible Word unto the practice of Piety. It is indeed more frequently,
abundantly and explicitly promised unto God's ancient People, as being a
conditional ingredient of the Covenant made with them, exhibited in that as a
recompense Prove. 11. 31.

Deuteronomy. 28. 1. and 7. 12. and 11. 13.


to their external performance of Religious works prescribed in their Law. The
Gospel does not so clearly propound it, or so much insist upon it, as not
principally belonging to the Evangelical Covenant, the which, in reward to the
performance of its conditions by us, peculiarly does offer Blessings Spiritual,
and relating to the future state; as also 2 Cor. 4. 17.

Romans 8. 18.


scarce deserving to be mentioned in comparison to those superior Blessings.
Yet as the celestial Benefits, although not openly tendered in the Jewish Law,
were yet mystically couched therein, and closely designed for the spiritual and
hearty Practisers of Religion; so is the collation of temporal accommodations
to be understood to belong to all pious Christians: there is a Codicill (as it
were) annexed to the New Testament, in the which God signifies his intention
to furnish his Children with all that is needful or convenient for them. His
Providence has not ceased to watch over us, his Bounty does not fail toward us
even in this respect; his Care will not be wanting to feed us and cloth us
comfortably, to protect us from evil, to prosper our good undertakings. Hence
does he command us to care for nothing, but to cast our care upon him, to
recommend our business to him, 1 Pet. 5. 7.

Phil. 4. 6.

Heb. 13. 5.

Matt. 6. 25.


because he cares for us, he will never forsake us; he will hear our Prayers,
and help us. Hence we are enjoined not to 1 Timothy 6. 17.


trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly all
things to enjoy. Hence it is said, that The divine 2 Pet. 1. 3.
power has given us all things pertaining unto life and godliness, through the
knowledge of him that has called us to glory and virtue. Hence it is promised
by our Lord, that If we seek first the Kingdom Matt. 6. 33.
of God, all things shall be added to us. Hence it is inferred as consequential
to the nature of the Evangelical dispensation, that we cannot want any good
thing; He (says S. Paul) that spared Romans 8. 32.
not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him
also freely give us all things? In fine, hence it is proposed as notorious,
that nothing is permitted to fall out otherwise then as conduces to our good.
We know (says Romans 8. 28.
S. Paul) that all things work together for good unto those that love God: Nor
will 1 Cor. 10. 13.
God, in any case, suffer us to be tempted, by any want or pressure, beyond
what we are able to bear. Thus is Piety evidently profitable, as having the
promises of this life, or exhibiting all temporal blessings desirable to the
practisers thereof.

But infinitely more profitable it is as having the promises of the future
life, or as procuring a title to those incomparably-more-excellent Blessings of
the other world; those indefectible treasures; that incorruptible, undefiled,
and neverfading Luke 12. 33.
inheritance, reserved in heaven for 1 Pet. 1. 4.
us; that exceeding weight of glory; those 2 Cor. 4. 17.
ineffable joys of Paradise; that lightsome 1 Pet. 1. 8.
Countenance and beatifying Presence 4. 13.
of God; that unconceivably and unexpressably joyful, glorious, perfect and
endless Bliss; briefly, all that is comprised and intimated in those words of
the Apostle, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the
heart of man 1 Cor. 2. 9.
the things which God has prepared for them that love him. Infinitely
profitable surely must that be which procures those things for us: and in
these respects great reason had S. Paul to say, that Godliness is profitable
for all things.

But farther to evidence and recommend this point, I might propound certain
peculiar Advantages arising from Piety, which have a very general influence
upon our lives, and do afford unto them exceeding benefit: but this I must, in
regard to the time and your patience, at present forbear.

The Third Sermon.
1 TIMOTHY 4. 8. -- But Godliness is profitable for all things.
IN discoursing formerly upon these words, I did propound diverse general
Considerations, serving to confirm and recommend this Assertion of S. Paul. I
shall now insist upon some others more particular, which yet seem much
conducible to the same purpose, declaring the vast Utility of Religion or Piety.

I. We may consider that Religion does prescribe the truest and best Rules of
action; thence enlightening our mind, and rectifying our practice in all
matters, and upon all occasions, so that whatever is performed according to it
is done well and wisely, with a comely grace in regard to others, with a
cheerful satisfaction in our own mind, with the best assurance, that things
are here capable of, to find happy success and beneficial fruit.

Of all things in the world there is nothing more generally profitable then
Light: by it we converse with the world, and have all things set before us; by
it we truly and easily discern things in their right magnitude, shape, and
color; by it we guide our steps safely in prosecution of what is good, and
shunning what is noxious; by it our spirits are comfortably warmed and cheared,
our life consequently, our health, our vigor and activity are preserved. The
like benefits does Religion, which is the Light of our Soul, yield to it. Pious
men are children of Luke 16. 8.

Ephesians. 5. 8.

1 Thessalonians. 5. 5.

Joh. 12. 36.

Matt. 5. 16.

Ephesians. 5. 11.

Ps. 119. 105.


the light; Pious works are works of light shining before men. God's word (or
true Religion) is a lamp unto our feet, and a light unto our path; enabling us
to perceive things, and judge rightly of them; teaching us to walk stfaightly
and surely, without erring or stumbling; qualifying us to embrace what is
useful, and to avoid hurtful things; preserving our spiritual life, and
disposing us to act well with a vigorous alacrity: without it a man is stark
blind, and utterly benighted, gropeth in doubt, wandreth Isa. 59. 10.
in mistake, trippeth upon all occasions, Job 5. 14.
and often falls into mischief: Deuteronomy. 28. 29.
The path of the just (says the Wise man) Prove. 4. 18, 19.
is as the shining light -- The way of the wicked is as darkness, they know not
at what they stumble. Righteousness keeps Prove. 13. 6. and 11. 3, 5.
him that is upright in the way; but wickedness overthrows the sinner.

Again, it is a fair ornament of a man, and a grand convenience both to
himself, and to others with whom he converseth or deals, to act regularly,
uniformly, and consistently; freeing a man's self from distraction and
irresolution in his mind, from change and confusion in his proceedings;
securing others from delusion and disappointment in their transactions with
him. Vid ennti aliquid extremum est; error immensus est. Sen. Ep. 16.
Even a bad rule constantly observed is therefore better then none: order and
perseverance in any way seems more convenient, then roving and tossing about
in uncertainties. But secluding a regard to the Precepts of Religion, there can
hardly be any sure or settled rule, which firmly can engage a man to, or
effectually restrain a man from any thing.

There is scarce in nature any thing so wild, so intractable, so
unintelligible, as a man who has no bridle of Conscience to guide or check
him. A profane man is like a Ship, without Anchor to stay him, or Rudder to
steer him, or Compass to guide him; so that he is tossed with any wind, and
driven with any wave none knows whither; whither bodily temper does sway him,
or passion does hurry him, or interest does pull him, or example leads him,
or company inveigleth and haleth him, or humor transporteth him; whither any
such variable and unaccountable causes determine him, or diverse of them
together distract him: whence he so rambleth and hovereth, that he can seldom
himself tell what in any case he should do, nor can another guess it; so that
you cannot at any time know where to find him, or how to deal with him; you
cannot with reason ever rely upon him, so unstable he is in all his ways. He is
in effect a mere Child, all humor and giddiness, somewhat worse then a Beast,
which, following the instinct of its nature, is constant and regular, and
thence tractable; or at least so untractable, that no man will be deceived in
meddling with him.

Nothing therefore can be more unmanly then such a person, nothing can be Nihil
est tam occupatum, tam multiforme, tot ac tam variis affectibus concisum atque
laceratum, quam mala men's. Quint. 12. 1.
more unpleasant then to have to do with him.

But a Pious man, being steddily governed by Conscience, and a regard to (...).
--

Arist. Eth. 9. 6.


certain Principles, does both understand himself, and is intelligible to
others: he presently descrieth what in any case he is to do, and can render an
account of his acting: you may know him clearly, and assuredly tell what he
will do, and may therefore fully confide in him.

What therefore Law and Government are to the public, things necessary to
preserve the world in order, peace and safety, (that men may know what to do,
and distinguish what is their own,) that is Piety to each man's private state,
and to ordinary conversation: it freeth a man's own life from disorder and
distraction; it prompteth men how to behave themselves toward one another with
security and confidence.

This it does by confining our practice within settled bounds: but this
advantage appears greater, considering that the Rules which it prescribes
are the best that can be. Such they must needs be, as proceeding from
infallible Wisdom and immense Goodness; being indeed no other then Laws which
the All-wise and most gracious Lord and Maker of the world, out of tender
kindness to his subjects and creatures, with especial regard to our welfare,
has been pleased to enact and declare. What of old he said to the Israelites,
concerning their Laws, may with greater advantage be applied to those which
should regulate our lives; And now, Israel, what Deuteronomy. 10. 12, 13.
does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk
in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and all thy soul; To keep the Commandments of the Lord, and his
Statutes, which I command thee this day for thy good? (For thy good, that was
the design of their being commanded, thereto the observance of them did tend.)
And that commendation which by the Levites in Nehemiah is given to that, does
more clearly and fully agree to the Christian (general and perfect)
institution: Thou came down from Mount Sinai, and spakest Neh. 9. 13.
with them from heaven, and gave them right judgments, and true laws, good
statutes and commandments. And, The Law (says the Apostle Paul) is holy, the
commandment is holy, just, and Romans 7. 12.
good: as such it is recommended to us by its Author, so we Christians are by
many great Arguments assured that it is, and that it is such even our natural
reason dictateth; so (as to the chief instances thereof) the most wise and
sober men always have acknowledged, so the general consent does avow, and so
even common experience does attest. For, heartily to love and reverence the
Maker of all things, who by every thing apparent before us demonstrateth
himself incomprehensibly powerful, wise, and good, to be kind and charitable
to our neighbors, to be just and faithful in our dealings, to be sober and
modest in our minds, to be meek and gentle in our demeanours, to be staunch and
temperate in our enjoyments, and the like principal rules of duty, are such,
that the common reason of men and continual experience do approve them, as
hugely conducible to the public good of men, and to each man's private
welfare. So notoriously beneficial they appear, that for the justification of
them we might appeal even to the judgment and conscience of those persons who
are most concerned to derogate from them. For hardly can any man be so
senseless or so lewd, as seriously to disapprove or condemn them, as inwardly
to blame or slight those who truly act according to them. The will of men
sometimes may be so depraved, that dissolute persons wantonly and heedlesly may
scoff at, and seem to disparage goodness; that good men by very bad men for
doing well may be envied and hated: (their being so treated is commonly an
argument of the goodness of their persons and of their ways:) but the
Understanding of men can hardly be so corrupted, that Piety, Charity, Justice,
Temperance, Meekness can in good earnest considerately by any man be
disallowed, or that persons apparently practicing them can be despised; but
rather, in spite of all contrary prejudices and disaffections, such things and
such persons cannot but in judgment and heart be esteemed by all men. The
luster of them by a natural and necessary efficacy (like that of Heaven's
glorious light) dazzleth the sight, and charmeth the spirits of all men living;
the beauty of them irresistibly conquereth and commands in the apprehensions
of men: the more they are observed, the more useful and needful they appear
for the good of men; all the fruits which grow from the observance of them
being to all men's taste very pleasant, to all men's experience very wholesome.
Indeed, all the good whereby common life is adorned, is sweetened, is rendered
pleasant and desirable, does spring thence; all the mischiefs which infest
particular men, and which disturb the world, palpably do arise from the
transgression or neglect thereof.

If we look on a person sticking to those Rules, we shall perceive him to have
a cheerful mind and composed passions, to be at peace within and satisfied
with himself; to live in comely order, in good repute, in fair correspondence
and firm concord with his neighbors. If we mark what preserves the body sound
and lusty, what keeps the mind vigorous and brisk, what saves and improveth
the estate, what upholdeth the good name, what guardeth and graceth a man's
whole life; it is nothing else but proceeding in our demeanor and dealings
according to the honest and wise Rules of Piety. If we view a place where these
commonly in good measure are observed, we shall discern, that Peace and
Prosperity do flourish there; that all things proceed on sweetly and fairly;
that men generally drive on conversation and commerce together contentedly,
delightfully, advantageously, yielding friendly advice and aid mutually,
striving to render one another happy; that few clamours or complaints are heard
there, few contentions or stirs do appear, few disasters or tragedies do
occur; that such a place has indeed much of the face, much of the substance
of Paradise.

But if you mind a person who neglects them, you will find his mind galled
with sore remorse, racked with anxious fears and doubts, agitated with storms
of passion and lust, living in disorder and disgrace, jarring with others, and
no less dissatisfied with himself. If you observe what does impair the health,
does weaken and fret the mind, does waste the estate, does blemish the
reputation, does expose the whole life to danger and trouble; what is it but
thwarting these good Rules? If you consider a place where these are much
neglected, it will appear like a wilderness of savage Beasts, or a sty of foul
Swine, or a hell of cursed Fiends; full of roaring and tearing, of factions and
fewds, of distractions and confusions, of pitiful objects, of doleful moans,
of tragical events. Men are there wallowing in filth, wildly revelling,
bickering and squabbling, defaming, circumventing, disturbing and vexing one
another; as if they affected nothing more then to render one another as
miserable as they can. It is from lust and luxury, from ambition and avarice,
from envy and spite, and the like dispositions, which Religion chiefly does
interdict, that all such horrid mischiefs do spring.

In fine, the Precepts of Religion are no other, then such as Physicians would
prescribe for the health of our Bodies, as Politicians would avow needful for
the peace of the State, as Epicurean Philosophers do recommend for the
tranquillity of our Mind, and pleasure of our lives; such as common reason
dictateth, and daily trial shows conducible to our welfare in all respects:
which consequently, were there no law exacting them of us, we should in wisdom
choose to observe, and voluntarily impose on our selves, confessing them to be
fit matters of law, as most advantageous and requisite to the good (general and
particular) of mankind. So that what Plutarch reports Solon to have said,
Plut. in Sol.
that he had so squared his Laws to the Citizens, that all of them might
clearly perceive, that to observe them was more for their benefit and interest,
then to violate them, is far more true concerning the Divine Laws.

II. We may consider more particularly, that Piety yields to the practiser
all kind of interior Content, Peace, and Joy; freeth him from all kinds of
dissatisfaction, regret, and disquiet; which is an inestimably-great advantage:
for certainly the Happiness and Misery of men are wholly or chiefly seated and
founded in the Mind. If that is in a good state of health, rest and
cheerfulness, whatever the person's outward condition or circumstances be, he
cannot be wretched: if that be distempered or disturbed, he cannot be happy.
For what if a man seem very poor; if he be abundantly satisfied in his own
possessions and enjoyments? What if he tastes not the pleasures of sense; if
he enjoys purer and sweeter delights of mind? What if tempests of fortune
surround him; if his mind be calm and serene? What if he have few or no
friends; if he yet be thoroughly in peace and amity with himself, and can
delightfully converse with his own thoughts? What if men slight, censure, or
revile him; if he does value his own state, does approve his own actions, does
acquit himself of blame in his own conscience? Such external contingencies can
surely no more prejudice a man's real Happiness, then winds blustering abroad
can harm or trouble him that abides in a good room within doors, then storms
and fluctuations at sea can molest him who stands firm upon the shore. On the
other hand, the greatest affluence of seeming goods will avail nothing, if real
content of mind be wanting. For what will the highest eminence of outward state
import to him that is dejected in his own conceit? What if the world court and
bless him, or if all people do admire and applaud him; if he be displeased
with, if he condemns, Prove. 18. 4.
if he despises himself? What if the weather look fair and bright without, if
storms rage in his breast, if black clouds do overcast his Soul? What if he do
abound with friends, and enjoy peace abroad; if he find distraction Chrysoft.
in Romans 1. Or. 1. (...).
at home, and is at cruel variance with himself? How can a man enjoy any
satisfaction, or relish any pleasure, while sore remorse does sting him, or
solicitous doubts and fears do rack him?

Now that from the practice of Religion, and from it alone, such inward content
and pleasure do spring; that it only ministers reason of content, and
disposes the mind to enjoy it; that it extirpateth the grounds and roots of
discontent; that it is the only mother of true, sober alacrity and
tranquillity of mind, will, upon considering things, be manifest.

There is no other thing here in this world that can yield any solid or stable
content to our mind. For all present enjoyments are transient and evanid; and
of any future thing, in this kingdom Prove. 27. 24.
of change and contingency, there can be no assurance. There is nothing below
large enough to fill our vast capacities, or to satiate our boundless desires,
Prove. 27. 20.
or to appease our squeamish delicacy. There is nothing whose sweetness we do
not presently exhaust and suck dry; whereof thence we do not soon grow weary,
quite loathing, or faintly liking it. There is not any thing which is not
slippery and fleeting; so that we can for a long time hope to possess it, or
for any time can enjoy it, without restless care in keeping it, and anxious
fear of losing it. Nothing there is, in the pursuance, the custody, the defense
and maintenance whereof we are not liable to disappointments and crosses.
Nothing consequently there is productive of any sound content to the
fastidious, impatient, greedy and restless heart of man. The greatest
confluence of present, corporeal, secular things (of all the health, the
riches, the dignity, the power, the friendships and dependences, the wit, the
learning and wisdom, the reputation and renown in this world) will not afford
much of it: which yet is but an imaginary supposition; for in effect hardly do
all such accommodations of life concur in any state. There is ever some dead
fly in our Eccles 10. 1.
box, which marreth our ointment; some adherent inconvenience, which soureth
the gust of our enjoyments: there is always some good thing absent, which we do
want or long for; some ill thing present, or in prospect, which we abhor,
would avoid, do fear may come. If therefore we would find content, we must not
seek it here; we must want it, or have it from another world: it must come
hither from Heaven, and thence only Piety can fetch it down. This, in stead of
these unsatisfying, uncertain and unstable things, supplieth us with goods
adequate to our most outstretched wishes, infallibly sure, incessantly durable;
an indefectible treasure, an incorruptible (...).
inheritance, an unshakable Kingdom, a perfect and endless joy, capable to
replenish the vastest heart: which he that has a good title to, or a confident
hope of, how can he be otherwise then extremely pleased, then fully content? It
assures the favor and friendship of God, of him that is absolute Lord and
disposer of all things: the which he that has, and confideth in, what can he
want or wish more? what can he fear? what can annoy or dismay him? what can hap
to him worthy to be deemed evil or sad? What is Poverty to him, for whom God is
concerned to provide? What is Disgrace to him, that has the regard and
approbation of God? What is Danger to him, whom God continually protecteth?
What can any Distress work on him, whom God does comfort, and will relieve?
What is any thing to him, who is sensible that all things are purposely
disposed to him by that Wisdom which perfectly knows what is best, by that
Goodness which entirely loves him? In fine, he that is conscious to himself of
being well-affected in mind, and acting the best way, who is satisfied in the
state of his Soul, secure from God's displeasure, and hopeful of his favor,
what can make any grievous impression on him? What other affections then such
as are most grateful and pleasant can lodge in his Soul? Joy and Peace have
natural seeds in such a mind, and necessarily must spring up there: (in
proportion, I mean, and according to the degrees of Piety resident therein.)

The Epicureans did conceit and boast, that having by their Atheistical
explications of natural effects, and common events here, discarded the belief
and dread of Religion, they had laid a strong foundation for tranquillity of
mind, had driven away all the causes of grief and fear, so that nothing then
remained troublesome or terrible unto us; and consequently, What, said they,
could forbid, but that we should be entirely contented, glad and happy? -- Nos
exaequat victoria coelo; No God then surely could be more happy then we. But
their attempt in many respects was vain and lame. They presumed of a victory
which it is impossible to obtain: and supposing they had got it, their triumph
would not have been so glorious, their success would not have been so great, as
they pretended. For seeing no Epicurean Discourse can baffle the potent
arguments which persuade Religion; (those arguments which the visible
constitution of Nature, the current Tradition of all Ages, the general Consent
of men, the pregnant attestations of History and Experience concerning
supernatural and miraculous events do afford;) since the Being and Providence
of God have proofs so clear and valid, that no subtlety of man can so far evade
them, as not to be shaken with them, as wholly to be freed from doubt and
suspicion of their truth; since there can be no means of evincing the negative
part in those questions to be true or probable; it is impossible that any
considering man, in this cause against Religion, should suppose himself to have
acquired an absolute and secure victory; or that he should reap substantial
fruit of comfort thence. It cannot be, that any man should enjoy any perfect
quiet, without acting so as to get some good hope of avoiding those dreadful
mischiefs which Religion threatens to the transgressors of its Precepts. Were
there indeed but reason enough to stir, if not to stagger, an Infidel; were it
somewhat dubious whether, yea, were it great odds that there are not reserved
any punishments for impiety, as indeed there is, if not the perfectest
assurance imaginable, yet vast advantage on the contrary side; were there but
any small reason for a Judgment to come, as there are apparently very many and
great ones; had most men conspired in denying Providence, as ever generally
they have consented in avowing it; were there a pretense of miracles for
establishing the Mortality and Impunity of Souls, as there have been
numberless, strongly testified by good witnesses and great events, to confirm
the opposite doctrines; did most wise and sober men judge in favor of
Irreligion, as commonly they ever did and still do otherwise: yet wisdom would
require that men should choose to be pious, since otherwise no man can be
thoroughly secure. It is a wildness, not to dread the least possibility of
incurring such horrible mischiefs: any hazard of such importance cannot but
startle a man in his wits. To be in the least obnoxious to eternal Torments, if
men would think upon it as men, (that is, as rational and provident creatures,)
could not but disturb them. And indeed so it is in experience: for whatever
they say or seem, all Atheists and profane men are inwardly suspicious and
fearful; they care not to die, and would gladly escape the trial of what shall
follow death. But let us grant or imagine the Epicurean successful as he could
wish in this enterprise of subduing Religion: yet except therewith he can also
trample down Reason, new mould humane nature, subjugate all natural appetites
and passions, alter the state of things here, and transform the world, he will
yet in greatest part fail of his conceited advantages; very short he will fall
of triumphing in a, contented and quiet mind. That which accrueth thence will
at most be no more then some negative content, or a partial indolency, arising
from his being rescued from some particular cares and fears; which exceeds
not the tranquillity of a beast, or the stupidity of one that is out of his
senses: that is all he can claim, which yet is more then he can ever compass.
For he cannot be as a Beast, or a mere Sot, if he would: Reason, reflecting on
present evils, and boding others future, will afflict him; his own unsatiable
desires, unavoidable fears and untameable passions will disquiet him. Were the
other world quite out of his faith or his thought, yet this world would yield
trouble sufficient to render him void of any steady rest, or solid joy. All men
ever have, and ever will complain, that the burdens, crosses, satieties of
this life, do much surpass the conveniences and comforts of it. So that, were
no other to be expected or feared, this of it self would become grievous and
nauseous; N^n tempestate vexor, sed nausea. Senec. de Tranq. an. 1.
we should soon have enough or too much of it, without a support and supply
from other-where. In the largest affluence of things, in the deepest calm of
our state, we are apt to nauseate, and are weary even of our prosperity it
self; the which indeed commonly has ingredients not only somewhat unsavory,
but very bitter and loathsome. We may add, that had those profane attempters
quite banished Religion, they with it must have driven away all the benefits
and comforts of it; which, even supposing them but imaginary, are yet the
greatest which common life does need, or can desire: with it they would send
packing Justice, Fidelity, Charity, Sobriety, and all solid Virtue, things
which cannot firmly subsist without Conscience: which being gone, humane life
would be the most disorderly, most unsafe, most wretched and contemptible thing
that can be; nothing but insipid and flashy sensualities would be left behind
to comfort a man with; and those hardly any man (by reason of competitions and
contentions for them, no-wise restrainable) could enjoy quietly, or safely. It
is therefore Piety alone, which, by raising hopes of blessings and joys
incomparably superior to any here, that cannot be taken from us, can lay any
ground of true content, of substantial and positive content; such as consists
not only in removing the objects and causes of vexatious passions, but in
employing the most pleasant affections (love, hope, joy,) with a delightful
complacence upon their proper and most noble objects. The Kingdom of God (and
that Romans 14. 17.
only, no other Kingdom has that privilege) consists in righteousness,
(first, then in) peace and spiritual joy. No Philosopher, with truth and
reason, can make that overture to us which our Lord does; Come unto me, all ye
that are Matt. 11. 28.
weary and heavy laden, and ye shall find rest to your souls. Out of Religion
there can be no Aphorism pretended like to that of the Prophet, Thou shall keep
him Isa. 26. 3.
in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee.

If indeed we distinctly survey all the grounds and sources of Content, it will
appear that Religion only can afford it.

Does it result from a well governing and ordering our Passions? Then it is
plain, that only a pious man is capable thereof; for Piety only can effect
that: it alone, with the powerful aid of Divine Grace, does guide our passions
by exact rules, does set them upon worthy objects, does temper and tune them in
just harmony, does seasonably curb and check them, Mala men's -- cum insidiatur,
spe, curis, labor distringitur; and jam cum sceleris compos fuerit,
solicitudine, poenitentia, poenarum omnium exspectatione torquetur. Quint. 12.
1.
does rightly correct and reform them. This no bare Reason (which naturally is
so dim and so feeble in man) can atchieve: much less can Unreasonableness do
it, which is ever prevalent in irreligious persons. Their Passions do ever run
wildly and at random, in no good pace, within no good compass, toward the
meanest and basest objects; whence they can have no rest or quiet in their
minds. As they are constantly offending, so will they ever be punishing Nulla
major poena nequitiae est, quam quod sibi ac suis displicet. Sen. Ep. 42.

(...). Plat. de Leg. 5.


themselves, with intestine broils and conflicts, with dissatisfactions and
regrets. Hence, There is no peace to the wicked. He is like the troubled sea,
which cannot Isa. 48. 22. 57. 20.
rest. God (as S. Austine speaks) has Deus jussit, and it a est, Sibi poena
est omnis inordinatus animus. Aug. Conf.
said it, and so it is, Every inordinate mind is a punishment to it self.

Does Content spring from a hearty approbation of, or a complacence in a man's
own actions; from reflection that he constantly does act according to reason and
wisdom, to justice and duty? Then can the pious man alone pretend to it, who
knows that he walks inoffensively toward God and man; that he consulteth
his own best interest and welfare; Nisi sapienti sua non placent: omnis
stulti^ia laborat fastidio sui. Sen. Ep. 9.
that assuredly no bad consequence can attend his unblameable behavior; that
most wise men have declared their approbation of his proceedings; that if he
prove in his chief design mistaken, yet no mischief can thence befall him; yea,
that he is not thereby quite disappointed, seeing even much present
satisfaction and convenience do arise up to him from his practice.

Does Content grow from a sound and healthful constitution of Soul? It is the
pious man alone that has that, whose mind is clear from distempers of vice and
passion. The impious man is infirm, out of order, full of disease and pain,
according to the Prophet's description of him; -- The whole head is sick, and
Isa. 1. 5, 6.
the whole heart faint: From the sole of the foot even unto the head there is
no soundness in it, but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores.

Does Content arise specially from good success in our attempts, or from
prosperous events befalling us? Then it is the pious man who is most capable
thereof: for he only is secure, that what seems good and prosperous is
really such to him, as meant for his good by the Divine Goodness, as tending
thereto by the guidance of infallible Wisdom. As he only has ground to hope
for success, because he confideth in God, because he dutifully seeks God's
help, because God is favorably disposed toward him, because God orders his
steps, because God is by promise engaged to bless him, because he is conscious
of his intentions to render God thanks and praise for it, to employ his success
to God's honor and service: so he only can be satisfied with the appearance
of success, being able with assurance to say after S. Paul, We know Romans 8. 28
that to those who love God all things cooperate for good.

Is security from danger, from trouble, from want, from all evil, a source or
matter of Content? It certainly does attend the pious man; God being his
especial Protector, his Comforter, his Purveyour. There shall no evil befall
the Prove. 12. 21.
just: There shall no plague come near his Psalm. 91. 10.
dwelling. God keeps all his bones, not Psalm. 34. 20, 17.
one of them is broken. He delivers the righteous out of their troubles. The
desire Prove. 10. 24.
of the righteous shall be granted. There is Psalm. 34. 9.
no want to them that fear God. So do the Holy Oracles assure us.

Does Contentedness spring from sufficiency, real or apprehended? This
appertains peculiarly to the pious man: for, having God, the Master of all,
for his portion, he has the richest estate that can be; he has all that he
can desire, he cannot but take himself to have enough. Hence Godliness with
contentedness 1 Timothy 6. 6.
((...), with sufficiency) is (as S. Paul says) (...), the great way of
gaining. He says it not, as supposing Godliness and Contentedness to be
separable; but rather, as implying Godliness therefore to be most gainful,
because Sufficiency and Contentedness do ever attend it. In fine, if that
saying of Seneca be true, that, If to Si cui sua non videntur amplissima, li et
totius Mundi Dominus sit, tamen miser est. Sen. Ep. 9.
any man the things he possesses do not seem most ample, although he be Master
of the whole World, he is yet miserable; then assuredly the pious man only can
be happy; for to him alone his possessions can seem the largest and best, such
as there can be no possible accession to, or amendment of. For nothing can be
greater or better then God, in whom he has a steadfast propriety, whose
infinite power and wisdom are engaged to do him the utmost good that he is
capable of. And farther,

III. Seeing we have mentioned Happiness, or the Summum bonum, the utmost scope
of humane desire, we do add, that Piety does surely confer it. Happiness,
whatever it be, has certainly an essential coherence with Piety. These are
reciprocal Propositions, both of them infallibly true, He that is pious is
happy; and, He that is happy is pious. No man does undertake or prosecute any
thing, which he does not apprehend in some order or degree conducing to that
which all men under a confused notion regard and tend to, which they call
Happiness, the highest Good, the chiefest desirable thing. But in their
judgments about this thing, or the means of attaining it, as men dissent much;
so of necessity most of them must be mistaken. Most, indeed, do aim and shoot
at a mere shadow of profit, or at that which is very little considerable, and
in comparison nothing at all; which little conduces to the perfection of their
nature, or the satisfaction of their desire. If they miss the mark, they are
disappointed; if they hit it, they are no less, and in effect hit nothing. But
whatever this grand matter is, in whatever it consists, however it be
procured; be it the possession and fruition of some special choice goods, or an
aggregation and affluence of all goods; Piety surely is the main ingredient,
and principal cause thereof. All other goods without it are insignificant and
unusefull thereto; and it cannot be wanting, where Piety is. Be a man never so
rich, so powerful, so learned and knowing, so prosperous in his affairs, so
honorable in the opinions and affections of men: yet no-wise happy can he be,
if he is not pious; being he wants the best goods, and is subject to the
worst evils; being he wants the love and favor of God, he wants peace and
satisfaction of Conscience, he wants a right enjoyment of present things, he
wants security concerning his final welfare. Be he never so poor, so low in
the eyes of men, so forlorn and destitute of worldly conveniences; yet if he
be pious, he cannot be wretched: for he has an interest in goods incomparably
most precious, and is safe from all considerable evils; he has a free resort
to the inexhaustible fountain of all Happiness, he has a right to immense and
endless Felicity, the which eminently contains all the goods we are capable
of; he is possessed thereof in hope, and certain reversion, there is but a
moment to pass before his complete fruition of it. The want of all other petty
things no more can maim the integrity of his Felicity, then cutting the hair,
or paring the nails, do mutilate a man: all other things are but superfluities
or excrescencies in regard to the constitution of Happiness. Whatever
happens, that will assuredly be true, which is so much inculcated in H.
Scripture, Blessed is every Ps. 128. 1, 2.
one that fears the Lord, that walks in 112. 1.
his ways; Happy shall he be, and it shall be well with him. Piety is indeed
fraught with Beatitudes, every part thereof yields peculiar Blessedness. To
the love Matt. 5.
of God, to charity toward our neighbor, to purity of heart, to meekness, to
humility, to patience, to mercifulness, to peaceableness Beatitude is ascribed
by our Lord, (the great Judge and Dispenser of it.) Each religious performance
has happy fruits growing from it, and blissfull rewards assigned thereto. All
pious dispositions are fountains of pleasant streams, which by their confluence
do make up a full sea of Felicity.

IV. It is a peculiar advantage of Piety, that it furnishes employment fit for
us, worthy of us, hugely grateful, and highly beneficial to us. Man is a very
busy and active creature, which cannot live and do nothing, whose thoughts
are in restless motion, whose desires are ever stretching at somewhat, who
perpetually will be working either good or evil to himself: wherefore greatly
profitable must that thing be which determines him to act well, to spend his
care and pain on that which is truly advantageous to him; and that is Religion
only. It alone fastneth our thoughts, affections and endeavors, upon
occupations worthy the dignity of our nature, suting the excellency of our
natural capacities and endowments, tending to the perfection and advancement of
our Reason, to the enriching and ennobling of our Souls. Secluding that, we
have nothing in the world to study, to affect, to pursue, not very mean and
below us, not very base and misbecoming us, as men of reason and judgment.
What have we to do but to eat and drink, like horses or like swine; but to
sport and play, like children or apes; but to bicker and scuffle about trifles
and impertinencies, like idiots? what, but to scrape or scramble for useless
pelf; to hunt after empty shows and shadows of honor, or the vain fancies and
dreams of men? what, but to wallow or bask in sordid pleasures, the which soon
degenerate into remorse and bitterness? To which sort of employments were a man
confined, what a pitiful thing would he be, and how inconsiderable were his
life? Were a man designed only, like a fly, to buzz about here for a time,
sucking in the air, and licking the dew, then soon to vanish back into nothing,
or to be transformed into worms; how sorry and despicable a thing were he? And
such without Religion we should be. But it supplieth us with business of a most
worthy nature, and lofty importance; it sets us upon doing things great and
noble as can be; it engages us to free our minds from all fond conceits, and
cleanse our hearts from all corrupt affections; to curb our brutish appetites,
to tame our wild passions, to correct our perverse inclinations, to conform the
dispositions of our Soul and the actions of our life to the eternal laws of
righteousness and goodness: it puts us upon the imitation of God, and aiming
at the resemblance of his perfections; upon obtaining a friendship, and
maintaining a correspondence with the High and Holy one; upon fitting our minds
for conversation and society with the wisest and purest Spirits above; upon
providing for an immortal state; upon the acquist of joy and glory everlasting.
It employeth us in the divinest actions, of promoting Virtue, of performing
beneficence, of serving the public, and doing good to all: the being exercised
in which things does indeed render a man highly considerable, and his life
excellently valuable.

It Is an employment most proper to us as reasonable men. For what more proper
entertainments can our mind have, then to be purifying and beautifying it self,
to be keeping it self and its subordinate faculties in order, to be attending
upon the management of thoughts, of passions, of words, of actions depending
upon its governance?

It Is an employment most beneficial to us: in pursuing which we greatly better
our selves, and improve our condition; we benefit and oblige others; we procure
sound reputation, and steady friendships; we decline many irksome mischiefs and
annoyances; we do not (like those in the Prophet) spend Isa. 55. 2.
our labor for that which satisfies not, nor spend our money for that which is
not bread: for both temporal prosperity and eternal felicity are the wages of
the labor which we take herein.

It Is an employment most constant, never allowing sloth or listlessness to
creep in, incessantly busying all our faculties with earnest contention;
according to that profession of S. Paul, declaring the nature thereof, Herein
always do I exercise my self, to have a conscience Acts 24. 16.
void of offense toward God and toward man. Whence it is called a Fight, and a
Race, implying the continual earnestness of attention and activity which is to
be spent thereon.

It is withal a sweet and grateful business: for it is a pious man's
character, that he delights greatly in God's commandments; Psalm. 112. 1.
that the commandments are 1 John 5. 3.
not grievous to him; that it is his meat Joh. 4. 34.
and drink to do God's will; that God's Ps. 119. 103.
words (or precepts) are sweeter then honey to his taste; that the ways of
religious wisdom are ways of pleasantness, and all Prove. 3. 17.
her paths are peace. Whereas all other Non potest cuiquam semper idem placere,
nisi rectum. Sen. 20. Dedit hoc providentia hominibus munus, ut honesta magis
juvarent.

Quint. 1. 12.


employments are wearisome, and soon become loathsome: this, the farther we
proceed in it, the more pleasant and satisfactory it grows. There is
perpetual matter of victory over bad inclinations pestering us within, and
strong temptations assailing us without: which to combat, has much delight; to
master, breeds unexpressible content. The sense also of God's love, the
influences of his grace and comfort communicated in the performances of
devotion and all duty, the satisfaction of good Conscience, the assured hope of
reward, the foretasts of future bliss, do season and sweeten all the labors
taken, all the difficulties undergone therein.

In fine, the bare light of Nature has discerned, that were it not for such
matters as these to spend a man's care and pains upon, this would be a
lamentable world to live in. There was, for instance, an Emperor great and
mighty as ever did wield scepter upon earth, whose excellent Virtue, coupled
with wisdom, (inferior, perhaps, to none that any man ever without special
inspiration has been endowed with,) did qualify him with most advantage to
examine, and rightly to judge of things here; who, not withstanding all the
conveniences which his Royal estate and well-settled prosperity might afford,
(the which surely he had fully tasted and tried,) did yet thus express his
thoughts; (...); What does it concern M. Ant. II. 11. and VI. 10.
me to live in a world void of God, or void of Providence? To govern the
greatest Empire that ever was, in the deepest calm; to enjoy the largest
affluences of wealth, of splendor, of respect, of pleasure; to be loved, to be
dreaded, to be served, to be adored by so many nations; to have the whole civil
World obsequious to his will and nod; all these things seemed vain and idle,
not worthy of a man's regard, affection, or choice, in case there were no God
to worship, no Providence to observe, no Piety to be exercised. So little worth
the while common sense has adjudged it to live without Religion.

V. It is a considerable benefit of Piety, that it affords the best
Friendships, and sweetest Society. Man is framed for Society, and cannot live
well without it: many of his faculties would be useless, many of his appetites
would rest unsatisfied in solitude. Nullius boni sine socio jucunda possessio
est. Sen. Ep. 6.
To have a friend wise and able, honest and good, unto whom upon all occasions
we may have recourse for advice, for assistence, for consolation, is a great
convenience of life: Ut aliarum rerum nobis innata dulcedo est, sic amicitiae.
Sen. Ep. 9.
and this benefit we owe to Religion, which supplieth us with various
Friendships of the best kind, most beneficial and most sweet unto us.

It makes God our Friend, a Friend infinitely better then all friends, most
affectionate and kind, most faithful and sure, most able, most willing, and
ever Prove. 12. 2.

Psalm. 34. 15. and 33. 18. and 145. 19. and 37. 28.

Job 36. 7.


most ready to perform all friendly offices, to yield advice in all our doubts,
succor in all our needs, comfort in all our troubles, satisfaction to all our
desires. Unto him it ministers a free address upon all occasions; with him it
allows us continually a most sweet and pleasant intercourse. The pious man
has always the All-wise God to counsel him, to guide his actions, and order
his steps; he has the All-mighty to protect, support and relieve him; he has
the immense Goodness to commiserate and comfort him: unto him he is not only
encouraged, but obliged to resort in need; upon him he may, he ought to
discharge all his cares and burdens.

It consequently does engage all creatures in the world to be our friends, or
instruments of good to us, according to their several capacities, by the
direction and disposal of God. All the servants of our great Friend will, in
compliance to him, be serviceable to us. Thou shall Job 5. 23.
be in league with the stones of the field, and the beasts of the field shall
be at peace with thee: So Job's friend promises him upon condition of Piety.
And God himself confirms that promise, In that Hos. 2. 18.
day (says he in the Prophet) will I make a covenant for them with the beasts
of the field, and with the fowls of heaven, and with the creeping things of the
ground. And again, When thou passest through the Isa. 43. 2.
waters, I will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow
thee: when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt; neither
shall the flame kindle upon thee. And, The sun shall not Psalm. 121. 6.
smite thee by day, nor the moon by night. Thou shall tread upon the lion and
adder, Psalm. 91. 13.
the young lion and the dragon shall thou trample under foot. They shall take
up Mark 16. 18.
scorpions; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them: (so our
Lord promised to his Disciples.) Not only the Heavens shall dispense their
Deuteronomy. 28. 12.
kindly influences, and the Earth yield her plentiful stores, and all the
Elements discharge their natural and ordinary good offices; nor only the tame
and sociable creatures shall upon this condition faithfully serve us; but even
the most wild, most fierce, most ravenous, most venomous creatures shall, if
there be need, prove friendly and helpful, or at least harmless, to us: as
were the Ravens to Elias, the Lions to Daniel, 1 King. 17. 6.
the Viper to S. Paul, the Fire to the Three Children.

But especially Piety does procure the friendship of the good Angels, that
puissant host of glorious and happy Spirits: they all do tenderly love the
pious person; they are ever ready to serve and do Psalm. 34. 7. 91. 11.

Heb. 1. 14.


him good, to protect him from danger, to aid him in his undertakings, to
rescue him from mischiefs. What an honor, what a blessing is this, to have
such an innumerable company of noble Friends (the Courtiers and Favorites of
Heaven) deeply concerned, and constantly vigilant for our welfare?

It also engages the blessed Saints in glory, the Spirits of men perfected,
the Church of the firstborn, to bear dearest affection to us, to further our
prosperity with their good wishes, and earnest prayers, mightily prevalent with
God.

It renders all sorts of men our friends. To good men it uniteth us in holy
communion; the communion of brotherly charity and hearty good will, attended
with all the good offices they are able to perform: to other men it reconcileth
and endeareth us; for that innocent and inoffensive, courteous and benign,
charitable and beneficent demeanor, (such as Piety does require and produce,)
are apt to conciliate respect and affection from the worst men. For, Vincit
malos pertinax bonitas; men Sen. de Benef. 7. 21.
hardly can persist enemies to him whom they perceive to be their friend: and
such the pious man in disposition of Qui sibi amicus est, scito hunc amicum
omnibus esse. Sen. Ep. 6.

Gal. 6. 10.


mind, and in effect, when occasion serves, is toward all men; being sensible
of his obligation to love all men, and, as he has opportunity, to do good to
all men. It assures, and more strictly endeareth our friends to us. For, as it
makes (...). Arist. Eth. 8. 4.
us hearty, faithful, constant friends to others; so it reciprocally tieth
others to us in the like sincerity and fastness of good will.

It reconcileth enemies. For, when a Prove. 16. 7.
man's ways do please the Lord, he makes his enemies to be at peace with him.
It has a natural efficacy to that purpose, and Divine blessing promoteth it.

By it all conversation becomes tolerable, grateful, and useful. For a pious
man is not easily disturbed with any crossness or (...). -- (Arist. Eth. 9. 4)

(...).


perverseness, any infirmity or impertinency of those he converseth with: he
can bear the weaknesses and the failings of his company; he can by wholesome
reflections upon all occurrences advantage and please himself.

In fine, Piety renders a man a true Quaeris quid profecerim? amicus esse mihi
coepi Sen. Ep. 6.
friend and a good companion to himself; satisfied in himself, able to converse
freely and pleasantly with his own thoughts. It is for the want of pious
inclinations and dispositions, that solitude (a thing which sometimes cannot be
avoided, which often should be Nemo est, cui non satius sit cum quolibet esse,
quam secum. Sen. Ep. 25.
embraced) is to most men so irksome and tedious; that men do carefully shun
themselves, and fly from their own thoughts; that they decline all converse
with their own Souls, and hardly dare look upon their own hearts and
Consciences: whence (...), etc. Plut. (...). p. 916.
they become aliens from home, wholly unacquainted with themselves, most
ignorant of their own nearest (...) -- Arist. 9. 4.
concernments, no faithful friends or pleasant companions to themselves: so
for refuge and ease they unseasonably run into idle or lewd conversation, where
they disorder and defile themselves. But the pious man is (like Scipio) never
less alone, Nonquam minus solus, quam cum solus.
then when alone: his solitude and retirement is not only tolerable, but
commonly the most grateful and fruitful part of his life: he can ever with
much pleasure, and more advantage, converse with Acquiescit sibi,
cogitationibus suis traditus. Sen. Ep. 9.

Sapiens ^unquam solus esse potest, ^abet secum omnes qui sunt, quique unquam
fuerunt boni; and animum liberum quocunque vult transfert: quod corpore non
potest, cogitatione complectitur; and si hominum inops fuerit, loquitur cum
Deo. Nunquam minus solus erit, quam cum s lus fuerit. Hier. adv. Jovin. 1. 28.


himself; digesting and marshalling his thoughts, his affections, his purposes
into good order; searching and discussing his heart, reflecting on his past
ways, enforcing his former good resolutions, and framing new ones; enquiring
after edifying truths, stretching his meditations toward the best and sublimest
objects, raising his hopes and warming his affections toward spiritual and
heavenly things; asking himself pertinent questions, and resolving incident
doubts concerning his practice; in fine, conversing with his best Friend in
devotion; with admiration and love contemplating the Divine perfections,
displayed in the works of nature, of providence, of grace; praising God for his
excellent benefits and mercies; confessing his defects and offenses;
deprecating wrath, and imploring pardon, with grace and ability to amend;
praying for the supply of all his wants. All which performances yield both
unconceivable benefit, and unexpressible comfort. So that Solitude (that which
is to common nature so offensive, to corrupt nature so abominable) is to the
pious man extremely commodious and comfortable: which is a great advantage
peculiar to Piety, and the last which I shall mention.

So many, and many more then I can express, vastly great and precious
advantages do accrue from Piety: so that well may we conclude with S. Paul,
that Godliness is profitable for all things.

It remains that, if we be wise, we should, if we yet have it not ingraffed
in us, labor to acquire it; if we have it, that we should endeavor to improve
it, by constant exercise, to the praise of God, the good of our neighbor, and
our own comfort. Which that we may effectually perform, Almighty God in mercy
vouchsafe, by his grace, through Jesus Christ our Lord; to whom for ever be all
glory and praise.

Amen.
The Fourth Sermon.
1 SAMUEL 2. 30. For them that honor me, I will honor.
THE words are in the strictest sense the word of God, uttered immediately by
God himself; and may thence command from us an especial attention and regard.
The History of that which occasioned them is, I presume, well known, neither
shall I make any descant or reflection thereon; but do take the words
separately, as a Proposition of it self, affording a complete instruction, and
ample matter of discourse. And as such, they plainly imply two things: a Duty
required of us, to honor God; and a Reward proffered to us, upon performance of
that Duty, being honored by God. It is natural for us, before we are willing
to undertake any work, to consider the reward or benefit accruing from it; and
it is necessary, before we can perform any duty, to understand the nature
thereof. To this our method of action I shall suit the method of my Discourse;
first endeavoring to estimate the Reward, then to explain the Duty. Afterward
I mean to show briefly why in reason the Duty is enjoined; how in effect the
Reward is conferred.

1. The Reward may be considered either absolutely, (as what it is in it self;)
or relatively, (as to its rise, and whence it comes.)

1. For it self, it is Honor; a thing, if valued according to the rate it
bears in the common market, of highest price among all the objects of humane
desire; the chief reward which the greatest actions, and which the best actions
do pretend unto, or are capable of; that which usually bears most sway in the
hearts, and has strongest influence upon the lives of men: the desire of
obtaining and maintaining which does commonly overbear other most potent
inclinations. The love of pleasure stoops thereto: for men, to get or keep
Reputation, will decline the most pleasant enjoyments, will embrace the hardest
pains. Yea, it often prevails over the love of life it self, (...). Isocr.
Orat. ad Philip.
which men do not only frequently expose to danger, but sometimes devote to
certain loss, for its sake. If we observe what is done in the world, we may
discern it to be the source of most undertakings Mors tum aequissimo animo
appetitur, cum suis se laudibus vit a occidens consolari potest. Cic. 1. Tusc.
therein: that it not only moves the wheels of public action, (that not
only for it great Princes contend, great armies march, -- Laudis avidi
pecuniae liberales erant, gloriam ingentem divitias honest as volebant; hanc
ardentissime dilexerunt, propter hanc vivere voluerunt, pro hac and mori non
dubitaverunt. Caeteras cupiditates hujus unius ingenti cupiditate presserunt.
Aug. de Civ. D. 5. 12.
great battles are fought;) but that from it most private business derives its
life and vigor: that for Honor especially the Soldier undergoes hardship,
toil, and hazard; the Scholar plods and beats his brains; the Merchant runs
about so busily, and adventures so far; yea, that for its sake the meanest
Labourer and Artificer does spend his sweat. and stretch his sinews. The
principal drift of all this (...). Arist. Eth. IV. 3.
care and industry (the great reason of all this scuffling for Power, this
searching for Knowledge, this scraping and scrambling for wealth) does seem to
be, Honos alit arts, omnesque incenduntur ad studia gloria, etc. Cic. Tusc.
Qu. I.
that men would live in some credit, would raise themselves above contempt.

In such request, of such force does Honor appear to be. If we examine why, we
may find more then mere fashion (or mutual imitation and consent) to ground the
experiment upon. There is one obvious reason why no mean regard Vid Hier. Ep.
ad Celant.

Conscientia nobis necessaria, est, sama pro^ima. Qui conscientia fidens, samam
negligit, crudelis est. Aug.

(...). Galen.

Nec vero negligenda fama est; nec mediocre telum ad res gerendas e^istimare
oportet benevolentiam civium. Cic. de Amic.

Vid. Chrysostom. Tom. 6. Orar. 17.


should be had thereto, its great convenience and usefulness: for that a man
cannot himself live safely, quietly or pleasantly, without some competent
measure thereof; cannot well serve the public, perform offices of duty to his
relations, of kindness to his friends, of charity to his neighbors, but under
its protection, and with its aid: it being an engine very requisite for the
managing any business, for the compassing any design, at least sweetly and
smoothly; it procuring to us many furtherances in our proceedings, removing
diverse obstacles out of our way, guarding a man's person from offenses, adding
weight to his words, putting an edge upon his endeavors: for every one allows
a favorable ear to his discourse, lends an assisting hand to his attempts,
grants a ready credence to his testimony, and makes a fair construction of his
doings, whom he esteems and respects. So is Honor plainly valuable among the
bona utilia, as no small accommodation of life; and as such, Reason approves it
to our judgment.

But searching farther, we shall find the appetite of Honor to have a deeper
ground, and that it is rooted even in our Nature it self. For we may descry it
budding forth in men's first Infancy, (before the use of reason, or speech;)
even little Children being ambitious to Vidi ego and expertus sum zelantem
parvulum, etc. Aug.
be made much of, maintaining among themselves petty emulations and
competitions, as it were, about punctilio's of Honor. We may observe it
growing with Age, waxing bigger and stronger together with the increase of wit
and knowledge, of civil culture and experience: that the maturest age does most
resent and relish it; that it prevails most in civilized nations; that men of
the best parts, of the highest improvements, of the weightiest employments, do
most zealously affect it and stand upon it; that they who most struggle with
it, do most feel its might, how difficult it is to resist or restrain it, how
impossible it is to stifle or extinguish it. For the Philosopher with all his
reasons and considerations cannot dispute it down, or persuade it away; the
Anchoret cannot with all his austerities starve it, or by his retirements shun
it: no affliction, no poverty, no wretchedness of condition can totally
suppress it. It Is a spirit that not only haunts our Courts and Palaces, but
frequents our Schools and Cloisters, yea creeps into Cottages, into Hospitals,
into Insolitudine sitis, subrepit superbia. Hier.
Prisons, and even dogs men into Deserts and Solitudes: so close it sticks to
our nature. Plato says it is the last coat which a wise man does put off. But I
question whether he could show us that wise man who had done it, or could tell
us where he dwelt, except perhaps in his own Utopian Republic. For they who
most pretend to have done it, (who in their discourse most vilify Honor; who
talk like Chrysippus, Cic. de Fin. 3.
that a wise man for Reputation sake will not so much as stretch out his
finger, or like Seneca, that we should Nihil opinionis causa, omnia
conscientiae faciam. Sen. de V. B.
do every thing purely for conscience sake, without any regard to men's
opinion; who make harangues and write volumes against Glory,) do yet appear by
their practice, sometimes, by so doing, Nil sit i^i cum ambitione famaque
commune, sibi placeat.

Epist. 113.

Justum esse gratis oportet. ib.

Id. de Ira 3. 41.


to aim at it: even as men do usually complain of and eagerly quarrel with that
which they most affect and woo. Chrysippus wrote, as we are Lae^t.
told, above 700 books, most of them concerning Logical quirks, and such as one
can hardly imagine what other drift he could have in composing them, beside
ostentation of his subtilty and sharpness of wit. Seneca, if history do not
wrong him, and the face of his actions do not misrepresent him, was not in his
heart exempt from a spice of Ambition. Yea, that excellent Emperor M.
Aurelius, who would often speak like a Stoic, could not but commonly act like
a Man, more by his practice commending Honor, then he disparaged it in his
words. For Story represents him very careful Erat famae suae ^uriosissimus,
and male loquentium dictis vel literis vel sermon respondebat. Capi^.
and jealous of his credit, very diligent to preserve it, and to repair it.
Terr. Apol.
Tertullian calls such Philosophers negotiatores famae, (Merchants for fame:)
and it is perchance some part of their cunning in that trade, which makes them
strive to beat down the price of this commodity, that they may more easily
engrosse it to themselves. However, experience proves that such words are but
words; (words spoken out of affectation and pretense, rather then in good
earnest and according to truth;) that endeavors to banish or to extirpate this
desire are but fond and fruitless attempts. The reason why is clear: for it is
as if one should dispute against eating and drinking, or should labor to free
himself from hunger and thirst; Ut quidam morbo aliquo and sensu, stupore
suavitatem cibi non sentiunt; sic libidinosi, avari, facinorosi verae laudis
gustum non habent.

Cic. Philipp. 2.


the appetite of Honor being indeed, as that of Food, innate unto us, so as
not to be quenched or smothered, except by some violent distemper or
indisposition of mind; even by the wise Author of our nature originally
implanted therein, for very good ends and uses, respecting both the private and
public benefit of men; as an engagement to Virtue, and a restraint from Vice;
as an excitement of industry, an incentive of courage, a support of constancy
in the prosecution of worthy enterprises; as a serviceable instrument for the
constitution, conservation and improvement of humane society. For did not some
love of Honor glow in men's breasts, were that noble spark quite extinct, few
men probably would study for honorable qualities, or perform laudable deeds;
there would be nothing to keep some men within bounds of honesty and decency,
to deterr them from doing odious and ugly things; men, not caring what others
(...). Naz. Carm. 56.
thought of them, would not regard what they did themselves; a barbarous sloth
or brutish stupidity would overspread the world, withdrawing from common life
most of its ornaments, much of its convenience; men generally would, if not
altogether shun society, yet at least decline the cares and burdens requisite
to the promoting its welfare, for the sustaining which usually the chief
encouragement, the main recompense, is this of Honor. That men therefore have
so tender and delicate a sense of their Reputation, (so that touching it is
like pricking a nerve, as soon felt and as smartly offensive,) is an excellent
provision in nature; in regard whereto Honor may pass among the bona
naturalia, as a Good necessary for the satisfaction of nature, and for securing
the accomplishment of its best designs.

A moderate regard to Honor is also commendable as an instance of humanity
Negligere quid de se quisque sentiat, arrogantis est and dissoluti. Cic. de
Offic. 1.
or good will to men, yea, as an argument of humility, or a sober conceit of
our selves. For to desire another man's esteem, and consequently his love,
(which in some kind or degree is an inseparable companion of esteem,) does
imply somewhat of reciprocal esteem and affection toward him; and to prize the
judgment of other men concerning us, does signify, that we are not
oversatisfied with our own.

We might for its farther commendation allege the authority of the more cool
and candid sort of Philosophers, (such as grounded their judgment of things
upon notions agreeable to common sense and experience; who adapted their rules
of practice to the nature of man, such as they found it in the world, not such
as they framed it in their own fancies,) who have ranked Honor among the
principal of things desirable, and (...). Plat. de Leg. IV.
adorned it with fairest elogies; terming it a divine (...). Idem, de Rep. XII.
thing, the best of exterior goods, the most honest fruit and most ample
reward of true Virtue; adjudging, that (...). Arist. Et^. IV. 3.
to neglect the opinions of men (especially of persons worthy and laudable) is
a sign of stupid baseness, that to contemn them is an effect of unreasonable
haughtiness; representing the love of Honor Levis est animi, justam gloriam,
qui est fructus virtutis honestissimus, repudiare. Cic. in Pis.
(rightly grounded and duly moderated) not only as the parent and guardian (as
productive and preservative) Ex omnibus praemiis virtutis amplissimum est
praemium gloria. Idem, pro Mil.
of other Virtues, but as a Virtue it self, of no small magnitude and luster in
the Constellation of Virtues, the Virtue of Generosity. A Virtue which, next to
the spirit of true Religion, (next to a hearty reverence toward the Supreme
Blessed Goodness, and that holy Charity toward men which springs thence,)
does lift a man up nearest to Heaven; does raise his mind above the sordid
desires, the sorry cares, the fond humors, the perverse and froward passions,
with which men commonly are possessed and acted: that Virtue, which enflames a
man with Courage, so that he dares perform what reason and duty require of him,
that he disdains to do what is bad or base; which inspires him with Sincerity,
that he values his honesty before all other interests and respects, that he
abhorrs to wrong or deceive, to flatter or abuse any man, that he cannot endure
to seem otherwise then he is, to speak otherwise then he means, to act
otherwise then he promises and professes; which endows him with Courtesy, that
he is ready to yield every man his due respect, to afford any man what help and
succor he is able: that Virtue, which renders a man upright in all his
dealings, and correspondent to all his obligations; a loyal Subject to his
Prince, and a true lover of his Country, a candid judge of persons and things,
an earnest favourer Trahimur omnes laudis studio, and optimus quisque maxim
gloria. ducitur. Cic. pro Arch. (...), Plausible and active men do (says
Aristotle) place Happiness in Honor. (Eth. 1. 4.)
of whatever is good and commendable, a faithful and hearty friend, a
beneficial and useful neighbor, a grateful resenter and requiter of
courtesies, hospitable to the stranger, bountiful to the poor, kind and good
to all the world: that Virtue, in fine, which constitutes a man of honor, who
surely is the best man next to a man of conscience. Thus may Honor be valued
from natural light, and according to common sense.

But beyond all this, the Holy Scripture (that most certain standard by which
we may examine and determine the true worth of things) does not teach us to
slight Honor, but rather in its fit order and just measure to love and prize
it. It indeed instructs us to ground it well: (not upon bad qualities or wicked
deeds, that is villainous madness; not upon things of a mean and indifferent
nature, that is vanity; not upon counterfeit shows and pretenses, that is
hypocrisy; but upon real worth and goodness, that may consist with modesty
and sobriety:) it enjoins us not to be immoderate in our desires thereof, or
complacencies therein, not to be irregular in the pursuit or acquist of it; (to
be so is pride and ambition;) but to affect it calmly, to purchase it fairly:
it directs us not to make a regard thereto our chief principle, not to propound
it as our main end of action: it charges us to bear contentedly the want or
loss thereof, (as of other temporal goods:) yea, in some cases, for Conscience
sake or for God's service, (that is, for a good incomparably better then it,)
it obliges us willingly to prostitute and sacrifice it, choosing rather to be
infamous then impious, (to Non vis esse justus sine gloria? at mehercule saepe
justus esse debes cum infamia. Sen. Epist. 113.
be in disgrace with men, rather then in disfavour with God:) it, in fine,
commands us to seek and embrace it only in subordination and with final
reference to God's honor. Which distinctions and cautions being provided,
Honor is represented in Holy Scripture as a thing considerably good, which may
be regarded without blame, which sometimes in duty must be regarded. It is
there preferred before other good things, in themselves not despicable. For, A
Eccles 7. 1.
good name is better then precious ointment; yea, A good name is rather to be
chosen then great riches, (says the Wise Prove. 22. 1.
man.) It Is called a Gift of God: for, There is a man (says the Preacher) to
whom God has given riches and honor. Eccles 6. 2.
Yea, not only a simple Gift, but a Blessing, conferred in kindness, as a
reward and encouragement of goodness: for, By humility and the fear of the
Lord, Prove. 22. 4.
says he again, are riches and honor. Whence it is to be acknowledged as an
especial benefit, and a fit ground of thanksgiving; as is practiced by the
Psalmist in his Royal Hymn: Honor Psalm. 21. 5.
(says he) and Majesty have thou laid upon him. Wisdom also is described unto
us bearing in her left hand riches Prove. 3. 16.
and honor: and Wisdom surely will not take into any hand of hers, or hold
therein, what is worth nothing. No, we are therefore moved to procure her,
because, exalting her, she shall promote us. Prove. 4. 8, 9.
-- She shall give unto our head an ornament of grace, a crown of glory shall
she deliver to us. We are also enjoined to render Honor as the best expression
of good will and gratitude toward them who best deserve in themselves, or most
deserve of us; to our Prince, to our Parents, to our Priests, (especially 1
Pet. 2. 17.
to such of them as govern and teach 1 Timothy 5. 3, 17.
well,) to all good men, (Have such in reputation, says the Apostle.) And were
Philip. 2. 29.
not Honor a good thing, such injunctions would be unreasonable. Yea, because
we are obliged to bear good will toward all men, S. Peter bids us to honor 1
Pet. 2. 17.
all men. From hence also, that we are especially bound to render Honor unto
God himself, we may well infer with Aristotle, that Honor is the best Aristot.
Eth. IV. 3.
thing in our power to offer. To these considerations may be added, that we are
commanded to walk (...), (decently, or speciously, which implies Romans 13. 13.
a regard to men's opinion;) to provide things honest in the sight of all men,
((...), Romans 12. 17.
that is, not only things good in substance, but goodly in appearance;) to
have our conversation honest before the 1 Pet. 2. 12.
Gentiles, ((...) again, that is, fair, or comely, and plausible, such as may
commend us and our profession to the judgment of them who observe us.) S. Paul
also exhorts us to mind, not only Phil. 4. 8.
what things are true, are just, are pure; but also (...), (whatever things
are venerable, or apt to beget respect,) (...), (whatever things are lovely,
or gracious in men's eyes and esteem,) (...), (whatever things are well
reported, or well reputed of.) He requires us not only, if there be any
virtue, (any thing very good in it self,) but, if there be any praise, (any
thing much approved in common esteem,) that we should mind such things. Lastly,
the blessed state hereafter (the highest instance of Divine bounty, the
complete reward of goodness) is represented and recommended to us as a state of
Honor and Glory; to be ambitious whereof is the character of a good man. To
every man (says S. Paul) shall God render according Romans 2. 7.
to his works: to them who by patient continuance in well doing seek glory, and
honor, and immortality, Eternal life.

Such is the Reward propounded to us in it self; no vile or contemptible thing,
but upon various accounts much valuable; that which the common apprehensions of
men, plain dictates of reason, a predominant instinct of nature, the judgments
of very wise men, and Divine attestation it self conspire to commend unto us as
very considerable and precious. Such a Reward our Text prescribes us the
certain, the only way of attaining.

2. Such a benefit is here tendered to us (that which yet more highly commends
it, and exceedingly enhances its worth) by God himself: I (says he) will
honor. It Is sanctified by coming from his holy hand; it is dignified by
following his most wise and just disposal; it is fortified and assured by
depending on his unquestionable word, and uncontrollable power; who as he is
the prime Author of all good, so he is in especial manner the sovereign
dispenser of Honor. The King (we say) is the fountain of honor. What any
King, as the Representative and Delegate of God, is in his particular Kingdom,
that is Almighty God absolutely and independently in all the world. Both riches
and 1 Chronicles. 29. 12.
honor (said good King David) come of thee, for thou rulest over all: in thine
hand is power and might; in thine hand it is to make great, and to give
strength unto all. He whose grants are in effect only sure and valid, whose
favors only do in the end turn to good account, he freely offers us most
desirable preferment: he does himself graciously hold forth most authentic
patents, by virtue of which we may all become right honorable, and persons of
quality indeed; having not only the names and titles, the outward ensigns and
badges of dignity, (such as earthly Princes conferr,) but the substantial
reality, the assured enjoyment thereof. (For man can only impose law upon
tongues and gestures; God alone commands and inclines hearts, wherein Honor
chiefly resideth) He offers it, I say, most freely indeed, yet not absolutely:
he does not go to sell it for a price, yet he propounds it under a condition;
as a most just and equal, so a very gentle and easy condition. It Is but an
exchange of Honor for Honor; of honor from God, which is a free gift, for
honor from us, which is a just duty; of honor from him our sovereign Lord,
for honor from us his poor vassals; of honor from the most High Majesty of
Heaven, for honor from us vile worms creeping upon earth. Such an overture one
would think it not only reasonable to accept, but impossible to refuse. For
can any man dare not to honor invincible Power, infallible Wisdom, inflexible
Justice? will any man forbear to honor immense Goodness and Bounty? Yes, it
seems there are men so mad as to reject so fair an offer, so bad as to neglect
so equal a duty. Let us therefore consider what it is that is here required of
us, or wherein this honoring of God consists, that we may thereby discern when
we perform this duty, when we are deficient therein.

II. There are several ways of honoring God, or several parts and degrees of
this Duty; all which we may referr to two sorts, conceiving the Duty as a
compound made up of two main ingredients, (correspondent to those two parts in
which they reside, and of which our nature consists; which distinction S. Paul
suggesteth, when he says, Glorify God 1 Cor. 6. 20.
in your body, and in your spirit, which are God's,) one of them being, as it
were, the form and Soul, the other as the matter and Body of the Duty.

1. The Soul of that Honor which is required of us toward God, is that
internal esteem and reverence which we should bear in our hearts toward him;
importing that we have impressed upon our minds such conceptions about him as
are worthy of him, suitable to the perfection of his nature, to the eminency of
his state, to the just quality of his works and actions: that we apprehend him
to be, what he really is, in his nature, superlatively good, wise, powerful,
holy, and just: that we ascribe unto him the production and conservation of all
beings, together with an entire superintendency over and absolute disposal of
all events: that we conceive our selves obliged to submit unto and acquiesce in
all his dispensations of Providence, as most wise and most righteous; to rely
upon the declarations of his mind, (whether in way of assertion, or promise,)
as infallibly true and certain. In such acts of mind the honoring of God does
primarily consist. In Acts, I say: not in speculative Opinions concerning the
Divine Excellencies, (such as all men have, who are not downright Atheists or
Infidels,) floating in the fancy, or dormant in the mind; but in
continually-present, lively, effectual acts of apprehension and judgment,
sinking down into the heart and affections, and quickening them to a congruous
real performance. Such an apprehension of God's Power, as shall make us to
dread his irresistible hand, shall cause us to despair of prospering in bad
courses, shall dispose us to confide in him, as able to perform whatever he
wills us to expect from him: such an opinion of his Wisdom, as shall keep us
from questioning whether that is best which God declares to be so; as shall
hinder us from presuming (in compliance with our own shallow reason, or vain
fancy) to do any thing against God's judgment and advice: such a conceit of
God's Justice, as shall render us careful to perform what his Law promises to
reward, and fearful to commit what it threatens to punish: such a persuasion
concerning God's Goodness, as shall kindle in us an hearty affection toward
him, shall make us very sensible of his bounty, and ready to yield returns of
duty and gratitude unto him; as shall preserve us from being distrustful of
his Providence, or doubtful in our need and distress of finding relief from
him: such a vigorous and fruitful esteem of God in all respects, as shall
produce in as dispositions of mind, and actions of life, agreeable to our
various relations and obligations to him; becoming us as his creatures and
children, as his subjects and servants. This is indeed the Soul of the duty,
which being absent, all exterior (how specious soever) either professions or
performances are but as pictures, having in them somewhat of resemblance in
shape and color, nothing of life: yea rather, as carkases, not only dead and
senseless; but rotten and filthy in God's sight. This people (says God) do
honor me with their lips, but their heart is far Matt. 15. 8.
from me. Such honor is indeed no honor at all, but impudent abuse and
profane mockery: for what can be more abominably vain, then for a man to court
and cajoul him who knows his whole heart, who sees that he either minds not, or
means not what he says? It behooves us therefore by all proper means (by
contemplating the Works and actions of God, (his admirable works of Nature, the
wise proceedings of his Providence, the glorious dispensations of his Grace) by
meditating on his Word, by praying for his Grace, by observing his Laws and
will) to raise up in our hearts, to foment and cherish this internal Reverence,
which is the true spring of all Piety, the principle which forms and actuates
that other sort, coming next to be touched on, being the Body of our due Honor
to God; concurring in its order to the integrity thereof, as without which the
interior part would be a kind of Ghost, too thin in substance, too remote from
sense, too destitute of good fruit and use.

2. This Bodily part consists in outward expressions and performances, whereby
we declare our esteem and reverence of God, and produce or promote the like in
others. For our thus honoring God respects those two ends and effects, the
uttering our own, the exciting in others a reverence toward him. And it we may
first view in the general, or gross bulk thereof; then survey its principal
members.

First, in general, God is honored by a willing and careful practice of all
Piety and Virtue for conscience sake, or in avowed obedience to his holy will.
This is the most natural expression of our Reverence toward him, and the most
effectual way of promoting the same in others. A Subject cannot better
demonstrate the Reverence he bears toward his Prince, then by (with a cheerful
diligence) observing his Laws: for by so doing he declares that he
acknowledges the Authority, and revereth the Majesty which enacted them; that
he approves the Wisdom which devised them, and the Goodness which designed
them for public benefit; that he dreads his Prince's Power, which can maintain
them, and his Justice, which will vindicate them; that he relies upon his
Fidelity, in making good what of protection or of recompense he propounds to
the observers of them. No less pregnant a signification of our Reverence toward
God do we yield in our gladly and strictly obeying his Laws; thereby evidencing
our submission to God's sovereign Authority, our esteem of his Wisdom and
Goodness, our awful regard to his Power and Justice, our confidence in him,
and dependence upon his word. As also the practice of wholesome Laws, visibly
producing good fruits, (peace and prosperity in the commonwealth,) does
conciliate respect unto the Prince, he thereby appearing wise and good, able to
discern, and willing to choose what conferrs to public benefit: so actions
conformable to the Divine Law, being (by God's wise and gracious disposal) both
in themselves comely and lovely, and in effect (as S. Paul says) good and
profitable to men, (conducing indeed not Tit. 3. 8.
only to private, but also to public Neh. 9. 13.
welfare, to the rendering humane Society Deuteronomy. 10. 13.
comfortable, to the settling and securing common tranquillity,) the
performance of them must needs bring great commendation to the author and
ordainer of them. By observing them we shall (as S. Peter speaks) set forth the
virtues of him that called us to such a 1 Pe^. 2. 9.
practice. The light and luster of good works, done in regard to Divine
command, will cause men to see clearly the Excellencies of our most wise and
gracious Lord; will consequently induce and excite them to glorify our Father
which is in Heaven. In this (says our Matt. 5. 16.

Joh. 15. 8.


Savior) is my Father glorified, if you bear much fruit. The goodliness to the
sight, the pleasantness to the taste, which is ever perceptible in those fruits
which genuine Piety bears, the beauty men see in a calm mind and a sober
conversation, the sweetness they taste from works of justice and charity, will
certainly produce veneration to the Doctrine which teaches such things, and to
the Authority which enjoins them. It is an aggravation of Impiety, often
insisted upon in Scripture, that it slurrs Romans 2. 23.

Tit. 2. 5. 2 Samuel 12. 14.

Isa. 52. 5.

Ezekiel. 36. 20.


(as it were) and defames God, brings reproach and obloquy upon him, causes his
Name to be profaned, to be cursed, to be blasphemed; and it is answerably a
commendation of Piety, that by the practice thereof we (not only procure many
great advantages to our selves, many blessings and comforts here, all joys and
felicities hereafter; but do also thereby) beget esteem to God himself, and
sanctify his ever-blessed Ephesians. 4. 1.

Phil. 1. 27.

Colos. 1. 10.

1 These. 2. 12.


Name; cause him to be regarded and reverenced, his Name to be praised and
blessed among men. It is by exemplary Piety, by Romans 12. 17.
providing things honest in the sight of all men, by doing things honorable
and laudable, (such are all things which God has been pleased to command us,)
that we shall be sure to fulfill that precept of S. Paul, of doing 1 Cor. 10.
31.
all things to the glory of God: which is the Body of that duty we speak of.

Secondly, But there are, deserving a particular inspection, some members
thereof, which in a peculiar and eminent manner do constitute this Honor; some
acts which more signally conduce to the illustration of God's glory. Such are,

1. The frequent and constant performance (in a serious and reverent manner) of
all religious Duties, or Devotions immediately addressed to God, or conversant
about him: that which the Psalmist styles, Giving the Lord the honor Psalm. 29.
2.
due to his Name, worshipping the Lord in the beauty of Holiness.

2. Using all things peculiarly related unto God (his holy Name, his holy Word,
his holy Places, (the places where Psalm. 26. 8.
his honor dwells,) his holy Times, religious Fasts and Festivities,) with
Isa. 58. 13.
especial respect.

3. Yielding due observance to the Deputies and Ministers of God (both Romans 13.
4.

Mal. 2. 7.


Civil and Ecclesiastical) as such, or because of their relation to God: the
doing of which God declares that he interprets 1 Samuel 8. 7.

Matt. 10. 40.

Joh. 13. 20.


and accepts as done unto himself.

4. Freely spending what God has given us (out of respect unto him) in works
of Piety, Charity, and Mercy; 2 Cor. 9. 13.
that which the Wise man calls Honoring Prove. 3. 9.
the Lord with our substance. 14. 31.


5. All penitential Acts, by which we submit unto God, and humble our selves
before him. (As Achan, by confessing of Josh. 7. 19.

Apoc. 16. 9.


his sin, is said to give glory to the Lord God of Israel.)

6. Cheerful undergoing afflictions, losses, disgraces, for the profession of
God's truth, or for obedience to God's commands. (As S. Peter is said by his
Joh. 21. 19.
death, suffered upon such accounts, to glorify God.)

These signal instances of this duty (represented as such in Holy Scripture)
for brevitie's sake I pass over; craving leave only to consider one, most
pertinent to our present business, and indeed a very comprehensive one; which
is this:

7. We shall especially honor God, by discharging faithfully those offices
which God has entrusted us with; by improving diligently those talents which
God has committed to us; by using carefully those means and opportunities,
which God has vouchsafed us, of doing him service, and promoting his glory.
Thus he to whom God has given Wealth, if he expend it (not to the nourishment
of pride and luxury, not only to the gratifying his own pleasure or humor,
but) to the furtherance of God's honor, or to the succor of his indigent
neighbor, (in any pious or charitable way,) he does thereby in especial
manner honor God. He also on whom God has bestowed Wit and parts, if he
employ them (not so much in contriving projects to advance his own petty
interests, or in procuring vain applause to himself, as) in advantageously
setting forth God's praise, handsomely recommending goodness, dexterously
engaging men in ways of virtue, (doing which things is true wit and excellent
policy indeed,) he does thereby remarkably honor God. He likewise that has
Honor conferred upon him, if he subordinate it to God's honor, if he use his
own credit as an instrument of bringing credit to goodness, thereby adorning
and illustrating Piety, he by so doing does eminently practice this duty. The
like may be said of any other good quality, any capacity or advantage of doing
good; by the right use thereof we honor God: for that men, beholding the worth
of such good gifts, and feeling the benefit emergent from them, will be apt to
bless the donour of them; as did they in the Gospel, who, seeing our Savior
cure the Paralytick man, did presently glorify Matt. 9. 8.
God, who had given such power unto men. But especially they to whom Power and
Authority is committed, as they have the chief capacity, so they are under an
especial obligation thus to honor God: they are particularly concerned to hear
and observe that Royal proclamation, Give unto the Lord, O ye mighty, give
Psalm. 29. 1, 2.
unto the Lord glory and strength; Give unto the Lord the honor due unto his
name. When such persons (like King Nebuchadnezzar returned to his right senses)
do seriously acknowledge their power and eminency derived from God Dan. 4. 34.

I blessed the most High, and praised and hon ured him, etc.


alone; when they profess subjection unto him, and express it in their
practice, not only driving others by their power, but drawing them by their
example, to piety and goodness; when they cause God's Name to be duly
worshipped, and his Laws to be strictly observed; when they favor and
encourage Virtue, discourage and chastise wickedness; when they take care that
justice be impartially administered, innocence protected, necessity relieved,
all iniquity and oppression, all violence and disorder, yea, (so much as may
be) all affliction and wretchedness be prevented, or removed; when they by all
means strive to promote both the service of God, and the happiness of men;
(dispensing Matt. 24. 45.
equally and benignly, to the family over which their Lord has set them, their
meat in due season; providing that men under them may live a peaceable and 1 Timothy 2. 2.
quiet life in all godliness and honesty; doing which is the business allotted
to them, the interest (as it were) of God, which he declares himself
concernedly to tender, and by their ministry to prosecute:) when they carefully
do such things, then do they indeed approve themselves worthy honourers of
their High Master, and Heavenly King; then do they truly act God's part, and
represent his person decently. When the actions of these visible Gods are so
divinely good and beneficial, men will be easily induced, yea, can hardly
forbear to reverence and magnify the invisible Founder of their Authority. By
so doing, as they will set before men's eyes the best pattern of Loyalty; as
they will impress upon men's hearts the strongest argument for Obedience and
respect toward themselves; as they shall both more plainly inform, and more
effectually persuade people to the performance of their duty unto them, then by
all the law and all the force in the world; as they will thereby consequently
best secure and maintain their own honor, and their own welfare: (for men will
never be heartily loyal, and submissive to Authority, till they become really
good; nor will they ever be very good, till they see their Leaders such:) so
they will together greatly advance the praise and glory of Him in whose name
they rule, to whose favor they owe their power and dignity; in whose hand (as
the Prophet says) Dan. 5. 23.
is their breath, and whose are all their ways. For all men will be ready most
awfully to dread Him, unto whom they see Princes themselves humbly to stoop and
bow: no man will be ashamed or unwilling to serve Him, whom he shall observe
that his Lords and Governors do concern themselves to worship: the world
cannot but have a good opinion of Him, a participation of whose power and
majesty yields such excellent fruits; it will not fail to adore Him, whose
shadows and images are so venerable. It Is a most notorious thing, both to
reason and in experience, what extreme advantage Great persons have, especially
by the influence of their practice, to bring God himself, as it were, into
credit; how much it is in their power easily to render Piety a thing in fashion
and request. For in what they do, they never are alone, or are ill attended;
whither they go, they carry the world along with them: they lead crowds of
people after them, as well when they go in the right way, as when they run
astray. The custom of living well, no less then other modes and garbs, will be
soon conveyed and propagated from the Court; the City and Country will readily
draw good manners thence, (good manners truly so called, not only superficial
forms of civility, but real practices of goodness.) For the main body of men
goes not qua eundum, sed qua itur, not according to rules and reasons, but
after examples and authorities; especially of great persons, who are like
stars, shining in high and conspicuous places, by which men steer their course:
their actions are to be reckoned not as single or solitary ones, but are, like
their persons, of a public and representative nature, involving the practice
of others, who are by them awed, or shamed into compliance. Their good example
especially has this advantage, that men can find no excuse, can have no
pretense why they should not follow it. Piety is not only beautified, but
fortified by their dignity; it not only shines in them with a clearer luster,
but with a mightier force and influence: a word, a look (the least intimation)
from them will do more good, then others best eloquence, clearest reason, most
earnest endeavors. For it is in them, if they would apply themselves to it, as
the wisest Prince implies, to scatter iniquity with their eyes. A smile of
theirs Prove. 20. 8.
were able to enliven Virtue, and diffuse it all about; a frown might suffice
to mortify and dissipate wickedness. Such apparently is their power of
honoring God; and in proportion thereto surely great is their obligation to
do it: of them peculiarly God expects it, and all equity exacts it. What the
meaner rank of servants (who are employed in baser drudgeries, whose fare is
more course, whose wages are more scant, who stand at greater distance from
their Lord, and receive no such ample or express marks of his favor, what
these) do is of some consequence indeed, but does not import so much to the
Master's reputation; their good word concerning him, their good carriage toward
him does not credit him so much. But those whom he employs in matters of
highest trust, and importance to his affairs, whom he places in the nearest
degree unto himself, (seats even in his own throne, upon his own tribunal,)
whom he feeds plentifully and daintily, maintains in a handsome garb, allows
largely, as their deportment does much reflect on their Lord's esteem, as they
are highly capable of advancing his repute; so all the rules of ingenuity and
gratitude, all the laws of justice and equity do oblige them earnestly to
endeavor it. And it is indeed no less their concernment to do so. For if
there be disorders, prejudicial to the Master's honor and interest, frequently
committed in the family, it is those servants must be responsible: if due order
be there kept to his glory and advantage, they shall chiefly be commended, and
peculiarly hear the Euge, bone Matt. 25. 23.

Luke 12. 48.


serve. They must be loaded with other men's faults, or crowned for other men's
virtues, as their behavior has respectively contributed to them. Those
universal Rules of equity, proposed in the Gospel, will, in God's reckoning
with and requiting men, be punctually observed: To whomsoever much is given, of
him much shall be required: answerable to the improvement of what is delivered
in trust, shall the acceptance be.

I have insisted somewhat more largely on this point, because our Text has a
particular aspect thereon; the words being uttered upon occasion of Eli, then
Judge in Israel, his not using authority to these purposes; his forbearing to
redress a grievous abuse, committed by his own Sons, to the disservice and
dishonor of God. Whence to persons of his rank is this law especially
directed; upon them is this duty chiefly incumbent; on them assuredly, (as sure
as God is true,) if they will observe the Duty, the Reward shall be conferred.
God will certainly not only preserve the Honor they have already, but will
accumulate more Honors on them.

These are general Truths; the particular application of them is ours. God, I
pray, vouchsafe his grace and blessing, that it may be made to our benefit and
comfort.

III. I should now show why the Duty is required of us, or how reasonable it
is. I must not (and the matter is so palpable that I need not) spend many words
on that. God surely does not exact honor from us because he needs it, because
he is the better for it, because (...). Chrysostom. in Psalm. 144. and vide in Psalm.
103.
he (for its self) delights therein. For (beside that he cannot want any thing
without himself, that he cannot anywise need mortal breath to praise him, or
hands of flesh to serve him, who has millions of better creatures then we
absolutely at his devotion, and can with a word create millions of millions
more fitter then we to honor him) the best estimation we can have of him is
much below him; the best expression we can make is very unworthy of him. He is
infinitely excellent beyond what we can imagine or declare: his Name is exalted
above all blessing and praise; his Nehem. 9. 5.

Psalm. 148. 13.

Ecclus 43. 30.


glory is above the earth and heaven. So that all our endeavors to honor him
are, in comparison to what is due, but defects, and in a manner disparagements
to him. It Is only then (which should affect our ingenuity to consider) his
pure goodness that moves him, for our benefit and advantage, to demand it of us.

1. For that to honor God is the most proper work of Reason; that for which
primarily we were designed and framed: (for as other things were made to afford
the matter and occasion, so Man was designed to exercise the act of glorifying
God:) whence the performance thereof does preserve and perfect Sen. Ep. 76.
our nature; to neglect it being unnatural and monstrous.

2. For that also it is a most pleasant duty. He is not a man (has lost all
natural ingenuity and humanity) who does not delight to make some returns
thither, where he has found much good will, whence he has felt great
kindness. Since then all the good we have, we have received from God's favor,
it cannot but be very pleasant to render somewhat of requital (as it were) unto
him; and we can render no other but this. We cannot make God more rich, more
joyful, more happy then he is: all that we can do is, to express our
reverence toward him.

3. For that likewise our honoring God disposes us to the imitation of him,
(for what we do reverence we would resemble,) that is, to the doing those
things wherein our chief perfection and happiness consists, whence our best
content and joy does spring.

4. In fine, for that the practice of this duty is most profitable and
beneficial to us; unto it by an eternal rule of justice our final welfare and
prosperity being annexed: whence God has declared it to be the way and
condition of our attaining that thing which we so like and prize, Honor to our
selves; the which by promise he has engaged himself to confer on those who
honor him. And,

IV. This promise he makes good several ways: Some of them I shall briefly
suggest.

1. The honoring God is of it self an honorable thing; the employment which
ennobles Heaven it self, wherein the highest Angels do rejoice and glory. It Is
the greatest honor of a Servant to bring credit to his Master, of a Subject to
spread his Prince's renown, and (upon grounds vastly more obliging) of a
Creature to glorify his Maker: that we may do so is an honor we should be
glad, may be proud of.

2. By honoring God we are immediately instated in great Honor; we enter into
most noble relations, acquire most illustrious titles, enjoy most glorious
privileges: we become the friends and favorites of Heaven, are adopted into
God's family, and are styled his Children; do obtain a free access unto him, a
sure protection under him, a ready assistence from him in all our needs. And
what honor can exceed, can equal this?

3. God has so ordered it, that Honor is naturally consequent upon the
honoring (...), etc. Naz. Orat. de Paup.
him. God has made Goodness a noble and a stately thing; has impressed upon
it that beauty and majesty Is gloria maxim excellit, qui virtute plurimum
praestat. Cic.
which commands an universal love and veneration, (...). Aristor. Eth. 4. 3.
which strikes presently both a kindly and an awful respect into the minds of
all men. The Prove. 12. 26.
righteous is (not only in Adeo gratiosa virtus est, ut insitum sit etiam
malis probare meliora. Sen. de Benef: 4. 17.
himself, but in common esteem) more excellent then his neighbor. Power may be
dreaded, Riches may be courted, Wit and Knowledge may be admired; but only
Goodness is truly esteemed and honored. Not only men of goodness and (...).
Plat. de Repub. XII.
discretion, but even the vulgar sort of men (yea, as Plato has well observed,
the worst men) do pass this judgment, do prefertrue Goodness above all things.

4. God by his extraordinary providence, as there is reason and occasion, does
interpose, so as to procure Honor to them, to maintain and further their
reputation, who honor him. God fashioneth the hearts of men: The hearts Psalm.
33. 15.
of the greatest men are in his hand; he Prove. 21. 1.
turns them as the rivers of waters, whithersoever he will: he consequently
raises or depresseth us, as he pleases, in the judgments and affections of
men. When Prove. 16. 7.
a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his enemies to be at peace with
him, says the Wise man; that is, he disposes the most averse minds to love
and honor him. No envy can supplant, no slander can deface the credit of such
a person; since God has taken it into his charge and care, since he has said
it, that he will bring forth his righteousness Psalm. 37. 6.
as the light, and his judgment as the noonday. God also by secret methods and
undiscernible trains, orders all events, managing our thoughts and designs,
Psalm. 30. 7. and 90. 17.
our enterprises and actions so, that the result of them shall be matter of
benefit, comfort, and reputation, or of disaster, regret, and disgrace, as he
thinks good. Victory and success he absolutely disposes of, and consequently
of the Honor that follows them; and they do usually attend the honourers of
God: for (as it is in the Psalm) A good Psalm. 111. 10.

Prove. 3. 4.


success have they who keep his commandments. Many are the instances of persons
(such as Abraham, Joseph, Moses, David, Job and Daniel) who, for their signal
honoring of God, from a base and obscure, or from an afflicted and forlorn
condition, have, in ways strange and wonderful, been advanced to eminent
dignity, have been rendered most illustrious, by the providence of him who
raises the poor out of the dust, and 1 Samuel 2. 8.

Psalm. 107. 41.


lifts the beggar out of the dunghill, to set them among Princes, and to make
them inherit the throne of glory. He does it in an evident manner, and eminent
degree, to some; he does it in a convenient way, and competent measure, to all
that honor him.

5. Whereas men are naturally inclined to bear much regard to the judgment Cic.
Tusc. I.
of Posterity concerning them, are desirous to leave a Good name behind them,
and to have their memory retained in esteem: God so disposes things, that the
memory of the just shall be blessed; Prove. 10. 7.
that his righteousness shall be had in Psalm. 112. 6.
everlasting remembrance; that his light Prove. 13. 9.
shall rejoice, (or burn clearly and pleasantly, even when (...). Plat. Epist.
2.
his life is put out here.) No spices can so embalm a man, no monument can so
preserve his name and memory, as a pious conversation, whereby God has been
honored, and men benefited. The fame of such a person is, in the best
judgments, far more precious and truly glorious, then is the fame of those who
have excelled in any other deeds or qualities. For what sober man does not in
his thoughts afford a more high and hearty respect to those poor Fishermen, who
by their heroical activity and patience did honor God in the propagation of
his heavenly Truth, then to all those Hectors in Chivalry, those Conquerours
and atchievers of mighty exploits, (those Alexanders and Caesar's,) who have
been renowned for doing things which seemed great, rather then for performing
what was truly good? To the honor of those excellent poor men conspicuous
monuments have been erected everywhere; anniversary memorials of their (...),
etc. Chrysostom. in 2 Cor. Or. 27.
names and virtues are celebrated; they are never mentioned or thought of
without respect; their commendations are interwoven with the praises of their
great Lord and Maker, whom they honored.

6. Lastly, to those who honor God here, God has reserved an honor
infinitely great and excellent, in comparison whereto all Honors here are but
dreams, the loudest acclamations of mortal men are but empty sounds, the
brightest glories of this world are but duskish and fleeting shadows; an honor
most solid, most durable; an eternal weight of glory. They shall in the 2 Cor.
4. 17.
face of all the world be approved by the most righteous Judge his
unquestionable Sentence; they shall be esteemed in the unanimous opinion of
Angels and Saints; they shall be applauded by the general voice and attestation
of Heaven; thev shall then be seated upon unmovable Thrones, their heads
encircled with unfading Crowns, their faces shining with rays of unconceivable
Glory and majesty. The less of Honor they have received here, in this
transitory moment of life, the more thereof they shall enjoy in that future
eternal state: where, with him who, through the whole course of his life,
sought not Joh. 8. 49, 50.
his own honor, but the honor of him that sent him; who, for the suffering of
Heb. 2. 9.
death, was crowned with glory and honor; who, for the joy that was set before
12. 2.
him, endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set at the right hand of
God; with those who consecrated all their endeavors, and who sacrificed their
lives to the promoting of God's Honor, they shall possess everlasting glory.
Which, together with them, God Almighty of his infinite mercy grant unto us
all, through Jesus Christ our Lord; to whom, with God the Father, and God the
Holy Ghost, be for ever all Honor and Praise.

Amen.
The Fifth Sermon.
PROVE. 10. 9. He that walks uprightly, walks surely.
THE world is much addicted to the Politics; the heads of men are very busy
in contrivance, and their mouths are full of talk about the ways of consulting
our safety, and securing our interests. May we not therefore presume, that an
infallible Maxim of Policy, proposing the most expedite and certain method of
security in all our transactions, will be entertained with acceptance? Such an
one the greatest Politician and wisest man for business (if we may take God's
own word for it) that ever was, or will be, 1 King. 3. 12.
does here suggest to us. For the practice couched in our Text he otherwhere
voucheth for a point of Policy, telling us, that A man of understanding walks
uprightly: and here he recommendeth Prove. 15. 21.
it as a method of Security, He that walks uprightly, walks surely.

Treating upon which Aphorism, I shall, by God's help, endeavor, first, in way
of Explication, briefly to describe the practice it self; then, in way of
Proof, by some Considerations to declare, that Security does attend it.

For Explication. To walk (as well in the style of Holy Scripture, as in other
Writings, and even in common speech) does signify our usual course of dealing,
or the constant tenor of our practice.

Uprightly, according to the original, might be rendered, in perfection, or,
with (...)
integrity: And by the Greek Translatours in several places is supposed chiefly
to denote Sincerity and Purity of intention.

In effect, the Phrase, He that walks uprightly, does import, One who is
constantly disposed in his designs and dealings to bear a principal regard to
the rules of his Duty, and the dictates of his He that walks in his
uprightness, seareth the Lord. Prove. 14 2.
Conscience; who in every case emergent is ready to perform that which upon
good deliberation does appear most just and fit, in conformity to God's Law and
sound Reason, without being swayed by any appetite, any passion, any sinister
respect to his own private interest of profit, credit, or pleasure, to the
commission of any unlawful, irregular, unworthy or base act; who generally
does act out of good principles; (namely, reverence to God, charity to men,
sober regard to his own true welfare;) who does aim at good ends, that is, at
God's honor, public benefit, his own Salvation, other good things subordinate
to those, or well consistent with them; who does prosecute his designs by
lawful means, in fair ways, such as honest providence and industry, veracity
and fidelity, dependence upon God's help, and prayer for his blessing: In
short, One who never advisedly does undertake any bad thing, nor any good thing
to ill purposes; nor does use any foul means to compass his intents.

For Proof. That such an one does ever proceed with much security, from the
following Considerations may appear.

I. An upright walker is secure of easily finding his way. For it commonly
requires no reach of wit or depth of judgment, no laborious diligence of
enquiry, no curious intentness of observation, no solicitous care, or plodding
study, to discern in any case what is just; we need not much trouble our heads
about it, for we can hardly be to seek for it. If we will but open our eyes, it
lies in view before us, being the plain, straight, obvious road, which common
Reason prompteth, or which ordinary Instruction points out to us: so that
usually that direction of Solomon is sufficient, Let thine eyes look right on,
Prove. 4. 25, 27 and 17. 24. and 14. 6.
and let thine eyelids look straight before thee -- Turn not to the right
hand, nor to the left.

The ways of iniquity and vanity, (if we may call them ways, which indeed are
but exorbitancies and seductions from the way,) ill designs, and bad means of
executing designs, are very unintelligible, very obscure, abstruse and
intricate; being infinitely various, and utterly uncertain: so that out of them
to pick and fix ^n this or that, may puzzle our head^ and perplex our hearts;
as to pursue any of them, may involve us in great difficulty and trouble. But
the ways of Truth, of Right, of Virtue, are so very simple and uniform, so
fixed and permanent, so clear and notorious, that we can hardly miss them, or
(except wilfully) swarve from them. For they by Divine wisdom were chalked
out, not only for ingenious and subtle persons, (men of great parts, of
refined wits, of long experience,) but rather for the vulgar community of men,
the great Body of God's subjects, consisting in persons of meanest capacity,
and smallest improvement: being designed to make wise the Psalm. 19. 7. and 119.
130.

Prove. 8. 5.

Prove. 1. 4.

Psalm. 119. 9.


simple, to give the young man knowledge and discretion; to direct all sorts of
people in their duty, toward their happiness; according to that in the Prophet,
A high way shall be there, and it Isa. 35. 8.

(...), LXX.


shall be called the way of Holiness -- the wayfaring-man, though fools, shall
not err therein.

They are in very legible characters graven by the finger of God upon our Romans
2. 15.

Isa. 30. 21.

Psalm. 37. 31.


hearts and consciences, so that by any considerate reflection inwards we may
easily read them: or they are extant in God's Word, there written as with a
Sunbeam, so perspicuously expressed, so frequently inculcated, that without
gross negligence or strange dullness we cannot but descry them. For who with
half an eye may not see, that the practice of pious love and reverence toward
God, of entire justice and charity toward our neighbor, of sober temperance
and purity toward our selves, is approved by Reason, is prescribed by God to us?

Hence in the Holy Scripture, as bad ways are called dark, crooked, Prove. 4.
19. and 2. 13, 15.

Joh. 8. 12. Psalm. 82. 5. and 125. 5. and 35. 6. and 73. 18.

Jer. 23. 12.


rough, slippery ways; so the good ways are said to be Heb. 12. 13. Psalm. 5. 8.

Luke 3. 5. Prove. 3. 23.

Deuteronomy. 5. 32. and 28. 14.


clear, plain, direct, even ways. Prove. 4. 18.

Prove. 8. 8, 9. and 14. 6.


The path of the just (say they) is as a shining light. All the words of my
mouth are plain to him that (...), LXX.
understands, (or, that considers them.) My foot stands Psalm. 26. 12.
in an even place. The Law of his God is in his heart: Psalm. 37. 21. and 26. 1.
and 17. 5. and 18. 36.
none of his steps shall slide.

Hence it is affirmed, that an upright man does hardly need any conduct beside
his own honesty. For, The integrity Prove. 11. 3.
(says Solomon) of the upright shall guide them; and, The righteousness of the
Prove. 11. 5.
perfect shall direct his way.

But in case such an one should ever be at a stand or at a loss, in doubt of
his course, he has always at hand a most sure guide to conduct or direct him.
It is but asking the way of him, or saying, with the Psalmist, Show me thy
Psalm. 25. 4. and 16. 11. and 17. 5.

Psalm. 143. 10. and 139. 24. and 119. 27.

Psalm. 119. 10, 27, 33, 35, etc.


ways, O Lord, teach me thy paths; Teach me to do thy will, and, Lead me in
the way everlasting; O let me not wander from thy commandments: and then Isa.
30. 21.
his ears (as the Prophet says) shall hear a word behind him saying, This is
the way, walk you in it; then the words of the Psalmist shall be verified, What
man is he Psalm. 25. 9. 12. and 37. 23.


that fears the Lord? him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose. The
meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek he will teach his way.

Hence is the upright man happily secured from tiring pains in the search, from
racking anxieties in the choice, from grating scruples and galling regrets in
the pursuit of his way.

II. The upright walker does tread (Prove. 12. 5.)
upon firm ground. He does build his practice, not upon the perilous bogs, the
treacherous quagmires, the devouring quicksands of uncouth, bold, impious
Paradoxes, (such as have been vented by Epicurus, by Machiavel, by others more
lately, whose infamous names are too well known, as the effects of their
pestilent notions are too much felt;) but upon solid, safe, approved, and
well-tried principles; viz. these, and the like coherent with them: That there
is an eternal God, incomprehensibly powerful, wise, just, and good; who is
always present with us, and ever intent upon us; viewing not only all our
external actions, (open and secret,) but our inmost cogitations, desires, and
intentions, by the which our actions chiefly are to be estimated: That He, as
Governor of the world, and Judge of men, does concern himself in all humane
affairs, disposing and managing all events according to his righteous pleasure;
exacting punctual obedience to his laws, and dispensing recompenses answerable
thereto; with impartial justice rewarding each man according to the purposes of
his heart, and the practices of his life: That all our good and happiness does
absolutely depend on God's favor; so that to please him can only be true
wisdom, and to offend him the great folly: That Virtue is incomparably the
best endowment whereof we are capable, and Sin the worst mischief to which we
are liable: That no worldly good or evil is considerable in comparison with
goods or evils spiritual: That nothing can be really profitable or advantageous
to us, which does not consist with our duty to God, does not some-wise conduce
to our spiritual interest, and eternal welfare: yea, That every thing not
serviceable to those purposes is either a frivolous trifle, or a dangerous
snare, or a notable damage, or a woeful bane to us: That content of mind,
springing from innocence of life, from the faithful discharge of our duty,
from satisfaction of Conscience, from a good hope in regard to God and our
future state, is in our esteem and choice much to be preferred before all the
delights which any temporal possession or fruition can afford: and, That a bad
mind is the sorest adversity which can befall us. Such are the grounds of
upright practice, more firm then any rock, more unshakeable then the
foundations of heaven and earth; the which are assured by the Sacred Oracles,
and attested by many remarkable Providence; have ever been avowed by the wiser
sort, and admitted by the general consent of men, as for their truth, most
agreeable to Reason, and for their usefulness, approved by constant experience.
The belief of them having apparently most wholesome influence upon all the
concerns of life, both public and private; indeed, being absolutely needful
for upholding Government, and preserving humane Society; no obligation, no
faith or confidence between men, no friendship or peace being able to subsist
without it. Whence the practice built on such foundations must be very secure.
And if God shall not cease to be, if he will not let go the reins, if his Word
cannot deceive, if the wisest men are not infatuated, if the common sense of
mankind do not prove extravagant, if the main props of life and pillars of
Society do not fail; he that walks uprightly does proceed on sure grounds.

III. The upright person does walk steddily, maintaining his principal
resolutions, and holding his main course, through all occasions, without
flinching or wavering, or desultory inconsistence and sickleness; his integrity
being an excellent ballast, holding him tight and well-poised in his
deportment; so that waves of temptation dashing on him do not make him roll in
uncertainty, or topple over into unworthy practices.

Lust, passion, humor, interest, are things very mutable, as depending upon
temper of body, casualties of time, the winds and tides of this vertiginous
world: whence he that is guided or moved by them must needs be manyminded, and
unstable in all his ways; Jam. 1. 8.
will reel to and fro like a drunken man, Psalm. 107. 27.
and be at his wit's ends; never enjoying any settled rest of mind, or
observing a smooth tenor of action. But good Conscience is very stable, and
persisteth unvaried through all circumstances of time, in all vicissitudes of
fortune. For it steereth by immovable pole-stars, the inviolable rules of duty;
it aims at marks which no force can stir out of their place; its objects of
mind and affection are not transitory; its hopes and confidences are fixed on
the rock of ages. Whence an upright person in all cases, and all conditions,
(prosperous or adverse,) is the same man, and goes the same way. Contingencies
of affairs do not (...).
unhindge his mind from its good purposes, Justum and tenacem propositi virum,
etc. Hor.
or divert his foot from the right course. Let the weather be fair or foul, let
the world smile or frown, let him get or lose by it, let him be favored or
crossed, commended or reproached, (by 2 Cor. 6. 8.
honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report,) he will do what his
duty requires: the external state of things must not alter the moral reason of
things with him. This is that which the Psalmist observes of him; He shall not
be Psalm. 112. 7, 8.

Prove. 3. 25.


afraid of evil tidings, for his heart stands fast, and believes in the
Lord. His heart is stablished, and will not shrink. And this the Wise man
promises to him; Commit thy works unto the Lord, Prove. 16. 3.
and thy thoughts shall be established.

Hence a man is secured from diffidence in himself, and distraction in his
mind, from frequently being off the hooks, from leading an unequal life,
clashing with it self, from deluding and disappointing those with whom he
converseth or deals, and consequently from the inconveniences issuing thence.

IV. The way of Uprightness is the surest for dispatch, and the shortest cut
toward the execution or attainment of any good purpose; securing a man from
irksome expectations and tedious delays, the which (as the Wise man says) do
make the heart sick. Prove. 13. 12.


It in Scripture is called the straight Luke 3. 5.
and the plain way. And as in Geometry, of all lines or surfaces contained
within the same bounds, the straight line and the plain surface are the
shortest; so it is also in morality: by the right line of Justice, upon the
plain ground of Virtue, a man soonest will arrive to any well-chosen end.

In this way there are no bewildring intrigues and mazes, no crooked windings
and turnings, no occasions forcing men to dance hither and thither, to skip
backward and forward, to do and undo; which courses do protract business, and
commonly do hinder from ever dispatching it. But a man acting justly and
fairly, does continually proceed on in the direct open road, without retreat,
excursion, or deflexion; not turning Prove. 4. 27.

Deuteronomy. 5. 32. and 28. 14.


aside (as the phrase is in Holy Writ) to the right hand, or to the left.

To clamber over fences of Duty, to break through hedges of Right, to trespass
upon hallowed enclosures, may seem the most short and compendious ways of
getting thither where one would be: But does not a man venture breaking his
neck, or scratching his face, incurring mischief and trouble thereby? Is he not
liable to the fate to which the Preacher doometh him, He that diggeth a pit
shall fall into it: Eccles 10. 8.
and whosoever breaks a hedge, a serpent shall bite him? For instance, to grow
rich, fraud, extortion, corruption, oppression, overreaching and supplanting
may seem the readiest and most expedite ways; but in truth they are the
farthest ways about, or rather no ways at all: for that which is got by those
means is not our own; nor is the possession of it truly wealth, but usurpation,
or detention of spoil or rapine, which we ought to disgorge. And however, to
the getting it there are often mighty difficulties occurring from men, there
are commonly insuperable obstacles interposed (Prove. 23. 10, 11.)
by God; who has expressly condemned and cursed those ways, declaring, that
Wealth gotten by vanity (or Prove. 13. 11.

Prove. 22. 16.


cozenage) shall be diminished; that He that oppresses to increase his riches,
shall surely come to want; that He who (thus) Prove. 28. 22, 20. and 13. 11. and
21. 6.
hastes to be rich, has an evil eye, and considers not that poverty shall
come upon him; that, As the partridge sits on Jer. 17. 11.
eggs, and hatcheth them not: so he that gets riches, and not by right,
shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a fool.
Whereas the plain way of honest harmless industry, (joined with a pious regard
to him who is the dispenser of all good things,) how slow soever it may seem,
is the most speedy, because the only safe, way to thrive; having, beside all
secondary advantages, the security of those Oracles; The hand Prove. 10. 4. and
28. 19.

Prove. 13. 11.

Prove. 22. 4.

Psalm. 112. 3.


of the diligent shall make rich: He that gathers by labor, shall increase:
By humility and the fear of the Lord are riches, and honor, and life.

V. The way of Uprightness is in it Prove. 28. 18.

Prove. 16. 17. and 13. 6. and 10. 29.


self very safe, free of danger, tending to no mischief; according to those
sayings of the Wise man; There shall no evil Prove. 12. 21.
happen to the just: In the way of righteousness Prove. 12. 28.
is life; and in the path thereof there is no death.

He who designeth only that which is just and reasonable, who innocently and
fairly prosecuteth his intent, can run no great hazard, cannot fall into any
extreme disaster, cannot irrecoverably sink into miserable disappointment.
Psalm. 37. 24.


He probably will not receive much harm from men, or trouble from the world:
for, as he means innocently, as he deals inoffensively, (not violently
assailing, not fraudulently circumventing, not any-wise injuriously or
maliciously abusing any man,) as he does yield no just provocation or urgent
temptation to oppose him; so he is not very likely to meet with obstructions or
crosses thwarting his designs. He can hardly raise up adversaries; at least
such as will prove very formidable, or very fierce and implacable toward him.

He may be sure that few wise men, and no good men will trouble him; but that
such rather will afford their countenance and furtherance to his undertakings.

But assuredly he shall have the favorable protection of Almighty God, who
thoroughly knowing his heart, and observing the righteousness of his intentions
and proceedings, will not suffer him to incurr any notable, destructive,
remediless calamity. His prayer, Psalm. 25. 21.

(Prove. 13. 6. and 11. 6.)

Prove. 2. 7. and 18. 10. and 28. 18. and 29. 25.

Psalm. 18. 2, 30, 35. and 23. 4. and 24. 4, 5.

Job 11. 14, 15.


dictated by good conscience, Let integrity and uprightness preserve me, will
certainly be heard; God having passed his word for it in numberless places of
Scripture; particularly in those remarkable words of Isay: Isa. 33. 15, 16.
He that walks righteously and speaks uprightly, he that despises the gain
of oppressions, that shakes his hands from holding of bribes, that stops
his ears from hearing of blood, and shuts his eyes from seeing evil; He
shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be the munitions of rocks, his
bread shall be given him, his water shall be sure. That is, A man who is
constantly upright in his dealings, shall by the Divine Providence be
infallibly and impregnably preserved from any grievous mischief, from any sore
want, from any extreme distress.

The way of Uprightness is ever guarded with Angels, ready to promote the
affairs of the honest person, or at least to protect him from evil. He may
hopefully say to himself, as Abraham did to his Servant, The Lord, before whom
I Genesis 24. 40.
walk, will send his Angel with thee, and prosper thy way: or he confidently
may apply to himself that of the Psalmist, He shall give his Angels charge over
thee, to keep thee in all thy ways: They shall Psalm. 91. 11, 12.
bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone.

However, the sequel will be tolerable: whatever the success of his
undertaking be, it can be no ruin, no slurr, no heartbreaking to him. His
Conscience is safe, his credit is ent re, his hopes are good; he is perfectly
secure from being tainted with foul guilt, from being exposed to due reproach,
from being stung with vexatious remorse, from being plunged into a gulf of
desperation or disconsolateness. For,

VI. The way of Uprightness is fair and pleasant. He that walks in it has
good weather, and a clear sky about him; a hopeful confidence, and a
cheerful satisfaction do ever wait upon him. It is joy (as the Wise man Prove.
21. 15.
says) to the just to do judgment.

Being conscious to himself of an honest (Prove. 23. 17, 18.)
meaning, and a due course of prosecuting it, he feels no check or struggling
of mind, no regret or sting of heart; being thoroughly satisfied and pleased
with what he is about, his judgment approving, and his will acquiescing in his
procedure, as worthy of himself, agreeable to reason, and conformable to his
duty.

He therefore briskly moves forward with alacrity and courage; there being
within him nothing to control or countermand him, to pull him back, to make
him halt, to distract or disturb him.

Nor hardly can any thing abroad dismay or discourage him. For he may
reasonably hope for the good will of men, and cannot hugely dread their
opposition. He may strongly presume upon the propitious aspect and favorable
succor of Heaven, which always smileth and casts benign influences Prove. 11.
20.
on honest undertakings.

He that has chosen a good way, may with assurance commend his way to Jer. 32.
19.

Prove. 24. 14.


God's providence; he may depend upon God for his concurrent benediction; he
with an humble boldness may address Heb. 4. 16.
prayers to God for his protection and aid. He so doing has interest in diverse
clear declarations and express promises of good success; such as those: Commit
thy Psalm. 37. 5. and 55. 22.

Prove. 16. 3. Ecclus 2. 10.

Psalm. 34. 22. and 26. 1. and 33. 21. Prove. 10. 24.


way unto the Lord, trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass. The Lord
is nigh unto Psalm. 145. 18, 19. and 34. 15. and 26. 11. Job 22. 27.
all that call upon him in truth: He will fulfill the desire of them that fear
him; he will hear their cry, and will save them.

He may dare to refer his case to the severest examination: saying with Job,
Let me be weighed in an even balance, Job 31. 6.
that God may know mine integrity; and with the Psalmist, Judge me, O Lord,
Psalm. 7. 8. and 26. 1.
according to my righteousness, and according to mine integrity that is in me.

He with an humble confidence can appeal to God, borrowing the words of
Hezekiah, I beseech thee, O Lord, remember 2 King. 20. 3.
how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done
that which is good in thy sight.

Hence, The Hope of the righteous (as Prove. 10. 28.
the Wise man tells us) is gladness. He considering the goodness, the
justice, the fidelity of God, whereof his integrity does render him capable and
a proper object, cannot but conceive a comfortable hope of a good issue.

And obtaining success, he does not only enjoy the material pleasure thereof,
but the formal satisfaction that it is indeed good success, or a blessing
indulged to him by special favor of God; enabling him to say with the
Psalmist, The Lord rewarded me according to my Psalm. 18. 20, 21.
righteousness; according to the cleanness of my hands has he recompensed me.
For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed from my
God.

However, an upright dealer has this comfortable reserve, that whatever does
befall him, however the business goes, he shall not condemn, and punish
himself with remorse; he shall not want a consolation able to support and to
erect his mind. He shall triumph, if not in the felicity of his success, yet in
(Prove. 24. 16.)
the integrity of his heart, and the innocence of his deportment; even as
Blessed Job did under all the pressures of his adversity: for, Till I die,
(said he) I will not remove my integrity from me. Job 27. 5, 6.
My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go: my heart shall not
reproach me so long as I live.

So true it is upon all accounts, that, according to that assertion in the
Psalm, Light is sown for the righteous, and joyful Psalm. 97. 11.
gladness for the upright in heart.

VII. He that walks uprightly is secure as to his honor and credit. He is
sure not to come off disgracefully, either at home in his own apprehensions, or
abroad in the estimations of men. He does not blush at what he is doing, nor
does reproach himself for what he has done. No blemish or blame can stick upon
his proceeding.

By pure Integrity a man first maintains a due respect and esteem for
himself, then preserves an entire reputation with others: he reflecteth on his
own heart with complacence, and looks upon the world with confidence. He has
no fear of being detected, or care to smother his intents. He is content that
his thoughts should be sounded, and his actions sifted to the bottom. He could
even wish, that his breast had windows, that his heart were transparent, that
all the world might see through him, and descry the clearness of his
intentions. The more curiously his ways are marked, the more exactly his
dealings are scanned, the more thoroughly his designs are penetrated and known;
the greater approbation he is sure to receive.

The issue of things assuredly will be creditable to him; and when the daylight
has scattered all mists, has cleared all misprisions and mistakes, his
reputation will shine most brightly: the event declaring, that he had no
corrupt ends; the course of his proceedings being justified by the very light
of things.

God himself will be concerned to vindicate his reputation, not suffering him
to be considerably defamed; according to that promise, He shall bring forth thy
righteousness as the light, and thy Psalm. 37. 6, 19. and 34. 5.

1 Pet. 2. 6.


judgment as the noonday. That in Job will be made good to him, Then shall Job
11. 15.
thou lift up thy face without spot: and he may confidently aver with the
Psalmist, Then shall I not be ashamed, when Psalm. 119. 6, 39, 46.
I have respect to all thy commandments.

If he finds good success, it will not be invidious, appearing well deserved,
and fairly procured: it will be truly honorable as a fruit and recompense
Psalm. 91. 15.
of Virtue, as a mark and pledge of the Divine favor toward him.

If he seems disappointed, yet he will not be disparaged: wise and candid men
will excuse him; good men will patronize his cause; no man of sense and
ingenuity will insult on his misfortune. He shall not (as the Psalmist Psalm.
37. 19.
assures) be ashamed in an evil time. Yea, often his repute from under a cloud
will shine, if not with so glaring splendor, yet with a pleasant luster;
Uprightness disposing him to bear adverse events with a graceful decency.

VIII. The particular methods of acting which Uprightness disposes to observe,
do yield great security from troubles and crosses in their transactions.

What is the conduct of the upright man? He is clear, frank, candid, harmless,
consistent in all his behavior, his discourse, his dealing. His heart commonly
Prove. 13. 5.

Psalm. 36. 3, 4. and 34. 13. and 15. 3.


may be seen in his face, his mind does ever suit with his speech, his deeds
have a just correspondence with his professions: he never fails to perform
what he does promise, and to satisfy the expectations which he has raised.

He does not wrap himself in clouds, that none may see where he is, or know how
to find him; may discern what he is about, or whither he tends.

He disguiseth not his intents with fallacious Prove. 10. 18.
pretenses of conscience, of public good, of special friendship, and respect.

He does use no disingenuous, spiteful, unjust tricks or sleights to serve the
present turn.

He lays no baits or snares to catch Jer. 5. 26.

(Psalm. 64. 5. and 56. 6. and 9. 15. and 7. 15. and 10. 2. and 57. 6. and 35.
7. and 140. 5.

Prove. 26. 27.

Eccles 10. 8.)


men, alluring them into mischief or inconvenience.

As he does not affect any poor base ends, so he will not defile his fair
intentions by sordid means of compassing them; such as are illusive
simulations, and subdolous artifices, treacherous collusions, Psalm. 10. and 55.
21. and 64. 6. and 10. 9, 10. and 56. 5.

Romans 16. 18.

Ecclus 19. 26.

2 Samuel 15. 5.

Prove. 11. 9. and 26. 25.


sly insinuations, and sycophantick detractions, versatile whifflings and
dodgings, flattering colloguings and glozings, servile crouchings and fawnings,
and the like.

He has little of the Serpent, (none of its lurking insidiousness, of its
surprising violence, of its rancorous venom, of its keen mordacity,) but much
of the Dove, (all its simplicity, its gentleness, its fidelity, its innocence,)
in his conversation and commerce.

His wisdom is ever tempered with sincerity, and seasoned with humanity, with
meekness, with charity; being the wisdom which is from above, first pure, Jam.
3. 17.
then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of good fruits, without
partiality, and without hypocrisy.

He sometime may prudently reserve Prove. 14. 33. and 29. 11. and 13. 16. and
13. 3. and 21. 23. and 12. 23.

Ecclus 20. 7.


his mind, not venting it by foolish loquacity: but his words do never clash
with his meaning, so as to deceive or disappoint any man.

He may warily prevent harm and decline Prove. 22. 3. and 27. 12. and 14. 8. and
14. 15, 16.
perils: but it is without hurtful countermining, or deriving mischief on his
neighbor.

He may discreetly pick out seasons, Eccles 8. 5.
and embrace opportunities of righting or benefiting himself: but he never will
seek or lay hold of advantages to prejudice others.

He sometimes may repress insurrections of anger or disgust: but he never does
Prove. 12. 16. 19. 11.
allow them to bake into rancour or malice.

He may be apt to use courteous, affable, obliging demeanor, serving to breed
friendships, and to stifle enmities: but he never thereby means to gull,
inveigle and entrap men; or to procure instruments and aids of any perverse
design.

He is no enemy to himself, but (according to the obligations of reason and
conscience) he has always a regard to the good of others; nor is ever so
selfish, as to be unjust or uncharitable to any man.

The principal engines he does employ for atchieving his enterprises are, a
careful and cautious providence in contriving, a sedulous and steady diligence
in acting, a circumspect heedfulness not to provoke any man by offensive
carriage, by injury, by discourtesie, to obstruct him, but rather by kind
demonstrations and real beneficence to engage men to further him in his
proceedings: but especially his main instrument, wherein he most consideth, is
devout supplication to God for his succor and blessing.

Now is not this conduct the most secure that can be? does it not afford many
great commodities and advantages? does it not exempt from manifold fears, and
cares, and crosses, and slaveries?

It cannot but derive blessings from the God of truth, the great friend of
simplicity and sincerity, the hater of falsehood and guile.

Prove. 12. 22.

(Pro. 12. 19.)


And humanely regarding things, he that uses these methods, does from them
obtain many conveniences. He does not lie under perpetual constraint, engaged
to keep a constant guard upon himself, to watch his memory, to curb his tongue,
to manage his very looks and gestures, lest they betray his intentions, and
disclose his plots. He is not at the trouble of stopping holes, of mending
flaws, of patching up repugnancies in his actions, that his mind do not break
through them. He is not afraid of the disappointment and shame which attend the
detection of unworthy designs. He is not at pains to obviate the jealousies,
the surmises, the diffidences, the counterplots, the preventive oppositions and
assaults, which gloomy closeness and crafty dissimulation Prove. 26. 25. 10. 18.
21. 6.
ever do raise against the practisers of them. In fine, men do not shun the
conversation Psalm. 26. 4.
and the commerce of an upright person, but gladly do consort and deal with
him; do seek his acquaintance and alliance: they are not apt to distrust him,
to suspect him, to be shy and reserved in their intercourse with him; but
readily do place an entire confidence in him, and use a clear frankness toward
him. No man does fear him as dangerous, or will cross him as an adversary.
Whence as he seldom has cause to fear, or occasion to contest with others; so
he does undisturbedly enjoy the benefits of Society with great safety, ease,
and comfort.

IX. Lastly, An upright walker has perfect security, as to the final result of
affairs, that he shall not be quite baffled in his expectations and desires.
And if prosperity does consist in a satisfaction of mind concerning events, he
cannot fail of most prosperous success. Whatsoever Psalm. 1. 3.

Prove. 12. 21.


he does (says the Psalmist of him) it shall prosper. How is that? Does he,
if he warreth, always get the victory? is he perpetually, when he tradeth, a
considerable gainer? will he certainly after sowing reap a plentiful crop?
Probably yea; and perhaps no: Yet assuredly he shall prosper, in the true
notion of prosperity, explained by those Divine Sayings; Mark the perfect man,
and behold the Psalm. 37. 37.
upright: for the end of that man is peace. The work of righteousness shall be
peace, Isa. 32. 17.
and the effect of righteousness quietness and assurance for ever. Surely I
know it Eccles 8. 12.
shall be well with them that fear God.

He cannot be much defeated in his purposes: for, as to his general, principal,
absolute designs, (that is, his design of pleasing God, and procuring his
favor; his design of satisfying himself, and discharging his Conscience; his
design of promoting his own spiritual interest, and saving his Soul; his design
of doing good, of exercising charity to his neighbor, of serving the public,
of obliging the world by virtuous example, and by real beneficence,) these he
cannot fail thoroughly to accomplish; nothing can obstruct him in the
prosecution, nothing can debar him from the execution of those undertakings;
in spite of all the world, by the succor of that Divine grace which ever does
favor and further such designs, he most happily will atchieve them. And for
other inferior designs, he can hardly be crossed in regard to them: for it is
an essential part of integrity, not otherwise to affect or aim at private
secular interests, then under condition, and with a reservation, if it be God's
pleasure, if it seem good to Divine Wisdom. He knows that his pains employed
on any honest purpose, in a fair way, (be it to procure some worldly advantage
for himself, for his relations, for his friend,) are not lost, if they have the
fruit of submission to God's will, and acquiescence in the event disposed by
him. He is assured that it is good luck to have his project blasted, and that
missing is better then getting, when by Sovereign Wisdom it is so determined.
He therefore could not so fix his heart, or engage his affection in any such
concern, that his mind is surprised, or his passions discomposed by a seeming
adversness of events to his endeavors. So that in effect he can have no bad
success. For how can that occurrence be deemed bad, which plain reason
dictateth in certain judgment to be most expedient for him; about which he ever
was very indifferent, and with which at present he is not heartily displeased?
How can it be taken for disappointment and misfortune, which one was prepared
to embrace with satisfaction and complacence?

Yea, to a person so disposed, that success which seems most adverse, justly
may be reputed the best and most happy, as promoting ends incomparably more
excellent then any worldly gain; as producing fruits exceedingly more wholesome
and more savoury then any temporal commodity; as exercising and improving the
divinest Virtues, (Humility, Patience, Meekness, Moderation, Contentedness) a
grain whereof is worth all the wealth, all the preferment, all that is
desirable in the world.

Wherefore let the worst that can arrive, (or that which humane blindness and
fondness do count the worst,) yet upright persons do not come off ill, or so
(matters being rightly stated) as to be losers upon the foot of the account.

If this do not satisfy grosser apprehensions, we may add, that even in these
meaner concerns Almighty God is pleased commonly to reward and encourage
upright persons by the best success. For He has as it were a natural
inclination to gratify those who desire to please him; and (as the Psalmist
expresses it) has pleasure in the prosperity Psalm. 35. 27.

Prove. 11. 20. 15. 9.


of his servants. He may seem concerned in honor to countenance those who have
regard to his will, and who repose confidence in his aid; discriminating them
from such as presume to act against or without him, in defiance to his will,
with no deference to his Providence. As they do render him his due respect, by
submitting to his authority, Prove. 14. 2.
and avowing his power; so he will acknowledge them by signally favoring their
concerns. Even his truth and fidelity are engaged in their behalf; seeing he
very often has declared and Deuteronomy. 28. 2, etc. and 30. 9.

Ps. 128. 1, 2. and 91. 1 --. and 34. 9, 10. and 84. 11.

Ma^t. 6. 33.

Eccles 8. 5.

Prove. 28. 10, 20. and 10. 6.


promised, that in all matters, and upon all occasions, he will be ready to
bless them.

X. To conclude; It is an infinite advantage of upright dealing, that at the
last issue, when all things shall be most accurately tried and impartially
decided, a man is assured to be fully justified in it, and plentifully rewarded
for it. As (Pro. 11. 18.)
then all the deceits, which now pass under specious masks, shall be laid bare;
all varnish of pretense shall be wiped off; all perverse intrigues shall be
unravelled; all wicked and base intentions shall be quite stripped of the veils
which now enfold them; all shrewd contrivers and engineers of mischief, all
practisers of unjust and malicious guile, shall be exposed to shame, shall lie
down in sorrow: So then The righteous man shall stand in grent boldness; his
case will be rightly stated, and fully cleared from slanderous aspersions, from
odious surmises, from unlucky prejudices and mistakes: what he has done, shall
be approved; what he has suffered, shall be repaired. So that it then
evidently will appear, that upright simplicity is the deepest wisdom, and
perverse craft the meerest shallowness: that he who is true and just to others,
is most faithful and friendly to himself: that who-ever does abuse his
neighbor, is his own greatest cheater and foe. For, In the day when God shall
Romans 2. 16.
judge the secrets of men by-Jesus Christ, every man's work shall be made
manifest. 1 Cor. 3. 13.
The Lord will bring to light the hidden 1 Cor. 4. 5.
things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts; and
then shall every man have praise of God. Unto which our upright Judge, the King
eternal, 1 Timothy 1. 17.
immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor and glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
The Sixth Sermon.
1 THESE. 5. 17. Pray without ceasing.
IT is the manner of S. Paul in his Epistles, after that he has discussed some
main Points of doctrine or discipline, (which occasion required that he should
clear and settle,) to propose several good advices and rules, in the
observance whereof the life of Christian practice does consist. So that he
thereby has furnished us with so rich a variety of moral and spiritual
precepts, concerning special matters, subordinate to the general laws of Piety
and Virtue; that out of them might well be compiled a Body of Ethics, or
System of precepts de officiis, in truth and in compleatness far excelling
those which any Philosophy has been able to devise, or deliver. These he
rangeth not in any formal method, nor linketh together with strict connection,
but freely scatters them so as from his mind (as out of a fertile soil,
impregnated with all seeds of wisdom and goodness) they did happily spring up,
or as they were suggested by that Holy Spirit which continually guided and
governed him.

Among diverse such delivered here, this is one, which shall be the Subject of
my present Discourse; the which, having no other plain coherence (except by
affinity of matter) with the rest enclosing it, I shall consider absolutely by
it self, endeavoring somewhat to explain it, and to urge its practice.

Pray without ceasing. For understanding these words, let us first consider
what is meant by the act enjoined, Praying; then, what the qualification or
circumstance adjoined, without ceasing, does import.

1. The word Prayer does in its usual latitude of acception comprehend all
sorts of Devotion, or all that part of Religious practice wherein we do
immediately address our selves to God, having by speech (oral or mental) a kind
of intercourse and conversation with him. So it includes that Praise which we
should yield to God, implying our due esteem of his most excellent Perfections,
most glorious Works, most just and wise dispensations of Providence and Grace;
that Thanksgiving whereby we should express an affectionate resentment of our
obligation to him for the numberless great benefits we receive from him; that
Acknowledgment of our entire dependence upon him, or our total subjection to
his power and pleasure, together with that Profession of Faith in him, and
avowing of service to him, which we do owe as his natural creatures, and
subjects; that humble Confession of our infirmity, our vileness, our guilt, our
misery, (joined with deprecation of wrath and vengeance,) which is due from us
as wretched men, and grievous sinners; that Petition of things needful or
convenient for us, (of supply in our wants, of succor and comfort in our
distresses, of direction and assistence in our undertakings, of mercy and
pardon for our offenses,) which our natural state (our poor, weak, sad and
sinful state) does engage us to seek; that Intercession for others, which
general charity, or special relation do require from us, as concerned or
obliged to desire and promote their good. All these Religious performances
Prayer in its larger notion does comprise: according whereto in common use the
whole Body of Divine Service, containing all such acts, is termed Prayer; and
Temples, consecrated to the performance of all holy duties, are styled Houses
of prayer; and that brief Directory, or pregnant Form of all Devotion, which
our Lord dictated, is called his Prayer: and in numberless places of Scripture
it is so taken.

In a stricter sense, it does only signify one particular act among those,
the Petition of things needful or useful for us.

But according to the former more comprehensive meaning I choose to understand
it here; both because it is most commonly so used, (then, especially, when no
distinctive limitation is annexed, or the nature of the subject matter does not
restrain it,) and because general reasons do equally oblige to performance of
all these duties in the manner here prescribed: nor is there any ground to
exclude any part of Devotion from continual use; we being obliged no less
incessantly to praise God for his excellencies, and thank him for his benefits,
to avow his Sovereign Majesty and Authority, to confess our infirmities and
miscarriages, then to beg help and mercy from God. All Devotion therefore, all
sorts of proper and due address to God (that (...), all prayer and
supplication, which Ephesians. 6. 18.
S. Paul otherwise speaks of) are here enjoined, according to the manner
adjoined, without ceasing, (...), that is, indefinently, or continually.

2. For the meaning of which expression, we must suppose, that it must not be
understood as if we were obliged in every instant or singular point of time
actually to apply our minds to this practice: for to do thus is in it self
impossible, and therefore can be no matter of duty; it is inconsistent with
other duties, and therefore must not be practiced; yea, will not consist with
it self; for, that we may pray, we must live, that we may live, we must eat,
that we may eat, we must work, and must therefore attend other matters; so that
actual Devotion neither must, nor can swallow up all our time and care. The
deliberate operations of our mind are sometimes interrupted by sleep, sometimes
will be taken up in satisfying our natural appetites, sometimes must be spent
in attendence upon other reasonable employments, commanded or allowed by God;
whence there can be no obligation to this practice according to that unlimited
interpretation. This Precept therefore (as diverse others of a like general
purport and expression) must be understood, not in a natural, but moral sense,
according as the exigence of things permits, or as the reason of the case
requires; so far as it is conveniently practicable, or as it is reasonably
compatible with other duties, and needs. But we must not so restrain it as to
wrong it, by pinching it within too narrow bounds. How then it may be
understood, and how far it should extend, we shall endeavor to declare by
propounding diverse senses Adoro Scripturae plenitudinem. Tertull.
whereof it is capable, grounded upon plain testimonies of Scripture, and
enforcible by good Reason; according to which senses we shall together press
the observance thereof.

I. First then, Praying incessantly may import the maintaining in our Souls a
ready disposition or habitual inclination to Devotion; that which in Scripture
is termed the spirit of supplication. This Zech. 12. 10.
in moral esteem, and according to current language, derived thence, amounts
to a continual practice; a man being reckoned and said to do that, to which he
is ever prompt and propense: as it is said of the righteous man, that he is
ever merciful, and lends, because Psalm. 37. 26.
he is constantly disposed to supply his neighbor with needful relief;
although Ut quamvis tacet Hermogenes, cantor tamen aeque est, etc. Hor.
he does not ever actually dispense alms, or furnish his neighbor with
supplies for his necessity. The words may signify this; they do at least by
consequence imply so much: for if we do not in this, we can hardly perform the
duty in any sense; without a good temper fitting, and a good appetite prompting
to Devotion, we scarce can, or will ever apply our selves thereto. If there be
not in our heart a root of Devotion, whence should it spring? how can it live,
or thrive? If the organs of Prayer be out of kelter, or out of tune, how can we
pray? If we be not accincti, have not the loins of our mind girt, and our feet
shod in preparation 1 Pet. 1. 13.

Luke 12. 35.

Ephesians. 6. 14.


to the service, when shall we set forward thereto? My heart (said David) Psalm.
108. 1.
is fixed, I will sing and give praise: fixed, that is, readily prepared, and
(a Chr. 30. 19. Ezr. 7. 10.)
steddily inclined to Devotion. So should ours constantly be. As a true friend
is ever ready to entertain his friend with a frank courtesy and complacency;
as he ever is apt upon occasion for advice and assistence to have recourse to
him: so should we be always disposed cheerfully and decently to converse with
God, when he freely comes to us, or we have need to apply our selves to him.
If there be (from stupidity of mind, from coldness of affection, from
sluggishness of spirit, from worldly distraction) any indisposition or
averseness thereto, we should by serious consideration and industrious care
labor to remove them; rousing our spirits, and kindling in our affections some
fervency of desire toward spiritual things: otherwise we shall be apt to shun,
or to slip the opportunities inviting to Devotion; our hearts will be so resty,
or listless, that hardly we shall be induced to perform it, when it is most
necessary or useful for us.

II. Praying incessanty may denote a vigilant attendence (with earnest regard,
and firm purpose) employed upon Devotion: such attendence as men usually bestow
on their affairs, whereof although the actual prosecution sometime does stick,
yet the design continually proceeds; the mind ever so directing its eye
toward them, as quickly to espy, and readily to snatch any advantages of
promoting them. This is a kind of continuance in practice, and is commonly so
termed: as we say that such an one is building a house, is writing a book, is
occupying such land, although he be at present sleeping, or eating, or,
following any other business; because his main design never sleeps, and his
purpose continues uninterrupted. This is that which is so often enjoined under
the phrase of watching about Prayer. Watch Luke 21. 36.
ye therefore, and pray always, says our Lord. Continue in prayer, and watch
in Col. 4. 2.

Ephesians. 6. 18.

1 Pet. 4. 7.

Matt. 24. 42. 25. 13.


the same, says S. Paul. Be ye sober, and watch unto prayer, says S. Peter.
Which expressions import a most constant and careful attendence upon this
duty: that we do not make it a (...), or bybusiness in our life, (a matter of
small consideration or indifference, of curiosity, of chance,) to be transacted
drowzily or faintly, with a desultorious and slight endeavor, by fits, as the
humor takes us; but that, accounting it a business of the choicest nature and
weightiest moment, we do adhere thereto with unmovable purpose, regard it with
undistracted attention, pursue it with unwearied diligence, being always upon
the guard, wakefull and expedite, intent upon, and apt to close with any
occasion suggesting matter thereof. That we should do thus reason also does
oblige: for that, as in truth no business does better deserve our utmost
resolution and care, so none does more need them; nature being so backward, and
occasion so slippery, that if we do not ever mind it, we shall seldom practice
it.

III. Praying incessantly may signify, 2 Pet. 1. 12.

(...).

Gal. 4. 18.

(...).


that we do actually embrace all fit seasons and emergent occasions of
Devotion. This in moral computation does pass for continual performance: as a
tree is said to bear that fruit, which it produces in the season; and a man is
accounted to work in that trade, which he exercises whenever he is called
thereto. This sense is in several Precepts parallel to that in hand plainly
expressed. Pray (says S. Paul) with Ephesians. 6. 18.
all prayer and supplication (...) and, Watch (says our Lord) (...), Luke 21.
30.
praying in every season, or upon every opportunity. Devotion indeed is rarely
unseasonable, or impertinent; we may offer it (...), in season, and out of
season; that is, 2 Timothy 4. 2.
not only taking opportunities presented for it, or urgently requiring it, but
catching at them, and creating them to our selves, when there is no such
apparent and pressing need of it. But there are some special occasions, which
more importunately and indispensably do exact it: some seasons there are
(either ministered by extrinsecal accidents, or springing from internal
dispositions) when, without both great blame, and much damage to our selves,
we cannot neglect it: times there be most proper, and acceptable, when we do
especially need to pray, and when we are likely to speed well therein. Every
one (says Psalm. 32. 6.
the Psalmist) that is godly will pray unto thee in a time when thou may be
found: and, My prayer (says he again) Psalm. 69. 13.

2 Cor. 6. 2.

Isa. 49. 8.


is unto thee in an acceptable time.

Thus, when we have received any singular blessing or notable favor from God,
when prosperous success has attended our honest enterprises, when we have been
happily rescued from imminent dangers, when we have been supported in
difficulties, or relieved in wants and streights; then is it seasonable to
render sacrifices of Thanksgiving and praise to the God of victory, help, and
mercy; to admire and celebrate him, who is our strength, and our deliverer,
Psalm. 18. 1, 2.
our faithful refuge in trouble, our fortress, and 71. 3. etc.
and the rock of our salvation. To omit this piece of Devotion then, is vile
ingratitude, or stupid negligence and sloth.

When any rare object or remarkable occurrence does upon this theater of the
world present it self to our view, in surveying the glorious works of Nature,
or the strange events of Providence; then is a proper occasion suggested to
send up hymns of Praise to the power, the wisdom, the goodness of the World's
great Creator and Governor.

When we undertake any business of (...) Marc. Erem.
special moment and difficulty; then it is expedient (wisdom prompting it) to
sue for God's aid, to commit our affairs into his hand, to recommend our
endeavors to the blessing of him, by whose guidance all things are ordered,
without whose concourse nothing can be effected, upon whose arbitrary disposal
all success depends.

The beginning of any design or business (although ordinary, if considerable)
is a proper season of Prayer unto him, to whose bounty and favor we owe our
ability to act, support in our proceedings, any comfortable issue of what we
do: (for All our sufficiency is 2 Cor. 3. 5.
of him: without him we can do nothing.) Joh. 15. 5.
Whence we can never apply our selves to any business or work, not go to eat,
to sleep, to travel, to trade, to study, with any true content, any reasonable
security, any satisfactory hope, if we do not first humbly implore the
favorable protection, guidance, and assistence of God.

When we do fall into doubts, or darknesses, (in the course either of our
spiritual or secular affairs,) not knowing what course to steer, or which way
to turn our selves; (a case which to so blind and silly creatures, as we are,
must often happen;) then does the time bid us to consult the great Oracle of
truth, the mighty Counselor, the Father Jer. 10. 23.

Prove. 20. 24. 16. 9.


of lights, seeking resolution and satisfaction, light and wisdom from him;
Isa. 9. 6.

Jam. 1. 17.


saying with the Psalmist, Show me thy Psalm. 25. 4, 5, 8. and 27. 11. and 86.
11. and 143. 10. and 32. 8. and 119 125.

Psalm. 119. 133.


ways, O Lord, lead me in thy truth, and teach me; for thou art the God of my
salvation: Order my steps in thy word, and let not any iniquity have dominion
over me; following the advice of S. James, If any man lack wisdom, let him ask
of Jam. 1. 5.

Prove. 2. 6.

Isa. 30. 1.


God, that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be
given him.

When any storm of danger blustereth Psalm. 56. 3. and 34. 4. and 18. 3.
about us, perillously threatening, or furiously assailing us with mischief, (so
that hardly by our own strength or wit we can hope to evade;) then with the
wings of ardent Devotion we should fly unto God for shelter, and for relief.

When any anxious care distracteth, or any heavy burden presses our minds, we
should by Prayer ease our selves of them, and discharge them upon God,
committing the matter of them to his care and providence; according to that
direction of S. Paul, Be careful Phil. 4. 6.
for nothing: but in every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving,
let your requests be made known to God.

When we do lie under any irksome trouble, or sore distress, (of want, pain,
disgrace;) then, for succor and support, for ease and comfort, we should have
recourse to the Father of pities, and 2 Cor. 1. 3.
God of all consolation; who is nigh to all Psalm. 145. 18, 19. and 147. 3.
that call upon him, will also hear their cry, and will save them; who, when
the righteous cry does hear them, and Psalm. 34. 17.
delivers them out of all their troubles; who is so often stvled the hiding
place Psalm. 18. 1, 2. and 56. 3. and 84. 9. and 32. 7. and 33. 20. and 71. 3.
from troubles, the help and strength, the shield and buckler, the rock, the
fortress, the high tower, the horn of salvation, to all good and distressed
people. To him we should in such a condition have recourse, imitating the pious
Psalmist, whose practice was this; In the day of Psalm. 77. 2. and 18. 6. and
142. 2.
my trouble I sought the Lord: I poured out my complaint before him, I showed
before him my trouble: I called unto the Psalm. 118. 5.
Lord in my distress; the Lord answered me, and set me in a large place.

When any strong temptation does invade us, with which by our own strength we
cannot grapple, but are like to sink and faulter under it; then is it opportune
and needful that we should seek to God for a supply of spiritual forces, and
the succor of his Almighty grace, as S. Paul did: when there was given to him
a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9.
Satan to buffet him; then he besought the Lord thrice that it might depart
from him: and he had this return from God, My grace is sufficient for thee.

When also (from ignorance, or mistake, from inadvertency, negligence, or
rashness, from weakness, from wantonness, from presumption) we have
transgressed our duty, and incurred sinful guilt; then, (for avoiding the
consequent danger and vengeance, for unloading our Consciences of the burden
and discomfort thereof,) with humble confession in our mouths, and serious
contrition in our hearts, we should apply our selves to the God of mercy,
deprecating his wrath, and imploring pardon from him; remembering that promise
of S. John, If we confess our sins, he is 1 John 1. 9.
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
iniquity; and that declaration of the Wise man, He Prove. 28. 13.
that covers his sins shall not prosper: but he that confesses and forsakes
them Psalm. 32. 5. and 51. 1, etc.

Job 7. 20.


shall have mercy.

In these and the like cases God by our necessities does invite and summon us
to come unto him; and no less foolish then impious we are, if we do then slink
away, or fly from him. Then we should (as the Apostle to the Hebrews exhorts)
come boldly unto the throne Heb. 4. 16.
of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need,
(or, (...).
for seasonable relief.)

And beside those outwardly prompting and urging us, there be other
opportunities, springing from within us, which we are no less obliged and
concerned to embrace. When God by his gentle whispers calls us, or by his
soft impulses draws us into his presence; we should then take heed of
stopping Jer. 35. 15.

Prove. 1. 24.

Isa. 50. 2. and 65. 12. and 66. 4.


our ears, or turning our hearts from him, refusing to hearken, or to comply.
We must not any-wise quench or damp any sparks of devout affection kindled in
us by the Divine Spirit; we must not repel or resist any of his kindly
suggestions or motions.

Whenever we find our selves well affected to, or well framed for Devotion;
that we have a lively sense of, and a coming appetite to spiritual things; that
our spirits are brisk and pure, our fancy calm and clear, our hearts tender and
supple, our affections warm and nimble; then a fair season offers it self:
and when the iron is so hot, we should strike.

If at any time we feel any forward inclinations or good dispositions to the
practice of this duty, we should never check or curb them, but rather should
promote and advance them; pushing our selves forward in this hopeful career;
letting out the stream of our affections into this right chanel, that it may
run freely therein, that it may overflow and diffuse it self in exuberance of
Devotion. Farther,

IV. Praying incessantly may signify, that we should with assiduous urgency
drive on the intent of our Prayers, never quitting it, or desisting, till our
requests are granted, or our desires are accomplished. Thus doing, we may be
said to pray continually: as he that goes forward in his journey, (although he
sometime does bait, sometime does rest and repose himself,) is said yet to be
in travel; or as he that does not wave the prosecution of his cause, (although
some demurrs intervene) is deemed still to be in suit. This is that which our
Lord did in the Gospel prescribe, and persuade, where it is recorded of him,
that He spoke a parable unto Luke 18. 1.
them, that men ought always to pray, and not to faint. That praying always the
ensuing discourse shows to import restless importunity, and perseverance in
prayer: the same which so often is commended to us by the phrases of (...), not
to faint or faulter; (...), Luke 18. 1.
not to cease, or give over; (...), Col. 1. 9.

Ephesians. 1. 16.

Romans 12. 12.

Col. 4. 2, 12.


to continue instant, or hold out stoutly; (...), to strive earnestly, or
contest and struggle in prayers; (...), to abide at supplications; 1 Timothy 5. 5.
(...), to watch with all perseverance. That Ephesians. 6. 18.
which also is implied by those terms, which in Scriptural style do commonly
express Devotion: by Psalm. 10. 4. and 9. 10. and 14. 2. and 24. 6. and 63. 1.
and 69. 6, 32. and 70. 4. and 83. 16.

Job 8. 5. Deuteronomy. 4. 29.

Prove. 8. 17. Psalm. 77. 6.


seeking God; which implies, that God does not presently, upon any slight
address, discover himself in beneficial effects answerable to our desires, but
after a careful and painful continuance in our applications to him: by Psalm.
123. 2. and 69. 3. and 130. 5. and 37. 7. and 25. 5. and 27. 14. and 37. 34.
and 25. 21. and 52. 9. and 59. 9. and 145. 15. Isa. 8. 17. and 40. 31. and 49.
23. Hos. 12. 6. Lam. 3. 25, 26. Prove. 20. 22.
waiting upon God; which signifies, that if God do not presently appear
granting our requests, we should patiently stay, expecting till he be pleased
to do it in his own best time, according to that in the Psalm, Our eyes wait
Psalm. 123. 2.
upon the Lord our God, until he have mercy upon us: by knocking; which
intimates, Luke 12. 36.

Matt. 7. 7.


that the door of grace does not ever stand open, or that we can have an
effectual access to God, until he, warned and (as it were) excited by our
earnest importunity, pleases to listen, to disclose himself, to come forth
unto us.

And this practice Reason also does enforce. For there are some good things
absolutely necessary for our spiritual life and welfare, (such as are freedom
from Vid. Chrysostom. Tom. 6. Orat. 8 ad Theod. 2.
bad inclinations, disorderly affections, vicious habits, and noxious errors;
the sanctifying presence and influence of God's Holy Spirit, with the blessed
Graces and sweet fruits thereof; growth in Virtue, delight in spiritual things,
the sense of God's love and favor, with the like,) which good reason engages
us so perseveringly to seek, as never to rest, or be satisfied, till we have
acquired them in perfect degree; since we cannot ever do well without them, or
ever get enough of them. In begging other inferior things, it may become us to
be reserved, indifferent, and modest; but about these matters (...).
(wherein all our felicity is extremely concerned) it were a folly to be slack
or timorous: as we cannot be said immoderately to desire them, so we cannot be
supposed immodestly to seek them there, where only they can be found, in God's
presence and hand. The case does bear, yea does require, that we should be
eager and hot, resolute and stiff, free and bold, yea, in a manner peremptory
and impudent solicitours with God for them. So our Savior intimates, where,
comparing the manner of God's proceeding with that of men, he represents one
friend yielding needful succor to another, not barely upon the score of
friendship, but (...), for his impudence; that Luke 11. 8.
is, for his confident and continued urgency, admitting no refusal or excuse.
So does God in such cases allow, and oblige us to deal with him, being instant
and pertinacious in our requests; giving him no rest, (as the phrase is in Isa.
62. 7.
the Prophet;) not enduring to be put off, or brooking any repulse; never being
discouraged, or cast into despair, by any delay, or semblance of neglect. We
may wrestle with God, like Jacob, and with Jacob may say, I will not let Genesis
32. 26.
thee go, except thou bless me. Thus God suffers himself to be prevailed
upon, and is willingly overcome: thus Omnipotence may be mastered, and a happy
victory may begained over Invincibility it self. Heaven sometime may be forced
by storm; (or by the assaults of extreamly-servent prayer;) it assuredly will
yield to a long siege. God will not ever hold out against the attempts of an
obstinate suppliant. So the Kingdom Matt. 11. 12.
of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force. We read in S.
John's Gospel of a man, that, being Joh. 5. 5.
thirty eight years diseased, did wait at the pool of Bethesda seeking relief:
him Vid Chrysostom. Tom. 5. Orat. 40. and in Joh. Or. 36.
our Lord pitied, and helped, crowning his patience with miraculous relief, and
proposing it for an example to us of perseverance. It is said of the Patriarch
Isaac, that he entreated the Lord for his Genesis 25. 21.
wife, because she was barren; and the Lord was entreated of him, and Rebekah
his wife conceived. Whereupon S. Vid. Tom. 6. Orat. 68.
Chrysostom does observe, that he had persevered twenty years in that petition.

Of good success to this practice we have many assurances in Holy Scripture.
The Lord is good unto them that wait for Lam. 3. 25.

Is. 30 18. and 49 23.

Psalm. 25. 3. and 37. 9.


him, to the soul that seeks him. Blessed are all they that wait for him.
None that wait on him shall be ashamed. Isa. 40. 31.
They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their 1 Chr. 28. 9.

Ezr. 8. 22.

Amos 5. 4.

2 Chr. 15. 2.

Psalm. 9. 10.

Seeking God the periphrasis of a religious man.

Psalm. 14. 2. and 24. 6. and 69. 6. and 70. 4. and 119. 2. and 10. 4.


strength, they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be
weary; they shall walk, and not faint. So has God assured by his Word, and
engaged himself by promise, that he will yield unto constant and patient
Devotion; so that it shall never want good success.

Without this practice we cannot indeed hope to obtain those precious things;
they will not come at an easy rate, or be given for a song; a lazy wish or two
cannot fetch them down from Heaven. God will not bestow them at first asking,
or deal them out in one lump: but it is upon assiduous soliciting, and by
gradual communication, that he dispenses them. So his wise good will for many
special reasons disposes him to proceed: that we may (as it becomes and
behooves us) abide under a continual sense of our natural impotency and penury;
of our dependence upon God, and obligation to him for the free collation of
those best gifts: that by some difficulty of procuring them we may be minded of
their worth, and induced the more to prize them: that by earnestly seeking them
we may improve our spiritual appetites, and excite holy affections: that by
much conversing with Heaven, our minds may be raised above earthly things, and
our hearts purified from sordid desires: that we may have a constant employment
answerable to the best capacities of our Souls, worthy our care and pain,
yielding most solid profit and pure delight unto us: that, in fine, by our
greater endeavor in religious practice we may obtain a more ample reward
thereof.

For the same reason indeed that we pray at all, we should pray thus, with
continued instance. We do not pray to instruct or advise God; not to tell him
news, or inform him of our wants: (He knows them, as our Savior tells Matt.
6. 8.
us, before we ask:) nor do we pray by dint of argument to persuade God, and
bring him to our bent; nor that by fair speech we may cajoul him, or move his
affections toward us by pathetical orations: not for any such purpose are we
obliged to pray. But for that it becomes, and it behooves us so to do;
because it is a proper instrument of bettering, ennobling, and perfecting our
Souls; because it breeds most holy affections, and pure satisfactions, and
worthy resolutions; because it fitteth us for the enjoyment of happiness, and
leads us thither: for such ends Devotion is prescribed; and constant
perseverance therein being needful to those purposes, (praying by fits and
starts not sufficing to accomplish them,) therefore such perseverance is
required of us. Farther,

V. Praying incessantly may import, that we do with all our occupations and all
occurrences interlace devout ejaculations of prayer and praise; lifting up our
hearts to God, and breathing forth expressions of devotion, suitable to the
objects and occasions which present themselves. This as it nearly does approach
to the punctual accomplishment of what our Text prescribes; so it seems
required by S. Paul, when he bids us pray always (...), in Ephesians. 6. 18. and
5. 19.

Col. 3. 16.


spirit, and to sing (...), in the heart: that is, with very frequent
elevations of spirit in holy thoughts, and desires toward Heaven; with
opportune resentments of heart, directing thanks and praise to God. We cannot
ever be framing or venting long Prayers with our lips, but almost ever our mind
can throw pious Sed non satis perspiciunt quantum natura humani ingenii valeat,
quae it a est agilis and velox, sic in omnem partem (ut ita dixerim) spectat,
ut ne possit quidem aliquid agere tantum unum; in plura vero non eodem die
modo, sed eodem temporis momento, vim suam impendat. Quint. I. 12.
glances, our heart may dart good wishes upwards; so that hardly any moment
(any considerable space of time) shall pass without some lightsome flashes of
Devotion. As bodily respiration, without intermission or impediment, does
concur (...). Naz. Or. 33.
with all our actions: so may that breathing of Soul, which preserves our
spiritual life, and ventilateth that holy flame within us, well conspire with
all other occupations. For Devotion is of a nature so spiritual, so subtle and
penetrant, that no matter can exclude or obstruct it. Our Minds are so
exceedingly nimble and active, that no business can hold pace with them, or
exhaust their attention and activity. We can never be so fully possessed by any
employment, but that diverse vacuities of time do intercurr, wherein our
thoughts and affections will be diverted to other matters. As a Covetous man,
whatever beside he is doing, will be carking about his bags and treasures; an
Ambitious man will be devising on his plots and projects; a Voluptuous man will
have his mind in his dishes; a Lascivious man will be doting on his amors; a
Studious man will be musing on his notions; every man, according to his
particular inclination, will lard his business, and besprinkle all his actions
Vid. Chrysostom. Orat. 5. in Annam, Tom. V. p. 78, 79.
with cares and wishes tending to the enjoyment of what he most esteems and
affects: so may a good Christian, through all his undertakings, wind in
devout reflections and pious motions of Soul toward the chief object of his mind
and affection. Most businesses have wide gaps, all have some chinks, at which
Devotion may slip in. Be we never so urgently set, or closely intent upon any
work, (be we feeding, be we traveling, be we trading, be we studying,) nothing
yet can forbid, but that we may together wedge in a thought concerning God's
Goodness, and bolt forth a word of praise for it; but that we may reflect on
our sins, and spend a penitential sigh on them; but (...). Chrysostom. ibid.
that we may descry our need of God's help, and dispatch a brief petition for
it: a God be praised, a Lord have mercy, a God bless or God help me, will
nowise interrupt or disturb our proceedings. As worldly cares and desires do
often intrude and creep into our Devotions, distracting and defiling them: so
may spiritual thoughts and holy affections insinuate themselves into, and
hallow our secular transactions. This practice is very possible, and it is no
less expedient: for that if our employments be not thus seasoned, they can have
no true life or savor in them; they will in themselves be dead and putrid,
they will be foul and noisome, or at least flat and insipid unto us.

There are some other good meanings of this Precept, according to which Holy
Scripture (backed with good Reason) obliges us to observe it: but those,
(together with the general Inducements to the practice of this Duty,) that I
may not farther now trespass on your patience, I shall reserve to another
opportunity.

The Seventh Sermon.
1 THESE. 5. 17. Pray without ceasing.
WHAT the Prayer here enjoined by S. Paul does import, and how by it
universally all sorts of Devotion should be understood, we did formerly
discourse. How also according to diverse senses (grounded in Holy Scripture, and
enforced by good Reason) we may perform this duty incessantly, we did then
declare; five such senses we did mention, and prosecute: I shall now add two
or three more, and press them.

VI. Praying then incessantly may imply, that we do appoint certain times
conveniently distant for the practice of Devotion, and carefully observe them.
To keep the Jews in a constant exercise of Divine worship, God did constitute a
Sacrifice, which was called Tamidh, Dan. 8. 11.

Heb. 13. 15.

Neh 10. 33.


((...)) the continual sacrifice. And as that Sacrifice, being constantly
offered at set times, was thence denominated continual; so may we, by
punctually observing fit returns of Devotion, be said to pray incessantly.

And great reason there is that we should do so. For we know that all persons
who would not lead a loose and slattering life, but design with good assurance
and advantage to prosecute an orderly course of action, are wont to distribute
their time into several parcells; Cur ipsi aliquid forensibus negotiis, aliquid
desideriis amicorum, aliquid rationibus domesticis, aliquid curae corporis,
nonnihil volupt^ti quotidie damus?

Quint. I. 12.


assigning some part thereof to the necessary refection of their bodies, some
to the convenient relaxation of their minds, some to the dispatch of their
ordinary affairs, some also to familiar conversation, and interchanging good
offices with their friends; considering, that otherwise they shall be
uncertain, and unstable in all their ways. And in this distribution of time
Devotion surely should not lack its share: it rather justly claims the
choicest portion to be allotted thereto; as being incomparably the noblest part
of our duty, and mainest concernment of our lives. The feeding our Souls and
nourishing our spiritual life, the refreshing our spirits with those no less
pleasant then wholesome exercises, the driving on our correspondence and
commerce with Heaven, the improving our friendship and interest with God, are
affairs which above all others do best deserve, and most need being secured.
They must not therefore be left at random, to be done by the bye, as it hitteth
by chance, or as the fancy takes us. If we do not depute vacant seasons, and
fix periodical returns for Devotion, engaging our selves by firm resolution,
and inuring our minds by constant usage to the strict observance of them,
secluding from them, as from sacred enclosures, all other businesses; we shall
often be dangerously tempted to neglect it, we shall be commonly listless to
it, prone to defer it, easily seduced from it by the encroachment of other
affairs, or enticement of other pleasures. It is requisite that our Souls also
(no less then our Bodies) should have their meals, settled at such intervalls
as the maintenance of their life, their health, their strength and vigor do
require; that they may not perish or languish for want of timely repasts; that
a good appetite may duly spring up, prompting and instigating to them; that a
sound temper and robust constitution of Soul may be preserved by them.

Prayers are the bulwarks of Piety and good Conscience, the which ought to be
placed so as to flank and relieve one another, together with the interjacent
spaces of our life; that the enemy (the sin which does so easily beset Heb. 12.
1.
us) may not come on between, or at any time assault us, without a force
sufficiently near to reach and repel him.

In determining these seasons and measures of time according to just
proportion, honest prudence (weighing the several conditions, capacities and
circumstances of each person) must arbitrate. For some difference is to be made
between a Merchant and a Monk; between those who follow a Court, and those who
reside in a Cloister or a College. Some men having great encumbrances of
business and duty, by necessity imposed on them, which consume much of their
time, and engage their thoughts; of them in reason neither so frequent
recourses to, nor so long continuance in prayer can be demanded, as from those
who enjoy more abundant leisure, and freer scope of thoughts. But some fit
times all may, and must allow, which no avocation of business, no distraction
of care should purloin from them.

Certain seasons and periods of this kind Nature it self (in correspondence to
her unalterable revolutions) does seem to define and prescribe: those which the
Royal Prophet recommendeth, when he faith, It is a good thing Psalm. 92. 1. 55.
17.
to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy Name, O thou most
High: To show forth thy loving kindness every morning, and thy faithfulness
every night. Every Day we do recover and receive a new life from God; every
Morning we do commence business, or revive it; from our bed of rest and
security we then issue forth, exposing our selves to the cares and toils, to
the dangers, troubles and temptations of the world: then especially therefore
it is reasonable, that we should sacrifice thanks to the gracious Preserver of
our life, and the faithful Restorer of its supports and comforts; that we
should crave his direction and help in the pursuit of our honest undertakings;
that to his protection from sin and mischief we should recommend our selves and
our affairs; that, by offering up to him the firstfruits of our diurnal
labors, we should consecrate and consign them all to his blessing; that as we
are then wont to salute all the world, so then chiefly with humble obeisance we
should accost him, who is ever present with us, and continually watchful over
us. Then also peculiarly Devotion is most seasonable, because then our minds
being less prepossessed and pestered with other cares, our fancies becoming
lively and gay, our memories fresh and prompt, our spirits copious and brisk,
we are better disposed for it.

Every Night also reason calls for these Duties; requiring that we should
close our business, and wind up all our cares in Devotion; that we should then
bless God for his gracious preservation of us from the manifold hazzards and
the sins to which we stood obnoxious; that we should implore his mercy for the
manifold neglects and transgressions of our duty, which through the day past we
have incurred; that our minds being then so tired with study and care, our
spirits so wasted with labor and toil, that we cannot any longer sustain our
selves, but do of our own accord sink down into a posture of death, we should,
as dying men, resign our Souls into God's hand, depositing our selves and our
concernments into his custody, who alone does never sleep nor slumber; praying
that he would guard us from all the dangers and disturbances incident to us in
that state of forgetfulness, and interregnum of our Reason; that he would grant
us a happy resurrection in safety and health, with a good and cheerful mind,
enabling us thereafter comfortably to enjoy our selves, and delightfully to
serve him.

Thus if we do constantly bound and circumscribe our days, dedicating those
most remarkable breaks of time unto God's service, since beginning and end do
comprehend the whole, seeing in the computation and style of Moses Evening and
Morning do constitute a Day; we may with some good congruity be said to pray
incessantly.

Especially if at the middle distance between those extremes we are wont to
interpose somewhat of Devotion. For as then usually our spirits, being somewhat
shattered and spent, do need a recruit, enabling us to pass through the residue
of the day with its incumbent business: so then it would do well, and may be
requisite, in a meal of Devotion to refresh our Souls with spiritual
sustenance, drawn from the never-failing storehouse of Divine grace; which may
so fortify us, that with due vigor and alacrity we may perform the ensuing
duties to God's honor, and our own comfort. Thus to practice was the
resolution of the Psalmist, that great Master of Devotion; Evening, (said he)
Psalm. 55. 17.
and morning, and at noon will I pray, and cry aloud. And this was the custom
of the noble Daniel, from which no occasion could divert, no hazard could
deterr him: He kneeled, says the story, upon Dan. 6. 10.
his knees three times a day, and prayed, and gave thanks before his God.

These are times which it is necessary, or very expedient, that all men (even
persons of highest rank, and greatest employment) should observe. These even of
old were the practices of Religious persons, not expressly prescribed by God's
Law, but assumed by themselves; good reason suggesting them to the first
practisers, and the consenting example of pious men afterward enforcing them.

God indeed did himself in his Law, or by his Prophets, appoint public and
solemn celebrations of worship to himself, in Sacrifices (involving Prayer, and
accompanied therewith) constantly to be offered every morning and evening;
religious Princes also did institute 2 Chro. 2. 4.

1 Chronicles. 16. 40, 41. and 23. 30.

Ezr. 3. 3.


services of thanksgiving and praise to be performed at those times: but there
does not appear any direct institution of private Devotion, or its
circumstances; but the practice thereof seems originally to have been purely
voluntary, managed and measured according to the reason, by the choice of each
person: yet so, that the practice of eminently-good men leading, and others
following, it grew into a kind of common law, or standing rule, (seeming to
carry an obligation with it,) to observe the times specified.

Besides those three times, there were farther other middle times observed by
devout people, who had leisure, and disposition of mind thereto; once between
morning and noon, and once between noon and evening were sequestered to that
purpose: whence in the Acts the ninth hour of the day (that is, the middle
intervall between noon and evening) is called the hour of prayer. Acts 3. 1.
Yea, some did impose on themselves the observation of two other times, one
between evening and midnight, the other between midnight and morn. To which
practice those places in the Psalms do seem to allude; My mouth Psalm. 63. 5, 6.
shall praise thee with joyful lips, when I remember thee on my bed, and
meditate on thee in the night-watches. I prevented Psalm. 119. 147, 148.
the dawning of the morning, and cried: Mine eyes prevent the night-watches,
that I may meditate on thy word. And plainly the whole number of those times,
which the Psalmist observed, is expressed in those words, Seven times a day Ps.
119. 164.
will I praise thee, because of thy righteous judgments. Which examples whoever
shall choose to follow, (in any measure) he shall do wisely and commendably; he
shall certainly have no cause to repent; he will find it richly worth his
while; great benefit and comfort will thence accrue unto him.

If indeed Jews were so liberal in assigning, so punctual in affording such
portions of time for yielding praise and offering supplications unto God; how
much more free and ready, more careful and diligent should we be in this way
of practice? we, who have a Religion so far more spiritual, and exempt from
corporeal encumbrances; Precepts so more express and clear; so much higher
obligations, and stronger encouragements to this duty; whom God in especial
manner so graciously does invite, so powerfully does attract unto himself? But
farther,

VII. More especially this Precept may be supposed to exact from us a
compliance in carefully observing the times of Devotion ordained by public
Levir. 19. 30. and 26. 2. Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary.
Authority, or settled by general Custom. This in a popular and legal sense is
doing a thing indesinently, when we perform it so often as is required by law
or custom. So the Apostle to the Hebrews says of the Priests, that they Heb.
9. 6.
went always into the Tabernacle, accomplishing the service of God: always,
that is, at all the solemn times appointed. And thus of the Apostles it is
affirmed by S. Luke, that they were continually in the Temple, blessing and
praising God; Luke 24. 53.
that is, they constantly resorted thither at the stated times of concourse for
prayer. This good Reason also plainly does enjoin: For that the neglecting it
is not only a disorderly behavior in a matter of high consequence; a criminal
disregard and disobedience to Authority; a scandalous contempt of our
neighbors, from whose laudable fashion we discost; a wrongful deserting the
public, to whose good, mainly promoted by the public worship of God, we do
owe the contribution of our endeavor: but a heinous affront to Almighty God,
who thereby is plainly dishonored, and in a manner openly disavowed; a huge
prejudice to Religion, the credit and power whereof, without visible
profession, exemplary compliance, mutual consent and encouragement, cannot be
upheld. Were there times by law or custom defined, (as in some places indeed
there are,) when all men should be required in person solemnly to attend on
their Prince, for professing their Allegiance, or deferring any Homage to him;
would not those who should wilfully refuse or decline appearance, be justly
chargeable as guilty of dishonouring and wronging him? would not their such
defailance pass for sufficient proof, that they do not acknowledge him, that at
least they do not much regard or value him? So by not joining at stated times
in celebration of Divine worship, we may be well conceived wholly to disclaim
God, or greatly to disesteem him; to slight Religion, as a thing insignificant
and unprofitable. Do we not indeed thereby more then intimate, that we little
believe God to be our Sovereign Lord, and Governor; that we stand in no great
awe or dread of him; that we are not much sensible of his benefits and mercies;
that we repose small trust or hope in him; that we do not take our selves much
to want his protection, his guidance, his assistence, his favor and mercy? Are
we not in effect like unto those in Job, who say unto God, Depart Job 21. 14,
15.
from us; for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways? What is the Almighty,
that we should serve him? or what profit shall we have, if we pray unto him?
Thus the standers by commonly (some so as to be much offended at, others so as
to be corrupted by our bad example) will interpret this neglect: and so
assuredly God himself will take it from us, and accordingly deal with us. As he
claims this public attendence on him for his due: (Give, proclaims he by
the mouth of one of his great Heralds, Give unto the Lord, O ye mighty, give
unto the Psalm. 29. 1. 2. 66. 2.
Lord glory and strength: Give unto the Lord the glory due to his Name; worship
the Lord in the beauty of Holiness:) so if we to his wrong and disgrace refuse
to yield it, we shall certainly find answerable resentment and recompense from
him; that as we are careless ^^ serve him, so he will be unmindfull to bless
us; as we are backward to avow and glorify him, so he will not be forward to
own and grace us; as we do so deny him before men, so he will deny us 2 Timothy 2.
12.

Matt. 10. 33.

Luke 9. 26. 12. 9.


before them also. What other measure indeed can we imagine, or expect to
receive? Will God, think we, be so partial and fond to us, so disregardfull and
injurious toward himself, that he will vouchsafe to appear in favor to us,
when we deign not to appear in respect to him? that he will openly tender our
repute, when we apparently disregard his honor? that he will employ his
wisdom, or exert his power in our behalf, when we scarce will think a thought,
or stir a step for his service? Can we hope, that he will freely dispense
prosperous success to our enterprises, when we either care not, or scorn to
implore his help? that he will reach forth undeserved blessings to us, when we
subtract due praises from him? that he will any-wise show himself bountiful
and merciful toward us, when we so palpably are injust and ungrateful toward
him? No, Surely he scorneth the Prove. 3. 34.

1 Samuel 2. 30.


scorners; and, Whosoever despises him, shall be lightly esteemed: so he
expressly has threatened; and, seeing he is both infallibly true, and
invincibly able, we may reasonably presume that he will accomplish his word.

VIII. Lastly, Praying incessantly may import at large a frequency in Devotion.
This the words at least do exact, or necessarily imply, however expounded. For
doing incessantly cannot imply less then doing frequently: in no tolerable
sense can we be said to do that continually, which we do seldom; but it is an
ordinary scheme of speech to say that a man does that always, which he is wont
to do, and performs often. As of the pious soldier Cornelius it is said,
that he gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God always; Acts 10. 2.
and of Anna the Prophetess, that she departed not from the Temple, but served
Luke 2. 37.
God with prayers and fastings night and day; that is, she frequently resorted
to the Temple, and served God with an assiduous constancy. As the words may
bear, and do involve this sense, so does the reason of the case enforce it: for
very just, very fit, very needful it is to practice thus. There is ever at
hand abundant reason for, and apposite matter of Devotion; therefore no large
space of time should pass without it: there be perpetually depending many
causes thereof; whence there is not to be allowed any long vacation from it. As
every moment we from God's mercy and bounty partake great favors; so should we
often render thanks and praise for them: for perpetually to receive courtesies,
and rarely to return acknowledgments, is notorious ingratitude and iniquity. We
frequently (and in a manner continually) do fall into sins; often therefore we
are obliged to confess sins, we are concerned to deprecate wrath, and beg
mercy: otherwise we must long croutch under the sore burden of guilt, the sad
dread of punishment, the bitter pangs of remorse, or the desperate hazard of
stupid obduration. Whatever we design or undertake, toward the good management
and happy success thereof we (being ignorant and impotent creatures) do need
the guidance, the assistence, and the blessing of God: so often therefore it is
requisite that we should be seeking and suing for them: if not, we do not only
transgress our duties, but fondly neglect, or foully betray our own
concernments. The Causes therefore of Devotion being so constant, the Effects
in some correspondence should be frequent.

Such frequency is indeed necessary for the breeding, the nourishment, the
growth and improvement of all Piety. Devotion is that holy and heavenly fire,
which darteth into our minds the light of spiritual knowledge, which kindles
in our hearts the warmth of holy desires: if therefore we do continue long
absent from it, a night of darkness will overspread our minds, a deadning
coldness will seize upon our affections. It is the best food of our Souls,
which preserves their life and health, which repaireth their strength and
vigor, which renders them lusty and active: if we therefore long abstain from
it, we shall starve, or pine away; we shall be faint and feeble in all
religious performances; we shall have none at all, or a very languid and meager
Piety.

To maintain in us a constant and steady disposition to obedience, to correct
our perverse inclinations, to curb our unruly passions, to strengthen us
against temptations, to comfort us in anxieties and distresses, we do need
continual supplies of grace from God; the which ordinarily are communicated in
Devotion, as the chanel which conveyeth, or the instrument which helps to
procure it, or the condition upon which it is granted. Faith, Hope, Love,
spiritual Comfort and Joy, all Divine Graces are chiefly elicited, expressed,
exercised therein and thereby: it is therefore needful that it should
frequently be used; seeing otherwise we shall be in danger to fail in
discharging our chief Duties, and to want the best Graces.

It is frequency of Devotion also which maintains that Friendship with God,
which is the soul of Piety. As familiar conversation (wherein men do express
their minds and affections mutually) breeds acquaintance, and cherishes good
will of men to one another; but long forbearence thereof dissolveth, or
slackneth the bonds of amity, breaking their intimacy, and cooling their
kindness: so is it in respect to God; it is frequent converse with him which
begets a particular acquaintance with him, a mindful regard of him, a
hearty liking to him, a delightful taste of his goodness, and consequently a
sincere and solid good will toward him: but intermission thereof produces
estrangement, or enmity toward him. If we seldom come at God, we shall little
know him, not much care for him, scarce remember him, rest insensible of his
love, and regardless of his favor; a coldness, a shyness, a distaste, an
antipathy toward him will by degrees creep upon us. Abstinence from his company
and presence will cast us into conversations destructive, or prejudicial to our
friendship with him; wherein soon we shall contract familiarity and friendship
with his enemies, (the World and the Flesh,) which are inconsistent with love
to him, which will dispose us to forget him, or to dislike and loath him.

It is, in fine, the frequency of Devotion which alone can secure any practice
thereof, at least any practice thereof duly qualified; so hearty, so easy, so
sweet and delightful as it should be. We have all a natural averseness or
indisposition thereto, as requiring an abstraction of thoughts and affections
from sensible things, and a fastening them upon objects purely spiritual; a
rearing our heavy spirits above their common pitch; a staying and settling our
roving fancies; a composing our vain hearts in a sober and steady frame,
agreeable to Devotion: to effect which things is a matter of no small
difficulty and pain; which therefore without much use and exercise cannot be
accomplished; but with it, may; so that by frequent practice the bent of our
heart being turned, the strangeness of the thing ceasing, the difficulty of the
work being surmounted, we shall obtain a good propension to the duty, and a
great satisfaction therein.

This will render the way into God's presence smooth and passable; removing, as
all other obstacles, so particularly those of fear and doubt in respect to God,
which may deterr or discourage us from approaching to him. God being most holy
and pure, most great and glorious, we, sensible of our corruption and vileness,
may be fearful and shy of coming near unto him. But when, coming into his
presence, we do find, that such as his Majesty is, such is his Mercy; when we
do taste and see that Psalm. 34. 8.
the Lord is good; when by experience we feel, that in his presence there is
fullness Psalm. 16. 11.
of joy; being abundantly satisfied with the fatness of his house; having our
Psalm. 36. 8.
Souls there satisfied as with marrow and Psalm. 63. 5.
fatness; finding, that a day in his courts Psalm. 84. 10.
is better then a thousand spent otherwhere; perceiving that he bids us
welcome, that he treats us kindly, that he sends us away refreshed with
sweetest comforts, and rewarded with most excellent benefits: this will not
only reconcile our hearts to Devotion, but draw us into a cordial liking, and
earnest desire thereof; such as the Psalmist expresses, when he says, My
Psalm. 84. 2.
soul longs, yea even faints for the courts of the Lord: my heart and my
flesh cries out for the living God. This will engage us into strong
resolutions of constantly practicing it; such as the same Holy person again
declares in those words, I love the Lord, because he Psalm. 116. 1. 138. 2.
has heard my voice and my supplications: Because he has inclined his ear
unto me, therefore will I call upon him as long as I live. Hence, in stead of a
suspicious estrangedness, a servile dread, or an hostile disaffection toward
God, there will spring up an humble confidence, a kindly reverence, a hearty
love toward him; which will upon all occasions drive us to him, hoping for his
friendly succor, longing after his kind embraces. So will the frequency of
Devotion render it facil and pleasant. Whereas, on the contrary, disuse thereof
will make it at any time hard and irksome; strengthening and increasing our
natural averseness thereto: performing it seldom, we shall never perform it
well; with that attention, that affection, that promptitude, that willingness
and alacrity, which are due thereto.

According to so many senses, in so many respects, may we, and should we
observe this Precept. From thus praying continually there can be no good
exception, or just excuse. The most common pleas that will be alleged for the
omission thereof are two; one drawn from external avocations, the other from
internal indispositions, obstructing it: both of which are so far from being
good, that, being scanned, they will soon appear serving rather to aggravate,
then to excuse, or abate the neglect.

I. I cannot (says one) now attend to Prayers, because I am not at liberty, or
at leisure, being urgently called away, and otherwise engaged by important
affairs. How much a flamme this Apology is, we shall presently descry, by
asking a few Questions about it.

1. Do we take Devotion it self to be no business, or a business of no
consideration? Do we conceit, when we pay God his debts, or discharge our
duties toward him, when we crave his aid or mercy, when we solicit the main
concernments of our Soul, (yea, of our body also, and its estate,) that we are
idle, or misemployed? that we lavish our time, or lose our pains?

2. What other affairs can we have of greater moment or necessity then this?
Can there be any obligation more indispensable, then is that of yielding due
respect and service to our Maker, our great Patron, our most liberal
Benefactour? Can there be any interest more close or weighty then this, of
providing for our Souls eternal health and happiness? Is not this indeed the
great work, the only necessary matter, in comparison whereto all other
occupations Luke 10. 24.

Job 23. 12.


are mere trifling, or unprofitable fiddling (...).

Constable. Apost. 2. 61.


about nothing? What will all other business signify, what will come of it, if
this be neglected? Busy we may be, we may plod, we may drudge eternally; but
all to no end. All our care is in effect improvidence, all our industry may be
well reckoned idleness, if God be not served, if our Souls are not secured.

3. If we survey and prize all worldly businesses, which among them will appear
so importunate as to demand, so greedy as to devour, so worthy at least as to
deserve all our time, that we cannot spare a few minutes for maintaining our
most pleasant intercourse, and most gainful commerce with Heaven? What are the
great businesses of the world? what but scraping and scrambling for pelf,
contriving and compassing designs of ambition, courting the favor and respect
of men, making provision for carnal pleasure, gratifying fond curiosity or vain
humor? And do any of these deserve to be put into the scale against, shall all
of them together be able to sway down our spiritual employments? Shall these
images, these shadows of business supplant or crowd out Devotion; that which
procures wealth inestimably precious, pleasure infinitely satisfactory, honor
incomparably noble above all this world can afford? If the expense of time be
(as the Philosopher said) (...), Theophr.
the most precious expense that can be; how can it better be laid out, then
upon the worthiest things, such as Devotion alone can afford the purchase and
possession of? True Virtue, sound Wisdom, a quiet Conscience, and steady
tranquillity of mind, the love and favor of God, a title unto endless joy and
bliss, are purely the gifts of Heaven; and thence they will not descend of
themselves, but Prayer must fetch them down. If nothing then in the world be
comparable to those things, how can any time be so well spent as in Prayer,
which acquireth them; which also best secureth whatever we have, and is the
readiest way to procure whatever we want?

4. Should we not farther, honestly comparing things, easily discern, that it
is no such indispensable business, but rather indeed some base dotage on lucre,
some inveigling bait of pleasure, some be witching transport of fancy, that
crosses our Devotion? Is it not often a complemental visit, an appointment to
tattle or to tipple, a match for sport, a wild ramble in vice or folly, that so
deeply engages us to put off our duty?

5. Yea, is it not commonly sloth rather then activity, an averseness from this
rather then an inclination to any other employment, which diverteth us from our
Prayers? Is not, I say, the true reason why we pray so seldom, not because we
are very busy, but because we are extremely idle; so idle, that we cannot
willingly take the pains to unscrew our affections from sensible things, to
reduce our wandering thoughts, to compose our hearts into a right frame, to bend
our untoward inclinations to a compliance with our duty? Is it not because we
do not feel that favor and satisfaction in these, which we do in other trivial
and worthless employments, nor will be at the trouble to work such dispositions
in our Souls? Do we not betake our selves to other conversations and commerces
merely for refuge, shunning this intercourse with God, and with our selves?
These, I fear, are oftener the real causes of our neglecting Devotion, then any
such mighty avocations which we pretend.

6. But were there indeed not only a counterfeit or imaginary, but a real
competition between Devotion and other lawful business; which, in reason,
should carry it? in conscience, which of the two should be forborne or
suspended? Is it not evidently better, that the pursuit of our temporal
interests, whatever they be, should be a little checked, then that our affairs
of everlasting consequence should be quite laid aside? that we should venture a
small impairing of our estate, then surely endammage our Souls? that we hazard
to disappoint or displease a man, then dare to affront and offend the Almighty
God?

7. Were it not strangely absurd and unhandsome to say, I cannot wait on God,
because I must speak with a friend; I cannot go to Church, although God calls
me thither, because I must haste to market; I cannot stand to pray, because I
am to receive money, or to make up a bargain; I cannot discharge my duty to
God, because a greater obligation then that does lie upon me? How unconceivable
an honor, how unvaluable a benefit is it, that the incomprehensibly-great and
glorious Majesty of Heaven does vouchsafe us the liberty to approach so near
unto him, to converse so freely with him, to demand and derive from his hand
the supply of all our needs, and satisfaction of all our reasonable desires?
and is it then just or seemly, by such comparisons to disparage his favor, by
such pretenses to baffle with his goodness?

Put the case our Prince should call for us to speak with him about matters
nearly touching his service, and our welfare; would it be according unto duty,
discretion, or decency, to reply, that we are at present busy, and have no
leisure, and must therefore hold our selves excused; but that if he will stay a
while, at another time, when we have less to do, we shall be perhaps disposed
to wait upon him? The case is propounded by our Lord in that Parable, wherein
God is represented as a great man, that had prepared a feast, and invited many
guests thereto; but they excused themselves: One said, that he Matt. 22. 2, etc.

Luke 14. 16, etc.


had purchased land, and must needs go out to see it; another had bought five
yoaks of oxen, and must go to prove them; another had married a wife, and
therefore (...), etc.

Chrysostom. in Joh. Orat. 11.


could not come. These indeed were affairs very considerable, as this world
has any; but yet the excuses did not satisfy: for, notwithstanding, the great
person was angry, and took the neglect in huge disdain.

8. Moreover, if we reflect what vast portions of time we squander away upon
our petty matters, upon voluptuous enjoyments, upon fruitless pastimes, upon
impertinent talk; how can we satisfy our selves in not allotting competent
time upon God's Service, our own Salvation, and the future everlasting state?
Does not he, who with the continuance of our life bestows on us all our time,
deserve that a pittance of it should be reserved for himself? Can all the world
duly claim so great an allowance thereof? May not our Soul (which is far our
noblest part, which indeed is all our selves) justly challenge a good share of
our time to be expended on it? or shall this mortal husk engross it all? Must
Eternity, which comprehends all Time, have no time belonging to it, or
allotted for its concernments?

9. Again, is it not great imprudence so to lay our (...). Chrysostom. in Joh. 1.
14. (Or. 11.)
business, that any other matter shall thwart or thrust out Devotion? Easily
with a little providence may things be so ordered, that it, without interfering
or justling, may well consist with all other, both needful business, and
convenient divertisement; so that it shall neither obstruct them, nor they
extrude it: and are we not very culpable, if we do not use so much providence?

10. In truth, attending upon Devotion can be no obstacle, but will be great
furtherance to all other good business. It is the most sure, most pleasant,
most advantageous and compendious way of transacting affairs, to mix Prayers
and Praises with them: it is the best oil that can be, to make the wheels of
action go on smoothly and speedily: it not only sanctifies our undertakings,
but much promoteth and exceedingly sweetneth the management of them. For the
conscience of having rendered unto God his due respect and service, of having
entrusted our affairs to his care, of having consequently engaged his
protection and assistence for us, will dispose us to do things with a
courageous alacrity and comfortable satisfaction; will fill us with a good hope
of prospering; will prepare us however to be satisfied with the event,
whatever it shall be; will in effect procure a blessing and happy success,
such as we may truly rejoice and triumph in, as conferred by God in favor to
us. Whereas neglecting these duties, we can have no solid content or savoury
complacence in any thing we undertake: reflecting on such misbehaviour (if we
be not downright infidels, or obdurate reprobates in impiety) will quash or
damp our courage: having thence forfeited all pretense to God's succor, and
provoked him to cross us, we must needs suspect disappointment: as we have no
reasonable ground to hope for success; so we cannot, if success arriveth, be
heartily satisfied therein, or take it for a blessing.

He therefore that is such a niggard of his time, that he grudgeth to withhold
any part thereof from his worldly occasions, deeming all time cast away that is
laid out in waiting upon God, is really most unthristy and prodigal thereof: by
sparing a little, he wastes all his time to no purpose; by so eagerly
pursuing, he effectually sets back his designs; by preposterously affecting
to dispatch his affairs, he renders them endless, or, which is the same,
altogether unprofitable.

In fine, we may be sure that no time is spent even so prudently and
politickly, with so great advantage, and so real fruit to our selves, as that
which is employed upon Devotion. In sacrificing his time, his pains, his
substance, any thing he has or can do, to God's service, no man can be a
loser.

We have also many examples plainly demonstrating the consistency of this
practice with all other business. Who ever had more or greater affairs to
manage, and who ever managed them with greater success, then David; upon whom
did ly the burden of a Royal estate, and the care over a most populous nation;
the which he fed with a Psalm. 78. 73.
faithful and true heart, and ruled prudently with all his power; who waged
great wars, vanquished mighty enemies, achieved many glorious exploits,
underwent many grievous troubles? Yet could not such engagements distract or
depress his mind from a constant attendence on Devotion. I will bless the Psalm.
34. 1. and 71. 6. and 145. 2.

Psalm. 35. 28.


Lord at all times, his praise shall be continually in my mouth. My mouth shall
show forth thy righteousness, and thy salvation all the day. I will abide in
thy Psalm. 61. 4.
tabernacle for ever. So he declares his resolution, and his practice. Who is
more pressingly employed then was Daniel, first President over so vast a
Kingdom, chief Minister of State to the greatest Monarch on earth? Yet
constantly thrice a day did he pray, and give thanks Dan. 6. 10.
before his God. Who can be more entangled in varieties and intricacies of
care, of pains, of trouble, then was he that prescribes unto us this rule of
Praying continually? Upon him didly the care 2 Cor. 11. 28.
of all the Churches; Night and Day with 2 Thessalonians. 3. 8.
labor and toil did he work for the sustenance of his life, that he might not
(to the disparagement of the Gospel) burden any man; perpetually he was
engaged in all sorts of labor and travail, ever conflicting with perils, with
wants, with inconveniences numberless: yet did he exactly conform his practice
to his rule, being no less indefatigable and incessant in his Devotion then he
was in his business. Who ever managed a greater Empire then Constantine? Yet
every day (as Eusebius reports) at stated (...). Eusebius. de Vita constable. 4. 22.
times, shutting himself up, he alone privately did converse with his God. The
most pious men indeed have never been idle or careless men, but always most
busy and active, most industrious in their callings, most provident for their
families, most officious toward their friends, most ready to serve their
country, most abundant in all good works: yet have they always been most
constant in Devotion. So that experience clearly does evidence, how
reconcilable much Devotion is to much business; and that, consequently, the
prosecution of the one cannot well palliate the neglect of the other.

II. No better can any man ward himself from blame, by imputing the neglect of
Devotion to some indisposition within him thereto. For this is only to cover
one fault with another, or to lay on a patch more ugly then the sore. It Is, in
effect, to say we may sin, because we have a mind to it, or care not to do
otherwise. Our indisposition it self is criminal; and, as signifying somewhat
habitual or settled, is worse then a single omission: it ought therefore to be
corrected and cured; and the way to do it is, by setting presently upon the
practice of the Duty, and persisting resolutely therein: otherwise how is it
possible that it should ever be removed? The longer we forbear it, the more
seldom we perform it, the stronger surely will our indisposition grow, and the
more difficult it will be to remove it. But if (with any degree of seriousness
and good intention) we come indisposed to Prayer, we may thereby be formed into
better disposition; and by continual attendence thereon, we shall (God's grace
cooperating, which never is wanting to serious and honest intentions) grow
toward a perfect fitness for it: Prayer by degrees will become natural and
delightful to us.

The Eighth Sermon.
EPHESIANS. 5. 20. Giving thanks always for all things unto God.
THESE words, although (as the very Syntax does immediately discover) they bear
a relation to, and have a fit coherence with those that precede, may yet,
(especially considering S. Paul's style, and manner of expression in the
preceptive and exhortative part of his Epistles,) without any Vid. Romans 12.
Ephesians. 6. etc.
violence, or prejudice on either hand, be severed from the Context, and
considered distinctly by themselves. And (to avoid encumbrance by farther
comparison) so taking them, we may observe, that every single word among them
carries with it something of notable emphasis, and especial significancy. The
first [Giving thanks] expresses the substance of a Duty, to which we are
exhorted. The next (I mean, in order of construction) [to God] denotes the
Object, or Term to which it is directed. The following [always] determines the
main Circumstance of this and all other Duties, the Time of performance. The
last [for all things] declares the adequate Matter of the Duty, and how far it
should extend. These particulars I shall consider severally, and in order.

I. First then, concerning the Duty it self, to give thanks, or rather, to be
thankful; (for (...) does not only signify gratias agere, reddere, dicere,
to give, render, or declare thanks, but also gratias habere, grate affectum
esse, to be thankfully disposed, to entertain a grateful affection, sense, or
memory: in which more comprehensive notion I mean to consider it, as including
the whole Duty or Virtue of Gratitude due to Almighty God for all his benefits,
favors and mercies:) I say, concerning this Duty it self, (abstractedly
considered,) as it involves a respect to benefits or good things received; so
in its employment about them it imports, requires; or supposes these following
particulars.

1. It implies a right Apprehension of, and consequently a considerate
Attention unto Benefits conferred. For he that is either wholly ignorant of his
obligations, or mistakes them, or passes them over with a slight and
superficial view, can no-wise be grateful. Whosoever Psalm. 107. 43.
is wise, and will observe these things, even they shall understand the
lovingkindness of the Lord. Men shall fear, Psalm. 64. 9.
and shall declare the work of God; for they shall wisely consider of his
doings. The works of the Lord are great, sought Psalm. 111. 2.
out of all that have pleasure therein. O Psalm. 34. 8.
taste (first) and (then) see that the Lord is good.

This is the method that great Master of Thanksgiving prescribes; first
experimental notice, then wise consideration, then grateful sense, then
public acknowledgment. And those we find both by him, and by the Prophet
Isaias (in the very same words) reprehended, as wickedly ungrateful persons,
who regarded not the work of the Lord, nor considered the operation of his
hands. Psalm. 28. 5.

Isa. 5. 12.


It Is part therefore of this Duty incumbent on us, to take notice of
diligently, and carefully to consider the Divine Benefits; not to let them pass
undiscerned and unregarded by us, as persons either woefully blind, or stupidly
drowzie, or totally unconcerned.

It Is a general fault, that the most common and frequent, the most obvious and
conspicuous favors of God, (like the ordinary Phenomenon of Nature, which, as
Aristotle observes, though in themselves most admirable, are yet least
admired,) the constant rising of the Sun upon us, the descent of fruitful
Showrs, the recourse of temperate Seasons, the continuance of our Life, the
enjoyment of Health, the providential dispensation of Wealth and competent
means of livelihood, the daily Protection from incident dangers, the helps of
improving Knowledge, obtaining Virtue, becoming happy, and such like most
excellent Benefits, we commonly little mind or regard; and consequently seldom
return the thanks due for them. Possibly some rare accidents of Providence,
some extraordinary Judgment, some miraculous deliverance may rouse and awaken
our attention: (as it is said of the Israelites, When he slew them, then they
sought him, Ps. 78. 34, 35.
and remembered that God was their Rock, and the high God their Redeemer:) but
such advertency is not the effect so much of Gratitude, as of curiosity, or of
necessity: the notable rarity invites, or some powerful impulse commands our
notice. But the truly grateful industriously design, and are studious to know
thoroughly their obligations, that they may be able to render answerable
returns for them.

2. This Duty requires a faithful Retention of Benefits in memory, and
consequently (...).
frequent Reflections upon them. For, he that is no longer affected with a
Benefit then it incurrs the sense, and suffers not it self to be disregarded,
is far from being grateful; nay, if we believe the Philosopher, is ungrateful
in the worst kind, and highest degree. For, Ingratus est, (says he) qui Sen.
3. de Benef. cap. 1.
beneficium accepisse se negat, quod accepit; ingratus est, qui dissimulat;
ingratus, qui non reddit: ingratissimus omnium, qui oblitus est. He that falsely
denies the reception of a Benefit, and he that dissembles it, and he that does
not repay it, is ungrateful; but most ungrateful of all is he that forgets
it. It is a sign the Benefit made no deep impression on his mind, since it left
no discernible footstep there; that he hardly ever thought of making
recompense, since he has suffered himself to become altogether incapable of
doing it: neither is there any hope of his amending the past neglect; no shame,
no repentance, no fair occasion can redeem him from Ingratitude, in whom the
very remembrance of his obligation is extinguished.

If to be sensible of a present good turn, deserved the title of Gratitude, all
men certainly would be grateful: the Jews questionless were so. When Almighty
God, by his wonderful power, in extraordinary ways, delivered them from the
tyranny and oppression of their prevalent enemies; when he caused streams to
gush forth from the bowels of a hard rock, to refresh their thirst; when bread
descended from Heaven in showrs, and the winds were winged with flesh, to
satisfy their greedy desires; then surely they were not altogether unsensible
of the Divine goodness; then could they acknowledge his power, and be forward
enough to engage themselves in promises of correspondent observance toward him
for the future. But the mischief was, immediately after, as the Psalmist
complains, They forgot his works, and the wonders he had Ps. 78. 11, 42.
showed them: They remembered not his hand, nor the day when he delivered them
from the enemy. They refused to obey, Neh. 9. 17.
neither were mindful of the wonders that God did among them; as Nehemiah
confesses in their behalf. Of the Rock that Deuteronomy. 32. 18.
Begat them they were unmindfull, and forgot the God that formed them; as it is
in Deuteronomy. They distrusted his Promises, repined at his dealings,
disobeyed his Laws, and treacherously apostatized from his Covenant. Such were
the fruits of their ungrateful forgetfulness; which therefore that people is
so often charged with, and so sharply reproved for by the Prophets.

On the contrary, we find that great pattern of Gratitude, the Royal Prophet
David, continually revolving in his Thy lovingkindness is ever before mine eyes.

Psalm. 26. 3.


thoughts, imprinting upon his fancy, studying and meditating upon,
recollecting and renewing in his memory the results of Divine favor. I will
remember, Ps. 77. 11, 12.
says he, thy wonders of old; I will meditate of all thy works, and talk of
thy doings: and, I remember the days of old, Psalm. 143. 5.
I meditate on all thy works, I muse on the works of thy hands: and, Bless the
Lord, Psalm. 103. 2.
O my soul, and forget not all his benefits: and, My mouth shall praise thee
with joyful Ps. 63. 5, 6, 7.
lips, when I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the
nightwatches, because thou have been my help. No place unfit, it seems, no time
unseasonable, for the practice of this Duty; not the place designed for rest,
not the time due to sleep, but, as David thought, more due to a wakefull
contemplation of the Divine goodness. Whose vigilant Gratitude we should strive
to imitate, devoting our most solitary and retired, our most sad and serious
thoughts (not the studies only of our closet, but the consultations also of
our pillow) to the preservation of those blessed Idea's; that neither length of
time may deface them in our fancy, nor other care thrust them out thence.

It was a satirical answer, (that of Aristotle,) and highly opprobrious to
mankind; who being asked, (...); What does the soonest grow old? replied,
(...), Thanks: and so was that adagiall verse, (...). No sooner the courtesy
born, then the resentment thereof dead. Such reproachful Aphorisms we should
labor to confute, especially as they are applicable to the Divine favors, by
so maintaining and cherishing our thanks for them, that they neither decay with
age, nor prematurely die, nor be buried in oblivion; but may resemble the
pictures and poetical descriptions of the Graces, those goodly Daughters of
Heaven, smiling always with a never-fading serenity of countenance, and
flourishing in an immortal youth.

The middle, we may observe, and the safest, and the fairest, and the most
conspicuous places in Cities are usually deputed for the erections of Statues
and Monuments dedicated to the memory of worthy men, who have nobly deserved of
their Countries. In like manner should we in the heart and center of our Soul,
in the best and highest appartments thereof, in the places most exposed to
ordinary observation, and most secure from the invasions of worldly care, erect
lively representations of, and lasting memorials unto the Divine bounty;
constantly attending to which we may be disposed to Gratitude. Not one
blessing, not the least favorable passage of Providence ought to perish with
us, though long since past, and removed out of the sphere of present sense.

We must not in our Old age forget who formed us in the Womb, who Psalm. 71. 6.
brought us into the light, who suckled our Infancy, who educated our
Childhood, who governed our Youth, who conducted our Manhood through the
manifold hazzards, troubles and disasters of life. Nor in our Prosperity, our
affluence of good things, our possession of Canaan, should we be unmindfull of
Deuteronomy. 6. 12. 8. 11.
him who relieved us in our streights, who supplied our wants, sustained our
adversity, who redeemed us from Egypt, and led us through the wilderness. A
succession of new and fresh Benefits should not (as among some Savages the
manner is for the young to make away the old) supplant and expunge ancient
ones, but make them rather more dear and venerable to us. Time should not
weaken or diminish, but rather confirm and radicate in us the remembrance of
God's goodness; to render it, as it does gold and wine, more precious, and more
strong. We have usually a memory more then enough tenacious of injuries and ill
turns done us: let it never be said, to the disgrace of that noble faculty,
that we can hardly forget the discourtesies of man, but not easily remember the
favors of God. But farther,

3. This Duty implies a due Esteem and valuation of Benefits; that the nature
and quality, the measure and quantity, the circumstances and consequences of
them be well expended: else the Gratitude is like to be none, or very
defective. For we commensurate our thankfulness, not so much to the intrinsic
excellency of things, as to our peculiar estimations of them. A Cynick,
perhaps, would not return more thanks for a diamond, then for a pebble; nor
more gratefully receive a talent of gold, then an ounce of copper: because he
equally values, or rather alike contemns both.

Wherefore we find our (never-to-be-forgotten) example, the devout Thanksgiver
David, continually declaring the great price he set upon the Divine favors;
admiring and displaying their transcendent perfections, their wonderful
greatness, their boundless extension, their excessive multitude, their endless
duration, their advantageous circumstances, (the excellent needfulness,
convenience, and seasonableness of them; together with the admirable freeness,
wisdom and power of the Benefactour shining forth in and by them.) I will
praise thee, O Lord, (says he) Ps. 108. 3, 4.
among the people, I will sing unto thee among the nations: For thy mercy is
great unto the heavens, and thy faithfulness reaches unto the clouds: and,
Remember the mavelous works that he has done, Ps. 105. 5, 7.
his wonders, and the judgments of his mouth. He is the Lord our God, his
judgments are in all the earth: and again, Thy mercy, O Lord, is in the
heavens, thy faithfulness reaches unto the Ps. 36. 5, 6, 7.
clouds. Thy righteousness is like the great mountains; thy judgments are a
great deep: O Lord, thou preservest man and beast. How excellent is thy
loving kindness, O God! and, How precious are thy Ps. 139. 17, 18.
thoughts unto me, O Lord! O how great is the sum of them! If I should count
them, they are more in number then the sand: and again, His work is honorable
and Psalm. 111. 3.
glorious, his righteousness endures for ever: and, The Lord is good to all,
and Psalm. 145. 9.
his tender mercies are over all his works: and, Blessed be the Lord, who daily
loadeth us with his benefits. Psalm. 68. 19.


In such manner ought we diligently to survey, and judiciously to estimate the
effects of Divine beneficence, examining every part, and descanting upon every
circumstance thereof: like those that contemplate some rare beauty, or some
excellent picture; some commending the exact proportions, some the graceful
features, some the lively colors discernible therein. There is not the least
of the Divine favors, which, if we consider the condescensive tenderness, the
clear intention, the undeserved frankness, the cheerful debonairity expressed
therein, has not dimensions larger then our comprehension, colors too fair,
and lineaments too comely for our weak sight thoroughly to discern; requiring
therefore our highest esteem, and our utmost thanks.

It Is, perhaps, somewhat dangerous to affix a determinate value upon any of
God's Benefits: (for to value them seems to undervalue them, they being really
inestimable:) what then is it to extenuate, to vilify, to despise the
greatest? We should esteem them, as we measure the Heavens with our eye, as we
compute the sands upon the shore, as we would prize inexhaustible mines of
gold, and treasures of pearl; that is, by confessing heartily their worth
surpasses the strength of our imagination to conceive, and of our speech to
utter; that they are immense, innumerable, unconceivable and unexpressible. But
still,

4. Giving thanks imports, that Benefits be received with a willing mind, a
hearty sense, a vehement affection. The forementioned particulars are indeed
necessary properties, inseparable concomitants, or prerequisite conditions to;
but a cheerful and cordial acceptance of Benefits is the form (as it were) and
soul, the life and spirit, the principal and most essential ingredient of this
Duty.

It was not altogether unreasonable, though it went for a Paradox, that dictate
of the Stoics, That animus sufficit animo, and, That qui libenter accepit,
beneficium reddidit: that he, who with a willing and well-affected mind
receives a courtesy, has fully discharged the duty of Gratitude; that other
endeavors of return and compensation are rather handsome accessions to it,
then indispensably requisite to the completion thereof. For as in the
Collation, it is not the gold or the silver, the food or the apparel, in which
the Benefit consists, but the will and benevolent intention of him that bestows
them: so reciprocally it is the good acceptance, the sensibleness of, and
acquiescence in the Benefactour's goodness, that constitutes the Gratitude;
which who affords, though he be never capable of yielding other satisfaction,
voluntate voluntati satisfecit; and, Regum aequavit opes animo --. It Is
ingenuity that constitutes (respectively) both a bountiful Giver, and a
thankful Receiver. A trulynoble Quoties quod proposuit quis consequitur, capit
operis sui fructum. Qui beneficium dat, quid proponit sibi? prodesse ei cui
dat, and sibi voluptati esse: Non sibi invicem reddi voluit; aut non fuit
beneficium, sed negotiatio. Beneficii proprium est, nihil de reditu cogitare.
Senec.

Nec est dubium quin is qui liberalis benignusque dicitur, officium, non
fructum, sequatur. Cic. de Leg. I.


Benefactour purely aims at not any material reward, or advantage to himself;
(it were trading this, not beneficence;) but the good, profit, and content of
him to whom he dispenses his favor: of which being assured, he rests
satisfied, and accounts himself royally recompensed.

Such a Benefactour is Almighty God, and such a tribute he requires of us; a
ready embracement of, and a joyful complacency in his kindness; even such as
he expressed, who said, Because thy loving kindness is better then life, my
Psalm. 63. 3.

Psalm. 104. 33. and 71. 22.

Psalm. 63. 5.


lips shall praise thee: and, My soul shall be filled as with marrow and
fatness, and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips: and, I will praise
thee with my Psalm. 9. 1, 2.
whole heart; I will be glad and rejoice in thee: and, Bless the Lord, O my
soul; Psalm. 103. 1.
and all that is within me, praise his holy Name.

No Holocaust is so acceptable to God, as a Heart enflamed with the sense of
his Goodness. He loves not only (...), (a merry giver,) but (...), 2 Cor. 9. 7.
(a cheerful receiver) also. He would have us, as to desire his favor with a
greedy appetite, so to taste it with a savoury relish. He designs not only to
fill our mouths with food, but Acts 14. 17.
our hearts also with gladness.

We must not seem to grudge or repine, to murmur or disdain, that we are
necessitated to be beholden to him; lest it happen to us as it did to them of
whom it is said, While the meat was yet in their mouths, the wrath of God came
Ps. 78. 30, 31.
upon them, and slew the fattest of them. Yea, it is our duty, not to be
contented only, but to be delighted, to be transported, to be ravished with
the emanations of his love: to entertain them with such a disposition of mind,
as the dry and parched ground imbibes the soft dew and gentle showrs; as the
chill and darksome air admits the benign influences of heavenly light; as the
thirsty soul takes in the sweet and cooling stream. He that with a sullen look,
a dead heart, a faint sense, a cold hand, embraces the gifts of Heaven, is
really unthankful, though with deluges of wine and oil he makes the altars to
overflow, and clouds the sky with the steam of his sacrifices. But yet farther,

5. This Duty requires due Acknowledgment of our obligation, significations of
our notice, declarations of our esteem and good acceptance of favors
conferred. It Is the worst and most detestable of ingratitudes, that which
proceeds from pride and scorn: and such is he guilty of, who is either
unwilling, or ashamed to confess himself obliged; who purposely dissembles a
Benefit, or disavows the Benefactour; who refuses to render those most
manifestly due, and most (...). Chrysostom. Tom. I. page 54.
easily discharged, those neither toilsome, nor expensive oblations of praise
and acknowledgment. This part of our duty requires, that we offer to God, not
costly Hecatombs, but the calves only of our lips, (as the Prophet Hos. 14. 2.
Hoseah speaks;) not the fruit of our hands, but (...) only, (as the Apostle
to the Hebrews styles it,) the Heb. 13. 15.
fruit of our lips, (...).
confessing to his name: that we employ some few blasts of the breath he gave
us on the celebration of his goodness, and advancement of his repute. I will
praise the name of God Psalm. 69. 30, 31.
with a song, and will magnify him with thanksgiving. This shall please the
Lord better then an ox or bullock that has horns and hoofs, says David.

And surely it is the least homage we in gratitude owe, and can pay to Almighty
God, to avow our dependence upon and obligation to him for the good things we
enjoy, to acknowledge that his favors do deserve thanks, to publish to the
world our experience of his goodness, to proclaim solemnly with the voice of
thanksgiving his most deserved praise; resembling him who abounds in such
expressions as these: I will sing of the mercies of the Lord for Psalm. 89. 1.
ever, with my mouth will I make known his faithfulness to all generations. I
will Psalm. 26. 7.
publish with the voice of thanksgiving, and tell of all his wondrous works. I
will Psalm. 145. 5.
speak of the glorious honor of thy Majesty, and of thy wondrous works. I have
Psalm. 40. 10.
not hid thy righteousness in my heart, I have declared thy faithfulness and
thy salvation: I have not concealed thy loving kindness Vid. Psalm. 66. 5. O
come hither, and behold the works of God, etc.
and thy truth from the great congregation.

Thus if a grateful affection live in our hearts, it will respire through our
mouths, and discover it self in the motion of our lips. There will be a
conspiracy and faithful correspondence between our mind, and our tongue: if
the one be sensible, the other will not be silent; as if the spring works, the
wheels will turn about, and the bell not fail to speak. Neither shall we
content our selves in lonesome tunes, and private soliloquies, to whisper out
the Divine praises; but shall loudly excite and provoke others to a melodious
consonance with us. We shall, with the sweet Singer of Israel, cite and invoke
Heaven and Earth, the celestial quire of Angels, the several estates and
generations of Men, the numberless company of all the Creatures, to assist and
join in consort with us, in celebrating the worthy deeds, and magnifying the
glorious name of our most mighty Creator, of our most bountiful Benefactour.

Gratitude is of a fruitful and diffusive nature, of a free and communicative
disposition, of an open and sociable temper: it will be imparting, discovering,
and propagating it self; it affects light, company, and liberty; it cannor
endure to be smothered in privacy and obscurity. Its best instrument therefore
is Speech, that most natural, proper, and easy mean of conversation, of
signifying our conceptions, (...), etc. Clem. Alexan. Strom. I. page 270.
of conveying, and, as it were, ttansfunding our thoughts and our passions into
each other. This therefore glory of ours, and best organ that Psalm. 57. 8.
we have, (as the Psalmist seems to call it,) our Tongue, we should in all
reason devote to the honor, and consecrate to the praise of him who made it,
and who conserves it still in tune.

And the farther to provoke us, we may consider, that it has been the manner,
prompted by Nature, and authorized by general practice, for men of all nations,
and all times, and all ways, by composed Hymns and panegyrical Elogies, to
express their gratitude for the gifts of Nature, and for the Benefits indulged
by Providence; in their public Sacrifices and solemn Festivities extolling the
excellent qualities of their imaginary Deities; and reciting the famous
achievements of their Heroes, and supposed Benefactours: to whose favorable
help and blessing, in their conceit, they owed the fruits of the earth, the
comforts of life, the defense and patronage of their countries: being indeed
mistaken in the object, but not transgressing in the substance of the Duty;
paying a due debt, though to false creditours. And I wish we were as ready to
imitate them in the one, as we are, perhaps, prone to blame them for the other.
For, certainly, acknowledgments of the Divine Goodness, and solemn
testifications of our thankful sense thereof, (whatever the abused world may
now imagine,) was always, is now, and ever will be the principal and most noble
part of all Religion immediately addressed to God. But moreover,

6. This Duty requires endeavors 1 Samuel 12. 24. Only fear the Lord, and serve
him in truth with all your heart: for consider how great things he has done
for you.
of real Compensation, and a satisfactory Requital of Benefits, according to
the ability and opportunity of the receiver: that we do not only verbally
dicere, and agnoscere; but really agere, and refer gratias: that to him who
has by his beneficence obliged us, we minister reciprocal assistence, comfort
and relief, if he need them, and be capable to receive them; however, by
evident testimonies to discover our ready disposition to make such real
returns; and withal, to suit our actions to his good liking, and in our
carriage to comply with his reasonable desires. For, as the earth, which
drinks the rain often coming upon it, and having Heb. 6. 7, 8.
been by great labor tilled, and manured with expense, yields yet no meet
(...).
herbage, or fruit agreeable to the expectation of him that dresseth it, but is
either wholly barren, or produces only thorns and briars, is (as the Apostle
to the Hebrews tells us) to be reprobated, and nigh unto cursing; that is,
deserves no farther care or culture to be employed on it, and is to be reputed
desperately worthless: so is he (that we may apply an Apodosis to the Apostle's
comparison) who, daily partaking the influences of Divine Providence and
Bounty, affords no answerable return, to be accounted execrably unthankful,
and unworthy of any farther favor to be showed toward him.

It Is true, our righteousness (or beneficence, Psalm. 16. 2.
so the word there signifies) does not extend unto God: His Benefits exceed all
possibility of any proportionable requital: He does not need, nor can ever
immediately receive any advantage from us: we cannot enrich him with our gifts,
who by unquestionable right, and in unalterable possession, is Lord and Master
of all things that do actually, or can possibly exist; nor advance him by our
weak commendations, who already enjoys the supreme pitch of glory; nor any
way contribute to his in it self complete and indefectible Beatitude. Yet we
may by apposite significations declare our willingness to serve and exalt him:
we may by our obsequious demeanor highly please and content him: we may, by
our charity and benignity to those whose good he tenders, yield (though not an
adequate, yet) an acceptable return to his Benefits. What shall I render unto
Psalm. 116. 12.
the Lord for all his benefits? says David, in way of counsel and
deliberation: and thereupon resolves, I will take Verse. 13, 14.
the cup of salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord: I will pay my vows
unto the Lord. Seasonable benedictions, officious addresses, and faithful
performances of vows, he intimates to bear some shadow at least, some
resemblance of compensation. And so did his wise Son likewise, when he thus
advised, Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the first fruits of thy
increase. Prove. 3. 9.


Almighty God, though he really does, and cannot otherwise do, yet will not
seem to bestow his favors altogether gratis, but to expect some competent
return, some small use and income from them. He will assert his rightful
title, and be acknowledged the chief proprietary by signal expressions of our
fealty, and the payment of some, though inconsiderable, quit-rent, for our
possessions derived from him: he will rather himself be seemingly indigent,
then permit us to be really ungrateful. For, (...).

S. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 144. page 885.

Savil.


knowing well that our performance of duty and respect toward him greatly
conduces to our comfort and happiness, he requires of us such demonstrations
of them, as we conveniently are able to exhibit; he appoints services
expressive of thankfulness, exacts tributes and customs, demands loans and
benevolences, encourages and accepts free-will-offerings from us. Thou shall
Exodus 23. 15.
not appear empty before the Lord, was a Statute to the Jews, qualified and
moderated by certain measures: The Firstfruits of their Lands, the Firstborn
of their Cattle and of themselves, the Tenths of their annual increase, and a
certain allotment from the Spoils acquired in wars, did God challenge to
himself, as fitting recompenses due for his bounty to and care over them.

Neither did the Gentiles conceive themselves exempted from the like
obligation. For the (...), the top or chief of the Corn-heaps, they were wont
to consecrate unto him who had blessed their fields with increase; and the
(...), the first and best of the prey, they dedicated to the adornment of his
temple by whose favorable disposal they had obtained the victory. Neither
would they sooner begin their meal, and partake of their necessary refreshment,
then, by pouring forth their gratulatory libation, they had performed some
homage to Heaven for it.

(...) Hom. Il. n'. adfinem.

(...), was the custom, it seems, in Homer's time. I shall not insist upon
their (...), their anniversary or their casual Sacrifices; but only observe,
(what, if seasonable, might by many sufficient testimonies be evinced,) that
those men (at least the most intelligent of them) were not so senseless as to
imagine, that the Gods to whom they performed those services, and devoted Vid.
Platonis Alcib. II. page 459.

(...), etc.


those oblations, did any-wise need, or were truly benefited by them; but that
they esteemed it a comely thing, by the most significant means they could
invent, to declare their grateful sense of the Divine goodness and indulgence
toward them.

And though we are, perhaps, disobliged now from the circumstantial manner, yet
are we no-wise freed from (but rather more strongly engaged to) the substantial
performance of this sort of Gratitude. We are to offer still, not dead bulls
and goats, but (as S. Paul says) our own bodies, living sacrifices, holy and
acceptable to God. We are excused Romans 12. 1.
from material, but are yet bound to yield (...), spiritual 1 Pet. 2. 5.
sacrifices unto God, as S. Peter tells us. We must burn incense still, that of
fervent Devotion; and send up continually to Heaven (...), that thank-offering
of praise, which the Heb. 13. 15.
Apostle to the Hebrews mentions. We must consecrate the firstborn of our
Souls, (pure and holy Thoughts,) and the first fruits of our strength, (our
most active Endeavors,) to God's Service. We must slay our impure desires,
mortify our corrupt affections, and abandon our selfish respects for his sake.
We must give him our Hearts, and present our Wills entirely to his disposal.
We must vow to him, and pay the daily oblation of sincere Obedience. We must
officiously attend his pleasure, and (...). C^m. Alex. Strom. 7 p. 511.
labor to content him by an innocent and unblemished conversation. With these
things Almighty God is effectually gratified; he approves of and accepts these,
as real testimonies of our Thankfulness, and competent returns for his Benefits.

Especially our Charity and Beneficence, our exhibiting love and respect to
good men, (his faithful servants and near relations,) our affording help and
succor to persons in need and distress, he accounts a suitable retaliation of
his kindness, acknowledges to be an obligation laid upon himself, and has by
settled rules and indispensable promises obliged himself to requite them. For,
He that has pity on the poor, lends Prove. 19. 17.
unto the Lord; and that which he has given, he will pay him again: and, God
is not unrighteous, to forget your work, Heb. 6. 10.
and labor of love, which ye have showed toward his Name, in that ye have
ministered to the Saints, and do minister: and, To do good and communicate,
forget Heb. 13. 16.
not; for with such sacrifices God is well pleased: and, I desire fruit (says
S. Paul Phil. 4. 17. 18.
to the Philipians) that may abound to your account. But I have all, and
abound; I am full, having received of Epaphroditus the things which were sent
from you, an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to
God. And, Inasmuch as ye have done it to (that Matt. 25 40.
is, fed, and clothed, and comforted) the least of these my brethren, ye have
done it unto me, says our Savior; manifestly declaring, that the good we do,
and the respect we show unto good and needy men, God reckons it done unto
himself.

And this point I shall conclude with the sayings of the wise Hebrew
Philosopher Ben-Sirach. He that keeps the Ecclus 35. 1, 2, 3.
Law, brings offerings enough: he that takes heed to the Commandment,
offers a peace offering. He that requiteth a good turn, offers fine flower:
and he that gives alms, sacrifices praise. To depart from wickedness, is a
thing pleasing to the Lord: and to forsake unrighteousness, is a propitiation.
To these I shall only add this one particular,

7. That true Gratitude for Benefits is always attended with the Esteem,
Veneration, and love of the Benefactour. Beneficence is a Royal and God-like
thing, an argument of eminent Goodness and Power conspiring; and necessarily
therefore, as in them that perceive, and duly consider it, it begets Respect
and Reverence, so peculiarly in those that feel its benign influence, it
produces Love and Affection: like the heavenly Light, which to all that behold
it appears glorious; but more powerfully warms those that are directly subject
to its rays, and is by them more vigorously reflected.

And as to those that are immediately concerned therein, it imports more
particular Regard and Good will; so, if they be duly sensible thereof, it
engages them, in mutual correspondence, to an extraordinary esteem and
Benevolence: such as David upon this account professes to have been in himself
toward God, and frequently excites others to. I will love thee, O Lord my
strength. Psalm. 18. 1.
I will call upon the Lord, who is worthy Verse 3.
to be praised. The Lord lives, and blessed Verse 46.
be my rock; and let the God of my salvation be exalted. I love the Lord,
because Psalm. 116. 1.
he has heard my voice, and my supplications. And, (in the Gospel) Because
Luke 7. 47.
her sins, being many, were forgiven, therefore she loved much. So true it is,
that (...). Soph.
sense of favor indulged is naturally productive of love.

Thus have I plainly and simply presented you with what my meditations
suggested concerning the Nature and Substance of this Duty, with the several
branches sprouting from the main stock thereof: I proceed now to that which
will exceedingly enlarge the worth, and engage to the performance thereof.

II. The Object and Term to which it is to be directed; we are to give thanks
to God. To God, I say; that is, to Him unto whom we are obliged, not for some
small and inconsiderable trifles, but for the most weighty and valuable
Benefits: from whom we receive, not few or some, but all good things; whatever
is necessary for our sustenance, convenient for our use, pleasant for our
enjoyment; not only those that come immediately from his hand, but what we
obtain from others, who from him receive both the will and the power, the means
and the opportunities of doing us good: to whom we owe, not only what we ever
did, or do at present possess, or can hereafter hope for of good; but that we
were, are, or shall ever be in capacity to receive any: to the author,
upholder and preserver of our being; without whose goodness we had never been,
and without whose care we cannot subsist one moment.

To Him who is the Lord and true owner of all things we partake of; whose air
we breathe, whose ground we tread on, whose food sustains us; whose wholly we
are our selves, both the Bodies we carry about us, (which is the work of his
hands,) and the Soul we think with, which was breathed from his mouth.

To Him who has created a whole World to serve us, a spacious, a beautiful, a
stately World for us to inhabit, and to disport in: who has subjected so fair
a territory to our dominion, and consigned to our use so numerous a progeny of
goodly creatures, to be managed, to be governed, to be enjoyed by us.

So that wherever we direct our eyes, whether we reflect them inwards upon
our selves, we behold his goodness to occupy and penetrate the very root and
center of our beings; or extend them abroad toward the things about us, we may
perceive our selves enclosed wholly, and surrounded with his Benefits. At home
we find a comely Body framed by his curious artifice, various Organs fitly
proportioned, situated, and tempered for strength, ornament, and motion,
actuated by a gentle heat, and invigorated with lively spirits, disposed to
health, and qualified for a long endurance; subservient to a Soul endued with
diverse Senses, Faculties and Powers, apt to enquire after, pursue and perceive
various delights and contents. To the satisfaction of which all extrinsecal
things do minister matter and help; by his kind disposal, who furnishes our
Palats with variety of delicious fare, entertains our Eyes with pleasant
spectacles, ravishes our Ears with harmonious sounds, perfumes our Nostrils
with fragrant odours, chears our Spirits with comfortable gales, fills our
Hearts with food and gladness, supplies our manifold needs, and protects us
from innumerable dangers.

To Him, who has inspired us with immortal Minds, and impressed upon them
perspicuous characters of his own Divine Essence; has made us, not in some
superficial lineaments, but in our most intimate constitution, to resemble
Himself, and to partake of his most excellent Perfections; an extensive
Knowledge of truth, a vehement Complacency in good, a forward Capacity of being
completely happy, (according to our degree, and within our sphere.) To which
blessed End by all suitable means (of eternal ministry and interior assistance)
he faithfully conducts us; revealing to us the way, urging us in our process,
reclaiming us when we deviate; engaging us by his Commands, soliciting us by
gentle Advices, encouraging us by gracious Promises; instructing us by his holy
Word, and admonishing us by his loving Spirit.

To Him, who vouchfafes to grant us a free access unto, a constant intercourse
and a familiar acquaintance with Himself; to esteem and style us his Friends
and Children; to invite us frequently, and entertain us kindly with those most
pleasant delicacies of spiritual repast; yea, to visit us often at our home,
and (if we admit) to abide and dwell with us; indulging us the enjoyment of
that Presence, wherein the life of all joy and comfort consists, and to behold
the light of his all-chearing countenance.

Is there any thing more? Yes: To Him who, to redeem us from Misery, and to
advance our estate, has infinitely debased Himself, and eclipsed the
brightness of his glorious Majesty; not disdaining to assume us into a near
affinity, yea, into a perfect union with himself; to inhabit our frail and
mortal nature, to undergo the laws and conditions of Humanity, to appear in our
shape, and converse, as it were, upon equal terms with us, and at last to taste
the bitter Cup of a most painful and disgraceful Death for us.

Yea, To Him, who not only descended from his Imperial Throne, became a
Subject, and (which is more) a Servant for our sake; but designed thereby to
exalt us to a participation of his royal dignity, his Divine nature, his
eternal glory and bliss; submitting Crowns and Sceptres to our choice; Crowns
that cannot fade, and Sceptres that can never be extorted from us.

Farther yet, To Him, the excellent quality, the noble end, the most obliging
manner of whose Beneficence does surpass the matter thereof, and hugely augment
the Benefits: who, not compelled by any necessity, not obliged by any law, (or
previous compact,) not induced by any extrinsick arguments, not inclined by our
merits, not wearied with our importunities, not instigated by troublesome
passions of pity, shame, or fear, (as we are wont to be,) not flattered with
promises of recompense, nor bribed with expectation of emolument thence to
accrue unto himself; but being absolute Master of his own actions, only both
Lawgiver and Counselor to himself, all-sufficient, and incapable of admitting
any accession to his perfect blissfulness; most willingly and freely, out of
pure bounty and good will, is our friend and benefactour; preventing not only
our desires, but our knowledge; surpassing not our deserts only, but our
wishes, yea, even our conceits, in the dispensation of his inestimable and
unrequitable benefits; having no other drift in the collation of them, beside
our real good and welfare, our profit and advantage, our pleasure and content.

To Him, who not lately began, or suddenly will cease, that is either uncertain
or mutable in his intentions, but from everlasting designed, continues daily,
and will (if we suffer him) to all eternity persevere unmovable in his
resolutions to do us good.

To Him, whom no ingratitude, no undutiful carriage, no rebellious disobedience
of ours could for one minute wholly remove, or divert from his steady purpose
of caring for us: who regards us, though we do not attend to him; procures our
welfare, though we neglect his concernments; employs his restless thought,
extends his watchful eye, exerts his powerful arm, is always mindful, and
always busy to do us good; watching over us, when we sleep, and remembering us,
when we forget our selves: in whom yet it is insinite condescension to think of
us, who are placed so far beneath his thoughts; to value us, who are but dust,
and dirt; not to despise and hate us, who are really so despicable and
unworthy. For, though he dwells on high, (says the Psalmist truly and
emphatically,) he humbles Psalm 113. 5, 6.
himself to behold the things that are done in heaven and earth.

To Him that is as merciful and gracious, as liberal and munificent toward us:
that not only bestows on us more gifts, but pardons us more debts, and forgives
us more sins, then we live minutes: that with infinite patience endures, not
only our manifold infirmities and imperfections, but our petulant follies, our
obstinate perversnesses, our treacherous insidelities; overlooks our careless
neglects, and our wilful miscarriages; puts up the exceeding-many outrageous
affronts, injuries and contumelies continually offered to his Supreme Majesty,
by us base worms, whom he has always under his feet, and can crush to nothing
at his pleasure.

To Him yet, who (as St. James says) gives freely, and upbraideth no man:
Jam. 1. 5.
who calls us neither very frequently, nor over-strictly to accounts: who
exacts of us no impossible, no very difficult, no greatly-burdensome, or costly
returns; being satisfied with the cheerful acceptance of his favors, the
hearty acknowledgments of his goodness, the sincere performance of such duties
to which our own welfare, comfort and advantage (rightly apprehended) would
otherwise abundantly dispose us.

To Him, lastly, whose Benefits to acknowledge, is the greatest Benefit of all;
to be enabled to thank whom, deserves our greatest thanks; to be sensible of
whose Beneficence, to meditate on whose Goodness, to admire whose Excellency,
to celebrate whose Praise, is Heaven it self and Paradise, the life of Angels,
the quintessence of Joy, the supreme degree of Felicity.

In a word, To Him, whose Benefits are immensely great, innumerably many,
unexpressibly good and precious. For, Who Psalm. 106.
can utter the mighty acts of the Lord? who can show forth his praise? said he,
who had employed often his most active thoughts, and his utmost endeavors
thereupon, and was incomparably better able to do it.

To this God, to this great, to this only Benefactour of ours, we owe this most
natural and easy, this most just and equal, this most sweet and pleasant Duty
of giving Thanks. To whom if we wilfully refuse, if we carelessly neglect to pay
it, I shall only say thus much, That we are not only monstrously ungrateful,
and horribly wicked; but abominably foolish, and deplorably miserable. I shall
repeat this sentence once again, and wish it may have its due effect upon us:
To this great, to this only Patron and Benefactour of ours, if we do not in
some measure discharge our due debt of Gratitude, for his inestimable Benefits
and Mercies, we are to be adjudged not only most prodigiously unthankful, most
detestably impious; but most woefully stupid also and senseless, most
desperately wretched and unhappy.

I should now proceed to consider the Circumstance of Time, determined in the
word Always; and the extension of the Matter implied in those words, for all
things: and then to subjoyn some farther inducements, or arguments persuasive
to the practice of this Duty. But the time (and, I fear, your patience)
failing, I shall reserve them to some other opportunity.

The Ninth Sermon.
EPHESIANS. 5. 20. Giving thanks always for all things unto God.
HAving formerly discoursed upon these words, I observed in them Four
Particulars considerable; 1. the substance of a Duty, to which we are exhorted,
to give thanks; 2. the Term unto which it is directed, to God; 3. the
Circumstance of time, determined in that word, always; 4. the Extent of the
Matter about which the Duty is employed, for all things. Concerning the Two
former Particulars, wherein the Duty consisted, and wherefore especially
related unto God, I then represented what did occur to my meditation.

III. I proceed now to the Third, the Circumstance of Time allotted to the
performance of this Duty, expressed by that universal and unlimited term,
Always.

Which yet is not so to be understood, as if thereby we were obliged in every
instant (or singular point of time) actually to remember, to consider, to be
affected with, and to acknowledge the Divine Benefits: for the deliberate
operations of our minds being sometimes wholly interrupted by sleep, otherwhile
pre-occupied by the indispensible care of serving our natural necessities, (and
with attendence upon other reasonable employments,) it were impossible to
comply with an obligation to the performance of this Duty so interpreted. And
those Maxims of Law, Impossibilium nulla est obligatio; and, Quae rerum natura
prohibentur, nulla Lege confirmata sunt, (that is, No Law or Precept can oblige
to Impossibilities,) being evidently grounded upon natural equity, seem yet
more valid in relation to his Laws, who is the Judge of all the World, and in
his dispensations most transcendently just and equal.

We may therefore observe that the Hebrews are wont (in way of Synecdoche, or
grammatical Hyperbole) so to use words of this kind, that their universal
importance ought to be restrained by the quality or circumstances of the matter
about which they converse. As when our Savior says, Ye shall be hated by all
men for my sake; All is not Matt. 10. 22.
to be taken for every singular person, (since there were some that loved our
Savior, and embraced the Evangelical Doctrine,) but for many, or the most. And
when David says, There is none that does good; he seems only to mean, Psalm.
14. 1^
that in the general corruption of his times, there were few righteous persons
to be found. And so for ever is often used, not for a perpetual and endless,
but for a long and lasting duration; and always, not for a continual
(unintermited) state of being, or action, but for such a perseverance as agrees
to the condition of the thing to which it is applied.

It Is (for instance) prescribed in Exodus, that Aaron should bear the judgment
of the Children of Israel (the Urim and Exodus 28. 30
Thummim) upon his heart before the Lord continually; that is (not in absolute
and rigorous acception continually, but) constantly, ever when he went into the
Holy Place to discharge the Pontifical function, as the context declares. And
our Savior in the Gospel says of himself, (...), I always taught Joh. 18. 20.
in the Temple; that is, very often, and ever when fit occasion was presented.
And the Apostles, immediately after Christ's ascension, (...), were (as St.
Luke tells us) continually Luke 24. 53.
in the Temple, praising and blessing God; that is, they resorted thither
constantly at the usual times, or canonical hours of prayer; in like manner
those injunctions (of nearest affinity) of rejoicing, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16, 18.
of giving thanks always, and particularly of praying without ceasing, (as I
have shown more largly in another Ephesians. 6. 18.

Luke 18. 1.

1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.


Discourse,) are to be taken in a sense so qualified, that the observance of
them may be at least morally possible.

Thus far warrantably we may limit the extension, and mollify the rigor of
this seemingly-boundless term: but we can hardly allow any farther restriction,
without destroying the natural signification, or diminishing the due emphasis
thereof. As far therefore as it is possible for us, we must endeavor always to
perform this duty of Gratitude to Almighty God: and consequently,

1. Hereby is required a Frequent performance thereof; that we do often
actually meditate upon, be sensible of, confess and celebrate the Divine
Beneficence. For what is done but seldom or never, (as we commonly say) cannot
be understood done always, without a Catachresis, or abuse of words too
enormous. As therefore no moment of our life wants sufficient matter, and every
considerable portion of time ministers notable occasion of blessing God; as he
allows himself no spacious intervalls, or discontinuances of doing us good: so
ought we not to suffer any of those many days (vouchsafed by his goodness) to
flow beside us, void of the signal expressions of our dutiful Thankfulness to
him; nor to admit in our course of life any long vacations from this Duty. If
God incessantly, and through every minute, demonstrates himself gracious unto
us; we in all reason are obliged frequently and daily to declare our selves
grateful unto him.

So at least did David, (that most eminent example in this kind, and therefore
most apposite to illustrate our Doctrine, and to enforce the practice thereof;)
for, Every day, says he, I will Psalm. 145. 2.
bless thee; I will praise thy Name for ever and ever. Every day. The Heavenly
bodies did not more constantly observe their course, then he his diurnal
revolutions of praise: Every day in his Calendar was as it were Festival, and
consecrated to Thansgiving. Neither did he adjudge it sufficient to devote some
small parcels of each day to this Service: for, My Tongue (says he) Psalm. 35.
28
shall speak of thy Righteousness, and of thy praise all the day long: and
again, My mouth shall show forth thy righteousness, Plal. 71. 8, 15, 24.
and thy salvation all the day; for I know not the numbers thereof. The
Benefits of God he apprehended so great and numerous, that no definite space of
time would serve to consider and commemorate them. He resolves therefore
otherwhere to bestow his whole life upon that employment: While I live, I will
praise the Lord; I will sing praises Psalm. 146. 2. and 104. 33.
unto my God, while I have any being: and, I will bless the Lord at all times;
Psalm. 34. 1. and Psalm. 71. 6.
his praise shall continually be in my mouth. No man can reasonably pretend
greater impediments, or oftener avocations from the practice of (...); etc.

Chrysostom. Tom. V. page 76.


this duty, then he, upon whom the burden of a royal estate, and the care of
governing a populous nation were incumbent: yet could not they thrust out of
his memory, nor extinguish in his heart the lively sense of Divine goodness;
which (notwithstanding the company of other secular encumbrances) was always
present to his mind, and, like a spirit, excluded from no place by any
corporeal resistance,) did mingle with and penetrate all his thoughts, and
affections, and actions. So that he seems to have approached very near to the
complete performance of this Duty, according to the extremity of a literal
interpretation; and to have been always without any intermission employed in
giving thanks to God. The consideration (methinks) of so noble a pattern,
adjoined to the evident reasonableness of the Duty, should engage us to the
frequent practice thereof.

But if the consideration of this excellent example do not, yet certainly that
may both provoke us to emulation, and confound us with shame, of Epictetus, a
Heathen Man, whose words to this purpose seem very remarkable: (...), (says he
in Arrian's Lib. I. cap. 17.
Dissert.) (...), etc. That is, in our language, If we understood our selves,
what other thing should we do, either publicly, or privately, than sing Hymns
(...). Clemens Alexand. Strom. VII. page 517.
to, and speak well of God, and perform Thanks unto him? Ought we not, when we
were digging, or plowing, or eating, to sing a (suitable) Hymn to him? Great is
God, in that he has bestowed on us those instruments wherewith we till the
ground: Great is God, because he has given us hands, a throat, a belly; that
we grow insensibly, that sleeping we breath. Thus (proceeds he) should we upon
every occurrence celebrate God, and superadd of all the most excellent and most
Divine Hymn, for that he has given us the faculty of apprehending and using
these things orderly. Wherefore since most men are blind and ignorant of this,
should not there be some one, who should discharge this office, and who should
for the rest utter this Hymn to God? And what can I, a lame (and decrepit) old
man do else, then celebrate God? Were I indeed a Nightingale, I would do what
belongs to a Nightingale; if a Swan, what becomes a Swan: but since now I am
endued with Reason, I ought to praise God. This is my duty and concernment, and
so I do; neither will I desert this employment, while it is in my power: and to
the same song I exhort you all. Thus that worthy Philosopher, not instructing
us only, and exhorting with pathetical discourse, but by his practice inciting
us to be continually expressing our Gratitude to God.

And although neither the admonition of Prophets, nor precepts of Philosophers,
nor the examples of both, should prevail; yet the precedents (methinks) of dumb
and senseless creatures should animate us thereto; which never cease to obey
the law imposed on them by their Maker, and without intermission glorify him.
For, The Heavens declare Psalm. 19. 1, 2, 3.
the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handiwork. Day unto day
utters speech, and Night unto Night shows Knowledge. There is no speech nor
language, where their voice is not heard. It Is St. Chrysostom's Argumentation:
(...), says he, (...) Psalm. 144.
(...), etc. 'Twere an ugly thing, that Man, endued with Reason, and the most
Honorable of all things visible, should in rendering Thanks and Praise be
exceeded by other Creatures: neither is it only base, but absurd. For, how can
it be otherwise, since other creatures every day, and every hour, send up a
doxology to their Lord and Maker? For, The Heavens declare the Glory of God,
etc.

If the busy Heavens are always at leisure, and the stupid Earth is
perpetually active in manifesting the Wisdom, Power, and Goodness of their
Creator; how shameful is it, that we (the flower of his creation, the most
obliged, and most capable of doing it) should commonly be either too busy, or
too idle to do it; should seldom or never be disposed to contribute our
endeavors to the advancement of his Glory? But,

2. Giving thanks always may import our Appointing, and punctually Observing
certain convenient times of performing this Duty; that is, of serious
meditation upon, and affectionate acknowledgment of the Divine Bounty. We know
that all persons, who design with advantage to prosecute an orderly course of
action, and would not lead a tumultuary life, are wont to distinguish their
portions of time, assigning some to the necessary refections of their Body,
others to the divertisement of their Minds, and a great part to the dispatch of
their ordinary business: otherwise (like St. James his doubleminded Jam. 1. 8.
man) they would be unstable in all their ways; they would ever fluctuate in
their resolutions, and be uncertain when, and how, and to what they should
apply themselves. And so, this main Concernment of ours, this most excellent
part of our Duty, if we do not depute some vacant seasons for it, and observe
some periodical recourses thereof, we shall be tempted often to omit it; we
shall be listless to do it, apt to defer it, and easily diverted from it by the
encroachments of other less-behoving affairs.

The Jews, to preserve them in the constant exercise of this Duty, had
instituted by God a Sacrifice called (...) Dan. 8. 11.
(Juge,) rendered by the Greek Translatours (...), the continual Sacrifice; to
which the Divine Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews seems to allude, when in
these words he exhorts: (...). By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of
Praise to God continually, Heb. 13. 15.
(or the continual sacrifice of Praise,) the fruit of our lips, giving thanks
to his Name. As that sacrifice therefore, being offered constantly at a set
time, was thence denominated continual; so perhaps may we, by constantly
observing some fit returns of praise and thanksgiving, be said always to give
thanks.

In determining the seasons and proportions of which, what other rule or
standard can we better conform to, then that of the Royal Prophet? I shall not
urge his example so much; (according to which we should be obliged to a greater
frequency;) for, Seven times a Tsal. 119. 64.
day (says he) do I praise thee, because of thy righteous judgments: but
rather allege his general direction and opinion, proposed to us in those words
of his; It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Psalm. 92. 1, 2.
Lord, and to sing praises unto thy Name, O thou Most high; to show forth thy
loving kindness every morning, and thy Psalm. 55. 17.
faithfulness every night. It is a good thing; that is, a seemly, a convenient,
a commendable, a due performance: every morning; that is, when our spirits,
being recreated with sleep, are become more vigorous, our memories more fresh,
our fancies more quick, and active: to show forth thy loving kindness; that is,
from a hearty sense of our obligation, to acknowledge the free bounty of him,
who, in pursuance of his former kindness, has been pleased to accumulate new
favors on us; to guard us by his watchful care, when we were buried, as it
were, in a senseless ignorance, and total neglect of our own welfare; to raise
us from that temporary death, and to confer a new life upon us, restoring us to
our health, to our means of subsistence, to all the necessary supports, and the
desirable comforts of life: every night also; that is, when our spirits are
exhausted with action, and our minds tired with thoughtfulness; when we are
become weary, not of doing only, but almost of being; we should conclude our
toils, and wrap up our cares in the sweet sense, and grateful memory of his
goodness, who has protected us so many hours from the manifold dangers, and
more sins, to which by our weakness, and our folly, and our bad inclinations,
we are through every minute exposed; and withal has provided us so easy, and
so delightful a means of recovering our spent activity, of repairing our
decayed strength.

Thus if we constantly begin, and thus close up, thus bound and circumscribe
our days, dedicating those most remarkable periods of time to blessing God, and
making (as the Psalmist speaks) the outgoings of the morning and evening Psalm.
65. 8.
to rejoice in him; (since beginning and ending do in a manner comprehend the
whole; and the morning and evening, in Moses his computation and style, do
constitute a day;) we may (not incongruously) be supposed and said to give
thanks always. But yet farther, this may import

3. A Vigilant attendance upon this Duty, such as men bestow on their
employments, whereof though the actual prosecution ceases, yet the design
continuedly proceeds. As we say, such a one is writing a Book, building a
House, occupying a piece of Land, though he be at that present peradventure
sleeping, or eating, or satisfying some other desire; because his design never
sleeps, and his purpose persists uninterrupted. And thus it seems we are to
understand our Savior, and the Apostles, when they exhort us (...), to
continue Romans 12. 12.
instant in prayer, and thanksgiving; and (...), to watch with all
perseverance; and (...), to Ephesians. 6. 18.
wake in thanksgiving; and (...), Coloss. 4. 2.
not to give over giving thanks: and, to Ephesians. 1. 16.
perform these duties (...), incessantly, or without giving off; (...), 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.
not to grow worse, faint, or faulter: (which Luke 18. 1.
is, in that place, made equivalent to, and explicatory of doing Duty always.)
Which expressions denote a most diligent attendence on these Duties: that we
make them not a (...), a diversion or by-business of our lives, allowing only a
perfunctory and desultorious endeavor on them; but esteem them a weighty
business, to be pursued with steadfast resolution, and unwearied industry.

As our beings and powers did proceed from the Goodness, so the results of them
naturally tend to the Glory of God; and the deliberations of our Will ought to
conspire with the instincts of our Nature: it should be the principal design
which our Intention should aim at, and our Endeavor always drive on, to
glorify our Maker. Which doing, we may be reputed to discharge this Duty, and
in some sense said always to give thanks. But farther,

4. This term [always] does necessarily imply a Ready disposition, or habitual
inclination to give Thanks, ever permanent in us: that our Hearts, as David's
was, be fixed always (that is, fittingly Psalm. 108. 1.
prepared, and steadily resolved) to thank and praise God: that our Affections
be like tinder, though notalways inflamed, yet easily inflamable by the sense
of his Goodness.

It Is said of the righteous man, that he is ever merciful, and lends: not for
Psalm. 37. 25.
that he does ever actually dispense alms, or furnish his poor neighbor with
supplies; but because his mind is ever inclinable to do it, when need requires.
So a grateful man does always give thanks, by being disposed to do it upon all
fit occasions. It Is the habit that qualifies and denominates a man such or such
in any kind or degree of morality. A good man is in Scripture frequently
compared to a Tree bringing forth fruit in due season; and the root thereof is
this habitual disposition, which being nourished by the dew of Heaven, and
quickened by the benign influence of Divine Grace, sprouts forth opportunely,
and yields a plentiful increase of good fruit. Though we cannot always sing,
our organs may be always rightly tuned for praise; at least they should never
be unstrung, (and wholly out of kelter.)

We should maintain in our selves a constant good temper of mind, that no
opportunity surprise, and find us unprepared to entertain worthily the effects
of Divine favor: otherwise we shall as well lose the benefit, as God the
thanks and glory due to them. That we be always thus disposed, is not
impossible, and therefore requisite. But moreover,

5. Lastly, Giving thanks always imports, that we readily embrace every
opportunity of actually expressing our Thankfulness. For so, what in some
places of Scripture is enjoined to be done continually and without ceasing, is
in others only required to be done upon all opportunities. Which shows, that
(...) is to be expounded, not so much (...), at all times, as (...), in every
season. So (...), praying upon every opportunity in your spirit: and, (...),
Ephesians. 6. 18.
Be watchful, praying in every season. And this sense Luke 21. 36.
seems probably to be chiefly intended by this Apostle, whenever he has (as
he has often) this expression, (...), that we embrace every overture, or fit
occasion of giving thanks,

It Is true, no time is unseasonable to do it; every moment we receive Favors
and therefore every minute we owe Thanks: yet there are some especial seasons,
that do more importunately require them. We should be like those trees, that
bear fruit (more or less) continually; but then more kindly, and more
abundantly, when more powerfully cherished by the heavenly warmth.

When any fresh, any rare, any remarkable Benefit happens to us; when
prosperous success attends our honest endeavors; when unexpected favors fall
as it were of their own accord into our bosoms; (like the grain in the Golden
age springing up (...), without our care, or our toil, for our use and
enjoyment;) when we are delivered from streights in our apprehension
inextricable, surmount difficulties seeming insuperable, escape hazzards (as we
suspected) inevitable: Then is a special season presented us of offering up the
sacrifice of praise to the God of mercy, help, and victory.

When we revolve in our minds (as we should often do) the favorable passages
of Providence, that in the whole course of our lives have befallen us: how in
our extreme poverty and distress (when, perhaps, no help appeared, and all
hopes seemed to fail us) God has raised us up friends, who have commiserated,
comforted, and succored us; and not only so, but has changed our sorrowful
condition into a state of joy; has (to use the Psalmist's expressions) turned
our mourning into dancing; has put off our sackcloath, and girded us with
gladness; has considered Psalm. 30. 11.
our trouble, and known our soul Psalm. 31. 7, 8.
in adversity; has set our feet in a large room, and, furnished us with
plentiful means of subsistence: how in the various changes and adventures, and
travails of our life, upon Sea and Land, at home and abroad, among friends and
strangers and enemies, he has protected us from wants and dangers; from
devouring diseases, and the distemperatures of infectious air; from the
assaults of bloody thieves, and barbarous pirates; from the rage of fire, and
fury of tempests; from disastrous casualties; from treacherous surprises; from
open mischiefs, that with a dreadful face approached, and threatened our
destruction: Then most opportunely should we with all thankful exultation of
mind admire and celebrate our strength, and our deliverer; our faithful refuge
in trouble, and the rock of our salvation.

Also when the ordinary effects of Divine Providence do in any advantageous
manner present themselves to our view; when we peruse the volumes of story, and
therein observe the various events of humane action; especially the seasonable
rewards of Virtue, the notable protections and deliverances of Innocence, and
the unexpected punishments of malicious Wickedness: Then we should with
thankful acclamations celebrate the Divine Goodness and Justice; joining in
consort with that Heavenly quire, and saying, Allelujah; Salvation, and glory,
and honor, and power unto the Lord our God: for true and righteous are his
judgments. Apoc. 19. 1, 2.


Or, when we contemplate the wonderful works of Nature, and walking about at
our leisure, gaze upon this ample theater of the world, considering the stately
beauty, constant order, and sumptuous furniture thereof; the glorious
splendor, and uniform motion of the Heavens; the pleasant fertility of the
Earth, the curious figure and fragrant sweetness of Plants; the exquisite frame
of Animals; and all other amazing miracles of Nature, wherein the glorious
Attributes of God (especially his transcendent Goodness) are most conspicuously
displayed; (so that by them not only large acknowledgments, but even
gratulatory Hymns, as it were, of praise, have been extorted from the mouths of
Aristotle, Pliny, Galen, and such like men, never suspected guilty of an
excessive devotion) Then should our hearts be affected with thankful sense,
and our lips break forth into his praise.

Yea, from every object of Sense, from every event of Providence, from every
common occurrence we may extract fit matter of Thanksgiving: as did our
Savior, when, considering the stupid infidelity of those proud people of
Chorazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum, (who were not at all affected by his
miraculous Works, nor moved to repentance by his pathetical Discourses) and
comparing it with the pious credulity of his meaner Disciples, he brake forth
into that Divine ejaculation; I thank thee, O Father, Luke 10. 21.
Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have concealed these things from the wise
and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes. (...), says the Evangelical
Narration; Upon that occasion Jesus thus spoke: he embraced that convenient
opportunity of thankfully acknowledging God's wise and gracious Dispensation.
And frequent occasion is afforded us daily (were our minds sutably disposed) of
doing the like.

But so much concerning the Time of performing this Duty.

IV. We proceed to the Matter thereof, For all things. St. Chrysostom (in his
Commentary upon the 145 Psalm) having enumerated several particulars for which
we are bound to thank God; Because (I recite his words punctually rendered)
Because (says he) he has made us, who before had no being, and made us such
as we are; because he upholds us being made, and takes care of us continually,
both publicly and privately, secretly and openly, with and without our
knowledge; for all visible things created for our sake, the ministry of them
afforded to us; the conformation of our Bodies, the Nobleness of our Souls; his
daily Dispensations by Miracles, by Laws, by Punishments; his various and
incomprehensible Providence; for the chief of all, that he has not spared his
onely-begotten Son for our sake; the Benefits conferred on us by Baptism, and
the other holy Mysteries, (or Sacraments;) the ineffable good things to be
bestowed on us hereafter, the Kingdom of Heaven, the Resurrection, the
enjoyment of perfect Bliss; having, I say, in these words comprised the things
for which we are obliged to thank and praise God, he thus despondently
concludes: ((...).) If any one shall endeavor to recount particularly every
one of these things, he will but plunge himself into an unexpressible depth of
Benefits, and then perceive for how unexpressibly and inconceivably many good
things he stands engaged to God. And to the like Nonplus does the devout
Psalmist seem to be reduced, when he thus exclaims; How precious are thy
thoughts unto me, O God? how great is the sum of them? Psalm. 139. 17, 18.

Psalm. 36. 5, 6, 7.


If I should count them, they are more in number then the sand.

I shall not therefore confound my self, by launching too far into this immense
Ocean; nor strive minutely to compute the incomprehensible sum of the Divine
Benefits: but only observe, that in gross, according to our Apostle's
calculation, all things, which how-ever happen to us, are ingredients thereof.
No occurrence (great or small, common or particular, present or past, pleasant
or sad, perpetual or transitory) is excluded from being the subject of our
Thanksgiving: each one may prove beneficial to us; and we are with a cheerful
contentedness, and a grateful refentment, to receive them all from God's hand.
But to observe some little distinction: I say,

1. We are to give thanks, not only for great and notable Benefits, but for the
least and most ordinary Favors of God: though indeed none of God's Favors are
in themselves small and inconsiderable. Men are wont to bless themselves, if
they receive but a transient glance from a Prince's eye; a smile from a great
personage; any slender intimation of regard from him that is in capacity to do
them good: what is it then to receive the least testimony of his good will,
from whom alone every good thing can be expected; upon whose disposal all happy
success of our wishes, our hopes, and our endeavors do entirely depend? We
repute him injust, who withholds the least part of what is due from the true
owner: and is not he ungrateful then, that omits to render thanks for the least
of Divine Mercies?

There is one glory of the Sun, another 1 Cor. 15. 41.
of the Moon, another of the Stars, says S. Paul. Some works of God indeed
excel in luster; yet all are glorious, all are to be discerned, all to be
esteemed, and thankfully entertained by us. The brightness of the one should
not wholly obscure the other; if it do, it argues the weakness of our sense,
the dullness of our spiritual faculty. For every beam of light that delights our
eye, for every breath of Air that chears our spirits, for every drop of
pleasant Liquour that cools our thirst, for every minute of comfortable repose,
for every step we safely take, for the happy issue of the least undertaking,
for escaping the vengeance due to an idle word, or a wanton thought, we owe a
hymn of praise to God. But,

2. We are to render thanks, not only for new and present Benefits, but for all
we have formerly, all that we may hereafter receive. We find David not only
frequently acknowledging the gracious dispensations of Providence toward him
through the whole course of his life, but looking back in his thankful
Devotions as far as his very original being, and praising God for favors
conferred on him beyond his memory, yea before his life. I will praise thee,
says Psalm. 139. 14, 15, 16.
he, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made: mavelous are thy works, and
that my soul knows right well. My substance was not hid from thee, when I was
made in secret, and curiously wrought in the lower parts of the Earth. Thine
eyes did see my substance yet being imperfect, and in thy book all my members
were written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none
of them. And S. Paul, yet farther reflecting his grateful consideration,
blesses God for his favor commenced before the beginning of things. Blessed
(says he) be the Ephesians. 1. 3, 4.
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all
spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ, according as he has chosen
us before the foundation of the world.

Neither does the memory only of former, and the enjoyment of present, but the
hope and foresight also of future Blessings worthily claim our thanks. For,
(says S. Peter) Blessed be the 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4.
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which, according to his abundant
mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the dead: to an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, reserved
in Heaven for you. Beasts only, and men not much better then they, are affected
with present good turns: but men of honest and generous tempers resent
indifferently the obligations of all times. Sense does not confine their
Gratitude, nor absence remove, nor age wear it out. What once is done, is ever
done to them; and what of courtesy is purposed, seems to them performed. But
having before discoursed somewhat largely concerning the remembrance of
Benefits, I leave this point. Furthermore,

3. We should bless God, not only for new, rare, extraordinary accidents of
Providence, but for the common and daily benefits and indulgences thereof.
These Favors are usually the greatest, and most valuable in their own nature.
(For what can be imagined of higher consequence to us, Quem vero astrcrum
ordines, quem dierum noctiumque v^cissitudines, quem mensium temperatio,
quemque ea quae nobis gignuntur ad fruendum non gratum esse cogant; hunc
hominem omnino numerare qui decet? Cic. de Leg II.
then the preservation of our Lives, and of our Estates, by which they are
comfortably maintained; then the continuance of our Bodies in good health, and
our Minds in their right wits; then the knowledge of heavenly Truth, the
encouragements to Virtue and Piety, the assistences of Divine Grace, and the
promises of eternal Bliss continually exhibited to us?) Shall the commonness
and continuance of these exceeding Favors, that they are not given us once
only, and transitorily, but continued, (that is, given us so often as time has
instants,) and with an uninterrupted perseverance renewed unto us; shall this
abate and enervate our Gratitude, which in all reason should mainly increase
and confirm it? But this point I also touched before, and therefore forbearing
to insist thereon, I proceed.

4. We should give thanks, not only for private and particular, but for public
Benefits also, and for such as befall others. I exhort therefore (says S. Paul)
1 Timothy 2. 1.
before all things, that supplications, prayers, intercessions and
thanksgivings be made for all men: not prayers only, for good things to be
bestowed on others; but thanksgivings also, for the Benefits received by
others. (And (...) in our Text, however otherwise commonly interpreted, may
well admit this sense also; and be taken indifferently, pro omnibus, for all
persons, and propter omnia, for all things.)

We are all Citizens of the World, and concerned in its good constitution; and
Vid. Chrysostom. in 2 Cor. Or. 2.
thence obliged thankfully to adore the mighty Upholder and wise Governor
thereof, praising him for all the general Benefits liberally poured forth upon
mankind. We partake in the commodities of Civil Society; and therefore should
heartily thank him, by whose gracious disposal Order is maintained, Peace
continued, Justice administered, Plenty provided, our Lives made safe and sweet
to us therein. We are Members of a Church, and highly interested in the
prosperous estate and well-being thereof: when Unity therefore is preserved,
and Charity abounds: when Knowledge is increased, and Virtue encouraged; when
Piety flourishes, and Truth triumphs therein; we are bound to render all
possible thanks to the gracious Bestower of those inestimable Blessings.

We are much mistaken in our account, if we either determine our own
concernments, or measure this Duty, by the narrow rule of our private
advantage: for, subducting either the Benefits commonly indulged to mankind, or
those which accrue from the welfare of public society, what possibility will
remain of subsistence, of safety, of content unto us? what but confusion, want,
violence, and disquiet?

As we are concerned with our utmost endeavors to promote, to wish and pray
for, to delight and rejoice in the public good of mankind, the peace of our
Country, the prosperity of Sion; so we are to bless and thank him, by whose
gracious help and furtherance they are attained.

If we consult all History, (Sacred, and Civil,) we shall find it to contain
hardly any thing else considerable, but the earnest endeavors of good men for
public benefit, and their thankful acknowledgments to the Divine goodness for
it. Moses, David, Nehemiah, S. Paul, all the Prophets, and all the Apostles,
what other things memorable did they do, but serve God in procuring public
Good, and bless God for conferring it?

Neither only as we are combined with others in common interest, but without
selfish respects, purely out of charity, and humanity, and ingenuous pity, are
we obliged to thank God for the Benefits he is pleased to impart to others. If
upon these accounts we are commanded to do good to all men; to rejoice with
those that rejoice; to love even Gal. 6. 10.

Romans (...) 1^.

Man. (...).


those that hate us, and bless those that curse us; it is (by fair consequence)
surely intended, that we should also bless God for the good issue of our honest
endeavors, or of our good wishes for them.

And verily could we become endowed with this excellent quality of delighting
in others good, and heartily thanking God for it, we needed not to envy the
wealth and splendor of the greatest Princes, not the wisdom of the profoundest
Doctors, not the religion of the devoutest Anchorets, no, nor the happiness of
the highest Angels: for upon this supposition, as the glory of all is God's, so
the content in all would be ours. All the fruit they can perceive of their
happy condition (of what kind soever) is, to rejoice in it themselves, and to
praise God for it: and this should we then do as well as they. My Neighbor's
good Success is mine, if I equally triumph therein: his Riches are mine, if I
delight to see him enjoy them: his Health is mine, if it refresh my spirits:
his Virtue mine, if I by it am bettered, and have hearty complacence therein.
By this means a man derives a confluence of all joy upon himself, and makes
himself, as it were, the center of all Felicity; enriches himself with the
plenty, and satiates himself with the pleasure of the whole world: reserving to
God the praise, he enjoys the satisfaction of all good that happens to any.

Thus we see David frequently thanking God, not for his Favor only and mercy
showed peculiarly to himself, but for his common munificence toward all; for
(to use his own phrases) his goodness Psalm. 145. 9.
is to all, and his tender mercies over all his works; for executing judgment
in behalf Psalm. 146. 7, 8, 9.
of the oppressed; for feeding the hungry; for loosening the prisoners; for
opening the eyes of the blind; for raising them that are bowed down; for
preserving the strangers, and relieving the fatherless and widow; for lifting
up the meek; for Psalm. 147. 6.

1 Pet. 5. 7.

Psalm. 5. 11.

Psalm. 104. 28. and 145. 16.


loving, and caring for, and defending the righteous; for opening his hand, and
satisfying the desire of every living thing; for giving to the beast his food,
and to the Psalm. 147. 9.
young ravens when they cry unto him; in a word, for his goodness to every
particular creature, not excluding the most contemptible, nor the most savage
of all. And how affectionately does Saint Paul everywhere thank God for the
growth in Grace and spiritual Wisdom, for the patience in affliction, and
perseverance in faith, of those good Christians he writes unto? So should, with
an unrestrained exuberance, both our Charity to men, and our Gratitude to God
abound. But moreover,

5. We are obliged to give thanks, not only for pleasant and prosperous
occurrences of Providence, but for those also which are adverse to our desire,
and distastful unto our natural sense; for Poverty, Sickness, Disgrace; for all
the Sorrows and Troubles, the Disasters and Disappointments that befall us. We
are bound to pay thanks, not for our Food only, but for our Physic also:
(which though ungrateful to our palate, is profitable for our health:) We are
obliged, in the School of Providence, not only for the good Instructions, but
for the seasonable Corrections also vouchsafed unto us, (whereby (...), etc.

Chry^ost. in Psalm. 148.


though our senses are offended, our manners are bettered.) Whatever proceeds
from good purpose, and tends to a happy end, that is graciously designed, and
effectually conduces to our good; is a fit subject of Thanksgiving: and such
may all Adversities prove unto us. They proceed usually from love and kind
intention toward us: for, Whom God loves, he chasteneth, and Heb. 12. 6.
scourges every son whom he receives: and, I know, O Lord, (says David)
Psalm. 119. 75.
that thy judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulness have afflicted me:
in faithfulness, that is, with a sincere intention of doing me good.

God thoroughly knows our constitution, what is noxious to our health, and what
may remedy our distempers; and therefore accordingly disposes to us -- pro
jucundis aptissima quaeque --; in stead of pleasant Honey, he sometimes
prescribes wholesome wormwood for us. We are our selves greatly ignorant of what
is conducible to our real good; and, were the choice of our condition wholly
permitted to us, should make very foolish, very disadvantageous elections.

We should (be sure) all of us embrace a rich and plentiful Estate: whenas, God
knows, that would make us slothful and luxurious, swell us with pride and
haughty thoughts, encumber us with anxious cares, and expose us to dangerous
temptations; would render us forgetful of our selves, and neglectful of him.
Therefore he wisely disposes Poverty unto us; Poverty, the mother of Sobriety,
the nurse of Industry, the mistress of Wisdom; which will make us understand
our selves, and our dependence on him, and force us to have recourse unto his
help. And is there not reason we should be thankful for the means by which we
are delivered from those desperate mischiefs, and obtain these excellent
advantages?

We should all (certainly) choose the favor and applause of men: but this, God
also knows, would corrupt our minds with vain conceit, would intoxicate our
fancies with spurious pleasure, would tempt us to ascribe immoderately to our
selves, and sacrilegiously to deprive God of his due honor. Therefore he
advisedly suffers us to incur the Disgrace and Displeasure, the Hatred and
Contempt of men; that so we may place our glory only in the hopes of his
Favor, and may pursue more earnestly the purer delights of a good Conscience.
And does not this part of Divine Providence highly merit our thanks?

We would all climb into high Places, not considering the precipices on which
they stand, nor the vertiginousness of our own brains: but God keeps us safe in
the humble Valleys, allotting to us employments which we are more capable to
manage.

We should perhaps insolently abuse Power, were it committed to us: we should
employ great Parts on unwieldy Projects, as many do, to the disturbance of
others, and their own ruin: vast Knowledge would cause us to overvalue our
selves, and contemn others: enjoying continual Health, we should not perceive
the benefit thereof, nor be mindful of him that gave it. A suitable mediocrity
therefore of these things the Divine Goodness allotteth unto us, that we may
neither starve for want, nor surfeit with plenty.

In fine, the advantages arising from Afflictions are so many, and so great,
that (had I time, and were it seasonable to insist largely upon this subject)
it were easy to demonstrate, that we have great reason, not only to be
contented with, but to rejoice in, and to be very thankful for all the crosses
and vexations we meet with: to receive them cheerfully at God's hand, as the
medicines of our Soul, and the condiments of our fortune; as the arguments of
his Good will, and the instruments of Virtue; as solid grounds of Hope, and
comfortable presages of future Joy unto us.

6. Lastly, We are obliged to thank God, not only for Corporeal and Temporal
Benefits, but also (and that principally) for Spiritual and eternal Blessings.
We are apt, as to desire more vehemently, to rejoice more heartily in the
fruition, and more passionately to bewail the loss of temporal good things; so
more sincerely and seriously to express our gratitude for the reception of
them, then for others relating to our Spiritual good, to our everlasting
welfare. Wherein we misjudge and misbehave our selves extremely. For, as much
as the reasonable Soul (that goodly Image of the Divine Essence, breathed from
the mouth of God) does in dignity of nature, and purity of substance, excel
this feculent lump of organized clay, our Body; as the blissful ravishments of
Spirit surpass the dull satisfactions of Sense; as the bottomless depth of
Eternity exceeds that shallow furface of Time, which terminates this transitory
life: in such proportion should our appetite unto, our complacence in, our
gratitude for spiritual Blessings transcend the affections (respectively)
engaged about these corporeal accommodations.

Consider that injunction of our Savior to his Disciples; In this rejoice not,
that the spirits are subject unto you: Luke 10. 20.
but rather rejoice, because your names are written in Heaven. Rejoice not,
that is, be not at all affected with this, (although in it self very rare
accomplishment, eminent privilege, glorious power of working that indeed
greatest of Miracles, subjecting Devils; that is, baffling the shrewdest craft,
and subduing the strongest force in nature,) in comparison of that delight,
which the consideration of the Divine Favor in order to your eternal Felicity
does afford.

We are, it is true, greatly indebted to God for our Creation, for that he has
extracted us from nothing, and placed us in so lofty a rank among his
creatures; for the excellent Faculties of Soul and Body, wherewith he has
endued us; and for many most admirable prerogatives of our outward Estate: but
much more for our Redemption, and the wonderful circumstances of unexpressible
love and grace therein declared; for his descending to a conjunction with our
Nature, aad elevating us to a participation of his; for dignifying us with more
illustrious Titles, and instating us in a sure capacity of a much superior
Happiness. Our daily Food deserves well a Grace to be said before and after it:
but how much more that constant Provision of Heavenly Manna, the Evangelical
Verity; those savoury delicacies of Devotion, whereby our Souls are nourished
to eternal Life? It Is a laudable custom, when we are demanded concerning our
health, to answer, Well, I thank God: but much more reason have we to say so,
if our Conscience can attest concerning that sound constitution of Mind,
whereby we are disposed vigorously to perform those virtuous functions, due
from reasonable nature, and conformable to the Divine Law. If for the
prosperous success of our worldly attempts; for avoiding dangers, that
threatened corporal pain and damage to us; for defeating the adversaries of our
secular quiet, we make Te Deum laudamus our (...), (our song for victory:) how
much more for the happy progress of our Spiritual Affairs; (affairs of
incomparably-highest consequence;) for escaping those dreadful hazzards of
utter ruin, of endless torture; for vanquishing Sin and Hell, those
irreconcilable enemies to our everlasting peace; are we obliged to utter
triumphal Anthymns of joy and thankfulness?

This is the order observed by the Psalmist: inciting his Soul to bless God
Psalm. 103. 1, etc.
for all his benefits, he begins with the consideration of God's mercy in
pardoning his Sins; then proceeds to his goodness in bestowing temporal
Favors. Who forgiveth all thy sins, leads the van; Who satisfies thy mouth
with good things, brings up the rere in the enumeration and acknowledgment of
God's Benefits. That our minds are illustrated with the knowledge of God and his
glorious Attributes, of Christ and his blessed Gospel, of that straight path
which conducteth to true Happiness; that by Divine assistence we are enabled to
elude the allurements, to withstand the violences of temptation, to assuage
immoderate desires, to bridle exorbitant passions, to correct vicious
inclinations of mind; requires more our hearty thanks, then for that we were
able by our natural wit to penetrate the abstrusest Mysteries; or to subjugate
Empires by our bodily strength. The forgiveness of our Sins does more oblige us
to a grateful acknowledgment of the Divine Goodness, then should God enrich us
with all the treasures contained in the bowels of the Earth, or bottom of the
Ocean. One glimpse of his favorable countenance should more inflame our
affections, then being invested with all the imaginable splendor of worldly
glory.

Of these inestimable Benefits, and all the advantageous circumstances
wherewith they are attended, we ought to maintain in our hearts constant
resentments; to excite our thankfulness, to kindle our love, to quicken our
obedience, by the frequent contemplation of them.

Thus have I (though, I confess, much more slightly then so worthy a subject
did require) prosecuted the several particulars observable in these words. I
should conclude with certain Inducements persuasive to the practice of this
Duty; whereof I have in the tenor both of the former and present Discourse
insinuated diverse, and could propound many more: but (in compliance with the
time) I shall content my self briefly to consider only these three very obvious
ones.

First therefore, We may consider, that there is no disposition whatever I.
more deeply radicated in the original constitution of all Souls endued with
any kind of perception or passion, then being sensible of Benefits received;
being kindly affected with love and respect toward them that exhibit them;
being ready with suitable expressions to acknowledge them, and to endeavor
competent recompenses for them. The worst of men, the most devoid of all not
only piety, but humanity and common ingenuity, the most barbarous and most
wicked, (whom neither sense of Equity nor respect to Law, no promise of reward
or fear of vengeance, can anywise engage to do things just and fitting, or
restrain from enormous actions,) retain notwithstanding something of this
natural inclination, and are usually sensible of good turns done unto them.
Experience teaches us thus much; and so does that sure Oracle of our Savior:
If (says he) you do good to Luke 6. 33.
those who do good to you, what thanks is it? for even sinners (that is, men of
apparently lewd and dissolute conversation) do the same.

Yea even Beasts, and those not only the most gentle and sociable of them, (the
officious Dog, the tractable Horse, the docile Elephant,) but the wildest also
and fiercest of them (the untamable Lion, the cruel Tiger, and ravenous Bear,
as stories tell us, and experience attests) bear some kindness, show some Vid.
Gell. lib. V. cap. 14.
grateful affection to those that provide for them.

Neither wild Beasts only, but even inanimate creatures seem not altogether
insensible of Benefits, and lively represent unto us a natural abhorrence of
Ingratitude. The Rivers openly discharge into the Sea those waters, which by
indiscernible conduits they derived thence: the Heavens remit in bountiful
showrs what from the Earth they had exhaled in vapor: and the Earth by a
fruitful increase repays the culture bestowed thereon; if not, (as the Apostle
to the Hebrews does pronounce,) it deserves cursing and reprobation. So
monstrous a thing, and universally Heb. 6. 8.
abominable to nature, is all Ingratitude. And how execrable a prodigy is it
then toward God, from whom alone we receive whatever we enjoy, whatever we
can expect of good?

The Second Obligation to this Duty II.
is most just and equal. For, (as Laberius.
he said well) Beneficium qui dare nescit, injuste petit; He injustly requires
(much more injustly receives) a benefit, who is not minded to requite it. In
all reason we are indebted for what is freely given, as well as for what is
lent unto us. For the freeness of the giver, his not exacting security, nor
expressing conditions of return, does not diminish, but rather increase the
debt. He that gives, indeed, according to humane (or political) Law, (which, in
order to preservation of public peace, requires only a punctual performance of
contracts,) transfers his right, and alienates his possession: but according to
that more noble and perfect rule of ingenuity, (the Law which God and Angels
and good men chiefly observe, and govern themselves by,) what is given is but
committed to the faith, deposited in (...).
the hand, treasured up in the custody of him that receives it: and what more
palpable iniquity is there, then to betray the trust, or to detain the pledge,
not of some inconsiderable trifle, but of inestimable good will? Excepta
Macedonum De Benef. lib. 3. cap. 6.
gente, (says Seneca) non est ulla data adversus ingratum actio: In no Nation
(excepting the Macedonians) an action could be preferred against ungrateful
persons, as so. (Though Xenophon, no mean Author, reports, that among the
Persians also there were judgments assigned, and punishments appointed for
Ingratitude.) However, in the court of Heaven, and at the tribunal of
Conscience, no offender is more constantly arraigned, none more surely
condemned, none more severely punished, then the ungrateful man.

Since therefore we have received all from the Divine Bounty; if God should in
requital exact, that we sacrifice our lives to the testimony of his Truth; that
we employ our utmost pains, expend our whole estate, adventure our health, and
prostitute all our earthly contents to his service; since he did but revoke his
own, 'twere great injustice to refuse compliance with his demands: how much
more, when he only expects from us, and requires some few acknowledgments of
our obligation to him, some little portions of our substance, for the relief of
them that need, some easy observances of his most reasonable commands?

Thirdly, This is a most sweet and delightful III.
Duty. Praise the Lord, (says Psalm. 135. 3.
the most experienced Psalmist) for the Lord is good; sing praises to his Name,
for it is pleasant: and otherwhere, Praise Psalm. 147. 1.
the Lord, for it is good to sing praises to our God; for it is pleasant, and
praise is Vid. Psalm. 9 1.
comely. The performance of this Duty, as it especially proceeds from good
humor, and a cheerful disposition of mind; so it feeds and foments them; both
root and fruit thereof are hugely sweet and sapid. Whence S. James; If any man
be afflicted, let him pray; is any merry, let him sing Psalms. (Psalms, Jam 5.
13.
the proper matter of which is praise and thanksgiving.)

Other Duties of Devotion have something laborious in them, something
disgustful to our sense. Prayer minds us of our wants and imperfections;
Confession induces a sad remembrance of our misdeeds and bad deserts: but
Thanksgiving includes nothing uneasy or unpleasant; nothing but the memory and
sense of exceeding Goodness.

All Love is sweet; but that especially which arises, not from a bare
apprehension only of the object's worth and dignity, but from a feeling of its
singular beneficence and usefulness unto us. And what thought can enter into
the heart of man more comfortable and delicious then this, That the great
Master of all things, the most wise and mighty King of Heaven and Earth has
entertained a gracious regard, has expressed a real kindness toward us? that
we are in capacity to honor, to please, to present an acceptable sacrifice to
him, who can render us perfectly happy? that we are admitted to the practice of
that wherein the supreme joy of Paradise, and the perfection of Angelical bliss
consists? For Praise and Thansgiving are the most delectable business of
Heaven; and God grant they may be our greatest delight, our most frequent
employment upon earth.

To these I might add such farther considerations. That this Duty is of all
most acceptable to God, and most Vid. Psalm. 69. 30, 31.

Psalm. 50. 13, 14, 23.


profitable to us. That Gratitude for Benefits procures more, disposing God to
bestow, and qualifying us to receive them. That the serious performance of this
Duty efficaciously promotes, and facilitates the practice of other Duties;
since the more we are sensible of our obligations to God, the more ready we
shall be to please him, by obedience to his Commandments. What S. Chrysostom
Vid. diviniss. Chrysostom. locum Tom. V. page 76.
says of Prayer, It is impossible that he who with competent promptitude of
mind does constantly apply himself thereto, should ever sin, is most especially
true of this part of Devotion: for how can we at the same time be sensible of
God's Goodness to us, and willingly offend him? That the memory of past
Benefits, and sense of present, confirms our Faith, and nourishes our hope of
future. That the circumstances of the Divine Beneficence mightily strengthen
the obligation of this Duty; especially his absolute freeness in giving, and
our total unworthiness to receive; our very Ingratitude it self affording
strong inducements to Gratitude. That giving thanks has de facto been always
the principal part of all Religion; (whether instituted by Divine Command, or
prompted by natural Reason, or propagated by general Tradition;) the Ethnic
devotion consisting (as it were totally) in the praise of their gods, and
acknowledgment of their Benefits; the Jewish, more then half in Eucharistical
oblations, and in solemn commemorations of providential favors; and that of
the ancient Christians so far forth, that bystanders Plin. Epist.
could hardly discern any other thing in their religious practice, then that
they sang Hymns to Christ, and by mutual Sacraments obliged themselves to
abstain from all Villainy. But I will rather wholly omit the prosecution of
these pregnant Arguments, then be farther offensive to your patience.

Now the Blessed Fountain of all Goodness and Mercy inspire our hearts with his
heavenly Grace, and thereby enable us, rightly to apprehend, diligently to
consider, faithfully to remember, worthily to esteem, to be heartily affected
with, to render all due acknowledgment, praise, love, and thankful obedience
for all his (infinitelygreat and innumerably-many) Favors, Mercies, and
Benefits freely conferred upon us: and let us say with David, Blessed be the
Lord God of Israel, who Psalm. 72. 18, 19.
only does wondrous things; and blessed be his glorious Name for ever, and let
the whole Earth be filled with his Glory. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel
Psalm. 106, 48.
from everlasting to everlasting: And let all the People say,

Amen.
The Tenth Sermon. On May 29.

1 TIMOTHY 2. 1, 2. 1. I exhort therefore, that first of all supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men:

2. For Kings, and for all that are in authority.


SAint Paul in his preceding discourse having insinuated directions 1 Timothy 1. 3.
to his Scholar, and Spiritual Son, Timothy, concerning the discharge of his
Office, of instructing men in their Duty according to the Evangelical Doctrine;
(the main design whereof he teaches to consist, not (as some men conceited) in
fond stories, or vain speculations, Verse 6.
but in practice of substantial Duties, holding a sincere Faith, maintaining
Ver. 5, 19.
a good Conscience, performing Offices of pure and hearty Charity;) in
pursuance of such general Duty, and as a principal instance thereof, he does
here first of all exhort, or does exhort that first of all, all kinds of
Devotion should be offered to God, as for all men generally, so particularly
for Kings and Magistrates. From whence we may collect two particulars. 1. That
the making of Prayers for Kings is a Christian Duty of great importance. (S.
Paul judging fit to exhort thereto (...), before all other things; or, to
exhort (...).
that before all things it should be performed.) 2. That it is incumbent on the
Pastors of the Church, (such as S. Timothy was,) to take special care, that
this Duty should be performed in the Church; both publicly in the
Congregations, and privately in the Retirements of each Christian: according to
what the Apostle, after the proposing diverse enforcements of this Duty,
subsumeth in the 8th ver. I will therefore, that men pray everywhere, lifting
up holy hands, without wrath or doubting.

The first of these particulars, That it is a Duty of great importance to pray
for Kings, I shall insist upon: it being indeed now very fit and seasonable to
urge the practice of it, when it is perhaps commonly not much considered, or
not well observed; and when there is most need of it, in regard to the effects
and consequences which may proceed from the conscionable discharge of it.

My endeavor therefore shall be to press it by diverse Considerations,
discovering our obligation thereto, and serving to induce us to its observance:
some whereof shall be general, or common to all times; some particular, or
suitable to the present circumstances of things.

I. The Apostle exhorts Christians to pray for Kings with all sorts of
Prayer: with (...), or deprecations, for averting evils from them; with (...),
or petitions, for obtaining good things to them; with (...), or occasional
intercessions, for needful gifts and graces to be collated on them: as, after
S. Austin, Interpreters, in expounding S. Paul's words, commonly distinguish;
Aug. Ep. 59. Beza, Grotius, etc.
how accurately, I shall not discuss; it sufficing, that assuredly the Apostle
means, under this variety of expression, to comprehend all kinds of Prayer.
And to this I say we are obliged upon diverse accounts.

1. Common Charity should dispose us to pray for Kings. This Christian
disposition inclines to universal benevolence and beneficence; according to
that Apostolical precept, As we have opportunity, let us do good unto all men:
Gal. 6. 10.
it consequently will excite us to pray for all men; seeing this is a way of
exerting good will, and exercising beneficence, which any man at any time, if
he has the will and heart, may have opportunity and ability to pursue.

No man indeed otherwise can benefit all; few men otherwise can benefit many;
some men otherwise can benefit none: but in this way any man is able to benefit
all, or unconfinedly to oblige mankind, deriving on any somewhat of God's
immense beneficence. By performing this good Office, at the expense of a few
good wishes addressed to the Sovereign Goodness, the poorest may prove
benefactours to the richest, the meanest to the highest, the weakest to the
mightiest of men: so we may benefit even those who are most remote from us,
most strangers and quite unknown to us. Our Prayers can reach the utmost ends
of the Earth; and by them our Charity may embrace all the world.

And from them surely Kings must not be excluded. For if because all men are
our Fellow Creatures, and brethren by the same Heavenly Father, because all men
are allied to us by cognation and similitude of Nature, because all men are the
objects of God's particular favor and care; if because all men are partakers
of the common Redemption, by the undertakings of him who is the common
Mediator and Savior of all men; and because all men, according to the
gracious intent and desire of God, are designed for a consortship in the same
blessed Inheritance; (which enforcements S. Paul in the Context does 1 Timothy 2.
4, 5, 6.
intimate;) if, in fine, because all men do need Prayers, and are capable of
benefit from them, we should be charitably disposed to pray for them: then must
we also pray for Kings, who even in their personal capacity, as men, do share
in all those conditions. Thus may we conceive S. Paul here to argue: For all
men, says he, for Kings; that is, consequently for Kings, or, particularly for
Kings; to pray for whom, at least no less then for other men, universal Charity
should dispose us.

Indeed, even on this account we may say, especially for Kings; the law of
general Charity with peculiar advantage being applicable to them: for that Law
commonly is expressed with reference to our Neighbor, that is, to persons with
whom we have to do, who come under our particular notice, who by any
intercourse are approximated to us; and such are Kings especially. For whereas
the greatest part of men (by reason of their distance from us, from the
obscurity of their condition, or for want of opportunity to converse with them)
must needs slip beside us, so that we cannot employ any distinct thought or
affection toward them: it is not so with Kings, who by their eminent and
illustrious Station become very observable by us; with whom we have frequent
transactions, and mutual concerns; who therefore in the strictest acception are
our neighbors, whom we are charged to love as our selves; to whom consequently
we must perform this most charitable office of praying for them.

2. To impress which consideration, we may reflect, that commonly we have
Privatorum is it a copia est, inter so esse munificos.

Auson. ad Grati^n.


only this way granted us of exercising our Charity toward Princes; they being
situated alost above the reach of private beneficence: so that we cannot enrich
them, or relieve them by our alms; Absit, Auguste, and illud Sancta Divinitas
omen avertat, ut tu a quoquam mortalium exspectes vicem beneficii. Mamerc. ad
Julian.
we cannot help to exalt or prefer them to a better state; we can hardly come
to impart good advice, seasonable consolation, or wholesome reproof to them; we
cannot profit or please them by familiar conversation. For as in diverse other
respects they resemble the Divinity; so in this they are like it, that we may
say to them, as the Psalmist to God, Thou art my Lord; my goodness extends
Psalm. 16. 2.
not to thee. Yet this case may be reserved, wherein the poorest Soul may
benefit the greatest Prince, imparting the richest and choicest goods to him:
He may be indebted for his safety, for the prosperity of his affairs, for God's
mercy and favor toward him, to the Prayers of his meanest vassal. And thus to
oblige Princes, methinks, we should be very desirous; we should be glad to use
such an advantage, we should be ambitious of such an honor.

3. We are bound to pray for Kings out of Charity to the Public; because their
Good is a general Good, and the Communities of men (both Church and State) are
greatly concerned in the Blessings by Prayer derived on them.

The safety of a Prince is a great part of the common welfare; the
Commonwealth, as it were, living and breathing in him: his fall, like that of a
tall Cedar, (to which he is compared,) shaking Isa. 2. ^3.
the Earth, and discomposing the State; putting things out of course, and
drawing them into new channels; translating the administration of affairs into
^ntried hands, and an uncertain condition. Hence, Let the King live, (which 1
King. 1. ^5.

2 King. 11. 12.

2 Chr. 23. 11.


our Translatours render, God save the King,) was an usual form of salutation,
or prayer: and, O King, live for ever, was a customary address to Princes, 1
King. 1. 31.

Dan. 2. 4. and 3. 9. and 5. 10. and 6. 6.


whereto the best men did conform, even in application to none of the best
Princes; as Nehemiah to King Artaxerxes, and Daniel to King Darius. Hence Neh.
2. 3.

Dan. 6. 21.


not only good King David is called the light of Israel; (Thou shall not, said
Abishai, 2 Samuel 21. 17.
any more go out with us to battle, that thou quench not the light of Israel;)
but even the wicked and perverse King 2 Kings 24. 19.
Zedekiah, is by the Prophet Jeremy himself (who had been so misused by him)
Jer. 32. 3.
styled the breath of our nostrils. (The Lam. 4. 20.
breath, says he, of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord, was taken in
their pits.) Hence not only the fall of good King Josiah was so grievously
lamented; but Zech. 12. 11.

2 Chr. 35. 24.


a solemn mourning was due to that of Saul; and, Ye daughters of Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 1. 12. 24.
weep for Saul, was a strain becoming the mouth of his great Successor King
David. Hence the Primitive Christians, who could not be constrained to swear by
the Genius of Caesar, did not yet, in Sed and juramus, sicut non per genios
Caesarum, it a per salutem eorum, quae est augustior omnibus geniis. Tert.
Apol. c. 32.
compliance with the usual practice, scruple to swear by their health, or
safety; that is, to express their wishing it, with appeal to God's testimony of
their sincerity therein; as Joseph may be conceived to have sworn Genesis 42. 15,
16.

2 Samuel 18. 3.


by the life of Pharaoh. Hence well might the people tell King David, Thou art
worth ten thousand of us; seeing the public was so much interested in his
safety, and had suffered more in the loss of him, then if a myriad of others
had miscarried.

The Honor likewise of a Prince is the glory of his People; seeing it is
founded on qualities or deeds tending to their advantage; seeing it can hardly
be supposed that he should acquire Honor without their aid and concurrence, or
that he should retain it without their support and their satisfaction. And as
the chief grace and beauty of a body is in the head, and the fairest ornaments
Prove. 4. 9.
of the whole are placed there; so is any Commonwealth most dignified and
beautified by the reputation of its Prince.

The Wealth and Power of a Prince are the supports, and securities of a State:
he thereby being enabled to uphold and defend its safety, its order, its peace;
to protect his people from foreign injuries and invasions; to secure them from
intestine broils and factions; to repress outrages and oppressions annoying
Psalm. 72. 4 --
them.

The Prosperity of a Prince is inseparable from the prosperity of his People;
they ever partaking of his fortunes, and thriving or suffering with him. For as
when the Sun shines brightly, there is a clear day, and fair weather over the
world: so when a Prince is not over-clouded with adversity, or disasterous
occurrences, the public State must be serene, and a pleasant state of things
will appear. Then is the Ship in a good condition, when the Pilot in open Sea,
with full sails and a brisk gale, cheerfully steereth on toward his designed
port.

Especially the Piety and Goodness of a Prince is of vast consequence, and
yields infinite benefit to his Country. Flexibiles in quamcunque partem
ducimur a Principe, atque, ut it a dicam sequaces sumus. Huio enim chari, huic
probats esse cupimus; quod frustra speraverint dissimiles. Eoque obsequii
continuatione perven^mus, ut pro^e omnes homines unius moribus vi vamus.

Plin. Paneg.


For, Vita Principis Censura est, The life of a Prince is a calling of other
men's lives to an account. Vita Principis censura est, eaque perpetua; ad hanc
dirigimur, ad hanc convertimur; nec tam imperio nobis opus est, quam exemplo.

Ibid.


His Ecclus 10. 2.
Example has an unspeakable influence on the manners of his people, who are
apt in all his garb, and every fashion to imitate him. His Practice is more
powerful then his Commands, and often does control them. His Authority has
the great stroke in encouraging Virtue, and checking Vice, if it bends that
way; the dispensation of honors and rewards, with the infliction of ignominies
and corrections, being in his hand, and passing from it according to his
inclinations. His Power is the shield of innocence, the fence of right, the
shelter of weakness and simplicity against violences and frauds. His very Look
(a smile or a frown of his countenance) is sufficient to advance goodness, and
suppress wickedness; according to that of Solomon, A King sitting Prove. 20. 8.
in the throne of judgment scatters away all evil with his eyes. His Goodness
pleasing God procures his favor, and therewith deduceth from Heaven all kinds
of blessings on his people. And if those politic Aphorisms of the Wise man be
true, That righteousness exalts Prove. 14. 3, 4. and 16. 12.

2 Samuel 7. 16.

Prove. 11. 10, 11.


^ nation, and establishes a throne; That when it goes well with the
righteous, the City rejoices; and the same by the blessing of the upright is
exalted: then upon his inclinations to Virtue, the advancement and stability of
public welfare do mainly depend. So for instance, how did Piety flourish in
the times of David, who loved, favored, and practiced it? and what abundance
of prosperity 2 Samuel 7 9.
did attend it? What showrs of blessings (what peace, what wealth, what (Psalm.
72. 7.)
credit and glory) did God then pour down upon Israel? How did the goodness of
that Prince transmit favors and mercies on his Country till a long time after
his decease? How often did God (2 Samuel 7. 16.
profess for his servant David's sake to preserve 1 King. 11. 13.

Jer. 33. 21.

Psalm. 89. 29. and 132. 10.)


Judah from destruction? so that even in the days of Hezekiah, when the King of
Assy^ia did invade that Country, God by the mouth of Isaiah declared, I Isa.
27. 35.

(1 King. 11. 32, 34.


will defend this City to save it for mine own sake, and for my servant David's
sake.

We may indeed observe, that, according to the representation of things in Holy
Scripture, there is a kind of moral connection, or a communication of merit and
guilt, between Prince and People; so that mutually each of them is rewarded for
the Virtues, each is punished for the Vices of the other. As for the iniquities
of a People, God withdraws from their Prince the free communications of his
Grace and of his Favor, (suffering him to incur sin, or to fall into
misfortune; which was the case of that incomparably-good King Josiah, and has
been the fate of diverse 2 King. 23. 25.

Isa. 3. 1, etc.


excellent Princes, whom God has snatched away from people unworthy of them,
or involved with such a people in common calamities; according to the rule
propounded in the Law, of God's Deuteronomy. 28. 36.
dealing with the Israelites in the case of their disobedience; and according
to that of Samuel, If ye shall do wickedly, 1 Samuel 12. 25.

(Prove. 28. 2.)


ye shall be consumed, both ye and your King:) so reciprocally, for the
misdemeanors of Princes, (or in them, and by them,) God does chastise their
people. 1 King. 11. 33.
For what confusions in Israel did 1 King. 15. 30.
the offenses of Solomon create? what mischiefs did issue thereon from
Jeroboam's 2 King 17. 21.
wicked behavior? How did the sins of Manasseh stick to his Country, since
that even after that notable Reformation wrought by Josiah, it is said,
Notwithstanding the Lord turned not 2 King. 23. 26.
from the fierceness of his great wrath, wherewith his anger was kindled
against Judah, because of all the provocations wherewith Manasses had provoked
him? And how sorely, by a tedious three 2 Samuel 21. 1.
years famine, did God avenge Readiness cruelty toward the Gibeonites?

Nor are only the sins of bad Princes affixed to people conspiring with them
(Jer. 32. 32.)
in impiety; for even of King Hezekiah it is said, But Hezekiah rendered not
again 2 Chr. 32. 25.
according to the benefit done unto him; for his heart was lifted up: therefore
there was wrath upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem. So the pride and
ingratitude of an excellent Prince were avenged on his Subjects. And when good
King David (God averting his Grace from him) did fall into that arrogant
transgression of counting his forces, that, as Joab prudently foretold, became
a cause of trespass to Israel: 1 Chr. 21. 3, 7.
and God (says the Text) was displeased with this thing, therefore he smote
Israel.

David indeed seemed to apprehend some iniquity in this proceeding,
expostulating thus, Is it not I that commanded 1 Chr. 21. 17.
the people to be numbered? even I it is that have sinned, and done evil indeed:
but as for these sheep, what have they done? But God had no regard to his plea,
nor returned any answer to it: for indeed God's wrath began with the People,
and their King's sin was but a judgment executed on them: for, The anger (it 2 Samuel 24. 1.
is said) of the Lord was kindled against Israel, (by their sin surely, which
is the only incentive of Divine wrath,) and he moved David against them, to
say, Go number Israel and Judah.

So indeed it is, that Princes are bad, that they incur great errors, or
commit notable trespasses, is commonly imputable to the fault of Subjects; and
is a just judgment by Divine Providence laid on them, as for other
provocations, so especially for their want of Devotion, and neglecting duly to
pray for them. For if they constantly with hearty sincerity and earnest
fervency would in their behalf sue to God, who fashioneth Psalm. 33. 15.
all the hearts of men, who especially holds the hearts of Kings in his hand,
Prove. 21. 1.
and turns them whither-soever he will; we reasonably might presume, that God
by his Grace would direct them into the right way, and incline their hearts to
goodness; that he would accomplish his own word in the Prophet, I will Isa. 60.
17.
make thy Officers peace, and thine Exactors righteousness; that we might have
occasion to pay thanksgivings like that of Ezra, Blessed be the Lord God of our
Ezr. 7. 27.
fathers, who has put such things as this in the King's heart, to beautify
the house of the Lord, which is at Jerusalem.

We are apt to impute the ill management of things, and the bad success waiting
on it, unto Princes, being in appearance the immediate Agents and Instruments
of it: but we commonly do therein mistake, not considering that our selves are
most guilty, and blamable for it; that it is an impious people which makes an
unhappy Prince; that their offenses do pervert his counsels, and blast his
undertakings; that their profaneness and indevotion do incense God's
displeasure, and cause him to desert Princes, withdrawing his gracious conduct
from them, and permitting them to be miss-led by temptation, by ill advice, by
their own infirmities, lusts, and passions, into courses fit to punish a
naughty people. So these were the causes of Moses his speaking Psalm. 106. 32,
33.
unadvisedly with his lips, and that it went ill with him for their sakes: of
Aaron's forming the molten Calf; of Exodus 32.

Deuteronomy. 9.


David's numbering the people; of Josiah's unadvised enterprise against Pharaoh
Neco; of Zedekiah's rebellion against the Assyrians, (notwithstanding the
strong dissuasions of the Prophet Jeremy;) concerning which it is said, For
through the anger of the Lord it came 2 King. 24. 20.
to pass in Jerusalem and Judah, until he had cast them out from his presence,
that Zedekiah rebelled against the King of Babylon.

Considering which things, it is apparent, that Prayer for our Prince is a
great office of Charity to the Public; and that in praying for his safety, for
his Honor, for his Wealth, for his Prosperity, for his Virtue, we do in effect
pray for the same Benefits respectively to our Country; that in praying for his
Welfare, we do in consequence pray for the good of all our Neighbors, our
Friends, our Relations, our Families, whose good is wrapped in his Welfare,
does flow from it, does hang upon it.

We are bound, and it is a very noble piece of Charity, to love our Country,
sincerely to desire and earnestly to further its happiness, and therefore to
pray for it; according to the advice and practice of the Psalmist, O pray for
the Psalm. 122. 6. (128. 5.)
peace of Jerusalem; they shall prosper that love thee. Peace be within thy
walls, and Psalm. 122. 7.
prosperity within thy palaces. We are obliged more especially upon the highest
accounts, with dearest affection to love the Church, (our Heavenly
Commonwealth, the Society of our Spiritual Brethren,) most ardently to tender
its good, and seek its advantages; and therefore most urgently to sue for God's
favor toward it: being ready to say after David, Do good, O God, in thy Psalm.
51. 18.
good pleasure to Sion, build the walls of Jerusalem. Arise, O Lord, and have
mercy Psalm. 102. 13, 16.

(Isa. 61. 1 --)


upon Sion; for the time to favor her, yea the set time is come. Now these
duties we cannot more easily, more compendiously, or more effectually
discharge, then by earnestly praying for our Prince; seeing that if we do by
our Prayers procure God's favor to him, we do certainly draw it on the State,
and the Church. If God, moved by our devout importunities, shall please to
guard his Person from dangers, and to grant him a long life; to endue his Psalm.
21. 4.
Heart with Grace, with the love and fear of himself, with a zeal of furthering
public good, of favoring piety, of discountenancing sin; if God shall
vouchsafe to inspire him with Wisdom, and to guide his counsels, to bless his
proceedings, and to crown his undertakings with good success: then assuredly we
have much promoted the public interest; then infallibly, together with these,
all other blessings shall descend on us, all good will flourish in our Land.
This was the ancient practice of Christians, and directed to this end. For, Cui
nos quotidianis precibus supplicamus, ut te inprimis, quem rerum custodem
voluit esse, custodiat; deinde inspiret tibi voluntatem, qua semper in amore
Divini nominis persereres; quod estomnibus salutare, and tibi ad felicitatem,
and nobis ad quietem. Lact. 7. 26.
We (says Lactantius to Constantine) with daily prayers do supplicate God,
that he would first of all keep thee, whom he has willed to be the keeper of
things; then that he would inspire into thee a will, whereby thou may ever
persevere in the love of God's Name; which is salutary to all, both to thee for
thy happiness, and to us for our quiet.

4. Wherefore consequently our own interest, and Charity to our selves should
dispose us to pray for our Prince. We being nearly concerned in his welfare, as
parts of the public, and as enjoying many private advantages thereby; we
cannot but partake of his good, we cannot but suffer with him. We cannot live
quietly, if our Prince is disturbed; we cannot live happily, if he be
unfortunate; we can hardly live virtuously, if Divine Grace do not incline him
to favor us therein, or at least restrain him from hindering us. Nescio an plus
moribus conferat Princeps, qui bonos esse patitur, quam qui cogit.

Plin. Panegyr.


This is S. Paul's own consideration: I exhort you, says he, to make prayers
for Kings -- that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty. Upon such an account God did command the Jews to pray for the welfare
of that Heathen State, under which they lived in Captivity: And seek, said Jer.
29. 7.
he, the peace of the City, whither I have caused you to be carried away
captives, and pray unto the Lord for it; for in the peace thereof ye shall have
peace. And for the like cause the Christians of old deemed themselves bound to
pray for the Gentile Magistrates; according to that of Tertullian, Vobiscum
enim concutitur imperium: concussis etiam caeteris membris ejus, utique and
nos, lice^t extranei a turbis aestimemur, in aliquo loco caius invenimur. Tert.
Apol. c. 32.
We pray for you, because with you the Empire is shaken: and the other members
of it being shaken, assuredly even we, how far soever we may be thought from
troubles, are found in some place of the fall. Farther;

5. Let us consider, that Subjects are obliged in gratitude and ingenuity, yea
in equity and justice, to pray for their Princes. For,

They are most nearly related to us, and allied by the most sacred bands; being
constituted Quem sciens (Christia nus) a Deo suo constitui, necesse est, ut and
ipsum diligat, and revereatur, and honoret, and salvum velit. -- Tert. ad Scap.
2.
by God, in his own room, the Parents and Guardians of their Country; being
also avowed and accepted for such by solemn Vows, and most holy Sacraments of
Allegiance: whence unto them as such we owe an humble piety, a very respectful
affection, a most dutiful observance; Jurant per Deum, and per Christum, and
per Spiritum S. and per Majestatem Imperatoris, quae secundum Deum generi
humano diligenda est, and colenda. Veget. 2. 5.
the which we cannot better express or exercise, then in our heartiest Prayers
for their welfare.

They by God are destined to be the Protectours of the Church, the Patrons of
Religion, the Fosterers and cherishers of Truth, of Virtue, of Piety: for of
the Church in the Evangelical times it was prophesied, Kings shall be thy
nursing Isa. 49. 23. and 60. 16.
Fathers; Thou shall suck the breasts of Kings; Kings shall minister to thee:
ver. 10.
wherefore to them, not only as men and Citizens, but peculiarly as Christians,
we owe the highest duty; and consequently we must pay the best Devotion for
them.

To them we stand indebted for the greatest Benefits of common life: they
necessarily do take much care, they undergo great trouble, they are exposed to
many hazzards for our advantage; that under their shadow we may Lam. 4. 20.
enjoy safety and quiet, we may reap the fruits of our industry, we may possess
the comforts and conveniences of our life, with security from rapine, from
contention, from solicitude, from the continual fears of wrong and outrage.

To their industry and vigilance under God we owe the fair administration of
Justice, the protection of Right and Innocence, the preservation of Order and
Peace, the encouragement of Goodness, and correction of Wickedness: for they,
as the Apostle tells us, are God's Ministers, attending continually Romans 13.
6.
on these very things. They indeed so attend, as to deny themselves, and to
forgo much of their own ease, their pleasure, their satisfaction; being
frequently perplexed with cares, continually enslaved to business, and subject
to various inconveniences, rendering their life to considerate Spectators very
little desirable.

As therefore, according to our Lord's observation, they are usually styled
Benefactours, so they really are; even Luke 22: 25.
the worst of them (such as Claudius, or Nero, of whom our Apostles speak) in
considerable measure; at least in comparison of Anarchy, and considering the
mischiefs issuing from want of Government. (...): (...) -- Chrysostom. in 1 Timothy 2.
1.
The matter is not flattery; (says S. Chrysostom, himself of all men farthest
from a flatterer;) but according to the reason of the case we must esteem our
selves much obliged to them for the pains they sustain in our behalf, and for
the benefits we receive from them. For he indeed must be a very bad Governor,
to whom that Speech of the Orator Tertullus may not without glozing be
accommodated; Seeing that by thee we enjoy Acts 24. 2, 3.
great quietness, and that very worthy deeds are done unto this Nation by thy
providence, we accept it always, and in all places, most noble Felix, with all
thankfulness.

However, what Seneca says of Philosophers, that they of all men are most
obliged and Nulli adversus Magistratus ac Reges gratiores suntnec immerito,
nullis enim plus praestant, quam quibus frui tranquillo otio licet. Itaque hi
quibus ad proposituna been vivendi confert securitas publica, necesse est
auctorem hujus boni ut parentem colant -- Sen. Ep. 73.
most grateful to Kings and Magistrates, because from their care they enjoy the
leisure, quiet, and security of contemplating, and practicing the best things;
upon which account, says he, they could not but reverence the authors of so
great a good, as Parents; that is, or should be, far more true of Christians.
That leisure (to use his words) which is spent with God, Quanti aestimamus hoc
otium, quod inter Deos agitur, quod Deos facit? Ibid.
and which renders us like to God; the liberty of studying Divine Truth, and
of serving God with security and quiet; are inestimable benefits, for the which
they are indebted to the protection of Magistrates: Therefore in all reason a
grateful retribution of good will, and of all good offices, particularly of our
Prayers, is to be paid to them. Is it not very absurd, says S. Chrysostom,
(...), etc?

Chrysostom. ubi supra.


that they should labor, and venture for us, and we not pray for them?

6. Whereas we are by Divine command frequently enjoined to fear and 1 Pet. 2.
13, 17.

Romans 13. 1 --

Tit. 3. 1.

Prove. 24. 21.


reverence, to honor, to obey Kings, we should look on Prayer for them as a
principal branch, and the neglect thereof as a notable breach of those duties.
For,

As to Honor and Reverence, it is plain, that no exterior signification, in
ceremonious unveiling or cringing to them, can so demonstrate it, as does the
wishing them well in our hearts, and from thence framing particular addresses
to the Divine Majesty for their welfare. Then which practice there can be no
surer argument, that we hold them in great account and consideration. And how
indeed can we much honor them, for whom we do not vouchsafe so much as to
offer our good wishes, or to mention them in our intercessions unto him, who
requires us to make them for all men, and particularly for those for whom we
are concerned? Does not this omission evidently place them in the lowest rank,
beneath the meanest of our friends and relations? does it not imply a very
slender regard had to them?

And as for Obedience, Prayer for Princes is clearly an instance thereof;
seeing it may be supposed, that all Princes do require it from their Subjects.
Not only Christian Princes, who believe God the sole Dispenser of all good
things, and the great efficacy of Devotion in procuring them from him, may be
deemed to exact this beneficial office from us; but even Heathens and Infidels,
from their dim notion of a Sovereign Providence, (which has ever been common
in the World,) have made an account of this practice: as we may see by that
Decree of the Persian King in Ezra, charging his Officers to furnish the Jewish
Elders with sacrifices, that, said he, they may offer sacrifices Ezr. 6. 10.
of sweet savor unto the God of Heaven, and pray for the life of the King, and
of his Sons. And that such was the practice of the Romans even in their
Heathenish State, does appear from those words of Pliny; We have, Nuncupar^
vota and pro aeternitate Imperii, and pro salute Civium, im^ pro salute
Principum, ac propter illos pro aeternitate Imperii, solebamus. Plin. Paneg.
says he, been wont to make vows for the eternity of the Empire, and for the
welfare of the Citizens, yea for the welfare of the Princes, and in their
behalf for the eternity of the Empire.

Not only pious Princes with a serious desire will expect this Duty from us;
but even profane ones in policy will demand it, as a decent testimony of
respect to them, and a proper means of upholding their State; that they may
seem to have place in the most serious regards, and solemn performances of
their Subjects. So that to neglect this Duty, is ever a violation of our due
obedience, and a kind of disloyalty to them. Again,

7. The Praying for Princes is a service peculiarly honorable, and very
acceptable to God; which he will interpret as a great respect done to himself;
for that thereby we honor his Deo vel privatus, vel militans servit, cum
fideliter eum diligit, qui Deo regnat autore. Veget. 2. 5.
image and character in them, yielding in his presence this special respect to
them as his Representatives; for that thereby we avow his Government of the
world by them as his Ministers and Deputies; for that thereby we acknowledge all
Power derived from him, and depending on his pleasure; we ascribe to him an
Authority paramount above all earthly Potentates; we imply our persuasion, that
he alone is absolute Sovereign of the world, the King of 1 Timothy 6. 15.
Kings, and Lord of Lords, so that Princes are nothing otherwise than in
subordination to Temperans Majestatem Caesaris infra De^m, magis illum commendo
Deo. Tert. Apol. c. 33.
him, can do nothing without his succor, do owe to him all their power, their
safety, their prosperity and welfare; for that, in fine, thereby, disclaiming
all other confidences in any son of man, we signify our entire submission to
God's Psalm. 146. 3. and 118. 8, 9.
will, and sole confidence in his Providence. This service therefore is a very
grateful kind of adoring our Almighty Lord; and as such S. Paul recommendeth it
in the words immediately subjoyned to our Text, For this (says he) is good,
and acceptable in the sight of God, 1 Timothy 2. 3.
our Savior.

8. Let us consider, that whereas wisdom guiding our Piety and Charity, will
especially incline us to place our Devotion there where it will be most needful
and useful, we therefore chiefly must pray for Kings, because they do most need
our Prayers.

Their Office is most high, and hard to discharge well or happy: wherefore they
need extraordinary supplies of Gifts and Graces from the Divine bounty.

Their Affairs are of greatest weight and importance, requiring answerable
skill, and strength to steer and wield them: wherefore they need from the
Fountain of wisdom and power, special communications of light, of courage, of
ability to conduct, to support, to fortify them in their managements; they
need that God should uphold them (...), Psalm. 51. 12.
with that Princely Spirit, for which King David prayed.

They often are to deliberate about matters of dark and uncertain consequence;
they are to judge in cases of dubious and intricate nature; the which to
resolve prudently, or to determine uprightly, no humane wisdom sufficiently can
enable: wherefore they need the spirit of counsel, and the spirit of judgment,
Isa. 11. 2. and 28. 6.
from the sole dispenser of them, the great Counselor, and most righteous
Judge. The wisest and ablest of them Isa. 9. 6.

Psalm. 7. 11.


has reason to pray with Solomon, Give thy servant an understanding heart, to
1 Kings 3. 9.

Sap 9. 4 --

(Psalm. 72. 1.)


judge thy people, that I may discern between good and bad: for who is able to
judge this thy so great a people? That so what the Wise man says may be
verified, A divine sentence is in the lips of Prove. 16. 10.
the King, his mouth transgresses not in judgment: and that of the wise woman,
As an Angel of God, so is my Lord the 2 Samuel 14. 17.
King to discern good and bad.

They commonly are engaged in enterprises of greatest difficulty, insuperable
by the might or industry of man; in regard to which we may say with H^nnah, By
strength shall no man prevail; 1 Samuel 2. 9.
with the Preacher, The race is not to the Eccles. 9. 11.
swift, nor the battle to the strong; with the Psalmist, There is no King saved
by Psalm. 33. 16.
the multitude of an host: wherefore they need aid and succor from the
Almighty, to carry them through, and bless their designs with success.

They are most exposed to Dangers and Disasters; (standing like high towers,
most obnoxious to the winds and tempests offortune;) having usually many
envious ill-willers, many disaffected malcontents, many both open enemies and
close insidiatours; from whose force or treachery no humane providence can
sufficiently guard them: they do therefore need the protection of the
ever-vigilant Keeper of Israel, to secure them: Psalm. 121. 4. and 91. 1 --

Psalm. 127. 1.


for, Except the Lord keeps the City, the watchman waketh but in vain; Except
the Lord preserve the King, his guards, Psalm. 33. 16.
his armies surround him to no purpose.

They have the natural Infirmities of other men, and far beyond other men are
subject to external Temptations. The malicious Spirit (as in the case of Job,
of David, of Ahab, of Joshua the High Zech. 3. 1.
Priest is expressed) is ever waiting for occasion, ever craving permission of
God to seduce and pervert them; success therein being extremely conducible to
his villainous designs. The World continually does assault them with all its
advantages; with all its baits of pleasure, with all its incitements to pride
and vanity, to oppression and injustice, to sloth, to luxury, to exorbitant
self-will and self-conceit, to every sort of vicious practice. Their eminency
of state, their affluence of wealth, their uncontrollable power, their
exemption Eccles. 8. 4.
from common restraints, their continual distractions and encumbrances by
varieties of care and business, their multitude of obsequious followers, and
scarcity of faithful friends, to advise, or reprove them, their having no
obstacles before them to check their wills, to cross their humors, to curb
their lusts and passions, are so many dangerous ^nares unto them: wherefore
they do need plentiful measures of Grace, and mighty assistances from God, to
preserve them from the worst errors and sins; into which otherwise it is almost
a miracle if they are not plunged.

And being they are so liable to sin, (...).
they must consequently stand often in need of God's mercy to bear with them,
and to pardon them.

They therefore upon so many accounts needing special help and grace from
Heaven, do most need Prayers to derive it thence for them.

All Princes indeed do need them. Good Princes need many Prayers for God's
help, to uphold and confirm them in their Virtue: Bad Princes need deprecations
of God's wrath and judgment toward them, for offending his Majesty; together
with supplications for God's Grace to convert and reform them: the most
desperate and incorrigible need Prayers, that God would overruled and restrain
them from doing mischief to themselves, and others. All Princes having many
avocations, and temptations, hindering them to pray enough for themselves, do
need supplemental aids from the Devotions of others.

Wherefore if we love Them, if we love our Country, if we love our Selves, if
we tender the interests of Truth, of Piety, of common Good, we, considering
their case, and manifold need of Prayers, will not fail earnestly to sue for
them; that God would afford needful assistance to them in the administration of
their high Office, in the improvement of their great talents, in the conduct
and management of their arduous Affairs; that he graciously would direct them
in their perplexed Counsels, would back them in their difficult Undertakings,
would protect their Persons from dangers, would keep their Hearts from the
prevalency of temptations, would pardon their Failings and Trespasses. Again,

9. Whereas God has declared, that he has special regard to Princes, and a
more than ordinary care over them, because they have a peculiar relation to
him, as his Representatives, the Ministers Sap. 6. 4.
of his Kingdom, the main instruments of his Providence, whereby he conveyeth
his favors, and dispenses his justice to men; because also the good of
mankind, which he especially tendereth, is mainly concerned in their welfare;
whereas, I say, it is he that gives Psalm. 144. 10. and 21. 1.

Psalm. 18. 50. (63. 11.)

2 Samuel 22. 51.

Prove. 21. 1.

Dan. 5. 23.


salvation unto Kings; that gives great deliverance to his King, and shows
mercy to his Anointed; that has the King's heart, and his breath, and all his
ways in his hand: even upon this account our prayers for them are the more
required. For it is a method of God, and an established rule of Divine
Providence, not to dispense special Blessings without particular Conditions,
and the concurrence of our duty in observance of what he prescribes in respect
to them. Seeing then He has enjoined, that in order to our obtaining those
great Benefits, which issue from his special care over Princes, we should pray
for it, and seek it from his hands; the omission of this duty will intercept
it, or bereave us of its advantages; nor in that case may we expect any
blessings of that kind. As without praying for our selves, we must not expect
private favors from Heaven; so without praying for our Prince, we cannot well
hope for public blessings. For, as a profane person (who in effect disavoweth
God, by not regarding to seek his favor and aid) is not qualified to receive
any good from him: so a profane Nation (which disclaimeth God's Government of
the world, by not invoking his Benediction on those who moderate it under him)
is not well capable of common benefits. It is upon all accounts true which Ezra
said, The hand of our God is Ezra 8. 22.
upon all them for good that seek him: but his power and his wrath is against
all Live. 5. 51.

Hor. Od. 3. 6.


them that forsake him. If therefore we desire that our Prince should not lose
God's special regard, if we would not forfeit the benefits thereof to our
selves, we must conspire in hearty Prayers for him.

10. To engage and encourage us in which practice, we may farther consider,
that such Prayers, offered duly, (with frequency and constancy, with sincerity
and zeal,) do always turn to good account, and never want good effect: the
which if it be not always easily discernible, yet it is certainly real; if it
be not perfect as we may desire, yet it is competent, as expediency requires,
or as the condition of things will bear.

There may be impediments to a full success of the best Prayers; they may not
ever prevail to render Princes completely good, or extremely prosperous: For
some concurrence of their own will is requisite to produce their Virtue, God
rarely working with irresistible power, or fatal efficacy; and the state of
things, or capacities of Persons, are not always fitly suited for prosperity.
Yet are not such Prayers ever wholly vain or fruitless: For God never
prescribes means unavailable to the end; he never would have commanded us
particularly to pray for Kings, if he did not mean to bestow a good issue to
that practice.

And, surely, he that has promised to hear all requests with faith, and
sincerity, and incessant earnestness presented to him, cannot fail to hear
those which are of such consequence, which are so agreeable to his will, which
do include so much honesty and charity. In this case, surely, we may have some
confidence, according to that of S. John, This 1 John 5. 14.
is the confidence we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his
will, he hears us.

As the good Bishop, observing S. Austin's Mother, with what constancy and
passionateness she did pray for her Son, being then engaged in ways of error
and vanity, did encourage her, saying, It is impossible that a Son of those
devotions Fieri non potest, ut filius istarum lacrymarum pereat. Aug. Conf. 4.
12.
should perish: so may we hopefully presume, and encourage our selves, that a
Prince will not miscarry, for whose welfare many good people do earnestly
solicit; Fieri non potest, ut Princeps istarum lacrymarum pereat.

You know in general the mighty efficacy Jam. 5. 16.
of Prayer, what pregnant assurances there are, and how wonderful instances
thereof occur in Holy Scripture, both in relation to public and private
blessings: How it is often promised, that All things, whatsoever we shall Mat.
21. 22.
ask in prayer, believing, we shall receive; and that whoever asks,
receives, and Mat. 7. 8.
he that seeks, finds, and to him that knocks, it shall be opened: How
the prayer of Abraham did heal Abimelech, and his family of barrenness; how the
Genesis 20. 17.
prayers of Moses did quench the fire; Number. 11. 2. and 21. 7 --

(Psalm. 106. 30. O. T.)

Josh. 10. 12.

1 Samuel 1. 10 --

Luke 4. 25.

Jam. 5. 17, 18.


and cure the bitings of the fiery Serpents; how the prayer of Joshua did
arrest the Sun; how the prayer of Hannah did procure Samuel to her, as his name
does import; how Elias his prayers did open and shut the heavens; how the same
Holy Prophet's prayer did reduce 1 Kings 17. 21, 22.
a departed Soul, and that of Elisha did effect the same, and that of another 2
King. 4. 33 --

1 King. 13. 6.


Prophet did restore Jeroboam's withered hand; how the prayers of God's people
frequently did raise them up Saviors; Deuteronomy. 4. 29 --

Neh. 9. 27.

Psalm. 106. 44. and 107. 6, 13, 19, 28.

Judge. 3. 15. and 4. 3. and 6. 7. and 10. 12.


and when they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, he delivered them out of
their distresses; how the prayers of 2 Chr. 14. 11 --

2 Chr. 20. 3, -- 12, 23.

2 Chr. 32. 203 21.

2 Chr. 33. 12, 13.

Esth. 4. 16.

Neh. 1. 11, and 2. 4.

Dan. chap. 2. 4. 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.


Asa discomfited a million of Arabians; and those of Jehoshaphat destroyed a
numerous army of his enemies by their own hands; and those of Hezekiah brought
down an Angel from Heaven to cut off the Assyrians; and those of Manasses
restored him to his Kingdom; and those of Esther saved her people from the
brink of ruin; and those of Nehemiah inclined a Pagan King's heart to favor
his pious design for re-edifying Jerusalem; and those of Daniel obtaining
strange visions and discoveries; how Ezekiel. 14. 14.

Jer. 15. 1.


Noah, Job, Daniel, Moses and Samuel, are represented as powerful intercessours
with God, and consequently it is intimated, that the great things achieved by
them were chiefly done by the force of their prayers.

And seeing prayers in so many cases are so effectual, and work such miracles;
what may we hope from them in this, wherein God so expressly and particularly
directs us to use them? If our Prayers can so much avail to our personal and
private advantage, if they may be very helpful to our friends; how much shall
the Devotions of many good men, all levelled at one mark, and aiming at a
public most considerable good, be prevalent with the Divine Goodness? However,
if God be not moved by Prayers to convert a Prince from all sin, to make him do
all the good he might, to bless him in all matters; yet he may thence be
induced to restrain him from much evil, to keep him from being worse, or from
doing worse then otherwise would be; he may dispose him to do many things well,
or better then of himself he would do; he may preserve him from many disasters
otherwise incident to him: which will be considerable effects of Prayer.

11. I shall add but one general Consideration more, which is this, That Prayer
is the only allowable way of redressing our case, if we do suffer by, or for
Princes.

Are they bad, or do they misdemean themselves in their administration of
government and justice? we may not by any violent or rough way attempt to
red^lm them; for they are not accountable to us, or liable to our correction.
Where the word of a King is, there Eccles. 8. 4.
^^ power: and who shall say to him, What do thou? was the Preacher's
doctrine.

Do they oppress us, or abuse us? do they treat us harshly, or cruelly
persetute us? we must not kick against them, or strive to right ourselves by
resistance. ^or, Against a King (says the Wiseman) Prove. 30. 31.
there is no rising up: and, Who (said 1 Samuel 26. 9.
David) can stretch out his hand against the Lord's Anointed, and be guiltless?
and, They (says S. Paul) that resist, Romans 13. ^.
shall receive to themselves damnation.

We must not so much as ease our stomach, or discharge our passion, by rai^ing
or enveighing against them. For, Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy
Fxod. 22. 28.

Acts 23. 5.


people, is a Divine law; and, to 2 Pet. 2. 10.

Jude 8.


blaspheme, or revile Dignities, is by S. Peter and S. Jude, reprehended as a
notable crime.

We must not be bold or free in taxing their actions. For, Is it fit, says
Eli^^, Job 34. 18.
to say to a King, Thon art wicked, and to Princes, Ye are ungodly? and, to
reproach the footsteps of God's Anointed, is Psalm. 89. 91.
implied to be an impious practice.

We must forbear even complaining and murmuring against them. For, Murmurers
J^de 16.
are condemned as no mean sor^ of offenders; and the Jews in the wilderness
were sorely punished for such behavior.

We must not (according to the Preacher's advice) so much as curse Eccles. 10.
20.

(Isa. 8 21.)


them in our thought; or not entertain ill conceits, and ill wishes in our
minds toward them.

To do these things is not only high presumption in regard to them,
(inconsistent with the dutiful affection and respect which we owe to them,) but
it is flat impiety toward God, and an invasion of his Authority; who alone is
King of Kings, and has reserved to himself the prerogative of judging, of
rebuking, of punishing Kings, when he finds cause.

These were the misdemeanors of those in the Late Times, who in stead of
praying for their Sovereign, did clamor and rail at him, did asperse him with
foul Imputations, did accuse his proceedings, did raise Tumults, and levy War
against him, pretending by rude force to reduce him unto his Duty; so usurping
on their Prince, or rather on God himself, assuming his right, and ^king his
work out of his hands; dis^overing also therein great profaneness of mind, and
distrust of God's Providence; as if God, being implored by Prayer, could not,
or would not, had ^t been needful, without such irregular courses, have
redressed those evils in Church or State, which they pretended to feel, or fear.

Nothing therefore in such cases is left to us for our remedy or ease, but
having recourse to God himself, and seeking relief from his hand Absit enim ut
indigne feramus ea nos pati quae optamus, aut ulttonem a nobis aliquam
machinemur, quam a Deo exspectamus.

Tert. ad Scap. 2.


in his good time, by converting our Prince, or directing him into a good
course; however comforting our selves in the conscience of submitting to God's
will.

This is the only method S. Paul did prescribe, even when Nero, a most vile,
flagitious man, Qui non dicam Regum, sed omnium hominum, and vel bestiarum
sordidissimus, dignus extitit qui persecutionem in Christianos primus inci eret

S^lp. Sev. 2. 40.


a sorry and naughty Governor as could be, a monstrous Tyrant, and most bloody
Persecutour, (the very inventer of Persecution,) did sway the Empire. He did
not advise Christians to stand upon their guard, to contrive plots, to provide
arms, to raise mutinies and insurrections against him; but to offer
supplications, prayers, It a nos magis oramus pro salute Imperatoris, ab eo eam
postulantes qui praesta^e potest. Et utique ex disciplina patientiae Divinae
agere nos, satis manifestum esse vobis potest, cum tanta hominum multitudo,
pars pene major civitatis cujusque, in silentio and modestia agimus. Tert. ad
Scap. 2.
and intercessions for him, as the best means of their security, and comfort.
And this was the course of the Primitive Christians, during their hard
condition under the domination of Heathen Princes, impugners of their Religion:
Prayers and Tears Fundendo sanguinem, and patiendo magis quam faciendo
contumelias, Christi fundata est Ecclesia; persecutignibus crevit, etc.

Hier. Ep. 62.


were then the only Arms of the Church; whereby they long defended it from
ruin, and at last advanced it to most glorious prosperity.

Indeed, if, not assuming the liberty to find fault with Princes, we would
practice the duty of seeking God for his blessing on their proceedings; if,
forbearing to scan and censure Acts of State, we would earnestly implore God's
direction of them; if, leaving to conceive disgusts, and vent complaints about
the state of things, we would assiduously petition God for the settlement of
them in good order; if, in stead of being shrewd Politicians, or smart Judges
in such matters, we would be devout Orators and humble Solici^ours at the
Throne of Grace; our endeavors surely would find much better effect toward
public advantage: we certainly might do more good in our closets by a few
hearty wishes uttered there, then by all our tattling or jangling Politics in
corners.

There are great contrivances to settle things; every one has his model of
State, or method of Policy, to communicate for ordering the State; each is
zealous for his own conceit, and apt to be displeased with those who dissent
from him: but it is, as the fairest and justest, so the surest and likeliest
way of reducing things to a firm composure, (without more a-do, letting the
world alone to move on its own hindges, and not impertinently troubling our
selves or others with the conduct of it,) simply to request of Almighty God,
the Sovereign Governor and sole Disposer of things, that he would lead his own
Vicegerents in the management of the charge by himself committed to them. Be
careful for nothing; but in every Phil. 4. 6.
thing., by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be
made known to God, is a rule very applicable to this case.

As God's Providence is the only sure ground of our confidence, or hope for the
preservation of Church and State, or for the restitution of things into a
stable quiet: so it is only our hearty Prayers, joined with a conscientious
observance of God's Laws, whereby we can incline Providence to favor us. By
them alone we may hope to save things from sinking into disorder, we may
assuage the factions, we may defeat the machinations against the public
welfare.

12. Seeing then we have so many good arguments and motives inducing to pray
for Kings, it is no wonder, that, to back them, we may also allege the practice
of the Church, continually in all times performing this duty in its most Sacred
Offices, especially in the celebration Constable. Apost. 8. 13. 2. 57.
of the Holy Communion.

S. Paul indeed, when he says, I exhort first of all, that prayers be made,
does chiefly impose this Duty on Timothy, or supposes it incumbent on the
Pastors of the Church, to take special care, that Prayers be made for this
purpose, and offered up in the Church jointly by all Christians: 1 Timothy 2. 8.
and accordingly, the ancient Polycarp. ad Philip. c 12
Christians, as Tertullian does Precantes sumus semper pro omnibus
Imperatoribus vitam ^llis prolixam, imperium securum, domum tutam, exercitus
fortes, senatum fidelem, populum probum, orbem quietum, quaecunque hominis and
Caesari^ vota sunt.

Tert. Apol. cap. 30.


assure us, did always pray for all the Emperors, that God would grant them a
long life, a secure Reign, a safe family, valiant Armies, a faithful Senate, a
loyal people, a quiet world, and whatever they as Men, or as Emperors, could
wish. Thus Hoc agite, boni Praesules, extorquete animam Deo supplicantem pro
Imperatore.

Ibid.


(adds he) even for their Persecutours, and in the very pangs of their
sufferings, they did not fail to practice. Likewise of the Church in his time
S. Chrysostom tells us, that all Communicants did know (...)

Chrysostom. in 1 Timothy 2. 1.


how every day, both at even and morning, they did make supplication for all
the world, and for the Emperor, and for all that are in authority.

And in the Greek Liturgies, (the composure whereof is fathered on S.
Chrysostom,) there are diverse Prayers interspersed for the Emperors, couched
in terms very pregnant and respectful.

If the Offices of the Roman Church, and of the Churches truckling under it, in
latter times, shall seem more defective or sparing in this point of service;
the reason may be, for that a superlative regard to the Solar or Pontifical
Authority (as Pope Innocent III distinguished) did obscure their devotion for
the Lunar or Regal Majesty. But our Church has been abundantly careful, that
we should in most ample manner discharge this Duty; having in each of her Holy
Offices directed us to pray for our King in expressions most full, hearty, and
lively.

She has indeed been charged as somewhat lavish or over-liberal of her
Devotions in this case. But it is a good fault, and we little nead fear
over-doing in observance of a Precept so very reasonable, and so important;
supposing that we have a due care to join our heart with the Church's words,
and to the frequency of Prayers for our Prince do confer a suitable fervency, If
we be not dead, or merely formal, we can hardly be too copious in this kind of
Devotion; reiteration of words can do no harm, being accompanied with
renovation of our desires. Our Text it self will bear us out in such a
practice; the Apostle therein by variety of expression appearing solicitous,
that abundance of Prayers for Kings should be offered in the Church, and no
sort of them omitted.

There are so many General Inducements to this Duty at all times; and there are
beside diverse Particular Reasons enforcing it now, in the present state and
posture of things.

Times of trouble, of danger, Psalm. 145. 18 -- and 18. 6 and 77. 2. and 86. 7.
and 118 5 and 142. 1. --.and 107. 6 -- Jam. 5. 13. 2 Chr. 6. 36 --

Inops Senatus auxilii humani ad deos populum ac vot a vertit. -- Live. 3. 7.
and 5. 16.


of fear, of darkness and perplexity, of distraction and distress, of guilt,
and deserved wrath, are most seasonable for recourse to the Divine help and
mercy in Prayer.

And are not Ours such? are they not much like to those of which the Psalmist
says, They know not, neither will Psalm. 82. 5.
they understand; they walk on in darkness: all the foundations of the earth
are out of course? or like those of which our Lord spoke, when there was upon
the earth distress of nations, with perplexity; Luke 21. 25, 26.

(2 King. 19. 3.)


men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which
were coming on the earth?

Are not the days gloomy, so that no humane providence can see far, no wisdom
can descry the issue of things?

Is it not a very unsettled world, wherein all the public frames are shaken
almost off the hindges, and the minds of men extremely discomposed Psalm. 107.
27.
with various passions; with fear, suspicion, anger, discontent and impatience?
How from dissentions in Opinion do violent factions and feuds rage; the hearts
of men boiling with fierce animosities, and being exasperated against one
another, beyond any hopes or visible means of reconcilement?

Are not the fences of Discipline cast down? is there any conscience made of
violating Laws? is not the dread of Authority exceedingly abated, and all
Government overborn by unbridled licenciousness?

How many Adversaries are there, bearing ill will to our Sion? how many Psalm.
129. 5. and 83. 5 --
turbulent, malicious, crafty spirits, eagerly bent, and watching for occasion
to subvert the Church, to disturb the State, to introduce confusion in all
things? how many Edomites, who say of Jerusalem, (both Ecclesiastical and
Civil,) Down with it, down with it even to the Psalm. 137. 7.
ground?

Have we not great reason to be fearful of God's. just displeasure, and that
heavy judgments will be poured on us for our manifold heinous provocations, and
crying Sins; for the prodigious growth of Atheism, Infidelity, and Profaneness;
for the rife practice of all Impieties, Iniquities, and Impurities, with most
impudent boldness, or rather with outrageous insolence; for the extreme
Dissoluteness in manners, the gross Neglect or contempt of all Duties, the
great Stupidity and coldness of People generally as to all concerns of
Religion; for the want of Religious Awe toward God, of Charity toward our
Neighbor, of Respect to our Superiors, of Sobriety in our conversation; for
our Ingratitude for many great Mercies, and Incorrigibleness under many sore
Chastisements, our Insensibleness of many plain Warnings, loudly calling us to
repentance?

Is not all the world about us in combustion, cruel Wars raging everywhere,
and Christendom weltering in blood? and although at present, by God's mercy, we
are free, who knows but that soon, by God's justice, the neighboring flames
may catch our houses?

In fine, is not our case palpably such, that for any good composure or
re-instatement of things in good order, for upholding Truth and sound Doctrine,
for reducing Charity and Peace, for reviving the spirit of Piety, and bringing
Virtue again into request, for preserving State and Church from ruin, we can
have no confidence or reasonable hope, but in the good Providence and merciful
succor of Almighty God; beside whom there is no Savior; who alone Isa. 43. 11.

Hos. 13. 4.

Jer. 14. 8.


is the hope of Israel, and Savior thereof in time of trouble: we now having
great cause to pray with our Lord's Disciples in the storm, Lord, save us, we
Mat. 8. 25.
perish.

Upon such Considerations, and others whereof I suppose you are sufficiently
apprehensive, we now especially are obliged earnestly to pray for our King,
that God in mercy would preserve his Royal Person, and inspire his Mind with
Light, and endue his Heart with Grace, and in all things bless him to us, to be
a repairer of our breaches, and a restorer Isa. 58. 12.
of paths to dwell in; so that under him we may lead a quiet life in all
godliness and honesty.

I have done with the First Duty, (Prayer for Kings,) upon which I have the
rather so largely insisted, because it is very seasonable to our present
condition.

II. The Other (Thanksgiving) I shall but touch, and need not perhaps to do
more. For,

1. As to general Inducements, they are the same, or very like to those which
are for Prayer; it being plain, that whatever we are concerned to pray for,
when we want it, that we are bound to thank God for, when he vouchsafes to
bestow it. And if common Charity should dispose us to resent the Good of
Princes with complacence; if their Welfare be a public benefit; if our selves
are interested in it, and partake great advantages thereby; if in equity and
ingenuity we are bound to seek it; then, surely, we are much engaged to thank
God, the bountiful Donour of it, for his goodness in conferring it.

2. As for particular Motives, suting the present Occasion, I need not by
information or impression of them farther to stretch your patience; seeing you
cannot be ignorant or insensible of the grand Benefits by the Divine Goodness
bestowed on our King, and on our selves, which this day we are bound with all
grateful acknowledgment to commemorate. Wherefore in stead of reciting trite
stories, and urging obvious reasons, (which a small recollection will suggest
to you,) I shall only request you to join with me in the practice of the Duty,
and in acclamation of praise to God. Even so

Blessed be God, who has given to 1 King. 1. 48.
us so Gracious and Benign a Prince, (the experiments of whose Clemency and
Goodness no History can parallel) to sit on the throne of his Blessed Father,
and renowned Ancestors.

Blessed be God, who has protected him in so many encounters, has saved Psalm.
18 46 -- 89. 22, 23.
him from so many dangers and snares, has delivered him from so great troubles.

Blessed be God, who in so wonderful a manner, by such miraculous trains of
Providence, did reduce him to his Country, and re-instate him in the possession
of his Rights; thereby vindicating his own just Providence, declaring Psalm. 98.
2 --
his salvation, and openly showing his righteousness in the sight of all people.

Blessed be God, who in Him and with Him did restore to us our ancient good
constitution of Government, our Laws and Liberties, our Peace and Quiet;
rescuing us from lawless Usurpations and tyrannical Yoaks, from the insultings
of Error and Iniquity, from horrible Distractions and Confusions.

Ever blessed be God, who has turned Psalm. 126. 1.
the captivity of Sion; has raised our Church from the dust, and
re-established the sound Doctrine, the decent Order, the wholesome Discipline
thereof; has restored true Religion with its supports, advantages and
encouragements. (If. 30. 20 --)


Blessed be the Lord, who has granted us to continue these sixteen years in
the peaceable fruition of those Blessings.

Praised be God, who has not cast out our prayer, nor turned his mercy from
us. Psalm. 66. 20.


Praised be God, who has turned our 30. 11.
heaviness into joy, has put off our sackcloath, and girded us with gladness.

Let our mouth speak the praise of the Lord; and let all flesh bless his holy
Name 145. 21.
for ever and ever.

The Lord lives, and blessed be our 18. 46.
Rock; and let the God of our salvation be exalted.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who Psalm. 72. 18, 19.
only does wondrous things; and blessed be his glorious Name for ever; and
let the whole earth be filled with his glory. Amen and Amen.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from Psalm. 106. 48. 41. 13. 89. 52. 68. 34.
--

1 Chronicles. 16. 8 -- 36.


everlasting to everlasting: and let all the people say, Amen. Praise ye the
Lord.

The Eleventh Sermon. On Novem. 5. 1673.

PSALM. 64. 9, 10. And all men shall fear, and shall declare the work of God;
for they shall wisely consider of his doing.

The righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and shall trust in him; and all the
upright in heart shall glory.


IF we should search about for a Case parallel to that which we do now
commemorate, we should perhaps, hardly find one more patly such, then is that
which is implied in this Psalm: and if we would know the Duties incumbent on us
in reference to such an Occasion, we could scarce better learn them other-where
then in our Text.

With attention perusing the Psalm, we may therein observe, That its great
Author was apprehensive of a desperate Plot by a confederacy of wicked and
spiteful enemies, with great craft and secrecy, contrived against his safety.
They, says he, encourage themselves in an Verse. 5.
evil matter; they commune of laying snares privily; they say, who shall see
them? That for preventing the blow threatened by this design, (whereof he had
some glimpse, or some presumption, grounded upon the knowledge of their
implacable and active malice) he does implore Divine protection: Hide me, says
he, from the secret counsel of the wicked, from Verse. 2.
the insurrection of the workers of iniquity. That he did conside in God's
Mercy and Justice for the seasonable defeating, for the fit avenging their
machination: God, says he, shall shoot at them with Verse. 7.
an arrow; suddenly shall they be wounded. That they should themselves become
the detectours of their crime, and the instruments of the exemplary punishment
due thereunto: They (added he) shall make their own tongue to fall upon Verse. 8.
themselves: all that see them, shall flee away.

Such was the Case; the which unto what passage in the history it does relate,
or whether it belongs to any we have recorded, it may not be easy to
determine. Expositours commonly do refer it to the designs of Saul upon David's
life. But this seeming purely conjecture, not founded upon any express words,
or pregnant intimations in the text, I shall leave that inquiry in its own
uncertainty. It suffices to make good its pertinency, that there was such a
mischievous Conspiracy, deeply projected against David; (a very great
personage, in whose safety the public state of God's people was principally
concerned; he being then King of Israel, at least in designation, and therefore
in the precedent Psalm, endited in Readiness time, is so styled;) Psalm. 63. 11.
from the peril whereof he by the special Providence of God was rescued, with
the notable disappointment and grievous confusion of those who managed it. The
which Case (at least in kind, if not in degree) bears a plain resemblance to
that which lies before us.

And the Duties which upon that occasion are signified to concern people then,
do no less now sort to us; the which, as they lie couched in our Text, are
these: 1. wisely to consider God's doing; 2. to fear; 3. to declare God's work;
4. to be glad in the Lord; 5. to trust in God; 6. to glory. Of which the First
Three are represented as more generally concerning men; the others as
appertaining more peculiarly to righteous and upright persons.

These Duties it shall be my endeavor somewhat to explain and press, in a
manner applicable to the present case. I call them Duties; and to warrant the
doing so, it is requisite to consider, that all these particulars may be
understood in a double manner, either as declarative of event, or as directive
of practice upon such emergencies.

When God does so interpose his hand, as signally to check and confound
mischievous enterprises; it will be apt to stir up in the minds of men an
apprehension of God's special Providence, to strike into their hearts a dread
of his Power and Justice, to wring from their mouths suitable declarations and
acknowledgments; and particularly then good men will be affected with pious
joy, they will be encouraged to confide in God, they will be moved to glory, or
to express a triumphant satisfaction in God's proceedings. These events
naturally do result from such providential occurrences; for production of these
events such occurrences are purposely designed; and accordingly (where men are
not by profane opinions or affections much indisposed) they do commonly follow.

But yet they are not purposed simply as Events, but also as matters of Duty:
for men are obliged readily to admit such impressions upon their minds, hearts,
and lives, from the special works of Providence: they are bound, not to cross
those natural tendencies, not to frustrate those wise intents of God, aiming at
the production of such good dispositions and good practices: whence if those
effects do not arise, as often notoriously they do not in some persons, men
thereby do incur much guilt and blame.

It is indeed ordinary to represent matter of duty in this way, expressing
those practices consequent in effect, which in obligation should follow,
according to God's purpose, and the nature of causes ordered by him. As when,
for instance, God in the Law had prescribed Duty, and threatened sore punishment
on the disobedient, it is subjoyned, And all the people shall hear, and fear,
and do no Deuteronomy. 117. 1^. and 13. 11. and 19. 20.
more presumptuously: the meaning is, that such exemplary punishment is in its
nature apt, and its design tends to produce such effects, although not ever,
questionless with due success, so as to prevent all transgression of those
laws. So also, When (says the Prophet) thy Isa. 26. 9.
judgments are in the land, the inhabitants of the world will learn
righteousness: the sense is, that Divine judgments in themselves are
instructive of Duty, it is their drift to inform men therein, and men ought to
learn that lesson from them; although in effect diverse there be, whom no
judgments can make wiser or better; such as those of whom in the same Prophet
it is said, The people turns not unto him that smites them; Isa. 9. 13.

Jer. 2. 30. and 5. 3.

Neh. 9. 29.


and in another, in vain have I smitten your children, they received no
correction. As therefore frequently otherwhere, so also here, this kind of
expression may be taken chiefly to import Duty. To begin then with the First of
these Duties.

I. We are upon such occasions obliged wisely to consider (or, as the Greek
rendereth it, (...), to understand, or, (...)
. to perceive, as our Old Translation has it) God's doing. This I put in the
first place, as previous in nature, and influential upon the rest: whence
(although in the Hebrew it be knit to the rest, as they all are to one another,
by the conjunctive parcicle ve, and, yet) we do translate it causally, for they
shall wisely consider, for they shall perceive; because indeed without duly
considering, and rightly understanding such occurrences to proceed from God,
none of the other acts can, or will be performed: attentive consideration is
needful to beget knowledge and persuasion, these to breed affection and
practice.

There are many who, in such cases, are no-wise apprehensive of God's special
Providence, or affected with it; because they do not consider, or do not
consider wisely and intelligently.

Some are very inobservant and careless in regard to things of this nature; so
drowzy and heedless, as not to attend to whatever passes, or to mind what God
acts in the world: such as those of whom the Prophet says, The Isa. 5. 12.
Harp and the Viol, the Tabret and Pipe, and Wine are in their feasts; but they
regard Psalm. 28. 5. and 10. 4.
not the work of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands: that is, their minds
are so amused by wanton divertisements, their hearts are so immersed in sensual
enjoyments, as no-wise to observe the most notable occurrences of Providence.

Others, (although they do ken and regard what is done, as matter of news, or
story, entertaining curiosity and talk; yet) out of sloth or stupidity, do
little consider it, or study whence it springs; contenting themselves with
none, or with any superficial account, which fancy or appearance suggesteth:
like beasts, they do take in things obvious to their sense, and perhaps stand
gazing on them; but do not make any careful reflection, or inquiry into their
original causes and reasons; taking (as a dog, when he biteth the stone flung
at him, or as a child that is angry with the log he falls on) whatever
appears next, to be the principal cause: such as the Psalmist again touches,
when he says, A brutish man knows not, neither does a Psalm. 92. 6.
fool understand this: and as he does acknowledge himself on one occasion to
have been; So foolish was I, and ignorant; Psalm 73. 22;
I was as a beast before thee.

Others pretend to consider much, and seem very inquisitive; yet (being
misguided by vain prejudices, or foul affections) do not consider wisely, or
well understand these matters; the result of their care and study about them
being to father them on wrong causes, ascribing them to the mere conduct and
agency of visible causes, hurried by a necessary swindge, or rolling on by a
casual fluctuation of things; not descrying God's hand in them, but profanely
discarding and disclaiming it: such as those in the Psalms, who so reflected on
Providence, as to say, How does God Psalm. 73. 11.
know? and is there knowledge in the Most High? The Lord does not see, neither
Psalm. 94. 7. and 10. 11.
does the God of Jacob regard it: such as have been the brood of Epicurean and
profane considerers in all times, who have earnestly plodded, and strained
their wits, to exclude God from any inspection or influence upon our affairs.

Some indeed there have been so very dull and stupid, or so perverse and
profane, as not to discern God's Hand, when it was made bare, raised up, and
stretched out in the achievement of Isa. 52. 10.

Exodus 14. 8.

Deuteronomy. 26. 8.

Isa. 26. 11.

Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see, etc.


most prodigious works; not to read Providence, when set forth in the largest
and fairest print: such as those of whom it is said in the Psalm, Psalm. 106. 7.
Our fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt; and those of whom it is
observed in the Gospel, Though he had done so many miracles Joh. 12. 37.
before them, yet they believed not: such as the mutinous people, who, although
they beheld the earth swallowing Number. 16. 32, 35, 41.
up Corah with his Accomplices, and a Fire from the Lord consuming the men that
offered Incense; yet presently did fall acharging Moses and Aaron, saying, Ye
have killed the People of the Lord. No wonder then, if many do not perceive the
same Hand, when it is wrapped up in a complication with inferior causes; when
it is not lifted up so high, or so far extended in miraculous performances.

The special Providence of God in events here effected or ordered by him, is
indeed commonly not discernible without good judgment and great care; it is not
commonly impressed upon events in characters so big and clear, as to be legible
to every eye, or to any eye not endued with a sharp perspicacy, not implying an
industrious heedfulness: the tracts thereof are too fine and subtle to be
descried by a dim sight, with a transient glance, or upon a gross veiw: it is
seldom so very conspicuous, that persons incredulous, or any-wise indisposed
to admit it, can easily be convinced thereof, or constrained to acknowledge it:
it is often (upon many accounts, from many causes) very obscure, and not easily
discernible to the most sagacious, most watchful, most willing observers. For,
the instruments of Providence being free agents, acting with unaccountable
variety, nothing can happen, which may not be imputed to them, with some
colorable pretense. Divine and humane influences are so twisted and knit
together, that it is hard to sever them. The manner of Divine efficacy is so
very soft and gentle, that we cannot easily trace its footsteps. God designeth
not commonly to exert his hand in a notorious way, but often purposely does
conceal it. Whereas also it is not fit to charge upon God's special hand of
Providence any event, wherein special ends of wisdom or goodness do not shine;
it is often hard to discover such ends, which usually are wrapped in
perplexities; because God acts variously, (according to the circumstances of
things, and the disposition, capacity, or state of objects,) so as to do the
same thing for different ends, and different things for the same end: because
there are different ends, unto which Providence in various order and measure
has regard, which our short and narrow prospect cannot reach: because God, in
prosecution of his ends, is not wont to proceed in the most direct and
compendious way; but windeth about in a large circuit, enfolding many
concurrent and subordinate designs: because the expediency of things to be
permitted or performed, does not consist in single acts or events, but in many
conspiring to one common end: because we cannot apprehend the consequences, nor
balance the conveniences of things in order to good ends: because we are apt
to measure things by their congruity to our opinions, expectations, and
affections: because many proceedings of God depend upon grounds inaccessible to
our apprehension; such as his own secret Decrees, the knowledge of men's
thoughts, close purposes, clandestine designs, true qualifications and merits;
his prescience of contingent events and what the result will be from the
combination of numberless causes: because sometimes he does act in methods of
Wisdom, and by rules of Justice, surpassing our capacity to know either from
the finiteness of our nature, or the ^eebleness of our reason, or the meanness
of our state, and circumstances here: because also the Divine administration of
affairs has no complete determination or final issue here; that being reserved
to the great day of reckoning and judgment. It is further also expedient, that
many occurrences should be puzzling to us, to quash our presumption, to
exercise our faith, to quicken our industry, to engage us upon ado^ing that
Wisdom which we cannot comprehend. Upon such accounts, for such causes, (which
time will not give me leave to explain and exemplify) the special Providence
of God is often cloudy, is seldom so clear, that without great heed and
confideration we can perceive it. But however to do so is plainly our duty; and
therefore possible.

For our Reason was not given us to be idle upon so important occasions; or
that we should be as brute Spectatours of what God does. He, surely, in the
Governance of his noblest creature here discovers his Being, and displayeth
his Attributes, we therefore carefully should observe it. He thereby (and no
otherwise in a public way) does continually speak, and signify to us his
mind: and fit it is, that we his Psalm. 50. 1. and 60. 6. and 62. 11.
subjects should hear, should attend to the least intimations of his pleasure.
To him thence glory should accrue, the which who but we can render? and that we
may render it, we must know the grounds of it. In fine, for the support of
God's Kingdom, for upholding the reverence due to his administration of Justice
among us, it is requisite, that by apparent dispensation of recompenses, Duty
should be encouraged, and Disobedience checked.: very foolish therefore we must
be, if we regard not such dispensations.

So Reason dictateth, and Holy Scripture more plainly declares our obligation
to consider, and perceive God's doings. To do so is recommended to us as a
singular point of wisdom: whose Psalm. 107. 43.
is wise, and will observe these things, they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord. Let him that glories, glory in this, that he
understands and knows Jer. 9. 24.
me, that I am the Lord, which exercise loving kindness, judgment and
righteousness in the earth. Who is wise? and Hos. 14. 9.
he shall understand these things; prudent? and he shall know them. For the
ways of the Lord are right, etc. We are vehemently provoked thereto:
Understand, Psalm. 94. 8.
ye brutish among the people; and, ye fools, when will ye be wise? They are
reproved for neglect and defailance, Psalm. 28. 5. and 10. 4.
who do not regard the work of the Lord, nor the operation of his hand. The not
Isa. 5. 12.
discerning Providence, is reproached as a piece of shameful folly; A brutish
Psalm. 92. 6.
man knows not, neither does a fool understand: and of woeful pravity; (Isa.
26 11.)

Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see.


Luke 12. 56.

Matt. 16. 3.


O ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the Sky; but how is it that ye
cannot discern this time? To contemplate and study Providence is the practice
of Good men: I will meditate on all thy works, says the Psalmist, chiefly
respecting Psalm. 77. 12. and 143. 5.

Psalm. 111. 2.


works of this kind: and, The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all
them that have pleasure therein. It is a fit matter of Devotion, warranted by
the practice of good men, to implore God's manifestation of his Justice and
Power this way. O Lord God, to whom Psalm. 94. 1, 2.
vengeance belongs, show thy self; lift up thy self, thou Judge of the earth.
It is God's manner hereby to notify himself. The Lord is known by the judgment
Psalm. 9. 16.
that he executes. He for this very purpose does interpose his Hand, that men
may know that it is his Hand, Psalm. 109. 27.
and that the Lord has done it; that (as it is in Esaias) they may see, and
know, Isa. 41. 20.
and consider, and understand together, that the Hand of the Lord has done
this, (Ezekiel. 7. 27.)
and the Holy one of Israel has created it. He manageth God thereby does
support and encourage good men.

He does thereby convince and confound ill men. Psalm. 9. 19, 20.

He thereby does instruct all men. Isa 26, 9,


things so, that men may be brought to know, may be induced to acknowledge his
authority, and his equity in the management thereof; that they may know, that
he whose Name Psalm. 59. 13. and 83. 18. and 67. 2.

Psalm. 58. 11.


is Jehovah, is the most High over all the earth; that they may say, Verily
there is a reward for the righteous, verily there is a God that judges the
earth. In fine, the knowledge of God's special Providence is frequently
represented as a mean of nourishing our faith and hope in him, as a ground of
thankfulness and praise to him, as an incentive of the best affections (of holy
joy, and humble fear, and hearty love) toward him: wherefore we ought to seek
it, and we may attain it.

There are consequently some distinctive marks or characters, by which we may
perceive God's Hand: and such may these be which follow, (drawn from the
special nature, manner, adjuncts, and consequences of events:) upon which may
be grounded Rules declarative of special Providence, such as commonly will
hold; although sometimes they may admit exceptions, and should be warily
applied.

1. The wonderful Strangeness of Events, compared with the ordinary course of
things, or the natural influence of causes: when effects are performed by no
visible means; or by means disproportionate, unsuitable, repugnant to the
effect. Sometimes great exploits are achieved, mighty forces are discomfited,
huge structures are demolished, designs backed with all advantages of wit and
strength are confounded, none knows how, by no considerable means that appear;
Nature rising up in arms against them; panick fears seizing on the Abetters of
them; dissensions and treacheries springing up among the actours; sudden deaths
snatching away the principal instruments of them. As, when the stars in their
Judge. 5. 20. Aug. de Civ. D. 5. 26.
courses fought against Sisera: when the winds and skies became auxiliaries to
Theodosius: when the Lord thundered 1 Samuel 7. 10.

2 Samuel 22. 14, 15.


with a great thunder upon the Philistines, and discomfited them, and they were
smitten before Israel: when the Lord made 2 King. 7. 6.

Psalm. 53. 5. and 48. 6.


the host of Syrians to hear a noise of chariots, of horses, of a great host;
-- whence they arose and fled: when the children of Ammon and Moab stood up 2 Chronicles. 20. 23.
against the inhabitants of mount Seir, utterly to slay and destroy them; and
when they had made an end of the inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to
destroy another: when the Angel of the 2 King. 19. 35.
Lord went out, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians 185000 men; and when
they arose early in the morning, behold they were all dead corpses: when the
mighty power of Antiochus was, as it is said, to be broken without hands, and
Dan. 8. 25.
when, as it is foretold, a stone cut out of the mountain without hands should
break Dan. 2. 45.
in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold. Such Events
do speak God to be their cause, by his invisible efficacy supplying the defect
of apparent means.

So likewise, when by weak forces great fears are Vid. Artabani Orat. apud
Herod Polymn. page 246.

Hom. Il. (...) ver. 688.


accomplished, and impotency triumphs over might: when (as the Prophet says)
the captives Isa. 49. 25.
of the mighty are taken away, and the prey of the terrible is delivered: when
One man (as is promised) does chase a Josh. 23. 10.

Lev. 26. 8.

Deuteronomy. 32. 30.


thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight: when 1 Samuel 17. 5, 40.
a strippling, furnished only with faith and a pebble, shall knock down a
monstrous Giant, armed with a helmet of brass, and a coat of mail, with a huge
target, sword and spear: when successes arrive like those recorded in
Scripture, under the conduct of Joshua, Gideon, Jonathan, Asa, Jehosaphat;
Judge. 7. 7.

1 Samuel 14. 6 --

2 Chronicles. 14. 11. -- and 20. 12, 17.


wherein very small forces, by uncouth means, did subdue formidable powers:
This does argue that God does interpose; 2 Chror. 14. 11.

1 Samuel 14 6.


with whom (as it is said) it is all one to save by many, or by few, and those
that have no power; whose power is perfected in weakness; who breaks 2 Cor.
12. 9.
the arm of the wicked, and weakneth the Job. 12. 21. and 38. 15.

Psalm. 10. 15. and 37. 17. and 35. 10.

(Psalm. 76. 5.)

Hom. '(...). verse. 11.


strength of the mighty, and delivers the poor from him that is too strong
for him.

Also, when great policy and craft do effect nothing, but are blasted of
themselves, or baffled by simplicity; when cunningly-laid designs are soon
thwarted and overturned: when most perspicacious and profound counselors are
2 Samuel 15. 31.
so blinded, or so infatuated, as to mistake in plain cases, to oversee things
most obvious and palpable: when profane, malicious, subtle, treacherous
Politicians (such as Abimelech, Achitophel, Ruffinus, S. Paul, d' Ancre. de
Luna, etc.
Aman, Sejanus, Stilico, Borgia, with many like occurring in story) are not
only supplanted in their wicked contrivances, but dismally chastised for them.
These occurrences do more then insinuate Divine wisdom to intervene,
countermining and confounding such devices. For he it is who (as the Scripture
tells us) makes the Diviners mad; turns wise men backward, and makes Isa.
44. 25.
their knowledge foolish; disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that
their hands Job. 5. 12, 13.

(Psalm. 33. 10)


cannot perform their enterprise; takes the wise in their own craftiness, and
turns (...).
down the counsel of the froward headlong.

Whenever a just cause, or honest design, without any support or succor of
wordly means, (without authority, power, wit, learning, eloquence,) does
against all opposition of violence and art prevail: this signifies him to
yield a special countenance and aid thereto, who (to depress humane pride, and
advance his own glory) has chosen the 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28.
foolish things of the world, to confound the wise; and the weak things of the
world, to confound the things that are mighty; and base things of the world,
and things which are despised, and things that are not, to bring to naught
things that are: (that are with us in most request and esteem.)

Again, when Plots, with extreme caution and secrecy contrived in darkness, are
by improbable means, by unaccountable accidents disclosed and brought to light:
a bird of the air (as Eccles. 10. 20.
the wise man speaks) telling the matter; the stones in the wall (as it is in
Hab. 2. 11.
the Prophet) crying out Treason. The King cannot sleep; to divert him the
Chronicle is called for; Mordecai's service is there pitched on; an inquiry is
made concerning his recompense; honor is decreed him: so does Aman's cruel
device come out. Pity seiseth on a pitiless heart toward one among a huge
number of innocents devoted to slaughter; that he may be saved, a Letter must
be sent; in that, words inserted suggesting the manner of execution; that
carried to the wise King, who presently smells it out: so This day's Plot was
discovered. Such events, whence can they well proceed, but from the
all-piercing and ever-watchful care of (Psalm. 121. 4.)

Job 34. 21.


him, whose eyes (as Elihu says) are upon the ways of man, and he sees all
his goings? There is no darkness, nor shadow Job 34. 22.
of death, where the workers of iniquity shall hide themselves: For Hell is
naked Job 26. 6.

Psa. 132. 2, etc.

Heb. 4. 13.

Am. 9. 2.


before him, and destruction has no covering.

Also, when ill men by their perverse wiliness do notably befool and ensnare
themselves, laying trains to blow up their own designs, involving themselves in
that ruin and mischief into which they studied to draw others; as when Saul,
exposing David's life to hazard, 1 Samuel 18. 25.
increases his honor; when the Persian Nobles incensing the King against
Daniel, do occasion his growth in favor, with their own destruction; when
Aman, by contriving to destroy God's Dan. 6. 24.
people, does advance them, and rearing a gallows for Mordecai, does prepare it
for himself: when it happens according to those passages in the Psalms, Psalm.
10. 2. and 9. 15. and 35. 8. and 140. 5. and 7. 15. and 57. 6. and 7. 16. and
^. 10.
The wicked are taken in the devices that they imagined; In the net which they
bid is their own foot taken; He made a pit and dug it, and is fallen into
the ditch which he made; His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his
violent dealings shall come upon his own pate. These are pregnant evidences of
God's just and wise Providence: for, the Lord is known by the judgment that he
executes; Psalm. 9. 2.
the wicked is snared in the work of his own hand.

All such occurrences, containing in them somewhat, if not down-rightly
miraculous, yet very admirable, in like manner deflecting from the stream of
humane affairs, as miracles do surmount the course of nature, most reasonably
may, most justly should be ascribed to the special operation of him, who only
Psalm. 72. 18. and 86. 10.
does wonderful things.

2. Another character of special Providence is, the Seasonableness, and
Suddenness of Events. When that which in it self is not ordinary, nor could
well be expected, does fall out happily, in the nick of an exigency, for the
relief of innocence, the encouragement of goodness, the support of a good
cause, the furtherance of any good purpose; (so that there is occasion to
acknowledge with the Prophet, Thou did terrible things, that we looked not
for:) This is Isa. 64 3.
a shrewd indication, that God's Hand is then concerned; not only the event
being notable, but the connection thereof with circumstances of need being more
admirable.

Thus in time of distress and despondency, when a man is utterly forlorn, and
destitute of all visible relief, when (as the Psalmist speaks) refuge fails
Psalm. 142. 4.

(Psalm. 44. 25. and 108. 12.)


him, and no man cares for his soul; if then Heb. 4. 16.
(...), an opportune succor does arrive; he is then unreasonable, and
ungrateful, if he does not avow a special Providence, and thankfully ascribe
that event unto him who is our refuge and strength, a very present Psalm. 46. 1.
and 99. and 44. 24 -- and 37. 29. and 27. 5. and 69. 14 -- and 18. 6.
help in trouble; Isa. 25. 4. and 33. 2.
a strength to the poor, a strength to the needy in his distress, a refuge from
the storm, a shadow from the heat; Jer. 14. 8.

Job 34. 1. 8.


the hope of Israel, and the Savior thereof in time of trouble. This is that,
for which in the 107 Psalm the Divine Goodness is so magnificently celebrated;
this is the burden of that pathetical Psalm. 107. 8, 15, 21, 31.
rapture, wherein we by repeated wishes and exhortations are instigated to
bless God; his wonderfully relieving the children of men in their need and
distress: this is that, which God himself in the Prophet represents as a most
satisfactory demonstration of his Providence. When the poor and needy seek
water, and Isa. 41. 17, etc.
there is none, and their tongue fails for thirst; I the Lord will hear them,
I the God of Jacob will not forsake them: I will open rivers in high places,
and fountains in the midst of the valleys, etc. That they may see, and know,
and consider, and understand together, that the Hand of the Lord has done
this, and the Holy one of Israel has created it.

So also, when pestilent enterprises (managed by close fraud, or by impetuous
violence) are brought to a head, and come near to the point of being executed;
the sudden detection, or seasonable obstruction of them, do argue the
ever-vigilant Eye, and the all-powerful Hand to be engaged. God ever does see
those deceitful workers of iniquity, laying their mischief in the dark; he is
always present at their Cabals, and clandestine meetings, wherein they brood
upon it. He often does suffer it to grow on to a pitch of maturity, till it be
thoroughly formed, till it be ready to be hatched, and break forth in its
mischievous effects; then in a trice he snappeth and crusheth it to nothing.
God beholds violent men setting out in their unjust attempts, he lets them
proceed on in a full career, until they reach the edge of their design; then
instantly he checketh, puts in a spoak, he stops, he tumbleth them down,
or turns them backward. Thus was Aman's plot dashed, when he had procured a
Royal Decree, when Esth. 3.
he had fixed a time, when he had issued forth letters to destroy God's people.
Thus was Pharaoh overwhelmed, when he had just overtaken the children of Exodus
14.
Israel. Thus were the designs of Abimelech, of Absalom, of Adonijah, of
Sanballat nipped. Thus when Sennacherib with an unmatchable host had encamped
against Jerusalem, and had to appearance swallowed it, God did put a hook into
his nose, and turned him back 2King. 19. 28.
into his own land. Thus when Antiochus 2 Mac. 9. 4. --
was marching on furiously, to accomplish his threat of turning Jerusalem into
a Charnel, a noisome disease did intercept his progress. Thus when the profane
C^ligula did mean to discharge his Joseph. 18. 12.
bloody rage on the Jews, for refusing to worship him, a domestic sword did
presently give vent to his revengefull breath. Thus also, when Julian had by
Chrysostom. in Babylam, Orat 2.

Naz. Orat. 4.


his Policy and his Authority projected to overthrow our Religion, his Plot
soon was quashed, and his life snapped away by an unknown hand. Thus, whenever
the enemy does come in like a Isa. 59. 19.
flood, (threatening immediately to overflow, and overturn all things,) the
Spirit of the Lord does lift up a standard against him; that is, God's secret
efficacy does suddenly restrain and repress his (Job 38. 11.)
outrage. This usually is the method of Divine Providence. God could prevent
the (...), etc. vid. Chrysostom. ad Olymp.
beginnings of wicked designs; he could supplant them in their first onsets; he
could any-where sufflaminate and subvert them: but he rather winketh for a
time, and suffers the designers to go on, till they are (...), etc. Ibid.
mounted to the top of confidence, and good people are cast on the brink of
ruin; then Nec Deu^ intersit, nisi dignus vindice nodus inciderit.
(...), surprisingly, unexpectedly he strikes in with effectual succor: so
declaring how vain the presumption is of impious undertakers; how needful and
sure his protection is over innocent people; how much reason the one has to
dread him, and the other to confide in him. Then is God seen, then his care and
power will be acknowledged, when he snatcheth us from the jaws of danger, when
our soul Psalm. 124. 7.
does escape as a bird out of the snare of the fowler.

3. Another character of special Providence is, the great Utility and
Beneficialness of Occurrences, especially in regard to the public state of
things, and to great personages, in whose welfare the public is much
concerned. To entitle every petty chance that arriveth to special Providence,
may signify lightness; to father on God the mischiefs issuing from our sin and
folly, may savor of profaneness: but to ascribe every grand and beneficial
event Magna dii curant, parva negligunt. Cic. 2. de N. D.
unto his good Hand, has ever been reputed wisdom and justice. Quicquid magnam
utilitatem generi adferret humano, id non sine Divina bonitate erga homines
fieri arbitrabantur. Cic. de Not. Deor. lib. 2.
It has been (says Balbus in Cicero) a common opinion among the Ancients,
that whatever did bring great benefit to mankind, was never done without
Divine goodness toward men. And well may they deem so, seeing to do so is most
agreeable to his nature, and appertaining to his charge; and may appear to be
so by good argumentation a priori. For, that God does govern our affairs, may
be deduced from his essential Attributes; and, consequently, that he does in
especial manner order these things, which are the most proper and worthy
objects of his governance. God indeed does not disregard any thing; he watches
over the least things by his general and ordinary Providence; so that nothing
in nature may deviate from its course, or transgress the bounds prescribed to
it. He thereby clothes the grass of the field; Mat. 6. 30.

Psalm. 104. 14.

Psalm. 147. 9.

Job 38. 39.

Psalm. 104. 21.


He provideth for the raven his food, and the young lions seek their meat from
him; without his care Mat. 10. 29, 30.
a sparrow does not fall to the ground; by it all the hairs of our head are
numbered. But his more special hand of Providence is chiefly employed in
managing affairs of great moment and benefit to mankind; and peculiarly those
which concern his people, who do profess to worship and serve him; whose
welfare he tendreth with more then ordinary care and affection. He therefore
has a main stroke in all Dan. 4. 25.

Psalm. 75. 7.


revolutions and changes of State: he presideth in all great counsels, and
undertakings; in the waging of war, in Psalm. 46. 9.

Prove. 21. 31.

1 Chronicles. 29. 11.


the settlement of peace; in the dispensation of victory and good success. He
is peculiarly interested in the protection of Princes, the chief Ministers of
his Sap. 6. 4.
Kingdom; and in preservation of his people, the choice object of his care,
from violent invasions, and treacherous surprises; so as to prevent disasters
incident, or to deliver from them. It is he that (as the Psalmist says) does
give Psalm. 144. 10.

Eccles 10. 20.

Psalm. 18. 50. and 21. 1. and 33. 16.


Salvation unto Kings; who delivers David his servant from the hurtful sword.
It is he that continually Psalm. 121. 4.

Jet. 14. 8.

Psalm. 46. 5.


keeps Israel without ever sleeping, or slumbering; who is the hope of
Israel, and the Savior thereof; who is in the midst of her, that she shall not
be moved; who has declared, that he will help her, and that right early; Psalm.
94. 14.
that he will not cast off his people, nor forsake his inheritance; that no
weapon formed against his Church shall prosper; Isa. 54. 15.
that salvation belongs to the Lord, and Psalm. 3. 8.
his blessing is upon his people. When therefore any remarkable event, highly
conducing to the public good of Church of state, (supporting them in a good
condition, or rescuing them from imminent danger,) does appear, it is most
reasonable and most just, to ascribe the accomplishment thereof to God's Hand.
When any pernicious enterprise, levelled against the safety of Prince and
people, is disappointed, it is fit we should profess and say, The righteous
Lord Psalm. 129. 4. (O. T.)
has hewn the snares of the ungodly in pieces.

4. Another like mark of special Providence is, the Righteousness of the case,
or the advantage springing from events unto the maintenance of Right, the
vindication of Innocence, the defense of Truth, the encouragement of Piety and
Virtue. God naturally is the Judge of right, the Guardian of innocence, the
Patron of truth, and Promoter of goodness. The Lord is a refuge to the Psalm. 9.
9.
oppressed: He is a Father of the fatherless, Psalm. 68. 5.
and a Judge of the widow: He will Psalm. 10. 14.

Job 36. 15.

Psalm. 140. 12.


maintain the cause of the afflicted, and the right of the poor: Psalm. 103. 6.
and 9. 8.
He executes righteousness, and judgment for all that are oppressed: He
blesses the righteous, and compasses Psalm. 5. 12.
him with favor as with a shield: He preserves the souls of the righteous,
Psalm. 97. 10. and 37. 12 --
and delivers them out of the hand of the ungodly: All his Paths are mercy
and Psalm. 25. 10. and 146. 6.
truth, unto such as keep his Covenant and his Testimonies. Whenever therefore
Right is oppressed, or perillously invaded; when Innocence is grossly abused,
or sorely beset; when Piety is fiercely opposed, or cunningly undermined; when
good men for the profession of Truth, or the practice of Virtue, are
persecuted, or grievously threatened with mischief: then may we presume that God
is not unconcerned, nor will prove backward to reach forth his succor. And
when accordingly we find that sig nal aid or deliverance do then arrive, it is
most reasonable to suppose, that God particularly has engaged himself, and
exerted his power in their behalf. For, seeing it is his proper and peculiar
work, seeing it most becomes and behooves him to appear in such cases,
affording his helpful countenance; when he does it, we should be ready to
acknowledge it. In such a case, The hand Isa. 66. 14.
of the Lord shall be known toward his servants, and his indignation toward his
enemies, says the Prophet.

5. Another character is, the Correspondence of Events to the Prayers and
desires of good men. For seeing it is the duty, and constant practice of good
Psalm. 69. 13. -- and 102. 1, 2. and 140 6. and 60. 10. and 56. 1 --

Jam. 5. 16.


men, in all exigencies to implore God's help; seeing such Prayers have, as S.
James tells us, a mighty energy, it being God's property, by them to be moved
to impart his powerful assistence; seeing God most plainly and Psalm. 56. 9.
frequently has declared, and obliged himself by promise, that he will hear
Psalm. 34. 15. and 91. 15. and 145 18.
them so as to perform whatever is expedient in their behalf; seeing we have
many notable experiments recorded in Scripture (as those of Asa, Jehoshaphat,
Hezekiah, Elias, 2 Chronicles. 14. 11. and 20. 9. and 32. 20. 2 Kings 19. 15. 1
Kings 17. 1, etc.
Daniel, and the like) of Prayer bringing down wonderful effects from Heaven,
with (...);

Naz. Orat. 4.

How many myriads and squadrons of men were there, whom we only praying, and
God willing, discomfited? says Nazianzen in reference to the defeating of
Julian 's design.


which the testimonies of all times, and the daily experience of good men do
conspire; seeing the presumption of such efficacy is the main ground and
encouragement of Devotion: we have great reason, whenever Events are answerable
to such Prayers, to ascribe the performance of them to God's Hand: great reason
we have in such cases to cry out with David, Now know I that the Lord saves
his Anointed; he will hear him from his holy Heaven, with the saving strength
of Psalm. 20. 6.
his right hand: just cause have we, according to his pattern, thankfully to
acknowledge God's favor in answering our petitions; The King (said he) shall
Psalm. 21. 1, 2.
joy in thy strength, O Lord, and in thy salvation how greatly shall he
rejoice? For Psalm. 30. 2. and 66. 17 -- and 118. 5.
thou have given him his heart's desire, and have not withholden the requests
of his lips.

6. Again, The proceedings of God (especially in way of judgment, or of
dispensing rewards and punishments) discover their original by their kind and
countenance, which usually do bear a near resemblance, or some significant
correspondence to the actions upon which they are grounded. Punishments (...).
Damasc.
(says a Father) are the forced offsprings of willing faults: and answerably,
Rewards are the children of good deeds: and God, who forms both, does
commonly order it so, that the children in their complexion and features, shall
resemble their Parents. So that the deserts (...) Chrysostom. (...) 19.
of men shall often be legible in the recompenses conferred, or inflicted on
them: not according to the natural result of their practice, but with a comely
reference thereto; apt to raise in them a sense of God's Hand, and to wring
from them an acknowledgment of his Equity in so dealing with them. So when
humble Modesty is advanced to honor, and ambitious Confidence is thrown into
disgrace; when Liberality is blessed with increase, and Avarice is cursed with
decay of estate; when Craft incurreth disappointment, and Simplicity finds
good success; when haughty Might is shattered, and helpless Innocence is
preserved; when the Calumnious tongue is blistered, the Flattering Psalm. 12. 3.
lips are cut off, the Blasphemous throat is torn out; when bloody Oppressors
have blood given them to drink, and come to welter in their own gore; Rev. 16.
6.
(an accident which almost continually does happen;) when Treacherous men by
their own Confidents, or by themselves are betrayed; when Retaliations of
vengeance are ministered, extorting confessions, like to that of Adoni-bezek, As
I have done, so God has requited me; deserving such exprobrations, Judges 1. 7.
as that of Samuel to Agaeg, As thy sword 1 Samuel 15. 33.
has made women childless, so shall thy mother be childless among women;
grounding such reflections as that concerning Antiochus, Thus the murderer and
blasphemer 2 Mac. 9. 28.
having suffered most grievously, as he entreated other men, so died he a
miserable death: By such Occurrences the finger of God does point out and
indicate it self; they speak themselves immediately to come from that just God,
who does (...), render to men answerably to their doings; who pays Luke 14.
12.

Romans 12. 19.


men their due, sometimes in value, often in specie, according to the strictest
way of reckoning. He (as the Prophet says) is great in counsel, and mighty
Jer. 32. 19.
in work: for his eyes are open to all the ways of the sons of men, to give
every one according to his ways, and according Psalm. 62. 12.
to the fruits of his doings. This indeed is a sort of administration most
conformable to God's exact justice, and most conducible to his holy designs of
instructing and correcting offenders. He therefore has declared it to be his
way. It is (says the Prophet, directing his Jer. 56. 15. and 51. 49.
speech to the instruments of Divine vengeance upon Babylon) the vengeance of
the Lord: take vengeance upon her; as she has done, do unto her. And, The day
of the Lord (says another Prophet Obad. 15.
concerning the like judgment upon Edom) is near upon all the Heathen. As thou
have done, it shall be done unto Ezekiel. 35. 15.
thee; thy reward shall return upon thine own head. Thereby does God mean to
declare himself the Judge, and Governor of men: For, I will, says he in Ezekiel.
7. 27.

Job 34. 11.


Ezekiel, do unto them after their way, and according to their deserts will I
judge them; and they shall know that I am the Lord. Farther,

7. Another argument of special Providence is, the Harmonious conspiracy of
various Accidents to one End or Effect. If that one thing should hit
advantageously to the production of some considerable Event, it may with some
plausibility be attributed to Fortune, or common Providence: yet that diverse
things, having no dependence, or coherence one with the other, in diverse
places, through several times, shall all join their forces to compass it,
cannot well otherwise then be ascribed to God's special (...). Eusebius. lib. I de
Vit. Constable. de Maximino (sub sinem.) Is oculos qui eruerat Christianis, ipse
visu orbatus;
Care wisely directing, to his own Hand powerfully wielding those concurrent
instruments to one good purpose. For it is beside the nature, it is beyond the
reach of Fortune, to range various causes in such order. Blind Fortune cannot
apprehend or catch the seasons and junctures of things, which arise from the
motions of causes in their nature indifferent and arbitrary: to it therefore no
such event can reasonably be imputed. So to the bringing about our Lord's
Passion, (that great Event, which is so particularly assigned to God's Hand,)
we may observe the monstrous Treachery of Judas, the strange Malignity of the
Jewish Rulers, the prodigious Levity of the People, the wonderful Easiness of
Pilate, with other notable accidents, to have jumped in order thereto. So also
that a malicious Traitor should conceive kindness toward any, that he should
be mistaken in the object of his favor, that he should express his mind in a
way subject to deliberate examination, in terms apt to breed suspicion where
the Plot was laid; that the Counselors should despise it, and yet not smother
it; that the King instantly, by a light darted into his mind, should descry it:
these things so happily meeting, may argue God (who mouldeth the hearts, who
guides the hands, who enlightneth the minds of men) to have been engaged in
the detection of this day's black Conspiracy.

Such are some characters of special Providence: each of which singly appearing
in any occurrence, would in a considerate man breed an opinion thereof; each of
them being very congruous to the supposition of it; no-such appearances being
otherwise so clearly and cleverly explicable, as by assigning the Divine Hand
for their principal cause. But the connection of them all Vid. Diod. Sic. lib.
15. p 482.
in one Event (when diverse odd accidents do befall at a seasonable time,
according to exigency for the public benefit, the preservation of Princes, the
security of God's People, the protection of right, the maintenance of Truth and
Piety, according to the wishes and prayers of good men, with proper retribution
and vengeance upon the wretched designers of mischief; such a complication, I
say, of these marks in one Event) may thoroughly suffice to raise a firm
persuasion, to force a confident acknowledgment concerning God's Providence, in
any considerate and ingenuous person: it readily will dispose such persons upon
any such occasion to say, This is the Lord's doing, and it is Psalm. 118. 23.
mavelous in our eyes.

Notwithstanding therefore any obscurity or intricacy that sometime may (...).
Chrysostom. ad Olymp. Ep.
appear in the course of Providence, notwithstanding any general exceptions
that may by perverse incredulity be alleged against the conduct of things,
there are good marks observable, whereby (if we are not very blockish, drowzy,
supine, lazy, or froward; if we will consider wisely, with industrious
attention and care, with minds pure from vain prejudices, and corrupt
affections) we may discern and understand God's doing. Which to do is the First
Duty specified in our Text: upon which having insisted so largely, I shall
(hoping you will favor me with a little patience) briefly touch the rest.

II. It is the Duty of us all, upon such remarkable occurrences of Providence,
to fear God: All men, it is said, shall fear. It is our Duty in such cases to be
affected with all sorts of fear; with a fear of awful dread, with a fear of
hearty Job 37. 22. -- and 13. 11.

Psalm. 52. 6. and 68. 35.

Dan. 6. 26.


reverence, with a fear of sober caution; yea, sometimes with a fear of
dejecting consternation. When God does appear clad with his robes of vengeance
and zeal, Isa. 59. 17.
denouncing and discharging judgment; when he represents himself fearful in
Exodus 15. 11.

Psalm. 66. 3, 5. and 65. 5.

(130. 3.)


praises, terrible in his doings toward the children of men, working terrible
things in righteousness; it should strike into our hearts a dread of his
glorious Majesty, of his mighty Power, of his severe Justice, of his glorious
and fearful Name: Deuteronomy. 28. 58. and 10. 17.
it should instill into our minds a reverence of his excellent Wisdom, his
exceeding Goodness, his perfect Holiness: it should breed in our Souls a
solicitous care of displeasing and provoking him: it should cause us in our
hearts to shake and tremble before him. Then is that Isa. 66. 2,
of the Psalmist to be put in practice, Let all the earth fear the Lord, let
all the Psalm. 33. 8.
inhabitants of the World stand in awe of him. Tremble thou Earth at the
presence Psalm. 114. 7.
of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob. Such dispensations are in
their nature declarative of those Divine Attributes which do require such
affections: they are set before our eyes to cast us into a very serious and
solemn frame; to abash, and deter us from offending, by observing the danger of
incurring punishments like to those which we behold inflicted upon presumptuous
transgressors; upon those who do hainously violate Right, or furiously impugn
Truth, or profanely despise Piety; who earnestly prosecute wicked Enterprises;
who prosecute the Friends of God with outrageous violence, or treacherous
subtilty. Upon infliction of such punishments, All the people shall hear, and
Deuteronomy. 17. 13. and 13. 11. and 19. 20.
fear, and do no more presumptuously, says God himself, declaring the nature
and drift of them. They do plainly demonstrate, that there is no presuming to
escape, being detected in our close Machinations by God's All-seeing Eye; being
defeated in ourbold Attempts by God's All-mighty Hand; being sorely chastised
for our Iniquity by God's impartial Judgment. Extremely blind and stupid
therefore must we be, or monstrously sturdy and profane, if such experiments of
Divine Power and Justice do not awe us, and fright us from sin. When the Lion
roareth, who will Hos. 11. 10.

Amos 3. 6, 8.


not fear? when the trumpet is blown in the City, shall not the people be
afraid? Shall he, at whom the mountains quake, Nah. 1. 5.
and the hills melt; whose indignation Jer. 10. 10.

Psalm. 104. 32. and 18. 7. and 76. 8. and 143. 2.

Job 26. 11.

(Isa. 64. 3.

Ezekiel. 21. 10.

Isa. 25. 3. and 59. 18, 19.)


the Nations are not able to abide; at whose wrath the Earth does shake and
tremble; at whose reproof the pillars of Heaven are astonished; shall he
visibly frown, shall his wrath flame out, shall he shake his rod of exemplary
Vengeance over us, and we stand void of sense or fear? If so, then surely a
brutish dotage, or a Gigantick stoutness does possess us.

III. We are in such cases obliged to declare God's work: that is, openly to
acknowledge and avow, to applaud and celebrate the special Providence of God,
with his adorable perfections displayed in such Events; to the glory of God's
Name, in expression of our reverence and gratitude toward him, for the common
edification of men; for which uses they greatly serve, to which purposes they
are designed. We should not view such providential occurrences, like dumb
beasts, with a dull or careless silence, as if we did not mind them, or were
not concerned in them: we should not suppress or stifle the knowledge of them
in our breasts, as if they were barely matters of private consideration and
use: we should not let our observation and resentment of them be fruitless, so
as to yield no honor to God, no benefit to man. But we should propagate and
convey them into others: in so loud a tone, in so lively a strain we should
vent them, as thereby to excite the notice, to inflame the affections of all
men within the reach of our voice; provoking them to conspire with us in
acknowledgment of God's Power and Wisdom, in acclamation to his Justice and
Goodness. This is the due improvement of our Glory; that peculiar Psalm. 57. 8.
excellency, wherein chiefly (except in our Reason) we do surpass all
creatures; that without which our Reason it self is more then half
unprofitable; that whereby we put our best Member to its best use. For this we
have the devout Psalmist his pious Resolutions, his exemplary Performances, his
zealous Wishes, his earnest Exhortations to guide and move us. I will speak of
the Psalm. 145. 5, 6, 11.

(and 77. 12. and 9. 14.)


glorious honor of thy Majesty, and of thy wondrous works. Men shall speak of
the might of thy terrible acts; and I will declare thy greatness. They shall
speak of the glory of thy Kingdom, and talk of thy power. So did he signify
his Resolution. I have not hid thy righteousness Psalm. 40. 10.
within my heart; I have declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation: I have
not concealed thy Loving Kindness and thy Truth from the great Congregation. So
his conscience testified of his Practice. Oh that men would praise the Lord for
Psalm. 107. 8, 15, 21, 22, 31.
his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men: that they
would offer the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and declare his works with gladness.
So does he pour forth his Desire. O clap your Psalm. 47. 1.
hands, all ye people, shout unto God with the voice of triumph. Sing unto the
Lord, Psalm. 96. 2, 3.
bless his Name: show forth his salvation from day to day. Declare his glory
among Psalm. 96. 3. and 105. 2.
the Heathen, his wonders among all people. Come and see the works of God --
Psalm. 66. 5, 2.

(Psalm. 66. 16.)


Sing forth the honor of his Name, make his Praise glorious. O give thanks
unto the Lord, call upon his Name; make known Psalm. 105. 1.
his deeds among the people. So does he summon, so does he urge us to this
practice; and in his deportment we may see our Duty.

IV. It is peculiarly the Duty and practice of good men upon such occasions to
feel, and to express religious Joy. The righteous shall he glad in the Lord.
Good men indeed then have great matter, and much cause, on many accounts to be
glad.

It becomes them to rejoice, as having an universal complacence in God's
proceedings, as gratefully relishing all dispensations of Providence. They, as
pious, are disposed to bless and praise God for all things incident, and cannot
therefore but rejoice; Joy being an inseparable companion of Gratitude, and
Praise. Hence, Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright
Psalm. 97. 11.
in heart. Hence, The voice of salvation and rejoicing is in the tabernacles of
the Psalm. 118. 15.
righteous. Hence, Rejoice in the Lord, Psalm. 33. 1.
O ye righteous: for praise is comely for the upright; is an exhortation backed
with a very good reason.

They cannot but find satisfaction in observing God's Providence notably
discovered, to the confirmation of their faith, and cherishing their hopes;
together with the conviction of infidelity, and confusion of profaneness. Our
heart Psalm. 33. 21.
(says the Psalmist) shall rejoice in him; because we have trusted in his Holy
Name. I have trusted in thy mercy, my heart shall Psalm. 13. 5.

Psalm. 107. 42.


rejoice in thy salvation. The righteous shall see it, and rejoice; and all
iniquity shall stop her mouth.

It is to them no small pleasure, to behold God's holy Perfections
illustriously shining forth; and the Glory of him (who is the principal object
of their love, their reverence, their hope and confidence) to be conspicuously
advanced. Rejoice, (says the Psalmist) O ye righteous, and give thanks at the
remembrance Psalm. 97. 12. and 30. 4.
of his holiness. Zion heard, and was glad, and the daughters of Judah
rejoiced, Psalm. 97. 8, 9. and 48. 11.
because of thy judgments, O Lord. For thou, Lord, art high above all the Earth.

It is to them ground of exceeding comfort, to receive so clear pledges of
God's Love and Favor, his Truth and Fidelity, his Bounty and Munificence
toward them, expressed in such watchful care over them, such protection in
dangers, such aid in needs, such deliverance from mischiefs vouchsafed to them.
Such Benefits they cannot receive from God's hand, Sen. de Benef. 2. 22. Cum
accipiendum judicaverimus, hilares accipiamus profitentes gaudium, etc.
without that cheerfulness which always does adhere to gratitude. I will (says
David) sing unto the Lord, Vid. ib. 30. Psalm. 13. 6.
because he has dealt bountifully with me. Because thou Psalm. 63. 7.
have been my helper, therefore in the shadow of thy wings I will rejoice. My
lips shall greatly rejoice in thee, and Psalm. 71. 23.
my Soul, which thou have redeemed. I will be glad, and rejoice in thy mercy:
Psalm. 31. 7.
for thou have considered my trouble, and have known my Soul in adversities.
The Psalm. 126. 3.
Lord has done great things for us, whereof we are glad. Let all those that
put their trust in thee rejoice: let them Psalm. 5. 11.
ever shout for joy, because thou defendest them --

They are also greatly refreshed with apprehension of the happy fruits
sprouting from such dispensations of Providence; such as are the Benefit of
mankind, the Peace and prosperity of the Civil State, the Preservation,
settlement enlargement, advancement of God's Church, the support of Right, the
succor of Innocence, the maintenance of Truth, the encouragement and
furtherrance of Piety; the restraint of Violence, the discountenance of Error,
the correction of Vice and Impiety. In these things they, as faithful servants
of God, and real friends of Goodness, as bearing hearty good will and
compassion to mankind, as true lovers of their Country, as living and sensible
members of the Church, cannot but rejoice. Seeing by these things their own
best interest, (which is no other then the advantage of Goodness) their chief
honor, (which consists in the promotion of Divine Glory,) their truest
content, (which is placed in the prosperity of Sion,) are highly furthered;
Psalm. 122. 6.

(1 Cor. 12. 26.)


how can they look on them springing up without great delight and complacence?
O (says the Psalmist) sing Psalm. 98. 1, 3.
unto the Lord -- for he has done mavelous things -- He has remembered his
mercy and truth toward the house of Israel: all the ends of the earth have seen
the salvation of our God. And, Sing, O heavens, (cries the Prophet) and be
joyful, O earth, and break forth into singing, Isa. 49. 13.

Psalm. 96. 11, 13.


O ye mountains: for the Lord has comforted his people, and will have mercy on
his afflicted. And, When (says he) Isa. 66. 14.
ye shall see this, (the comfort of God's people,) your heart shall rejoice;
and your bones shall flourish like an herb, and the hand of the Lord shall be
known toward his servants, and his indignation toward his enemies.

Even in the frustration of wicked designs, attended with severe execution of
vengeance on the contrivers and abettours of them, they may have a pleasant
satisfaction; they must then yield a cheerful applause to Divine Justice. The
righteous (says the Psalmist) shall Psalm. 58. 10.

Job 22. 19.


rejoice when he sees the vengeance: and, Let the wicked (says he) perish at
the presence of God; but let the righteous be Psalm. 68. 2, 3.
glad, let them rejoice before God, yea let them exceedingly rejoice. Whence at
God's infliction of Judgment upon Babylon, it is said in Jeremy, Then the
heaven, Jer. 51. 48.
and the earth, and all that is therein, shall sing for Babylon: and at the
fall of Mystical Babylon, in the Apocalypse it is likewise said, Rejoye over her,
thou Apoc. 18. 20.
heaven, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets; for God has avenged you on her.

Farther,

V. The next Duty prescribed to good men in such cases is to trust in God: that
is, to have their affiance in God (upon all such like occasions, in all
urgencies of need) settled, improved, and corroborated thereby. This indeed is
the proper end, immediately regarding us, of God's special Providence,
disclosing it self in any miraculous, or in any remarkable way; to nourish in
weldisposed minds that Faith in God, which (Psalm. 78. 7.)
is the root of all Piety, and ground of Devotion. Such experiments are sound
arguments to persuade good men, that God does govern and order things for their
best advantage; they are powerful incentives, driving them in all exigencies to
seek God's help; they are most convincing evidences, that God is abundantly
able, very willing, and ever ready to succor them. They, says the Psalmist,
that know thy Name, Psalm. 9. 10.
will put their trust in thee: for thou, Lord, have not forsaken them that seek
thee. And, I (says he) will abide in Psalm. 61. 3, 4, 5.

Psalm. 115. 9. etc. and 130. 7.


thy tabernacle for ever; I will trust in the covert of thy wings: For thou, O
God, have heard my vows; thou have been a shelter for me, and a strong tower
from the enemy. It is, indeed, a great aggravation of diffidence in God, that
having tasted and seen that the Lord is good; Psalm. 34. 8.
having felt so manifest experience of Divine goodness; having received so
notable pledges of God's favorable inclination to help us; we yet will not
rely upon him. As a friend, who by signal instances of kindness has assured
his good will, has great cause of offense, if he be suspected of unwillingness
in a needful season to afford his relief: so may God most justly be displeased,
when we, (notwithstanding so palpable demonstration of his kindness,) by
distrusting him, do in effect question the sincerity of his friendship, or the
constancy Ecclus. 1. 10.
of his goodness toward us.

VI. Good men upon such occasions should glory: All the upright in heart shall
glory. Should glory, that is, in contemplation of such Providence feeling
sprightly elevations of mind and transports of affection, they should exhibit
triumphant demonstrations of satisfaction and alacrity. It becomes them not in
such cases to be dumpish, or demure; but jocund and crank in their humor,
brisk and gay in their looks, pleasantly flippant and free in their speech;
jolly and debonair in their behavior; every way signifying the extreme
complacency they take in God's doing, and the full content they taste in their
state. They with solemn exultation should Psalm. 126. 1. etc.
triumph in such events, as in victories achieved by the glorious Hand of God
in their behalf, in approbation of their cause, in favor toward their persons,
for their great benefit and comfort. They may (not as proudly assuming to
themselves the glory due to God, but as gratefully sensible of their felicity
springing from God's favor) se jactare, se laudibus efferre, as the Hebrew
word does signify;) that is, in a sort boast, and commend themselves as very
happy in their relation to God, by virtue of his protection and aid. They may
(not with a haughty insolence, or wanton arrogance, but with a sober
confidence, and cheerfulness) insult upon baffled Psalm. 52. 6, 7.

The righteous shall -- laugh at him, or deride him, in this manner; Lo, this
is the man that made not God his strength --


impiety, by their expressions and demeanor upbraiding the folly, the
baseness, the impotency, and wretchedness thereof, in competition with the
wisdom, in opposition to the power of God, their friend and patron. For such
carriage in such cases we have the practice and the advice of the Psalmist, to
warant and direct us. In God, says he, we boast all the day long, and praise
Psalm. 44. 8.
thy Name for ever. Thou, Lord, have Psalm. 92. 4.
made me glad through thy work; and I will triumph in the works of thy hands.
We will rejoice in thy salvation; and in Psalm. 20. 5.
the Name of our God we will set up our banners. Glory ye in his holy Name: let
Psalm. 105. 3. 4.
the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord. Sing unto him, sing Psalms unto
him; talk ye of all his wondrous works. Save us, O Lord our God, and gather us
from Psalm. 106. 47.
among the heathen, to give thanks unto thy Name, and to triumph in thy praise.
Such should be the result (upon us) of God's merciful Dispensations toward his
people.

I shall only further remark, that the word here used is by the Greek rendered
(...), they shall be praised: which sense the Original will bear, and the
reason of the case may admit. For such Dispensations ever do adorn integrity,
and yield commendation to good men. They declare the wisdom of such persons, in
adhering to God, in reposing upon God's help, in embracing such courses which
God does approve and bless: they plainly tell how dear such persons are to God;
how incomparably Psalm 126. 3. and 125. 1, etc. and 138. 1, etc.
happy in his favor, how impregnably safe under his protection; as having his
infallible wisdom, and his invincible power engaged on their side. This cannot
but render them admirable, and their state glorious in the eyes of all men;
inducing them to profess with the Psalmist, Happy is the people which is in
such Psalm. 144. 15. and 33. 12.
a case; yea, happy is that people, whose God is the Lord. And of such a
people, that declaration from the same mouth is verified, In thy Name shall
they rejoice all Psalm. 89. 16, 17.
the day long, and in thy righteousness shall they be exalted: For thou art the
glory of their strength, and in thy favor their horn shall be exalted.

Such are the Duties suggested in our Text, as suting these occasions, when God
in special manner has vouchsafed to protect his people, or to rescue them from
imminent mischiefs, by violent assault or by fradulent contrivance levelled
against them. I should apply these particulars to the present Case solemnized
by us: but I shall rather recommend the application to your sagacity, then
farther infringe your patience, by spending thereon so many words as it would
exact. You do well know the Story, which by so many years repetition has (...)
(...) on your minds: and by (...) (...),

You will easily discern, how God, in the seasonable discovery of this
execrable Plot, (the masterpiece of wicked machinations ever conceived in
humane brain, or devised on this side Hell, since the foundation of things,) in
the happy deliverance of our Nation and Church from the desperate mischiefs
intended toward them, in the remarkable protection of Right and Truth, did
signalize his Providence.

You will be affected with hearty Reverence toward the gracious Author of our
salvation, and with humble dread toward the just awarder of vengeance upon
those miscreant wretches, who dug this pit, and fell into it themselves.

You will be ready with pious acknowledgment and admiration of God's Mercy, his
Justice, his Wisdom, to declare and magnify this notable Work done by him
among us.

You must needs feel devout resentments of Joy for the Glory arising to God,
and the Benefits accruing to us, in the preservation of God's Anointed, our
just Sovereign, with his Royal posterity: in the freeing our Country from civil
Broils, Disorders, and Confusions; from the yoaks of Usurpation and slavery;
from grievous Extortions and Rapines; from bloody Persecutions and Trials, with
the like spawn of disastrous and tragical consequences, by this Design
threatened upon it: in upholding our Church (which was so happily settled, and
had so long gloriously flourished) from utter ruin: in securing our profession
of God's Holy Truth, the truly Catholic Faith of Christ, (refined from those
drossy alloys, wherewith the rudeness and sloth of blind Times, the fraud of
ambitious and covetous Designers, the pravity of sensual and profane men had
embased and corrupted it,) together with a pure Worship of God, an edifying
administration of God's Word and Sacraments, a comely, wholesome, and moderate
Discipline, conformable to Divine Prescription, and Primitive example: in
rescuing us from having impious Errors, scandalous Practices, and
superstitious Rites, with merciless violence obtruded upon us: in continuing
therefore to us the most desirable comforts and conveniences of our lives.

You further considering this signal testimony of Divine Goodness, will thereby
be moved to hope and confide in God for his gracious preservation from the like
pernicious attemps, against the safety of our Prince, and welfare of our
Country, against our Peace, our Laws, our Religion; especially from Romish Zeal
and Bigottry, (that mint of woeful Factions and Combustions, of treasonable
Conspiracies, of barbarous Massacres, of horrid Assassinations, of intestine
Rebellions, of foreign Invasions, of savage Tortures and Butcherics, of holy
Leagues, and pious Frauds, through Christendom, and particularly among us,)
which as it without reason damneth, so it would by any means destroy all that
will not crouch thereto.

You will in fine, with joyous festivity glory and triumph in this illustrious
demonstration of God's Favor toward us; so as heartily to join in those due
acclamations of blessing and praise.

Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us a prey to their teeth. Our soul is
Psalm. 124. 6. (68. 32.)
escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers; the snare is broken, and we
are escaped.

Allelujah; Salvation and glory, and Apoc. 19 1, 2.
power unto the Lord our God: For true and righteous are his judgments.

Great and mavelous are thy works, O Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy
Apoc. 15. 3.
ways, O thou King of Saints.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who only does wondrous things: And blessed
Psalm. 72. 18, 19.
be his glorious Name for ever: and let the the whole earth be filled with his
glory.

Amen, and Amen.
The Twelfth Sermon. Henry the 7ths Chapel. July 4. 1663. at the Bishop of Man
his Consecration.

PSALM. 132. 16. I will also cloth her Priests with salvation.
THE context runs thus: The Lord has sworn in truth unto David, he will not
turn from it, Of the fruit of thy body I will set upon thy throne. If thy
children will keep my covenant, and the testimony that I shall teach them;
their children also shall sit upon thy throne for evermore. For the Lord has
chosen Sion; he has desired it for his habitation. This is my rest for ever:
here will I dwell, for I have desired it. I will abundantly bless her
provision; I will satisfy her poor with bread. I WILL ALSO CLOTH HER PRIESTS
WITH SALVATION, and her Saints shall shout aloud for joy. There will I make the
horn of David to bud, etc.

If all, not only Inaugurations of persons, but Dedications even of inanimate
things to some extraordinary use, has been usually attended with especial
significations of joy, and festival solemnity; with great reason, the
Consecration of a person to so high and sacred a Function, as that of a
Christian Bishop, (that is, of a Prince, or principal Pastor in God's Church,)
requires most peculiar testimonies of our gratulation and content: the face of
things ought then to be serene and cheerful; the thoughts of men benign and
favorable; the words comfortable and auspicious, that are uttered upon such
occasion. And that ours at present should be such, the subject as well as the
season of our Discourse does require. Words few, but pregnant, and affording
ample matter for our best affections to work upon: and which more particularly
will engage us both to a hearty thankfulness for past Benefits, and to a
confident expectation of future Blessings; while they acquaint us with the
ancient exhibition of a gracious Promise, re-mind us of the faithful
performance thereof hitherto, and assure us of its certain accomplishment for
the future. The occasion whereof was this.

King David, moved by a devout inclination to promote God's Honor, and benefit
the Church, had vowed to build a magnificent Temple, imploring God's propitious
concurrence with, and approbation of his design. Whereupon Almighty God not
only declares his acceptance of that pious resolution, but rewards it with a
bountiful Promise, consisting of two parts; one conditional, relating to
David's Children and posterity, that they in an uninterrupted succession should
for ever enjoy the Royal dignity, in case they did constantly persist in
observing his Covenant, and the Testimonies that he should teach them; the
other more absolute, that however, what he chiefly intended concerning God's
established Worship, and the perpetual welfare of the Church, God would have an
especial care that it should fully and certainly be accomplished: that he would
for ever fix his residence in Sion; that he would protect and prosper it, and
all that did belong thereto; especially those that did most need his favor and
assistence, the Poor, the Priests, and the Saints, (or gentle ones.) This is
briefly the importance (...)
of the general Promise wherein is comprehended that particular one whereon we
are to treat: and in which we may observe,

1. The Promiser, I;

2. The Persons who are especially concerned in the Promise, her Priests;

3. The Thing promised, clothing with salvation.

I. I say, the Promiser, I: that is, the Lord; the most true, the most
constant, the most powerful God; most true and sincere in the declaration of
his purpose, most constant and immutable in the prosecution, most powerful and
uncontrollable in the perfect execution thereof: whose words are right, and all
Psalm. 33. 4.
whose works are done in truth: who will not break his covenant, nor alter the
thing Psalm. 89. 34.
that is gone out of his lips: whose counsel Isa. 46. 10.
shall stand, and who will do all his pleasure. These glorious Attributes and
Perfections of his (so often celebrated in holy Writ) do ground our reliance
upon all God's promises, and do oblige us (notwithstanding the greatest
improbabilities or difficulties objected) to believe the infallible performance
of this.

II. The Persons whom the Promise mainly regards, her Priests. Priests, that
is, persons peculiarly devoted to, and employed in Sacred matters;
distinguished expressly from the Poor, (that is, other meek and humble
persons;) and from the Saints, (that is, all other good and religious men.)
And, her Priests; that is, the Priests of Sion: of that Sion which the Lord
has chosen; which he has desired for his Contrd, 2 Chronicles. 7. 21.
permanent habitation; which he has resolved to rest, and reside in for ever.
Whence it plainly enough follows, that the Priests and Pastors of the
Christian Church are hereby, if not solely, yet principally designed. Which
interpretation, because it is in a manner the foundation of our subsequent
Discourse, and by some it may perhaps not be readily admitted, I shall
endeavor farther to confirm by these few Arguments.

1. Because the Covenant here mentioned is not (as to the main parts thereof)
of a conditional or temporary nature, but absolute and perpetual; and Vide 2 Chronicles. 7. 16.
must therefore be understood to respect the Christian Church, (that of the
Jews being long since rejected, their Temple demolished, their Sion utterly
forsaken.) For although one particular contained therein, concerning the
continual succession of David's posterity in the Regal authority over Israel,
has a condition explicitly annexed; (and, consequently, the effects depending
upon the performance of that condition were contingent, and mutable;) yet all
the rest of this Covenant (or Promise) is conceived in terms peremptory, and
expressly importing perpetuity. This is my rest for ever, (...), that is, (as
the Greek Translatours render it,) (...), (in seculum seculi,) that is, to the
end of the world; as (...) denotes the end of all worlds, or the most perfect
sempiternity. And that it does really in this case denote a proper and
unlimited perpetuity, is also evident by those explications thereof in the 89
Psalm, (where the very same Covenant is, as to some parts thereof, more largely
recorded.) Once have I sworn by my Holiness, that I Verse. 35, 36, 37.
will not lie unto David: His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the
Sun before me: It shall be established for ever as the Moon, and as a faithful
witness in heaven. No words can express more fully a perpetual duration, or at
least one co-extended with the duration of the world, then those do. And the
Prophet Jeremy, referring also to this very Covenant, and particularly to this
very clause thereof, thus expresses the matter: Thus says the Lord; If you can
Jer. 33. 20, 21.

Vid. 2 Chronicles. 7. 16.


break my covenant of the day, and my covenant of the night; and that there
should not be day and night in their season: Then may also my Covenant be
broken with David my servant, that he should not have a Son to reign upon his
throne; and with the Levites the Priests, my Ministers. But farther,

2. The completion of this individual Promise is both by the Prophets foretold,
and expressed by the Evangelists, to appertain to the times of the Gospel. Ye
heard even now the words of Jeremy, which are by him applied to those times,
when God would cause the Branch Jer. 33. 15.
of righteousness (that is, Jesus of Nazareth, our Blessed Savior) to grow up
unto David; who should execute judgment and righteousness in the Land. In
those days (says he farther) shall Judah Verse. 10.
be saved, and Jerusalem shall dwell safely: and this is the Name wherewith she
shall be called, (or rather, which he shall be called, as not only the Vulgar
Latin and the Greek Interpreters, but the Chaldee also read it,) THE LORD OUR
RIGHTEOUSNESS. Likewise in the 55. of Isaiah God thus invites the Gentiles;
Incline your ear, and come unto me; hear, and your soul Isa. 55. 3.
shall live: and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure
mercies of David: that is, I will ratify that everlasting Covenant, which, in
your behalf, I once made with David, and will confer on you those favors which
I faithfully promised him; relating to this very Promise also. For both in
Solomon's Prayer, (2 Chronicles. 6.) which in all probability was indicted about the
same time, and upon the same occasion with this Psalm, and in the 89. Psalm,
the benefits of this same covenant are called the mercies of David. O Lord 2 Chronicles. 6 42.
God, turn not away the face of thine Anointed, remember the mercies of David
thy servant, says Solomon: And, My mercy (says God) will I keep with him
Psalm. 89. 28.
for evermore, and my covenant shall stand fast with him: and, My faithfulness
and Verse. 24.
my mercy shall be with him; that is, my faithful (or sure) mercy; (...), as
the LXX, and S. Paul with them in the Acts, render this place of Isaiah. Acts
13. 34.
And in the Song of Zachary we have one passage of this Promise cited, and
applied to the times of the Gospel: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who Luke
1. 68, 69, 70.
has visited and redeemed his people; and has raised up a horn of Salvation
in the house of his servant David; as he spoke by the mouth of his holy
Prophets: viz. by the mouth of this Prophetical Psalmist here, where it is said,
There will I make the horn of David to bud; and in the parallel Psalm. 89. In my
Name shall Verse. 24.
his horn be exalted. To omit those many places where our Savior, in
correspondence to this Promise, is affirmed to possess the throne of his father
David, Vide Luc. 1. 32. edit. Curcel.
and to rule over the house of Jacob for ever. Moreover,

3. That by the Sion here mentioned is not chiefly meant that material Mountain
in Judaea, but rather that mystical Rock of Divine Grace, and Evangelical
Truth, upon which the Christian Church, the only everlasting Temple of God, is
unmovably seated, is very probable, (or rather manifestly certain,) by the
Prophets constant acception thereof in this sense, when they assign the
character of perpetual durability thereto. As in Isa. 60. where he thus
prophesies of the Christian Church; The sons also of them that afflicted thee
Isa. 60. 14, 15, 16.
shall come bending unto thee, and all they that despised thee shall bow
themselves down at the soles of thy feet; and they shall call thee The City of
the Lord, The Sion of the Holy One of Israel. Whereas thou have been forsaken,
and hated, so that no man went through thee; I will make thee an eternal
excellency, a joy of many generations. Thou shall also suck the milk of the
Gentiles, and shall suck the breasts of Kings, etc. And the Prophet Micah,
speaking of the last days, (that is, of the Evangelical Times, when the
mountain of Mic. 4. 1.
the House of the Lord should be established in the top of the mountains,)
says thus; And I will make her that halted, a remnant, Verse. 7.
and her that was cast far off, a strong Nation: and the Lord shall reign over
them in mount Sion from henceforth even for ever. And the Prophet Joel,
speaking of the same times, (when God would pour out his Spirit upon all
flesh,) Joel 2. 28.
has these words: So shall ye know that and 3. 16.
I am the Lord your God, dwelling in Sion, my holy mountain: then shall
Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no strangers pass through her any more. All
which places no man can reasonably doubt, and all Christians do firmly consent
to respect the Christian Church. To which we may add that passage of the
Author to the Hebrews, chapter 12. v. 22. But ye are come unto mount Sion, and
unto the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem; that is, to the
Christian Church.

4. The manner of this Covenant's delivery, and confirmation by the Divine
Oath, argues the inconditionate, irreversible, and perpetual constitution
thereof: for to God's most absolute and immutable Decrees this most august and
solemn confimation does peculiarly agree. So the Apostle to the Hebrews seems
to intimate: Wherein (says he) Heb. 6. 17.
God willing more abundantly to demonstrate the immutability of his counsel,
((...),) interposed an oath.

We may therefore (I suppose) upon these grounds solidly and safely conclude,
that this Promise does principally belong, and shall therefore infallibly be
made good to the Christian Priesthood; to those who in the Christian Church, by
offering Spiritual Sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving, by directing and
instructing the people in the knowledge of the Evangelical Law, by imploring
for and pronouncing upon them the Divine benedictions, do bear analogy with,
and supply the room of the Jewish Priesthood.

From which discourse we may by the way deduce this Corollary; That the title
of Priest, although it did (as most certainly it does not) properly and
primarily signify a Jewish Sacrificer, (or Slaughterer of Beasts,) does yet
no-wise deserve that reproach which is by some inconsiderately, (not to say,
profanely,) upon that mistaken ground, commonly cast upon it: since the Holy
Scripture it self, we see, does here, even in that sense (most obnoxious to
exception) ascribe it to the Christian Pastors. And so likewise does the
Prophet Isaiah; And I will also take of them for Priests and for Levites, says
the Lord: speaking (as the context plainly Isa. 66. 21.
declares) of the Gentiles, which should be converted and aggregated to God's
Church. And the Prophet Jeremiah; Neither shall the Priests the Levites Jer.
33. 18.
want a man before me to offer burntofferings, and to do sacrifice continually.
Which Prophecy also evidently concerns the same time and state of things; of
which the Prophet Malachi thus foretells: For from the rising of the Sun Mal. 1.
11.
to the going down of the same, my Name shall be great among the Gentiles; and
in every place Incense shall be offered to my Name, and a pure offering. It
were desirable therefore, that men would better consider, before they entertain
such groundless offenses, or pass so uncharitable censures upon either words,
or persons, or things. But I proceed to the

III. Particular, which is the Matter of the Promise, Clothing with salvation.
Where we may observe,

First, That the usual metaphor of being clothed, does in the Sacred dialect
denote a complete endowment with, a plentiful enjoyment of, or an entire
application to, that thing, or quality, with which a person is said to be
clothed. So is God himself said to be clothed Psalm. 93. 1.
with majesty and strength. And David prays, that they might be clothed Psalm.
35. 26.

Psalm. 109. 29.


with shame and dishonor, that did magnify themselves against him. And in
Ezekiel, The Princes of the Isles, being Ezekiel. 26. 16.
amazed by the ruin of Tire, are said to cloth themselves with trembling. And
that bitter adversary of David (in Psalm. 109.) did cloth himself with cursing,
as with a garment. And Job avoucheth Verse. 18.
of himself, I put on righteousness, and it Job 29. 14.
clothed me; my judgment was as a robe, and a diadem. And S. Peter advises us
to put on, or to be clothed with humility. Finally, Isaiah introduces our
Savior 1 Pet. 5. 5.
speaking thus: I will greatly rejoice Isa. 61, 10.
in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God: for he has clothed me with
the garments of salvation, he has covered me with the robe of righteousness;
as a Isa. 59. 17.
bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth her self
with her jewels. So that (as by these instances we may discern) to be clothed
with salvation, is, to be perfectly endowed therewith; to be invested with it
as with a garment, which wholly encloseth and covers the body, so that no
part is left unguarded and unadorned thereby.

Secondly, But now what is that Salvation, with which the Priests of Sion shall
be thus clothed? I answer: Salvation, when it is put absolutely, and not
conjoined with any particular object, (or term from which,) does in the Hebrew
language properly signify a Deliverance from, or remotion of all sorts of
inconveniences; and, consequently, an Affluence of all good things; and, in
effect, the same which other languages call Felicity and Prosperity, or design
by terms equivalent to those: the Hebrews having hardly any other word so
properly correspondent to those, as this word, Salvation. Whence that title of
Savior, and the God of Salvation, so often attributed to Almighty God, imports
as much as, the Deus, (...), saepe Platon.
Dispenser of all good gifts; the great Benefactour, Assister, and Protector
of men: And to Save, is promiscuously used for, to relieve the needy, to
comfort the sorrowful; to restore the sick to his health, the prisoner to his
liberty, the captive to his country; to defend the weak from injury, and the
humble from contempt; to deliver the distressed from imminent danger, the
innocent from unjust condemnation, the slandered from undeserved reproach: in a
word, all the effects of God's Goodness and Power, the whole work of the Divine
Providence and Beneficence, are hereby expressed.

We will recite one or two of those many places which confirm this notion.
Psalm 85. 9. Surely his Salvation is nigh them that fear him, that glory may
dwell in our land: his Salvation is nigh, that is, his loving care attends upon
them, to assist and preserve them: which in Psalm. 145. 19. is thus otherwise
expressed; He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him; he will hear their
cry, and will save them. And again, Psalm 149. 4. The Lord takes pleasure in
his people; he will beautify the meek with Salvation: that is, he will by his
good Providence dispose them into a convenient and decent condition of life.
And again, Psalm 144. v. 10. It is he that gives Salvation unto Kings; that
is, by whose gracious disposal they prosper, and are preserved in dignity,
plenty, and safety.

I will not, by citation of places, labor to confirm so obvious a Notion: it
may suffice for that purpose, that the supreme accomplishment of all Happiness,
the enjoyment of perfect Bliss in Heaven, is, in agreement with this Jewish
acception of the word, most commonly styled Salvation. But I must add, that
whereas Salvation may relate either to the outward estate of a man's body,
life, and fortunes, or to the internal dispositions of the mind; to our present
condition in this world, or to our future and eternal estate: it does seem here
(I say not, to exclude the latter altogether, yet) more directly and
principally to respect the former, viz. that external and temporal welfare,
which is conspicuous and visible in this world. My reason is, Because the other
parts of this prophetical Promise do, in their most natural acception, signify
that outward Prosperity wherewith God would vouchsafe to bless his Church: that
abundant benediction of her store, that satisfying her poor with bread, that
joyful exultation of her Saints, that clothing her enemies with shame, being
expressions properly denoting a state of external good weal and comfort; and in
consonance to them require, that we thus likewise understand this phrase; the
Priests being also questionless designed to partake in this glorious Felicity
of the Church. Which is also confirmed by other Prophecies of the same tenor
and intention: as particularly that in Jer. 31. concerning the collection of
Israel, and redemption of the Spiritual Sion, it is said, I will satiate the
soul of the Priests with fatness, and my people shall Ver. 14.
be satisfied with my goodness, etc.

Now, although we may adventure safely to interpret the declarations of Divine
favor according to the most comprehensive sense of which the words are
capable, where they are conceived: (it being the manner of the immensly Good
God, to exceed rather, then to be deficient, in the performance of his word;
and to surpass the expectations he has raised in us, then any wise to
disappoint them:) yet however, the least we can imagine here promised to the
Priests of Sion, will comprehend these three things.

1. A Free and Safe condition of life; that they be not exposed to continual
dangers of ruin; of miserable sufferance, or remediless injury: that the
benefits of peace, and law, and public protection, shall particularly
appertain to them; so that their adversaries (if any they happen to have) shall
not be incited, by hope of reward or impunity, to hurt their persons, rifle
their goods, disturb their quiet; but that they shall enjoy good degrees of
security, liberty, and tranquillity in this world.

2. A Provision of competent subsistence for them: that their condition of life
be not wholly necessitous, or very penurious, destitute of convenient
accommodations, or depending altogether for them upon the arbitrary
benevolences of men, which is, at best, but a more plausible kind of beggary;
but that they shall be furnished with such reasonable supplies, as are
requisite to encourae them in the cheerful performance of their duty.

3. A Suitable degree of respect, and so high a station among men, as may
commend them to general esteem, and vindicate them from contempt: that they be
not reputed among the dregs and refuse of the people; that their persons be not
base and despicable, their names made the objects of vulgar obloquy, their
functions become prostitute to profane irrision; but that some considerable
authority, some more then ordinary regard and veneration accrue unto them from
the high relations which they bear, and from the sacred business which they
manage.

All this at least (according to the most moderate interpretation of the
phrase) that abundant Salvation does imply, wherewith God has promised to
invest the Priests of Sion.

We may therefore presume, or rather not presume, but confidently rely upon,
and comfort our selves in the expectation of God's faithful continuance to
fulfill this Promise. We may assure our selves, that neither the secret envy of
them who repine at those encouragements which God's Providence has conferred
on his Priests, nor the open malice of those that furiously oppugn their
welfare, shall ever prevail to overwhelm them with extreme misery, penury, or
disgrace; since no endeavor of earth or hell can ever be able to reverse this
everlasting decree of Heaven, or to defeat that irresistible power which is
engaged to its execution. No inferior force can strip them naked of that
Salvation, wherewith the Supreme Truth has promised to cloth them.

Which confidence of ours may be improved, by considering the Reasons that
might induce Almighty God to resolve, and promise thus favorably in behalf of
his Priests. (For though we cannot penetrate the incomprehensible depths of the
Divine Counsel, nor should ever peremptorily conclude concerning the
determinate Reasons of his Actions: yet when the wisdom of his proceedings does
clearly approve it self to our understandings, we ought readily to acknowledge
it, and humbly to praise him for it.) Now the Reasons why Divine Providence
should undertake to preserve the Priesthood in safety, to procure for them
liberal maintenance, and to raise them above a state of scorn and infamy, may
be especially these three.

1. It concerns God's Honor. 2. The Good of the Church requires so. 3. Equity
and the reason of the case exacts it.
In prosecuting which Heads of discourse, I shall not seem to you (I hope) to
transgress the rules of modesty, or decency. There be certain seasons, wherein
confessedly it is not only excusable, but expedient also, to commend one's
Self; as when a man is falsely accused, or unjustly afflicted. And with greater
reason sometime men are allowed to praise the Country where they were born and
bred, the Family to which they are allied, the Society to which they are more
especially related. And if at this time I assume the like liberty, the occasion
(I hope) will apologize for me. It becomes not me to be an adviser, much less a
reprover, in this Audience: may I therefore, with your favorable permission,
presume to be a commender, or (if you please) a pleader for the welfare of this
Sacred Order, although my self an unworthy and inconsiderable Member thereof. I
say therefore,

I. God's Honor is concerned in the safe, comfortable, and honorable estate
of his Priests: and that upon account of those manifold relations, whereby they
stand allied, appropriated, and devoted to himself.

They are in a peculiar manner his Servants. The servant of the Lord (says S.
Paul) must not strive, but be gentle Joel. 2. 17.

2 Timothy 2. 24.


unto all men, apt to teach. The servant of the Lord, who is that? are not all
men God's servants? is not he Lord of all? Yes; but a Christian Priest, such as
Timothy was, is by way of excellency so styled. All men owe subjection,
obedience, and homage to God: but the Priests are (his (...)) his 1 Cor. 4. 1.

Romans 15. 16.


Ministers, his Officers, his immediate Attendants, his Domestics as it were,
and menial Servants; that approach his Person, that tread the Courts of his
House, that wear his proper Badges, that are employed in his particular
business. And is it then for God's honor, to suffer them to be abused, to want
convenient sustenance, to live in a mean and disgraceful condition? Would it
not redound to the discredit of an earthly Prince, to permit, that the
attendents on his Person, the officers of his Court, the executers of his
Edicts should have the least injury offered them, should fare scantly or
coursely, should appear in a sordid garb? are they not therefore by especial
privileges guarded from such inconveniences? And shall the Great King and Lord
of all the world be deemed less provident for, less indulgent (not to say less
just) unto his Servants? Servants, I say, and those not of the lowest rank, nor
appointed to the vilest drudgeries; but such as are employed in the most
honorable charges, and are entrusted with his most especial concernments.

They are his Stewards. (A Bishop, Tit. 1. 7.
says S. Paul, must be blameless, as the Steward of God.) If the Church be
(...), God's house, or family, 1 Timothy 3. 15.
as it is called, and the Priests the (...), the Stewards of that house, the
Comptrollers of that family; it is surely no mean station they obtain therein.
The distribution of his bread, (the Bread of life, Vid. Mat. 24. 45.
his holy Word,) and the dispensation of his most precious Goods, (the holy 1
Cor. 4. 1.
Mysteries,) are committed to their care and prudence. Who then (says our Luke
12. 42.
Savior) is that faithful and wise steward, whom his Lord shall make ruler
over his household, to give them their portion of meat in due season? Who but
the Priests, who are therefore styled both (...), (...), (Presidents, Guides,
Rulers,) and (...) (Feeders or Pastors) of the Church?

Yea they are (...) also, the Builders of that house, founding it by initial
conversion, rearing it by continued instruction, covering and finishing it by
sacramental obsignation of Divine grace. As a wise architect, (says S. Paul) I
have laid the foundation, and another 1 Cor. 3. 10.
builds upon it.

They are (...), Co-operatours with God; that manage his business, 1 Cor. 3. 9.
and drive on his designs: the Solicitours of his affairs; the Masters of his
requests: (...).
his Heralds, that publish his Decrees, denounce his Judgments, proclaim his
Pardons, and acts of Grace unto his subjects; that blazon his Titles, and
defend his rightful Authority in the world: yea his Ministers of State; the
Ministers (I say, absit invidia,) of his most glorious Spiritual Kingdom;
(which is peculiarly denominated the Kingdom of God;) the orderly
administration of which, its advancement, its preservation, and its
enlargement, are especially commended to their diligence and fidelity.

They are, lastly, God's Vide Mal. 2. 7 For the Priest's lips should keep
knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth: for he is the Messenger
of the Lord of Hosts.
Ambassadors, delegated by him to treat of peace, and solicit a fair
correspondence between Heaven and Earth. Now then (says S. Paul) we 2 Cor. 5.
20.
are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us: we pray you
in Christ's stead, be reconciled to God. As though God did beseech you by us;
see, they manage God's concernments, and in a manner represent his person. At
least, if the Apostles were more properly God's Ambassadors, the present
Ministers of Religion are his Agents, and Residents here among men, designed to
pursue the same negotiations commenced by them. Now you know by the law of
Nations, and common consent of all men, all manner of security, good
entertainment, and civil respect has been ever acknowledged due to
Ambassadors, (and public Ministers:) their employment has been esteemed
honorable, their persons held sacred and inviolable; and whatsoever
discourtesie has been showed unto, or outrage committed upon them, has been
interpreted done to him from whom they derive their commission, whose person
they represent. And so truly the bad usage of God's Priests, if John 13. 20.
What you have done to these, etc.

Mat. 10. 40, and 25. 40.

He that receives you, receives him that sent you.


not directly and immediately, does yet really and truly, according to moral
estimation, terminate on God himself, and reflect on his Honor, and prejudice
his Religion; a due regard to which cannot be maintained, without
proportionable respect to the Ministers thereof. The basest of the people may
serve to be Priests to Jeroboam's Calves, but not become the Ministry of the
God of Israel.

Do we not see the reverence of Civil Government upheld more by the specious
circumstances, then by the real necessity thereof; by the magnificent retinue,
and splendid ornaments of Princely dignity, then by the eminent benefits of
peace and justice springing thence? Shall not (not only the greatest inward
worth, but) the highest Nobility, if basely attired, badly attended, slenderly
accommodated, pass unregarded, yea disregarded by us? men being generally
either unable to discern, or unwilling to acknowledge excellency divested of
sensible luster. Religion therefore must be well habited, or it will be ill
respected: the Priests must wear a comely (if not a costly) livery, or God
their Master's reputation will be impaired in popular fancy.

Consider David's reasoning; Lo, I dwell in a house of Cedars, but the Ark of
the Covenant of the Lord remains under 1 Chronicles. 17. 1:
Curtains; and compare such discourse therewith as this; and judge heartily,
whether they have not some parity: Lo, my Attendents are clad with the finest
purple, God's Ministers are covered with the coursest sackcloath; my People
surfeit with dainties, his Servants pine away for scarcity; my Courtiers are
respectfully saluted, his Priests scornfully derided; no man dare offend mine,
every one may trample on his Officers.

And lest we should imagine God himself altogether void of such resentments, or
such comparisons impertinent, consider that disdainful expression of his; If ye
offer the blind for sacrifice, is Mal. 1. 8.
it not evil? and if you offer the lame and sick, is it not evil? Offer it now
to thy Governor; will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person? says the
Lord of Hosts. The same testimonies of respect that we show our Governors,
God, it seems, expects from us in all kinds, and may reasonably much greater.

Nor is it a matter of slight consideration, how plentiful provision, in the
policy devised and constituted by God himself, was made for the Priests; how
God assumes the immediate patronage of them, and appropriates the matter of
their sustenance unto himself. The Priests (says the Law) the Levites, Deuteronomy.
18. 1, 2.
and all the tribe of Levi shall have no part nor inheritance with Israel; they
shall eat the offerings of the Lord made by fire, and his inheritance.
Therefore they shall have no inheritance among their brethren: the Lord is
their inheritance. So that then (it seems) no man could withhold any part of
the Priests maintenance, without sacrilegious encroachment on God's own right,
and robbing him of his due: (which is the greatest security of an estate
imaginable.) How likewise (next to the Prince) the highest dignity and
authority was then conferred on the Priests: to them the interpretation of Law,
to them the decision of doubtful cases did appertain; with severe injunctions
to comply with their determinations. See how the business is inculcated. If
there arise a matter Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
too hard for thee, between blood and blood, between plea and plea, between
stroke and stroke, being matters of controversy within thy gates; then shall
thou arise, and get thee up unto the place which the Lord thy God shall choose:
And thou shall come unto the Priests the Levites, and unto the Judge that shall
be in those days, and enquire; and they shall show thee the sentence of
judgment. And thou shall do according to the sentence which they of that place,
which the Lord shall choose, shall show thee; and thou shall observe to do
according to all that they inform thee. According to the sentence of the Law
which they shall teach thee, and according to the judgment which they shall
tell thee, thou shall do: thou shall not decline from the sentence, which they
shall show thee, to the right hand, nor to the left. And the man that will do
presumptuously, and will not hearken to the Priest, that stands to minister
there before the Lord thy God, even that man shall die, and thou shall put away
evil from Israel. Observe with how eminent a power God then thought fit to
endow his Priests (...), says Josephus: The Priests were constituted
Supravisours of all things, and Judges of controversies, and Punishers of
offenses. 2. in Apionem.
.

And though we are not in all cases obliged punctually to follow those
political prescriptions; yet is the reason of them perpetual, and the example
venerable: especially since the custom of all Times, and the reason of all the
World does in a sort conspire to back it.

The first Priest we meet with in Scripture is Melchizedek; a King also; and
such a one, as the Patriarch Abraham, (a Prince also himself, and, what Genesis 14.
is somewhat more, just then a Conqueror,) in the midst of his triumphal
heights, was not ashamed to acknowledge his superior, to honor him with a
tribute of his spoils, and to receive a benediction from him. The next (if I
mistake not) is Potipherah, Genesis 41. 45.
Priest of On, whose Daughter was not thought by the King of Egypt an unequal
match for Joseph, his chief Favorite, and the next in dignity to himself in
that flourishing Kingdom. (Though such an alliance would perhaps he thought
derogatory to the Worships of our days.) The third is Revel, or Jethro, Priest
of Midian, the Father-in-law likewise of the illustrious Moses; a man as of
approved wisdom, so doubtless of considerable dignity too. And the next to him
(in order of story) is the venerable Aaron, no meaner a man, then the Brother
of him who was King in Jesurun. Thus all Nations, Deuteronomy. 33. 5.
wise and ignorant, civil and barbarous, were by one common instinct (as it
were) of Vid. Aristot. Pol VII. 9. (...).
natural reason prompted, by conferring extraordinary privileges of honor and
convenience on their Priests, to express their reverence of the Deity, and
their affection to Religion.

I will not ransack the closets of Antiquity, nor with needless ostentation
produce the Egyptian Hierophantae, Porph. (...). lib. IV. 16

Caes. de bell. Gall. L. VI.


the Persian Magi, the Gaulish Druids, the Caliphs and Mufti's of other
Nations, to show what preeminencies of respect they enjoyed, what powerful sway
they bore in their respective countries; how the most weighty affairs, both of
peace and war, were commonly directed by their oracular dictates. It shall
suffice to observe, that the gallant Romans, (whose devout zeal to religion
Polybius himself, no special Lib. 6.
friend of theirs, could not forbear to admire and applaud,) I say, that the
most wise and valiant Romans did set so (...). Plut. in Marcello.
high a value upon the Priestly order, that if their principal Magistrates (the
Praetors, and Consuls themselves) did casually meet with one of Vesta's
Priests, they caused immediately those dreadful Rods, the ensigns of their
Authority, to submit; and they themselves respectfully Sen. in Controv.
gave place, as if they meant to confess those Priests in a manner their
betters. Nor did they among them of the most noble extraction, and of the
highest dignity in the Commonwealth, (even after many glorious exploits
achieved by them,) scornfully disdain, but rather did ambitiously affect to be
admitted into the College of Priests: insomuch that, after the dissolution of
the Republic, the Emperors thought good to assume the Pontifical dignity to
themselves, supposing the Office too honorable, the Title too magnificent for
a Subject. For they wisely, it seems, and honestly adjudged it no debasement of
their quality, no diminution to their personal excellency, to be employed in
the service of the immortal Gods; whom they acknowledged the Patrons of their
Country, the Protectours of their safety: Nor that they less deserved of the
public, who rightly ordered their religious Devotions, then they who prudently
advised in the Senate, or fought valiantly in the field: for that the good
success of public undertakings did as much, or more, depend upon the
favorable disposition of Divine Providence, as upon the careful endeavor of
humane industry.

I cannot forbear to allege that so grave and pertinent speech of Cicero, which
is the Exordium of his Oration ad Pontifices: Cum multa divinitus, Pontifices,
a majoribus nostris inventa atque instituta sunt; tum nihil praeclarius, quam
quod vos eosdem and Religionibus Deorum immortalium, and summae Reip. praeesse
voluerunt: ut amplissimi and clarissimi Cives Rempubl. been gerendo, Religiones
sapienter interpretando, Remp. conservarent. A wholesome and politic
institution he thought it, conducible to the public good and safety, that the
Civil and Sacred Authority should be united in the same persons; that it was as
well for the interest of the State, as for the credit of Religion, that the
Priests should be men of honor, or (which is all one) honorable men Priests.

All which evinces plainly, that it is in no wise the result of a generous
heart, (for what Nation ever produced so many brave spirits as that?) but
rather proceeds from an inconsiderate delicacy of humor, (or from a profane
haughtiness of mind,) to loath, as now men do, and despise that employment,
which in its own nature is of all most noble, and most beneficial to mankind.
For if to be Itane, plus decet homi^is, quam Dei famulum nominari? ac terreni
quam coelestis Regis officiale^, altioris ducitur dignitatis? Qui Clero
militiam, forum ^nteponit Ecclesiae, divinis profecto humana, coelestibus
praeferre terrena convincitur. Bern Epist. 78.
a Courtier in a particular Country, is of all others the most honorable
relation; and to wait upon a mortal King, is accounted a most worthy function:
to be peculiarly God's Servant, and in Religious addresses immediately to
attend on him, must consequently be the most excellent preferment in the World,
which is God's Kingdom. And if to supply a man's bodily needs, to restore his
liberty, to save his life, be works of generous beneficence: how much more is
it so, by good conduct and instruction of men, to adorn their Souls with
Virtue, to free them from the bondage of Sin, to rescue them from eternal ruin?

Our magnanimous Ancestors, who erected as well trophies of their invincible
courage abroad, as monuments of their incomparable piety at home, and equally
by both did purchase immortal renown to their ungrateful posterity, (for not to
imitate good example, is the greatest ingratitude,) they, I say, were otherwise
disposed; to whose honest Devotion we owe those handsome privileges, and those
competent revenues which the Priesthood still enjoys; and which are so maligned
by this untoward Age, not less degenerate in spirit, then corrupt in manners:
when all Wisdom, and Virtue, and Religion, are almost in most places grown
ridiculous: when the serious use of Reason is become (in vulgar opinion) the
most impertinent and insignificant thing in the world: when Innocence is
reputed a mere defect of wit, and weakness of judgment; Integrity, a fond
pertinacity of humor; Constancy of mind, and Gravity of demeanor, a kind of
fullen morosity, or uncouth affectation of singularity; and all strict practice
of Christian Duty incurrs the imputation of some newfound opprobrious name,
one or other. No wonder then, when Religion it self has so much decayed in its
love and esteem, if the Priests, its professed Guardians, do partake in its
fortune. Nor is it to be feared, but that, when the predominant vanities of the
Age are somewhat decocted, and men grow weary of their own inconvenient
follies; whenever (not a fierce zeal for some whimsical Model, or some
paradoxical Opinion, but) a sober esteem of, and a cordial affection to Virtue
and genuine Piety do begin to revive in the breasts of men; the love and
reverence of the Clergy will return. For it will be ever true, what was once
said, (though dictated only from the reason and experience of a Heathen,) Qui
bona fide colit Deos, amat and Sacerdotes; Statius, Epist. Dedicat. in V. lib.
Sylvarum.
He that sincerely worships God, will heartily love his Priests. But not to
insist longer on this Reason.

II. The Good of the Church requires, that the Priesthood be well protected,
well provided for, and well regarded. That men be converted from iniquity, and
induced to the sincere practice of Virtue, is the chief Good of the Church,
that to which the Favor of God is annexed, and upon which the Salvation of
Souls does rely. And this Good mainly depends, partly upon the due execution of
the Priestly office, partly upon the fit disposition of the people to comply
therewith: and to both those effects the comfortable estate of the Priesthood
is conducible and requisite. The Priest must be capable to instruct with
advantage; and the people disposed to learn with readiness: He must lead, and
they follow cheerfully in the paths of righteousness. Which alacrity how can he
be Master of, whose mind care and grief, the inseparable companions of a needy
estate, do continually distract and discompose? whose spirit is dejected with
constant regret, and frequent disappointments? Can he be free and expedite in
the discharge of his duty, who is perplexed with the difficulties, and
encumbred with the varieties of secular business, (such as the exigencies of a
narrow condition do necessarily induce?) No: few there be, that, with
Epictetus, can philosophate in slavery; or, like Cleanthes, can draw water all
the day, and study most of the night.

The Priests are bound, (for the propagation of truth and right, and for the
reclaiming of men from error and sin, that is, for the most important good of
the Church,) as the Apostles are often related to have done, (...), Act. 9. 27.
and 14. 3. and 19. 8.
to speak all out; (or to use an unconfined liberty of speech;) to exhort to
Ephesians. 6. 19. etc.
the practice of Virtue, as our Savior did, (...), with license and authority;
Luke 4. 32.
to deter from Vice, as St. Paul injoyns Titus, (...), with Tit. 2. 15.
an all-commanding and imperious strain; and (as those faithful brethren did,
encouraged by Saint Paul's example) (...), to dare undauntedly Phil. 1. 14.
to utter the word of Truth: they are obliged to deal impartially with all, to
flatter no man; to admonish, yea and (with prudence seasonably) to reprove the
greatest of men; not to respect the persons of the rich, nor to dread the faces
of the most terrible among men. And how shall this necessary courage be
engendered, be cherished, be preserved in the breast of him who grovels upon the
ground, and -- plurima sunt quae Non audent homines pertusa dicere laena.

Juven. Sat. 5.

(...). Hes. 1. 317.

(...). Menand.


crouches under the depressing loads of want and disgrace? What engines are
able to raise the spirits of men above the ordinary fountains from which they
spring, their fortunes? what props can sustain them at that due pitch,
destitute of solid strength, wealth, and respect? With what face shall a
pitiful underling encounter the solemn looks of an oppressing Grandee? with
what hope of success in his forlorn habit shall he adventure to check the
vicious extravagancies of a ruffling Gallant? Will he dare to contradict the
opinion, or to disallow the practice of that wealthy, or this powerful
neighbor, by whose alms, it may be, he is relieved, and supported by his
favor?

But admit it possible a man may be both extremely indigent, and sufficiently
resolute: (that is, strong without food, and fat by digesting the thin air:)
with what regard then shall his free and faithful advice be entertained? Shall
not his moderate confidence be accounted impudence; his open sincerity of
speech be styled unmannerly presumption; his minding others of their duty
adjudged a forgetfulness of his own condition, or a disorderly transgressing
the due limits thereof? If he be not ashamed of the truth, will not the truth
be ashamed of him? Shall he not prejudice more by the meanness of his garb,
then further by the force of his reason, that good cause which he maintains?
Will men respect his words, whose person they despise; will they be willingly
counseled, or patiently reproved by him, whom they esteem, yea, whom they
plainly see, so much their inferior? No: the same words, (...)

Eurip. in Hecuba.


which proceed from the mouths of men in eminent dignity, are not the same when
they are uttered by those of base degree. Weak and ineffectual are the most
eloquent harangues of beggarly Orators; obscure like themselves and unobserved
the most notable dictates of poor mercenary pedants. The authority of the
speaker does usually more incline, then the weight of the matter. It was the
observation of the wise Son of Sirach, When a rich man slips, he Ecclus. 13.
22, 23.
has many helpers; he speaks things not to be spoken, and yet men justify
him: the poor man miscarried, and they farther rebuked him; he spoke
discreetly, and yet could have no place. When a rich man speaks, every man
holds his tongue; and his words they extol to the clouds: (...).
but if a poor man speak, they say, Who is this? and if he stumble, they will
help to overthrow him.

And Solomon himself notes the same: Eccles. 9. 16.
The poor man's wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard. Not only
those that swell with pride, and swim in plenty, but even the meanest of the
people will be apt to contemn his instructions, whom they perceive in few or no
circumstances of life to excel them. If the Preacher's condition be not, as
well as his Pulpit, somewhat elevated above the lowest station, few will hear
him, fewer mind his words, very few obey him. Job's Case deserves well to be
considered. While he flourished in wealth and reputation, all men attended to
his counsel, and admired his discourse. The Princes (says he) resrained Job
29 9, 10, 11, 21, 22.
talking, and laid their hand on their mouth: The Nobles held their peace, and
their tongue cleaved to the roof of their mouth. When the ear heard me, then it
blessed me; and when the eye saw me, it gave witness to me. Unto me men gave
ear, and waited, and kept silence at my counsel. After my words they spoke not
again, and my speech dropped upon them. So officiously attentive were all men
to Job in his prosperity. But when the scale was turned, and he became
depressed in estate, no man minded either him or his discourse; except it were
to despise and scorn both. But now (says he) they that are younger Job 30. 1,
9, 10, 11.
then I, have me in dirision, whose fathers I would have disdained to have set
with the dogs of my flock. I am their song, yea, I am their byword. They abhor
me, Prove. 14. 20.

The poor is hated even of his own neighbor: but the rich has many friends.


they fly far from me, and spare not to spit in my face: Because he has loosed
my cord, and afflicted me. If Job, a person who so equally and moderately, yea
so c. 30. 25.
humbly and courteously and bountifully used his prosperity, as we find he did,
was notwithstanding in his adversity so generally slighted and abhorred; what
shall their lot be, who never enjoyed those advantages? what regard shall their
wholesome advice find? what efficacy their most pathetical exhortations obtain?
what passion their faint breath raise in men's benumbed hearts? No more,
certainly, then their mean condition shall procure among men either of
friendship or esteem.

We see therefore how Almighty God, that he might conciliate credit unto, and
infuse a persuasive energy into the words of his Prophets and Apostles, was
pleased to dignifie them with extraordinary gifts of foretelling future events,
and doing miraculous works: their Doctrine, it seems, (though of it self most
reasonable and plausible,) being not sufficient to convince the hearers,
without some remarkable excellency in the Teachers, challenging the people's
awful regard, and exciting their attention. Otherwise how pitifully-scant a
draught those poor fishers of men had caught by the common allurements only of
innocent life, and rational discourse, I leave you to imagine. And where such
extraordinary commendations are wanting, is it not reasonable that the need of
them should be supplied by ordinary and probable expedients?

I might further add, how a necessitous and despicable estate does commonly not
only disturb the minds, and deject the spirits of men; but distempereth also
their Souls, and viciateth their manners; rendering them not only sad and
anxious, slavish and timorous, but greedy also and covetous, peevish and
mutinous, rude and ignorant: engages them in sordid company, and tempts them to
unworthy courses. From which one cause, how scandalous effects, and how
prejudicial to the Church's both honor and safety, have proceeded, I need not
for to say, since woeful experience too loudly proclaims it.

I might add more-over, that the Priests do confer to the good of the State;
which is secured and advanced by the sincere instruction of men in duties of
Obedience, Justice, and Fidelity; and by maintenance of good Conscience among
men. So that if things be rightly considered, it will be hard to find a better
Commonwealths-man, then a good Minister.

Seeing therefore the good of the Church, upon various accounts, is so much
concerned in the Priests encouragement, welfare, and respect; it is very fitting
they should have them. Which Consideration I conclude with that serious
Admonition of the Apostle to the Hebrews; wherein the substance of what has
been spoken on this point is contained: Obey your Rulers, (or Guides,) Heb. 13.
17.
and submit to them; for they watch for your Souls, as they that are to give an
account: that they may do it with joy, and not with complaint; for this is
unprofitable for you. (...). that (...).
is, for this pays no taxes, quits no scores, turns to no account, is no-wise
advantageous for you; but rather (for there is a Miosis in those words) is
hurtful and detrimental to you. But farther,

III. Common Equity, and the Reason of the Case exacts, that Safety, competent
Subsistence, and fitting respect be allowed to the Priests. If you consider
their Personal qualities; who, I pray, do [commonly] better deserve those
advantages then they? Those qualities, I say, which result from a liberal, a
sober, a modest Education, in the Schools of Wisdom, and under the influences
of good Discipline. If Birth (that is, at best, an imaginary relation to the
gallantry of an Ancestour) entitle men to Honor; if the cheap favors of
Fortune be so highly prized and admired; if Riches (that is, the happy results
of industry in trivial matters) do easily purchase respect: what may they not
pretend to, whose constant (and not always unsuccesful) endeavor it has been
to deserve well, to cultivate their minds, and regulate their manners?

True worth indeed is not confined to any particular order of Men; yet I should
wrong none, by saying it is nowhere more plentifully to be found then in this.
What is it that does advance Vid. Orig. contra Cells. l. 3. page 129.
men's nature, that adorns their minds, that commends their persons to especial
regard? Is it Knowledge? The Priests lips preserve it; their discourse Mal. 2.
7.
does diffuse it. Is it Virtue? Whence have more, or greater examples thereof
proceeded then from them? Is it Piety? It is their proper business, it has
been always (in some measure) their care to promote it: That ignorance and
barbarity, dissoluteness and irreligion have not long since, like a deluge,
overspread the face of the world, none, I suppose, will be so unjust, as to
deny in greatest part due to their vigilant endeavors. Even those improvements
of Wit and Eloquence, which are employed to their disgrace and disadvantage,
must be acknowledged originally derived from them.

Faults they have had, and will always have; for they are Men, and subject to
the common imperfections of mortal nature: but that, perhaps, less and fewer
then any other distinct sort of men; that as it is their duty, so it has been
their practice, to excel in Virtue; and that they have commonly in effect made
good St. Ambrose his words, Debet praeponderare Epist. 82.
vita sacerdotis, sicut praeponderat gratia, were not difficult to demonstrate,
if seemly to make comparisons, or to insist upon so invidious a subject. Nor,
were they greater then ever really they have been, or then ever malice could
misrepresent them; should it be therefore equal, that the miscarriage of some
should derogate from the reputation, or prejudice the welfare of the whole
Order?

But to wave this plea; consider their Employment. Is there any office more
laborious, more vexatious then theirs; accompanied with more wearisome toil,
more solicitous care, more tedious attendence? They are deservedly called
Watchmen, being constrained to stand Heb. 13. 7.
always on the guard, to be always wakefull, attentive, and ready to warn the
People of approaching dangers: and Shepherds likewise, being forced to endure
the various hardships of that uneasy life, the inconveniences of all
weathers, the nipping frosts, and sweltry heats, and all diversities of irksome
travail; they must feed, they must guide, they must defend; they must seek the
lost, and reduce the straying Sheep. What assiduity of Study, what earnest
contention of Soul are they obliged to use, in the continual instruction,
exhortation, and reprehension of the people; in rectifying their judgments,
satisfying their scruples, removing their prejudices, bearing their
infirmities, and sympathizing with their afflictions? It Is they that are
engaged with all their might to withstand the prevailing encroachments of
Iniquity, to stop the progress of pernicious errors, to detect the false
pretenses of Impostours, to confute the fallacies of Sophisters, to repel the
assaults of all Adversaries to the Truth; yea, if need be, to expose not only
their dearest contents of life, but even their lives themselves, in defense
thereof.

Eusebius reports thus of Maximinus, (...). Lib. VI.
He commanded that only the Governors of the Church (that is, the Bishops)
should be slaughtered, as the Authors of the growth and prevalence of
Evangelical Doctrine. Neither was it a singular practice of that bloody Tyrant,
but as a thing of course it constantly follows, that wherever Righteousness
and Truth are violently impugned, the Priests are sure to taste deepest of that
bitter Cup; that their Goods be in the first place sequestered and spoiled,
their Reputation stained, their Persons misused, their Lives sacrificed to the
Persecutors outrageous malice.

Is it not reasonable then, and equal, that they who, for the service of God,
and benefit of the Church, undergo such difficulties, and are objected to so
great hazzards, should be sustained, should be refreshed by proportionable
encouragements? Is it not barbarous usage, to expect so hard duties from them,
to impose such heavy burdens on them, and yet to grudge any suitable comforts,
any satisfactory rewards to them? Good King Hezekiah surely was not so minded,
of whom it is said, He commanded the people that dwelt in Jerusalem, to give the
portion of the Priests 2 Chronicles. 31. 4.
and the Levites, that they might be encouraged in the Law of the Lord: that
is, that they might be heartned to study, to teach, to perform the duties
required of them by the Divine Law. And Saint Paul thus rationally expostulates
in the Priests behalf: Who ever goes to war at 1 Cor. 9. 7, 11.
his own charges? who planteth a vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof?
or who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of the flock? If we have
sown unto Vid. Romans 15. 27.
you spiritual things; is it a great thing, if we shall reap your carnal
things? Is it a great thing? do you think much of it? If you do, you are
unreasonable, you are unjust, you are ungrateful. And otherwhere he thus very
emphatically admonishes; We beseech you, brethren, to 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13.
(...).
mind them which labor among you, and (...).
preside over you in the Lord, and that admonish you; and to esteem them more
then exccedingly ((...)) in love, 1 Timothy 5. 17.
for their work (or, for their office) sake: (so (...) frequently signifies in
such cases.) And again; Let the Elders (or Priests, (...),) which rule well, be
counted worthy of double honor: (or, of double recompense: so (...) also
imports.) Priests are so, for their office sake, have honor and reward due to
them; which, according to the good management of that office, are
proportionably to be augmented and multiplied.

But further yet, abstracting from both their personal worth, and the merit of
their service, consider their Condition in this world, and see whether it does
not in equity challenge some reasonable provision to be made for them. Are they
not, by the nature of their profession, secluded from all ordinary means of
temporal advancement? Be not those usual inlets of Wealth, the Court, the Camp,
and the Exchange, shut upon them, yea barred against them, by those insuperable
obstacles of Law and Custom? Can they grow rich by Trade, or famous by feats of
Arms? May they plead for others? it is well if they be allowed to do it for
themselves before equal judges. Yet are they not Men, endued with humane
passions and resentments? Are they not Citizens, partaking in the common
interests of the weal public? Are they not sensible of the inconveniences,
and capable of enjoying the benefits of this life? Are they not equally
obliged, and would they not be glad, as well as others, to be in a capacity to
requite courtesies, to help relations, to gratify friends, to relieve the
poor, to express respectively their humanity, and their gratitude? Skill they
not to use the goods of Fortune (or rather the gifts of Providence) with as
much discretion, as much sobriety, as much honor, as others? Compare things
righteously, and let Reason judge; let Experience be examined; let those
eternal monuments of their Piety, their Charity, their Hospitality, declare and
testify. Shall, lastly, the fruits of painful study, the improvement of
hopeful parts, the flower of vigorous age and strength spent in the public
service, tend only hither, to put a man into a state of struggling with extreme
contempt and penury? If this be not, what, I pray you, is monstrous iniquity?

Since therefore it appears (upon so many several scores) reasonable, that
Almighty God should undertake the protection, and assert the honor of his
Priests; we may not only praise the goodness, but approve also the wisdom of
this promise; and by the contemplation thereof strengthen our Faith in reliance
thereon. To which purpose one Consideration more may very much conduce, and
withal may provoke our gratitude to celebrate his truth and faithfulness, in
making good, as well as his goodness and wisdom, in making this Promise; viz.
the considering how continually hitherto God has been pleased effectually to
cloth his Priests with Salvation, to provide abundantly for their safety,
their accommodation, their respect in this World; and to deliver them from the
opposite inconveniences.

If we reflect our thoughts on the first Ages of Christianity, (not more dismal
for Suffering, then glorious for Piety,) it is admirable to see how sincerely
and passionately the Christian People did then love their Priests and Pastors;
how liberally, out of their slender stock, and the shipwrecks of their spoiled
fortunes, they contributed to their maintenance; what exceeding veneration they
bore them; with what incredible alacrity they submitted to the most severe
disciplines injoined by them; how willingly they followed them, though leading
into the jaws of death and cruel torture: so that, although it was then
necessary for the Christian Priests to undergo the greatest hardships,
according to the design of Christian Religion; (which was to be propagated, not
by terror of Power, nor by politic Artifice, but by the invincible Faith,
Resolution and Patience of the Professors and Teachers thereof;) yet never more
may they have seemed to thrive and prosper, then in that juncture of time, when
they enjoyed the universal good will and applause of good people, when they
unconstrainedly embraced affliction for righteousness-sake, and acquired
thereby the certain fruition of a more excellent Salvation.

But in the succeeding Times, when Christianity, breaking out of the clouds of
Persecution, began to shine over all with brightest luster; of the glories and
happy fruits of that illustrious triumph none did partake more fully, than
they, who had sustained the hardest brunts of the foregoing conflict, and had
been the principal causes of the success. Then the joyful acclamations of the
faithful People resounded in the praise of their victorious Champions: Then did
the Emperors themselves, with arms outstretched, and hearts enlarged, with
affection embrace the Authors of their happy Conversion; then all Laws
prejudicial to their welfare were rescined, and new ones were substituted,
abundantly providing for their security, honest livelihood, and due reverence;
which in progress of time, not in the Roman Empire only, but in all other
Nations (that afterward did entertain Christianity) were no-wise impaired, but
were rather ampliated and fortified by the pious favor of Princes: The
barbarous Goths, and Vandals, and Lombards, being no sooner endued with any
degree of Civility, or any sense of Religion, then possessed with a hearty
reverence of their Bishops, and Priests.

And ever since, (which is not to be imputed, as some rashly, if not impiously,
averr, to the prevalence of Antichristian iniquity, but rather to the
Providence of Divine Benignity; ever since, I say) till the late Commotions and
Alterations in Christendom, they have been the Guardians of others safety, not
themselves deprived of protection; have abounded with Wealth, rather than
wanted sustenance; have been the objects of Envy, more than of Contempt.
Princes have loved and cherished them, have relied upon their advice, and
entrusted them with their highest concernments. Nobles have not been ashamed to
yield them place. The Sacerdotal Robe has been often dyed with Purple; and the
Sons of mighty Monarchs have not thought themselves degraded by entering into
their Order. And if in some particular places (before or since those Changes)
their condition has not been so high and plentiful; yet has it been (almost
ever) tolerable; the countenance of Authority, and the respect of the People
being in good degree vouchsafed them. Even in those Churches which till this
day groan under the oppression of Infidel Princes; the Priests (by the free
permission of those Princes) retain their Jurisdiction in a manner as great as
ever; and withal enjoy a maintenance not altogether inconsiderable.

So favorable hitherto has God been unto his Priests, so faithful to his
Promise: which does oblige us to thank him; which may encourage us to hope in
him; which may arm us with confidence against the present ill will of those
that wish, and against the practices of those that design our ruin.

It Is true, This Promise is not affixed to all parts of time, to all
particularities of place, to all determinate circumstances of things. The
Priests may now and then, here and there, in this or that suffer highly; they
may be ejected, be plundered, be degraded, as experience has showed us. But
they may be also soon restored, re-possessed, re-advanced, and (I had almost
said) revenged too; as the like experience does assure us. It Is not impossible,
I confess, we may relapse into the same, or into a more calamitous estate; the
obstinate disaffections of Men threaten it, and our own miscarriages more
dangerously: yet the most offensive of these (which many honest Men dislike,
and most Men exclaim against) have been in as bitter terms complained of in
almost the first Ages. Inhiant possessionibus, praedia excolunt, Sulp. Sev.
Lib. 1. c. 43.
auro incubant, quaestui per omnia student, said a devout Writer of
Ecclesiastical History about 1300 years ago. And so much no Man (without
extreme uncharitableness and falsehood) can in so general terms impute to the
present Clergy: notwithstanding which, God did continue to vouchsafe his
protection to them. They were sometimes, (by the inundations of barbarous
People,) and we may again (by national concussions) be severely chastised for
our Faults: Yet were not they, nor shall we be (at least everywhere, and for
ever) utterly rejected. God may visit our Transgressions with the Rod, and Ps.
89. 32, 33, 34.
our Iniquity with Stripes: Nevertheless his loving kindness will he not
utterly take from us, nor suffer his faithfulness to fail. His Covenant he will
not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of his lips. God may for a time
hide his Face from us; but he will not for ever turn his Back upon us: The
honor of the Priesthood may for a while be overclouded in some part of the
World; but shall never totally be eclipsed, nor swallowed up in a perpetual
Night. While God continues his Residence in Sion, and defends his Church
against the gates of Hell, and powers of Darkness; while Religion retains any
sway in the Hearts of Men, and Truth possesses any room upon Earth; the Priests
shall not be left destitute and naked, but everlastingly be clothed with
Salvation. Which that it may (to the Glory of God, and Good of his Church) more
surely come to pass, let us convert this Promise into a Prayer, and say with
Solomon, Now therefore arise, O Lord God, thou and the Ark of 2 Chronicles. 6. 41.
thy strength: Let thy Priests, O Lord God, be clothed with Salvation, and let
thy Saints rejoice in Goodness.

Amen.
THE END.
Books writ by the late Reverend and Learned Dr. Isaac Barrow; and printed for
Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons, over against the Royal Exchange, in
Cornhil.
1. TWelve Sermons preached upon several occasions; in 8o.

2. Ten Sermons against Evil-Speaking; in 8o.

3. The Duty and Reward of Bounty to the Poor: In a Sermon, much enlarged,
preached at the Spittal, upon Wednesday in Easter-week, Anno Dom. 1671. the
second Edition; in 8o.

4. A Sermon upon the Passion of our Blessed Savior; preached at Guild Hall
Chapel, on Good Friday, April 13. 1677. in 8o.

Also the true and lively Effigies of Dr. Barrow; in Folio.

Against Easter-Term 1679, will be published a Learned Treatise against the
Supremacy of the Pope. By the same Author.


