THE DUTCH Way of Toleration Most proper for our ENGLISH DISSENTER

Written at the Request of a Friend.

O! Imitatores servum pecus.
Quo teneam vultus mutantem Protea Nodo?
Hor. As free, and not using your Liberty for a Cloak of Maliciousness, etc.
St. Pet. Ep. 1. Chapter 2. V. 16.

LONDON, Printed for the Author (...)

THE DUTCH Way of Toleration, Most proper for our ENGLISH DISSENTERS.
SIR,
THis returns my Thanks, for the Favor of your last, and candid
Acknowledgment, that I had reason in affirming, the Sword would continue to
halt it on between St. Paul's and Pinner's-Hall, as long as this was Mayor; for
now you were come over to my Opinion, and saw it would not only be so, but that
his Successor, finding the Ice thus broken, would, probably, follow in the same
Track, or otherwise improve the Affront to our old Establishments, according as
the several Factions, which placed him in the Chair, should think fit to
direct: Hereupon you desire me to communicate what I know in reference to the
Dutch Toleration, (whereof you have heard several hints in our private
Converse) and how it comes to pass, that the many differing Persuasions amongst
them enjoy their Liberty with a continued Peace and Quiet, whereas ours are
always restless and encroaching, every day grasping at more, and seem still
dissatisfied unless they can engross all.

Indeed, Sir, it was to my no little surprise, when last in Town, to find your
self, and some other Friends, so positive, that a Reprimand from the Court of
Aldermen, and some by- Reflections in an Higher Court, would stifle their
Delign, or make them give it over, which I perceived was deeper laid, and had
greater Encouragements, than any of you did then imagine; yet sure this you
must (...) ^^^v'd, that it is very rare to find those Parties doing their
business by halves; whatever Lights they may pretend to, there is an infallible
Argument to prove them Children of this World, being so wise, that is, cunning,
in their Generations. No People carry on their Projects with greater Intrigue,
nor more nicely observe the several steps and degrees by which they must be
accomplished: Their Legal Indulgence, as it was a great Point gained, so the
timing of it was very critical; for, being in the heat of the Revolution, there
might be several Casus omissi, which upon farther Debate would have been better
considered; particularly, I question very much, whether any Dissenter would
have been allowed going to the Conventicle during his Magistracy, especially to
carry the Insignia thither; the former of which has been all along practiced
in several Corporations throughout the Kingdom; and, doubtless, the President
your Lord Mayor has set, will be Ap'd by several of his Brethren in other
Places: (notwithstanding, as the Act runs at present, it is a Moot Case among
the Gentlemen of the Long Robe, whether allowable thereby) But that your Lord
Mayor may not have the sole Honor of the first Attempt, at least, that was
done the First Year of their Indulgence, at a Corporation in my Neighborhood,
where an old Zealot of the 41 Cause (brought in perhaps for that purpose) would
needs have the Mace attend him to the Barn; but the honesty, or as they termed
it, obstinacy of the Officers, the Sergeants, would not comply, and so he went
without it. Afterward, Indeed, when one of the same Stamp was in course to be
chosen, the Company capitulated, that however the Mayor might take his liberty,
the Mace should be confined to Church; which some thought a little hard on the
Mace's side, since 'twas believed every whit as tender-conscienc'd as the Man
who followed it.

But, to return to our purpose, you see how their Affairs stand at present, and
how little they scruple stretching to the utmost any Liberty which is indulged
them, whereof now they have a fair Prospect to make a greater enlargement; for
you know next Winter a New Parliament will come in course; and they are so far
from being ignorant thereof, or idle thereupon, as it is hard for a Person of
your undesigning Integrity, to imagine how earnestly they already stickle to
carry on their Point in that Critical Juncture, leave never a Stone unturned,
are tampering with all Interests, and in all Places, to get confiding Members
chosen, such Root and Branch-men, as shall effectually carry on the Work of the
Lord, and once more establish the Good Old Cause; and then let the State look
to it as well as the Church, for it is hard to resolve whether suffered most
from such thorough Reformers. Now ^his to me is Demonstration, that a Religious
Liberty, a Freedom as to (...) Consciences, is not the sole, nor main thing
they aim at; for then would they press no farther, that being confirmed to them
by Legal Establishment, to all Intents and Purposes imaginable; But to be
dabbling in the Government, is as natural to them as Water to a Fish; and if
they may not command the Royalty, and control at Pleasure, prescribe who are
worthy Men, and Men worthy, those Waters will be always troubled, never free
from foul Weather, and Storms: Nay, farther to remark, how scandalously they
prostitute their Spiritual Liberty, their Right of Conscience, to obtrude
themselves upon the Temporal Power, their double dealing, playing fast and
loose with our Church and Sacrament, is an irrefragable Argument. Formerly, the
Church of England (to use their great Patriarch's J. O's Words) was a mere
Antichristian Encroachment upon the Inheritance of Christ, all her
Darling-Errors, Stones of the Old Babel; and therefore by no means to be
communicated with: The Faithful of the Lord must not touch such defiled
Garments; and this indeed was the common Cant of them all, for some score of
Years together: Yet now we see to serve a State-turn, or rather overturn the
State, the Holy Sacrament goes down as glib with them as the Covenant of old;
there is no Scruple, when the Cause is concerned: In the mean while, I dare
engage, that if this next Election, they can make a Party prevalent enough to
repeal the Test, as they have already cancelled the other Penal Laws, they will
return to their Old Invectives, Our Sacrament shall be Reprobated as an
Antichristian Rite, and all Communion with our Church sinful and abominable.
Now here, if they would give me leave to expostulate a little, I would desire
them to consider, whether any thing can bring a greater reproach upon Religion,
the Innocence, and Simplicity of the Gospel, than such vain Tergiversations as
these? Such Linsy Woolsy Consciences? Such profane Halters between God and
Baal? Can we imagine there should be any thing more in all these Mockeries,
than a sordid Interest, spiteful Revenge, or popular Humor? To be cried up by
the Factions, and make something of a Figure amongst the Mob-Sectaries, which
they despaired of obtaining from Men of Sense and Principles. This indeed is
not exactly the Laodicean Temper; but the little difference is for the worse,
being so hot, where they need not be so much as lukewarm, and less than so,
where they should express a religious Fervor: And since Almighty God
threatened to spew the former out of his Mouth, I fear his Blessings may be the
less, if these others be not spewed out of the Government.

And this, Sir, brings me to the ^^estion you propounded (and what I presume
was chiefly aim'^ at in the Acknowledgment you made) How it comes to (...)
Dutch live in so much Peace and Quiet, notwithstanding the ma^y Persuasions
tolerated amongst them? Which may be clearly answered in very few Words; viz.
because no such troublesome, ^^easie People, as aforementioned, have to do in
the Government. And I have sometimes admired our great Sticklers for Liberty,
and Toleration, who upon all occasions are too forward in crying up the
Low Country Model, and pretend to be of a much quicker Scent than others, never
hit of this; but, upon second Thoughts considered, they generally belong to
some of the Factions, and would be sure not to exclude themselves: Yet,
doubtless, what, Horace observes in Poetry, is as true in Politics, Decipit
exemplar vitiis imitabile, it is hard coming at the same end, without the like
means: To imitate their Toleration, without their Caution and Restrictions,
will not only be sordid, as the Poet terms it, but ineffectual, prove a Remedy
worse than the Disease; for from thence, more especially, it proceeds, that
their Toleration has turned to Account: In all other Places, where Universal
and unlimited, it has fallen a Prey to the undermining Stratagems of that
Spiritual Usurper upon all Christian Liberty whatsoever, as will hereafter
appear. For your fuller satisfaction therefore, I shall give you an Account of
the Dutch Toleration; as likewise how hard it will be to bring us to that
Model, and yet show you it is that alone can do our business: All other Courses
will be much more unpracticable, and unsafe, and multiply those Distractions
which we designed to prevent. And that you may give the greater Credit to what
I shall say herein, it shall not depend upon my sole Authority (though it was
my chief Enquiry during some Years abode there) but have the Confirmation of
Sir William Temple's Observations upon those Provinces; which, as I think it
was the first, so it is, generally believed, the exactest Piece we have had from
that Ingenious Gentleman; Clear Matter of Fact, without that partiality and by
respect, which many times is not avoided by such as pretend most thereunto.

Now what makes it seem more difficult and unpracticable amongst us, than them,
is, That the Constitution of their Government, and Temper of their People, will
be found better adapted thereunto, with some other Advantages of lesser
Moments: All which take, as follows.

First, Then the Constitution of Their Government seems better adapted
thereunto: To which purpose, I must let you know, that however those Provinces
are given out to be a Commonwealth, a Free State, with such other swelling
Titles of Liberty, Privileges, etc. as if the People had the sole Control,
the Dernier Resort, in all Public Determinations (and so indeed it was in
those little Democracies of Greece, and that great one of Rome, where no Laws
could be enacted, nor Magistrates chosen, etc. but by their Consent) upon
Enquiry it will appear quite otherwise; the Populace, the Burghers, have no
more to do in the Government, than you and I, if we dwelt, or but sojourned
amongst them: It Is the exactest Oligarchy that is this day, or perhaps ever was
in the World, where the Magistrates of every City, or Province, are as absolute
as any Prince in Christendom: Enact Laws, levy Taxes, choose one another into
the several Offices of Government, and upon a Vacancy (which seldom happens,
but by death) elect another to fill up their number, without any control, but
from their Stadtholder, who has a negative Voice, or somewhat like it in all
their Elections; and though a reasonable Check, is what their Hogan Moganships
have been most uneasy under, and endeavored more than once to free themselves
from. Sir W.T. instances more particularly in the City of Amsterdam, as chief
of the Province of Holland, Obs. p. 9^.
and in that, as chief of the Seven Provinces; and tells you, the Government of
that City is in the sole management of Thirty six Persons, whom he calls
Senators; and says, indeed, they were formerly chosen by the Voices of the
Richer Burghers, or Freemen of the City; who, upon the death of a Senator, met
together either in a Church, a Market, or some other Place, spacious enough to
receive their Numbers, and there made an Election of the Person to succeed, by
a Majority of Voices. But about One hundred and thirty, or forty, Years ago,
when the Towns of Holland began to increase in Circuit and People, so as these
frequent Assemblies grew into danger of Tumult and Disorders, upon every
occasion, by reason of their Number and Contentions: This Election of Senators,
came by the Resolution of the Burghers in one of their General Assemblies, to
be devolved forever upon the standing Senate for that time; so that ever since
when any of their Number dies, a new one is chosen by the rest of the Senate,
without any intervention of the other Burghers, which makes the Government a
sort of Oligarchy, and very different from a popular Government, as it is
generally esteemed by those, who passing, or living in these Countries, content
themselves with common Observations, or Inquiries. And this Resolution of the
Burghers either was agreed upon, or followed, by General Consent, or Example,
about the same time, in all the Towns of the Province, though with some
difference in the Number of the Senators. Thus far the forementioned Gentleman;
whereto I must farther add, that these Senators both here, and in all other
Towns, are of the same Communion, as to the Public Exercise of Religion;
which, after some Debates, and Alterations, upon their Defection from Spain,
was fixed upon the Geneva-Model, with an Allay of Erastianism, the better to
keep under the Insolency of their Presbyteries, so troublesome elsewhere. It Is
not of much moment to tell you farther, that as these Senators marry generally
into one another Families, so they keep the Government, for the most part,
amongst themselves, the Children, with other Relations, coming in, and
gradually ascending, if capable of it; which nevertheless being faithfully
discharged, without Partiality, Avarice, or any other such by-respects, the
People seem no ways dissatisfied therewith.

This, Sir, is a small Scratch of the Present Establishment of that People,
which I shall farther confirm to you, upon the Authority of the present Bishop
of Sarum; who, speaking of the Low Countries, how they got their Liberty, and
how they maintained it, Peace and union, p. 9.
adds, yet after all this, though the Name of their Government has a greater
sound toward Liberty than our own, we are really the much freer People of the
two, where every Man has a more open access to a proportioned Share in the
Government, than among them.

The high-flown Demagogues of our Nation, I know, will censure this as a great
defect, a giving up their Rights, a betraying their Privileges, with a great
deal such like Commonwealth-Cant, as has betrayed us into confusion more than
once; whereas doubtless those thoughtful People made a sober Judgment of
Things, and well understood such Privileges not worth keeping, as tended only
to the distraction of their Debates, and might, in the end, destroy their
Government: To be sure the General Toleration, which followed soon after, could
have stood upon no other Bottom; and those at the Helm were so well satisfied
with this New Constitution, as to set the Sovereingty of all the Seven
Provinces upon the same Foot: For so the Assembly of the States General, Sir W.
T. p. 110.
which consisted of above Eight hundred Persons, who meeting together in one
Place from so many several Parts, gave too great a shock to the whole Body of
the Union, made their Debates long, and sometimes confused, the Resolutions
slow, and upon sudden Occasions out of time, was by mutual Consent of the whole
Body, devolved upon those, now styled the States General, which consists of so
many Deputies from each Province, more or less, as they are pleased to send;
which makes no difference, as to their Votes, because given according to their
several Provinces, not number of ^^^sons, although their number seldom arise to
so many as the (...) at Amsterdam consists of.

Now, Sir, to come to the disparity, in reference to our selves, none of this
is done, or must be thought off amongst us, as to the whole Body of the
Government; which, though a Free Monarchy, is so, well tempered, as we see
every Subject owned to have more Liberty, than under a Free State: It Is pity it
should be so much abused; yet since it is so, might there not be some
Abridgment as to particular Persons, without the least Infraction upon the
whole Constitution, an Exchange of Temporal for a Spiritual Liberty? They that
will have a New Religion, let them live according to this New Model of our
Neighbors, and forbear meddling in Civil Concerns; otherwise I cannot see how
the Old Establishment should be long upheld: For whilst the Tolerated Parties
are free to Vote, and put in their Claims to all Public Administrations, all
Offices of Honor, Trust, or Profit, they may carry things as they please; what
thorough their Industry and Importunity, Cabals and Clamours, Libels and Lies,
it is as possible to stop a raging Sea, as the Madness of such People: No man of
Sense will attempt it; for though they are divided amongst themselves, in
Doctrines, Modes of Worship, and Forms of Government, Ephraim against Manasseh,
and Manasseh against Ephraim; yet the Judah of the Church of England, is the
united Object of all their Spites, and what they study most implacably to
supplant and destroy: And if we reflect how many or them, in the late Reign,
complied with the Dispensing Power, and superseded all those Laws, which the
Nation, for above an hundred years successively, had compiled to secure the
Protestant Religion, there needs no Window into any of their Breasts, (as a
leading Holder-forth then wished in an Address) to discover the Reality of
their Intentions. It Is too clear from thence, and all their other Practices,
that the Church of England is the only Popery they have a Pique against; and
can confederate with that which is really so, nay, Turk or Jew, to effect its
Ruin. In my Judgment, therefore, It would be a very reasonable, and necessary
Test, (and, I fancy, reduce the truly conscious Dissenters to a very small
number) to try the sincerity of their Intentions, and steadiness of their
Principles, by an Indulgence of that Liberty they are so zealous for, upon
Condition not to intermeddle in Civil Affairs, which their, weak Vndestandings,
strong Prejudices, and vain Enthusiasms, render them most unqualified for: Will
the Freeholder, even to the Cottager with his Cabbage-ground and Apple Tree,
recede from the Right he has of throwing up his Cap at a County-Election? The
Members of smaller Buroughs, as well as larger Corporations, of putting their
(...) to an Expense upon the like account, together with being on the Livery,
strutting at Common Halls, Common Councils, and the like? Nay, even in
Country-Parishes, will they recede from serving as Constable in their turns,
controling the Poor as Overseers or Parsons as Churchwardens? So likewise the
Country-Gentleman; how will he take being left out of the Peace, or not
appearing upon the Bench at Sessions, and Assizes, as well as his Conforming
Neighbors? If I mistake not the Temper of the several Parties, these little
things will be of hard digestion, since, they have been ever observed as
forward to command, as uneasy to obey; yet if we would go according to the
Low-Country-Plan, (to use the New Word) this course must be taken; for it is
this, alone has secured them, and this, or nothing, will secure us: And
therefore a very learned Person, about Eighteen or Twenty Years since, who
understood the Unreasonableness of our several Separations extremely well, had
fully studied all their Cavils, and as fully evinced them, if any thing of
Eviction could work upon that sort of People: Yet, Pref. p. 85.
in his Preface to that Demonstrative Piece, whether it was to let the
Dissenters see, he was averse to nothing which might, tend to a Settlement, or
propounded it from a Friend, whose Head has been always pregnant with
Comprehension, and Toleration-Projects: Or, perhaps, to humor some great Men
at the Helm, who about that time stickled very much for a Suspension of Penal
Laws; upon what Design, as every Eye then discovered, so, I fear, in spite of
all Endeavors to the contrary, that Design will be ever concerned therein, and
advanced thereby; I say, upon whatever Account it was, this Reverend Worthy
Person, in his Preface, makes a short Essay as to a Toleration, laying down
such Restrictions and Limitations, as are requisite to prevent the Mischiefs of
an unlimited Licentiousness, which he says would certainly bring Confusion
amongst us, and in the end, Popery: Now the first of his Restrictions, is, That
none be permitted this Indulgence, who do not declare, that they hold all
Communion with our Church unlawful; for it seems unreasonable to allow it to
others, and will give countenance to endless and causeless Separations. And
give me leave to add, will gratify the Capricio's of such wanton Libertines,
as live Scepticks, and dye Atheists: To which kind of Skepticism I find
several, who associate with at least, and ab^tt the Dissenters, much inclined.
Quere, as to your Lord Mayor. Another Restriction is, That no Person, so
indulged, be capable of any Public Office; it being unreasonable, that such
should be trusted with Government, who look upon what the Government has
already established as unlawful* A Third is, That all such as enjoy it, must
declare the part^cular Congregation they are of; and enter their Names before
such Commissioners as shall be authorized to that purpose. I shall mention no
more, (though there be several others tending to the same purpose) but only
appeal whether you, or any Man else of sober Sense, must not acknowledge these
to be highly reasonable, and absolutely necessary; that we may know what Men
are, and where to have them. In Martial-Law, none are more severely proceeded
against, than such as fly from their own, or are taken as Spies in the Enemies
Camp; yet we must suffer these Enemies of our Church, though they have been all
along in the Dissenters Service, to enter our Line at pleasure, take our Word,
our Test, and Sacrament, that they may be the better qualified to work our
Ruin; nay, are so stupidly senceless, as not only to let them alone, but
entertain and caress them as Friends: Just thus the Amalakites served Israel,
and we know how highly Almighty God was incensed thereat, and what the People
suffered thereby. But not to ramble too far, or be thought too much concerned
upon the Church-Account, let us consider our Government in General, whether it
can be so well secured by such an Hodge-podge of Persuasions, who will be
continually pulling several ways, and aiming at several Interests, as the Low
Countries, where a few understanding Men Act unanimously for the Public
Welfare, without any by-Regards, or Factious Designs.

Secondly, What I mentioned, in the next place, by way of Disparity, as likely
to make a Toleration less feasible amongst us, than the Dutch, is the different
Temper and Humors of the Two Nations: They are a serious, and thoughtful
People, wholly intent upon their own private Concerns, and very industrious in
all their particular Callings; frugal and parsimonious to the utmost; truly
speaking, necessitated thereunto, by reason of the many and continual Imposts
laid upon them, which no People under Heaven so contentedly bear, nor so
indefatigably wade through, being abundantly satisfied with the Prudence and
Integrity of their Governors, and highly transported with an imaginary Conceit
of Liberty, which no body can see into, or understand, but themselves: So that,
as the forementioned Gentleman observes, All Appetites and Passions seem to run
lower here, than in other Countries. I am sure they do not run so low in ours,
which, on the contrary, is too sanguine to be settled as it ought; for, to pass
by that old Charge of Rex Diabolorum, the English good Nature was so strongly
sowr'd by our late Times of Libertinism, and Confusion, Men contracted such a
habit of Self-conceit, Opposition, and Disobedience, were so totally given over
to a perverse Enthusiastical Spirit; and for so long a time, as now indeed it
may be looked upon, next to impossible, absolutely to conjure it down; yet
doubtless it ought to be confined to its own home, the melancholy Tombs of
their restless unquiet Thoughts, and not wander up and down the World, to
possess others with the Legions of such Frenzies; which, if let alone, will
certainly be; for it is a Pestilent Infection, and without due Caution spreads
like the Plague. And that this unhappy Disposition began from the
Separation-Fraternity, and is much more incident to the English, than Dutch
Temper, take this single Instance: There were more Disputes, Contests, and
Quarrels, amongst the few Brownists, and other Independent Sectaries, which
resorted thither the latter end of Queen Elizabeth's, King James the First's
time, and so on, than among the whole Dutch Nation ever since they Reformed:
It Is unaccountable what impertinent Controversies arose between them, even to
the Color of Aaron's Ephod, whether it were Blew, or a Seagreen, which made
an irreconcilable difference between their Pastors, and consequently the Flocks
divided.

Once indeed there was a Controversy amongst the Dutch, about some
School-Points (and I think that the only Instance can be given) which rose to a
great height; but then you must know it was occasioned principally by two great
State-Factions, wherein most Divines, especially of the Geneva-cut, are too
easily made Properties: In this, to be sure, they served themselves to purpose;
for obtaining by Power, what they could not get by Argument, one Party became
Judge of the other, and thrust them down amongst the several Herds of Tolerated
Dissenters. And here give me leave to observe a farther Evidence of the
peaceable Temper and Disposition of those People; for though the ablest, and most
learned in their Government, have all along laughed at the Stoical Fatality and
Reprobation-Rigours of their Divines, and known what hard measure the
Remonstrants the Arminians had met withal; yet never thought it worth while to
have the Debate revived, which might only revive new Exasperations about
insignificant Opinions; or, as I find it expressed in a late Poem, for Points
by neither Party understood. On the other side, to return home, how differently
have these Disputes been managed amongst us, and how vexatiously continued?
Arminian and Papist, passed a long time for Terms synonimous; which not only
the Pulpit-Beautifeus, but several Grandees of the House, maliciously applied
to every Orthodox Divine, and indeed all others, who would not go along with
them in those cursed Desolations they then brought upon Church and State; which
having wretchedly effected, how did the Religious Brawl multiply upon their
Hands? With what implacable Enmity, did the Presbyterian and Independent
prosecute each other? And how violent in their several ways, both against them,
and one another, were the numerous Spawn of Equivocal Sects, which like the
overflowing Nile, their Deluge of Mischief so fatally produced? Insomuch, as
when Cromwell had bestrid the Commonwealth, and set himself in the Saddle, he
was presumed to connive at several Church of England-Congregations, both in
Public Parishes, and Private Assemblies, in spite to the Presbyterians, and
other Sectaries, whom he dreaded as much as the Loyal Party; and did, with
reason, expect they should improve those Calumnies, and Invectives against him,
whereof he had been the grand Promoter against their Righful and Lawful King;
and so he found it to his End, which that perplexity and vexation he met with
from Fanatics of all sorts, and in all Places, City, Country, but especially
his Army, was presumed to hasten.

It Is true, when the Legislative Power, the other day, thought fit to establish
them an Indulgence, there was a Project set on-foot to make Two Sticks one, (to
use their own Canting Terms) and several Proposals laid down in order
thereunto; yet we find them still separated from one another, and the several
Parties, upon every little occasion, dividing among themselves, though much Art
is used to smother and conceal it: At the best, it was but a Flourish, a Cord
of Vanity, which bound them together, and it held accordingly; neither can you
expect otherwise, upon consideration of the Causes which that great Undertaker
assigns of those Divisions, the Root from whence their Discords spring: Come
they not hence, even of our Lusts? Whatever you find to have been the Cause of
them, Two Sticks made one, p. 28.
whether Spiritual Pride, or a Contentious Disposition, or an Affectation of
Singularity, or Error of Opinion, or Admiration of Men's Persons, or a Sowrness
of Spirit, or an Ambition of drawing Disciples after us: Let the Cause be what
it will, it must be removed, etc. All which is sooner said than done; such
Pecadillo's, and of so long Continuance, are not easily dislodged: Although he
might as well have taken his Character from St. Paul's Perilous Times, 2 Tit.
3 Ver. 9.
which he foretells in the last Days, when Men should be Heady, High-minded,
Covetous, Proud, Boasters, etc. so far from growing better, as he declares they
should wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being, deceived. Now, Sir, whatever
Censure I may incur from others, my Appeal is to your self, whether the Account
here given of these People be any other, than what their daily Practices do
sadly; verify? And if left to their own Culture, and Ingenuity, any likelihood
they should reform? It Is grown as customary, as habitual with them, to thwart,
contradict, and oppose, as with the Dutch to live quietly, and mind their own
business: From which Disposition of theirs, I may continue the Disparity, and
observe,

Thirdly, How their constant application to Business and Employment, afford
them no time to dream of New Lights, or trouble themselves about any other
Persuasion, as to Religion, than what they were brought up in; For, as at their
first Establishment, there were Three predominant Way of Opinion, (I will not say
Doctrine) and Worship, which they had then Reformed themselves into, Lutherans,
Calvinists, and Anabaptists; so the Toleration more especially extended to
them, and has been generally continued down in the same Families, from Father
to Children ever since; neither is it so usual with them to flitt up and down,
from one Maggotty Persuasion to another, as among us. Those upstart puny Sects,
which arose of later Days, are mostly Foreign, and mostly from England too, as
the Brownists, and Independents first, the Sabbatarians after them, then
Quakers, Muggletonians, and what not? Who have, prevailed with some of the
Natives to be as foolish and mad as themselves, but not many; and, perhaps, had
they been kept to the same Thoughtfulness at home for Bread, and all other
Necessaries of Life, would not have so wantonly gone a-Whoring with their own
Inventions.

And the like reason may be given, that there are not so many Libertines,
Atheistical, Profane Persons, as in many other Parts, where all Religions are
Tolerated: It cannot seem strange there should be some without any; and that
there are not more, shall not be attributed so much to their Virtue as
Necessity: For not only their Mechanics and Tradesmen, but Persons of the best
Quality, are obliged to the like Care and Industry, as to the Concerns of
Humane Life. The Ground on which their many populous Cities stand, is of small
Compass; and the Rents of that little Land they have, are very low, not able to
maintain any one in the Port of a Gentleman; (that is, an Idleman, which is
their Term for that degree) whereof as there are few Ancient Families amongst
them, so the Children of those that are, as likewise of their Chief
Magistrates, and Rich Merchants, are constantly brought up to some Employment,
Military or Civil, with an Education agreeable thereunto, which, together with
their Natural Disposition, keeps their Thoughts fixed upon things really
advantageous; and so you shall generally find them very intent upon their
Designs, and assiduous in their Application. Will you give me leave to apply
this and observe how opposite their Course is to that of our Mercurial Wits,
who being born to great Fortunes, and valued for the great Worth of those
Predecessors which raised them, as if nothing else were wanting which should
recommend them to the World, think themselves above any serious Application,
either as to Business, or Knowledge. I need not tell you now little, or no,
Education our young Master has from his very Cradle; how careful the good
Lady-Mother is, he should not be kept in too much at School; what a fruitless
Figure he makes in the University; and when he comes up to the Extravagancies
of the Town, is as much for living above sober Sense, as our Dissenters above
Ordinances. God forbid this should be a General Rule; yet it could be wished
there were more Exceptions, than daily Experience will permit us; to observe:
Liberty of Life, though not so much clamoured for, is as much in Vogue as Liberty
of Conscience, and the one doubtless consequent of the other: For the practical
Atheist has been ever thought to introduce the Speculation; and when Men are
left free to all Religions, that is the proper time to set up for none. I
remember, during Cromwell's Usurpation, the Leviathan-Doctrine was first
started; and as some Gentlemen of too good Parts, unless better employed, were
industrious to cultivate and improve it, so many of our Airy Sparks about Town,
and elsewhere, became their sordid Imitators: Nothing would go down with them,
but a State of War, with a total Abolition of all difference between Good and
Evil, Right and Wrong. Now, whether it was their being weary, or ashamed, of
such unreasonable Notions, or an affectation of Novelty, the delight of vain
Minds, Deism seems to have superseded that, and is become at present the
Darling-Subject of every young Libertine's Discourse; who will presume to
expose, and run down Revealed Religion with all Confidence imaginable, although
the little Impertinent never thought a sober hour in its life; and understands
the Philosophy of Matter and Motion, no farther, than that his own Brains are
in a continual Hurry: Not but that these Engines too are set on work by some
more plodding Heads, who have several secret Designs in exploding the Authority
of Scripture, upon the Politic as well as Profane Account; and, among the
rest, to buoy up such Models of Government, as the Belief thereof expressly
overthrows. Here then arises the main Quere: What shall we do with such
Dissenters as these? The Sceptick, the Deist, the Atheist, under what Class
shall we place them? They have the same Plea to be conside^^^ (...) which the
others always brought, that is, Number and (...) being able to vie, in either
Particular, with any of their differing Factions, and, for ought I see, in a
short time, may outdo them all; since daily Experience assures us it is the last
result of Fanatic Zeal; for being overheated, and weary, with running its
several Courses of Faction and Opinion, it sits down in the end, and centres
here. And yet, all this while, the rest will not see what a fine Thread they
have spun for themselves, as well as us; whilst the one are undermining the
Church of England, these others are doing the same to the Christian Religion:
Although, to speak impartially, the Latitude some Divines have taken, as to the
Socinian, and other Points of like Nature, must be acknowledged not a little
conducing to this Grand Apostasy; so readily will Corrupt Minds improve bad
Principles, deny those Mysteries by wholesale, which some Men's rash and nice
Enquiries had made more perplexed and intricate, than the Simplicity of True
Religion stands in need of, or did ever design. And this, Sir, is the result of
an Unlimited Toleration; which going on at this rate, (unless the Pater Noster
Men interpose their Inquisition) must necessarily end in a Sit anima mea cum
Philosophis.

Fourthly, Another thing which makes the Dutch Toleration sit the more easy,
is, That Their Government is most exact and punctual in the Administration of
Justice, and Execution of Law; which as they are enacted at first, upon the
mature deliberation of a few sober understanding Men, with sole regard to the
Common Weal, the Public Good; so, once proclaimed, there is no evading their
true Import, or escaping the Penalty of a Violation: The Lawyers among them
dare not Open, or so much as Qu^tch against what their Superiors have thought
fit to establish, much less study Flaws, and hammer out Niceties, to gratify
bad Men, in frustrating whatever good the Legislative Power designed, and put
them to the trouble of an Explanatory Act next Session, which runs the same
risque: Yet that we are under these very Circumstances, I need not tell you;
which, with the Insolency of Faction, the remissness and indifferency of the
Executive Power, has brought us too nigh an Affinity with that deplorable
Estate of the Jewish Anarchy, where every one did what seemed right in his own
Eyes. Otherwise, we have Laws more than enough; and could they have executed
themselves, all Allegations for a Toleration had been long since quashed; not
only the Externals of God's Public Worship had been kept up in Decency and
Order, but every Man's Temporal Concern, his Right and (...) fixed upon a much
surer Bottom. On the contrary, a (...) Indifferency, as to Religious Duties,
has so far unprincipled, and debauched Men's Minds, that our modern Faith is
not only without Works, but so wholly confined to some Spiritual Chimaera's, as
there is little of Truth or Trust in the ordinary Transactions of Humane Life:
Our Meum and Tuum is in a very precarious Condition, what with the Latitude of
their new Notions, and the advantage to be taken from the Perplexity, the
Niceties of our Laws, with the little Tricks of Practice, so shamefully now
adays alla-mode, an undesigning Integrity can scarce tell whom to trust, and
is frequently at a loss, either to recover Right, or repel Wrong: Neither will
it be ever otherwise, as long as so many Law-jobbing Make-bates are suffered to
swarm in every County throughout the Kingdom. Were Grievances to be redressed
by their Malignity and epidemick Contagion, I know no one thing sooner to be
considered; that it is otherwise, you and I cannot help. In short, Sir, a
strict and Regular Execution of Laws, is the Life and Soul of any Government.
Take these two different Instances: In the Spanish Netherlands, we find the
Romish Religion solely established, with the Rigor, though not the Name, of that
Inquisition; which was the most plausible Plea for their first Defection: On
the other side, in the United Provinces, there is a general Toleration; both
which, the Uniformity of the one, and Indulgence of the other, are supported,
and kept up, by a vigorous Execution of such Laws as were thought most proper
thereunto; and if either, the latter are the more exact and severe, by reason
it is so natural for different Opinions to clash with, and thwart each other;
so far are they from admitting them into the Magistracy, giving the least way
to New Lights, and Fanciful Enthusiasms there, as well knowing such a Freedom
is enough to make any Government as monstrous as that Picture, which had an
Hanc Populus affixed.

Fifthly, I shall only add farther, that the Dutch Toleration was established
in the Infancy of the Reformation, when Men had a sincere and unfeigned Zeal
for the Truth of Religion, desired nothing more than to have her freed from
Ignorance and Superstition, such spurious Doctrines, and burdensome
Ceremonies, as rust of Time, neglect of Enquiry, and, above all, the Intrigues
of Papal Usurpation, had imposed upon the World, and for several Centuries
together made pass for Catholic. Now, although this Zeal was not always
according to Knowledge, the different, and, in some Places, not justifiable
Methods which were taken, did much obstruct, ay, and scandalize so good an
Undertaking; yet the maint Point being gained in shaking off the Roman Yoke,
whether out of Interest, Prudence, or Piety, I shall not determine, Men
generally sat down abundantly satisfied with the Enjoyment of that Persuasion,
which (...) deepest Impression upon their Minds: And this happened in such a
juncture for the United Provinces, as perhaps no Age will be ever able to
parallel. For the Spanish Interest prevaling in Brabant, and Flanders, with the
Walloon Provinces, whoever could; or would not submit, retreated hither, as
likewise great multitudes out of France and Germany; which made them the
Pantheon, the common Receptacle of all People pretending to the Liberty of
Conscience, the only thing then desired, and in the enjoyment whereof (whether
well or ill-inform'd we are not now to enquire) they were abundantly satisfied.

How much the World (especially amongst us) is cooled as to such a Temper, and
heated as to much worse Dispositions, our many Feuds and Factions, unreasonable
Cavils, and implacable Enmities, too sadly declare. Men, now adays, bellow out
the Protestant Religion, the Protestant Religion, as the Jews of old, The
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, as if the very name, or relation
thereunto, might authorize the grossest Impieties, their wilful Perjuries, and
seditious Practices, the Violation of Public Laws, and disturbance of Public
Peace, even to a most unnatural Rebellion, and execrable Regicide: This, Sir,
impartially speaking, is undeniable Matter of Fact; and if ever the Nation
returns to its Wits again, sober Sense, and sound Principles, such Protestants
will be recorded with a very black Character, the Reproach not only of the
Reformation, but of every thing which tends to true Religion, like the
Pharisees and Zealots among the Jews, sacrificing all to their own gross,
Hypocrisy, sordid Avarice, and self-willed Ambition; and God grant they do not
bring the like fatal End upon our Place and Nation: The dreadful apprehension
whereof makes not only my hand, but my heart, tremble; and, amid'st such
melancholy Reflections, wish to have been born in an Age, when Wise Men had had
the Ascendent of Fools, and Honest Men of Knaves. On the contrary, as things
now stand, you know the Close of that Old Rhyme, Knaves and Fools will quite
undo us.

Neither can our Prospect be much better, if we look upon the Reformation
abroad: What a strange Indifferency have some Great Princes of the Empire
lately discovered? And how gross the Apostasy of others? To be sure, where
there was a General Toleration of Lutheran and Calvinists, together, with the
several other differing Persuasions, Anabaptists, Arrians, Socinians, etc they
are either wholly extirpated, as in Bohemia, Moravia, the Two Austria's,
Poland, etc. or in a fair Tendency thereunto, as at present in Hungary, and
Transylvania: In all which Places they were very numerous; but what with
contending amongst themselves, and innovating, or opposing the Established
Government, they have been either worm'd, or beaten out, with all the contempt
and ease imaginable: And that the same Design is carrying on amongst us, and
the same Event expected, they must be wilfully blind who do not see, what with
Licentiousness on the one hand, and Hypocrisy on the other, the no- Reality of
such as pretend most, and great Indifferency of all the rest; as we are
naturally prone to fall into Extremes, so we seem strangely disposed (and the
more, because unwilling to believe it, to fall into that which we have all
along pretended most vehemently to avoid.

Thus, Sir, have I impartially, and perhaps too freely, told you what I know,
and what I think of the Dutch Toleration; yet without this Freedom, it had been
impossible to set you in a True Light, so as to discover the gross mistakes of
our Commonwealth Pretenders, who are always admiring the Hollanders, with the
Excellent Administration People live under there; which nevertheless they
understand no more, than how the Empire, and Army of Russia, is now managed
during the Czar's Absence; and the many Projects they are so troublesome
withal, both in Theory and Practice, are as opposite thereunto, as one Pole to
the other: Yet, since things are brought to that pass, as a Toleration must be,
give me leave to tell you, that venturing in any other than a Dutch Bottom,
will shipwreck the whole Cargo; that is, without a Metaphor, keeping the
Magistracy in such hands as shall be of one Piece, Uniform, and Unanimous in
the Management thereof; for which I shall briefly lay down these following
Reasons, and so end your Trouble.

1st. We shall have some Face of Government in an Established National
Religion; which I mention solely upon a Civil Account, and that not only in
regard to the outward Decorum, (which yet ought to be considered) but the
absolute Necessity thereof, as the only means of preventing those continual
Contrasts and Caballings, which the several Factions will have one against
another; and if admitted to Debates, all together against that which is
uppermost; the Mischief, and Inconveniences whereof, can no other way be
redressed, than by fixing the Ruling Power in one Persuasion, to whom it shall
solely appertain to take care of the whole, see the several Parties enjoy their
private Opinions, without the least Infraction upon our Public Peace. On the
other side, let us reflect, first, upon the Indecency of the thing, how
preposterous it must seem to any Man of Sense, whether Native or Foreigner,
that the Sword should dance attendance from one Place to another, according to
the Caprice of each prevailing Faction: This Year's Lord Mayor has a Conscience
of such Latitude, as to Trim it between Church and Conventicle, without the
least regret; whereas his Successor may have one so squeamish, and
streight-lac'd, as not to come within the Sound of St. Paul's Organ, or under
the roof of that Sumptuous, and therefore Superstitious Structure. But then too
having got the Sword to go their own way, how strangely must it wander up and
down, as each Party prevail to get into the Chair; one Year it must attend a
Presbyterian-Meeting, the next, perhaps, will fall to the Independant's Lot,
and the Anabaptists will ill resent it to go without their turn; nay, we are
not sure but the Quakers may put in their Claim, and without any Offense to the
Inward-Man, desire it should attend their Motions on a bulk in
Grace Church Street. This, Sir, I take to be as Natural to the aspiring Spirits
of those several Schismatical Herds, as Milk to a Calf, and they will low as
much if kept without it; yet how decent this will be, how unbecoming the State
and Gravity of any Magistracy, I leave for you, and the World to judge. However
that of Public Security is much more to be considered; for whatever Pleas may
be alleged, or Protestations made, we know how things went, when the weak
Conscience had got the strongest Sword, Dominion was then founded in Grace, and
the appointed time come for the Saints to inherit the Earth, and bring in
Subjection all the Powers of Darkness.

2dly, The Ancient Grandeur and Hospitality of our City-Magistracy, and
proportionably of all other Corporations, will be hereby continued and kept up;
which since it came into these hands, has been most scandalously slighted, and
disused; for the Character which our Poet Laureat gave of that cursed Shimei,
who first led the Van to Faction and Frugality, is true of all the rest, Cool
are their Kitchens, though their Brains are hot. To speak freely, a sneaking,
single-soul'd Sectary, cannot exert it self to any thing that is Great or
Generosn, Gain is their Godliness, and Profit their Preferment; in order
whereunto, upon Enquiry, you shall find, that those Great Offices wherein
worthy Citizens were formerly wont to expend several thousand Pounds, are now
made to bear their own Charges, and bring somewhat into Pocket too: And, as a
farther ill consequence hereof, there are those will tell you all Places of
Inferior Trust are disposed off accordingly; and whoever makes a hard Bargain,
will be more solicitous for his own Reimbursement, than the Commonweal. 'Twas
nobly said of Tully, Nec quidquam aliud videndum est nobis, quos Populus
Romanus hoc in Gradu collocarit, nisi ne quid privatis studiis de opera publica
de^rahamus; neither can it possibly go well with any Government, if Men in
Public Places have not Public Spirits, under which defect I am afraid our
poor Nation, at present more especially, very much labors.

3dly, This will make an exact Discrimination between the truly conscientious
Dissenter, and the Politic, the Factious Intriguer; for when every Man must
declare to what Body of Church Membership he will join, and is obliged therein
to abide (whether in the Lord, or not, the same Lord shall judge at last) our
sundry shifting Proteus's such Amphibious Christians, as can live both in Land
and Water, Church and Conventicle, (and that, more especially, to get Prey)
will entirely be defeated of their many base Ends; Conscience shall have its
full Liberty, but the State-Libertine wholly abridg'd from promoting their
Maggotty Commonwealth Innovations; or abusing the Sacred Robe of Magistracy,
for a Cloak of Maliciousness, Avarice, or both; and were this reasonable*
distinction effectually prosecuted, and their little factious Properties
excluded from voting the Sword into such unworthy Hands, it must fall in course
to some honester Man's Lot, who will be the Minister of God for good, and bear
it not in vain. It Is likewise to be hoped, this may tend by degrees to the
better Information of the deluded People, make them reflect upon the
Inconsistency of their Principles, and Unwarrantableness of Schism, how
naturally they tend to a licentious Profanation of all things Sacred and
Civil, whilst Men of corrupt Minds can so easily prostitute the most solemn
Obligations of Religion, and Conscience, to two such servile respects as
Interest and Humor. Neither are we to despair, but it may work a Reformation
in the Persons themselves; for generally when Men get nothing by acting the
Hypocrite, they care no longer to wear the Vizard, choose rather to appear as
they really are, and fall at last to desire a right Information of Things,
since Error and Deceit has failed in those Advantages, which were formerly the
main Support of their Unrighteous Mammon. But whatever the Event be as to them,
I am confident you are satisfied no Government can be safe in such slippery
hands; for they that can be any thing, will be every thing, and are good for
nothing; having betrayed their own Consciences, is it possible they should
demur serving others in the like kind?

4thly, But to come to that which is most considerable in this case, indeed the
main Support of every Government: By this means all Public Deliberations, and
Resolves, will be carried on in a smooth and even, steady, uniform Course, free
from Factious Oppositions, with the many other by-respects of Intriguing
Interests: This, I say, in a (...), at least, would abate the several Feuds,
ay, and (...) Expenses too, at the Election of our National Represen^^^^^es,
and secure their Debates, when Assembled, from frequent Embarassments,
according to the French Term, the Obstructions and Delays, which such as cannot
obtain their own private, pettish Humors, are prone to interpose in the most
weighty Transactions, though never so prejudicial to the Common Good. In like
manner all other sinister Practices, Plots, and Brangles, whether in Towns
Corporate, City, or Country, would be reduced to something of Temper, Noise and
Nonsense being once excluded, such Men in course must come in place, as would
speak to the purpose, and act upon a Principle. And if any one objects this
would be too great an Invasion upon their Liberties, I shall only reply, as at
first, it is no more than what their admired Neighbors the Hollanders, did upon
their own accord, to prevent the dangerous Consequences of their many Popular
Heats, and Tumultuous Assemblies, when they gave way that all their Right
thereto should be devolved upon a few sober understanding Men, who knew better
how to act for the Common Welfare than themselves: But whether many, or few
(for this propounds only the exclusion of some, no alteration in the whole
Constitution, as well knowing neither Oligarchy, nor Polygarchy will do with
us, however there be zealous Pretenders to both) so they be all of one Piece,
Business will go on much the smoother, and be sooner brought to a Conclusion:
And therefore give me leave to transferr St. Paul's Comparison, from the Church
to the Body Politic, it being equally dangerous to them both, as in the
Natural: If the Head be a Monarch, and the Feet Commonwealths-men; the Eye of
the Presbyterian, and the Ear of the Congregational Persuasions, with the Devil
and all of little Maggotty Sectaries grumbling in the Belly, what care can be
taken of the whole? What will become of it in the end? Amongst sundry pretty
Crotchets, which in the Low Countries hang out for Signs, there is one at
Harlem, called the Misforstand, that is, a Barrel of Beer between two Dray-men,
turned Back to Back, and so pulling two contrary ways. I have known a Nation
standing in this unhappy Posture for nigh these Sixty Years together, with
these aggravating Circumstances, that as there have been many more than two
Pullers, so they pulled more than Twenty several ways, that the poor Vessel
has been able to hold out thus long is much; yet that it should hold out much
longer, will be more to admiration.

5thly, That the Monarch, and Monarchy, will be hereby very much secured,
cannot be disputed; for, as we see, how fatal it is, when a Prince differs
(...) his Persuasion from the Established Religion, so one of that Persuasion
is as little secure, if his Ministers, ^ther inferior Officers, and
Dependants, are of different Sentiments, and Inclinations; and that not only as
to Divine Matters, but the very Nature and Original of all Humane
Constitutions, and Civil Societies: And whoever wears the Crown of England,
upon any other than the Old Church of England Principle, will neither find that
sit easy, nor himself long safe; for notwithstanding the many Protestations,
and Acknowledgments, which either Flattery, or Interest, may for some time,
oblige them unto, there is not One in Ten of the several Factions, could they
have their own Wills, would endure a Monarchy, any more than the Kingdom of
Heaven a Commonwealth. That such a Book as Ludlow's Memoirs should come abroad
at this time of day, is somewhat odd, and argues his Admirers Men of no little
Assurance; yet really however it may prevail upon the infatuated Sectaries, the
many Plots and Counter-Plots there discovered, their implacable Enmities one
against another, persidious Hypocrisies, and clandestine Underminings, with a
continued Irresolution as to any thing of Accord and Settlement, must convince
every man of Sense, that (like their Infernal Abettor) their sole Talent lay in
doing Mischief, opposing, and pulling down; which, having effected, they could
no more agree what should succeed, than the Mob of Capua, when they had brought
things into the same condition. Read over his whole Second Volume with a
serious Attention; and then tell me, whether Hell it self can be represented in
greater Confusion, than he does there the Conduct of Affairs, the Contrasts,
and Counterminings of the several Usurping Powers, till things being brought to
the Extremity of Distraction, with an Expense of Blood and Treasure, never
before paralelled, they were forced, like the Evil Spirit in the Gospel, to
return from whence they set out, and cease troubling the World, till their
former Freaks, and its own Follies should be quite forgot; yet these were our
Commonwealth-Patriots, the Keepers of our Liberties, and what not: From whom,
and all such, God keep this Poor Nation for evermore.

6thly, Were I not sure, you would expect something in reference to the Church
of England, I had been wholly silent as to that Point, being of a Persuasion
somewhat more sanguine, than most of her Son's Clergy as well as Lay, viz. that
what a wise Observer said of the whole Nation in general, is more applicable
here, None can destroy her but her self. There is, as I hinted just now, so
strict and mutual a dependence between the Crown and Mytre, that they must both
stand and fall together: And, give me leave farther to add, we must never
expect a settled State, or continued Peace, without keeping (...), and
Necessities (...) themselves (...), to bring in their (...) true, whenever a
Nation is so unhappy (...) divided (...) it self, fall into Parties, and
Fractions, upon any (...) ^^clesiastical, or Civil; as some Churchmen will
make themselves (...) be made Properties therein, so the Church must expect to
bear her p^oportion in such Distractions, and that to a large degree; yet still
if the main Body keeps steady to its self, wal^^ by the same Rule, and minds
the same Thing, such a reserve of Mercy and Providence will constantly attend
her, as though persecuted, she shall never be forsaken, cast down, but not
destroyed; and it very rarely happens some great Good does not come out of that
Evil. But if she forsakes her self, folds her Arms in a careless Despair, or
consults her Peace by an Union with Faction and Schism, and as the Judicious
Bishop La^^y observed, Last Sermon at Court, p. 26.
pulls down her old Walls, her Confessions of Doctrine, and Canons of
Discipline (like the foolish Trojans) to let in a comprehensive Horse, full of
those very Enemies, which have used all other means, though God be praised in
vain, to effect her ruin. This would be a Perditio tua ex te, and as the same
good Man farther declares, against all the Rules of Wisdom and Government, by
which it was ever thought necessary, that the People should conform to the Laws
of the Church, never that the Church should conform to the Humors of the
People; and therefore, as he very well distinguishes, to such as be content to
leave their Faults and Errors behind them, we ought to set our Gates wide open,
and need not pull down our Walls; but if they bring their Errors, Animosities,
and divided Judgments along with them, to admit such, only secures them from
Punishment, but leaves them free to all other Causes of Dissension, or rather
fortifies and animates them to pursue their Differences with the greater
Violence. God, to be sure, receives none but upon Repentance and Amendment; and
why his Church should do otherwise, I am yet to learn; if they will not be the
same with us, let them Her^ by themselves, and not come among us, their Room is
better than their Company: And therefore I have always suspected, either want
of Understanding, or Affection, in those Persons, who trouble their Heads so
much in that Affair, without any regard to the Caution in the Gospel, as
likewise the reason of the thing, and will be treating with, ay, and courting
too, those Wolves, because they appear in Sheeps Clothing; or can otherwise
allege some plausible Pr^^^nces, which the Devil is never without, nor fails
of a supply to such as act on his behalf; whereas Matter of Fact has all along
spoke quite the contrary, the continued Experience of nigh an hundred Years
most sadly assured us, that they could never be obliged by any Kindness, nor
satisfied (...)

And now, Sir, without doubt you must (...) find the Trouble I was complemented
into, (...) upon your (...) receiving a Volume instead of a Letter.

Yet, be assured, 'twas with some difficulty it ended here; for having once set
my Thoughts afloat, the Current ran so strong, I could not stem its Force so as
to stop at pleasure: And by this you may see confirmed what I have hitherto
entertained you withal; for if a single Person cannot take his Liberty, in so
little an Affair too, without somewhat of Inconvenience and Trouble, how much
worse must it prove in a whole Body, a Community of People, who are so easily
hurried on, without knowing what they do, or from whom they act, till all end
in Mischief and Confusion: And therefore give me leave to declare, that the
Restraints propounded in the Premises, whatever satisfaction they may give you,
and some few of your Temper, will be no ways acceptable to that extravagant
Licentiousness, both Corporal and Spiritual, Ecclesiastical and Civil, which
has so long had the Ascendant amongst us, and bears too nigh Affinity to that
Acknowledgment in Livy; Nec Morbum far possumus, nec Remedium. God, in his
due time, make us sensible both of the Folly and Danger, which such Courses
tend unto: In the mean while, and ever, continue to defend our Church from all
her Enemies, within, as well as with^^^, the daily Prayer of,

SIR, Yours, etc. -- M -- ^.

FINIS.

