A Brief and Plain DISCOVERY OF THE Falseness and Unscripturalness OF
ANABAPTISM: As the same is now Practiced by those of that Persuasion: W^^^^in
are (plainly) Proved, from God's Word, the Five Particulars here Handled.

I. That God's Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17.7. is the Covenant of Grace,
whereby all God's Elect are Saved.

II. That Circumcision was the Initiatory Seal of that Covenant to Abraham and
his Church-Seed, during that Dispensation.

III. That, Water Baptism is now (under the Gospel) succeeded in the room
thereof.

IV. That the Gentile Believers and their Infant Seed, have as Real a Right to
the same Covenant of Grace, and the Seal thereof, as had Abraham and his
Infant Seed.

V. That Sprinkling (or Pouring-out) Water, on the Subject of Baptism, is the
(Undoubted) Right Way of Administering Baptism under the Gospel.

By Ja. Barry, an Unworthy Minister of the Gospel

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1699.

TO THE Impartial and Unprejudiced READER, Who desires to be Rightly Informed
in the Nature and Design of God's Covenant with Abraham, (his Friend) in the
behalf of Himself and all his Ecclesiastical (or Church) Seed, both among Jews
and Gentiles; to the End of the World.
Courteous Reader,
IF the Spirit of Grace Reigns in thy Heart, thou will (I doubt not) readily
believe me, (especially when I most Solemnly Profess, as if I were
(immediately) to be called to the Bar of the Great Judge) that no Prejudice
('or Hatred) against the Persons of the People, who (without any Warrant from
God's Word) Style themselves Baptists, and Baptized Churches of Christ, has
stirred me up to appear in Print, in Opposing those Pernicious Principles,
which the Men of that Persuasion do (with so much Violence and unscriptural
Zeal) Teach and Maintain. I sincerely Bless God, that his good Spirit has
taught me to distinguish between Persons, and the Errors which they hold and
maintain. Their Persons I love, and am really grieved, that I love them no more
than I do. And I hope neither they nor any others will be Angry with me for so
doing: But their Errors (in Religion) I do from my Heart abominate and loath,
because hateful to God, and all good Men, who know and understand them so to
be. And for thus doing, I neither fear a Frown from God, nor yet Blame from any
Man, (truly-wise) who is able to distinguish Truth from Error.

That I shall be Censured and (uncharitably) Reflected on, for what I have
done, in Printing this small Tract, I am not Insensible: I am very sure none
will thus do, but such as eitheir know not, or care not what they say.

These kind of Blows I am taught to ward off with a Religious Scorn and a Holy
Contempt; resolving (in Christ's Strength) to pursue and hold fast the Truth of
God, let who will Bark and Cavil against it. It was the saying of Valerius
Maximus, Aequo Animo ferenda sunt, Imperitorum Convitia, and ad Honesta
vadenti, Contemnendus est, Iste Contemplus. The Reproaches (says he) of the
Ignorant and Unskilful are to be born with an even (or patient) Mind: And he
that intends to advance toward Good and Honest things, must Contemn their
Contempt. That somewhat will come out in answer hereto, I question not, (if the
Men of that Principle have not lost their old Wont) but (my Comfort and
Confidence being built on the Rock of Ages) I never fear a Confutation from any
(nay all) of that Persuasion, who Breath on the Earth, until they procure (from
Heaven) another Gospel, which is (Diametrically) opposite to the Gospel
delivered by the Son of God, which I am sure will never be.

I have made no Deviation from the good old Way chalkt out by Abraham's God,
(wherein the Prophets and Apostles, with all the Primitive Churches, who are
gone to Heaven, walked in) that I know of: If I have, I do faithfully promise,
that (upon the discovery of my Error) I will own my self therein mistaken.

I have been (for several Years past) importuned by many Serious and Godly
Christians, to Print what now I expect to be Blamed for, but never found my
self (thereto) inclined, till of late (not that I Question any part of what I
have Printed, being God's Truth; but (indeed) the variety of Trials and sharp
Afflictions, which have (Incessantly) followed me, since called to the Sacred
Office, both in my Native City (Dublin) and also in England, have kept me back;
together with my own great Aversion to appear in Print, in any Matters
Controversal. But observing (of late) how strangely Anabaptism spreads both in
City and Country; and being fully convinced, that Ignorance of (and
Vnacquaintedness with) the Covenant of Grace, was (and still is) that which
has given advantage to the Preachers of that Way, in drawing Proselites after
them, I have (in Conscience of my Duty, both to God and Men) Improved my poor
Talent, in Explaining and Opening up the Nature and Design of the Covenant of
Grace, made with Abraham in Genesis 17.7. in hopes, that God will Bless the
Plainness and Brevity therein used, to inform poor Ignorant (and Vnthinking)
Souls, how wretchedly they are imposed upon, by Preachers of that Persuasion,
who have (themselves) as great need to be Instructed and Taught, what the deep
Mysteries of the Covenant of Grace be, as the poor (Tongue-ty'd) Bades, whom
they (in vain) Labor to exclude and shut out from the Benefits and Seal of
that Covenant, in the Visible Churches of Christ. As their denying Abraham's
Covenant, to be the Covenant of Grace, administers just ground of suspecting,
whether they have any other than dark and confused Notions about the Doctrine
of God's Free Grace, (so much spoken of in Pulpit and Print.)

So their Unmercifulness and Hard-heartedness to the Infants of Believing
Parents, in not allowing such to be accounted of the number of God's Elect,
merely because of the Incapacity of such, to make an open Profession of Faith
and Repentance themselves, administers just ground of suspecting whether they
be Orthodox in the Doctrine of Election. I am very sure the State of Infancy
can neither null or make void the Electing Decree of God, nor yet render the
Elect Infant any way incapable of that Grace of God's Covenant, to which he is
Elected, or of the Seal of that Covenant of Grace in the Church Visible; for
any to hold or say it does, is to Reflect on the most High God, and to make him
a mutable Agent, like to a Fickle Man, contrary to Mal. 3.6. Romans 11.29. and
(unavoidably) to send all Elect Infants to Hell, (who Die Infants) contrary to
Mar. 10 14. Jo. 6.39. Romans 11.7. All that I shall farther say, is only to ^eg
and Pray thee, for the Lord's sake, for thy own Souls sake, and for that Love
and Tenderness, which the Law of Nature (especially that of Grace) obliges thee
to have for poor Infants, (if thou be a Parent) consider well, and weigh
Judiciously (in the Balance of God's Sanctuary) the Arguments laid down in
this small Tract, to prove what I have (therein) undertaken. If God Bless the
Reading thereof, to the keeping thee back from Espousing the Errors herein
decry'd; or if it should prove the occasion of thy Vomitting up (by sound
Repentance and hearty Reformation) the love and liking thou have had to those
Principles of Darkness, give God the Glory of his own Grace, and suffer thy
self no longer to be imposed on by such Preachers, who are not only Intruders
into the Sacred Office, but also Heterodox and Unsound, in what they Teach
concerning God's Covenant with Abraham, being a Covenant of Works, concerning
Infants Baptism, being but a Popish Invention, and a piece of Will Worship; and
what they Teach and confidently Affirm of Dipping, being the only right Mode of
Baptizing Commanded by Christ, and Practiced by John and all the first
Baptizers: By which Principles they Raze the very Foundation of Salvation to
Grown Believers, as well as to their Infants: And disown, that Christ has any
right Gospel Churches but themselves: From which Principles I shall ever say,
and heartily pray, Good Lord Deliver me, and all the Families of thy Faithful
People.

THE INTRODUCTION. An occasional Discourse between a Minister and a Church
Member, concerning Infant Baptism; wherein sundry material Questions are put by
the Church Member; and plainly and particularly Answered by the Minister, for
the Information of the Ignorant, and the satisfaction of such as are staggering
in their judgments, about the lawfulness of Infants Baptism.
Minister. Brother Edward, By what I have heard from some of my Neighbors, as
also by the discourse which past between you and me when last together, I
suspect that some have been tampering with you, to draw you away to Anabaptism;
is it so or no? deal plainly, to the end I might address my self to my duty, in
giving you satisfaction herein, from Gods Word.


Church Member. I must ingeniously acknowledge Sir, that I am not without
wavering, and doubtful thoughts in my Mind about Infant Baptism, occasioned
partly, by discoursing with some of that way and persuasion; partly, by reading
some Books which were put into my hand; which, to me seems full of clearness,
that Infant Baptism is no way warrantable or justifiable by the Gospel of
Christ.

Minist. I find then that I am not mistaken in my apprehension of you in this
matter: but for your encouragement, I must tell you, that you are but tried
herein by a temptation; for which I think never the worse of your Souls state,
neither are my hopes and confidence of your integrity toward God, a jot or
whit lessened by the inclination in your Mind to favor that Opinion; for I
have known some very Holy and upright Hearted Christians, who in the simplicity
of their Hearts have strongly inclined to favor and espouse that cause and
principle, as the most plausible and likely to agree with the Gospel, there
being no mention at all of Infant Baptism in the Gospel, neither in Precept,
nor yet in Example, to recommend it; yea, I my self have (in my first setting
out in the ways of Christianity) met with temptations to draw me to that
Opinion; and that by the very same means which has occasioned your staggering
herein. And the main things which induced me to hanker after that Principle,
were, (1.) The high and charitable opinion I had of some of that Party, being
Men of high seize in Grace and Gospel Holiness. (2.) There appearing to
me no command for Infant Baptism in all the Gospel, nor yet any one instance
where it is said that such were Baptized. (3.) The many Quotations of Learned
Divines and Counsels, which the Anabaptists Books assured me were all of their
Judgment and Persuasion herein; which much startled, and swayed me to kind
apprehensions of their way. (4) Their Branding Infant Baptism with the Black
Brand of Will Worship and Popery; against both which I always had (since I knew
Christ in the Gospel of his Grace) and ever shall have (I humbly hope in
Christ) a Mortal Dislike, and rooted Hatred. By means of the 4 particulars now
mentioned, I was drawn to the very verge or brink of Anabaptism, being just on
the point of renouncing my Baptism (received in my Infant State) as being a
mere Nullity or no Baptism at all. My roving Spirit thus fluctuating and
tossing between the Waves and Billows of doubtful and distracting Cogitations:
what I had best to do in this Case? whether to offer my self to be Dipped, yea,
or not? or to address my self to Ministers of the contrary Judgment for
resolution (in so weighty and material a point:) Matters being thus, I
providentially and happily happened into the Company of some of the
Congregational Persuasion, Men no whit inferior to those I so much admired,
(for Piety) and Holiness, and who (I very well knew) were able to instruct and
teach the others for matter of Learning, and deep knowledge in the Mysteries of
the Gospel: These debating sundry points in Controversy between the Anabaptists
and the Orthodox, Protestant, Reformed Churches, concerning Infant Baptism; I
apprehended and saw so far into the Mystery of Baptism, that I was at a stand,
and began to question whether I was not under a delusion in disliking my
Infant Baptism, received in Infancy; by means hereof I was stirred up to Pray
earnestly to God, that his good Spirit might teach and guide me in the way of
Gospel Truth; which was seconded by a diligent search into the Holy Scripture,
and a careful reading and weighing the Arguments brought by both Parties, both
for and against Infant Baptism. And in a short time (through the special
assistance of the Spirit of Christ) I was enabled to see and understand that
there was nothing of solid weight in the Reasons brought against
Infant Baptism, but what are in reality repugnant, and contradictory to the
Word of God: as will (I hope) in time, most plainly appear to your
understanding. I have been the more prolix in speaking my experience herein,
that you might become sensible, that even Godly Men might be entangled in
erroneous Opinions. And to let you know what be the ordinary means to escape
the Nets of Crafty Men, who lie in wait to ensnare poor, unstable, (though
Honest and well meaning) Souls. Now, as Christ (my Lord and Master) said to
Peter, after his recovery from his fall: When thou art Converted strengthen thy
Brethren, Luke 22. So, I am now come as my Duty binds me, to endeavor your
recovery, and full satisfaction in these points, about Infant-Baptim, wherein
you seem to stagger.


Church Memb. I hope I can say (through special Grace) that I am no way fond of
Error: But what I do herein, I do it really from my Conscience, according to
the light thereof: I hope (Sir) you will not blame me for acting according
thereto.


Minist. I am far from arraigning your integrity to God, (being very sensible
that herein you are but under a temptation, as stronger Christians than you or
I have been, and now are; neither shall I (in the least) attempt to press you
to act herein against your Conscience: Conscience (I am sensible) is a tender
thing, which is to be informed, not violently impelled or forced. I hope you
have the same Charity for me, as to believe that what I do act in Baptizing the
Infant Seed of encovenanted Parents, and Pleading for such; I do the same from
my Conscience, being fully persuaded that what I do herein, is according to the
Word of God: But though I do not take on me to force or Lord it over your
Conscience, I hope you will (without offense) give me leave to use the freedom
of a Pastor with you, in doing two things, in order to recover you. The first
is, to reprove you for going out of the way of Duty, in exposing your
Conscience to those Soul deluding entanglements, which has occasioned your
present disturbance, and unsettledness in your Principles, by deluding
entanglements; I mean your going out of the way of your Calling, to stare and
gaze (out of curiosity) at the plunging of Persons under the Water; which
(albeit you and others may think may be done without either offense to your
Brethren, or any kind of danger to your self) has in it an infatuating,
charming Energie, to allure and draw into a liking of it. Your frequent
discoursing with Men of that Principle, who (you very well know) glory not a
little in Proselyting People to that way: And your so much delighting to Read
their Books, being not able to grapple with such subtle Enemies; the Deceit of
whose Arguments lies covered under a false Vizzard. By these your Practices you
have filled the Eyes of your Conscience so full of that dust and smoke, which
is always raised by doubtful Disputations; that for want of your Monitor, (your
Conscience I mean) you are now at an apparent stand in those ways of Truth
wherein you ought to run swiftly; and well it were if you had been at a stand
before you had so far advanced in these unscriptural Tenants: But however,
seeing you are not ascended so high (in these Errors) as to be Seated in the
Scorners-Chair, to laugh at and deride Baby-sprinkling, as a piece of
Will Worship and mere Popery; as the Anabaptists are well known to term and
account Infant Baptism: (Not for want of ignorance and prejudice, the Lord
knows.) I shall now in the second place endeavor to help you out of this
Quagmire, into which your own incautelousness and sinful curiosity has (by the
Art of a subtle Adversary) involved you: in order then to a speedy helping you
herein, I desire you will reduce those things wherein you desire to be
satisfied (about Infant Baptism) to as few Heads, (and in as plain a method) as
you possibly can; and then I shall endeavor to Answer your Objections; wherein
(I faithfully promise you) I shall most freely refer my self to the Word of
God, and to the Writings of those Divines now in Glory: At whose Writings the
Wisest of Anabaptists are glad to light their Candle, though in the point of
Baptism they are accounted neither able nor worthy to teach them. And when you
and I are come to Conclusion, You in Objecting, and I in Answering, it will
then appear whether Infant Baptism be any part of Will Worship or mere Popery,
as it is represented by its Adversarys.


Church Memb. Sir! I like your Proposal very well, and in compliance with your
reasonable Request, as also in order to my own satisfaction, I shall reduce
those particulars wherein I desire to be satisfied, to 3 General Heads; under
each of which I hope you will give me liberty to Propose (by way of Objection,)
what I think convenient and fit to start.


Minist. I like very well to hear you name but 3 General Heads; I hope you will
observe Order and Method in what you intend to Object under those 3 Heads.


Church Memb. I will observe Order and Method as well as I can; and shall (I
hope) with becoming Candor, weigh in the Balance of an impartial and
unprejudicate consideration and judgment, what strength appears to be in your
Answer; and in case I find my Conscience satisfied by the strength of your
Answer, I shall readily own it, and give Glory to God.


Minist. I desire you to name the 3 General Heads, for fear we should forget
them when we come to be earnest in our Dispute.


Church Memb. The 3 General Heads which I propose to be satisfied in, are as
follows, (1.) The Covenant which God made with Abraham, mentioned in Genesis 17.7.
(2.) The Seal of that Covenant. And (3.) The Subjects who have a visible Right
to that Covenant and the Seal thereof. Under these 3 Heads (I suppose) may be
brought in all that I need to say.


Minist. As touching your first General Head, (viz.) The Covenant which God
made with Abraham, What would you be at, about it.


Church Memb. I would pray you to clear it up from the Word of God, that that
Covenant is a Covenant of Grace, and not a Covenant of Works; for the
apprehension I always had (till of late) that that Covenant was the Covenant of
Grace, was the foundation whereon my former Principle, (viz.) Infant Baptism
was founded; but being informed and taught otherwise, both by Men's Preaching,
and also by their Books. I am much in doubt as touching the lawfulness of
Infant Baptism.


Minist I perceive then you apprehend that Infant Baptism is like to stand or
fall, as the Covenant of God with Abraham, is proved to be either a Covenant of
Grace or otherwise; what if it be made good from the Word of God, that the
Covenant of God with Abraham is a Covenant of mere Grace.


Church Memb. Truly, to be plain and ingenious, I cannot see how Infant Baptism
can stand, if that Covenant be a Covenant of Works; as I am sensible the
Baptists hold and teach it is; and which I am inclined (under my present light)
to judge it must be as they say. But in case it be proved otherwise, I plainly
see the Anabaptists are like to suffer a miserable Shipwreck; for their holding
and teaching that Gods Covenant with Abraham is a Covenant of Works, is the
principal Pillar, on which almost all their Arguments against Infant Baptism
lean. If that Pillar then be shaken and overthrown by Scriptural Arguments, the
whole structure will tumble of course.


Minist. I am very glad that You and I do (in any measure) agree in our
Sentiments about this matter; To let you see then, how Sandy a foundation the
Anabaptists Build on, I shall bgin to lay down some Scriptural Arguments, to
prove them most heterodox and unsound in this point of Abraham's Covenant;
wherein they do most evidently raze the very foundation of Life and Salvation
to Abraham himself, and all his Seed.


CHAP. I.
Of God's Covenant with Abraham, wherein is plainly proved, that that Covenant,
in Genesis 17.7. is the Covenant of Grace.

THat God's Covenant with Abraham, in Genesis 17.7. was, and still is, the
Covenant of Grace, dispensed in a Church way: None of the Orthodox ever did,
(or do) deny, that I can find, That the taking that Covenant in this Sense, is
the Foundation Principle, on which all sound Protestants, do maintain and
justify, the Right of Believers Infants to Baptism, is beyond contradiction.

When the Most High, and Sovereign Lord God saw fit to make known his Will and
Pleasure, to be; that his Covenant of Grace, (agreed on, between himself, and
his Son Christ in Eternity) should be Dispensed in an Ecclesiastical (or
Church) way, he singles out (above all other men) Abraham his Friend; on whom
he Confers the Honorable Title, of the Father of the Faithful, Romans 4.11. Not
that Abraham did, or could (possibly) Beget a Believer (as such) or could
convey into the Children he Begat (according to Fleshly Generation) that Noble
Grace of Faith, wherewith God's Free-Gift had Blessed himself. But God opens
and propounds his Everlasting Covenant of Grace and Salvation to him, as a
Public Person, who was to Personate all true Believers; who (in after Ages)
were to be Members of his Visible Churches, to the second coming of Christ.

The Sum and Substance of that Covenant, is briefly comprehended in the Words
of Genesis 17.7. I will Establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed
after thee; in their Generations, for an Everlasting Covenant; to be a God to
thee, and to thy Seed after thee.

This Covenant has Two Essential Parts, as all Right Covenants have, (1.)
God's part, held forth in the Words, I will be a God to thee, etc.

The meaning whereof (according to the Analogy of Faith,) must be thus
understood. Though thou Abraham, whom I now call, to become my Friend and
Favoright, and a Public Head (or Representative) of all believing Church
Members, to the end of the World; be'st an undon and guilty sinner, polluted in
thy Nature, and born under Adam's Covenant of Works; liable and obnoxious to
its Curse, and to the Wrath to come; unable to recover or help thy self out of
that deplorable Condition, into which thy natural Birth (as Adam's Child) has
put thee. And albeit, thou be no way worthy of any Favor, yet I think fit, to
let thee know, what thoughts and purposes of Mercy and Kindness, I have in
store for thee, Abraham: And for the Rest of mine Elect, whom I have Chosen to
my self in Christ, (the Promised Messiah,) of whom, that Son which I have
Promised thee, is to be a Type: And in whose Person, all mine Elect, are to be
Allegorically (or Typically) Represented; and that, as thy Son is to be a Type
of mine, in whom I have Elected and Chosen them.

I frankly and freely Pardon and Forgive thee, all those Transgressions and
Sins, wherewith, (as Adam's Child) thou stand Chargeable, for breaking that
Covenant of Works I made with Adam, thy (and all Mankinds) Natural and Faederal
Head.

I Account thee perfectly Just and Righteous in my sight; not by, or for, that
Principal of Inherent Holiness, which the Spirit of Grace (in effectual
Calling) has wrought in thee, (which Inherent Holiness is (ever) the fruit and
effect of a Justified State; but never the Procuring (or Meriting) Cause. But I
account and esteem thee, as Just and Righteous, as if thou had (in thy own
Person) exactly performed that Legal Righteousness, which the Law Moral
requires; on the alone account of my Sons righteousness, which (as the
Mediator, and surety of this my Covenant of Grace; he is to perform in the
behalf of thee, and all mine Elect) I most freely impute to thee.

I Sanctify, and Renew, thy vitiated, and poluted Nature, by my Sanctifying
Spirit, that thou may be capable of Communion and Fellowship, with me, both
here, in my Church Militant: And here after, in my Church Triumphant.

I Adopt thee to be my Son, by Grace, and by virtue hereof, thou art restored
to all the Blessings, Rights and Privileges, which Adam (thy Natural and
Federal Head) lost and forfeited, by his Apostasy and Defection: Hereby thou
art Admitted (as a Free Denizon) into the Family and Household of God: from
whence thou wast cast out (in Adam) when he was ejected and cast out, for his
Rebellion, witness his expulsion out of Earthly Paradise a lively Type of the
Heavenly. I Promise to Establish thee in Grace, so as thou shall never (more)
be in danger, of loosing thy self, or forfeiting my Love and Favor any more:
For ever I will be a Sun, and a Shield, to furnish and supply thee with all
necessary Accomodations for Life in this World; I will Protect and Defend thee,
from all adverse Powers, Spiritually and Bodily, which shall contrive and seek
thy Ruin. And (finally) I will receive thee into Heaven, when (by Death) thou
go hence; where thou shall Live and Reign, with me, Eternally.

And the very same Mercy and Favor, which I have (now) expressed, and shown to
thee; I do oblige my self, by the promise of this my Covenant, that I will do
to all mine Elect, who are to spring from thy Loins. As also, to all mine
Elect, who are to come of the Gentile Race; to the end of the World.

(2.) Man's Part; As for thee (Abraham) this thou must do, (on thy part) thou
must walk Humbly and Uprightly before me; thou must make the Moral Law
(Engraven by the Finger of my Spirit) on the heart of Adam (thy Natural and
Federal Head) the standing Rule of thy Obedience, both Negatively and
Positively. In all the parts of thy Obedience, thou must look (exactly) to
three things, (1.) To the Subject Matter of thy Obedience, let it be what I
Command and Require, not what Creatures Devise or Enjoin. (2.) To the manner,
See that thou do it in Faith, keeping thine Eye on Christ (my Son) for
Acceptance, and Acting all by Strength derived from him. (3.) To the end, See
that my Glory be that thou aimest at, and designest, in all thou go about.
Thou shall not do my Work and Service in a Mercenary way, as a Servant that
Works for Wages; but thou must obey my Command as a Son, with freedom of
Spirit, and from a Principle of Love and Gratitude, knowing and considering,
that my Grace and Love has made Provision of all that is needful, to make thee
(every way Eternally happy, both here and hereafter. The dreadful Curse, and
Eternal Death, to which (by Sin) thou becamest obnoxious: My Son Christ (Typ'd
out by the Ram) has set thee for ever Free from it. And that by his being made
a Curse, and undergoing Death for thee, (as being thy Sponsor or Surety) at his
Hands I have Received, the full of that Debt, whereto thou becamest liable, by
breaking my Law, there remains not the least Mite for thee to pay; so that
(now) thou have no cause to fear my Vindicative Justice; the many and sharp
Afflictions, wherewith thou shall meet, in thy way to Glory, shall be but the
gentle Chastisements, of thy (dearly) Loving, and Reconciled Father; who (by
them) will Purge out, the remains of thy indwelling Corruption: and sweetly
wean thee from the enticing Objects of the vain and bewitching World thou
Live in. That Perfect and Spotless Righteousness, which must Recommend thee
to me, and present thee Blameless, before the Throne of my Glorious Holiness,
in the Third Heaven, is (Subjectively) Inherent, in the Person of God-Man, thy
Mediator and Surety; to this Mediatorial Righteousness of his, thou shall add
nothing, neither thy own Personal qualifications; nor yet, the Holiness of
Saints or Angels; (as if thereby) thou could be made more Acceptable, than
that Righteousness of his does make thee. Thou shall keep my Covenant, both
thou and all thy Ecclesiastical, (or Church) Seed, throughout your Generations,
till my Son comes to Judge the World at the last day. Thou, and all thy Church
Seed, (which Springs from thee by Fleshly Generation,) shall observe to have
all your Males marked with Circumcision, the visible Token and Seal of this my
Gracious Covenant, which I have (now) entered into, with thee; for thy self (a
stipulating Father,) and for all thy Children; who are to be the Members of my
Sons Mediatorial Kingdom; or Visible Church on the Earth.

And when Christ my Son shall come in the Flesh, and shall enter upon his
Mediatorial Kingdom, whatever visible Token or Seal he shall appoint to Succed
in the Room of Circumcision, thy Gentile Church Seed (as well as Jews,) who are
to believe in him, shall (carefully) observe to be Sealed therewith, both they
and their Infants: And that by Virtue of this my Covenant, I now make with
thee, for thy self and them. And to the end, that neither thou, nor thy
Children (in succeeding Ages) may Be Ignorant of what my Will and Pleasure is,
concerning the Non-Elect, who are to come and spring from Believing and Holy
Parents, in my visible Church or Churches. I notify to thee, and thy Church
Seed after thee, (throughout their Generations) that my Sovereign Will and
Pleasure is, that all the Infants of my Believing, Professing Church Membrs,
shall be marked with the Visible Token or Seal, of this my Covenant in the
Church, whereof the Professing Parent (or Parents) are Members, and that
without any regard had to the Elect, or Non-Elect. For, seeing that the Secrets
of my Decrees and Counsels are known to my self alone, I Will, that thou, and
thy Church Seed after thee, (to the end of the World) do, in the Judgm^nt of
(rational) Charity, Judge all the Seed, and Infant Posterity of my Professing
People, who have laid hold on my Covenant, (by an Eternal Visible Profession)
to belong to the Election, and to own them for such, until they (by open
Apostasy, and final Impenitency) do manifest the contrary. For albeit my
Visible Churches do consist of Elect, and Non Elect, and the one as well as the
other do partake of the Seal of my Covenant, and are partakers of all Church
Privileges; yet none shall ever partake (internally and savingly) of the
inward Grace and Mercy Signified, and Sealed by the Token and Seal of my
Covenant, (in the Church Visible,) but the Elect only, whose Names are
(particularly) Registered in the Lamb's Book of Life. And although the Non-Elect
in my Church, do fall short of the saving Benefits of my Covenant of Grace; yet
shall they find that I am no way behind with them; for, although I (the Absolute
Sovereign of the World) be no way obliged to the Creature (especially fallen
Rebels,) yet, seeing it is my Pleasure to Employ the Non-Elect in the Service
of my Church, (while it is in a Militant State) that those common Gifts (of my
Spirit) wherewith they are to be endowed, might be laid out and improved, for
the good and welfare of my Elect and Chosen; I will give them a Place in my
Church, that they shall be called by my Name, and shall have an equal Right
(with mine Elect) to the Seal of my Covenant, and all outward helps and means
of Salvation, in the Church Visible; whereby it shall plainly appear (in the
day of Judgment) that their missing Heaven, and falling short of Eternal Life,
was of their own Procurement. Notwithstanding, As is the Service wherein they
are Employed in my Church, I will give them a plentiful Recompense (viz.) a
Temperal Reward, in Lieu of a Temporal Service; Such as Bodily Health, Worldly
Wealth, Pleasures and Honors, etc. which are (every way) more suitable to
their Spirit, and are more sought and delighted in (by them) than are the
things laid up for my Chosen: Plain Instances (hereof) I have seen fit to leave
on Record, in the Persons of Ishmael and Isaac, both born of Abraham (according
to the Flesh) the one a Reprobate the other Elect; both must be of the Church
Visible, and Sealed with the Visible Token and Seal of Gods Covenant with
Abraham. Of the same Nature is that of Esau and Jacob, both born of Isaac
(according to Fleshly Generation) yet the one a Reprobate and the other Elect;
both must be of the Visible Church, and Sealed with the Seal of the Covenant,
and pass (current) for Church Members, (before men) until they (themselves)
make the contrary to appear: As did Ishmael, Esau, etc.

And thus, having as plainly and as briefly as I could, (for the information of
those who are yet Ignorant of Abraham's Covenant) Explained and shown the
Substance and Tenure of Gods Covenant with Abraham, for himself and all his
Ecclesiastical, or Church Seed, both Jews and Gentiles, to the end of the World.

I come now to lay down some Scriptural Arguments, to Prove, that Gods Covenant
with Abraham, (as now Explained) is the Covenant of Grace; which God Propounded
to Abraham, in Genesis 17.7. And not a Covenant of Works, as the Anabaptists Teach
it is.

That it is the Covenant of Grace, and no other, will evidently appear to any,
who look not asquint on the Arguments following.

Arg. 1. The first Argument is this, If God never yet made a Covenant of Works,
with any (mee^) Man, but that which he made with sinless Adam (the Natural and
Federal Head of all Mankind) in the State of Innocence, before the Fall: Then
God's Covenant with Abraham, is the Covn ant of Grace, and not a Covenant of
Works. But God never (yet) made a Covenant of Works, with any mere Man, but
that which he made with sinless Adam, (the Natural and Federal Head of all
Mankind) in the State of Innocence, before the Fall: Therefore, Gods Covenant
with Abraham, in Genesis 17.7. is the Covenant of Grace, and no other. Plain it
is, and none (without Lying against God) can deny it, that God made a Covenant
of Works with Adam, and in him with all Mankind.

The Condition whereof was, do and Live; sin and Dye. And as plain it is, that
Adam Fell, by Transgressing that Covenant, by which Fall he lost the Blessed
Image of God to himself, and all his Posterity, whereby he and his Posterity
became (utterly incapable of Life and Salvation by that Covenant.

Now, Abraham being (by natural Birth) a Son of the first Adam, and (as such)
born under the Curse of Adam's Covenant, and partaker of a sinful and polluted
Nature; which rendered him as incapable of performing any Work, which (as a
condition) can Answer the Laws demand; as a man naturally dead, is incapable of
raising or quickening himself; or as a Sparrow is incapable to remove, or carry
on its Back, the greatest Mountain in the World. To what end should the only
Wise God make a Covenant of Works, with such a fallen sinner.

Arg. 2. If to hold and Teach, that God's Covenant with Abraham, (in Genesis
17.7.) is a Covenant of Works, and not a Covenant of Grace, be a high
Reflection on God; and also destructive to the Souls of Men; then is God's
Covenant with Abraham (in Genesis 17.7.) the Covenant of Grace, and not a Covenant
of Works. But to hold and Teach, that God's Covenant with Abraham, (in Genesis
17.7.) is a Covenant of Works, and not a Covenant of Grace, is a High
Reflection on God; and destructive to the Souls of Men.

Therefore, God's Covenant with Abraham, (Genesis 17.7.) is the Covenant of Grace,
and not a Covenant of Works.

For rendering this Argument Unanswerable, Two things want confirmation. First,
That to hold and Teach, that God's Covenant with Abraham is a Covenant of
Works, is a high Reflection on God. And Secondly, That the same is Destructive
to the Souls of Men.

The First of these will evidently appear, to the unprejudiced and Impartial
Reader, if he (seriously) consider, how Inconsistent it is, with the Divine
Attributes of God, to make a Covenant of Works, with a Lapsed, Polluted Sinner,
whom he knows to be (altogether) Dead in Trespasses and Sins, and (every way)
as unable to will, or do, any Work that is (Spiritually) good, as a Dead Man is
able to quicken and raise himself.

For Illustration sake, let it be considered, How unbecoming a Wise and Prudent
Man it would be, to strike a Covenant (or Bargain) for ten, or twenty thousand
Pounds, with an Insolvent Person, who is well known not to be worth ten
Farthings in the World; and (which is yet worse) who has neither Wit to
contrive, nor Health or Limbs to Work to get a Penny toward paying such a vast
Sum. I cannot so much as doubt of any (worldly Wise) Man's unwillingness to be
guilty of such an oversight as this: And shall the (Unerringly) Wise God, be
guilty of so great an Absurdity?

S^condly, As this Principle Reflects on God; so it is Destructive to the Souls
of Men. This appears (beyond all contradiction,) in that it raseth the very
Foundation of Men's Salvation: by denying that Covenant to be a Covenant of
Grace, which Abraham and Isaac, with Jacob, and all the Old Testament Believers
depended on for Eternal Salvation; and by which, we (Gentile Believers) hope to
go to Heaven. For, most plain it is, that by this pernicious Principle, Abraham
is lost, with all who died trusting to the Grace exhibited in that Covenant.
And if Abraham (the Father of the Faithful) be, trusting to a Covenant of
Works; I cannot see, how any of his Eccelsiastical Church Seed can be Saved,
any more than he is. For, by a Covenant of Works, no mere Man, ever was, or
shall be justified and Saved.

Arg. 3 If the Scripture no where, (either directly or by consequence) calls
God's Covenant with Abraham, (Genesis 17.7.) a Covenant of Works; then it is a
Covenant of Grace, and not a Covenant of Works. But the Scripture no where
(either directly or by consequence,) calls God's Covenant with Abraham, a
Covenant of Works: Therefore the Covenant of God with Abraham, is the Covenant
of Grace, and not a Covenant of Works.

If it cannot be Demonstrated from the written Word, or by Arguments Deducible
therefrom, that Abraham's Covenant, Genesis 17.7. is called, (or can be proved) a
Covenant of Works; They who so hold and Teach, will be found ranked among those
who call good evil; and evil, good; and who put Light for Darkness, and
Darkness for Light, Esa. 5.10. For Men to take on them, to term Abraham's
Covenant a Covenant of Works, without any Warrant Divine, is (to me) an
Argument of an ignorant, rash and presumptuous Spirit: from which Charge, let
such Men see how they can Acquit and free themselves.

Arg. 4. If Abraham was Justified by Faith, and not by Works; then the Covenant
which God made with him, is the Covenant of Grace, and not of Works. But
Abraham was Justified by Faith, and not by Works; Therefore the Covenant which
God made with him, is the Covenant of Grace, and not the Covenant of Works.
That Abraham was Justified by Faith, and not by works, the Scripture is
express, and clear, Romans 4.2, 3, 4. Gal. 2.5, 6, 7.

Arg. 5. If God has made no other Covenant of Grace with Abraham, distinct
from that in Genesis 17.7. then, that Covenant in Genesis 17.7. is the Covenant of
Grace: but God made no Covenant of Grace, with Abraham, distinct from that in
Genesis 17.7. Therefore, that Covenant in Genesis 17.7. is the Covenant of Grace, and
not the Covenant of Works.

That which will determine the Point in Controversy, is this, let those who
(herein) oppose me, lay down a Scriptural definition of the Covenant of Grace;
and that in such Terms, as best please themselves; and in Case, their own
definition, do not agree (at least for Substance) with Genesis 17.7. if it be
according to God's Word, then am I freely willing to own my self (herein)
mistaken: If they refuse to comply with so fair a Proposal, let the Judicious
and Impartial Reader Judge, who is at the Loss (herein,) they or I?

I conclude this Chapter with this Dilemma, (viz.) Abraham, (the Father of the
Faithful) he is e^ther Saved, or else he is Damned; one of these two the
Adversaries (I now oppose) must grant, for there is no middle State for Souls
Departed.

If they say he is Damned, then is there no ground left us to hope, that any of
Adam's Posterity ever were or shall be Saved; for we have no other Covenant
whereby to expect Salvation, but that of Abraham: And if he Perished under that
Covenant, so must we.

If they grant, that Abraham is in a State of Salvation, (as they must, if they
speak by the Spirit of Christ) then Abraham was Justified and Saved by a
Covenant of Grace, and if by a Covenant of Grace, then that Covenant mentioned
in Genesis 17.7. must needs be the Covenant of Grace; for besides that Covenant
the Scriptures know no other.

Against what I have said, (and all Orthodox Protestants constantly ^old and
aff^^m) conce^ning Abraham's Covenant being a Covenant of pure and absolute
Grace; this is Obj^cted by the Adversaries.

Object. The Land of Canaan was a Temporal Blessing, therefore such was the
Covenant, of which Circumcision was a Temporary Seal.

I Answer in two Particulars. First, The Promise of the Land of Canaan is no
Essential part of the Covenant of Abraham. Let the Words in the 7th Verse be
Read without prejudice. The last Clause of the Verse does fully comprehend the
sum and substance of the Covenant of Grace made with Abraham. The Promise of
the Land of Canaan is only by way of Addition or Overplus. No Essential part of
the Covenant it self. The Covenant is briefly comprehended in these Words; I
will be a God to thee, and to thy Seed after thee: For in these Words God
Engages himself (by free and absolute Promise) to Abraham and to his Elect
Church-Seed, that he will be a God to him and them, to do all things for them,
which are needful to complete their Happiness, both here and hereafter.

Secondly, The Land of Canaan was promised, not as it was any Essential part of
the Covenant of Grace; or, as if real Blessedness consisted in the actual
Enjoyment thereof: But as the same was a Temporary Type of Heaven. And for want
of understanding and considering this very thing, many, who have thought
themselves Wiser (in the Mysteries of the Gospel) than their Neighbors, have
proved themselves short of true Wisdom; in this Particular at least.

To convince of this Mistake, let that of our Savior (in Mat. 6.33. But seek
ye first the kingdom of God, and the righteousness there of, and all these
things shall be added to you) be weighed in the Balance of an unprejudiced
Consideration; and to an Impartial Eye, that looks not Asquint at these two
places of Holy Scripture, Genesis 17.7. and Mat. 6.33. it will most plainly
appear, that Temporal Blessings are held forth in one, as well as in the other.
And if it must needs be granted, that because God made the Promise of the Land
of Canaan to Abraham, etc. that therefore God's Covenant with him and his, was
a Covenant of Works: It will (as necessarily follow, that Believers to whom
Christ directs his Speech in Mat. 6.33. are now under a Covenant of Works, as
well as Abraham was. And so, neither Abraham (the Father of the Faithful) nor
any of his Seed, (the Elect I mean) either of the Jewish or Gentile Race, are
like to be Saved or Enjoy God for their Portion. And by this way of Arguing, it
will evidently appear to any seeing Man, (who shuts not his Eyes for fear of
being convinced) that while the Adversaries (I now Oppose in this Controversy)
were employed in devising this Shift to prove God's Covenant (with Abraham) to
be a Covenant of Works; and that (on purpose) to exclude poor Infants from that
Covenant, and from Baptism (the now Seal thereof,) they have (insensibly) shut
both Abraham and themselves too, out from being Saved: And what advantage will
(hereby) accrue to their Cause, let it be improved to the utmost.

Object. 2. It is again Objected, If the Covenant in Genesis 17.7. be a Covenant
of pure Grace, and not a Covenant of Works, and that all Abraham 's Children be
alike Interested therein, then does Grace come by natural Generation, contrary
both to Scripture and Reason.

Answ. The ground of the Objectors mistake, Lies in two things: First, His not
distinguishing or considering, that the Children of Believing Abraham, are said
to be in Covenant two Ways, or in a twofold Respect: First, Internally, by
Virtue of God's Election: And thus none are (or ever shall be) in Covenant, but
Abraham's Seed, (viz) The Elect, who are in Scripture (by way of distinction)
styled, the Children of Promise, Typ'd out in the Person of Jsaac, Gal. 4 28.

These (and they alone) Partake in the saving benefits of the Covenant; and
have also a right to the visible Sign or Seal of the Covenant in the visible
Churches of Christ, under the Gospel Dispensation.

Secondly, Externally, by Virtue of the External Profession made in the Church:
And thus the Non-Elect (as well as the Elect) are said to be in Covenant with
God, in his Churches Visible, (here on Earth.) These Albeit, they never partake
in the saving Blessings of the Covenant; yet by Virtue of the External
Profession made, they and their Infant Seed, (though not Elect,) have an
External Right (in the Church Visible) to the Token (or Seal) of Abraham's
Covenant; and to all other Privileges and Ordinances in the Church, whereof
they are capable, according to the Revealed Will of God: By Virtue hereof it
is, that God calls such his People; and he will have his Church to call and own
them for such too, until they manifest themselves to be otherwise; and that by
a voluntary Defection, and final Apostasy. Plain Instances hereof are
(Graphically) set down in God's Word, in the Persons of Ishmael and Esau (in
whose Persons the Reprobate Seed of Abraham were (Allegorically) typ'd out as
the Elect Seed) were Allegorically and Typically represented in the Persons of
Isaac and Jacob: The former of these Sprang from the Flesh of Abraham, as well
as the latter: And on this account, they had a place in the Visible Church, and
were marked with the Seal of God's Covenant, as well as the latter. They were
esteemed and reckoned as God's Children, and true Members of the Church, until
(by Defection and Apostasy) they discovered themselves to be otherwise. If this
Distinction be not allowed, I cannot see how God can be (orderly) Worshiped by
any Visible Church on Earth.

This is the Sum and Substance of God's Covenant, made with Abraham in Genesis
17.7. and with his Elect Seed, etc. And by Virtue of this Promise, Abraham and
(with him) all his Elect Seed would have been most Happy and eternally Blessed,
had no Promise been made of the Land of Canaan. So (in like manner) shall all
true Believers (with their Elect Seed, be eternally Happy and Blessed, being made
Partakers of the Righteousness of Christ, (intended in Mat. 6.33.) Albeit such
Believers (and their Elect Seed) should (with Lazarus) Die on a Dunghill, for
want of those Temporal Blessings held forth by Christ, in the abovementioned
Promise, which plainly demonstrates, that the Promise which God made to
Abraham, of giving to him and to his Seed, the Land of Canaan, was no more an
Essential part of the Covenant made with him and his Seed, than the Promise
held forth by Christ, in the place (abovenamed) proves, that Believers and
their Elect Seed are (now) under a Covenant of Works. All the difference which
I can find between these two places, is, that the Promise in Genesis 17.7. was
Typical of the Kingdom of Heaven: The other is not so. Were this Covenant of
God made with Abraham, (the Father of the Faithful) as he was a Stipulating and
a Covenanting Representative (in a Church Visible,) but rightly understood and
believed with Application to Men's own Souls, I am persuaded there would be
neither Anabaptists nor Arminian in the World.

The Church of Rome Holds and Teaches that Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion:
I am not ashamed to say, it is the Mother of all Errors in Religion. Neither am
I afraid to affirm it to be both the Mother and Nurse of Anabaptism and
Arminianism.

CHAP. II.
Proving that Circumcision was a Seal of Gods Covenant of Grace, made with
Abraham, and his Seed.

Arg. 1. EIther Circumcision was the external Token (or Seal) of Abraham's
Covenant (of Grace) mentioned, G. 1^ 7. Or else that Covenant had no Seal at all

The Adversary cannot avoid here, H must either Grant or Deny; if he gran^ that
Circumcision was the Seal of Abraham's Covenant, I have what I was to prove; if
he deny it to be the Seal of that Covenant, then it lies at his Door to
demonstrate what was the Seal of that Covenant: If he say that that Covenant
had no Seal at all, He will (thereby) not only gainsay the Word of God, but
also speak against reason; for all Men know it is an essential property of a
Covenant to have a Seal, to confirm the matter contained in the Covenant.

Arg. (2.) If Circumcision is (by God himself) called the Seal of the Covenant,
then is it (beyond all Controversy) the Seal of the Covenant.

But Circumcision is (by God himself) called the Seal of the Covenant.

Therefore Circumcision is (beyond all controversy) the Seal of the Covenant.
For Proof of the Argument, compare Acts 7, 8, with Genesis 17, 10. To which I will
only add, Romans 4, 11, which will put the matter (in Dispute) beyond the reach
of all Dispute. The Words are plain and express, in calling Circumcision the
Seal of the Righteousness of Faith; which plainly proves two things. First,
That Circumcision is a Seal of the Covenant made with Abraham. Secondly, That
the Covenant of which Circumcision was the Seal, was the Covenant of Grace, and
no other.

CHAP. III.
That Water Baptism succeeded, or came in the room of Circumcision, (under the
Gospel Dispensation) I prove by 3 convincing Arguments.

Arg. 1. IF there be no other Initiatory Seal appointed by Christ under the
Gospel but Water Baptism, then is Water Baptism come (or suceeeded) in the room
of Circumcision, to be the initiating Seal under the Gospel: But there is no
other initiatory Seal appointed by Christ under the Gospel, but Water Baptism.

Therefore Water Baptism is come or succeeded in the room of Circumcision, to
be the initiatory Seal under the Gospel.

The truth and strength of this Argument will the more clearly appear, by duly
considering that Circumcision was (under the dark Dispensation of the Law) the
initiating Seal of the Covenant, which will not, (cannot) be denied, unless by
Men who understand (or care) not what they say: That Water Baptism is, (and
must be) so now; must (of necessity) be acknowledged by all who own that the
Lords Supper succeeded, or came in the room of the Passover.

I humbly conceive no Wise Man will oppose me, in saying that the Churches of
the New Testament have as great need of an initiating Seal of the Covenant of
Grace, as had the Church of the Jews under the Old: And if Baptism be not that
Seal, I know not what is; for that Circumcision is (now) abrogated and
abolished under the Gospel, none can deny; and that some other visible sign
must succeed (or come) in its room, must be granted by them who acknowledge
that the Lords Supper succeeded (or came) in the room of the Passover.

Arg. (2.) If the Adversaries themselves do (practically) own Baptism to be the
initiating Seal of the Gospel Covenant, then Baptism is the initiating Seal of
the Gospel Covenant: But the Adversaries themselves do (^ractically) own
Baptism to be the initiating Seal of the Gospel Covenant. Therefore Baptism is
the initiating Seal of the Gospel Covenant.

Those I (here) dispute against, before they can overthrow this Argument, must
abandon their own practice in making Baptism by Dipping, the Door of Entrance
into their Churches; by which Practice they Unchurch all other Churches who are
not of their own Persuasion. It is well known in London, and else where, where
Anabaptism is practiced, that they make Baptism (by Dipping) the form of a
right Gospel Church; on which account it is they refuse Communion (in the Lords
Supper) with the most Sanctified Believers, if they are not Dipped after their
Mode.

It Is true that some of that Persuasion would seem more moderate and charitable
than others (of that way) while they make Saintship the (only) term of Church
Communion: These seem not to lay such stress on Baptism as the rest of that
Persuasion do; they will admit to the Lords Supper (with them) those of other
Persuasions, though not Baptized in their way; but how such will be able to
justify their practice in admitting Unbaptized Persons to the Lords Supper, I
cannot understand; to me it is plain, that there is the same parity of reason
for keeping back an Unbaptized Person from the Lords Table, as there was for
keeping back an Uncircumcised Person from the Passover of Old. The first of
these (viz.) Baptism is the visible Badge of our Union (with Christ) in
Regeneration, (as Circumcision was to the Believing Jews) The other, (viz.) the
Lords Supper, is the visible Badge of our Communion and Fellowship with Christ,
as the Passover (of Old) was to the Believing Circumcised Jews: Now, as
Communion is a fruit of Union, and follows after it, so no Person ought to be
admitted to the second, that is, not (actually) a visible Partaker of the
first. It is not to be doubted, that these who (in Charity) invite us to the
Lords Table (with them) do account us as Unbaptized Persons, while they reckon
our Baptism (received in Infancy, and by Sprinkling) but a mere nullity, that
is, no Baptism at all.

Arg. 3. If Water Baptism have the same end and use assigned it by God, as
Circumcision had of old, (viz.) to signify and Seal to Believers and their
Infants Elect, the truth of their Regeneration, etc Then Water Baptism has
Succeeded in the room of Circumcision. But Water Baptism has the same end and
use Assigned it by God, as Circumcision had of old, (viz.) to signify, and
Seal to Believers (and their Elect Infants,) the truth of their Regeneration,
etc. Therefore, Water Baptism has Succeeded, in the room of Circumcision.

This Argument depends on the Right and Genuine Explication, of that Text, in
Colos. 2.11. In whom also ye are Circumcised, with the Circumcision made
without Hands; in putting off the Body of the sins of the Flesh, by the
Circumcision of Christ,

Buried with him in Baptism, wherein also, you are Risen with him, through the
Faith of the Operation of God, who has raised him from the Dead.

I shall not here meddle with Explaining this, because, I shall have occasion
to speak to it when I come to Answer the Objections brought against Baptism
being come in the room of Circumcision: whereto I refer my Reader.

Against what has been said, concerning Circumcision being the Seal of the
Covenant of Grace, etc. it is Objected, thus,

Object. Circumcision was only a Seal of a Temporal, Carnal Covenant, Sealing
only Earthly and Temporal Blessings, to the Carnal Church of the Jews.

Ans. To this Objection, I Answer in three Particulars.

1. I have already proved, that God's Covenant with Abraham, of which
Circumcision was the Seal) was (and still is) the Covenant of Grace, and not a
Covenant of Works; as some Ignorant and Injudicious Teachers would fain have it
to be: And that (merely) on the account of keeping Poor Infants from Baptism,
which they know could never be Justified, (by God's Word) should they
Judiciously acknowledge, that Abraham's Covenant is the Covenant of Grace; and
that Circumcision, was the Seal thereof: and that Water Baptism, is (now) come
in the room thereof.

2. In that some have reflected on that Covenant, calling it a carnal Covenant
of Works, and the Church which was to Observe and Practice Circumcision (the
Seal thereof) a carnal Church: all I need to say (by way of Reply) is, to
bewail the carnallity of their Uncircumcised Hearts and Lips; who have no
better or higher Apprehensions of God's Holy Covenant, (the Grace whereof must
bring them to Heaven if ever they come thither,) and of his so highly Honored
Friends, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, with all the rest of the Holy Patriarchs,
Prophets and Godly Believers of that Day; than to call it a carnal Covenant,
and them a carnal Church.

3. If Abraham's Covenant, was a Covenant of Works, to him and his Children,
then it must (needs) he so to us Gentile Believers, and to our Children now.

And if so, let the Adversary Demonstrate (if he can) how Abraham, or any of
that carnal Church (as they falsely term it) can be supposed, to be (now) in a
Saved State: Or, what ground of hope, we Gentile Believers (and our Children)
have, that we or any of ours shall go to Heaven when we Die, seeing that we are
still under the very same Covenant with Abraham; which Covenant, if it be a
Covenant of Works, and not of Grace, no Salvation, can be expected; and if the
Believers (under that dark Dispensation) were Carnal, and not Spiritual, how
comes the unerring Wisdom of God to Propound them to Believers under the
Gospel, for Examples and Patterns of Faith, Patience, etc. Heb. 11. Heb. 12.1.
Ja. 5.10. Let it be farther considered, that, Albeit, the Seal of Circumcision
Sealed no saving Blessings to the Non-Elect; it does not hence follow, that it
Sealed no other than Temporal Blessings to the Elect, seeing, that (to them)
the Heavenly were (Typically) included in the Earthly.

As touching the Earthly Blessings, which Circumcision Sealed to the Non-Elect,
they were greater and better than God was (any way) obliged to give them. I am
sure than they (savingly) improved.

Object. We utterly deny, that Water Baptism did succeed and come in the room
of Circumcision.

Answ. For confirmation of the Affirmative, let the three Arguments already
laid down under this Head be seriously (and without prejudice) considered: To
which I will only add the Explication of Colos. 2.11, 12. whereon I have
grounded a fourth Argument, to prove, that Water Baptism succeeded and came in
the room of Circumcision. In the place above quoted, the Apostle plainly sets
forth to the believing Colossians (and in them to all believing Gentiles, to
the Worlds end) two things, (necessary to be known and believed by all true
Believers.)

First, That they, who (by a true lively Faith) have Embraced the Lord Jesus
Christ, (as held forth in the Gospel,) evidencing their Faith by the Truth of
Gospel-Sanctification. They (and none else) who are Adult, are made actual
Partakers of the true and saving Circumcision, effected in the Soul by the
Spirit of Christ. And which was (Externally) signified by the outward
Circumcision.

These Believers having (now) obtained the Spiritual Circumcision, are not at
all to be Concerned or Troubled, that they are not outwardly Circumcised with
the Circumcision made with Man's Hands. Forasmuch as that which was
(Externally) Signified and Sea^ed to the believing Jews, by the outward
Circumcision, is (now Internally and Powerfully) wrought in their Hearts by the
Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Secondly, The Apostle sets forth in this place, that Water Baptism is
Instituted and Appointed by Christ (under the Gospel Dispensation) to be (to
believing Gentiles) the same that Circumcision was to the Jews, (viz.) A
Visible Sign and Seal of Abraham's Covenant to all his Ecclesiastical
Church-Seed among the Gentiles, (viz.) All of that Race, who (on God's calling
them) Believe in and Obey the Lord Jesus Christ. To these and their Infant Seed
(and none else among the Gentiles) Baptism does (now under the Gospel) Signify
and Seal the very same Spiritual Blessings and Church Priviledges, which
Circumcision (of old) did Signify and Seal to the believing Jews and their
Infant Seed.

This I take to be the Sense and Meaning of the Apostle, in that so much
controverted place. In this Sense, I hope, I shall Die satisfied. And herein (I
humbly conceive) none of the Orthodox will differ from me, which Sense being
granted, it is beyond the reach of all Scriptural contradiction, that
Water Baptism was Instituted and Appointed (by Christ) on purpose to succeed in
the room of Circumcision.

CHAP. IV.
Showing and proving, that the Infants of Believing Gentiles (now under the
Gospel) have as real a Right to the Covenant of Grace, and to Baptism, the
(now) Visible Sign and Seal thereof; as had the Children of Abraham (according
to the Flesh) to it, and to Circumcision, the then Seal of the Covenant of
Grace.

And, that they are as capable of the Grace and outward Seal of the Covenant,
as are the most Adult grown Believers.

I shall lay down Four Arguments, to evince and make good (against all
Opposition) what I now assert.

Arg. 1. THE first Argument is thus framed: If God (himself) did, by absolute
Sovereign Grace, comprehend Abraham's Church-Seed in the Covenant of Grace he
made with believing Abraham, (their Stipulating and Covenanting Father) and
never since Repealed that Gracious Act of his: Then the Infants of Abraham's
Church-Seed are still Interested in the Covenant of Grace, and have as great
Right to, and are as capable of the Grace and Seal of that Covenant as ever.

But God (himself) did by absolute Sovereign Grace, comprehend Abraham's
Church-Seed in the Covenant of Grace he made with believing Abraham, (their
Stipulating and Covenanting Father) which Gracious Act of his was never since
Repealed.

Therefore the Infants of Abraham's Church-Seed are still Interessed in the
Covenant of Grace, and have as great a Right to, and are as capable of the
Grace and Seal of that Covenant as ever.

I cannot see how this Argument can (possibly) be overthrown, but by proving,
that God did alter and change that Covenant he made with Abraham (his Friend,)
for himself and for his Church-Seed: The which, when the Adversary does by
Evidence of Scripture, (not abused and perverted,) I shall then yield the
Cause, and bewail my Mistake. But two things cause in me an unshaken
Confidence, that this can never be done. First, The Immutability and
Unchangableness of God, on which very account he is styled a Covenant-keeping
God, who never yet cast off any poor Sinner, until that Sinner did first
actually cast God off; the which (I think) the Adversary dares not deny.
Secondly, The Impossibility of poor Infants actually casting God off, and that
because of their Incapacity in respect of Age.

Arg. 2. If Infants be at all Saved, they are Saved by the Grace of God's
Covenant made with Abraham; which Covenant, and the External Seal thereof, (in
the Visible Church) must belong to them also.

But Infants are Saved by the Grace of God's Covenant, (made with Abraham) and
in no other way.

Therefore the Covenant of God's Grace (by which they are Saved) and the Seal
thereof, (in the Visible Church) must belong to them also.

This Argument has been constantly maintained (by the Orthodox) against the
Enemies of Infant Baptism, with such success, that I never yet heard the Man's
Name, who was able to answer or overthrow the same by sound or solid Argument.

To deny Salvation to Infants is a Principle so monstrously Cruel and
Uncharitable, (exposing to the Judgment of God, and to the deserved Frowns of
all Tenderhearted Parents) that some, who account it a point of great Skill
and Wisdom, (in the Mystery of the Gospel) to Decry and Witness against
Infant Baptism, have declared themselves strongly inclined to believe, that all
Infants are Saved, and that without distinguishing between Elect and Reprobate,
or between the Seed of Professing Godly Believers, and that of Mahometans, etc.
a Principle (altogether) as silly and groundless as that of denying the Right
of Believers Infant Seed to the Covenant of Grace, and the Visible Token or
Seal thereof in the Church. And at what Door this (Heterodox) Dream should
enter, or from what Root or Principle it should spring, I know not, unless from
that Popish Arminian Principle of general Redemption and universal Grace. Here,
by the Concession (or Grant) of the very Adversaries, Infants are Saved; but
how, or in what way? whether by a Covenant or without a Covenant. Here they are
(profoundly) silent, not daring to mention any Covenant at all, fearing an
Advantage may be (thereby) given, to discover or prove the Right of Infants to
the Covenant. It is sufficient (such Dreamers Judge) to leave poor Infants to
the general Mercy and Grace of God, as those do, who Dream and Conceit, that
the very Damned in Hell shall (at length) be delivered from the Torments of
that Place. For which Chymerical Whym, there is as much to be said (from the
Word of God.) As there is to prove, that God will extend the Grace of his
Covenant to all Infants Dying so.

The Adversary (I dispute against) knows (very well,) that should it be granted
(in Terminis) in plain Terms, that Infants are Saved by the Grace of the
Covenant, it can no way be avoided, but that Infants must be in that Covenant,
and must have an Indisputable Right (in foro Ecclesiae) to the outward Seal
thereof.

But this must be denied, and its contrary asserted, (for the most Glorious
Gospel Truth,) (viz.) That Believers only (excluding their Infants) are
Interested in the Covenant, and have a Right to the Seal thereof; and that in
the Right of the Profession they make before Men.

Now, how absurd and contrary to the very Tenure and Design of God's Covenant
with Christ (in the behalf of the Elect) this Principle of Anabaptism is? I
leave to every Unprejudiced Reader (who understands any thing in Religion) to
Judge. And whether to restrain the Promise of God's Covenant (which equally
extends to all the Elect) to that part of the Elect, which are Adult and Grown
up, to make a Profession, and to extend the Grace of God beyond the bounds of
his own Covenant, be not equally to Raze the Foundation of Gospel Truth, and to
Usurp the Throne of God (or to Invade his Prerogative) in the Church; I leave
to Wise Men to determine.

If thus to do falls not under that dreadful Commination (or Woe threatened) in
Rev. 22.18. I am greatly mistaken.

Arg. 3. If Infants do stand in as real need of the Grace of God's Covenant as
the Adult do, and be (every way) as capable thereof as the Adult are, then must
they (of necessity) be allowed the Seal thereof in the Church.

But Infants do stand in as real need of the Grace of God's Covenant, and are
(every way) as capable thereof as the Adult are.

Therefore the Seal of God's Covenant in the Church must (of necessity) be
allowed them.

That Infants are Partakers of Adam's Guilt, and also of that Pravity and
Pollution of Nature, which came by Adam's Fall, I am confident will be denied
by none (unless by downright Dreamers) now to own this.

And at the same time to Teach and Hold, that Infants are (because not Grown up
to the use of Reason and actual Faith) incapable of Regeneration, is to deny
Salvation to all Infants, who Die Infants: And how well this Principle accords
with all Infants being Saved, (who Die Infants) is not difficult to understand.
If this be not Contradictio in Terminis, (viz.) A Contradiction in plain Terms,
I know not what a Contradiction means.

The Lord Christ (who can neither lie nor be deceived in what he says) assures
us, that except one be Born again, he cannot (possibly) see the Kingdom of God.
Jo. 3.8. wherein the absolute need of Regeneration is discovered and asserted;
and the Subject of which, this is predicated (in that Text) being indefinitely
and universally expressed; we are taught that neither Adult nor Infant, shall
ever enter Heaven, till that work of Regeneration pass on the guilty polluted
Soul: And to say that an Adult (or grown) Person (by reason of his Age) is
capable of this great Change, but that an Infant (because he wants the use of
reason, etc.) is incapable of it. What is this but (interpretatively) to hold
and say that the Creatures own will and reason must concur to the producing
the New Creature in a Dead Soul.

And how advantageous this Principle is to Papists, Arminians, Pelagians and
Socinians; the Learned and Orthodox well know.

The Enemies themselves do (with us) acknowledge that Water Baptism is a
Passive Ordinance; and strange it is, that those (of that Party) who are
concerned to deck and adorn the Frontispiece of their Books (against
Infant Baptism) with such Ornate Florishes of Greek, Hebrew, and Latin
Sentences, do not (in their way of arguing about this matter) give us to
understand that they understand and know the meaning and proper signification
of the word Passive, better than it appears they do; certain it is, and the
Learned know it) that the term Passive signifies and imports a Non-agency in
the Subject, when a change is passing on it, or a work producing in it; to the
effecting of which change (or work) the Subject Recipient neither wills nor
acts any thing toward the production of such a change.

If I understand any thing of Gods Mind (revealed in the Sacred Scripture) or
was ever (experimentally) acquainted with the Spirits method in passing that
great change on a Sinner, in effectual Calling. The work consists of two parts.
First, Gods Gracious Acts, in freely Pardoning all the Rebels Sins and
Transgressions committed against the Law, imputing to him that spotless
Righteousness of Christ his Son (the Sinners Sponsor or Surety) as truly and
really as if that spotless Righteousness had been acted performed by the Sinner
himself (Personally.) This is the first part wherein that great change lies or
consists, which (in Divinity) is called Justification.

The Second is, Go^s quickening and renewing the inward Powers and Faculties of
the Soul, by communicating a principle of Spiritual Life to the Sinner, in
every of the Souls faculties within: I do not mean (or intend) that in this
work of Regenerating the Sinner, the Natural faculties (concreated with the
Nature of Adam) are destroyed or annihilated, but that the Predominancy of
those vicious qualities (inhering in the Souls faculties) is overpowered by the
Sanctification of the Spirit; and a contrary Principle of saving (and
unloosable) Grace is communicated to every of these faculties in the Soul,
whereby the new Principle communicated, maintains its own Being in those
respective Faculties, (and this through the continual supply of the Spirit
which produced the change) and making continual resistance against that Vice
and Corruption (as yet) remaining in the same Faculties where the new Creature
is appointed to War and Combat, until that Sinless Perfection (promised in the
Covenant of Grace) supersede and dispossess that indwelling Corruption (in the
Soul) under which the new Creature continues to groan, until a perfect release
come.

This is called Sanctification; and when the set time (prefixed in Gods Decree)
for calling an Elect Sinner, is come; what produces this great change?

I will suppose the Sinner to be come to the Years of Manhood, capable of
acting or exercising his natural Faculties; does his will or his reason help
the Almighty in producing so miraculous a change? can the Eye of this Sinners
blind reason (and understanding) see into or comprehend the hidden Mystery of
that Wisdom manifested and set forth in that stupendous and astonishing
contrivance of Gods justifying and reconciling to himself an Apostate, Rebel,
Sinner, by the imputed Righteousness of another? can the Eye of blind reason be
capable of this? can the Will of this dead Sinner incline or move it self
toward the Sinners own Conversion, to be a Coadjutor or Fellow-helper, to
forward or help the Almighty in effecting this strange and miraculous change?
can it (possibly) be that Spiritual (or Corporal) Blindness can cure it self,
or that Enmity and Rebellion can change its own Nature?

Let the experience of every (rightly) assured Believer speak to this.

If then nothing in the poor dead Sinner, neither the use of his natural
reason, nor yet any activity in his unrenewed Will does contribute any help to
produce so wonderful a change; the work must needs be (entirely) Gods own work.
From which I argue in the behalf of poor Infants, if God can, and does freely
pardon and blot out the Millions of actual Sins (added to the original guilt)
of an adult Sinner; if he can and does freely and most graciously impute the
Righteousness of his Son; and by thus doing, justifies an adult Sinner: If God
can (and does) by the irresistible efficacy of his own Holy Spirit, renew the
faculties of the Soul of an adult Sinner, which is (as I may say) steeped (and
even soaked) in Vitiosity and actual Pollution; cannot the same Almighty, Just,
Wise and Gracious God do and effect the like change in and upon a poor helpless
Infant, though that Infant understand not what is done to it, neither is
capable of contributing any help toward so great a change?

From what has been (here) offered to consideration, to me it is evident and
plain, that when Men cry out and say, Infants, (while Infants) are incapable of
Regeneration, because they want the use of reason, etc. they speak most
injuriously and ignorantly against God himself, as if he could not (or would
not) effect that in and for an Elect Infant which he does for an adult Sinner;
as the justifying and renewing an adult Sinner has no dependence on the
reason, will or speech of a grown Sinner, even so the want of actual reason,
activity of Will or Speech in an Infant, cannot (possibly) hinder God from
effecting this great and gracious work in and upon an Elect Infant, though the
poor Infant can do nothing toward so great a change. The Subject Recipient of
this work of Regeneration, is (every way) Passive, the adult as well as the
Infant.

Agreeable to this Act of Gods in changing a Sinner, is that Ordinance of
Water Baptism, whose principal use is twofold. First, to signify and represent
his own gracious dealing with the Sinner (Baptized) in Pardoning all his Sins,
for Christ's sake; whose Blood represented by the Water in Baptism) was shed for
the Remission of the Sins of all, comprehended in that Covenant of Grace,
whereof Baptism is a Seal. And Secondly, that it may be a Seal to confirm to
the Baptized (if Elect) all the gracious Promises of the same Covenant of
Grace; as Gods work (upon the Soul of a true Convert) is (in respect of the
Sinner) wholly Passive, so Baptism (the outward Sign and Seal of Gods Covenant
of Grace) is altogether Passive: And as the Wisdom of Christ saw fit to appoint
the Element of material Water to be used in Baptism, as (above all the other
Elements) most suited to the design of that Ordinance, because of the Analogy
and resemblance which is between Water and the Blood of Christ; so no mode or
way of administering this Water Baptism does so exactly and to the life, set
forth the freeness of Gods Grace and Mercy (exhibited) in the Covenant of
Grace, then the act of Sprinkling or pouring out the Water on the Party
Baptized. By this way of Sprinkling (under the Gospel) there is a sweet and
orderly Harmony kept between the Penmen of Gods Word, both under the Old and
New Testament Dispensation, with whom, whoever studys to agree (in applying the
Water of Holy Baptism) they will be (at length) found to be in the right; how
many and black Censures soever are heapt on them by injudicious Spirits: The
Spirit of God (in the work of Regeneration) applys the Spiritual Baptism by
Sprinkling or pouring out of his Graces on the Soul. There must be an Analogy
kept between the thing signified and the outward Sign.

Against what has been laid down to prove Infants right to Baptism, (the Seal
of Gods Covenant) many things are objected. I will (for brevity sake) contract
the Objections (with my Answers) to as few particulars as (possibly) I can.

Object. 1. In the Words of the Grand Commission, there is not one word
concerning Infants. Mat. 28.19. Go ye and Teach all Nations, Baptizing them in
the Name, etc.

This seems too weak, (though well meaning) Minds to be unanswerable: But in
the strength of him who gave out this Grand Commission, I hope to show how
wretchedly the Objector is mistaken herein.

In order whereto, let two things be seriously (and warily) considered.

First, that albeit Christ the Lord does not mention Infants (in particular)
yet he includes them in the Words of the general Commission^ Go Teach all
Nations, Baptizing them, etc. Here the Lord commands (expressly) that all such
as belong to Gods Covenant (with Abraham) Genesis 7.7. shall be Baptized; Namely,
all who shall embrace the Son of God by Faith, and their Infant Seed (if any
they have) That this is the true sense and meaning of Christ in that place, is
clear to any who do not (wilfully) shut their Eyes; for evident it is, and none
can deny that he (there) commands to Baptize all Nations, not excepting against
or forbidding the Disciples to Baptize little Infants: He knew that he spoke to
Men, who (after the sending of the Holy Ghost) should know and consider that
Abraham's Covenant (with Believers and their Infant Seed) was to remain and
continue the same to the end of the World. And this, (together with the sharp
rebuke he gave to his Apostles, for offering to hinder Little Ones being
brought to him; and his laying before them such a convincing reason wherefore
such should not be kept from coming to him. Mar. 10.14. was the principal, (if
not the only reason) wherefore his infinite Wisdom saw it not needful to
mention Infants in particular, they being (most certainly) included in the
general term all Nations: All Men (who know any thing of Learning) understand
that Omne majus continet in se minus, (every greater includes (or contains in
it the lesser) is a sure and standing Rule both in Logic and Divinity.

Agreeing with this sense (I have given off the Grand Commission) is that of
Peter, Acts 2.39. For the Promise is to you and to your Children, etc. which
affords an invincible Argument to prove that there is (now under the Gospel) no
change of Abraham's Covenant, (any other than in the external administration of
it) The Covenant (in its substance) abides the same for ever: By the Grace
thereof all Gods Elect (both of the Jewish and Gentile Race) are to be Saved.
Romans 3.29. What I have said will yet receive farther confirmation by what is
laid down by Paul in Gal. 3.14. That the Blessing of Abraham might come upon
the Gentiles, through Jesus Christ, etc. The places now quoted out of Acts
2.39. and Gal. 3.14. presuppose a command to all, (whether Jew or Gentile) who
(by Faith) receives Jesus Christ for a Savior) that they shall be Signed with
the Seal of Abraham's Covenant, according to Genesis 17.9. For if the Gentiles (who
believe in Abraham's Savior) do expect that they and their Infants should be
made actual Partakers of the Blessings of Abraham's Covenant; they must be sure
to observe and keep Gods Covenant with Abraham throughout their Generations.

Secondly, seeing that Christ (himself) words the Commission so in general
terms, (which (undoubtedly) includes the particular) not excepting against
Infants: It must (necessarily) follow, that if Infants be a part of those
Nations which the Apostles, etc. are commanded to Baptize; that Christ commands
them to Baptize Infants as well as any others. Reader, observe the Words of the
Commission, Go and Teach all Nations, etc. Here is no more mention of grown
Persons, Men or Women, than there is of Infants. If then Anabaptists cannot
deny that Infants are a part of Nations, and that they can no way prove how
Abraham's Blessing can come on the Gentiles (through Christ Jesus) any other way
than by and through the Covenant of Abraham. It will (unavoidably) follow, (all
the Wit in Man cannot oppose it with success) that Infants as well as adult
Persons are (as the proper Subjects of Baptism) intended (by Christ) in the
Grand Commission.

Object. 2. None are the proper Subjects of Baptism, but such as are first
taught Go and Teach, etc. Infants are not capable of Man's Teaching, therefore
they are not the proper Subjects of Baptism.

Answ. This, with the Objection already spoken to, seems (to weak and
injudicious People) to be unanswerable, (for excluding Infants from Baptism)
but he that looks into it with a Spiritual Eye, will find nothing in it against
Infants.

In order to discover the weakness and mistake of the Objector, let it be
observed (with care) that the Word Teach, is twice mentioned in the Words of
the Commission; Go and Teach all Nations, Baptizing them; etc. And in Ver. 20,
Teaching them to observe, etc.

The first Teach is (in the Original) Matheteusate; and the other is
Didaskontes; which I choose to set down in the English (rather than in the
Greek) Character, to the end the Unlearned may Read them; and (in Reading)
observe the great difference which is between the two Words, and that both in
the Letters and Sound of the Words; if this be taken notice of, it will afford
to the Unlearned (who would not be imposed upon) ground to suspect, not only
the Skill (in Tongues,) but also the Honesty and Faithfulness of those Guides,
whom they Judge come nearer to Infalibility in what they Teach, than do the
other eminent Servants of Christ, who differ from them; and at whose Labors
the ablest Preachers of that Party, are glad to Light their Candles.

As these two Words differ in Letters and Sound, as the Unlearned themselves
will find, (if they be but Faithful to themselves,) so they differ also in
their Sense and Signification, as the Orthodox and Learned well know. I begin
with the first, (viz.) Matheteusate, which signifies (properly) to Disciple, or
to make Disciples in all Nations, where the Gospel shall be (gladly) received.

How is this to be done? Answ. Even as God Taught Abraham, when he Instructed
him in the great Mystery of the Covenant: The which, when Abraham Embraced for
himself and his Infant Seed, he received (gladly) the Visible Token or Seal of
that Covenant of Grace, (viz.) Circumcision, and marks out his Infant Seed, by
putting the same Seal of the Covenant on them, and that in compliance with
God's Command.

It is but Rational to suppose and grant, that the first Subjects of an
Ordinance should be Persons Adult, and Grown up to the use of Reason, that they
may be capable of Acting for not only themselves, but for their Off spring and
Posterity also, who are not (while Infants) capable of Acting for themselves.

This was God's Way and Method with Abraham (his Friend) he Propounds his
Covenant of Grace to him and (in him) to his Seed, as their Stipulating and
Covenanting Head and Representative. In Instructing Abraham, God (in Abraham's
Person) Instructs his Infants, so as by that Instruction, his Infant Seed
became Disciples, and were (accordingly) Signed with the Seal of their
Stipulating Father's Covenant.

This (undoubtedly) was the Method which the Apostles went in, when they were
sent forth to make Disciples (to Christ) in every Nation. They Instructed Adult
and Grown Persons in the Mystery of God's Grace (by Christ;) and when such laid
hold on Christ (in the Covenant) by an External Profession of Faith, (in him)
they were Baptized with their Infants, (if any they had.) Hence we Read of the
Jailer in Acts 16.33. who (on his Believing) was Baptized, he and all that were
of him, (viz.) His own Personal Offspring, so the Greek Word signifies. Hence
also we Read of whole Families, who were Baptized (by the Apostles) on the
Faith of such as were the Heads of such Families. It was no more necessary,
that Infants should be made mention of, (as being in such Families when
Baptized) than it was, that they should be named in the Grand Commission; the
Spirit which gave out the Grand Commission, was in, and with the Apostles, when
they Baptized; and it is (to me) convincing, that Infants are intended in both,
seeing they are excepted against, in neither, which the Adversary must (needs)
be convinced of, unless he be able to prove, that Infants are neither a part of
Nations or of Families.

The other Word Teach in the Commission is, Didaskontes, which (properly)
signifies a Teaching or Instructing (Doctrinally) those, who are (already) made
Disciples by the former way of Teaching. Neither can it (without Lying) be said
to be Nonsense and folly, to term Infants (who are by the first Teaching made
Disciples) Scholars or Disciples, seeing, that Infants (in Age) are (by the
Spirit of Truth) so styled, witness Acts 15.10. where such are called
Disciples, who were made so by the Initiating Ordinance of Circumcision, who
afterward (when grown up) were taught (Doctrinally) what they were to know and
practice; neither is this (any whit) repugnant to the Method God took with
Abraham, but rather agreeing with it; as appears by Genesis 18.19. and even among
Men nothing more common and frequent, than to call our little Children
Scholars or Disciples, and that from the very first day of their being entered
into a School: And as in Men's Schools there are sundry Ranks or Classes of
Scholars, some lower and some higher; so in the School of Christ (the great
Prophet of his Church) there are several Ranks or Degrees of Church Members. It
is well known how ignorant (in the Mysteries of the Gospel) the very Apostles
themselves were, when they first entered into Christ's School; yet Christ calls
them his Disciples for all that. The Apostle Paul could not write or speak unto
the Corinthians, but as unto Babes, as unto Carnal Men; yet they were Church
Members for all that. These things duly considered, forces me to conclude those
Men profoundly ignorant in the Mystery of Gods Holy Covenant; who (because
Infants are incapable of being taught and instructed (Doctrinally) as adult and
grown Men are) peremptorily deny that Infants are capable of being made
Disciples (to Christ) by the Ministry of Men. This Principle came (no doubt)
from the same Spirit which teaches that Infants, (while Infants) are incapable
of Regeneration; which are both (manifestly) false, because contrary to Gods
revealed Will.

Object. 3. Baptism is a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, to which none have
a right, but he or she who is a real true Believer.

Answ. I answer in three particulars. First, If Baptism be a Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith, then must it needs succeed and come in the room of
Circumcision: And so the truth is (here) granted, which else where is denied,
that Circumcision is a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith; is most plain from
Romans 4.11. Now if Baptism be a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, (as the
Objector grants, and as I believe and affirm it is) then Baptism did
(undeniably) come in the room of Circumcision, that the same might be to
Believing Gentiles (under the Gospel) what Circumcision was (of Old) to
Abraham, (viz.) a Seal of the Covenant of Grace.

Secondly, If none but actual Believers have a Right to that Righteousness of
which Baptism is a Seal, then must it follow (unavoidably) that all Infants
(who Dye in Infancy) are Eternally lost: And how (cruel this Doctrine is, and
how inconsist^nt with the Doctrine which teaches that all Infants (Dying
Infants) are saved, all Men may see.

Thirdly, If none but real true Believers have a Right to Baptism, I would
gladly see how those (I Dispute against) can justify their own practices, in
admitting so many poor ignorant Folk to that Ordinance (in their way) who (with
some who admit them) are as ignorant of the Mystery of Regeneration and of
Baptism, (the external Seal thereof) as was Nicodemus. Can they (without a
Divine Revelation) know that those whom they admit to Baptism are (infallibly)
real true Believers?

Object. 4. To apply Baptism, (the Seal of the Covenant) to an unintelligent
Subject, who neither knows what is done to him, nor yields consent thereto: It
is all one as to present a Picture to a Blind Man, which to do is most absurd
and ridiculous.

Answ. To this I shall reply in four particulars. And first, I say (with a
Learned Man) this is (at best) but a blind Comparison; and (which is far worse)
a high and fancy Reflection on the infinite Wisdom and uncontrollable
Sovereignty of the most high God; for most certain it is, that nothing can be
offered as an Argument to keep Infants from Baptism, (merely) on the account of
their being unintelligent Subjects, and incapable of yielding their consent to
what is done to them in Baptism) But what will be of as great force to keep
them back from Circumcision? And so the Objector may see (plainly) how (herein)
he arraigns the Wisdom and Sovereignty of God at the Bar of a shallow and
corrupt Creatures Reason, which demonstrates him to be more Brutish; (I am sure
more proud end wicked) than those Non-intelligent Subjects which the Objection
is levelled against.

This will appear by considering Gods dealing with Abraham, in that he
commanded him to Mark (or Seal) his Son Isaac with the Seal of Circumcision at
Eight Days old. Had Isaac the use of reason at that Age? Had he actual Faith or
Speech to express his consent to what was (then) done to him? No sure; what
then must God be charged with weakness or unreasonableness for applying the
Seal of his Covenant to an unintelligent Subject? By these kind of Objectors,
Gods Act (herein) stands charged with weakness and folly, but I conclude with
Paul, Romans 3.4. Yea, let God be true, but every Man a Liar. God commands
nothing in vain, and the reason is, because his Ordinance has no kind of
dependence on the Creature, to give it power, or to make it effectual to
accomplish what he has appointed it to, but on his own free Spirit, which
works most powerfully, yea, irresistably where he himself has purposed to
confer the Spiritual Good, signified by the outward Ordinance.

Object. 5. The Promise of Gods Covenant is made to the Elect, and none but
they have a Right to the Seal: No Man can affirm that an Infant brought to
Baptism is Elect.

Answ. I Answer to this in two things. First, I grant that none shall ever reap
any saving Benefit by the Covenant, but the Elect; (and that in the right of
Election) yet does it not hence follow, that none but they have a right to the
Seal of the Covenant in the Church Visible, seeing that by the very
Constitution of Gods Covenant (with Abraham the Ecclesiastical Father, and pub
ick Visible Head of all the Seed of Believing Church Members) God commands that
the Seal of his Covenant shall be equally applied to all the Male-Seed of the
Believer; and that without any regard to the Election, which is a Secret known
(only) to God; about which he would not have us to trouble our Spirits, any
farther than to give all (becoming) diligence to make our own (Pe sonal)
Election sure to our s^lves. As touchi^g the Infants of Church Memb^rs, (about
whom all the Dispute is) We are not (^nxiously) to be concerned about them,
whether they be in the Election of God, yea or no. It is ground sufficient for
us to Bless and thank God for his dealing so Graciously with our Infants, in
that they (with us) are taken into the same Covenant, and Sealed with the Seal
thereof; for by Gods dealing thus with Believers Infant Seed, Believers have a
good foundation laid, whereon to bottom their Hope and Comfort, (with reference
to their Dying or Deceased Infants) and also of wrestling with God in Prayer
for their Conversion and Eternal Welfare; the which the Enemies to
Infant Baptism, do (by denying that Infants belong to the Covenant, or have any
right to the Promis^s thereof, till they themselves B^lieve) deprive, and
(insensibly) s^oil themselves of. This is most evidently true, as will appear
if it be s^riously consi^ered, tha^ all right Prayer is a Pl^^^i^g the Promises
of Gods Covenant, in the Name and Merit of Christ his own So^, in and through
whom, the said Promis^s are entailed on all the Children of Promise: Now if my
Infant be Sick or Ailing? If he be going on in Sin, etc. how can I (by the
Anabaptist Principle put up a Prayer to God for him, seeing there is no promise
of Gods Covenant belongs to him? Or how can I comfort my sorrowful Spirit (with
reference to my Deceased Children) if I must look on my dear Babes as Strangers
and Enemies to God, (the which they are by Nature; and must remain so for ever)
in case they be not Partakers of the Grace of Gods Covenant?

Secondly, If none but the Elect have right to Baptism, this Objection will
fall like a Millstone on them who Baptize whole droves of Men and Women; of
whose Election (to Eternal Life) neither Baptizer nor Baptized, know any more
than they know how many Stars in the Firmament; so that by thus arguing against
poor Tongue-ty'd Infants, they may see how they deny Salvation to their own (as
w^ll as others) Infants, and render themselves incapable of discharging a good
Conscience to their poor Children, in putting up (daily) Petitions to God for
them.

Object. 6. We have an open Profession from those we Baptize, and that warrants
our Baptizing such as offer themselves to join to the Churches. You have not
the like from Infants.

Answ. I Answer hereto in three particulars. First, it were well for both
Baptizers and Baptized, if both the one and the other were better acquainted
with the Nature of right Conversion than they are, and that they were better
grounded in the sound (and experimental) knowledge of the Covenant of Grace;
the which if they were, I dare (boldly) say, they would not be so precipitant
and rash in condemning and despising those poor Infants, who are set forth (by
the Wisdom of God) as Patterns and Examples, by which grown Persons are to be
molded and sitted for Heaven: Neither would they be so forward to offer
themselves to Baptism on such slight and evanid Motions, as falls short (in too
many) of common Convictions.

Secondly, poor Infants never (yet) broke or transgressed the Moral Law,
(Personally) and that is one great reason why an actual confession of Faith and
Repentance is not required of them, to qualify them for Baptism: As the Sin of
Infants lies in the imputation of Adams Disobedience, and the Pollution of
Nature, derived by fleshly Generation; so their help and remedy lies in the
imputation of Christ's Spotless Righteousness to their Persons; and his Spirits
renewing their inward Faculties in Regenerating them. And this twofold work of
the Spirit in Justifying and Sanctifying the Elect Infant, is (plainly)
signifi^d and Sealed in that Ordinance of Baptism, to the Infant, as well as to
a grown ^eliever.

Thirdly, albeit Infants be not able to spe^k for themselves, and to claim that
right to the Seal of Gods Covenant which the Covenant it self has entailed on
them, (as they are the Church Seed of Believing Parents) yet there is one who
speaks for them, whose Judgment and Testimony of them is more sure and
infallible than all other Testimonies of Men and Angels; the Lord Jesus (I
mean) who (with his Father, and God the Holy Ghost) contrived and made the
Covenant of Grace, wherein they are comprehended. I will lay down in six
Particulars what is the Judgment of Christ concerning Infants, (as they are
concerned in the Covenant) First, he propounds them as Patterns, by which grown
Persons must be molded and fitted for Heaven, Mat. 18.3. Secondly, declares
their right to the Kingdom of God, Mar 10.14. For of such is the Kingdom of
God. Thirdly, rebukes (most severely) his Disciples for hindering Infants being
brought to him, Mar. 10.14. But when Jesus saw it, he was much displeased, etc.
In the Greek it is Eganaktese, which signifies to have the Bowels (inwardly)
moved, or affected with Grief, to be filled with Indignation; (as Beza renders
it, Indignatus est, to be Stomackt at a Person, or a thing which is greatly or
highly displeasing: A Word which judicious Sydenham observes, was never used by
Christ in any case, or on any occasion, besides this of poor Infants, to
instruct and teach Men: (No doubt) how greatly he was concerned for helpless
Infants, and how displeased he was at the hardness of his Disciples Hearts
against them: Oh! that the consideration of this might melt the hard Hearts of
such, into a Christ like tenderness toward poor Infants. Fourthly, commands
Infants to be brought to him, Mar. 10.14. Suffer little Children to come unto
me, etc. Fifthly, pronounces them Holy, Romans 11.16. 1. Cor. 7.14. Sixthly,
Blesses them, Mar. 10.16. And he took them up in his Arms, laid his Hands upon
them and Blessed them. These six Particulars laid together, and weighed in the
Balance of Gods Sanctuary, I leave it to any Man of Sense (in Spiritual
matters) to judge whether is safer to credit this infallible Testimony of the
Son of God, concerning Infants, than to rely on the bare Testimony of a mere
Man, concerning himself; who may (in all he pretends to) be but a Painted
Sepulcher.

Object. 7. If Infants must needs have a right to Baptism, because it is a Seal
of the Covenant, then (of necessity) they must have a right to the Lords Supper
also; for that is a Seal of the Covenant of Grace as well as Baptism. The Wine
in the Supper might as well be poured down the Infants mouth with a Spoon, as
to sprinkle Water on his face.

Answ. This Objection better becomes a Superannuated Man, who borders on
perfect Dotage, than one who pretends to be a Teacher of ignorant and misguided
Souls; and not only so, but who takes on him to Usurp the Seat of Judgment, in
passing Sentence on all the Holy, Learned and Orthodox Divines, and Protestant
Martyrs and Churches, who are gone to Glory in the unshaken Belief that the
Infants of Believing Parents have an unquestionable right to Baptism, and that
they are as capable of the Seal of Baptism as they are of the Grace of Gods
Covenant, signified thereby.

But that the Lords Supper belongs to none but to Adult and actual Believers,
who are capable of those qualifications required in a worthy Communicant; such
as Self-examination, (with reference to his State Godward) his faith in Christ,
his progress in a Holy Life, his discerning the Lords Body, his keeping up a
lively Communion with Father, Son and Spirit in that Ordinance, and judging
ones self in case of short coming in Holy Duties.

These are the qualifications required to be in one who comes to the Lords
Supper; of which, any (not in a Dream) may judge an Infant cannot be capable,
(while an Infant.) I humbly hope no judicious Christian will censure me (as
rash and uncharitable) if I judge those Preachers fitter for a Shopboard than a
Pulpit, who are not able or willing to discern or distinguish between Milk and
strong Meat; and who will deny to Infants the Milk of Holy Baptism, (whereof
they are capable, and whereto (by Gods Covenant) they have right, because they
are incapable of receiving and digesting the strong Meat of the Lords Supper.

Object. 8. If Infant Baptism were God's Ordinance, and were accompanied with
his Blessing, to the Infant, how comes it to pass, that so many Baptized, (in
Infancy) prove so Carnal and loose in their Lives and Conversations?

Answ. Hereto I reply in three Particulars, wherewith I shall shut up the
present Dispute.

First, It is with many Believers Infants now (under the Gospel) as it was with
Abraham and his Infants of old. Some are their Children by fleshly Generation
only, who ( Ishmael-like) prove Mockers and Scoffers at Holiness, and Haters of
God and good Men: These, (notwithstanding the Relation they stand in to the
Church, by Virtue of their Baptismal Vow and the External Profession they make
in the Visible Church for a time) being left to the darkness and folly lodged
in their corrupted Nature, they give themselves over to all kind of Looseness.
Baptism (now) is no more to be faulted on this account, than Circumcision was
formerly.

When the Children of believing Gentiles do (actually) violate God's Covenant,
and depart from him; then will God do with them, as he did with Abraham's
Carnal Seed, etc.

Secondly, As some of the Children of believing Parents, who were Baptized in
Infant State, prove loose and vain, so (Blessed be God) a great many prove Holy
and Upright Walkers with God, manifesting in their Lives and Conversations, the
lively Copy of that Spiritual Circumcision wrought (by the Spirit) in their
Hearts when Converted, which was Signified and Sealed by that Baptism, which
they were made Partakers of when Infants.

Thirdly and lastly, If from the vain and sinful Practice of some (Baptized in
Infancy) Infant Baptism, must be disallowed, (as no Institution of God,) how
strong an Argument will this prove, to overthrow the Baptizing grown
Professors? For (if I mistake not) the Opposers of Infant Baptism must own,
(will they nill they) that many of those Baptized (in their way) have
(notwithstanding their shining Profession, and their high Pretensions to the
Work of the Spirit within) fallen most foully, and never recovered again.

And thus I have (according to the Wisdom given from above) endeavored to
clear up, (from God's Word) that Abraham's Covenant, Genesis 17.7. is (most
certainly) the Covenant of Grace. I have also proved (from the same Word,) that
Circumcision was the Seal of that Covenant: And that Baptism (under the Gospel)
is now succeeded (or come in the room) thereof. I have endeavored to prove,
that the Infants of believing Gentiles have as real a Right to Baptism as
Abraham's Seed had to Circumcision, under that dark Dispensation. And whether
the Answers I have given to the most material Objections, I find brought
against Infant Baptism, be pertinent and convincing, I leave to the Judicious
and Unprejudiced to Judge.

CHAP. V.
AMong all the Rash and Presumptuous Assertors of Dipping the whole Body under
Water, being the only right Mode or Manner of Baptizing, none has made a
greater noise (or a fairer show) of being (herein) Infalible, than one William
Russel, who styles himself Medicinae Doctor, Accademiae Cantabrigiensis.

This Author, with a more than ordinary Confidence, has boldly asserted; that
Dipping, etc. is the only right Mode of Baptizing, commanded by Christ in the
New Testament, and practiced by John the Baptist, and all the Apostles and
Primitive Christians.

This crude (or raw) Assertion of his, he labors to support and make good by a
fourfold Medium: First, The Etymology of the Greek word the Holy Ghost uses
to express Dipping by.

Secondly, Those Metaphors used in Holy Scriptures, to represent it to our
Understanding.

Thirdly, The Practice of the first Baptizers.

Fourthly, The words of the Grand Commission given by our Savior in Mat. 28.19.

To demonstrate the falseness of his Assertion, and to discover to Weak and
Injudicious People the great Mistakes, whereon he bottoms his Assertion, is the
design of my present Undertaking. But before I attack this Goliath, in examining
what he can get from the four Particulars (above mentioned,) which may cause
Simple and empty Brains to think and conceit this Accademical Doctor Invincible
and Unanswerable in what he has (so Peremptorily) asserted for the Truth of
God. I will lay down two things, (by way of Premise) whereof I desire the
Reader (who is unwilling to be deceived) to take notice.

The first is, That not so much the bare Letter of Scripture, as the sense and
meaning of the Spirit, (therein) is the Word of God; by which Truth and Error
are to be Tried and Judged. I have often said, (and I am very bold in
affirming, that) that Sense or Interpretation, which any Man or Men give of any
Text of God's Word, which thwarts and contradicts the Analogy of Faith, that
Sense or Interpretation is from the Spirit of Satan; not from God, be the same
never so plausible and pleasing to the Sons of Men; and be the Authors never so
highly esteemed of, for both their Piety and Learning. There is a sweet and an
harmonious Concord and Agreement between all the parts of God's Revealed
Religion, though but few (Comparatively) can see it to be so. The Doctrine and
Institutions of God in all the particulars of his Instituted Worship, are
plain, easy and obvious to the Eye, which the Spirit of Christ has Anointed:
But to such Men and Women, who are Destitute of the Spirit of Christ, nothing
in Religion appears to them, but Nonsense and seeming Contradictions, which is
the Reason why so many thousands in England, etc. Stagger and Reel (with a
Spiritual Vertigo) in the Principles of the Protestant Religion, wherein both
they and their Ancestors were Initiated (by Water Baptism;) and in maintaining
of which, they seemed (for many years) very Zealous.

The second thing I shall Premise, is this, (viz.) That Heterodox and Corrupt
Underminers of the Gospel are then to be most of all looked after and watched
against, when they lay about them, to advance the Fame and Credit of the
Devil's Ministers, by Ecclipsing and Darkening the Credit and deserved Fame of
Christ's Worthys, whom Christ has Honored with, being the chief Combatants in
the Lord's Battles against the Powers of Darkness in this World.

My design in this, is to discover to the unwary Reader, this Doctor's Design
of Blackening that Renowned and Incomparable Servant of Christ, Mr. John
Calvin, than whom, I verily believe, the World has not (since the Apostles
left the Earth) seen a Greater Divine. A Man, who (for his high and excellent
Endowments in all manner of Learning, especially his Eagle-eyedness, in
penetrating into the Sense of Scriptures) was more like a Prophet, or an
Apostle, than an ordinary Preacher.

This Doctor, that he might put a Luster on Michael Servetus his Name, draws
the Pencil of horrid and black Reproach across the Name and Reputation of Holy,
and (as I said) Incomparable Calvin. The Devil (in his Ministers) being deeply
sensible how the famous and elaborate Works of that one Man stand in the way,
to prevent and hinder the Devil growing Rampant, in advancing his Kingdom of
Darkness among the Sons of Men.

Calvin is (by the Dr.) represented as an ambitious, Self seeking Man; and
(which is far worse) a bloody Persecuter, while his Servetus is decked and
adorned wi^h the Robes of a Glorious Martyrdom. The Drs. Words will show
whether I be mistaken in what I say of him, see Page 4 of the Drs. Epistle,
where he says, (with a Spirit of virulency) and at last I concluded it must
certainly proceed from the very Spirit and Principle of the first founder of
your Sect, (meaning the Presbyterians) Master John Calvin, who burnt the Books
of Servetus, a Learned Baptist, and afterward persuaded the Magistrates of
Geneva to Burn him alive; which Sentence was executed upon him, (as Castellio
testifies, (who was a contemporary with him) In these words Michael Servetus
was burnt alive for his Opinion, at Geneva, 1553, upon the 27th ^ay of October.

Besides this, The Dr. tells his Reader, (with an ungodly design, to lessen and
blacken the Famous Calvin; and to Extol his Servetus,) that one well observes,
that Mr. Calvin did acknowledge of Servetus, that he was a Learned Charitable
Man; notwithstanding which, he wrote a Book to Justify Servetus being put to
Death.

When I See and Rea^ these things, from a better, and more Impartial Testimony
than Castellio was, I shall then say somewhat to it. But (indeed) I must
Ingeniously assure the Dr. that I shall neither believe him, nor his Castellio,
in the Reports they spread abroad of Calvin, and others (of Christ's Worthys)
who Detect and Decry their Heretical Doctrines.

Not him, because sad Experience Teaches, that those of his Judgment are
pretty well Skilled, in Misrepresenting and Belying the most Holy, Orothodox,
and most Learned of Divines; on purpose to gain Ground among the less
Intelligent, whom they know to be strangers to Authors; and who will be easily
drawn to Credit those Reports, which they are not able to contradict:
Especially when Represented to them, by the Mouth and Pen, of such, as they
take to be good Men.

Not his Castellio, because I look on him every way as unfit to be a Witness
against so Orthodox and great a Propugnator of Gospel Verities, as Calvin is
known to be; And that, on the Account of the Testimonies given of Castellio; by
good and Learned Men, who better knew what Castellio was than Dr. Russel does.

The Great and Learned Scaliger charges Castellio, with holding many corrupt
Opinions of the Anabaptists.

And the Learned Hoffman Accused him for being one of the first Sowers of the
Seed of Arminianism.

Tar. Faber, another Great and Learned Author, Charged him with saying that the
Song of Solomon was a Wicked Book. And he held that Paul Taught a more
Mysterious Divinity to some perfect Disciples, than he left in Wri ing, this is
to be seen in his Book, on the First Epistle to the Corinthians.

Now if the Impartial Reader, seriously weighs the Account given of Calvin and
Castellio, by the Orthodox and Learned, he will soon conclude (with me,) That
had the Parts and Learning of Servetus and Castellio both Concentered in one
Head, Calvin's Orthodoxy in the Faith, and his Excellency in all manner of
Learning, had never been in danger of Suffering an Eclipse: Nor yet his Books
of receiving a Solid Answer (much less a Confutation) by such Men as Servetus
and Castellio, whatever Dr. Russel and his Bigoted Proselites think or believe
to the Contrary.

That Eagle Eyed Calvin, soared too High (in Penetrating into the Arcana
Imperii of Heaven) for such Glowworms to reach his Sense, or to understand the
Spirit by which he Speaks and Writes. Wisdom is Justified of none but her own
Legitimate Offspring. Mat. 11.19.

And here I desire the wary Reader, to take notice of the fraudulent design of
Dr. Russel, which is, to I^pose on his Reader, a believing that Servetus (who
died at Geneva for his Opinion) did Dye for b^ing an Anabaptist: which inded is
a notorious Piece of Fals^ood, as the Learned and Godly (who look into
Antiquity) well know, who give that Account of Servetus, that he was Executed
at Geneva for his Blasphemy against the Holy Trinity, he Denying the Godhead
of Christ, and the Personality of the Holy Ghost.

This the Dr. well knew would have spoiled his design, had he (honestly) told
his Reader, what an Heterodox and Blasphemous Wretch, his Servetus, that
Learned Baptist (who Died at Geneva for his Opinion) was.

And truly, (to be plain,) had Servetus Died for being an Anabaptist (which I
utterly deny he did,) yet, I am far from thinking the better of Anabaptism
therefore: Or, Judging Servetus, (or any others who on that Account loose their
Lives) to be true Martyrs of Jesus.

That saying of Cyprian will ever be true, that Causa, non Mors, facit
Martirem, The Cause, not Death, makes a Martyr. As the Blessed Jesus has his
Witnesses, who Seal the Word of his Patience, with their dearest Blood.

So the Devil has his Witnesses, (yea, many more than Christ has,) who Seal
their Infernal Heresies, and Damnable Doctrines, with their Hearts Blood; yet I
am far from Believing that such Martyrs, will ever be owned by Christ, at their
going off the Stage: Or, that such Sufferings will make better the horrid Lies
and Blasphemies Men Suffer for, be their Constancy, seeming Zeal, and Courage
what it will.

Having Premised these things, I now proceed, to Examine the Four Particulars,
whereon his Fabric of Anabaptism seems to be Founded.

The Dr. and (with him all Anabaptists) Hold, (and with great Confidence)
Assert: that Dipping and ^lungeing the whole Body under Water, is the Only
Right manner of Baptism, which all Believers are to practice under the Gospel.

This he labors, (though in vain) to make good by the Etymology of the word,
which the Spirit uses to express Baptism by.

The word (in the Greek) is (...), which (says the Dr.) is derived from (...)
to Dip or Plunge a thing under water. This signification of the Primitive word
(...), he confirms by Human Testimony; he begins with Learned Mr. Leigh, to
whose Critica Sacra he refers his Reader, in Quoting whom, he deals with his
Reader as he did in Quoting Servetus; he says that Servetus Died at Geneva for
his Opinion, but hides from his Reader the horrid Blasphemies for which he
Dyed: So here the Dr. (designedly) Curtails the Observations of Mr. Leigh on
the word (...), telling his Reader so much out of Mr. Leigh as he thinks makes
for his Cause, but leaving out what of Mr. Leigh he knows makes full against
him; which (I must needs say) is the trick of a Deceiver: And by these kind of
shifts he and the most Crafty of his Party, do endeavor to underprop their
sinking Cause, bearing poor simple folk in hand, that the Eminently Learned and
Godly Men (whom they Quote) were of the Anabaptists Persuasion.

Now to let his unfairness appear herein, I here set down what of Leigh he
quotes, and what of him he omits.

The word (...) (says Mr. Leigh, is derived from the word (...), Tingo, to Dip
or Plunge into the Water; and signifies (primarily) such a kind of washing as
is used in Bucks, where Linen is plunged and dipped. Thus far the Dr. Quotes
Leigh, and who would not think by reading so much of Leigh, and looking no
further, (as the Dr. no doubt would have his Reader) but that Leigh in his
Critica Sacra was of the Drs. judgment herein.

Now follows the Learned Leighs Observations on the signification of the word
(...). yet (says he) it is taken more largely (meaning Baptizo) for any kind
of washing, rinsing or cleansing, even where there is no Dipping at all; for
which he Quotes Mat. 3.11. I indeed Baptize you with Water, etc. Mat. 20.22.
Are ye able to be Baptized with, etc. Mar. 7.4. And when they come from the
Market, except they wash they eat not. Luke 3.16. Acts 1.5. Acts 11.16. and 1.
Cor. 10.2. In all which Scriptures Mr. Leigh does acknowledge that (...) (the
Derivative) is of a larger signification then (...) its Primative, and intends
such a washing as is done without Dipping; and why should this be concealed
from the Reader?

As for Zeppeorus, Alstedius, Plutarch and Nazianzen, (on whom the Dr. lays no
small stress) I hope he will allow us the same liberty he takes to himself,
(viz.) to Quote such Testimonies as make for us.

The Learned Dr. featly (Quoted by Mr. Leigh) tells us that Christ no where
requires Dipping, but only Baptizing; which word (says he) Hesychius,
Stephanus, Scapula and Budeus, the great Masters of the Greek Tongue) make good
by very many Instances and Allegations out of Classick Writers, that the word
imports no more then Ablution or Washing, (...) (say they) in their Lexicons
and Commentaries) Lavo (...) Lavatio, Ablutio, which may be done without
Dipping.

As touching the Greek Lexicon, Published, and recommended by.

Joseph Caryl, George Cokayne, Ralph Venning, William Dell, Matthew Barker,
William Adderly, Matthew Mead, Henry Jessey.
All that I shall (or need to) say, is this, (viz.) that albeit I own my self
bound to Reverence and Honor the hoary Head, when found in the way of Truth
and Righteousness, yet it must still be with the reservation of the honor and
respect which I owe to God, (that Ancient of Days) their Father and mine, who
alone and not the Learning and Wisdom of Men, (though the Greatest and Holiest)
is the Father of their Faith and mine. I am not insensible that some Learned
and good Men have granted, that the word (...) does indifferently signify, any
kind of Washing by pouring out or sprinkling Water upon, or, by Dipping or
Plunging into the Water; and this they have grounded on the native
Signification of the Primitive word (...). But with becoming modesty and due
veneration to their Reverend Names, I must crave leave in telling the World,
that for a World I cannot be of their Opinion (herein) until I receive greater
and clearer light from the Spirit and Word of God, concerning this matter; and
that for the reasons here following. First, the apparent difference I find
between the two Words, (...) and (...), in Letters and Syllables, let the words
be observed, in (...) (the Primitive) I can find but 2 Syllables, (...),
Bap-to, but in the Derivative (...) I find three, (...), Baptizo, and as in the
Active, (so also in the Passive) Voice, (...), Bap-to-mai has three Syllables,
whereas (...) which is the Passive of (...), has four Syllables, (...)
Bap-ti-zo-mai. Now that the 2 words should both in Active and Passive Voice so
apparently differ in Letters, Syllables, and sound of the words; and yet, that
both the words should signify and import the very same thing, is to me such a
Riddle, that indeed I cannot see how the same can be unfolded, unless by the
elucidating Art, and skill of Dr. Russel. The Learned know (very well) that in
the Hebrew and Greek Tongues, the change of a Letter or a Syllable does greatly
alter the Sense and Import of Words; and why it should not be so here, I cannot
see any solid reason to the contrary, only it is the Will and Pleasure of our
Dr. (and his Adherents in this Cause) that it must and shall be so, right or
wrong; as appears by his Arminian Confidence almost in every Page where he
mentions the Word Baptize; where he (peremptorily) beggs the Question, taking
for granted, that which will never be granted by any, (unless by Brainless
Heads or wilful underminers of the Gospel, (viz.) that the Derivative (...)
does always (in the Gospel) signify and import the very same thing with Bapto,
(viz.) to Dip or Plunge the whole Body under Water.

But that which will farther clear the matter, and put the Truth (I here
contend for) out of the reach of all Scriptural Contradiction, is the Practice
of the Holy Ghost, who is better Etymologist than our Dr. and then all the
Arminian (and other Heretical) Critics, who (in pretense of giving the Native
and Genuine sense of Words in the Scripture) have forced a wrong sense from the
Original, on purpose to lay a firm foundation, on which they may build their
Heterodox, and Soul deluding Doctrines.

I find that when the Holy Ghost would express the Act of Dipping or Plunging
into, he does it only by the Primitive (...), never by the Derivative (...)
that I can find: For Proof whereof, let those Scriptures (Quoted by the Dr.
himself in Page 11.) be without prejudice looked into, and seriously weighed.
Rev. 19.13. He had his Vesture dipped in Blood. Mat. 26.23. He that dippeth his
hand with me in the Dish. Luke 16.24. That he may dip the tip of his finger in
Water. And in John 13.26. it is (says the Dr.) twice used, (...) Dipped,
(...), and when he had Dipped: Here in these places the Holy Ghost expresses
the A^t Dip or Plunge into by the Primitive (...), but never by (...), Baptizo
the Derivative.

Secondly, again (on the contrary) when the Holy Ghost expresses Baptism by
washing, he does it by the Derivative (...), but never by the Primitive (...),
Bapto. For Proof hereof, let the places of Scripture already quoted (out of
Leigh's Critica Sacra) be consulted, in all which places the Spirit speaks of
Baptism, but not a word of Dipping; and that by the Derivative word (...),
Baptizo; never by the Primitive Bapto.

Seeing then it has pleased the Holy Ghost to express Dipping or Plunging into
by the word (...), but never by the word (...), Baptizo; and that he has
expressed Baptism by the word (...), but never by the word (...). I think none
but Fools or mad Men will blame me for resolving to believe the Holy Ghost (in
this matter) before I believe Dr. Russel, and all the human Testimonies he has
quoted to make good his Cause; though he were able to quote a Million of
Authors as Witty and Learned as his so much admired Servetus and Castellio.

The Premises considered, I hope the Dr. will not be displeased for making
this fair and generous offer to him, and all who espouse his Unscriptural
Cause, (viz.) that if he (or they) can show such a solid and convincing reason
(as does not contradict the Analogy of Faith) why (or wherefore) the Holy
Ghost should not in any of those Scriptures (where he expresses Dipping)
express Dipping by (...) the Derivative, but only by (...) the Primitive; and
why he should not express Baptism in any of the places of Scripture above
quoted, by the Primitive (...), Bapto, but always by Baptizo, in case both
(...) the Primitive, and (...) its Derivative do signify the very same thing,
(viz.) to Dip or Plunge under the Water: And I do faithfully promise him to own
my self mistaken, and him to be (herein) in the right.

If he cannot, I then hope his misguided Proselytes as well as himself, will
ingeniously own themselves mistaken, and persist no longer in fighting against
the truth of God.

From the difference between the two words in Letters, Syllables and Sound; as
also from the Practice of the Holy Ghost, in using both the words in the N. T

I thus Argue, Major. If the words (...) and (...) do apparently differ in
Letters, Syllables and Sound, and if the Holy Ghost do always express the Act
of Dipping and Plunging by Bapto, never by Baptizo; and Baptism by Baptizo,
never by Bapto; then the word Bapto must signify to Dip and Plunge, but never
to Baptize; and the word Baptizo must signify to Baptize, but never to Dip or
Plunge under Water.

Assump. But the words Bapto and Baptizo do apparently differ in Le^ters,
Syllables and Sound; and the Holy Ghost does always express the Act of Dipping
or Plunging by Bapto, never by Baptizo; and Baptism by Baptizo, never by Bapto.

Conclusion, Ergo the word Bapto must signify to Dip or Plunge, but never to
Baptize; and the word Baptizo must signify to Baptize, but never to Dip or
Plunge under Water.

Besides this Argument, others shall be laid down to confirm this when I come
to speak to his third, (viz.) the Practice of the first Baptizers.

In the 2d place, our Dr. will have Baptizing to be only by Dipping or Plunging
the whole Body under Water: The Proof he gives (to make good his Assertion
herein) are those Metaphors used in Holy Scripture: To represent it to our
understanding, he Instances in two, in Page 8, (viz) Burial and Resurrection.

He tells his Reader there, that our Lord Jesus has not burdened us under the
Gospel with a multitude of Ceremonies, as it was in the Economy of the Jews
under the Legal Dispensation, but only with some few; and those very
Significant, this being a more Spiritual Dispensation. Before I meddle in
speaking to his Metaphors, I ^ill take liberty to tell the World, that al^eit
Christ does not burden us with a multitude of Ceremonies now, as under the
Economy of the Jews under the Legal Dispensation; yet this one Ceremony (of
Baptism) will prove a heavier Yoke to Believers now then Circumcision with all
the whole Body of Ceremonies appertaining to that Legal Dispensation, in case
it must be Administered by Dipping and Plunging the whole Body under Water, as
Anabaptists say it must.

I come now to his Metaphors, the first whereof (he says) is that of a Burial:
For this, he and all of his Persuasion quote Romans 6.4. and Colos. 2.12. Buried
with him in Baptism unto Death. From this Metaphor of a Burial the Dr. and all
his Party, do hold and teach (for an infallible truth) that the Scope and
Design of the Apostle in the two places (now quoted) is to teach and set forth
the mode and manner how Christ was Buried, to the end Believers should (in
Baptism) imitate the same: This (if I mistake them not, as I am very confident
I do not) is the sense and meaning wherein he and all Anabap^ists take those
Scriptures.

In Answer to whom, I affirm that this their sense of those places is
senseless, and merely forced to serve their own turn, in proving that Dipping
and Plunging (in Baptism) is the only true and right Baptism.

Now to discover their Mistake and Error herein, I shall offer but two things
to consideration.

The first is, to show the Scope and Design of the Apostle in those places,
which is not (as they fondly and injudiciously imagine) to show that Christ was
Baptized by dipping, or that Believers are to be so Baptized.

But the Scope and Design of the Apostle in those places, is to set forth and
prove that Suretyship Union, which is between Christ (the Mediatorial Head) and
all the Members of his Body Mystical; there being no one Act of Obedience,
either Active or Passive, which Christ (the Mediator) performed in the assumed
Nature, but all his Members are said to do and perform the same; and all the
Effects and Saving Benefits thereof do undoubtedly redound to all the Elect:
and all this is Signified and Sealed in Baptism to every Elected Sinner,
whether Infant or Adult. And I cannot but reckon it a strange Infatuation on
those who lay such stress on the Dutch Translators, in the point of John the
Dooper, (wherein silly and weak People do not a little Glory and Brag) that
they should put such Sleights and Contempt on the Dutch Annotators, those great
Lights of the World, in matter of Infants right to Baptism, of Abraham's
Covenant being a Covenant of absolute Grace, of Circumcision being the Initial
Seal thereof, and Baptism succeeding in the room thereof; with sundry other
material points in Gospel Religion, wherein they are Sound and Orthodox: Yet,
in nothing must our Dr. and his Adherents make use of the Dutch, only John the
Dooper, John the Dooper: And in this Commission, de Salve Dopende, Dipping them.

And what ground has our Dr. to conclude, that had our English Translators
turned the words (about Baptism) into Dipping, as the Dutch Translators have
done? (If it be as he says) that therefore it must (necessarily) be so in the
Original, or how will he prove the Dutch Translators nearer to Infallibility
than our English Translators were? or that our English Translators would have
been more Infallible than they were, in case they had Translated John the
Baptist Johannes de Dooper; and in the Commission Baptizing them, de Salve
Dopende Dipping them.

Secondly, if to imitate and set forth Christ's Burial, be the design of the
Apostle, then must it (necessarily) follow that it is Men's duty to imitate it
in all the Circumstances of a Burial, as well as in some.

Christ when he was Buried, he was wholly Passive; he did not go into the Grave
himself, but was laid in by others; so must Persons be in Baptism, they must be
wholly Passive, they must not go into the Water themselves, but must be laid
under the Water by the Administrator of Baptism: Christ when Buried was left in
the Grave, so must the Person in Baptism; he must be left under the Water as
long as Christ continued in the Grave, which was three Days and three Nights.

If any shall say it is absurd and ridiculous to think or say, that these
Circumstances should be attended or imitated by Believers in Water Baptism, I
say so too; ad do farther say and affirm, that it is (altogether) as absurd and
ridiculous for any to affirm and teach, that for Believers to set forth and
imitate Christ's Burial is the Apostles design in the abovementioned
Scriptures: If Anabaptists will be peremptory in asserting and teaching that to
set forth and imitate Christ's Burial in those places, is the scope and design
of the Apostle, they must give me leave to be as peremptory as they in
affirming, that unless they imitate Christ's Burial in the Circumstances now
mentioned, their Baptism (about which so great and confused a noise is made in
the World) is but a mere ludicrous (or mock) Baptism, for that they do not
imitate Christ in their Baptism in those Circumstances which are so essentially
necessary to s^t forth and represent his Death and Burial, in case it be as
they hold it is.

To which I add, that our Baptizing by pouring out or sprinkling Water on the
Subject, does (every way) more exactly represent and set forth a Burial, than
that of Dipping and Plunging the whole Body under Water.

The truth of this will appear, if the Particulars following be seriously and
without prejudice considered.

First, In Dipping and Plunging into the Water, the Party Baptized, is Active,
in going himself into the Water, which (indeed) ought not to be the Ordinance
of Water Baptism, being (in all respects) a Passive Ordinance, wherein the
Subject is to be wholly Passive, as the Soul is in the Work of Regeneration.

The Work of Conversion or Regeneration is the Inward and Spiritual Baptism
Administered by Christ. In this wonderful Work, the Dead Sinner has no hand in
effecting or producing the same, it is wholly done by Christ, the Administrator
thereof. So in the outward Ordinance of Water Baptism, (which is no more than
the outward Sign or Seal of the Inward) the Minister of the Gospel (in
Administering Baptism) must only be Active, the Subject must put forth no Act at
all. The Party going himself into the Water, does not represent and set forth a
Dead Man, in Pouring out or Sprinkling Water on the Subject, the Party is
wholly Passive, as is a Dead Man when Buried. Again, in Dipping and Plunging
the Party Baptized, is applied to the Water, not the Water to the Party, which
is contrary to the manner of Burials, which all Men know is to lay the Corpse on
its Back in the Grave, and to Pour out or Sprinkle the Earth on it.

In Baptizing by Sprinkling or Pouring out Water, the Party is laid on his
Back, and the Water poured out or sprinkled on him.

The Party Dead is never thrust into the Earth, but the Earth or Mould is
poured out on him.

Now, whether of these two ways of Baptizing by Dipping and Plunging, or that
of Pouring out or Sprinkling Water upon, do more lively and exactly set forth
and represent a Burial, let any (who have not lost their Senses) Judge.

As to the second Metaphor, (viz.) A Resurrection, I humbly conceive, that what
here follows may suffice to show, that as Anabaptists do not (at all) hold
forth or ^epresent the Death and Burial of Christ in ^^eir going into the Water
(in their way) so, neither do they set forth and represent his Resurrection, as
they fancy they do.

First, It is most certain, that when the time (determined by God's Decree) for
Christ's remaining in a State of Death was accomplished, (according to the Holy
Scriptures,) he raised up himself from the Grave. No Hand of Men or Angels
helped to raise him. So that plain it is, if the Scriptures they allege for
this, be to be taken in a literal Sense, then must it needs follow, that as he
that Administers Baptism (by Dipping or Burying the whole Body under Water,)
does Administer Baptism in that way of Burying under the Water, to the end the
Party so Baptized might lively set forth the Death and Burial of Christ; so he
must leave the Party Buried in the Water, to raise up himself, that so he might
represent Christ in his raising up himself from the Grave. If this were
practiced, it would not be hard to guess, how many Proselites they would get to
join with them in this their Fantastical new Mode of Baptizing. And truly, for
my part, I cannot see how they can be excused from doing the one as well as the
other, seeing that the Metaphor must be Prosecuted in all its parts, as well as
in some. And thus they may see what they are like to get, by building their
Confidence on misunderstood and wrested Metaphors.

I come now to the Doctor's third Medium, whereby he labors to prove, that the
right way of Baptizing under the Gospel, is (and must be) by Dipping and
Plunging the whole Body under Water, (viz.) The Practice of the first
Baptizers. In this he is as full of Confidence as he was in the other two; I
have now dismissed, and I hope in the Goodness of God it will plainly be
demonstrated, that (in this also) he and his Adherents do pervert the
Scriptures, which gives us the account of the first Baptizers, as they (most
certainly) do the other Scriptures, which they bring to justify and make good
their Soul deluding Dreams.

He begins with John the Baptist, Page 10. where he tells his Reader, that it
does appear that Dipping is the right way of Baptizing from the first
Baptizers: The first mention (says he) of this Ordinance of Holy Baptism, we
have in Mat. 3.1. where John the Dipper is mentioned; and so he goes on in a
strange kind of Rapsody, warbling out his so much affected Note, Dipping and
Plunging. I shall not be concerned to follow the Dr. (Pedetentim) step by step
in his Pedantick way, least I should be found guilty of the same empty
Tautologies wherewith his so much admired Epistle abounds.

The ground of his mistake herein, is the wrong Etymology he gives of the word
(...), which he and his mistaken Testimonies take to signify and mean Dipping
and Plunging the whole Body under Water.

This Etymology of his I have overthrown, as the Reader may see, if he look
back to the first Head of the Dispute, (viz.) the Etymology of the word (...).
I shall not repeat but go on to confirm the truth of the Etymology I have
given of the word (...), from the word of God, and the best Greek Authors, by
such Arguments as (I hope in Christ) will prove irrefragable.

The first shall be grounded on the necessity of John Baptist, his Harmonizing
with the Penmen of the Old Testament in all the parts of his Ministry, if the
Dr. will grant (as he must) if he speak truth that his John the Dooper was a
true and faithful Prophet of God, he must of necessity grant that John did run
parallel with Moses and the other Prophets.

This the Dr. must either grant or deny, if he grant that John did run exactly
parallel with Moses and the other Prophets, then is it beyond all contradiction
that John administered Baptism by pouring out or sprinkling Water on the Persons
he Baptized; for most certain it is, that Moses (under the Ceremonial
Dispensation) did apply all the Legal Washings and Purifications by Water,
(which all had a Typical relation to Christ to come, as John's Baptism also
had) by pouring out or sprinkling the Water: The Prophets also, (witness those
two great Prophets Esa. and Ezekiel.) they foretold of the manner how God would
apply to his People the two great Benefits accrewing by his Sons Mediatorial
Sacrifice, (viz.) Justification and Sanctification, which was to be by
Sprinkling, as will evidently appear by Esa. 52.15. Then shall he Sprinkle many
Nations, etc. and Ezekiel. 36.25. Then will I Sprinkle clean Water upon you, etc.
In these places the Spirit of Christ (in his Prophets) had an Eye to the
Baptismal Washings of the New Testament Dispensation. Now if John Baptist did
(in all the parts of his Ministry) Harmonize with Moses and the other Prophets,
he did (undoubtedly) Baptize by pouring out or sprinkling Water on those he
Baptized; for most certain it is, (as has been already observed) pouring out
or sprinkling was the mode or way of application of all the Ceremonial Washings
which were used before John's Baptism.

If the Dr. and his Adherents deny that John did run (exactly) parallel with
Moses and the other Penmen of Holy Scriptures, then is John the Dooper (by
them) made a false Prophet; and all who (from John) take up and practice the
mode of Dipping the whole Body under Water, (as the only right Baptism) are
Self-condemned in that they do (herein) follow one who contradicted the Spirit
of God in the other Prophets.

And so (hereby) it appears how much John the Baptist is obliged to the Dippers
of our Age, who, (rather than they will lose their silly Opinion) will have the
Spirit of Truth to speak Nonsense, (yea, contradict himself) and John the
greatest of all the other Prophets, (because the immediate forerunner of
Christ) to be a false Prophet.

This Stain they will never be able to wash off their Name, any other way than
by honestly acknowledging that John did (in all the parts of his Ministry)
Harmonize with Moses and the other Prophets, the which if they once grant, (as
they must if they speak by the Holy Ghost) then is their Cause lost, and John
no more to be Styled John the Dooper, but John the Baptizer.

From what has been said, I argue thus, if John Baptist did (in all the parts
of his Ministry) Harmonize and agree with Moses and the other Prophets, then
did he administer Baptism by pouring out or sprinkling Water upon those he
Baptized: But John Baptist did (in all the parts of his Ministry) Harmonize and
agree with Moses and the other Prophets.

Therefore John Baptist did administer Baptism by pouring out or sprinkling
Water on those he Baptized.

A second Argument shall be grounded on impossibility, thus, that way of
Baptizing which is impossible to be practiced (without a miraculous strength of
Body) was never commanded by Christ, nor practiced by John; but to Baptize the
many Multitudes which came to John's Baptism, by Dipping the whole Body under
Water, was a thing altogether impossible, seeing John had no miraculous
strength of Body to render him capable of such an arduous and difficult
Administration.

Therefore that way of Baptizing, by Dipping the whole Body under Water, was
never commanded by Christ, nor practiced by John.

The major Proposition will not be denied, the Assumption will readily be
subscribed, (as an unquestionable truth) if Men who plead for that way of
Dipping will be but ingenious in doing two things. First, in lifting up in
their Arms (cleverly from the Earth) the many Corpulent-Bodies which offer
themselves to Baptism, lay them under the Water, and there hold them until the
Administrator pronounce the words of Institution, I Baptize thee in the Name of
the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Secondly, in sincerely
acknowledging what experience teaches them concerning this Practice; these two
Particulars complied in, will (I doubt not) put the matter now in Debate out of
all Question, that to Baptize in that way of taking up in the Arms, and laying
under Water the most Corpulent Bodies who offer to Baptism, and to hold them
under the Water till the words of Institution be pronounced; is a thing
altogether impossible, not only in respect of the Administrator, whose Bodily
Strength must (in an ordinary way) sink and fail in lifting and holding up (so
long) such massy, ponderous weights: And also in respect of the Subject, who
must (undoubtedly) be in great fear and in apparent danger of being let fall,
if not of being Suffocated or Smothered in the Water.

And strange it is to me, that Arminians, who plead so much for the universal
Love and Mercy of God to Mankind (in general,) should not see how full of
Reflection on God, this Principle of theirs is, which makes the God of Love and
Mercy, the Author of such a Mode or Way of Baptizing, which is not possible to
be practiced, without apparent Danger, both to Health and Life, of both the
Subject and the Administrator too.

I conclude this Argument with the Saying of Judicious Sydenham, (viz) That if
Baptism be to be Administered in that way of Dipping only, Happy are those who
live in hot Climates, or who have Bodies of Brass.

A third Argument may be grounded on Scandal, thus; That Mode or Way of
Baptizing, which is both Immodest and tends to Excite Lustful Motions and
Carnal Desires in Men and Women, cannot be commanded by Christ; neither was the
same ever practiced by John. But that way of Baptizing by Dipping the whole
Body under Water, is both Immodest and tends to Excite Lustful Motions and
Carnal Desires in Men and Women.

Therefore that Mode of Baptizing by Dipping the whole Body under Water, was
never commanded by Christ, neither was the same ever practiced by John.

He who commands all Matters (relating to Divine Worship) to be done decently,
and in order, 1 Cor. 14.40. and who commands Believers to abstain from all
appearance of Evil, 1 These. 5.22. can never be the Author of such Disorderly
Practices, as thwart and contradict his own general Rules. Now, whether it be
not an Immodest and unseemly Sight, to see a mixed Company of Men and Women
stand in Garments, (to use Mr. Sydenham's Expression) next to Nakedness it
self: Let any (not bereaved of common Modesty) Judge: And whether the
Administrator can (possibly) handle the Female Sex, as he does (when actually
Dipping them,) and not feel the risings and motions of Concupiscence in his
Nature; I leave to Thinking Persons to Determine and Judge.

Again, in the fourth place, (to add no more) let the last Argument be grounded
on the Analogy, which is (and must be) between the Baptism of John and that of
Christ. The Argument is thus framed.

If Christ's way and manner of Administering the Inward Spiritual Baptism
(whereof that of John was but the Outward Visible Sign) be by Sprinkling or
Pouring out upon: Then John did (certainly) Baptize by Sprinkling or Powering
out the Water on those he Baptized:

But Christ's way and manner of Administering the Inward Spiritual Baptism, is
by Sprinkling or Pouring out upon.

Therefore John did (certainly) Baptize by Sprinkling or Pouring out Water on
those he Baptized.

If there was a necessity that John should Harmonize with Moses, the Ceremonial
Law and the Prophets, I cannot see any reason why he should not be as greatly
concerned to Harmonize with Christ himself: And seeing that the manner of
Christ's Administering the Inward and Spiritual Baptism, is by Pouring out and
Sprinkling the Graces of the Spirit upon the Souls of the Elect in the Work of
Regeneration, why John (the forerunner of Christ) should Administer his Baptism
(which was but an External Sign or Christ's) by Dipping or Plunging the whole
Body into the Water, can never be demonstrated by all the Wit and conceited
Skill in our Doctor, though he were as well Verst in all the Roots and
Heemantique Nouns of the Hebrew Tongue, as his so much admired Robertson was:
And if the Doctor will not be offended, I am very desirous to know if his so
highly commended and admired Robertson was (by his so great Excellency in the
Hebrew and Greek Tongues) more Infallibly acquainted with the Mind of the Holy
Ghost than other Men; and that Mr. Robertson did certainly believe, that the
Etymology, which he gave of the word Baptizo, was Infalible as he said. How
came it to pass, that the Learned Robertson did not Renounce that Baptism,
which he received in Infancy and by Sprinkling?

I think I knew Master William Robertson as well as Dr. Russel; and during the
time of my Acquaintance with him, I am sure, he was far enough from Anabaptism.
All the Skill he had in the Tongues, with his Acquaintance in the Arts, did not
convince him, that the Baptism he received in Infancy, and by Sprinkling, was a
Nullity, as the Doctor holds it is.

But to return to John the Dooper, I think fit to assure the Doctor, that I own
my self bound to believe John himself, rather than Doctor Russel, or any of
those Learned Men he so greatly Brags of. The words of John are so plain, that
I can see no need of a Commentator, to explain their Sense; he tells us in Mar.
1.8. and in Mat. 3.11. that he did Baptize with Water; but that Christ should
Baptize with the Holy Ghost: (...) and (...), do both intend and signify the
very same way and manner of Administration: All the difference between John and
Christ, in both their Baptisms, is in the Subject Matter, (viz.) In the outward
Water and the inward Grace: John he did Administer Water, the outward Sign; but
Christ he did Administer the Spiritual Grace: But as touching the manner, it
was (most certainly) the very same in both.

Now, if the Doctor grant, (as he must if he speak Truth) that Christ does
Administer the Inward and Spiritual Baptism, by Pouring out or Sprinkling the
Graces of the Holy Ghost, he will find it (altogether) Incongruous, and no way
agreeing with the Analogy of Faith, to hold or assert, that John did
Administer the outward Sign in such a manner as was directly contrary to
Christ. There must be (necessarily) an Harmonious Agreement between the Sign
and the Thing signified thereby, which can never be, in case Christ Baptizes by
or with, Pouring out or Sprinkling; and John should Baptize by Dipping or
Plunging into.

As Christ applies the Graces of the Spirit to the Soul in Conversion, not the
Soul to the Spirit; so in the outward Baptism John he applied the Water (the
outward Sign) to the Person, not the Person to the Water.

For making the Thing or Point (now in Debate) obvious and plain to the meanest
Capacity, let it be seriously considered, how plain and express the Scriptures
are in affirming, that Christ's way or manner in Administering the Spiritual
Baptism, is by Pouring out and Sprinkling the Holy Spirit on the Souls, which
he Regenerates, but never by applying the Souls to the Holy Spirit, Read
(without prejudice) Tit. 3.5, 6. Not by works of righteousness, which we have
done, but according to his mercy, he has saved us by the washing of
regeneration, and the renewing of the holy Ghost, which he shed on us
abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior.

(...), has powered on us, the very same word is made use of in Acts 2.17. And
it shall come to pass in the last days, (says God) I will power out my Spirit
on all flesh, (...). Both which places are the fulfilling of those Gracious
Promises in Esa. 44.3. and Joel 2.28. where the Lord promised, that he will
pour Water on him that is thirsty, etc. and his Spirit on the Churches Seed.
The Hebrew word in Esa. is (...), Etzek Ruchi; and in Joel the word used to
express the same thing by, is, (...), Eshpoch Eth Ruchi: in neither of which
places will our Doctor's (...) Vetabe lu Otham: And Dip ye them, be found. The
Doctor, the better to help his limping Proselites over the Style of Heresy and
Error, tells his Reader, that the Evangelist Matthew wrote his Gospel in the
Hebrew Tongue; for Proof where^f, he sets down his own Opinion, that so it is;
and this Opinion of his he confirms (as infallible) by the Testimony of Jerome,
and (he thinks) the Opinion of the most Learned Men: But the Dr. was so wary in
this point, that he resolved the Reader should not (easily) find him out in his
quotations, the which the Dr. knew would easily be done, had he (fairly)
directed his Reader to the Book and Page in Jerome; where his judgment
concerning this matter is expressed, and by Naming the Learned Men, who were one
with him and Jerome in this Opinion: His neglect herein forces me to charge him
with unfairness, (to say no worse) if that be a true rule in Logic, Dolus
latet in Vniversalibus, that Deceit lies hid in Universals; I am sure the Dr.
(as well as the rest of his Fraternity, (who frequently walk in this Path) must
fall under this Lash; the Drs. lothness to Name the Learned Men, who were of
his Opinion in this, causes me to suspect that he means such as his Learned
Baptist Servetus, and his famous Castellio, with those other Arminian and
Popish Authors, whose Names are in his Book.

It were worth while for the Reader to observe what shifts the poor Man is put
to, to prove and make good (from Gods word) his new, (though falsely pretended
ancient) Mode of Baptizing, by Dipping and Plunging the whole Body into the
Water.

He tells his Reader that Matthew wrote his Gospel in Hebrew; the Drs. design
being (no doubt) to make way for his Hebrew words, (...) and Dip ye them. The
root (says he) is Tabal, which is the third Person Singular of the
Preterperfect Tense, and signifies he Dipped: He Instances in Naaman the
Syrian, 2. Kings 5.14. Then went he down and Dipped himself seven times in
Jordan, etc. From Naaman the Syrian the Dr. comes (per Saltum) by a long leap
to John B^ptizing in Jordan; in Mat. 3.6. you have (says he) the same Words
again in the Passive Voice, which must be rendered in English, And were Dipped
of him in Jordan: And in Ver. 16. you have the same root again as it is applied
to our Savior, And Jesus when he was Dipped went up straight way out of the
Water.

The Dr. takes for granted, that because Tabal signifies he Dipped, and that
because Naaman (in the place above quoted Dipped himself in Jordan; that
therefore in Matthew it must needs be Vetabelu Otham, and Dip ye them; and that
John did Dip all he Baptized, over Head and Ears in Jordan.

Am I bound to believe that Matthew did write his Gospel in Hebrew, because the
Dr. is of the Opinion he did?

Or, must I therefore grant it because Jerome is of his Opinion? though neither
Jerome nor he gives any solid reasons for that their Opinion.

Two things convince me that both Jerome, the Dr. and his pretended Learned Men,
were all mistaken in this their Opinion.

First, I find (by Reading) that the Gospel which Matthew is supposed to have
written in Hebrew, was never yet seen by any Author, and therefore I must mind
him of the Maxim, as true and applicable in the present case, De non
apparentibus, et non existentibus eadem est Ratio, of things not appearing, and
of things not existing, there is the same Reason to be given.

Secondly, if Matthew had written his Gospel in Hebrew, he would not have
translated into Greek the word Emmanuel, in Mat. 1.23. and those whole
Sentences, Eli, Eli, Lamma Sabacthani, in Mat. 27.46.

But suppose I should (for Argument sake) grant (which I utterly deny, and
challenge the Dr. to make good) that Matthew had Written his Gospel in the
Hebrew Tongue, does it therefore follow (necessarily) that the Holy Ghost, (who
is so exact and precise in choosing the most apt and fit words, whereby to
express his Mind) should use the Hebrew word (...) Tabal, which signifies to
Dip, and not the word (...) Rachatz, which signifies to Wash, or (...) Kibbem,
which signifies the same: I have already demonstrated from the word of God,
that in all the places of the New Testament where the Holy Ghost makes mention
of Baptism, he does it by the Derivative (...), which signifies to Wash, by
pouring out or sprinkling Water upon, but never by the Primitive (...), Bapto,
which signifies to Dip or Plunge into: And when the Holy Ghost expresses the
Act of Dipping or Plunging into, he does it by the Primitive (...), which
signifies to Dip into, but never by the Derivative (...), which signifies to
wash with; by which it plainly appears (to me at least) that rather than the
Dr. will loose his Credit and suffer his rotten Cause to be lost, he will
rather open door to the old Babel confusion of Tongues, resolving (Jesuit like)
to set the Penmen of Holy Scripture together by the Ears, and impose on his
credulous Reader a real Belief, that what the Holy Ghost has laid down (and
plainly expressed) in Greek, he has gainsaid and contradicted in Hebrew; which
Contradiction can never befall the Penmen of the Holy Scripture, nor (without
Blasphemy) be charged on that Holy Spirit, by which they were Acted and
infallibly Inspired.

The reason which Jierom gives why Matthew writ his Gospel in Hebrew, (viz.)
for the Sake of those Jews which Believed, is no reason at all; for had it been
the Will of God it should be so, I know no reason why Peter, James and Paul,
(who all three wrote to the Jews, which Believed) should write in Greek, not in
Hebrew; witness the two Epistles of Peter, the Epistle of James, and that of
Paul to the Hebrews.

The Dr. pleases himself in telling his Reader, that in Mr. William
Robertson's Hebrew New Testament, he finds these words between the 18th and
19th Verses (of Mat. 28 he means) And as my Father has sent me, even so also I
send you. Go ye therefore, etc.

These words he sets down in the Hebrew Character, telling his Reader that he
finds them not in any Greek Copy.

An Argument (thinks he) that Matthew wrote his Gospel in Hebrew! a mere
Non-sequitur: What though those words be not in Matthew, I hope he will not
deny that they are in Jo. 20.21. there the Spirit of God has recorded them;
and why the Dr. should look to find them in Matthew I know no reason, or
wherefore his Learned Friend Mr. Robertson should take on him to place the
Words recorded by John, between the 18th and 19th of Mat. 28. I cannot
conceive: But whatever moved Robertson to so presumptuous an Act, in taking on
him to alter things of this Nature, (as if by his Skill (in the Hebrew Tongue)
he thought himself able to rectify the Order, in which the Holy Ghost has set
down his own Mind in Writing) I doubt not but the Dr. was well pleased with so
Palpable an Aberration; and all for the love and liking he has to his (...)
Tabal, he Dipped, and (...) Velammddu, Disciple ye. By what I have said, it is
easy to judge, that could the Dr. but have his will in two things. First, that
the word (...), Baptizo, does always signify the very same thing with its
Primitive (...).

And Secondly, that Matthew did write his Gospel in the Hebrew Tongue, and that
the words (...) Vetabelu otham, and Dip ye them, were the very words of
Matthew. All the Art in Men and Angels could never hinder but that Dipping the
whole Body under the Water, must needs be the only right way of administering
the outward Baptism.

But both these (on which he erects his tottering structure of Anabaptism) I
utterly deny, and do fairly offer, and sincerely promise him, that if he can
confute (by Gods Word) the Arguments laid down, to prove him mistaken in both,
I will forthwith) renounce my Baptism received in Infancy and by Sprinkling, as
a mere Nullity; and not only so, but I will in Pulpit and Print too, Declare
(to the World) that I am fully convinced that Dipping the whole Body (under
Water) is the only right way of administering Water Baptism under the
New Testament Dispensation.

And this, (I hope with the offer made him, in clearing up the Etymology of the
word Baptizo) will prove as generous an offer as he made to Master James.

As touching what is (usually) Objected from Mat. 3.16. concerning Christ's
coming up out of the Water. And from Acts 8.38, 39. concerning Philip and the
Eunuch going down into, and coming up again out of the Water; I need say but
two things.

First, For any to affirm (possitively) what the Word of God affirms not, is
(to me) a sure Argument of an Ignorant, Rash and Presumptuous Spirit. Reader,
mark the words: And Jesus, when he was Baptized, went up straightway out of
(Greek (...), not (...), from not out of) the water. The Text does not say, (in
downright Terms) that Christ was Dipped under the Water; neither does it appear
from Acts ^.38, 39. that the Eunuch was Dipped, on^ the Doctor (and his
Adherents) will ^ve it to be so, right or wrong.

Secondly, There is nothing more certain than that a Person may be said
(properly enough) to go down into the Water, though he go not in above Shoe
(or Ancle) deep, which (I doubt not) was practiced by both John and by Philip,
in the places abovementioned; and that for the better convenience of catching
hold of the Water with their Hands, in order to Sprinkle or Pour out the same
on those they Baptized.

And that which may convince any Man, (not prepossest with Prejudice against
the Truth I here contend for) that this was the Practice of John, and all the
first Baptizers, (so much bragged of by the Dr.) is the Impossibility of the
Spirit's being the Author of any (though the least) Contradiction in any part
of God's Worship.

Hence I argue. That which can no way be proved or made good by express
Testimony of God's Word, or deduced therefrom by sound (and necessary)
Consequence, is an Invention in God's Worship, which God will Reject and
Abominate as not appointed by him.

But Dipping the whole Body under Water in Baptism, can no way be prov^^ made
good by express Testimony of Go^, Word, nor yet by sound (or necessar^
Consequence deduced therefrom.

Therefore Dipping the whole Body under Water (in Baptism) is an Invention in
God's Worship, which God will Reject and Abominate, because not appointed by
him.

The major Proposition will not be denied. That which secures the Minor, and
proves the Conclusion to be the Truth, (which all the Wit of the Adversary will
never be able to prevail against) is the Scriptures silence, in that it no
where gives an express Witness (or Testimony) heret^ And the Impossibility of
that being prov'^ a sound Consequence (from God's Word,) which makes God the
Author of Self-Contradiction.

The Word of God no where commands Dipping in Baptism, neither does it say (in
express terms,) that either John or any of the Apostles did Baptize by Dipping
under the Water. Reader! Keep the Adversary close to this, where does the word
Dip appear, either in the command of Christ, (when speaking of Baptizing) or in
any Instance of Persons Baptized by Jo^ or the Apostles? If thou keep close to
this, the Enemy will retreat and fly to Consequence (...) the which, if he
does, (as no doubt he will) (...) pursue him with a Holy Courage, be not a^
(...) of his daring Brags. How do yo prove, that (...) sound and Scriptural
Consequence, which (...) the Holy Spirit of God the Author of
Self-^^^^^adiction?

that thus it is, will (evidently) appear, the Ad^^^sary can no way avoid it.
If thou urge, (with an Holy Zeal for Truth) what is (Graphically) set down in
God's own Word, concerning the manner of Application of the Blood of the
Sacrifices, and the Waters of Purifications, both which had a Typical Relation
to the Spiritual Baptism, Administered by the Spirit of Christ. These were
applied under the Ceremonial Administration, by Sprinkling, not by Dipping, (as
has been before observed.) The Prophets, who foretold of Christ, and the great
Benefits which should come by him to Believers under the Gospel. They set it
forth by Sprinkling, witness ^sa. 52.15. and Ezekiel. 36.25. and in the Gospel ^e
are assured, that the Spirit of Christ does apply ^he inward Spiritual Baptism,
by Sprinkling or Pouring out the Graces of his Spirit on the Soul in the Work
of Regeneration, see Tit. 3.6.

Now to affirm, that Christ either commands Dipping, or that he (himself) was
Dipped in Baptism, what is it, but to affirm, that Christ's Spirit does
contradict himself? What is pretended (for Dipping) from John 3.23. has
nothing in it to help their Cause, but what empty Conceit and Unscriptural
Confidence supply. John (says the Adversary) was Baptizing in Aenon, because
there was much Water there: Therefore he Baptized by Dipping the whole Body
under the Water.

The stress (or weight) of the Argument is laid on a fond Conceit, that much
Water (there) signifies and ^^ports Greatness and Depth of Water, which
(plainly) appears to be otherwise, witness the Greek, (...) (...). Many Waters
denoting ra^ (...) Rivulets or Springs of Water, wherewith tha^ abounded, than
that the Waters of that place deep. And it was (I doubt not) for Convenienc^
that John left Bethabarah, (a place of deeper V^ because Aenon was (every way)
more convenien^ commodious for the multitudes o People, which o^ daily to his
Baptism.

Piscator's Note upon the place, may not (here) (...) either improper or
impertinent to the Purpose i^ hand, Videntur significari plures Rivi, non autem
unu^ Magnum Flumen. Many Rivulets, not one gr^^^ Flo^ or Water, seems (here) to
be signified, says that Lear^ed Author; with whom agrees the best Geographe^
who give the Description of that place.

I conclude my Treatise (against Dipping in Ba^tism) with that Saying of Godly)
and Judicious) S^denham: If (says he) there be any absolute need of Di^ping,
it is to cool the heat of those Men's Spirits, who de^ Baptism to be true (or
right) Baptism, because not A^ministred by Plunging or Dipping.

Reader! Observe, that as in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, it is not so
much the Quantity of the Wine drunk in that Ordinance, (by a Believer) (...)
the Quality, which signifies and represents the Bloo^ of Christ.

Christ does not tie a Believer up to such or suc^ a quantity of Win^ to be
drunk in remembrance o^ his Bloodshed, but (only) commands Wine to (...)
drunk, leaving to the Discretion of the Believ^ what quantity to drink.

So in Water Baptism it is not the depth or qu^tity of Water which is necessary
to right Baptism, real Water; it matters not how small the quant^ be, so there
be but a Sprinkling (or Pouring out) Water on the Subject, to represent the
Sprinkli^^ (or Pouring out) of the Graces of God's Spirit on t^ Elect Soul in
Effectual Calling.

FINIS.

