The CASE of the Poor Widows and Orphans of the City of LONDON.
THere are about fourteen hundred Orphans, whose Portions left them by their
Parents, were forced into the Chamber of London, under pretense of Security,
but have for some years been unjustly detained from them; so that many young
Men who are out of their Apprenticeships, for want of their Moneys cannot set
up their Trades, whereby they are liable to take ill and Vicious Courses; and
many young Gentlewomen who have Thousands of Pounds in the Chamber, have been
forced to go to Service for a Livelihood, though by their former Breeding and
Education very unfit for such Employment; and several being destitute of both
Father and Mother, are fain to live upon the Charity of Friends, and diverse
poor Widows are disabled to relieve their Children, for want of the Supply the
Chamber of London ought to pay them for Finding Money; so that they are ready
to beg their Bread.

Therefore they most humbly Implore your tender Compassion to Relieve them, and
to search into the Causes of their great Sufferings; and though some do pretend
that we were not forced to bring in our Moneys, yet it sufficiently apparent
that not one in Twenty could procure such large and unreasonable Security as
they insisted on; and several they have made to acknowledge Satisfaction, and
then not paid them their Moneys; and when they knew their Charter was going,
and the Chamber in so low a Condition, yet have made some to bring in their
Moneys. There are many other Grievances, which for brevity we omit, and do
humbly rely for Relief (under God) on his most Gracious Majesty and this
Honorable Assembly.


