The Case of Sir William Glynne Baronet, in Opposition to a Bill intended for
an Act of Parliament to Restore the Earl of Derby to the Manner of Hawarden.
WHICH BILL turns a Purchase made 32 Years since into a Mortgage, and Vests the
Estate presently in such Persons as the Earl of Derby shall Nominate; and then
appoints the Chancery to direct an Account of the Profits for 32 Years to
discharge the Purchase Money, and what shall then remain due to be paid out of
the Rents, or by Sale of Estate.

That James late Earl of Derby being by the Iniquity of the late Rebellious
Times put to Death for adhering to King CHARLES the First, his Estate was
exposed to Sale as forfeited. Sir John Trevor, George Twisleton, and Andrew
Ellis, by Agreement between them and Charles then Earl of Derby, Son and Heir
of Earl James, undertake to purchase the Manners of Hawarden, Mould and Hope,
part of the late Earls Estate, of the then Trustees for Sale of Delinquents
Lands in Trust for the then Earl according to Articles betwixt them, which were
to be performed within a year.

The Earl not performing those Articles, his Mother, the Countess Dowager,
himself and Countess, as well by themselves as by the earnest Solicitation of
Sir Orlando Bridgeman late Lord Keeper, did desire Sir John Glynne deceased to
buy those three Manners, whereby some Advantage might come to the Earl.

Novem. 7. 1653.
Sir John Glynne agrees with the Earl for his Interest in those Manners, and
was to pay 1700 l. to the Earl and his Lady, and such Sums of Money as Sir John
Trevor, Twisleton and Ellis had or were to pay for the Purchase thereof to the
Trustees, according to the former Articles between the Earl and them.

Febr. 15. 1653.
Sir John Glynne in pursuance of those Articles paid to the late Earl 1700 l.
and 9000 l. to Trevor, Twisleton and Ellis by the Earls particular direction,
as appears by a Receipt under his Hand and Seal, and thereupon the late Earl
and his Lady did by Feoffment, Deed Enrolled, Fine and Recovery convey Hawarden
to Sir John Glynne for 10700 l. being as much as Hawarden. was then reputed to
be really worth; and it is believed that Sir John Glynne might then have bought
as good an; Estate elsewhere for the same Money, free from all manner of
Encumbrances and Forfeitures.

That Sir John Glynne's Contract was with the Earl, and not with the Persons
that Purchased from the Trustees, and paid his Purchase-Money to the Earl, and
according to his Directions, and was not concerned in the Purchase from the
Trustees of Drury-House, nor paid them any Money.

1662
The late Earl thinking himself aggrieved with the Dealings of Sir John Trevor,
Twisleton and Ellis, brought his Bill in Parliament to be restored to Mould and
Hope, resting satisfied with the justness of the Purchase of Hawarden by Sir
John Glynne, which Bill passed both Houses in favor of the Earl, wherein Sir
John Glynne was not concerned.

That the said Earl never attempted or pretended to be relieved by that or any
other Bill or otherways howsoever as to the Manner of Hawarden; And therefore
Sir William Glynne humbly Objects against the said Bill:

That his Father was a real and absolute Purchasor of the said Manner, and
therefore kept not any Accounts as Mortgagees do.

That Sir William Glynne is a Purchasor by Settlement upon Marriage, and being
an utter Stranger to all these Proceedings acted 32 years since, it is
impossible for him to Account.

That 'twere better for him to part with his Estate for nothing than to be
involved in a Suit, and an Account in Chancery, which is impossible for him to
make.

It is humbly submitted that by a future Law, especially after so many years,
and after so many Sessions of several long continued Parliaments to destroy
Assurances that are good both by Law and Equity, is not consistent with
Justice, especially when such Contracts and Assurances were desired on the late
Earls part, and in whom there was no disability to grant, and the Purchase so
fairly transacted, that it is without either Error or Crime.

This Bill is conceived not only to weaken the Act for Confirmation of Judicial
Proceedings by a new Law to take away the force of those Fines and Recoveries
which that Act made good, but also all other Common Assurances of the Kingdom:
And if this should passs into a Law, it would be of dangerous consequence as is
humbly conceived. Whereas the intended Act mentions a Recovery obtained at Law
for the Manner of Hope, Objection
by reason the Reversion thereof was in the Crown, the now Earl pretended the
like to Hawarden, and brought Ejectments wherein he was Nonsuited; and upon a
Quare impedit brought by Sir Will Glynne against the said Earl for the
Presentation of Hawarden, Answer to
Sir Will. Glynne obtained Judgment, and his Clerk was Instituted and Inducted
to that Living, and is now in Possession of the same.


