THE REPRESENTATION OR DEFENSE OF Colonel Nathaniell Barton (a Member of this
present Parliament.) Occasioned by the Petition of Sir SAMVEL SLEIGH Knight,
Which Representation is humbly tendered to the Consideration of this Honorable
Assembly of PARLIAMENT.
THere are three things by the Petitioner suggested, as the grounds why I
should be disabled from sitting in this Parliament, though freely and clearly
elected by the County of Derby, and approved by his Highness Council.

First, There is a complaint of some undue proceedings in the Election.

Secondly, That I Preach publicly in Derby, and receive some benefit thereby.

Thirdly, That I am a Minister now in Orders.

As to undue proceedings in the Election, were it not that I consider before
whom I speak it, my answer to this should be in such an expression, as the
suggestion does deserve: But it is well known, that the generality of the
Electors of this County, were pleased to make choice of me, in the first place,
and accordingly by the Sheriff I was returned: And in my Election, as also in
the Election of two other persons (more worthy then my self) there was none
that so much as openly demanded the Pole at all, in relation to Sir Samuel
Sleigh; And for this, let the Country speak, I believe there were Mill testes.
Indeed when the first Three were chosen, and publicly assented to without
question, Sir Samuel Sleigh came into Nomination with Mr Gell, which of them
should be the Fourth. Division of the Electors being made in the Marketplace,
the Majority appeared to be so clearly on Mr Gell's side, that both the Sheriff
and other indifferent spectators were fully satisfied; yet the Pole being
desired, was by the Sheriff forthwith yielded to, and proceeded upon. The
Petitioner lost it (as I do remember) by about forty voices, and had lost it
by many more, had he not been well befriended by the Town of Derby, many of
whom came in at last to help: And therefore I wonder that this Gentleman, the
Petitioner, should so publicly make that his allegation, which is so obvious
to contradiction.

To the second, That I Preach publicly in Derby, and receive some benefit
thereby. It Is true, I do Preach publicly in Derby: But is public Preaching
become a crime in the Petitioners sense? I do believe that many others as well
as my self, both in Civil and Military capacities, have Preached publicly,
which will not upon that account be the sooner disenabled to do their Country
service. But it is alleged that I have some benefit thereby: In answer to
this, I crave leave to say thus much, That my estate (though mean enough, yet
it) is not so mean, that I am necessitated to Preach for Twenty pounds per
annum, neither is my condition so obscure, and interest so weak, but that, if I
would have Preached for advantage, I might have had long since a fairer in-come
by Preaching, then such a Salary. When as I was in motion as a Soldier in
Englands service, I have preached in very many, if not most Counties in England
(and freely too) and this not to oppose, but to second the faithful Ministers
of the Gospel where ere I came. And this County knows, how often for this Dozen
years I have Preached without advantage; and therefore, with far better ground
then it can be objected against me, I can (yet in much sincerity) aver it,
that the ground why I undertook the Lecture at Derby, is that I might have a
public place to Preach in for a far better end then outward gain: This
Objection may indeed bring a blot upon me (whether in the Petitioners design or
no I will not say) among carnal men, and such as scorn the Gospel; but I am
confident, it cannot in the least degree prejudice me before this Honorable
Assembly: And I am sure, the Instrument of Government which lays down
qualifications of being elected, does not not exempt a Preacher from being
chosen to serve in Parliament.

But the main thing Objected is, that I am in holy Orders and so disabled by an
Act of Parliament 17o Caroli.

To this I shall in all humility crave leave to offer diverse things.

First, I count it a comfort (I shall not presume to call it an honor) to me,
that in all the difficulties, dangers and temptations that have attended
Englands service for these many years; at last my Charge, and that before a
Parliament, is, that I am in holy Orders. The proof of this Charge it seems is
put upon my self: for it is strongly affirmed, that it has been mine own
Confession and Acknowledgement, that I am in Orders: Whether this in foro
publico, be proof enough to ground a judgment on, I leave it to the learned to
determine: or whether (in case that holy Orders be a Crime) to put the
Delinquent upon Confession, be not something hard, I shall only query, not
conclude; And did I think, that holy Orders were a Crime, I should humbly
desire, that a fuller proof might be made by the Petitioner, then yet I
understand has been produced. But I never did, nor for ought I can see as yet,
ever shall, count Ordination, even by Bishops, as to the substance of it
(setting aside some groundless and frivolous Circumstances) to be a Crime. And
yet almost a cunabulis, I have been principled against Episcopacy, as it was
stated and exercised in this Nation: For I have not forgotten since I was a
child, that I then was sensible of my Fathers several times suffering under
Episcopal tyranny. And because my own occasional and in private Confession, is
urged against me, I humbly beg pardon for saying a word, as to the Petitioners
confession too, that I have heard this Gentleman that now petitions against me,
something publicly to confess, or rather profess his judgment for
Episcopacy and Common Prayer Book.

Upon the ground abovementioned, I shall not forbear freely to acknowledge and
own it, before this Honorable Assembly of Parliament, that not long before the
Wars broke forth in England, I was Ordained by Bishop Wright at Lichfield,
yet happily it deserves enquiry. And that

First, Whether I am within the Letter of that Act of 17. Caroli.

And secondly, it is more to be questioned, Whether I am or no within the
grounds design and scope of that Act.

And thirdly, If I were within the compass of one or both, yet through Gods
good providence, and mercy to me, in the service of my Country, I am clothed
with such Considerations that I see no Cause to fear to appear in Parliament,
or to plead my Cause against this Petitioner, in the greatest presence in this
world. All which I humbly crave leave to produce, and then with all due
reverence, I shall submit to the just determination of this Honorable Assembly.

And first, I crave leave to query, How far? and whether I am at all within the
Letter of that Act? I conceive, it is obvious, that the Act of the 17. Caroli
was made against Archbishops and Bishops principally, who sat then in, and as
Members of the House of Lords: and they must sit there, either upon a single
score, as Peers, or representing the Ministers of this Nation, and none else.
But for ought I could ever learn, that neither Bishops sat then in the House
of Lords as Representers of the people; neither did any Minister at all sit in
the House of Commons, as chosen by, and a Representer of the people: For a man
in holy Orders, to be chosen by his Country to sit in the House of Commons, I
do believe (when that Act was made) was not in rerum Natura: And it cannot be
imagined that an Act of Parliament, should be directed against a Non Ens; Ex
malis moribus nascuntur leges: If I be not mistaken, Acts of Parliament are
made to suppress appearing evils; they are not Prophetic, not directed against
that which is not in view, but only in potentia remota or esse possibili, and
therefore not under debate. But further, let me humbly offer, that since that
Act, Episcopacy it self, with all its pomp and interest, is root and branch
disanulled, and that by Law: Now the Act in question is believed to be a
Parliamentary superstructure imposed upon Episcopacy, and intended as a clog,
to keep down Episcopal power from soaring higher, as to draw it down some pins
lower. In that therefore Episcopacy it self is thrown out of doors (to which
that Act does relate) and not so much as a Toleration granted in the
Government; whether the Act it self ex consequenti does not cease in its
operation, I humbly do submit it.

One thing more I would present in this place, that when that Act was made,
Church Government and holy Orders were in force and power: But since,
Ordination it self by Bishops, to be practiced de novo, is disallowed, yea
Ordination by Ministers of the Gospel alone, is much impugned: I might add the
Pastoral Care of souls is frequently undertaken by those that will not own
Ordination, neither in the former nor in the later sense, and this undertaken
by some (as I have heard) who do openly renounce (at least Episcopal)
Ordination in themselves: Holy Orders then was a Law and binding, and the Act
in question I do believe does suppose them so: But now I do not know any Law in
force, at least so put in execution, as to require those that take the Charge
of souls upon them to be Ordained: (I speak in reference to humane Laws only)
for as to Ordination its Law and force upon a higher account, it is not my work
here to speak; yet I say, Ordination-Law was then in force; And if Ordination
be not now in force as it was when the Act was made (for usual practice speaks
the contrary,) but does seem to suffer much in the main concernments of it; I
know not how my Case can directly fall within the Letter of that Act: For
Ordination as it was a required-introduction to a Pastoral Charge, is either
null in Law, or binding and not null. If it be not in force by present Laws and
Ordinances, but in some sort null, how can use be made of Orders against me, in
the Case in question? If Orders be not null, but by Law in force properly,
then, Orders are binding to all in England that are or are to be Preachers as
well as my self; so as not to be permitted usually and in public to preach
without it: And thus, it is confessed, that this Act relating to Orders
established by Law, does seem literally to take place. But when the present
state of things in England, does seem to let Ordination fall, or but admit it
under toleration, that at this time Holy-Orders should be kept alive, or have
life put into them to strike me dead as to the service of my Country in any
politic consideration, does (and yet I desire to speak it with submission) to
me seem something, if not very strange.

In the second place, That I am not within the compass of the grounds, design,
and scope of that Act, may happily appear to this honorable Assembly, by
observing some of the grounds themselves; And to make a little way to this, I
beg leave to offer it, that even in Courts of Justice I have sometimes observed
Acts to be interpreted principally according to their grounds, Summum jus summa
injuria; To go by exact letter of the Law does sometimes strike too hard upon
the innocent; And hence I humbly do conceive that in prudent reason and
originally was founded the Court of Chancery; and when the Letter strikes and
the meaning does not reach, the case then affords a natural occasion for a
Freeborn Englishman to appeal to the highest Court of Chancery on earth (I mean
the Parliament:) I do remember that in the Bishops times, whereas there was a
Law made against Recusants for not coming to Church, though the scope and
design of that Law was intended against Papists, and not against godly and
conscientious Protestants, yet the Bishops and others finding these within the
Letter of that Law, did bring diverse of them within the penalty thereof for
absenting from their Parish Church, though sometimes there was nothing there
but Common-Praier Book Service; read by some ignorant, sottish, and drunken
fellows (for Ministers I cannot call them.) This was Englands grievance, that
whereas a Law was made against Popish Recusants, the edge thereof was turned
against Conscientious Protestants: How far this instance is applicable to,
does illustrate and help the case in hand; I lay it at the feet of this
Honorable Assembly. And this Act it self does encourage me to expect that in
my case it shall be interpreted according to the meaning, more then according
to the Letter of it, For in the close thereof it does declare, that any thing
done by persons in holy Orders shall be made void, but it is only of those
things [ that are contrary to the purport and true meaning of this present Act.]

Now for the purport and meaning of this Act; In reading of it I do observe
first that this Act was grounded upon [ his (late) Majesty's religious care of
the Church and the souls of his people] His late Majesty's care of souls was
well known; And the then Parliaments care of souls is not to be questioned by
me. But it was at least professed care of souls, that did produce this Act,
that so the good of souls should not be hindered, it was enacted, etc. But what
is this to the case in question? It Is true, I have some special care of souls
as a Master of a Family, and as a Christian neighbor should have some watch
over my brother; And if this care of souls does disenable me from sitting, I
believe there would be very few found to sit in Parliament; For other cure of
souls I have none, and for prejudice to souls, which the Act does seem to hint,
I know none occasioned by my self at all, which will appear the better in
considering of the second ground. And in the Act it is expressed thus, [ The
Office of the Ministry being of such great importance that it will take up the
whole man;] Which I fully grant: And I well remember what Paul says, speaking
of this Office, Who is sufficient for these things? yet I find Paul himself,
and that without scandal or prejudice of souls, in case of necessity, laboring
in that craft of Tent-making: That Englands necessity and this Counties
necessity did put a sword into my hands, and called me at first to act in some
civil capacities, will afterward appear. I do observe, that the Act styles
the Ministry an Office, and I pray that always in England and In the Church of
Christ it may be owned so: This Office is of such great importance that it will
take up the whole man: But this Office, unless there be materia substrata, a
present charge to apply it self unto, cannot be said so properly, to take up
the whole man; The Office of a Minister I do conceive is of a relative
consideration, and being taken in actu exercito, as having relation to a
pastoral charge, or that which is usually called cure of souls, so it will
take up the whole man. I never was invested either with Parsonage, Vicarage, or
Donative, and am not at this hour invested with either, neither have I ever
undertaken the charge of any of those (which are called) select Congregations,
but am at this very time a private member of a Congregation in Derby. It has
always been against my principle (...), to meddle in other men's Cures; I have
none of mine own, but the design of the Act is evident, that those in holy
Orders were to be disenabled to sit in Parliament, that souls might not be
neglected, that Ministers might not be taken off from that great important duty
of watching over those souls committed to their charge.

A third ground of the Act is [ for that it is found by long experience that
their intermedling with secular jurisdictions has occasioned great mischief
both to Church and State.] It is not my work to rip up the mischiefs that
Episcopal men did to Church and State by meddling with secular jurisdiction; I
believe they did as much mischief in their spiritual as in their secular
jurisdiction, and therefore were justly deprived of both, yet I do believe if
they had not been observed to do mischief, but to have employed their power
spiritual and secular to the benefit of Church and State, the Parliament would
have suffered their double power to this day. What prejudice either to Church
or State has my intermedling with secular jurisdiction brought forth? If
hazarding life, if losing blood, if endeavoring in my Country as a Justice to
be in some measure to the praise of them that do well, and to the punishment of
evil doers; If in the last Parliament opposing those wild and dangerous
principles (so much spoken of) be prejudicial to Church and State, then am I
guilty: And if I had been in any secular employment prejudicial to Church or
State, I make no question but it would have been inserted in the Petition
preferred against me.

But the Act says, That Bishops and other persons ought not to be entangled
with secular jurisdiction; What an Act of Parliament speaks has great
influence upon me to command my outward man, and to lead, though not
altogether compel my judgment, yet upon this occasion; If I thought this
Honorable Parliament would indulge an unworthy member so far; I would offer to
consideration that instance of Aaron, Exo. 24.14. where Moses going up into the
Mount to remain forty days, he says unto the Elders [ Tarry ye here for us
until we come again unto you, and behold Aaron and Hur are with you; if any man
have any matters to do let him come unto them;] Whether Aaron as well as Hur be
not here delegated to take cognizance of civil causes, I leave it sub judice;
And whether Aaron at least as a deputed Magistrate Exodus 32. was not concerned
to have hindered the golden Calf, I Will not determine; And when Moses makes use
of the Levites only, to put three thousand to the Sword who had had an hand in
that Idolatry, the question is, whether this was the fruit of an
Ecclesiastical or a civil censure. We read of Samuel, 1 Samuel 3.20. that he
was established to be a Prophet of the Lord, yet in Chap. 7.15. we find that
he judged Israel all the days of his life, and v. 16. he went from year to
year, in circuit to Bethel and Gilgal, and Mizpah, and judged Israel in all
those places;] If it be objected that there are no instances in the New
Testament, It might be answered, that Magistracy it self was not then in
Christian hands; But suppose there had been civil power in such hands in Paul
and Timothys time, and there had been a Council or Parliament held, where
Church as well as State affairs had been to be transacted, The Question would
be, Whether in case that Paul and Timothy had been chosen, whether the one or
other ought not to have attended the trust reposed, or whether Christian
members would have rejected them?

Thirdly, If it were granted, that I am within the letter of this Act, yea, in
some sort within the ground and meaning of it, yet I have something further,
and that with such advantage to offer, that I think I need not fear to plead
my case against the Petitioner, before this Honorable Assembly, or in any
presence in this world; And here first I shall refer my self unto the
Instrument which is styled, The Government of the Commonwealth of England;
Which Goveroment in the 14th and 15th Articles lays down the rules, who shall
not be capable of being elected, and makes no exception of any in holy Orders.
That I come within the compass of the 17th Article I shall easily put the
business to that issue; And in the 21th Article I find these very words, That
every person and persons being so duly elected, and being approved of by the
major part of the Council, to be persons not disabled but qualified as
aforesaid, shall be esteemed a Member of Parliament, and be admitted to sit in
Parliament, and not otherwise.] And accordingly I did pass with the
approbation of the Council: As the Government makes no exception as to any in
Orders, so it makes provision for some to be capable of being elected, to serve
in this Parliament, notwithstanding [ they have aided, advised, assisted, or
abetted in any war against the Parliament since Jan. 1. 1641. In case they have
been since in the Service of the Parliament, and have given signal Testimony of
their affection thereunto;] and this notwithstanding former Acts or Ordinances
of Parliament to the contrary. And hereupon I cannot but take leave yet in all
humility to prostrate this before this Honorable Assembly; In that the
Government is so tender of the service of any done to the Parliament, in any,
though a later season, as that it does not exempt those from being chosen that
happily formerly have shed blood against the Parliament, and happily have shed the
blood of some of the Parliaments faithful Friends and servants; May not now my
constant expres affections, and real hazards of my dearest blood against the
common Enemy, from the beginning to the end, and this for the Parliament of
England, in equity and with much advantage (notwithstanding that Act in
reference to holy Orders) crave that the Parliament-dore may be open to me as
well as to some others?

And to show that I have some little reason to present this last consideration
before this Honorable Assemby, I humbly beg the leave in the last place to
offer some few particulars of that service, that Providence has called me to,
and Gods mercy has carried me through, in the Service of this Nation; And the
rather because now it is attempted, that I should not be in a further capacity
of serving of my Country; And I never thought that I should thus have been
(upon this account) constrained to trouble this Parliament in speaking for my
self: But I find a patient Job making his defense, I find also an holy
self-denying Paul forced to reckon up what he had done, therein pleading for
himself; Sometimes the tongu-strings of the dumb have been loosed, and I appeal
to every person of honor and English Gentleman within those Walls, whether it
would not trouble an ingenuous spirit, after so many years faithful endeavors
in his Countries service, to which he has been called, and no intruder (as by
and by will appear) to be now at last under an attempt to move this Parliament
(whereof I am a member) to adjudge me in some sort a Delinquent, and to deny me
the privilege and opportunity of asserting that which according to my weak
ability I have with thousands better then my self so long strugled for: What I
have therefore now to say is not without reluctance, and forced from me by that
Gentleman who would Petition me out of Parliament, that he might be admitted,
whether he or I have in times of danger done this Country and England better
service, let all that know us speak; yea, this County has spoken its
apprehensions in this sufficiently by the late Election; And in speaking this,
whatever I may seem to some, yet I hope that in the sight of God my heart does
not give way to any arrogance at all.

Even before the Standard was set up at Nottingham, I was so far observed to
own and declare for the Parliament, that I had notice given me, that some of
the then intended Enemies, in these parts did threaten to hew me in pieces: It
is well known, how industrious I was, both to procure Moneys, to be lent on the
Propositions, and encourage men, to engage in the service at the very first.
And in 1643. removing from Derby, with (then Lieutenant Colonel Sanders) to
the Garrison at Burton upon Trent; soon after with Colonel Haughton (now Sr
Richard Haughton) Lieutenant Col. Sanders and many others in that Garrison, we
were by assault taken prisoners, and my self not only wounded but stripped of all
I had, yea almost to nakedness. The enemy soon knowing what I was, did make me
a public scorn in the Queens Army (particulars too long to be related,) but by
the good providence of God, I was again at liberty; and not long after, when
this County was at lowest, the Earl of Newcastles Army prevailing every where
in the North; and being in the bowels of this County; Colonel Sanders (a
worthy member of this Parliament) being about to raise a Regiment of Horse in
and about the Garrison of Derby, was pleased (without desire of mine) to offer
me a Commission for a Troop of Horse, a service and trust then, I was very
unfit for: But being encouraged to take a Commission, I presently found diverse
honest men willing to engage under my Command: Diverse brought in their Horses
and Arms with them; diverse well-affected persons that knew me did lend, and
others did send in their Horses to me; so that suddenly I had a considerable
foundation of that, which afterward became a full Troop; and had no other
Recruits afterward, either of Horse or Arms, then what my Men with my self
could get from the enemy. What service and often service my Troop did in this
Country, with other Troops, and this when Derby was surrounded with Garrisons
of the enemy, is well known. I wear the Marks of the service of this County
upon me: and when England was low and this County was almost overrun, the
Gentleman that now petitioneth against me, would never desire me to forbear, or
petition against my intermedling with secular affairs, because I was in holy
Orders: Once, God, was pleased to give me that success against the enemy,
close by the petitioners own door, that might have deserved his respect, and
not such an Attempt against me: Sure he has forgotten his then backwardness
to serve his Country, and that, he who would now sequester me from this
Countries service, was himself once under an attempt of being sequestered for
something else: what ground there was, he best knows.

When this County was cleared of the enemies Garrisons, from some hard measure
of some in power of our own side, I was forced (with the license and
recommendation of Colonel Sanders, from whom I had my Commission) with my
Troop in 1645. to repair to the standing Army; where, by the Lord Fairfax, the
then Lord General, through the favorable mediation of my Lord Protector that
now is, I with my Troop was entertained. For my personal carriage and
discipline of my Troop, and endeavors as to the Regiment, when I was called to
be Major of it, under Colonel Scroop; it is well known, to persons of Honor
in the House? This I found, that my service in the Army, was to me a kind of
recreation, in comparison of hardship endured before. Yet in the Army (not to
mention other things) I was personally employed in two services of concernment
to this Nation in the second War: The first was in Wales, when Laughorns Army
was routed by an handful of men: my Lord Protector, then Lieutenant General,
when he came up to Pembrooke, was so far sensible of my share in that
service, as that when he first saw me, he told me, That he was as glad to see
me, as if I had been his brother. The second service was in Lancashire against
Hambletons numerous Army: It is well known when Colonel Thorney was slain (and
upon that, the Vanne something disordered) who came in, and with his Troop
charged the enemies Rear-guard and put him to a retreat to the body of their
remaining Army then not far off. And upon Saturday following at Winwicke, in
the hot dispute about that pass, when Major Cholmely was mortally wounded
(commanding the forlorn:) it is not forgotten, who with those men under his
command, and in the head of them, did receive the enemies shot for an hour
together, in which service near Twenty (as I do remember) of my own Troop were
wounded, of which wounds some died, and some are maimed to this day. I need not
mention, how I was hated and endangered by the Levelling party, which was
seasonably suppressed at Burford. Though I was in Orders, then as much as now,
yet my Lord Protector was pleased to honor me, with the Command of a Regiment
of Horse, for Ireland; and being not capable of going at that time, the late
Lord Deputy Ireton took that Regiment to himself; and there is a worthy
Gentleman now in the House, was pleased for a short time, in relation to that
Regiment, to own me as his Colonel.

Having for that time laid down Arms, I was put into the Commission of the
Peace in this County; to which service that everhonoured late Lord Deputy
Ireton himself was pleased to move me a year before, yet for a time I waved it,
and had not undertaken to act in that capacity, had there not been very few
(though in Commission) who then would act as Justices in this County: and how
forward the Petitioner himself was, even then, to do his Country service is
well known.

Though I was in Orders, yet I was by the Gentlemen of this Country nominated
to the Council of State, to have the Command of the Militia; and accordingly by
Commission from the Council of State, was in the year 1650, constituted
Commander in chief of the Militia-Horse and Foot of this County of Derby.

At Worcester-fight, though I was in Orders, my Lord Protector under his own
hand, did entrust me, for a time, with the Command of 1500 Horse and Dragoons,
to secure the pass at Bewdley, besides the intended addition of Shropshire and
Staffordshire-forces: What service was done by these, the Act for the day of
Thanksgiving for that glorious Victory does mention. The service being over, I
returned home, and was disbanded, and did apply my self to serve my Country in
what I could. Not long after this, as I was informed, there was two of this
County, that at London did make an attempt against me in this Case of Orders:
the one was since arraigned for poisoning of a man, the other has been
indicted, and I think I may say convicted for Barretry, both notorious to those
that know them: But their attempt came to nothing: For my Lord Protector by
Colonel Sanders was acquainted with it; who was pleased (as I heard) to
declare his opinion, That, that Act was intended against Episcopacy, and that
it did not comprehend me, or to that purpose.

When the long Parliament was dissolved, and my Lord Protector and his Council
of Officers, were upon the nomination of persons to be called to the late
Assembly or Parliament; my Lord Protector (notwithstanding my being in Orders,)
was pleased himself to nominate me, as one to appear for this County of Derby,
and under his Hand and Seal, did summon and require my personal appearance, to
take upon me my share in that secular employment: And being in that Parliament,
I have many worthy witnesses now in the House, of my constant and resolute
opposing those dangerous principles that were then in working. It is well
known, that when the Vote for the new body of the Law was passed in the
affirmative, I could not contain, but (though something irregularly) did make
an open protest against it. When that Assembly was dissolved, I came home to
live privately amongst my neighbors, until a Writ came down into this County,
for an election of Members to serve in this Parliament: after which diverse came
to me to know whether I would stand; I answered I would not stand for it; there
were intimations given from all parts of the Country, of a desire, that I
should be one: I am sure, I told diverse that wished me well, that I would not
thank them for it; yet I shall not forget their favor and good opinion of me
while I breathe.

I was not chosen, because I was in Orders or a Minister, for upon that account
there was far more able then my self: But this County chose me upon the
grounds abovementioned: And there is something in it, that whereas the
Petitioner is pleased to give me no other style then Nathaniel Barton Clerk
(silencing even that Military title, that the service and unquestionable
authority has formerly conferred upon me,) Yet the Clerk (in the Petitioners
sense) was with much affection expressed by the Electors, chosen to serve as a
Knight for the County of Derby: And yet if ever I be so happy, as to see a
Church Government according to the word of God settled in this Nation; I hope I
shall then soon discover which service I most esteem and prefer.

Shall I presume with the pardon of this Grave Assembly to speak but once more
in way of allusion: I read of Esther, though she was an Alien, yet, out of her
affection to her people, did amongst Heathens adventure upon the breach of a
known Law, and cast her self upon the favor of an Heathen King, saying
beforehand, If I perish: I perish: I confess my case in degree does come short
of this, Mille-parasangis, yet in the kind, it may admit a parallel.

I bless the Lord, I can say it, and say it from my heart, That out of my
affection to my native Country, and to the welfare of Gods people in this
Nation, I have worn a sword, and answered diverse calls to secular employments;
and have no reason to be ashamed of either. Out of my well-wishes to the good
people of this Nation, I came unto this Parliament, and find a Law objected
against me: I come before you with better advantage then Esther could come
before Ahasuerus. I look upon you as, and know you to be, a Christian
Parliament; And I am confident you will look upon me not as an alien or
captive, but as a Freeborn Englishman, and one that has proved himself no
less, and therefore I hope I need no naturalization that may make me capable
of having my share in Englands immunities and freedoms, and of wearing the
favor of my Countries confidence in, and good affections to me; If I am a
transgressor it is for and not against the public Interest of this Nation; If
Esther found the Scepter of favor to be held forth unto her; why may not I be
confident of it from a Parliament, many of whose worthy Members do so well know
me.

The common Enemy has a good while since had an Act of Oblivion for what he
has done against this Nation; I cannot but be confident that this Honorable
Assembly will never necessitate me to crave an Act of Indemnity for what I
have done for this Nation, whereas others have their rewards and find
acceptance; If notwithstanding this my defense against that Petition, you
proceed to vote, and your vote should pass against me: Would not those that are
mine enemies for the Service sake; Would not those that envy me for that favor
this County has cast upon me, be gratified? Would not Swearers, Drunkards and
profane persons; who have in some measure been discountenanced, take occasion
to insult and rejoice? Would not many of Englands faithful friends, that chose
me and those that know me, be discouraged? Would it not put a temptation upon
mine own heart, to be wounded in the house of my Friends, and forsaken there:
Yet if it should be so (which I cannot see any cause to suspect,) then, I hope
my God would take me up, and he that has given me an heart in some poor
measure to act for him and his cause, will bear up my spirit and refresh me
with his comforts. Should I at last suffer in expressing my affections to the
land of my nativity; I shall say no more, but having in the first place
committed my person and my cause unto the Lord Jehovah, who knows my heart in
what I have said, is the God of spirits, and judges among the gods. In the
next place, with all humility I submit my self, and what I have been
necessitated to plead in my own defense, unto the wise, just and equitable
censure of this Honorable Assembly.

FINIS.

