Mr. BARTON's THANSGIVING-SERMON Before the Honorable House of COMMONS, APRIL
16. 1696.

Veneris 17. die Aprilis 1696.
Ordered,
THAT the Thanks of this House be given to Mr. Barton for the Sermon preached
before them yesterday at St. Margaret's Westminster, and that he be desired to
print the same; and that Mr. Conyers do acquaint him therewith.

Paul Jodrell, Cl. Dom. Com.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of Commons, AT St. MARGARET'S
WESTMINSTER, Upon the 16th of April, 1696.

BEING A Day of THANKSGIVING unto Almighty God, for Discovering and
Disappointing an Horrid and Barbarous Conspiracy of Papists and other
Traitorous Persons to Assassinate and Murder his Most Gracious Majesty's Royal
Person; and for Delivering this Kingdom from an Invasion intended by the French

By SAMVEL BARTON, B. D. Chaplain to the House.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Cockerill, Senr and Junr, at the Three Legs in the
Poultrey. MDCXCVI.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of Commons, etc.
PSALM LXXV. 1. Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks; unto thee do we give
thanks; For that thy name is near, thy wondrous works declare.


IF we reflect on the Wicked and Traitorous Designs of our Enemies, and think
how near they lately were to put 'em in execution, and what the Consequences of
that must have been; we cannot but see cause to acknowledge God's Goodness, to
adore his Wonderful and Gracious Providence, and to think our selves exceeding
happy, in that we are now here peaceably met together, to render our devour
Praises and Thanksgivings unto him, and not driven from home, or scattered up
and down under the Fears and Terrors of Foreign Armies ravaging amongst us, or
of a more Unnatural Brood of Vipers amongst our selves, that were to have
joined with 'em for the Ruin of their own Religion (as they call it), and of
their Country. From these woeful Calamities that were hastily coming upon us,
and must, in all human appearance, before this time have overtaken us, Not our
own Policy and Foresight, not any Wisdom or good Conduct that we can boast of,
but the mere overruling Hand of Divine Providence, the Wisdom and Goodness of
that God who sees through all the dark Plots and Conspiracies of his own and
his Church's Enemies, have mercifully delivered us.

This, as well as many former Deliverances that we have had, is of such a
nature, that it plainly speaks him to be the Author of it. And it should
therefore engage us to the most cheerful and hearty Thanksgivings, to
reiterated Acts of Praise and grateful Acknowledgment, and should teach us to
ascribe the Glory of all to him, who in so visible and remarkable a manner has
appeared from time to time, most opportunely to help and deliver us. I suppose
therefore the Words which I have chosen as the Subject of my Discourse at this
time, will be allowed to be proper and pertinent enough to the Occasion.

They are part of a Psalm which, as some conjecture, was composed by Asaph the
Seer (mentioned 2 Chronicles. 29.30.) as a Thanksgiving for the great Deliverance
that God wrought for Hezekiah, and the People of the Jews, from Senacherib the
King of Assyria. And if this were so, then we may understand the Al-taschith
that is in the Title, to be not merely, as some would have it, a Note to direct
how the Psalm was to be sung, but to be put as an Allusion to what the Prophet
Isaiah had foretold concerning Senacherib, viz. That for all his proud Boasting
and his Confidence, he should not come into Jerusalem, Isa. 37, 33.
nor shoot an arrow there: For so the Word Al-taschith signifies; Let him not
destroy; or, He shall not destroy. Which Sense of it need not be rejected,
though we should suppose this Psalm to have been made (as others think it was)
long before the days of Hezekiah, viz. as an Hymn of Thanksgiving for David's
happy Settlement upon the Throne, after the many Troubles and Difficulties
which he met with in his way to it. For then it may refer to Saul, and the
Frustration of all his Attempts to take away David's Life. But however it were,
we may observe in the Words these Two Things; viz.

1. A Devout, Emphatical, and Repeated Thanksgiving; Unto thee, O God, do we
give Thanks; unto thee do we give Thanks; where the Reduplication of the
Expression intimates to us, That the Psalmist thought there was abundant Cause
to give Thanks to God; yea, that the Thanks were peculiarly due to him, in a
manner far transcending all that could be due to Instruments or subordinate
Causes.

2. A Reason added, why they ought to be more than ordinarily thankful unto
God; viz. Because the Deliverance was such as plainly pointed out him for its
Author. For that thy Name is near, i. e. that thou art near by thy Power and
Goodness to help and save us, thy wondrous works declare.

Now if the Occasion of this Psalm were the Deliverance from Senacherib, it is
plain then that there was great Cause of Thanksgiving. For then both King and
People had been in extreme danger. And had Senacherib prevailed, the City of
Jerusalem had in all probability been spoiled and laid waste, the Holy Temple
of God violated and profaned, great numbers of people slain with the Sword,
and the rest carried into a woeful Captivity. Neither had they any sufficient
Strength of their own to defend or preserve themselves from these threatening
Evils, but the work was done for 'em by an Angel, who went out with God's
Commission and slew in one Night a Hundred and fourscore and five thousand of
the Enemy. So that this was a thing wholly extraordinary.

But if the Occasion of this Psalm were David's happy Settlement upon the
Throne, after many years patient waiting, many dangers and hardships undergone;
Then have we indeed not any direct or downright Miracle demonstrating the Name
of God to be near, or his Power and Goodness to be exercised and displayed in
the Transaction, but a visible Series of many remarkable Events, whereby God
brought to pass what he intended and had foretold; and which an observing
Beholder, that was concerned in 'em, might well call. Wondrous Works, though
there were no Violence offered to the Course of Nature, nor nothing done
wherein Second Causes had not their subordinate Agency as usual, under him who
is the Grand Disposer of all things for his own Glory, and his People's Good.

Since therefore by Wondrous Works it is not necessary for us to understand such
as are in the strictest sense Miraculous, but rather Signal and Remarkable
Providence, I suppose we may fairly make from the Text these Two following
Observations; viz.

1. That as all things are ordered by the Providence of God, so there are some
Events that deserve the name of Special Providence, for that they show forth
the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of God, and his Care over his Church and People
in a more especial and extraordinary manner than others do.

2. That it is our Duty to observe and take notice of such Events, to render God
the Glory, and to offer unto him our hearty Praises and Thanksgivings for the
Benefit or Deliverance that we receive thereby.

I shall speak something to each of these, and then proceed to make some
Application to the present Occasion. And

1. That as all things are ordered by the Providence of God, so there are some
Events that deserve the name of Special Providence, for that they show forth
the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of God, and his Care over his Church and People
in a more especial and extraordinary manner than others do.

That all Human Affairs are ordered by God's Providence, so that without his
Knowledge and Permission at the least, nothing can possibly come to pass, yea,
that he is able to bring about whatever he pleases, This is a Truth so bright
and clear, that it was scarce ever, I think, denied by any that owned a God who
was the Creator of the World: For it were too absurd to imagine that God should
make the World, and not be the Governor of it. And though indeed we are no more
able to give a Reason of all the Proceedings of the Divine Providence, than we
are to explain all the Works of Nature; yet as in the latter we see enough to
convince us of his Infinite Power, Wisdom, and Bounty to his Creatures, so in
the former also we may easily see sufficient Proofs of the same his most
Adorable Perfections. But all the Works of Providence are not alike. Sometimes
for wise and good Reasons God has been pleased quite to alter the Course of
Nature, as it were to show himself to have a Power above it. So it was when he
divided the Sea, and made the Waters to stand on an heap, whilst the Israelites
passed through: So likewise in many other his Miraculous Works that we read of
in Holy Scripture, both of the Old and New Testament.

In the general Course of Things, Second Causes seem as if they were left to
themselves, and tempt inconsiderate men sometimes to think that they are so:
But there are very frequently such Events brought to pass, that are, as it
were, of a Middle Sort, not plainly Miraculous, nor yet Common and Ordinary,
but carrying in 'em very peculiar Marks and Characters of the Divine Power,
Wisdom, and Goodness, and of his Care of Good Men, or of his Truth and
Faithfulness to his Promises or Predictions. And these we call Special and
Signal Providence.

Such was that whereby Joseph was brought into Egypt; and the Ill will and Envy
of his Brethren, as well as his Mistress her false Accusations afterward,
turned to the great advantage and happiness both of himself and his Family; and
the Divine Predictions thereby also fulfilled. Such was that whereby David was
advanced to the Throne from the mean Calling of a Shepherd. By such a signal
Providence it was that he married one of the Daughters of Saul, though much
against the good liking of her Father, 1 Samuel 18.21.
only that he hoped (the Text tells us) that she would become a snare to him,
in which he proved to be much mistaken. And by the like Providence was he
preserved from time to time, from all the Attempts of his Father-in-law to
assassinate him, and, at last, after the Tragical Death, both of Saul and his
Son Ishbosheth, settled peaceably in the Kingdom which God had promised him.

By such a signal and remarkable Providence was the whole Nation of the Jews
delivered from the Destruction and Extirpation designed against 'em by Haman,
and he himself hanged on the very Gallows he had prepared for Mordecai.

I might add many more Instances out of Scripture, and innumerable there are to
be found in other Histories. But to come a little nearer our own Times, and to
such things as are of particular concernment to our selves. The Conduct of
Divine Providence was very observable in bringing about a Reformation of
Religion in the Church, and particularly in these Nations.

That in Germany such a man as Luther should be raised up, with a Spirit fit to
encounter the Difficulties of that work for which he was designed; That the
gross and notorious corruption of Indulgences, preached about at that time in a
shameless manner, to delude and cheat the People, should give him the occasion
of enquiring; and that the Opposition he met with, should only serve to whet
him, and put him upon examining farther, and discovering still more Errors and
Abuses, which in those dark Ages had been put upon the Christian World; that no
means should be found to take him off, or to hinder the spreading of his
Doctrine, though it were so vehemently endeavored by the Great Ones of those
days; and that whole Countries should thereupon revolt, and casting off their
Obedience to the Sea of Rome, together with the Errors they had sucked in
thence, should return to the Primitive and Apostolical Christianity: The
carrying on, and management of all these things by the Divine Providence,
affords a very wonderful Scene to him that seriously and considerately takes a
view of it, and observes how happily things then concurred to bring that about,
in God's appointed time, which to man might have justly seemed impossible; and
how vain were all the strivings, and earnest Endeavors of the Great Ones of
the World to hinder what God had determined to bring to pass; even just like
the Endeavors of the Heathen Emperors to suppress Christianity.

In our own Nation how remarkable was the Providence of God that made use of an
High-spirited Prince, a zealous Assertor of the Popish Cause, and a Writer
against Luther, to lay the Foundations of a Reformation amongst us, and to
remove those Obstacles, those Nurseries, I mean, of Idolatry and Superstition,
which would else have rendered the Work impossible (in a manner) to his
Successors! So that it might be said according to Sampson's Riddle, Judges
14.14.
That out of the eater came forth meat!

It Is very observable also, how much the Reformed Religion here was
established, and made to take the deeper root in the hearts of the People,
instead of being rooted out by the Blood of the Martyrs, which was shed in such
abundance, during the short Reign of Queen Mary. And how it was legally settled
under the long and happy one of Queen Elizabeth. As also, how she, whilst she
strictly adhered to it, was all along wonderfully preserved from the Designs
and Machinations of her Enemies, which were many and dangerous; and yet served
to no other purpose but to knit the hearts of her Subjects the more closely to
her, and to unite them in mutual Bands of Association to do all that in them
lay to preserve her Life.

I might speak also of the strange, but happy Discovery of the Gunpowder Plot
in the following Reign. But I should be too long should I descend to more
Particulars.

I proceed therefore to speak to the Second Proposition that was drawn from the
words, which was,

2. That it is our duty to observe and take notice of the signal Providence of
God; to render unto him the Glory of them; and to offer him our hearty Praises
and Thanksgivings for the Benefit or Deliverance that we receive by them.

There are two Extremes that men are apt to run into in this matter. The one
is, of those who construe Providence always in favor of themselves, or their
own Party; and if Good befall us, presently reckon it is for their sakes; or if
Evil come, immediately conclude, It Is because we will not do as they would have
us, tho perhaps there is very little Reason that we should. The other Extreme
is, of such as are so careless and inconsiderate, as to overlook the hand of
God whatever falls out, though never so remarkable, never so seasonable, never
so surprising and unexpected, or never so necessary, in all appearance, for the
support and preservation of True Religion, or for the bringing of some just
Judgment upon great and notorious Offenders. Such there are, who seem to impute
all to second Causes, scarce ever looking higher; or else, at least, to
imagine, that all things are so promiscuously ordered by Providence, that it
signifies nothing to take any notice what falls out.

But the true and middle way which we ought to take between these Extremes, is,

First. Never to look on the mere seeming favor of Providence alone, as a
sufficient Argument of the goodness of any Cause, for that will be found a very
dangerous and uncertain way of Arguing. But yet,

Secondly, When we are from other Reasons well satisfied of the Goodness or
Justice of a Cause, or the Truth of any Profession, to take a particular notice
then of what Providence does in favor of it, and to believe that, though indeed
it be true, that in the general course of God's Providence things are somewhat
promiscuously carried (as it is reasonable they should, since God designs this
Life for a time of Trial) yet, as he is ever a lover of good Men, and a Friend
to those that fear him, so he will so far appear in their defense, as never to
suffer Piety, true Religion and Virtue to be utterly run down and destroyed, as
they would certainly be, did not his Providence sometimes interpose, and appear
for 'em. And for that Reason, God does sometimes signally show himself for
their Defense, and Preservation, and for the Confounding of their Enemies. And
when he does do so, for us to take no notice of it, is an Argument of great
stupidity, Ingratitude, and Folly. They are highly blamed in Scripture, who
regard not the work of the Lord, nor consider the operation of his hands; they
are the brutish among the People, who look no farther than the immediate
Agents or Instruments whereby such things are done, and cast no Eye upwards
toward him, who sits in the Heaven above, and beholds all the dwellers upon
Earth, and orders every thing that falls out among 'em, according to the Rules
of a most Exquisite and Unsearchable Wisdom. The passing over such things
without any regard, is a robbing God of the Glory of his Works, and of the
Praise that is due unto him, as well as a depriving our selves of the Benefit
and Comfort that we might and ought to take in the Performance of so Excellent
and Noble a Duty, as that of rendering Praise, and Honor, and Thanksgiving to
our Great Creator.

It becomes every Good and Religious Man, in all such Cases, when he sees the
Innocent happily preser'd from intended Ruin, the Profession of true Religion
rescued from imminent Danger, Mischievous and Traitorous Plotters and
Conspirators surprizingly discovered, and brought to Condign Punishment,
Tyrants and Persecutors disappointed in their Barbarous and Bloody Designs, and
God's Judgments perhaps remarkably executed upon 'em. It Is the part, I say, of
every Good and Religious Man, in such a Case, to Admire and Adore God's
Infinite Wisdom and Power, to applaud his Justice and his Goodness to his
People, and to Rejoice and Triumph in the Event. So the Psalmist tells us in
such Cases, The Righteous shall see it, and rejoice, and all Iniquity shall
stop her mouth, Psalm. 107.42. And in diverse places he Exhorts to this Duty,
particularly Psalm. 5.11. Let all those that put their trust in God rejoice, let
them ever shout for joy, because thou defendest them. And in the Book of the
Revelations, the Saints and all the whole Heavens are called upon to rejoice at
the fall of Babylon. Rejoice over her thou Heaven, and ye Holy Apostles, Rev.
18.20.
and Prophets, for God has avenged you on her.

I now proceed in the last place, to make some Application of this Discourse to
the present Occasion. And here I shall,

First, Consider how very Remarkable and Signal our present Deliverance is,
which should induce us to the more heedful observance, and devout admiration of
the Providence of God in it. And,

Secondly, I shall consider how beneficial and happy a Deliverance it is to us,
in order to the increasing of our Thankfulness, and putting us upon a suitable
Carriage toward God.

Now our present Deliverance will appear to be very Remarkable, whether we
consider either,

1. The Circumstances of it; Or, 2. For whom it is wrought; Or, 3. What Ends
and Designs of Providence are answered by it. And,
1. For the Circumstances of it. If we consider it, as indeed it is, but a
part, and a farther carrying on of that great Work which God has been doing
these several years past in this part of the World, and particularly amongst us
of these Nations, we cannot but think it very suitable, and of a piece with all
the rest; nor can we choose but reflect on the whole, as on a wonderful Scene of
Providence, fit to be taken notice of, and admired. In order whereunto, it will
be necessary for us to call to mind that, which one would think none should
easily forget, viz. What our Condition was, and what the state of the
Protestant Religion abroad, before the late happy Revolution. As for our
selves, you cannot but remember by what hasty steps we were going toward
Popery, and how fearful and apprehensive we then generally were of it, as
having no visible means to prevent its being forcibly obtruded upon us,
together with a new Constitution of Government, according to the Pattern of a
Neighboring Nation. In France you all know how the Professors of the Reformed
Religion were persecuted in a new and unheard of manner, which has prevailed to
an utter Extirpation of the open profession of it. And so great was the Power
and Influence of France, that it did not appear how either we, or any of the
Protestants abroad, in the Circumstances that things were, could possibly
resist or prevent the execution of those two grand Designs, that were visibly
enough on foot, of Extirpating the Northern Heresy (as they called it) and
setting up an Universal Monarchy. This I take to be but a true representation
of our Case as it then was, when all on a sudden God was pleased to bring about
one of the most wonderful and surprising Revolutions that any Age has ever
seen. His present Majesty, with a small number of Forces came over to Deliver
us from that yoke of Popery and Slavery that was just a going to be put on. It
was a great wonder that he would venture upon so bold and hazardous an
Undertaking, and no less that he should find an Opportunity to do it. Whether
the Enemy discovered not the Design time enough to hinder it, or whether he
imagined such an Expedition would end but in the ruin of the Undertaker. Take
it either way, the Providence was very Remarkable; and when His Majesty, the
then Prince of Orange, was ready to come, you all remember how seasonably and
happily God was pleased to order the Winds to come about to favor his Arrival,
and at the same time to prevent the late King's Fleet from making any
opposition. That Circumstance of the Wind I am sure was very Remarkable, and
then much talked of; for God gave just enough to do the business, and then
immediately, when it had as it were executed its Commission, it chopped about
again. And truly the turning about the hearts of the People so Universally at
that time, and making even those that were pitched upon as the Instruments to
bring us into Slavery, so readily go over to the other side, was a Circumstance
not less, but rather much more Remarkable than that of the Wind; yea the more
so still, because like that too, as soon as the Business was well over, diverse
of them quickly turned about again, as unaccountably as the Wind it self, which
our Savior tells us blows where it lists, no Man being able to say why from
this Corner, rather than from that. But here now there opened a new Scene of
Affairs; and I should be too long, should I reckon up all the Remarkable
Providence that have attended the present War in which we are Engaged. However
this is visible and clear, that the Successes we have had, have been still
owing very much to some signal Interpositions of Providence; as particularly
that at La Hogue, when the Wind was again so favorable as to keep off the
Enemie's Fleet, 'till just we were ready for it; and then to deliver a good
part of it into our hands. But to come to the Occasion of our present meeting.
The War growing tedious, it seems at last the Enemy had resolved to make a
Descent upon England; and truly he had pitched upon a time that seemed very
favorable to such a Design; A time when he might hope the continuance of the
War so long, together with some unhappy Circumstances we have of late lain
under, might make a Rash and Heady People ready for another Change, although
apparently to their Ruin, if they had but eyes open to see it. A time when
very few of our Regulated Troops were in the Kingdom. A time when by Agreement
they had assurances from hence of a Party that would rise and join 'em at their
Landing. Though it be a thing wonderful (even to astonishment) that any among us
should be so mad; that any English Man, especially that calls himself a
Protestant, should have so little regard either to his Religion, or his Native
Country, as upon any Account to Desire and Encourage the bringing over a French
Army hither; but such it seems there were too many. A Time it was moreover when
our Fleet was to have been gone far enough off, and had been actually gone
above a Month before, if the Wind again would have permitted 'em to obey their
Orders. Yea, which was worst of all, it was a Time when a Crew of Ruffians (by
whose Commission or Instigation the World must judge) even just about such a
number as Conspired against St. Paul, had agreed together in a most Horrid and
Barbarous Design to Assassinate our King. A Time certainly this was, upon all
accounts, very proper for the French to make an Invasion! And no doubt they
reckoned themselves in a manner sure of the Success.

But here again, behold the wonderful Hand of God! Yea it is fit for us to stand
still and pause a while to admire his Providence! For our Fleet should indeed
have sailed, but the Wind for a matter of two Months together hung still in one
Corner and would not suffer it. Our Allies abroad having some Apprehension of
our Danger, prepared to send us back our Soldiers to defend us; And, which was
more than all the rest, The Project for the Assassination (that damnable and
hellish Design) is happily discovered and disappointed. And now instead of a
French Invasion, we have been lying with a large Fleet upon their Coasts;
Instead of having our King barbarously murdered, God has given him the Necks of
his Enemies, yea we have the Heads of diverse of those Miscreants upon our City
Gates. Instead of an Insurrection among our selves, we have, God be thanked, a
good Number of the Contrivers of it disarmed and secured. Instead of any
Commotions from a Discontented People weary of the War; we find the People of
England generally wiser than to think to ease themselves by such absurd Means;
nay, on the contrary unanimously associating to do their utmost for the Defense
and Preservation of his Majesty's Sacred Person and Government; Yea, looking
upon him (as there is great Reason they should) as a particular Gift from
Heaven, sent us in the most needful time for our Deliverance! A Prince in whom
all the Virtues of his Ancestors shine very bright, and who, like them too, but
in a more high and eminent degree, has that peculiar Honor done him by the
wise Providence of God, to be set as the Bulwark of True Religion, the Patron
of Laws and Liberties, and the Grand Opposer of Tyranny and Oppression in all
this part of the World. So that now (thanks be to Almighty God) instead of the
Clergy of France preaching to their People upon that Text in the 46th of
Jeremiah, verse. 10. which, it is said, was put about amongst 'em as a proper
Subject upon this Occasion of their intended Descent, and the Success they
expected in it; viz. This is the Day of the Lord of Hosts, a Day of Vengeance,
that he may avenge himself of his Adversaries; And the Sword shall devour, and
it shall be satiate and made drunk with Blood; For the Lord of Hosts has a
Sacrifice in the North Country. Instead of this, I say, we may with better
Reason take up the following words at the next Verse of that Chapter: O Virgin
Daughter of Egypt, in vain shall thou use many Medicines, for thou shall not be
cured. The Nations have heard of thy shame, and thy Cry has filled the Land,
for the Mighty has stumbled against the Mighty, and they are fallen both
together.

And thus much, I suppose, may be sufficient to show us, how very remarkable
and wonderful our present Deliverance is, considering the Circumstances of it.
That which adds to the Remarkableness of it, is,

2ly, The Consideration of the People for whom it is wrought. That God should
signally appear in behalf of a Righteous and Religious Nation, a Thankful and
Obedient People is agreeable to the Notions we have of him, and is what we are
ready to expect from his Providence: But that he should do so much for an
ungrateful People as he has done for us, that he should show himself so kind to
those that have woefully abused his Mercies, and that continue still unreform'd
in a high degree, notwithstanding all the plain Warnings that he has given 'em,
and the loud Calls of his Providence to Repentance and Amendment: This is what
may justly raise our Wonder. But for our Resolution in the Case, that we may
discern something of the Signs of the times, and of the true Reason, as near as
we can judge, of God's Proceeding with us on this manner, and not flatter our
selves, and impute all to our own good Deserts, we may do well to Enquire into
that which I proposed as the third Consideration whereby the Remarkableness of
our present Deliverance, and of this whole Scene of God's Providence, which
began with our late Revolution, may farther appear. And that was

3ly, What Ends and Designs of Providence we may reasonably suppose are brought
about or answered by these Events. And here it may be sit for us to observe,
that what God has designed and soretold as certainly to come to pass, that he
is wont accordingly to bring about, notwithstanding the Sins and Provocations
of those for whose Benefit it is, and though there be but few of them that do in
any degree walk worthy of such Mercies; For he can find ways enough to punish
those that do not, without altering any of his Purposes or Decrees. Thus we
find that though the Posterity of Jacob were extremely degenerated in Egypt, yet
God brought 'em out thence, Exodus 12.41.
punctually to a day, at the End of the 430 years, according to his Promise.
Thus also afterward, though they provoked him highly, insomuch that he cast off
Ten of their Tribes, and the other two were little better, yet he still
preserved them as a distinct People, though made Captives first, and afterward
Tributaries to other Nations, because the so doing was necessary in order to
what he had often foretold and promised, concerning the coming of the Messiah.
Thus again, it is very observable, That though we can discern nothing that was
visible in the Face of things, from whence to gather any likelihood of such or
such Events coming to pass, yet God having foretold 'em, we find that still in
due time, all things were made to work that way, and so as to bring about what
he had purposed. For instance; It having been revealed to Daniel that there
should be four great Monarchies set up in the World, ( viz. Three more beside
that of Babylon, which was then in being) the Providence of God did in a very
wonderful manner, cause it in due time to be effected and brought about. For
the overthrow of the Babylonian Empire by Cyrus, which Daniel lived to see, and
of the Persian by Alexander the Great, carried in 'em very signal Characters of
a Divine Providence. And so did also the raising up of the fourth and last,
viz. The Roman Empire, from very inconsiderable and low beginnings. It was a
long Series and Course of Successes for many hundred years, which the Romans
themselves attributed to Providence, by which their City came at last to be the
Empress of the World: Nor can we discern any thing but the mere Will and Decree
of Heaven, that hindered Hannibal, when he gave it so terrible a Shock as he
did, from quite overturning it. But he and his People were of the Race of Cham,
of which it was foretold that they should be Servants, and not bear Rule. And
God had also designed that the fourth Monarchy should be set up at Rome, and
not at Carthage. And therefore though Hannibal seemed to be come within a very
little of utterly destroying that State, yet he could not effect it, which drew
from him those memorable words recorded by the Historian, after the deciding
Battle at Metaurus, Live. l. 27. c. 51.
Agnosco fortunam Carthaginis. I see it is not the Decree of Heaven that
Carthage should prevail. Or, I acknowledge and submit to the Fate of that City.

If then we have now but sufficient Reason to persuade us, that it is a thing
contrary to the Will and Pleasure of Almighty God, that either the Reformed
Religion should be totally extirpated, or that a fifth Universal Monarchy
should be set up, We may then sufficiently discern what Ends of Providence are
served by the late strange and unexpected Events, whereby the Designs of the
aspiring Monarch of our Days have been hitherto blasted and brought to naught:
And, at the same time, we may see reason still the more to observe and admire
the Hand of God in all these things, and to put our Trust in him for the future.

Now as for the Design of Extirpating the Protestant Religion, that we are as
sure is a wicked Design, as we are that our Religion is true and good. Yea,
both the Design, and the barbarous Methods whereby it has been in part
effected, are certainly abominable in the sight of God and Man: The converting
of poor People, quiet and loyal Subjects, by Missionary Dragoons, being a
practice that is reproachful, not to Christianity only, but even unto Humane
Nature. But that it is also a Design which God will not permit to take effect,
we may probably gather from what has been before briefly touched concerning the
wonderful Providence whereby God kindled the Light of the Reformation but
about the beginning of the last Age, which it is hard to imagine he should
suffer so soon to be extinguished again. Yea moreover, since we are assured
that God will always have a Church, and the Popish one is now so extremely
corrupted (since the Reformation, worse in many respects than it was before)
that it can hardly be called a true one, that gives us good ground to believe
that God will never suffer the Reformation to be utterly destroyed. And yet
it is hard to see but that that would be the plain Consequence of the French
Successes, of their overrunning these Kingdoms, and setting up an Universal
Monarchy.

But as for the Design of a Fifth Monarchy, it is a thing generally agreed, I
think, by all the Interpreters of Daniel's Visions, as being sufficiently plain
in the Text, that there are to be, and shall be but Four; And that whenever
they are at an End, the next thing we are to expect, is either the End of the
World, or such a Renovation of it as is utterly inconsistent with the French
Designs. And if so, what can we expect, but that God should as effectually
blast all Attempts to set it up, as he did those in the last Age, of Philip the
Second of Spain: Though perhaps in a more extraordinary and terrible manner, in
regard to the Blasphemies that have been uttered, and the Outrages that have
been offered to the Saints and Servants of the most High!

And thus much, I suppose may be sufficient to show us how very remarkable both
our present Deliverance is, and also all that Scene of Providence of which it
is a part: And likewise to excite our devout Admiration of the Power, Wisdom,
Goodness, and Faithfulness of Almighty God as manifested therein.

2. I come now in the last place briefly to consider how very beneficial and
happy a Deliverance this is to us, in order to the increasing of our
Thankfulness, and putting us upon a suitable Carriage toward God. And though we
cannot say that this Deliverance is sent us as a Reward of our Good Deserts,
but rather have great reason to bewail the contrary Carriage of the generality
amongst us; Yet so many as have but sincerely endeavored to do their Duty, and
in an humble Sense of the total Dependence of all upon the Divine Providence,
have been earnest Suitors and Solicitors at the Throne of Grace for Mercy upon
these sinful Nations, They may look on this Deliverance as an Answer to their
Prayers, and an Encouragement to 'em to pray still, and to put their Trust in
God. And as for others, it is a great and unspeakable Benefit to them, if they
have but the hearts to make use of it. For it is a granting 'em farther Respite;
It Is the affording 'em another Call to Return and Repent, which if they will
not hearken to, it is their own Fault; but the kindness of Almighty God is
never the less. Neither let any think, that since the Reason of this Providence
seems rather to be God's high Displeasures at the Designs of our Enemies, than
any respect that he has to such a sinful People as we are, that therefore it
signifies no great matter whether they reform or not. For doubtless though he may
still go on to defeat those Enterprises which are contrary to his Will, yet he
can easily find Means sufficient to punish all those that are thus hardened in
their Sins, and give them but little cause to rejoice even though their Enemies
are not suffered to attain their Ends. We may see already how variously God has
mixed good and bad Success in the course of this present War; the bad still
being owing to our selves, and an effect of our own Sins, but the good
proceeding from an overruling Hand of Providence that will not suffer our
Enemies to have their Will. But now if we would Repent and become a People fit
for Mercy, we might hope that God would not only bring down our Enemies, but
cause us to rise by their Fall, and grant us that Peace and Prosperity which by
our Sins we have so justly deserved to forfeit.

In the mean time, if we consider but what the Effect must have been of our
Enemies having their expected Success in this Enterprise which God has been
pleased so happily to discover and defeat, we shall find cause enough for Joy
and Thanksgiving, if there be any Blessing we enjoy, which we think deserves
it, since there is scarce any which their Success would not have deprived us
of. I know not how strangely some People might flatter themselves, and imagine
that the Restoration of the late King, even by a French Power, would have been
consistent with the Enjoyment of the free Profession of their Religion and
their Liberties, that the Foreign Forces should quietly have retired so soon
as they had set him upon the Throne, and that he, laying aside all former
thoughts, would have contented himself in taking a little pleasure to see how
they would Persecute and Torment their fellow Protestants, and have gone no
farther. To me this seems so great a piece of Folly and Extravagance, as needs
only to be named in order to it is being exposed. And therefore I conclude, that
if our present Condition be better than that of conquered Slaves; if it be a
Happiness not to fall into the Hands of incensed and bitter Enemies; if the
Enjoyment of Peace at home, with the hopes of good Success in our Wars abroad;
if our Laws and Liberties; yea, if the Light of the Gospel, and the free
Profession of our Religon, be things of any value to us, then ought we to be
exceeding thankful to that God who has so signally appeared for us, and
delivered us in the most seasonable and needful time. And that this our
Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving may be accepted, we should add thereto our
hearty and sincere Endeavors to walk worthy of God's Mercies, and so to behave
our selves in all holy Obedience to his Laws, that it may indeed appear, that
this great Grace and Favor of his in delivering us so often and so signally as
he has done, has not been bestowed in vain upon us, nor may ever turn to our
greater Condemnation. Which God of his infinite Mercy grant.

FINIS.

