Licensed,

April 9. 1673. Roger L'estrange.

THE ART OF COMPLAISANCE OR THE Means to oblige in Conversation.

Quis nescit dissimulare, nescit vivere.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey at the Miter in Fleet Street near Temple Bar.
1673.

To His Ingenious Friend, Mr. W. B.
SIR,
IT may seem strange to you and all those who have had any acquaintance with my
humor, that I should pretend to give Rules, to the practice of which there is
so little disposition in my nature, insomuch that I have not escaped the
Imputation of pride and singularity; the truth is, I have always had an
aversion to gratify the pride, vanity, or ambition of others, and ever
disdained to make one in the affected train of every fantastic idiot, how
fortunate soever, I never could hear a profane or hollow jest, but my face grew
stiff, and all my actions by their constraint, betrayed the little pleasure I
took in such applauded trifles, nor ever did I (let me be thought to speak
without vanity) do an action whereof Interest was the only object, but when I
found my self alone, I was grieved and ashamed at the poorness and baseness of
my own spirit.

I have been guilty of many more irregularities, of which, like a man who
intends to be a Convert, I make this confession to you: You remember, Sir, that
the first time I was so happy to be admitted into the number of your
acquaintance, was when I had newly left the University: Oh! how I am covered
with shame, when I reflect, how infected I came from thence, with pedantry, and
a humor of contention; in all companies I discovered a spirit petulant, eager,
and impatient of contradiction, and the affectedness of my behavior, and the
constraint which constantly appeared in my visage, failed not to displease as
many as I conversed with. All this time, Sir, you were pleased to pardon my
faults, and to love me for the sincerity of my soul.

But as soon as you began to reprehend me, which you always did with your usual
sweetness, I began to reflect, not without some torment, on the contrary
methods I took, to those by which you forced all men, when you pleased, to
resign, with their opinions, their hearts and affections to you: It was then
that I resolved to make you the Model of my Reformation, and from that time I
endeavored to cashier my presumption and sought to temper the violence, and
impetuosity of my humor, with mildness and modesty; to this end, I frankly
confess, I have reduced into this method what I could either observe, or
collect from others, that might any way contribute to my better conduct, though
possibly I could not have taken better measures, then from your example.
Suspect me not, Sir, of flattery, for all men know this for a truth, and this
declaration is but a due acknowledgement, of the advantage I have had from your
friendship and conversation: Your perfect knowledge of me, and of my heart,
makes it needless to tell you, who it is who professes himself to be,

The most faithful of your Friends, And your most humble Servant, S. C.

To the Reader.
IN an age wherein fame seems only to be won by the sword, it is in vain to hope
to seribble a man's self into reputation, much more for him, who by a voluntary
concealment of himself shows he has no such pretentions.

I need not much concern my self, what the world judges of this book or of me,
since I am resolved not to be drawn into the light, obscurity being the best
sanctuary from envy or censure, yet that I may have no cause to blush in the
dark, as sometime men do who are pursued by shame, or guilt: I confess, that
with my own observations, I have given you many remarks of the wisest persons,
and greatest Courtiers, modern as well as ancient, and it is not much material
whether I have preserved their original form, or given them in my own dress.

Though I have not always cited my Authors, since I make no particular claim, I
shall not be obliged to dispute my title, and yet it would be something hard,
that (did I claim a property in them) I should be arraigned for thoughts which
have long peaceably inhabited within my own, and whereof time has worn out the
distinction; For if all the writers of large volumns were obliged to return
what they had borrowed from others, we should see many boistrons Folio's
shrink, and hide themselves within their covers; and indeed if they could be
content to do so, they would find it very difficult or impossible to
distinguish their own proper thoughts or notions, amidst those various
Impressions they have received from reading and Conversation.

Yet why need any be solicitous in this matter, since a nimble theft is grown
so plausible, and so publicly owned on the Stage, for say the Plagiaries, the
thoughts we approve become our own, and this only difference is betwixt a
translatour and those who unite the scattered notions they receive from others,
the latter gives them a form more agreeable to their own fancy, and possibly is
at something more of pains and travel then the other.

To Conclude (supposing that I am a person who ought to be occupied in more
solid and important studies) I excuse my self by saying, that there are some
hours of the day which may be better spent in writing Sonnets to Chloris and
Phillis, Provided it bring advantage to the Bookseller, and be without expense
of reputation, then to enrich the Vintners, by a lavish profusion of money, and
health. However it be (Reader) if thou receivest any advantage from this book,
thou will think thy self obliged to be Complaisant, and to treat me with
Indulgence.

The Reader is desired to take the pains to Correct the Material errors, which
change the sense, or may lead him into mistake.

PAge, 22. line, 22. read, by what means, p. 34. l. 16, for, and believer, r. a
belief, p. 50. l. 11. for, attend, r. offend,, p. 54. l. 8. for, night, r. to
night, p. 66. l. 3. for, are they, r. they are not, p. 67. l. 10, leave out,
and, p. 70. l. 21. for, you from, r. from you, p. 87. 1. S. r. betray him, p.
91. l. 17. for, proposed, r. reposed, p. 97. l. 3. for, Mulcianus, r. Mucianus,
p. 97. l. 6. for, he proper, r. he was proper, p. 103. l. 20. for, treasure up,
r. put up, p. 105. margent, for, habetar, r. habitat, p. 133. l. 9. for,
humor, r. honor.



The Table.
CHap. 1. Of Complaisance in general. Page 1. Chap. 2. Of Reservation or
dissimulation. p. 8. Chap. 3. Of Dexterity. p. 14. Chap. 4. Of Patience and
humility. p. 22. Chap. 5. Of Civility and affability. p. 31. Chap. 6. Of
Conversation. p. 51. Chap. 7. Of the Conversation of the Court. p. 63. Chap. 8.
Of the Conversation of the Inns of Court. p. 68. Chap. 9. Some general Rules to
be observed in Conversation. p. 74. Chap. 10. How we must demean our selves to
gain the favor of our Prince or Sovereign. p. 89. Chap. 11. Considerations
upon the humor of Princes. p. 102. Chap. 12. Of Conversation with Ladies. p.
118. Chap. 13. Of Conversation with great men. p. 138. Chap. 14. How to be
Complaisant to persons of all humors, ages and Conditions. p. 146. Chap. 15.
Of the difference of persons in their outward conditions proceeding from their
Age. p. 165.
THere is lately published a useful piece Entitled* The Rules of Civility or
certain ways of deportment observed amongst all persons of quality, upon
several Occasions. The second Edition with many Additions, in 12o price bound
1. ^. Printed for John Starkey at the Miter in Fleetstreet near Temple Bar.

THE ART OF COMPLAISANCE OR THE Means to oblige in Conversation.
It Is not enough, to gain the esteem and love of all men, that we possess the
greatest qualities of mind and body; This farther is necessary, That we expose
those great virtues without ostentation, or striving to eclipse the smaller
merits of others: Those who Act otherwise attract but hate or envy, under the
burden of which they are often seen to stagger, this Complaisance, which I
pretend to teach, Is an Art to regulate our words and behavior, in such a
manner as may engage the love and respect of those with whom we Converse, by
distributing our praises and differences, where the quality or merit of the
person require it, By a seeming diligence to give our assistance, and by mildly
suffering the errors and miscarriages of others.

I do not hereby intend that a man should constantly oblige himself, to a
sordid Compliance, with the excesses or impieties of any, as to be profane with
the profane, or to suffer himself to be lead by the licentious into the vilest
debaucheries; for this, as it is attended with the ruin of body and estate, so
perhaps the too Complaisant man may ruin his esteem, even with those in whom
he pretends by these means to establish it, by degrees as they approach to
reason and to a knowledge of themselves.

Though the practice of this Art be extremely advantageous to all persons, and
in all places, yet since it is especially of use to those who place themselves
in the Court where conversation is most difficult, and appears with greatest
variety, I shall take occasion in some part of this discourse, to address my
self particularly to such, to assist them in their designs of advancement in
the pursuit of which, they will find so many oppositions.

For this being the place where most fix themselves, who are pushed on by
ambition or desire of pleasure, as affording the most likely means to content
the one or gratify the other; from the violence of these two passions, and the
equal tendancy of so many to the same end, there arises many frequent and
unexpected adventures, which ought to oblige the Courtier to a more strict
reservation and a dissimulation more covert, and to the practice of those
finesses which may secure him amidst the pride and circumventions of his
competitours.

The saying of Cicero, Vitam regit fortuna non sapientia, is no reason why we
should neglect the most ordinary and useful rules, which may serve us in our
conduct, it is true many a pilot has suffered shipwreck, notwithstanding all
his knowledge and experience in Navigation, whilst others less skilful, have
rid out many storms and happy voyages; Yet, none would think him far from
madness, who would wilfully venture out in a rotten shallop, under the conduct
of a man totally ignorant, into a dangerous and tempestuous Sea.

Let us then commit our selves to the direction of this admirable Art, which by
a secret and most powerful charm, calms the displeasures of tyrants, disarms or
averts the fury of our enemies, and wrests the sword from the hand of
vengeance, all this it does by it is submissions, and by persuading them that we
have divested our own enmity, and changed it into a true friendship; For this
reason many Philosophers, have compared the Complaisant man to a friend,
because both the one and the other express an equal care, to render themselves
agreeable and serviceable, and both being obliged to observe a mean betwixt a
too low condescension, and a too sharp contradiction, there being this only
difference betwixt them, a friend acts only out of affection, and reserves all
his Complaisance for him he loves; whereas the Complaisant man, naturally so;
acting out of humor, shows his Complaisance in favor of many persons, yet
ought he never to suffer it to degenerate into flattery, as in approving things
unworthy of approbation; Imitating those Greeks who Inhabited at Rome, of whom
Juvenal makes so pleasant a Picture; These men says he, are professed
Comaedians, do you laugh, they strive who should laugh loudest; If they observe
that you have any disposition to weep, they dissolve into a torrent of Tears;
Say but that you are cold, they hastily call for their Furr'd-robe; and they
are all in a sweat, if you happen to complain that the weather's too hot. In
short, without feeling any of your passions, they appear more affected then
your self, and never fail to compose their countenances according to yours.

I must avow that a flattery so base, is more worthy of contempt, then of the
amity of those whom they endeavor by this means to please; Complaisance ought
to be fine and delicate, but it ought to appear without constraint, and
grounded upon reason if we would have it produce the effects we desire.

I hope I may without provoking the too Critical, use this word Complaisance in
such an extensive signification, as to comprehend reservation, dissimulation,
dexterity, patience, humility, civility and affability; of which I have
discoursed as parts of Complaisance, and such as without which it is impossible
to oblige in conversation; First, then I begin with reservation and
dissimulation.

CHAP. II. Of Reservation or Dissimulation.
DIssimulation is part of the essence of Complaisance, without which it is
impossible that a Courtier or any other person should be able to conduct
himself with safety amidst the malice and contrivances of men, for he who knows
not how to conceal his game, gives great advantage to those he plays with, not
only against himself, but against his friends whose affairs and interests are
twisted with his. Like those gamesters who showing their Cards occasions their
own loss, and also that of their Companions whose friends likewise participate
of the damage.

Besides, who can have any great confidence in him, who discovers himself so
easily, from whence it often happens that those kind of Persons see themselves
abandoned without advice in the necessity of their affairs.

But such with whom we ought principally to make use of this dissimulation, are
those, who to draw some secret from us, employ themselves to spy out occasions
in which they may insinuate themselves into some credit with us: Either by the
communication of some affair which oftentimes imports little or nothing, with
intent to create in us a confidence in them, and to draw from us something more
Important; sometimes feigning to hate one and to love another, though their
minds and affections are disposed quite contrary; This dissimulation, though it
be necessary to all sorts of Persons, yet more especially to the Courtier for
the better conduct of his ambition.

Yet it is always to be practiced with this caution, that it be seasonable and
mixed like antidotes in the Composition of Medicines, which administered
seasonably, profits the patient, but out of season proves too often destructive,
dissimulation or subtilty once discovered, not only becomes unserviceable to
us, but renders us suspected to those whose confidence is necessary to the
prosperity of our designs.

The practice of it consists in three things, in silence, in our words, and in
our actions and outward appearances.

In silence, by keeping secret what may prejudice our friends and our designs
which depend on the not disclosing the secret.

But especially in hiding the affronts and offenses which are done; not only
for to give us the better means of revenge; if the matter deserve it, but also
that we may not provoke him, who has offended us to heap greater upon us, the
better to prevent the execution of our vengeance; This dissimulation which is
practiced by silence has always, and in all occasions, met with approbation:
And it was thus, that the Senators demeaned themselves to Tiberius,
counterfeiting when they could not approve, not to understand his designs, Ne
dissimulans suspectior fieret, says Tacitus.

There are always some occasions; wherein silence would be suspected, and it is
sometime fit that we express our displeasure, but yet it must be in such a
manner, that after a light complaint we make it believed that we would not
remember it, or resent it.

But it sometimes happens that there is necessity to dissemble in our words,
this requires more caution and artifice, there are some who with a wonderful
agility break from the subject, and leap to another, but that way cannot be
practiced at all times with equal happiness, nor is it always answered with
success.

For this reason our answers in such occasions, ought like a retreat, be made
without flying and without Combating, observing these three things: First, Not
to enter into a denial of what is affirmed for an absolute truth; The Second,
Not to speak any thing that may prove injurious. The Third, To leave the Spirit
of him to whom we speak in doubt, by terms ambiguous; and the more reserved the
Answer is, the more laudable. Yet it is permitted to us to dissemble with
exterior appearances, as in concealing our joy, sorrow, hope, desire, fear,
choler, or other passions; always seeming not to see or hear, either what is
done, or said; If we find any difficulty in returning of a reply, or if it
bring no fruit or advantage to us.

CHAP. III. Of Dexterity.
THere is one other part of Complaisance, which is so joined with it, that it
is impossible to be Complaisant without it, this I will call dexterity, since
we usually call those dexterous, who are nimble, proper and fit for all kind of
motions, and who know easily to surmount the most painful and unexpected
traverses.

From this similitude we may call that power dexterity, by means whereof we
dispatch our affairs with most happiness, rendering that which is difficult,
easy and pleasant, receiving and representing all things without gall or
bitterness.

On the contrary there are some persons so unapt, that the least things they
make mighty, representing the most easy difficult, and always aggravating to
insupportable those that are grievous, ever wanting a capacity to manage their
affairs, but in a ver ill manner, rendering them lame, imperfect, and sometimes
Impossible, in which they imitate those unskilful Surgeons, who in lieu of
healing render the wound incurable.

But on the contrary, the prudent and judicious, sweeten the ill, and mittigate
the pain by lenitive Unctions, or if they make Incisions they cast the Patient
into such a sleep, as makes him insensible; after their example we must
represent things which appear difficult and grievous, by Insinuating them
sweetly into the spirit of those to whom we speak, without violence or
constraint; disposing them by little and little, to enter into consideration of
our reasons, serving our selves of these means, principally with them who are
of a nature rough, eager, and impatient, or by some other passion or interest,
show themselves in supportable, using words full of arrogance, and such as seem
rather to defy us to the Combat then amicably to treat with us; it is from the
impetuous assault of these, (who like Bulls chafed and enraged, bow their
rugged fronts to the earth in a posture to overturn their enragers.) That the
dextrous person saves himself by his agility, nimbly diverting to another side,
and by a light leap passing to a subject more agreeable, not appearing
disturbed or the least discomposed by extravagant or words full of passion. It
is not as some unjustly think, an act so servile, for a man who continues
reason his Companion, to answer sometimes pleasantly and without anger, to
those who are in Choler or speak in passion, but on the contrary I esteem it a
thing worthy of a well tempered mind, and a spirit replenished with prudence,
and yet, more suitable to persons of the highest quality then to those of lowest
condition, it being as much their duty, and a greater subject of triumph, to
subdue their own affections.

In this dexterity then, we ought to do as they who play at Tennis, who regard
not only to toss back the ball dexterously, but also to do it so, that they may
be ready to receive it in place, from whence they may return it where it may be
most advantageous for the game.

Thus in treating or conversing we ought to have the same considerations, and
then we should seldom be unprovided of a seasonable reply.

With this Artifice, we may sometime dissemble honestly and seem not to
understand, or not to know something that imports the discourse which is made
us, to the end that we may gain time to answer, and to secure us from surprise,
or replying in confusion.

But if we adventure to declare our judgment or resolutions, let it be in such
a manner, that let the success be what it will we may still rest upon our feet,
and find a door still open behind, imitating Mucianus in his answer to Antonius
primus, who demanded his advice if he should attend Vespatian, and attack Rome,
Tacitus lib. 3. of his histories.

But above all we must carefully shun the occasion to break abruptly from the
question, but with all imaginary caution excuse us upon the long and
importunate pressing of our affairs, remitting it to another time, or by
remonstrating that the quality of that affair, is not to be treated on at that
time, and in that place, or by alleging the Impossibility of it.

There is not a more nice, and difficult point in conversation, then the art of
refusal, since every one persuades himself that his demand is just; for this
reason, there are some who grant and promise all things, which either lie not
in their power, or what is worse, they at the same Instant determined not to
obsere, hoping that before the time of execution, many things might arrive to
hinder or trouble the effect of their promise, and deliver them from their
bonds, or at least they hope that they may find excuses, and defeats, having in
the mean time given content to the importunate.

But these manner of actings seldom are good or successful above once; for if
the deceit be discovered, the practiser draws upon himself the hate and clamor
of the disappointed: no better do they succeed who feed their dependants with
hopes, only to content their own vanity by increasing there number of their
followers and Petitioners.

The most sure way in my opinion is, not to grant or promise what we cannot,
ought not, or will not effect; If what is demanded of us, is not of this
quality, let us defer our answer as long as we can, under various pretexts, or
labor to change the designs of those who press us, in proposing a way to their
demands in which we are better able assist to them, or if those means we
propose are not sufficient to obtain the end, yet they may at least make known
our kind intentions, or let us form our promises in terms so general as may not
precisely oblige us.

This last manner of proceeding is at some distance from an easy freedom, but
yet the injustice of the demand may render it excusable, though even the
refusal proceed rather from our want of power, then want of good will, of whose
effects we would give all assurance at another time, and in another subject,
which depend more upon us; to those whom we are forced to deny: Thus awakening
by this means their courage, and giving them hopes that the door is not so
wholly shut against them, and that they may arrive to their desires by another
way, we not only sweeten the refusal, but even that refusal shall be taken by
the more moderate for an extraordinary grace and favor. Minus decipitur Cui
negatur Celeriter.

CHAP. IV. Of Patience and Humility.
THese two qualities are very necessary to the composition of a Complaisant
man, a reverend Courtier being asked by what he had lived so long and so firm
in favor at Court, answered that it was by patiently supporting injuries, and
by repaying thanks in lieu of revenge, patience as it is said being the cause of
Augustus's love to Agrippa and secrecy of his affection to Moecenas.

But the patience of the Court does not lie only in supporting and dissembling
of Injuries, but also (as I have before observed) the defects and Imperfections
of another, there being nothing so odious or distastful, as to be reprehended
and censured by us, yet so great is the vanity of some, as to think they cannot
be esteemed if they control not the actions of another.

Such persons are usually admired only by ignorants, and their conversation
not supportable to any but such, as are much their inferiors; and if they have
not a great sufficiency, they render themselves most often ridiculous, even to
those who seem to hold them in most admiration. The Courtier then ought to take
care of tart or bitter speeches, even of things which are true, for the sting is
felt a long time after, and especially by persons of highest rank.

A second kind of patience, is, to be diligent and not to abandon our designs,
whatsoever repulse or disgrace we meet, never resting our selves on one single
event, nothing being more subject to change then the will of Princes, and of
Grandees, which is in perpetual flux and reflux, but above all keep us near our
Masters and Patrons, and that with the greatest assiduity imaginable, not only
to avoid calumnies, which are usually fixed upon us in absence, but also
because such an occasion may happen, wherein the diligence of our attendance
may be particularly be observed, and hence concluded our affection to his
service; Then we are thought worthy to execute his particular Commands, and in
these oppertunities, If we acquit us happily, the praisses of our Patron
prepares that way to the Princes favor, where the continuance of our diligence
and good conduct must establish us.

There is in the Court, as there is said to be in Love, one Critical minute,
and a Prince having sometimes need of so many kind of persons, that he who is
thought the most unprofitable may once meet with such a fortunate occasion,
which may render him serviceable and agreeable.

Another effect of patience, is that, when we, enterprise any affair with hopes
well conceived and founded upon reason, we pursue it with all perseverance, and
against all opposition, being always cautious that we precipitate nothing, but
always attend occasion.

Many Gentlemen, who in time might hope to see themselves elevated to the
highest dignities, striving to prevent their hopes, not only find a check, but
their ruin from an unfortunate precipitation.

Humility is no less apart of Complaisance, and necessary virtue in the Court,
which being for the most part composed of vain and ambitious persons, who
commonly having nothing of commendable in them, seek for these outward
appearances and submissions from others to make themselves to be valued. And by
so much more they regard them, by how much they are conscious of the smallness
of their own merit.

Yet humility does not alone consist in this, for it appears in us either by
the opinion that we make known to have of our selves, or by the will and desire
we express, of enterprising above our power, or by our outward behavior and
deportment.

The opinion that a humble spirit has of himself consists in the small value he
sets upon himself, believing that he is unprofitable, and in always
acknowledging his own weakness to the end to enterprise nothing above his
forces.

Though Divines tell us that it is our duty to possess this virtue inwardly,
yet it is sufficient obedience to the Rules of this Art, not to boast our
selves of the things we cannot effect, and not knowing the extent of our own
power that we do it in silence and without ostentation.

The humility which consists in the will, has two parts, obedience to the
Commands of those on whom we depend, and the moderation of our desires, when
humility appears in our outward behavior it is remarked in our Countenance,
gestures, words and Actions.

In the Countenance, by a modest regard, not too lofty, nor too bold, by a
sweet and moderate laughter, not loud, nor jeering, and by respectful carriage,
as salutations, reverences, and such like Ceremonies.

In the words, as by offers of services, and the like Complements, as also by
speaking soberly, to the purpose, and with respect, keeping silence till we are
questioned, and in yielding a willing attention to what is said to us.

In our Actions there are three degrees of humility, to abase our selves to the
great ones, not endeavoring to make our selves believed their equals; to
descend below our equals, and to submit even to those who are beneath us.

Many think it sufficient to a Courtier to hold himself in the first degree,
for fear an humility too low render him despised; but since the Court is so
composed that oft-times the great stand in need of the least; there being some
Offices only to be done by the meaner sort, a Courtier is constrained to gain
them by Caresses and countenances full of humility; Coesar who lived in a
Republic in which that humility was no less necessary to an ambitious man, then
in the Court of a Monarch; Caressed and flattered the vilest of the people.

Yet in this we must be careful to observe a mediocrity, always demeaning our
selves according to the quality of the persons, never debasing us too low, but
restraining our humility within the bounds of Courtesy and decent affability,
some persons of a mean descent, seeing themselves high advanced in Credit in a
very short time, (thinking they cannot surmount the contempt of their former
condition and extraction, if they bear not themselves haughtily, and make not
themselves feared), remit the moderation of their lofty procedure, and the
resuming a sweet and courteous behavior, till by the continuance of their
prosperity and great fortune, that contempt (with the remembrance of their
first condition) is effaced: but it is to be feared that this change does but
difficultly, or too late happen, a man who is accustomed to pride, being not
able, easily, to divest himself of it.

CHAP. V. Of Civility and Affability.
THere remains these two qualities, to perfect the composition of a Complaisant
person: Civility consists principally of two parts, to render it accomplished,
one is a certain decency or sweet behavior to which we ought to conform our
selves as much as possible, the other is an agreeable affability, which renders
us not only accessable to all those, who would address themselves to us, but
also make our society and conversation desirable.

Decency is chiefly to be observed in three things, our speech, countenance,
and clothes; In the speech the voice must be fine, not rough, nor too loud, nor
too low, but distinct, the terms honest, ordinary, Intelligible and Common, not
mean or affected, but proper to the thing.

2. In the countenance, herein we must be careful, that all our looks be full
of sweetness, kindness and modesty, not affected, and without grimaces; the
carriage of the body decent, without extraordinary or apish gestures in all our
ordinary actions, be it in eating, drinking, or the like, we must show modesty,
and follow that which is most received, amongst those with whom we converse,
for that Courtier is but over punctual, who in a Country Gentleman's house will
strictly practice all his forms of new breeding, and will not be content to
express his thanks, and esteem to others, in the same manner, and with the same
ceremony that he receives the respects of others, his practice shows, like a
correction of the other, and often puts the modest Company into a bashful
confusion, and constrained distrustful behavior and conversation.

3. Our Clothes ought to be proper and suitable, not superfluous; and according
to the fashion then in use, without being fantastic, in too much affecting
new, or counterfeiting gravity in obstinately following the old: the best rule
in this age is to consider the fashion, and countenance of those who possess
the reputation of this decent mediocrity, that we may conform and prepare our
selves to an Imitation.

Affability consists in many things, but principally in the knowledge to give
an obliging reception to all persons, to entertain them with freedom and
kindness, to salute, honor and respect them, in short, by all outward signs,
and Caresses that may assure them of our Courtesy and good will, giving them
by these attractive ways, all the assurance and confidence that may be.

It is not enough for to confirm entirely the spirit of men, and to establish
and believe that they are beloved by us, to have a good will toward them, and
a great desire to aid them, but we must with an agrreable Visage, and a sweet
courteous entertainment encourage and invite them to be familiar with us.

And having by these means drawn them thus far, to hearken to 'em with signs of
contentment, and patience, for he who will not yield attention to what is said,
cannot be named affable, no more then he who constantly and harshly interrupts
the discourse of another, or who contradicts, or devines what another would
say, the last being only a foolish vanity, to be admired for a nimble
conception, and a vast and comprehensive understanding; and it ordinarily falls
out that such persons themselves are ridiculous, and confused with the loss of
time; and thus to interrupt, or interpret without infinite modesty, the
conceptions of him who speaks, or not to be attentive, is an offense and a
testimony of contempt; Now this attention is principally shown by answering to
the purpose, and with judgment and mildness, flying as much as possible rude
and eager reparties, creating a hope in those who speak to us, that they may
easily approach us, and speak what and as often as they please.

But though this facility is necessary to all sorts of persons and on all
occasions; yet it is most necessary to persons of the highest rank in the
management of their affairs.

For their inferiors entertaining an opinion, that those who use this
affability, descend equal to them, they become so assured that they fear not to
discover openly their thoughts and all their designs, as if it were to their
companions and friends, insomuch that those that practice this Art, seem to
keep a key to unlock men's hearts at pleasure.

But as the honor that we receive from a person of quality is not agreeable
only, in regard of his person, but also because his countenance and Caresses
obtains us credit with others, so the contempt which a great person shows, is
not only grievous in regard of himself, but becomes insupportable to us, when
we find our esteem lessened with those who were spectators of our ill treatment.

Though this affability ought always to be accompanied with sweetness, I do not
intend that ought not to be attended with gravity, and decency suitable to our
condition and estate.

In short affability ought to be mixed with sweetness and severity; or to speak
better, it ought to be as a mean betwixt these two extremities, so that the one
may not render us a terror to those who have any affair with us or the other
too much debase us, and subject us to the contempt which too great familiarity
generally produces, but that it may be full of dignity, and agreeable,
according to the quality of affairs, persons, and other circumstances; For so
much of these as concerns our outward behavior I shall omit, there having been
(a particular discourse of that subject, Called the rules of Civility,) Writ
Originally in the French, and Translated into our own Tongue, in which you may
learn the Mode of France, and are taught upon the Authors grounds, to make of
the usuage of our own nation, a perpetual Rule.

I have here the occasion to speak of raillery as a part of affability, which
serves to season our discourse, nature having given laughter to men, as a
release of those sad and melanchollique humors, which usually attend us in our
serious affairs.

There must be used in the practice of it, great judgment and discretion, for
those who use it licentiously, and on all occasions, instead of being esteemed
affable gain only the names of Buffoons.

We must use it then with sobriety, and intersperse it as a ray of light,
amidst the obscurity of a grave discourse, in such a manner as may not detract
from the dignity of the person, or of the affair of which we treat; for as a
little water cast upon a great fire inflames it more, which a greater quantity
would extinguish, so railery too frequent, looses its grace, and ruins the
dignity of him who serves himself of it, but intermixed and sprinkled with
judgment, it strangely revives and animates the fainting conversation, so that
we ought to use it as delicious sauce, and not as food, least in lieu of giving
us pleasure by its agreeable relish, it cause satiety and disgust.

The quality of this raillery ought to be innocent, and in no part odious, that
is to say too tart, or bitter, and that it turn not into mockery, slander, or
reproach of some truth, which may bring shame or a just confusion on him with
whom we discourse, for this instead of gaining affection, commonly provokes to
contempt, disdain or enmity, and creates particularly in great men, a long, if
not an immortal resentment, and though it seem our due, to be allowed some
reply (to those who attack us) after the same manner, yet the most prudent and
modest counsel we can take, is to rebate the points of such words, either with
a grae silence or a negligent smile, rather then with a biting reply hazard the
loss of our friend, it is a kind of acknowledging the truth of a jest to seem
stung and offended at it, whereas on the contrary seeming to slight it, we make
others believe there is nothing in it, and so it passes without leaving any ill
or disadvantagious impression of us in the minds of the hearers.

We ought also to shun such jests as are usually observed in the mouths of
persons of the vilest condition, and which have in them something, I know not
what, of servile and abject, and also those which arise from equivocations and
words of a double intent, because they are commonly foolish, constrained and
ill taken; but above all, let us beware they be not accompanied with grimaces
or ( Sueton. Histrionem and Philosophum nihil amplius quam urbe; Itali^que
summovit, vel contemptu omnis insamioe vel ne faciendo dolorem irritaret
ingenia.
) disagreeable gestures, after the manner of Players, Mimicks, and Buffoons. I
have known some gentlemen who have not wanted either wit, goodness, or good
nature; yet by their disagreeable meens, and manner of expression, even of what
in it self has been innocent enough, have unhappily gained as many enemies as
new acquaintance.

Whenever we have an occasion to make a facetious repartie, it must not seem
affected or premediated, but as if it were born without pain or thought.

We must also avoid those which tend to our own praise or advantage, or which
verge upon pride or presumption, nor ought our raillery bite so sharply as to
engage the enmity or hate of another, this would be too dear a purchase of a
light, and shameful satisfaction.

It behooves us no less to be cautious in reproaching another, for the same
thing, for which we stand reproachable, nor ought we to scoff at the miserable
and unhappy, as being a thing too cruel and barbarous, nor at our friends or
Parents, as a thing unnatural, full of malignity, and inhumanity. In short, he
who gives himself liberty to jest or rally, must do it with great consideration
of the quality of the Person, place, time, and other Circumstances.

As to the several sorts of jests, the number is great and various some consist
in a rencounter of words, which is now accounted the lowest kind, others in the
conception and Intent of him who speaks, and some in a certain manner of
answering, as when we answer what is least expected from us, or when we reply
coldly and without emotion to a demand made with a pressing ardure, and
Impatience, of which several kinds, though I could bring many examples of the
Ancients, and of witty men of this age, yet because they are better learned by
practice and conversation, I shall here omit them, they being also for the most
cold in the recital if the words be not animated with the grace wherewith they
were at first pronounced.

Complements also make a part of affability, we call a Complement a short
expression of love, a declaration or demonstration of honor, and of obligation
to those whom we desire to induce to a confidence and assurance that they are
beloved with an extraordinary and reciprocal affection.

These kind of Offices as all other have their means, and extremities, so that
to observe a mediocrity, it is necessary to enter into a consideration of
circumstances, as of the person, place, time, thing, and of the cause, because
another manner of speaking is requisite to a person of an illustrious rank,
then to our equals or inferiors, so one manner of speaking is required when
it is only to express our good will, and an other when it is to manifest our
obligations and respects.

But we ought especially to take heed that we suffer not our selves to be
transported with beautiful words, least, we engage our selves in terms from the
purpose, or in replies undecent, or too far constrained; so amongst persons
which are our familiars, we must use common terms and expessions not
researched, or too affected; briefly we ought to take care that the tongue and
judgment walk together, accompayning our discourse with such gestures,
countenances and actions, as are expressive of the same will and affections,
giving to know in short the causes which induce us to love and honor, and to
think our selves obliged.

Amongst which we must choose, such as are most proper to the subject and such as
are least remote or best known to him, to whom we address our Complement.

And if we have any pledge of his amity, either from some good Office we have
received from him, or from expressions of his readiness to serve us, we must
often show our remembrance of it, attributing all to his nature full of affection
and courtesy, to which he will give so much more credit, by how much every one
is apt to be deceived with the love of himself, and too easily to persuade
himself, that others believe he possesses those qualities which render him
agreeable and esteemed of all.

These means, if managed with Artifice, and discretion have a certain occult
power to move and dispose the mind to give faith and credit, to him who serves
himself of them.

I have said discretion, because we may sometimes meet with persons of that
nature, though they are very rare at Court, which are at such a distance from
that ordinary vanity, that they look with too much suspicion and distrust on
this kind of procedure.

For this reason, with such persons as are free from affectation, we must
venture upon such complements, only in such occasions where custom renders
them necessary, or at least when we are moved to it in the pursuit of our
discourse, or affairs, testifying in us rather the constancy and firm
resolution of our inclinations then the violence of a vehement affection which
may be suspected either of inconstancy, flattery, or design.

In the answers that we make to such Complements, let us govern our selves with
the same measure and temperament, but particularly in our answer to the
acknowledgements of obligations, or benefits received from us, we must
extenuate them, without diminishing them more then is convenient, which some as
vainly, as imprudently do, because that lessening them too much, as by saying,
that they are but such common Courtesies as we show to any other, we accuse the
judgment of him, who is pleased to set another value upon them, and who
believes he has a pledge of our good will more then Common; which we diminish
in diminishing the benefit, and by this means we debase him, who thinks himself
numbered amongst our friends equal with those who are not.

For this reason though indeed it was our duty alone which moved us to do him
this pleasure, we may show as if a particular affection contributed something,
provided it be always done without vanity.

This is all that I shall say in general of these kind of affairs which if
practiced with prudence serve very much to gain us credit and esteem, whereas
on the contrary, If they be not accompanied with discretion become ridiculous,
and being omitted, attend those who expect them of us.

After I have spoken so largely of Complaisance, and the several parts and
kinds of it, in the next place I think convenient to speak something of
Conversation and the several species of it.

CHAP. VI. Of Conversation.
ALL the world must acknowledge, that it is Conversation which contributes to
render men sociable and makes up the greatest commerce of our life, so that we
may say, that it is impossible to take too much care to render our discourse
pleasing and profitable.

Memory may furnish us with matter to maintain it, but it can give us nothing
but what we have treasured up before, so that it is necessary that we labor to
enrich it with a great number of the choicest things, that it may make us
restitution when we have occasion for them, yet how necessary soever its
succors may be, it alone suffices not to make us successful in Conversation
since it is required that judgment be joined with it, to regulate what we have
to speak, and to engage us to view with circumspection, what we are obliged to
observe; it forbids us to speak gallantries to an old and austere Doctor, and
to entertain young Ladies with discourses of Geometry, for though a man should
speak admirably of both these things, yet he would not fail to be thought very
tedious to those whose humors are at enmity with such conversation, so that it
is not only necessary to speak excellently of things, but it is also necessary
that those discourses be well timed and placed, for the eyes, which exceed in
luster the other parts of the face, would render us monstrous if they were not
placed where nature designed them.

It is then necessary to observe well, all the Circumstances which regard those
persons to whom we speak, the place where they are, and the subject wherewith
we entertain them, for when the subject should be great and elevated, we must
not speak with a light and wanton air, and how knowing so ere we are we may
happily testify a too great concernment to make appear our knowledge; on the
contrary, we must give to the rest of the Company time to speak their thoughts,
that we may not draw upon our selves, the same reproach, that a Lady very
pleasantly made to one of her friends, that friend, who was a Gentleman,
doubtless of very great learning, so deeply plunged himself one day into a
discourse of politics, speaking of the Conduct of Philip the second, that
forced the Lady I speak of, to interrupt him, after she had thus patiently
heard him a very long time; Why, Sir, said she to him, will you be wise from
morning night?

We ought always in our discourse to have regard to Truth, as the ground of
Conversation, but to avoid involving my self in those great questions
concerning truth, I shall content my self to say, that it is a conformity of
our words with our thoughts, without determining whether there ought to be a
precise similitude of the thoughts we express to the thing we have in our mind.

This virtue is so extensive, that it is of general profit, upon which all the
commerce of this life, might be very solidly established; If men loved it so
much as they are enemies to it. The most flourishing nations, have always had
truth in a particular veneration, the Persians, according to Herodotus,
instructed their Children to speak it very exactly, and endebted persons were
only held in such contempt amongst them; because they presumed they were
constrained to lie often, when they conversed with their Creditors: we see by
our own experience, that our own nation show themselves such friends to Truth,
that they think nothing more offensive then when any gives another the lie.

Yet many persons Imagine that none can prosper in their designs at Court,
without a continual dissimulation, and making a particular profession, never to
speak their true thoughts, that error is almost general, yet a reasonable
distinction may draw us out of it, I confess that a man to whom one has
Entrusted a secret, is obliged to be faithful, and not to discover, what is
important to be concealed; it is not necessary that a Courtier who aspires to
some employment, proclaim his pretentions, or discover the means he intends to
make use of, since his Competitour, may draw from thence an advantage to his
prejudice; but in the ordinary course of a man's life, for what reason is he
bound to lie perpetually, and to make a virtue of so great a vice.

Can it be believed, that a man who Caresses indifferently all the world, and
who promises all those who make any address to him to serve them, without any
such Intention, can make himself many friends, or establish himself in a
reputation of being civil and obliging; on the contrary, though he blind them
at present by such procedure, it will not be long before they be disabused, and
so far will they be from building upon what he says, that they will scarce ever
give ear to him after, regarding him only as a Comaedian, who says what he
thinks ^ot, and whose only care is to acquit himself well of the part he has
undertaken to Act.

I should be taxed of contradiction, should I dissalow a prudent dissimulation
of some dangerous truth, when the effects of it will be only an unseasonable
exasperation, and perhaps draw upon our selves envy, hate, or contempt. On the
contrary I esteem it wisdom, in such who practice it in such manner as I have
before prescribed.

I am here again invited to speak something of Raillery, though I have made
some particular reflection of it before, since it is manifest nothing so much
animates discourse, provided it be honest and pleasant, and it ought to be so
far from being banished from conversation, that we may say it is that alone
which seasons discourse, and preserves it from growing faint and languishing;
some have said that it made the principal part of what the Romans called
Urbanity, saying, that Urbanity, as the word in some measure signifies, was
properly the manner of behavior, and conversation of persons of the City, who
are so different in all things from the most considerable persons of the
Country, who for that cause we call Rusticks.

Others have conceived that Raillery was that Attick-salt, so renowned in the
writings of the Ancients, as well as moderns, that, producing in conversation
the same effect which salt does in a ragoust, so that we may say, excessive
raillery displeases and stimulates the spirit, as victuals too salt disgust and
offend the pallat.

Raillery then must be fine and delicate, and such as rather serves to heighten
Conversation which begins to fall, then to offend the persons which compose the
assembly, but when we would rally, to excite laughter it is best to speak in a
cold and serious manner, that the Company be may pleasantly surprised, in
seeing us serious in the midst of persons, who rend the air with laughters.

Nothing contributes so much to the design we have to divert those who hearken
to us, then a happy natural disposition to furnish us with quick, and facetious
returns, nothing is so pleasant or makes so great an Impression, as these
suprizing repartees.

And we must agree, that there is something very extraordinary in those
genius's, who have this gift to please; Yet such persons must be cautious
against whom they permit themselves to exert their talent, for they ought never
to attack the unhappy, or Criminal, because if the former be more worthy to
draw from them Compassion, rather then this kind of Raillery; a Malefactor on
the other side deserves a more severe chastisement, and we ought to have so
much horror of his crimes, as not to make them a matter of divertisement; they
must also spare men of a remarkable probity, and the reputations of virtuous
women, and it is properly against the vainglorious that they are permitted to
sport themselves, and divert others, because vanity is usually odious to all
the world, and worthily deserves to be scoffed at.

The excellency of these repartees, consist in being short, acute and clear,
and not only spoken with a grace; but so much to the purpose, that it may not
be suspected that we have prepared them in our studies.

To obtain this Excellent faculty, it would be in vain to read ancient
Authors, since we have many Collections of the Moderns, whose happiness in
this kind has made great noise in the world, yet how pleasant soever those
repartees have been when they were spoken, they lose much of their grace when
we come to r^late them, because we have not the same passions they had in the
Company where they were first spoken; for this reason I shall not amuse my self
to give you any examples of them, and indeed I do scarce think this knack can
be attained by study or immitation, nor succeed happily, except they result
from extemporary thoughts.

Before I proceed any further, I will give you a description of the
Conversation of those places where it is presumed to be of most perfection.

CHAP. VII. Of the Conversation of the Court.
THe two great subjects which make up the Conversation of the Court, are Love
and War. If the thoughts of the more brave and active Spirits, are taken up
with Sieges, engagements, and the acquisition of glory, those of the vain
effeminate and impertinent, are no less busied in the Conduct of an Amarous
Intreague. If chance or any other respect cast you into the Company of one of
the latter sort, you must be content to hear him relate his Conquest of the
Lady of some decrepit Knight, in terms as Martial, as an old Soldier would the
taking the best Fort in Flanders. First, by a studied description he exalts her
virtue, her wit and her modesty, and having rendered his beauteous enemy thus
formidable, and thus guarded, he attacks her, is repulsed, then charges again,
and again forced to retreat; once more, supposing her a Fort, he gives the
assault, storms and enters, and in spite of all resistance, enjoys the fruit
of this glorious victory, now! he expects his triumph should be attended by the
acclamations of all who are present, and that you should praise and admire at
the efforts of his irresistible gallantry, as if in one continued minute of
fury, he had taken in three parts of the Netherlands.

According to these, do some vicious and Mercenary Poets fashion the Characters
of their complete Gentlemen; for half an hour after I had seen a late new Play,
whilst the Impression continued, I wished nothing so much as to be like the two
tearing fellows, which the Poet had designed for the Characters of Gentlemen,
nor in that mood would I have exchanged their abilities, in drinking and
whoreing, for all the old fashioned, virtues in the world, and I dare swear
that three parts of the men then present, would have preferred the honor of
committing a thousand rapes and adulteries, to the practice of all those sullen
virtues which under that name they are taught to abhor.

How deplorable a thing is it! that a man who wants wit to paint the true image
of virtue, should be suffered to make the Stage the seat of Atheism, and the
throne of all impiety, by giving the public only a representation of a filthy
life, and a debauched conversation! and are they to be esteemed much more
Impudent, and regardless of the Honor of this Renowned Kingdom, who say they
write to please the humor of the age, as if nothing could be agreeable to us,
but the seeing the most horrid vices, of the most wretched of men, rendered
amiable under the name of virtues, and by discourses full of tottenness and
bawdery.

If you would please such a brutish creature, as I have described, you must
seem by your words and behavior, that in such an adventure he ought to esteem
himself the happiest of men, you may in a short manner accuse your own
imperfection, or your fortune, for the ill success of your own amors, and you
must carefully avoid as disobligeing to ascribe his victory to chance, or to
the weakness of the vanquished, leaving him always in the opinion that you
attribute all to the power of his wit and eloquence, this you may do, if you be
constrained to indulge your self this flattery, and by feigning a relation of
another, who succeeded in the like attempt, and on this imaginary person fix
without suspicion, what commendations you please, which the others
self-admiration will quickly apply, and love you for it.

Those who make profession of a severe virtue will think it perhaps a thing too
painful, or dishonest, to comply with these persons, and indeed those who take
not their measure from their ability to serve him, in his designs of Interest
or glory submits himself to the meanest vassalage.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Conversation of the Inns of Court.
AS these are the places to which there is the most general confluence of young
gentry, from all the parts of these three Kingdoms, so there are here to be
found a great number of the finest Spirits, Considerable as well for their
learning as their external accomplishments, yet these are not without a mixture
of a number of dull, sottish and vain persons with others as pedantick,
trifling, and debauched, here it is that you may see in a Winter term at dinner
time in their halls a drowsy company of formal Fellows stand purring over a
fire; who after a long and painful study of thirty years, have attained to the
wonderful, and gainful Art of speaking nonsense, with the greatest confidence
in the world, and when they walk, to carry their eyes and noses directly before
them, not daring to turn their weighty noddles, on either side, for fear of
forfeiting their gravity, these are commonly a brood of men, who start from a
desk and snatch up the gown, and having first in their infancy been swadled and
nursed up in rags of paper, are at riper years, sometimes out of poverty,
(instead of having a free and generous education, which inspires us with those
Noble thoughts, which after become as planted in our natures) put Clerks to
Attorneys; from whence without the least taste of University learning they
advance, swelled with presumption, and full of ignorance and Impupudence, to
the Bar; profit and lucre them becomes the only subject of their Conversation,
gain gives motion to all their Actions, and that also, is the end of all their
Arguments, whilst reason and honesty, are too often made factours to their
avarice, if ever you have occasions that force you to make use of these
persons, or to seek any favor from them upon any account (except for reward,
and then you shall even blush to see, how base and servile they appear in their
flatteries) they expect you from the greatest submissions and attendance, to
this how repugnant so ere it is, you must dispose your self, and when your
thoughts are at strife about it, call it a submission to necessity and
occasion: how necessary attendance and importunity is at these season, hear
Juvenal to this effect.

When Clients by the sleeve their Lawyers pull,
Lord! how the brain works through the learned skull,
Then the hollow bellows breathes forth mighty lies,
Till on their breasts the eager spittle flies.
To Conclude, Epict. jun. says, It is one of the pleasant humors in the world
to see two men together, the one to receive advice, the other to give it, the
one demeans himself with a respectful, and complaint indifference to receive
directions, and to submit his sentiments to the other, on the contrary he who
is consulted seems to requite the sincerity of his Client with an earnest and
disinterest zeal to serve him, and in the mean time examines his own concerns,
for rules whereby to advise him, so that his Counsel becomes more advantageous
to himself then to him who receives it.

There are a second sort, who as soon as they arrive at the bar. Throw off the
gallant, and fashion themselves according to the mode and form of the other,
all their actions, words and gestures grow stiff, and affectedly constrained,
their Conversation obstinate, and full of a petulant contradiction.

A third sort is a Company of raw mopish youths, who come to town burdened
with the wary precepts of their Parents, who having a little breathed the
freedom of the Town make a loose into all manner of vanity and debaucheries,
let fear of Calumny, move you to a little Complaisance to these, as the
contemplation of interest to others.

Yet after all, I desire to be understood to speak of the smallest number, or a
species of them; for I would not be thought of a nature so venomous, as to seek
to throw disgrace upon that glorious Profession, which has raised in all ages,
so many eminent persons, to the first Honors of the Realm, and who have left
their posterities ingrafted in the Nobility, but these were the effects of real
merit and virtue, which still sheds a luster on the rest, and not of
indirection.

I shall omit the conversation of the City, which consisting of Merchants, and
Tradesmen, use no discourse but what tends to Traffic, and accumulating
riches. Considering them in general, as they have the same passions with other
men.

In the next Chapter therefore, I shall give some general Rules to be observed,
and of use in all Conversations.

CHAP. IX. Some general Rules to be observed in Conversation.
WE ought to be careful in regulating our discourse and our silence, preserving
modesty, and studying brevity without obscurity, and with all the decency which
our quality requires, and also suitable to the quality of those with whom we
converse, weighing all the Circumstances which occur; principally flying
importunity, lying and vanity.

1. Importunity, in speaking nothing that may be tedious or from the purpose,
not repeating often the same thing, nor offering to speak or interrupt another
when he speaks, but always giving the same attention that you expect in
Civility from others, for can there be any thing so blameable, as that, which
often even persons of the greatest abilities and Complaisance content themselves
with; that is, to make a show of attention in their Countenances, even when
there may be observed in their looks and apprehensions, a certain distraction
and a precipitancy of returning to what they would say, not considering that it
is an unlikely method of pleasing or persuading others to be so attentive to
please themselves, and that to hearken attentively, and to answer pertinently,
is one of the greatest perfections a man can be master of. Epict. jun.

I must here take the liberty to add something to what I have already said of
lying.

I shall here therefore consider it, According to the belief of him who speaks,
for he who speaks only what he believes, cannot be called a liar, yet he
commits a fault, who assures any thing of which he knows no Certainty, and how
great soever his own Confidence of it is, it would be greater wisdom to be
silent in such a subject.

But he who speaks and believes the Contrary is truly a liar, and such persons
are as little esteemed in Conversation as they deserve, for this in effect is
to betray the Commerce of men, which consists in the mutual credit we give to
each other, and there cannot be any thing more wretched then to contradict our
own knowledge.

Secondly, According to the subject of which we speak, as where we speak of our
selves or of others, speaking of our selves, if we say any thing untrue to our
own advantage, we cannot escape being accounted both vain and liars; and the
lie will render us odious, and the vanity ridiculous.

When we speak of others, we must be careful that we speak not of them to their
disadvantage, for if truth it self be odious in such discourse, a lie must be
much more, as accompanied with malice, yet there is a kind of malignity in most
men, that disposes them (out of a desire to appear more understanding then
their Companions) too freely to blame, and reprehend those whom they ought to
be more inclined to praise, or to conceal their Imperfections, for if he of
whom we speak be our inferior or equal, that for which we praise him, we not
only render him more esteemed of others, but also tacitly teach our
superiors to place a greater value upon our selves.

But if he of whom we speak ill, be known to excel us, we thereby render our
selves foolish and ridiculous, and the more we labor to diminish him, the
greater disesteem we derive upon our selves, when the Company has leisure to
make a sober Comparison.

It is then much better to speak to the advantage of another, then to his
disadvantage, for though some may impute it to flattery, that we speak much
good of another, yet I think those who do so, extend flattery very far, or if
they will call such praises flatteries, I may say there are some flatteries
excusable as well as some inexcusable.

For when we praise one with an intention only to please, without any other
ill design, to divert some mischief, or to obtain some good without the damage
of another, this flattery I presume to say is excusable amongst men, thus we
may also judge the quality of a lie, for where a man lies out of a sportive
humor, or for mirth alone, which appertains rather to Buffoons then to persons
who make any profession of honor, in such kind of lies, there is less danger,
and malignity, but those which are made with design to do an injury, though the
success fall out against the speakers intentions, ought especially to be
eschewd, as destructive to scociety, whose union is preserved by good, not by
ill offices. But if the lie bring damage to none, and is of profit to some one,
it may perhaps be dispensed with, provided the nature of the subject do not
forbid it.

Vanity which is the other vice which we ought to fly in conversation, has two
principal branches, boasting and presumption.

The ridiculousness of boasting may be discovered, in those who boast of things
they have never done. He who relates and praises what he has done, is something
more excuseable, but even in that he shows himself not a little vain and
indiscreet for in lieu of making himself the more esteemed, he lessens his own
value with others, for those praises which issue from our own mouths cannot be
well received, this alone possibly has done the greatest injury to one of the
greatest wits of this age.

For this reason, when we have occasion to speak of our selves, we must do it
with much reserve and modesty. It being no less vanity to praise then after the
manner of some foolish persons, to dispraise our selves, with a design to
engage others in our Commendation.

There are some kind of poisonous praises which may be cautiously used of our
enemies, which by an unexpected cast discover those imperfections in them which
we cannot safely divulge otherwise, this indeed is the most refined way of
dispraising, since there are few who are arrived to that degree of wisdom, as
to prefer the discommendation, which is advantageous to them, before the praise
which betrays them. Epict. jun.

As to presumption, it extends it self further then discourse, omitting
therefore what regards our actions, I shall only speak of it as it regards our
discourse, which is in two manners, 1. When we will not yield to the opinion of
another from whence comes obstinacy. 2. When we too passionately strive to
Impose our opinions upon others, from whence proceeds an odious and Injurious
contradiction, to the end that we may seem to know and understand more then
they, and to be thought above them in every thing, we ought especially to fly
in Conversation these two follies.

We ought likewise as a species of presumption, to avoid being obstinate in any
argument in a matter which touches the profession of him we converse with, for
in presuming that we are in the right, we make a secret reflection upon him,
which is always taken as very injurious.

But especially when we have reason to Contradict any, we must be careful that
we do it not with too much roughness, sharpness or obstinacy, but let us
sweeten it as much as we can by humble terms and expressions, seeming as if we
desired rather to be Instructed then to Instruct, proposing our thoughts by way
of doubt, and difficulty, and not as an affirmative, or negative resolution,
and that it may be the better taken, we must take care that it touch not at all
the person, but only the matter we discourse of; on the contrary, it is good
sometime to cast in a word of praise of the person, we are forced to
contradict, sometime confessing our doubt, and our ignorance, never standing
out obstinately, but yielding, when the argument cannot be maintained without
begetting a displeasure in him whom we oppose.

But above all there are two kind of persons whom I advise never to Contradict,
to wit, those to whom we owe much respect, least we offend them; and those who
are inferior to us, least engaging our selves too far, we seem by our
contestation to admit them equal to our selves, there always arising a greater
shame and confusion in being surmounted by them, then honor in a victory from a
Combat so unequal.

Neither ought we to show our selves astonished, or offended at the opinions of
another, though they seem very extravagant to us, nor ought we to seem
displeased at the little follies, indiscretions, and levities they commit in
our presence, but always considering wherein they may be profitable to us,
whether for our entertainment, or for the accomplishment of any other design,
let us make of them our best, so it be an innocent advantage.

To conclude, touching the Ornaments, we are to use in our common discourse, I
have observed it to be the common practice of most Gentlemen to endeavor even
in common Conversation, to make choice of the most polished words, but in my
opinion as we ought not to abandon our selves to a careless neglect, so we
ought not to discover too much care in their election, avoiding a more grave or
formal way, then is natural to us.

Indeed I know a Gentleman, the possessour of no Indifferent qualities, who to
avoid an error on this hand, has betrayed himself into an habitual affectation
on the other; this person has been long esteemed a perfect master of beautiful
words, and indeed I never heard him at a loss for words, very apt and very
expressive in any subject, yet to avoid the censure of being affected, in a
scrupulous choice of words, and to show his absolute Command of that science,
he constrains himself to speak with all imagineable swiftness, pattering over
all he says, and out-runing the Imaginations as well as conceptions of those
who attend; others accuse him of a fault (which indeed is exceeding ridiculous,
and to which vanity the confidence of his skill may easily betray) that is, a
clogging each material word with half a score redundant Epithites, this last is
a fault of which I cannot accuse him, but for the former, I always thought it
as great a fault as the contrary extreme of affected gravity, which makes us
drag out our expressions, and in every word of three syllables to make as many
pawses.

When I have been in this Gentleman's Company I have shunned with much care all
Ornaments in my discourse, and sometime rejected what was both proper and
beautiful, least I should seem to contend with him for victory, and this must
be acknowledged very painful; for as it is natural and easy to fly what is
displeasing, so it is difficult to avoid what on the contrary appears full of
beauty and charm; I propose not my example as a thing to be imitated by others,
yet I think that he who possesses any talent in speaking cannot show it in
company where it will be less agreeable or more unseasonble.

With these few general considerations I shall content my self in this place,
and descend to the more particular rules of this art, and as meriting the first
place. I will speak next how a Courtier must behave himself in his actions and
conversation to gain the favor of his Prince or Sovereign.

CHAP. X. How we must demean our selves to gain the favor of our Prince or
Sovereign.
SInce it is the liberality of the King or Sovereign Power alone, which can
shower upon us benefits so considerable, as to raise and establish our fortunes
in a day, and that his favors are the only But, that we propose in being near
his person, how important does the practice of these Arts appear, in which I
observe some difference from what we are bound to Act out of our duty and
loyalty: and what perhaps men of a blunt integrity will hardly be persuaded to
practice or allow.

Let those therefore who resolve by this to raise their fortunes consider, (to
engage him to practice this Art with the greater caution) if he be a person
born in obscurity, that persons of a more illustrious extraction have
considerable advantages above him, when they first enter into the Court, and
that he is obliged to supply by an extraordinary merit the defect of Nobleness
of blood, and to pretend by the virtue of his services, what the former believe
they may attain in repose, as a recompense due to the glorious actions of their
Ancestors.

Diligence is the first and most necessary quality, for besides that by it our
presence speaks continually for us, when discretion forbids us to do it, in any
other manner, it is certain that a man who is diligent, finds himself (as I
have somewhere before said) in a condition to render some peculiar service, and
to receive his reward, yet diligence must not go to importunity, and when he is
not arrived to a near familiarity with his Prince, he ought prudently to avoid
being near his person during those times which he desires to enjoy in private;
for how unhappy would the condition of Princes be, if they might not have some
times free, as well for their more important affairs, as for their
divertisements, which they would not take before persons in whom they have not
proposed an entire Confidence.

We read upon this subject, that Philip King of Macedon, was in a strange
Confusion, when one day Antigonus entering unexpectedly into his Chamber,
surprised him playing at a trivial game, that Prince imagined, out of a nicity
too great, that it was a shame for him to abase himself to that amusement, and
I do not know whether he did not resent some despite for the future against
Antigonus, in the thoughts he had that it might abate that great Captains
esteem of him.

Besides, the diligence whereof I have spoken, we ought to show much zeal and
concernment in all those occurrences, where we may do it to purpose, but
especially we ought to prepare our selves to endure all manner of wearines in
his service, and that we be always armed with extreme patience, otherwise we
shall find our selves in danger to lose in one minute the recompenses which we
expect from the service of many years.

When by a long diligence, and great pains, a Courtier has raised himself to
favor, and has gained himself an Interest in the secrets of his Prince, he
must observe very strict measures, he must always speak with an extraordinary
reservedness, he must consider that the resolutions which his Sovereign takes
from his Council, have consequences so Importent, that he cannot too much
examine matters of so great weight, nor give his advice with too much
circumspection, and this he almost does with all Imaginable humility, and
modesty, for boldness in these occasions, is a mark of presumption which will
not fail to draw upon him ill Consequences.

The chief thing that a Courtier is to consider (to maintain him in the favor
of his Prince) is his inclination and manner of procedure which is usually
conformable to his humor, which though the greatest part of politic Princes
endeavor to disguise, yet nevertheless it is difficult to do without
discovery, because all their actions are so much in view of all the world, that
it is easy to judge whither they tend, and the importance of their affairs
sometime disturbs them so much that its impossible but to discover by the
motions of their Spirits, what their nature is, and Tiberius the most crafty,
and covert of all men, with all his artifice, could not conceal his designs
from the meanest of his Subjects.

The Inclinations of Princes are various, and almost infinite, in that
diversity, as those of other men, but they may all be reduced to those which
either serve their grandeur or their pleasures.

Grandeur consists either in reputation or riches, or in the obedience of their
subjects, or in the valor, and fidelity of their men of war, as the Prince
inclines to one side more then to another, so those who are most proper to
serve him (having no other parts that are suspected, and disagreeable to him)
are most acceptable to him.

So if the Prince be voluptuous, he makes choice of those who are best able to
serve his pleasures: a Prince suspicious and fearful, as Tiberius was, loves a
bold Calumniator, who fears not the envy of the great, and is prompt and
resolute to execute his commands, as Tacitus paints Sejanus to have been.

If he be addicted to drunken debauchery, he will advance near him persons of
the same humor, as the same Tiberius did Pomponius Flaccus and Lucius Piso,
with whom he sometimes passed two whole days and the following night in
drinking, calling them always his friends recompensing one with the government
of Syria, and the other with the Praefecture of the City of Rome: the same
Emperor preferred a man of a base condition, and little known, before a great
many Noble Persons who stood in Competition for the Questure, because he had
done him reason, to use the terms of that admirable Art, in pledging him a
whole Amphora of Wine.

The unchastity of Nero made him choose Tigelinus amongst those who served him
in his pleasures, and kept Petronius near him to be the Arbiter of the elegance
of his Luxury. Comodus, and Heliogabalus filled all the charges of the Empire
with persons as Salacious as themselves, and Mulcianus was not so much esteemed
for his Fidelity and Conduct, as because he proper to content the Avarice of
Vespastan his Master.

But I need not multiply examples to establish this maxim, which is so well
known, by those who are dependants on the Courts, viz. that he who would be in
favor of his Prince must second his inclinations and passions.

Here men of a severe virtue will think that it is better to banish our selves
from Court, then to follow, or flatter the Inclinations of Princes, which
exceed so much the terms of reason and prudence.

In truth I must avow, that he who desires to lead a life wholly Innocent it is
best to sequester himself, Yet thus far these complyances are innocent, when he
cannot hinder the disorders, or evil designs of his Master, for hereby he may
gain the power and opportunity to devert by sweetness, what he could not
possibly do by a rough opposition.

And a mean may be preserved betwixt a contradiction of the will of the Prince,
and a giving up our selves to a vile and abject servitude which makes us
partakers of his excesses, imitating in this Lepidus under Tiberius, which
Tacitus represents as a good man and a wise Courtier.

The same Tacitus commends Labeo and Capito, the former of which discreetly
maintained his liberty at Court, and was esteemed of all, and the latter
rendered himself agreeable to his Prince by his obedience.

With these I may recommend the example of Vibius Crispus, of whom Juvenal
speaks, in his fourth Satyr, he was a rich, wise, and smooth old man, who
maintained himself in favor with many Emperors of several dispositions. When
Nero said to him, Crispus, have thou enjoyed thy sister, he answered, Not yet
Sir, not willing to confess an untruth, nor daring to deny it, lest the
Emperor should think himself touched, who had practiced with his own sister.

So that I may conclude, that though it is a thing more painful to a good man,
then to a person of wicked disposition, yet he shall gain, a contentment in his
soul, if he govern himself in not resisting his Prince only in things he cannot
change or remedy.

But above all a good man in his speech must govern himself with abundance of
caution, for evil Princes do very seldom approve too severe speeches from such
persons. Plato experienced the effects of his freedom to Dennis Prince of
Syracuse, having been by him remitted into the hands of a Master of a ship, to
be sold into Candy, where after he was bought by some Philosophers, who gave
him this lesson against another time, Either not to frequent the Courts of
Princes, or to learn to speak according to their inclinations.

The like Counsel was given by Aristotle to Chalisthenes, who followed the
Court of Alexander, to speak seldom, according to the pleasure of him, who had
power of his life.

There is no remedy, but we must indulge our selves some kind of flattery, but
not in all the kinds of it, for that base and crouching manner displeased
Tiberius himself, who coming from the Senate made complaints, that the
Senators were of spirits too poor, and too disposed to servitude.

And sometimes too great flatteries succeed worse, then if we used none at all,
for he who is so flattered, enters ofttimes into an opinion that we intend to
deceive, we must, says Eschenes and Plutarch, have something free in
appearance, mixed with our flattery, not only to persuade the Prince, that we
believe what we say, but to make it believed by others, and the better to
maintain our reputation.

I could produce many examples, but shall content myself to advertise those,
who must be constrained to make use of these flatteries, not to employ them to
the damage of the public, nor of any particular person, but only to content
themselves to practice them, to satisfy the vanity of their Sovereign, having
thus declared my opinion, how far we may extend our Complaisance.

I shall next speak of the different humors of a Prince and our particular
Conduct in such Cases.

CHAP. XI. Considerations upon the humors of Princes.
THe humors of the Prince differ not much from those of Common-persons, if not
that as Princes are more puissant in all other things, so they are not so able
to moderate their passions and humors, they are more violent and less
restrainable by reason.

So that the Choleric will be prompt in all his actions, proud and imperious,
desiring that all should bow under his commands, enemy of the least
disobedience, impatient in the execution of his enterprises, precipitate in his
Counsels and Resolutions, and careless to take advice of any other, if it be
not to find some who will join with, and undertake the execution of his will,
he is injurious, offending lightly, but suddenly returning to himself; provided
that we seem to treasure up the offense he has done, otherwise he becomes
vindicative, and perpetually hates him whom he has offended.

To one of this humor a Courtier ought to have his eye and ear open, and his
foot in the air, that he may readily see, hear, speak and do, what his
Sovereign shall desire without reply, pawse or difficulty, for fear he make his
master believe that he thinks himself more wise then him, rending himself
humble and obedient to all his Commands even though they be beneath his
dignity, patient in supporting injuries, and ready to forget them, redoubling
his service and obedience, after he has been offended, never recounting his
services, least he seem to reproach, but in continuing them, awake gratitude,
and acknowledgment in the mind of his Prince, amidst the most violent
transports of his Choler, at which time he must carefully shun to meet him, for
then all things displease him, and even those whom he loves the most, can do
nothing pleasing to him whilst he continues in that passion, Princes of this
humor interpret all familiarity, contempt, insomuch that though themselves
invite us to that freedom, we ought not to engage our selves therein, but treat
with them with grand respect and humility, Publius Minus. Fulmen est ubi cum
^^testate habetat ira^undi^. Agreeing with what Sen^ca the Tragedian, says in
Medea. Gravi^ est ira regum semper.
they are Lions which seem tame and gentle for a time, but in the end devours
him who thinks he knows how to govern them best.

The Courtier must on all occasions make known his thoughts in a fearful and
submissive manner, rather as if he proposed a doubt, then in a decisive tone,
by this conduct, he may save himself from those reproaches, which he may fear
from ill success, and it is manifest we have always more complaints to sustain,
when our Counsels succeed not so happily as were expected, then
acknowledgements to pretend, when the event is conformable to the hopes we have
raised; yet we must not fail to Counsel our Prince with all fidelity, and
propose nothing which may not turn to his advantage.

The Sanguine is usually of a joyful nature, loving pleasures, pastime and
drollery, enemy of sadness and melancholy, flying affairs that are tedious and
burdensome, desirous of peace, leaving voluntarily the disposition of affairs
to those who are under him, loving those who discharge them without giving
subject of Complaints, which he hears very unwillingly. He is Courteous,
gracious, and difficultly can dispose himself to do injury to any one, or if he
does, it will rather be with words than otherwise, forgetting as freely what is
done to him, as what he does himself; he pleases himself in distributing
favors, and is usually liberal, and of a bountiful soul.

With such kind of Princes, we must discourse seriously the least we can, yet
nevertheless we ought to preserve the respect we owe him.

And those who have the most important affairs of state to manage, must not
represent them to him, when they are not called, or at least are assured not to
find them in their pleasures or taking their pastime, for besides that they
interrupt the Prince, in what pleases him most, they raise a shame in him to be
surprised in such diversions, which he believes, that in their hearts they do
not approve.

As then, these persons have a great advantage in the management of affairs,
the Prince referring all things to their Conduct, so they have a great
disadvantage in approaching him, or in familiarising themselves with him, who
flies those serious humors as Contrary to his nature.

But those who are of a jovial humor and equally capable of affairs, usually
best succeed near such Princes, provided, that being out of the Princes
presence, they preserve a gravity suitable to their dignity, for if they do not
they make themselves despised, and from contempt rises the confidence to
complain under other pretexts, which complaints coming to the Princes ear, is
forced to appease them by sacrificing him who gave the cause.

A Melanchollick Prince, is gentle, and slow in his resolutions, contemplative,
distrustful, suspicious, ingenious, and most commonly malicious, of few words,
which he most often imploys before the execution of a design, to sound those who
attend on him, rendering them ambiguous, and of a double signification, even in
the most knotty affairs he is secret, and uses the greatest dissimulation, an
obstinate enemy of too free jestings, he is retired, loves solitude, is uneasy
of access and uncommunicative, loving few persons, and that but coldly, easily
hating for little cause, by reason of the distrust which always accompanies
him, he is Courteous, and fears the earth will not be enough to content his
avarice, as much an enemy of those whom he has offended, as of them who has
offended him, vindicatif and irreconcilable, and in whose reconciliations
there is little assurance to be reposed.

He who would please a Prince of this humor, must always march with the bridle
in his hand, be very reserved, weigh all that he says, say nothing but what is
useful, and what he judges will be well received; and the most sure way is, not
to speak, when he is not requested; in all his deportments to express a grand
respect and circumspection, to shun contradiction, and not to press him too
much in his resolutions, for fear his Melancholy should be inflamed into
Choler, and his Choler into hate, and lastly, to beware of importunity for what
he may be refused.

For besides, that it is always dangerous to accustom the Prince, to give us
denials, the Melancholic being speculative, holds the refusal for an offense
that he has done you, and believes that you will think your self offended, and
become his enemy, we must almost do miracles to take from him that opinion, for
as he forgets not injuries, so he believes we will not forget the refusal he
made us.

In short, his humor is the most unquiet, troublesome, and unequal of all
others, because of the diversity and strangeness of the objects it produces in
the imagination, and for that it is most painful to govern ourselves well with
such kind of persons.

There is a fourth temperament wherein Phlegm is predominate, persons of this
cold temper are slow in their resolutions like the Melancholic, but they
neither are so ingenious, nor so violent in their hate no more then in their
amity; If they appear suspicious, it is rather out of their own weakness, then
any distrust they have of others, they frame no great designs fearing the want
of power to execute them, so that a man that desires to please a Prince of this
cold nature, ought to appear bold and adventurous, and especially to endeavor
to succeed in some enterprise, the execution of which his Prince apprehends
exceeding difficult, or Impossible.

Whilst he acts in this manner, he attracts his esteem, confidence and
admiration, he must be absent from him as little as he can, for his master
being weak may in his absence have recourse to some of his competitors, and it
cannot be very strange, that the last having served him with success, make him
forget the services which the first has rendered him; indeed this maxim, that
we must not be long absent from the person whose affections we would gain,
ought to be general for all those who would omit nothing that tends to their
establishment, since a man who absents himself gives opportunity to another to
be employed, whom he seems to have left to supply his place.

Of these four humors Princes are composed as well as other men, and are
thereby inclined in their affections, according to the degree of the humor
which is most predominant in them; Yet we must not make a perpetual judgment
thereupon, for as their humor changes according to their age, affairs, and
conversations, so our manner of procedure should change, and answer the
Inclinations of the Prince.

In the time of War we see a Prince Caress, and endear his Captains and Men of
War, of whom in times of peace, the necessity being passed, he makes very
little account, and changeging his martial inclinations into those of pleasure,
he transfers favor and affection to the Ministers of his Content.

Tiberius was one under Augustus, another during the life of Germanicus and
Drusus, another during the life of Livia his mother, when he loved and feared
Sejanus, he very much differed from what he was when his fear was removed,
according to the saying of Passienus, he never saw a better servant then
Caligula in the times of Tiberius, nor a worse master when he arrived to the
Empire.

Plutarch speaking of the change of the manners of Marius and Sylla, makes a
doubt whether it was their fortune which changed their natures, or which
discovered that which was concealed before for certain respects.

Euripides makes one to reproach Agamemnon, because of a humble man that he
was, and accostable, before he was elected chief General of the Greeks, he was
now become an enemy of his friends, difficult of access, and had shut himself
up in his house.

But the most great and most ordinary Imperfections of Princes come from
presumption, which often times accompany power, which renders them difficult to
receive Counsel, making them believe that as they are superior in power to
their subjects, they are so also in sufficiency, and some believe that they
cannot submit to Laws, and to reason, without diminishing their authority, and
that when they cannot do all they would, they are no longer Sovereigns, and
that it would be to abase themselves, and to be no more then the Common people,
if they should regulate themselves, according to that only which is permitted
to the Common multitude, for whom they think, that the rules of Piety, Honor
and Justice have been prepared, and not for them.

If these tirannick opinions entered only into Common Spirits, it would be a
less wonder, but we have likewise seen the wisest men drunk with power; for
amongst all antiquity, more have left better precepts of moderation, then those
who were called the seven wise men of Greece, and yet in their times there were
no tyrants more unjust and cruel then those who possessed the power.

Now that I have spoken how we should demean our selves with our Sovereign, let
us see what we owe to another species of power, which commonly is but too
absolute upon our wills.

CHAP. XII. Of Conversation with Ladies.
FRequenting of the company of Ladies acquire us, that air of the world, and
that politeness, which no Counsel nor Lecture can give us; a warrior, who is
simply a man of War, who has never sweetened his manners in the entertainment
of Ladies, would rather make people afraid, then give them any desire to seek
his conversation, his head is only full of Armies, and Assaults, he speaks of
nothing but of Sieges, or of Battles, and how terrible soever his discourse is,
I do not know whether it be not less then the savageness of his visage. If this
Brave, a little too dreadful, had entered into a Ladies Chamber, when he was
not obliged to remain in the Camp, he had soon ceased to be a man of fire and
sword, to become sociable, he would neither have spoken of Arms nor Combats,
and his modesty which would have shut his mouth upon his own valor, would have
opened a thousand others in his commendation.

A Doctor newly come from the University, where he has been confined, must
needs be very troublesome in those companies which are constrained to receive
him, he proves all things by infallible Arguments, and scarce can even forbear
to interrupt every minute the discourse of the persons who speak, to tell them
their discourse observes not at all the forms of Sylogisms, but for fear that
Greek and Latin corrupt not in this sort, a spirit which gives it self too
absolutely to it, and least these wise men appear not strangers in their own
Country, and finally that they may not see themselves constrained the second
time to learn the language which their nurses speak, would they not do well to
visit the world sometime to render their Doctrine more humane, and as Ladies
are naturally enemies of all kind of rudeness, it is hard that a man who
frequents their company should continually resolve to offend the delicateness
of their Spirit; on the contrary he would accustom himself Insensibly to the
desire to please them, and to accommodate (to the sweetness of their
entertainment, and of their manner of behavior,) whatsoever he has offensive
or disagreeable in his language or in his countenance.

Yet notwithstanding we must observe very strict rules in a commerce, in which
we have much more to fear then hope; for, certain it is, we ought to regard the
entertainment of Ladies, only as a pleasing amusement, or a School of
politeness, a man who makes it his whole business, renders himself
contemptible, even to those persons whom he visits with so much assiduity; what
is the object of his greatest cares, but to choose well a Perriwig, or a point
of France? and if he strive at higher conversation, perhaps he gives well his
judgment upon a Madrigal, or some piece of the Stage, provided always that he
has heard some person speak of it before who knew how to judge of it better
then himself.

But if it be a pitiful life to go from Chamber to Chamber, without other
design then to relate and hear trifles, I think a passionate and conceited
lover is not less ridiculous, when instead of fixing himself to what decency
requires, in a great company, he only dreams on his particular engagement; he
is hardly placed according to his design, but he begins to speak and fool with
the Lady he loves, as if he was not observed; whilst the persons who compose
the Assembly are continually casting their eyes upon him to find matter of
laughter at his looks and countenance. Also there is nothing to be seen more
pleasant or extravagant then a man who having only regard to his own thoughts
and passions, expresses his joy and his sorrow at unseasonable times, he
laughs at a place where all the Company is serious or sorrowful, he sighs or
appears pensive when we hear the Company laugh from every side, and see no
marks but of rejoicing.

We must visit Ladies after another manner and with a different intention; It
is not only permitted us, to pretend to a general esteem or to a place amongst
their particular friends, but I may say, even that the design to render our
selves beloved, may produce very good effects, to aspire to this advantage, we
must acquire all the qualities of a truly accomplished man, we must have wit,
sweetness, and complaisance; we must be brave, civil, honest, liberal, and have
something of free, gallant, and noble in our action and discourse.

Above all, it is necessary to have a kind and open air, to shun all sort of
equivocations, we must not be too obstinate in our opinions, never
contradicting nor continuing to speak too long of a matter unpleasing, or of
little importance. Is there any thing more importunate then a Lawyer, who
relates the particularities of a long process, or more tedious and offensive to
those who are not concerned; what a charming diversion is it to a Lady to hear
them speak of contempts, and forclusions, and estoppels, and to cite a thousand
other terms as barbarous? whereof notwithstanding they make but too often use
of in those affairs where they are not required: a sick man who complains
continually of his indisposition, is in my opinion yet more insupportable, he
is not content to disturb the company by the relation of his Colic and Megrim,
but he goes further, and tells them all the remedies he is prescribed. Those
persons who have collected Tales and Hystories to be ready to relate on every
occasion, weary in a strange manner, those persons who hearken to them; they
relate upon every subject, with a thousand unprofitable and languishing
circumstances, what they have prepared in an Alphabetick order, and they lie in
ambush for any common place, which may furnish them plentiful matter for a long
discourse.

I should fall into the fault which I reprehend, if I should number all the
species of these great talkers, and what disturbances they cause every minute
in a Civil Society. Besides it is in vain to enlarge upon a subject, against
which so many Modern Authors have made such pleasant Satyrs in Verse and Prose.
I only say, that we may upon occasion speak of all these things, so that our
relations be not too long: we must speak in a manner unperplexed, succinct and
pleasant. It is permitted (when we are asked the question) to speak in a few
words, in wha^ consists a malady; and it is not forbidden (...) to speak of a
suit in Law, which hinders us from paying some duty of Civility, or which
oblies us to some extraordinary attendance and solicitation, we may speak
sometime of Stuffs, or points, and it is always good to know so much in both,
as may keep us as well from being deceived when we have occasion to buy, as to
be able to give our Judgment, when it is the subject of the conversation which
often happens amongst Ladies: but in all these subjects, we must pass presently
to others, and re animate the entertainment, when we see it languish.

This Art of varying the discourse we owe to Ladies, because they have
ordinarily more of delicateness then knowledge, so that they take only the
flower of things, being not willing to penetrate too far: we are also indebted
to them for one part of the reputation we obtain, for since every one has
Complaisance for their sentiments, and as they praise us with more freedom then
persons of the same Sex and Profession, the good opinion they give of us,
spreads insensibly, and establishes it self in our favor.

To what I have already said, These few Maxims may yet be added: It is
necessary that a man who visits Ladies wear always good clothes, even to
magnificence, if he may do it without impairing his fortune: the expense we
make in habits bears us through all, as an Ingenious man once said, it opens
all doors to us, and always procures us an obligeing reception, and as the
exterior part striking first the sight, is that which makes the first
Impression in our Spirits, doubtless we ought to take some care to render that
Impression favorable. Yet we must not imagine that we are best-habited when
our clothes are rich above the mode: on the Contrary, we cannot any way exceed
it without being guilty of extravagance, and if we judge of the humor of a
man, (as we often do) by the manner of wearing his clothes, what esteem can we
have for those persons, who by this kind of folly, appear to be men of another
Country, and age, amongst those persons who have seen their birth.

The most Important thing which regards the entertainment of Ladies, is to shun
all manner of equivocations, since it is certain they very seldom please, I
speak even of words which have no certain signification, yet wound the
Imagination; for as for those words which conceal a dishonest sense, they are
only for Rusticks and Debauched persons, not tha^ they are entirely banished
from conversation, many of our moderns have happily made use of them, in
conversation, and in their writings. Cicero, who without doubt was the greatest
master of beautiful words, has not always disdained to use them.

When he had upbraided a man with the baseness of his extraction, and the man
had told him that he understood him not, yet thou have thy ears pierced,
replied Cicero, signifying by that repartee, that he was of a servile
condition, because the Romans use to pierce the ears of their slaves.

Finally, it is necessary, that those who frequent the company of Ladies, know
how to perform with a good grace, all the exercises suitable to persons of their
age and profession, especially to dance, and to ride the horse well, always
taking heed, not to apply themselves so absolutely, to acquire one of those
qualities, as to neglect all the other, it is better that a Gentleman possess
all equally, then to pass simply for a good horseman, or a fine dancer. If one
of these qualities be so preheminent as to eclipse the luster of the other, the
gallant who possesses it, would be oftentimes exposed to repent himself of his
skill, for if he gave himself too much to dancing, none would speak to him but
of a Corant or a Mask; and if in the other he spent the greatest part of his
life, none would ask his opinion but upon a B^rb or some Spanish horse. Our
nation loves better, that a person of quality be indifferently accomplished in
many things, then extremely skilful in one alone.

This is not my particular opinion, we may observe it is conformable to what
the Ancient Romans had in the flourishing estate of their Republic.

To conclude, in the Comoedies of Terence, a father speaking of the conduct of
his son, says that till then, he had had no cause to complain, having taken
care, that the young man had only given himself to the chase, to prepare his
horses, or to other honest exercises, without applying himself to any of those
occupations with too much attention, and without affecting to gain more skill
in one then in another.

Yet it is necessary to conclude with this important distinction, that we
cannot apply our selves too much to things which regard the profession we have
embraced, since it is to this labor, and particular diligence, we are indebted
for those famous men, which we have in all the Arts and Sciences.

There are three sorts of persons, who possess different different degrees in
the favor of Ladies, the witty man, the aerie and conversable fop, and the
sober and prudent man.

The first place for the humor of ingenious women, I assign to the witty man,
though it is a very difficult thing to determine what wit is, (those who having
had the greatest pretentions to it, finding themselves at a loss when they
fought to define it) yet it is observed that those men who have that reputation,
are generally men of a nimble and volatile spirit, such are impatient of
laborious studies, and whose active thoughts run over a thousand several
objects in a minute, esteeming it a thing too painful, to fix long upon one,
this renders them more capable to please, and to raise diversion out of every
small occurrence, and when in one scene he has given you all the delight he
can, he shifts into another, never continuing any discourse so long till it
become disgustful, it is this humor (so conformable to the humor of that Sex)
which makes his visits never unacceptable, and his departure never without
regret.

The Conversable Fop, is such a one who can indifferently discourse of what he
has heard or seen, but if he venture to wade farther into any discourse, it is
always found very shallow; he is a man of an amarous and flexible disposition,
and has always leisure enough to give a fair Lady a treat, to wait on her to a
Play, to a Ball, or to the Park; all which please the Ladies very much, giving
them the opportunity of making ostentation of their beauty and gallantry; This
pretty gossiping humor in women, the French call by the name of Coquetrie, and
indeed so great a part is this of the essence of those Ladies, who have any
pretense to beauty, that he who cannot Comply with them in it, must not expect
to be very agreeable to'em.

Besides, the Fop obliges the Ladies to no constraint or vigilance over their
words and actions, having a full ^^berty to say what they please, without being
thought vain, or foolish, by a man who knows not what it is in himself or in
others, it is enough for him to be laughed at, and to laugh for Company; and
perhaps renders his Company every whit as desirable as that of the wittiest
man on earth.

The sober and prudent man has the least portion in the esteem of Ladies, for
being a person thoughtful, and his head busied with other affairs, then with
stratagems to Conquer a Mistress, accosts the Ladies with a countenance that
shows the distraction of his thoughts, not being able to banish the last
thought that pleased him, to assume those which are more gallant and fit for
the present entertainment; Nay though he does not condemn those little
Complaisances, which are usually paid to women, and allows that a man may show
himself ingenious enough in discoursing of trivial things; yet notwithstanding
some repugnancy, controuls the freedom, and aier with which such things should
be spoken; those Ladies who are acquainted with his reputation, though they
entertain no mean opinion of him for this behavior, yet they presently find
themselves infected with the like constraint, and by consequence, his Company
cannot be pleasing to'em, since it obliges them to stand too much upon their
guard, who of all creatures in the world are least able to be confined.

I shall conclude this Chapter with this general Rule, That the readiest way to
become agreeable in any Conversation, is to banish all distrust, and to be
confident that we are already so.

CHAP. XIII. Of Conversation with great men.
IN our Conversations with persons eminent for their dignity or fortune,
nothing gains so much upon them as Complaisance and respect; toward these all
inferiors ought to be disposed to demean themselves with all humility and
submission, and to manifest it in all their words, and actions, they must not
only in all entertainments use a sweet mildness and Complacential address, but
also reverence, being neither rough, servile, or flattering, for nothing more
engages the affections of men, then a handsome address and graceful language,
the first and greatest caution then that is to be observed, is that their
language be not only full of submission and humility, but of such a difference
as approaches to the abasing of our selves, for we are born in an age
extravagantly Complemental, nor ought we to be ashamed of an error so
universally received; Custom renders our Compliance legitimate, and to repine
were malepertness, and to condemn it, too great an arrogance; yet this
Compliance ought not to be totally eloigned from the regards of honesty and
justice, though I do not bind him up to the rules of that exact and Imaginary
virtue which are only to be found in the books of Philosophers and harangues of
malcontents, but there is a certain vulgar morality which I would not have
them to abandon, nor for any profit to render themselves base and unworthy.

Touching his actions, let him take heed that all his carriage, every motion of
his, whether he walk, stand, sit, or eat, that his hands, his eyes, his voice,
all have nothing that is boyish, affected, or distastful, but on the contrary,
that he manage all his actions, with such a mien and grace, as may evince, that
he reverenceth, and almost adores his superior, no profuse laughters, no
outcries or pierceing acclamations, no rude or Antic postures, no yawning or
frequent spitting, nothing that carries with it indecency, neglect or excessive
freedom, is to be tolerated, all that liberty, and negligence of garb which
some use when they would be debonair, and divert themselves from serious
cogitations, is to be confined to the Conversations of men of equal rank, and
quality, too great intimacy in this case is offensive, not but that at some
times, and for some moments, with some persons, a pleasant familiarity, nay
even a blunt freedom, may succeed well, but no man ever miscarried through
excess of respect, nor was disgraced for retaining a constant and proportionate
sense of the quality or merit of his superior; these are the sentiments, and
almost the very words, of Johannes Casa the Archbishop of Benevento, whose
discourse on this subject is very well rendered in English under the title of
the Arts of Grandeur and Submission, to which I commend the Reader. In which
discourse the secret paths and method of that Art is so well explained, that I
dare not venture to make any greater excursion into his province.

I shall only add a few means how to remedy and support the injuries of great
men.

The first remedy to prevent the effects of their enmity, is to treat with them
with all respect, without presuming to too much familiarity, or too much
importuning them with our Company or Intrusion.

The second is to dissemble with patience the resentment that we have; we act
not safely or wisely to present our selves with defiance in our mouth, or
casting out menaces in quarrels so disproportionate, the power of those who
have done us wrong without cause, excusing in this our dissimulation.

I know that some think, that the threats we make them who have offended us,
may affright them to seek a reconciliation with us, and that indeed may move
men of poor spirits to a feigned reconciliation, but not a true; for they w'ont
cease underhand to offend us, when they have the means, or a secret
opportunity; so that it being much more difficult to secure us from a
Clandestine then an open enemy, it seems more safe and advantageous for us to
continue them our enemies then to compel them to reconciliation by terror, but
this I intend should hold place only amongst equals, from whose Company we may
sequester our selves without prejudice to our Credit or interest.

For where the opinion of our being hated by our superiors may bring any
damage to our affairs or any diminution to our credit, a feigned reconciliation
is to be preferred before an open enmity.

If we find our selves hated for an offense we have committed to another, as
the ill proceeds from us, so we ought to think our selves obliged to repair it,
either by our selves or the means and intermise of our frinds.

But to judge which of our enemies may most obstruct us, after we have
considered their power, we must also take care by what passion (besides hate)
they are moved to oppose us.

For the hate of some spring from the thirst of vengeance, others from fear
that if we obtain what we pursue, we should be rendered more capable to oppress
them. Now though the desire of vengeance be very violent yet fear pushes on our
enemy to oppose us with a greater passion, and it is much more difficult to
effect a change upon him who is thrust on by the former, then on him who is
precipitated by the latter.

We may vanquish the one by good Offices services and satisfaction, but he who
fears and distrusts, cannot without much difficulty be persuaded that he is
secure.

The only means is to reconcile our selves to them, and by many expressions of
a sincere change and friendship, revive their confidence of us, in which every
man must manage his several occasions, there being nothing certain which can be
prescribed.

With these few considerations I content my self, and pass on to discourse of
Complaisance in Conversation practicable to our superiors, equals and
inferiors, and to persons of all ages, qualities and fortunes, in which
general manner I principally intended to treat of this subject.

CHAP. XIV. How to be Complaisant to persons of all humors, ages, and
conditions.
It Is the general practice for men to proportion their respects according to
the quality, wealth or merit of those to whom they address them, but since
amongst those who pretend to no more then being Gentlemen, there appears no
difference of quality, for every one is not presumed so much a Herald, as to
know how ancient every man's family is with whom he converses, and indeed there
are few who will not take it as an affront, that any should pretend to be
better Gentlemen then themselves; and since men's estates or fortunes are often
concealed, and those of lesser fortunes desire their hopes should be thought to
balance the possessions of the others: and lastly since every man has some
pretentions, to wit and merit, none being willing to yield precedence to his
Competitor. I cannot approve their procedure, who thus too strictly give to
every one what is their due, as a practice capable to raise more enemies then
friends.

I shall therefore once more lay down this Rule, that he who would be
Complaisant, and oblige in Conversation, must perfectly learn the inclinations,
and the various motions of the will of man, and as much as he can conform or
accommodate himself to all his affections; for this reason I shall endeavor to
expose these different motions, beginning first with Choler.

The Person which is agitated with this passion, openly complains of an injury
received, amplifies it, and has a spirit full of vengeance, he is prompt in his
enterprises, fearless of danger, seeks rather the means to execute, then to
enter into consideration of what he is about to do, he pursues his rash designs
with precipitation, speaks ill of him who has offended him, raises him all the
enemies he can, and by his Countenance mainfests that passion in various and
different forms, his face changes color, he speaks with impetuosity and
confusion, looking sometimes wildly, casting his inflamed eyes, sometimes here
and sometimes there.

He who would accommodate himself to him who is transported with this passion,
must imitate him in some of his actions, and seem as if his anger proceeded
from the same cause, blaming the person who has done it, praising vengeance,
approving his promptitude, boldness, and resolution to revenge, and the like.

In short, in all those hasty and violent resolutions which choler may produce,
we must seek to defer the execution, by the most specious pretexts we can
founding that delay, (if possible) upon such considerations, that we see
already embraced by the passionate man.

It is charity in this occasion to deceive our friend, when it is to divert him
from designs full of violence and hazard, and Complaisance to act after such a
manner, that we seem not to accuse or reproach him by avowing contrary
sentiments to his.

With a person of a sweet nature, and contrary disposition to Choler, we must
take the contrary method, for such persons are usually free from thoughts of
vengeance, speaking with much humanity even of those who have offended them,
diminishing in excusing the injury received, considering the difficulties, and
the dangers they may meet with in their revenge, they grant they ought not to
suffer themselves to be vanquished by that passion, but that they ought to
proceed with reason, and with Counsel, and are content with any moderate
satisfaction.

If we would accommodate our selves to such persons, we may promise the
resistance they make to the impetuosity of choler and to the desire of revenge.
And their wisdom, in poising the injury with the qualities of him who has done
it, and of him who has received it.

The fearful man takes into consideration all kinds of dangers, how small so
ere they are, the evil seems to approach nearer then it does, he is afraid and
allarmed at all things, his hopes are feeble, and he is distrustful even of
things that are certain, he often changes his advice and Counsel, and always
slotes in irresolution, turning himself on that side where there appears least
danger, though it be less honorable, aggravates the present danger, forgetful
of himself and those persons which are most dear to him, preferring always
before them his own security; he betrays his fear by many gestures and
countenances, changing often his visage, growing pale, speaking confusedly,
inconstantly, and with many interruptions.

To accommodate our selves to this passion, we must endeavor to justify his
fears by reason, calling wisdom and providence the mother of security, blaming
the resolution which founds it self upon vain hopes, and calling it temerity to
act otherwise, and sometimes showing as if we were struck with fear; we may
excuse what we cannot praise without some kind of shame.

On the contrary if we have any affair with a man full of confidence, who
enters not into consideration of any thing which may bring fear or damage and
who thinks he is able to defend himself from misfortunes, amplifying the means
that he has, and diminishing the evil and the danger; being prompt to hazard
and to put his designs in execution; accompanying all his actions with a
Countenance full of joy, and a speech bold, constant and resolute; we may
remember him of his condition, quality, power and credit, which gives us all
assurance, that he will obtain what he enterprises, diminishing the peril and
hazard, exalting his providence, and the means that he has in his hands; let us
also praise the promptness of his resolutions, the constancy of his pursuit,
and his courage to execute, and if occasion present, let us show that we have
(in our own affairs) followed his method of procedure.

But if we would accommodate our selves to a person who is touched with some
shame, considering that such persons (who complain, and are grieved when there
falls out any thing which gives them shame, and strive to conceal it or excuse
themselves, confessing their fault (being discovered), and showing by their
penitence, that they are jealous of their honor, or reputation,) take no
pleasure to have the remembrance of the cause of their shame revived.

With these kind of persons, therefore let us seem as if we were grieved at the
displeasure they resent, and that we unwillingly enter into the discourse of
it, and tell him such shame proceeds from a nature very commendable, and
jealous of honor, and that there is no man, who is not subject to such
accidents, whereof in the end, time, or some contrary action will efface the
memory.

But if we encounter with persons shameless, and Impudent, considering that
such persons suffer not any displeasure, shame or repentance, from any thing
they commit, how dishonest so e're it be, but on the contrary, praise and
excuse their actions, and sometimes speak of them with pleasure, having no
regard to the injury such things do to their reputation, hating and contemning
those who do contrary or find fault with their actions.

If we cannot disingage our selves from such Lind of persons we must, as the
saying is, howl with the Wolves, and with them, blame, and contemn that too
great regard that is given to the opinion and censure of men, to which those
who subject themselves are slaves, and are deprived of an infinite of pleasures
and conveniences, accusing those (who regulate themselves by that measure) of
too great severity and simplicity.

To accommodate our selves to him, who has a particular affection to another,
(knowing that such persons praise, openly, honor, respect, defend, and excuse
whom they love) we must show that we approve the choice and the election he
has made, and praise the constancy of his affections, and the Offices done to
them he loves.

But to him who hates another, If we are forced in that to comply with him, we
may blame the person hated, aggravate the actions and ill offices he has done
him, and seeming as if we should rejoice at any ill which should befall him, and
be troubled at the good, charging the fault upon him, and amplify the injury
he has done to the other.

But because our good will or affection appears not but by the effects, which
are comprised under the name of Courtesy, we must know, persons which are thus
disposed are ready to do a pleasure, rejoicing when occasion is presented,
watching the time, place, and conditions of the persons, which may invite and
give them the means to an act of kindness, they are pleased that they are the
first in doing of Courtesies, and blaming those who do contrary; are very
joyful to be accounted such, and to be beloved, cherished, honored, praised
and respected for this reason; with such persons, we must praise their
readiness to do Courtesies; let us show our selves very much contented when
they present to us any occasion to imitate their example, and let us be careful
to acknowledge, either by way of thanks, or by other benefits, that which we
have received.

If we have to do with ungrateful persons, (whose Company I shall always
Counsel to fly, as much as it shall be possible), we may diminish the pleasure
received, blame the intention of him who did it, remonstrating, that it is hard
that he should be charged with an obligation without just cause, and that wise
men know very well how to make a distinction betwixt a real favor, and what
are feigned or but counterfeit.

Those who are of a kind and loving nature, are also accompanied with pity and
compassion toward others, commiserating, and lamenting the ills of the person
afflicted, showing not only themselves sensible, how unworthy such persons
(whom they lament) are of the ills they sustain, but also that they have cause
to fear, that as much may arrive to them, or to those whom they love, praising
often the patience, courage, conditions and qualities of the afflicted, condoling
and comforting them, and offering them their assistance and succor, and
sometimes with sighs and tears giving signs of their compassion; in the same
manner we may demean our selves, according as the quality of the ill, and
decency requires.

Those who are transported with indignation for the good which arrives to any
one without merit, are accustomed to debase and diminish his qualifications and
desert, and to cast out complaints of the condition of humane affairs, and of
the blindness of fortune.

The envious almost demean themselves after the same fashion, but to gratify
him the more, we may enter into a Comparison of him who envies, with him who is
envied, exalting the merit of the envious, and lessening that of the person
envied, summoning together all the ill actions of the last, which are most
worthy of hate or contempt.

But men of these dispositions, being such as a Gentleman ought to shun, he
will not need to engage himself in these Complaisances, but when he is forced
by some grand consideration, and then, with such discretion, as honesty and
prudence demands.

As to joy and sorrow, they govern differently, for joy admits not willingly
sorrow into its company, but sorrow may be in such a degree, that the sorrowful
will freely admit a joyful and pleasant man, provided that he know how to
insinuate sweetly; for if in the midst of a deep sorrow, any one come to play
the Buffoon, he renders himself disagreeable and importunate, but if suffering
to pass over the violence of the grief, and accommodating himself for a time,
some discourse may happen, that from thence we may slide to another, and by
degrees enter into a discourse which may prove pleasing to the afflicted
person, and assuage his sorrow.

For the nature of man, being more inclined to pleasure then to things irksome,
the former being presented with address, he embraces it more willingly.

But indeed, this rather regards divertisement than Complaisance, which amongst
persons in sorrow obliges us to silence, when we cannot in decency imitate the
Countenances of those who are in affliction.

As to joy, every one knows how to counterfeit it, and he who intermixes some
praises of him with whom we would comply, shall be yet more welcome. I should
be too long to represent all the different manners of behavior, which proceed
from our interior motions, and that would not only be tedious, but also
unprofitable, this being sufficient to comprehend how we ought to govern our
selves upon all other occasions.

I shall only give this advice, by the way, not to Ape foolish and ridiculous
countenances, as did the Courtiers of Alexander, who carried their heads more
inclined to one side than another, because Alexander carried his after that
manner.

It is true, that sometimes we are constrained to imitate the vices and
debauches, as well as the virtues of those with whom we converse. Alcibiades
being at Athens, was both Orator and Philosopher; amongst the Lacedaemonians, he
showed himself austere and severe in his life; with the Thracians, he not only
used to make himself spruce, but to drink lustily; with the Ionians, he was
voluptuous, jovial and fantastic; and with the Persians, sumptuous and
splendid in his habit and other accoutrements, according to the humor of that
luxurious Nation.

Such spirits are very proper in the Court, where we must comply and render our
selves easy to conform to all kind of humors and manners, without being
perceived to be guilty of constraint.

This shall suffice, touching the difference of persons, which proceeds from
the diversity of our interior conditions. Next I pass to the exterior, which
being also infinite, I shall only take notice of those, which may serve to know
the interior, or such which are most remarkable in conversation.

CHAP. XV. Of the difference of persons, in their outward Conditions,
proceeding from their Age.
THose exterior conditions of persons, which may serve us to make a judgment
of their interior, proceed either from their age, or from their fortune. The
age of man may be divided into different parts, but those in which the
difference of manners are principally to be remarked, are youth, manhood, and
old age.

In youth we are usually lead by our wills, prompt to execute our desires,
ardent and incontinent in the pleasures of the body, often changing, and easily
glutted and distasted, even with our pleasures, which cannot endure long, no
more then all other things that are violent; we are easily transported to rage,
and for small things we abandon our selves to the impetuosity of Choler,
because that in this age, we being more passionate for honor, can less endure
contempt, but we are withal less covetous, not having yet proved what want is,
which is the reason that in this age, we are commonly superfluous and profuse
in our expenses.

There is also in youth less of malignity, and more of simplicity, then in
another state, because of their want of experience and consideration of the
world.

From hence it comes, that young men because they have not been often deceived,
are so swelled with hope, that they promise themselves all they desire, and also
because their hopes are greater then the memory of things past, for hope
regards what is to come, which is much greater in youth, then the remembrance
of past objects, they being also Choleric, and full of hopes, Choler is the
cause they enterprise all things promptly, and the hope they have to compass
their affairs makes them afraid of nothing, and to enter easily into a
confidence of themselves.

But they are also modest and respectuous, out of a reflection of their own
want of knowledge or experience, following rather splendid vanities than what
is profitable, and commonly friendship and love are more strong in that age
then in any other, because the consideration of profit, which sometimes
dissolves those amities, has less possession in the thoughts of young persons.

Yet though they are usually ignorant of many things, they ha^^ nothing the
less of presump^^^^, and thinking they know all, they stick not to assure all,
from whence it comes that they sometimes run beyond their bounds in their
designments, and in their opinions, inclining in all their affections toward
the extremities, whether it be in love or hate.

They always do injury rather by their insolence and petulance, then by malice,
they are easily moved to compassion, having a good opinion of all men, and
believing them better then they are, because the frequent practice of vice, in
regard of their age, is not so well known to them; this is the cause also that
having more innocence in them, they condemn vice by their judgments with more
severity, and the sanguine complexion ruling usually in that age, they are
sportive, delighting in mirth and gayety.

But old men, as they are of a contrary temperament, so their manners, and
their humors, are directly contrary to those of young people.

For having been long acquainted with the world, and often disappointed and
deceived, they assure nothing, nor promise themselves any thing, showing that
they hold all things as opinion and doubt, and nothing of science or certainty,
their courage and resolution of mind is weak, because in their lives they have
had many cross rencounters and repulses, speaking always doubtfully,
interpreting all things to the worst, and always representing to themselves the
ill side, and sometimes construe ill, things done with a good intention: they
are suspicious and distrustful, the effects of that fear which freezes their
hearts, and of the experience they have of the infidelity of men, they neither
love, nor hate with vehemence: they desire to live more then young men, because
that desire is commonly of things farthest removed from us, so that life being
a thing which daily retires from them, and having but a little to enjoy, they
desire what they want, that consideration in part, renders them more covetous,
because plenty is the means to preserve life, and in part the pain they have
sustained in the accumulation, the little hope they have to be able to do it,
in the short time which remains, and the easiness to lose the riches they have
already got.

The remembrance of what is past, renders them extreme talkative and sometimes
vain and Importunate, they grow easily angry, and very crabbed, but withal that
anger is always feeble.

As for the appetites common to men, part have abandoned them, and those few
which remain, have little force, from whence it comes that they suffer
themselves to be guided by their wills, measuring all by their gain and profit;
The injuries they do are with intentions to hurt, and not out of bravado; they
are full of compassion like the young, but that in them is weakness, and not
the goodness or bounty of their nature, or the effects of that innocence, which
ordinarily accompanies youth:

From these two extremities, it is easy to devine the humor of those who are in
their age of manhood which is equally eloigned from that confidence, and
presumption common to the young, and from the fear and distrust of the old:
thus using moderation in their manners, and in their judgment of affairs, they
deport themselves with circumspection, joining the profitable with the honest,
and assembling all the advantages which are separate from youth and old age,
the defects and excesses of both ages become more moderate in them.

CHAP. XVI. Of the difference of persons according to the condition of their
fortune.
WE now come to the difference which proceeds from the diverse conditions of
men's fortunes.

The four principal advantages which we receive from fortune, are Nobility,
Riches, Power and Happiness, to which, four disadvantages are opposed, which
may diversifie and change our manners of proceeding, by how much therefore that
our knowledge of the contrary, may illustrate the knowledge of what is opposed
to it, I shall content my self to represent here the inclinations, and manners
of those who possess these four advantages.

Men who are of Noble-birth, are more ambitious and more thirsty of honor then
others, it being the usual nature of men who possess any good, to endeavor to
increase it, and pride ordinarily accompanying those of this condition, they
not only contemn men of a base condition, but also those who are not so ancient
in their nobility as themselves.

The Rich are insolent and lofty, taking their confidence and courage from
their wealth, which they esteem to be the price of all things, and by
consequence, all things to be in their power, they are curious and delicate, as
well because these are the ordinary product of abundance, as to make
ostentation of their Grandeur.

They are ungrateful, arrogant, vindicative, boasters and vain; and because men
please themselves in thinking and speaking of what they love and admire, the
rich admiring and loving nothing so much as their riches, they speak ordinarily
of it, and glory themselves in it, believing that every one takes as much
pleasure in such things as themselves, so that in effect they are happy in
their folly.

But there is a very great difference between those who have been long rich and
descended from wealthy ancestors, and those who have attained to estates on a
sudden, these last being more imprudent, more avaricious, and more Insolent.

As to the injuries that the rich do, they are committed more out of insolence
and bravado, then with intentions to hurt.

Those who are powerful, and in some great authority, are almost of the like
humor: but they are more courageous and desirous of honor, and are not so
supine as the rich, for power being subject to surprise, and in perpetual
action, they had need be more vigilant and distrustful: their countenance has
something rather great then disdainful, and is much more modest then those who
are rich, being also accompanied with a moderate severity.

As to their injuries, they are great, according to their power, difficultly
reconciling themselves with those they distrust, and who show they resent
themselves offended by them.

Those who in all their actions have been attended with happiness, and success,
have all the humors of the Noble, Rich, and of men in Power, but they are yet
more arrogant, choleric and inconsiderate, expecting that all things should
wait upon their wishes, without control or opposition.

Besides, these differences which proceed, the differences of age, or the
various conditions of fortune, we must consider in Conversation, if the person
with whom we have any affair, be our Domestic, or a strange, ror our
confident; our equal, or unequal; inferior, or superior to us; of a good, or
ill nature; one that has a regard to speak truth, or a liar; whether pleasant,
gay and modest, or severe; haughty and interessed, or disinteressed: every one
of these qualities requiring a particular manner of address, for with our
Domestics and Confidents we must be free, with strangers distrustful, and more
reserved, we must honor Superiors, respect our equals, and toward our
Inferiors use Courtesy and sweetness.

We may also proceed with all security and confidence toward men of sincerity
and unsuspected integrity, but never give any credit to those who are
accustomed to lying, or who have not much reputation.

Toward those who are of agreeable Conversation, we must demean our selves
with much familiarity, with those who are severe, let us be more reserved and
treat with fewer words.

To the ambitious and haughty, let us pay all the honor they desire of us, and
seem to esteem them much, but with those who are humble and modest, let us live
without constraint, or any affectation; to the malevolent and malicious, let us
not give an ear, but in such a manner that they may not suspect that we take
them for such, and those who are full of good will and affection, let us render
all the testimonies of amity we can; with interessed persons, it is good to
demean our selves as wisely in what concerns their interest, and not believe
lightly what they say; on the contrary to those who are not interessed, we need
not be scrupulous in giving our credit. Having thus shown what measures we are
to observe from the difference of persons and their Conditions, there remains
little to be added to render us pleasing in the most difficult Conversation.
And therefore thus I conclude this small Treatise with this note, That the
practice of this Art is of a public as well as private advantage, for by its
influence on private dispositions, it allays the heat, and those unquiet
passions of hate and envy amongst Grandees, which very often makes such dreadful
eruptions, to the disturbance of the public peace and tranquillity, like sparks
thrown amongst Combustible matter, which too often are inflamed into an universal
conflagration; Besides, it will rescue us from the imputation of being people
of sullen and morose dispositions, and uneasy of access.

Hoc adulandi genus, gens prudentissima laudat.
FINIS.

