Sir Thomas Sherley of Wiston in the County of Sussex, was great Grandfather to
the Plaintiff. He had issue.
Three Sons.
Second Sir Anthony Sherley, the Plantiffs great Uncle: He dyed without issue.
First Sir Thomas Sherley his eldest Son, (the Plantiffs Grandfather*) He had
issue. Two Sons First Henry Sherley the Plantiffs Uncle, he dyed without issue
in the life of his Father. Second Thomas Sherley, afterward Sir Thomas Sherley
the Plantiffs Father. He had issue. Thmas Sherley who is the Plantiff.

Third Sir Robert Sherley the Plantiffs great Uncle. He dyed without issue
The Case of Thomas Sherley Esquire one of his Majesty's Physicians in Ordinary.
SIR Thomas Sherley the Elder, the Plantiffs great Grandfather was seized in
Fee of the Manor of Wiston, and diverse other Manors and Lands in the County
of Sussex, to the yearly value of more then three thousand pounds. The said Sir
Thomas Sherly half a year before his Death, did by Indenture bearing date the
29 Novemberis, nono Iacobi. Settle the said Manors upon himself and Dame Anne
his Wife during their lives, and after their Decease to Sir Thomas Sherley his
Eldest Son the Plantiffs Grandfather for Life, and after his Decease to Henry
Sherley the Plantiffs Uncle for Life, and after his Decease to the Sons of the
said Henry successively in Tail male; And for default of such issue to Thomas
Sherley afterward Sir Thomas Sherley the Plantiffs Father (and Brother to the
said Henry) for Life, and after his Decease to the first, second, third, and
fourth sons, etc. of the said Thomas in Tail male; And the Plantiff as only son
of the said Thomas, by virtue of the said Settlement is alone entitled to the
said Estate.

But diverse Persons having got into Possession of the said Manors are combined
together to defraud the Plantiff and especially one Sir John Fagg, who is got
into possession of the chief Manor, and a house that cost three and thirty
thousand Pound building, as the Plantiff is informed, and several Lands and
Tenements, to the value of Eight hundred Pound per annum: As the Plantiff
verily believes And also for ten pounds in Money, and a Horse or Mare, worth
six: Has gotten into his Custody by the delivery of one Francis Whatker, the
said Deed of Settlement, without which the Plaintiff cannot recover his Estate
from the said Sir John Fagg, nor other Lands contained in the said Settlement.

The Plaintiff has sued Sir John Fagg by English Bill, in the High Court of
Chancery for discovery of the said Deed, to which he put in a Plea to the said
Bill before the then Lord Chancellor: the Substance whereof is only that he is
a purchaser of the said House and Lands, for the Consideration of Six thousand
Eight hundred pounds; which he calls a valuable Consideration, though in truth
he derives no Title from any of the Plaintiff's Ancestors, nor denies notice of
the Plantiff's Title. And yet the said Plea being argued the Court allowed of
the same, and dismissed the Plantiff's Bill out of Chancery, which dismission
is signed and Enrolled, whereby the Plantiff is Ruined, and left without remedy
either at Law or Equity, to recover his estate of three thousand pound Per
Annum; gotten from him as a foresaid, without any manner of Consideration
either to him or any of his Ancestors under whom the Plantiff claims. And for
want of the said Deed, the Plantiff has no way to obtain relief, or compel the
said Sir John Fagg, to produce the said Settlement without his Address to the
Right Honorable the house of Lords, the supreme Court of Equity.

Now the said Decree of Dismission of the Plantiffs Bill out of Chancery being
very Erroneous, and the matter of Fact being mistated and there being many
Errors in Fact in the said proceedings for which the said Decree and Order of
Dismission ought to be reversed, and as the Case stands the Plantiff cannot
maintain or assign any Bill of Reveiw for the same in the Court of Chancery
according to the strict Rules of that Court the Plantiff has therefore by
Petition Appealed from the said Decree and Order of dismission to the Right
Honorable the House of Lords where he hops the same will be examined and
Reversed

The substance of the Plantiffs desires are, that their Lordships would be
pleased to cause the said Deed of settlement to be produced before them and
restored to the Plantiff, and to do him what further Justice their Lordships in
their great Wisdom shall think fit; to which the Plantiff submits both himself
and cause.

Thomas Sherley


