THE CASE OF THE FANN-MAKERS; Who have Petitioned the Honorable House of
Commons, against the Importation of Fanns from the East Indies.
THE Petitioners are several Tradesmen, and Artificers, who are concerned in
the manufacture of Fanns, in which great Numbers of Men, Women and Children,
used to be constantly Employed, some in making the Sticks, Papers, Leathers,
and in Ordering and Stiffning of the Silks, others in Painting, Varnishing, and
Japanning, and in preparing other Materials wherewith Fanns are made, by which
there used to be Yearly consumed great Quantities of Silk, Paper, Leather,
Wire, and several Tunns of Whale-bone, Tortoise-shell, Ivory, Box, Ebony, and
other sorts of Wood, which were Imported from Turkey, Russia, and other Foreign
Parts, to the Increase of His Majesty's Customs, and to the great Benefit and
Advantage of our Woollen Manufacture, for which such Foreign Goods were bought
in Exchange; so that by the making of Fanns here at home, not only the Woollen
Manufacture, and the King's Customs are greatly advanced, but abundance of Poor
People are continually kept at Work. All which Advantages to the Commonwealth
are now likely to be destroyed, by the Importation of vast Quantities of Fanns
from the East Indies, from whence there have been lately brought over above a
130000, though scarce half that Quantity has been Entered in the Custom-house,
the rest having been Fraudulently conveyed on Shore by the Seamen and others,
without paying any Duty; and as for the Duty which is paid, it is but
inconsiderable, in comparison of the Duty which arises from the Commodities
Imported from Turkey, Russia, and other Foreign Parts, which are consumed here
about the Fanns; and besides formerly great Quantities of our own Fanns have
been Exported, for which a considerable Duty used to be paid to the King; so
that it is hoped that this Honorable House will think fit to Prohibit the
Importation of Indian Fanns, and Fan-sticks, as well as Silks and Callicoes;
for that thereby, not only the Woollen Manufacture, and His Majesty's Customs
are considerably Lessened and Impaired; but also Multitudes of Poor Artificers,
and their Families will be reduced to a Deplorable Condition. And many of them
for want of Work are already become a Burden to the several Parishes where
they Inhabit.


