The CASE of the Glass-makers in and about the City of London.
I. THE Glass Manufacture is very beneficial and advantageous to this Nation,
and might be much more improved, if sufficiently encouraged, and much greater
Quantities exported, if Foreigners were not enabled to undersell us in Foreign
Markets; which they can do, not only from the high Duties on Salt Petre,
Berilla, Foreign Ashes, and other Materials used in the said Manufacture, N.B.
Saltpetre is double the Value in London to what it is in Holland.
but from the Difference between the Duties on our own Coals brought Coastwise,
particularly into the Port of London, and on those exported abroad.

s. d. The several Duties on Coals spent at London, amount to per Chaldron 9 2
The Duty on Coals exported, (if laid on London Measure) is but per Chaldr. 3 0
The Difference in favor of Foreigners, is per Caldr. 6 2

Which considering the great Quantity of Coals spent in the working of a small
Quantity of Glass, makes a very great Difference in the Value of it when
wrought.

II. Besides the Advantage given to Foreigners, by furnishing them with
Materials for underworking us at cheaper Prices than to our Natives; the Duties
on Exportation of British Glass is a great Hindrance to its being exported
abroad, whilst the French King, for the enabling his Subjects to afford their
Glass cheap, gives to the Manufacturers thereof their Fuel gratis.

III. As there are continually new Manufactures of Glass setting up in the
Northern Parts of Europe, particularly Muscovy, Hamburgh, Prussia, etc. it is
necessary also to regulate the Duties on Foreign Glass imported, so as that
Foreigners may not be enabled to undersell us at home as well as abroad, which
would be the total Ruin of the Manufacture.

IV. The Duties now laid on the Importation of Foreign Glass are some of them
too low, particularly those on Normandy or Crown Glass, which as the Duties now
stand would in Time of Peace be imported cheaper from France than our own Crown
Glass can be afforded at; and others of them, particularly all Looking-glass
Plates of above 12 Inches in Length (which was the largest Size known when the
Act of Tonnage and Poundage passed) pay Duties ad valorem, which is to be
proved by the Oaths of the Importers; and there are but too many instances to
prove, that such Oaths are little regarded, whereby the Intent of the Duties
will be lost. Whereas were the low Duties advanced, and the Duties now laid ad
Valorem put upon the Measure and Size, according to which the Value of Glass
Plates is settled, the same would effectually prevent any Collusion or
Avoidance of the Duties.

The Glass-makers therefore humbly pray the Honorable House of Commons to give
them such Relief in the Duties abovementioned, as they shall think most proper
for the Encouragement of so useful a Manufacture.

THE CASE OF THE Glass-makers, Relating to the Duties on COALS, and on GLASS
Exported and Imported.


