THE CASE of the Bailiffs and Burgesses Of the BOROUGH of DROYTWICH In the
County of WORCESTER.
KING John by Charter in the 17th. year of his Reign, granted to the Burgesses
of Wych, and their Heirs, all he had in Wych, together with the Salt Springs,
Liberties, Customs, and Apurtinances under a Fee-Farm Rent of 100 l. Sterling
per annum, by virtue of which Grant, the Burgesses became seized of the Salt
Springs in Fee.

There have all along been Three Salt Springs or Pits, two in Nether-Wych, and
one in Vp-Wych, within the Liberties of Droytwich; and the salt Water springing
in the two Pits in Nether-Wych has been divided into Thirty two Shares or
Parts, called Bullaries or Phats; and the Water springing in the Pit in Vp-Wych
into about 372.

The said Burgesses have always been a Body Politic, and sent Members to
Parliament, 26 Edv. primi (before any other Charter was granted to them) and
have made Bylaws for the Regulation and Government of the Salt Works, and two
of them were yearly elected Bailiffs for collecting the Fee-Farm Rent, and
putting the Bylaws in execution: For the payment of which Rent, and for the
maintenance of the Rights and Customs of the Corporation, they give 1000 l.
Security when they enter into Office.

The Burgessship has descended from Ancestor to Heir, and for supportation of
the Corporation, it has been the usuage and custom of making Burgesses two
ways, viz. A Burgess by Birth has had power to make his younger Children,
Brothers or Sisters Burgesses, by granting to each a quarter of a Bullary or
Phat of inheritance, which is called Adoption; and the Burgesses at their
general Assemblies have had power, by unanimous consent, to elect any Person
having a quarter of a Bullary or Phat of Inheritance a Burgess, and without
such share of Inheritance none could be made or continue a Burgess.

The Burgesses have granted several of the said Shares of Salt Water to other
Persons, but no part of the Soil of the said Pits, which still remains in the
Burgesses, and the Purchasers have right only to Proportions of the Salt Water,
in the same manner as Tenants have to Harbage where the Soil is the Lords, and
were never esteemed Burgesses, or admitted to Vote in their Assemblies, but
were always distinguished from the Burgesses, and are called Commoners; and
when any Commoner purchased or aliened Possession was delivered and received by
a Burgess by Letter of Attorney, and no Commoner has any Possession in the Pits,
nor can call any Brine his own before it be delivered to him by the Bailiffs.

The Burgesses are now about Fifty five, who have about 150 Shares or Phats;
there are about Sixty Commoners, who have about 100 Shares, and are satisfied
with the present Government; and the Commoners who complain are about Thirty
five, and have about 150 Shares.

The Bailiffs desray all public Charges relating to the Salt Works, and a
Month before the expiration of their Office, deliver their Accounts to the
Town Clerk, where all Persons concerned in the Salt Works may have Copies, and
liberty to object against them at the general Assembly or great House before
they are passed, which is always held upon a day certain. And all Orders made
at the lesser Assemblies are controulable at the next General Assembly or great
House.

The Bailiffs have an Allowance in Salt Water for satisfaction of their
Disburstments.

That several of the Commoners exhibited a Bill in Chancery complaining of
mis-management of the Salt Works by the Bailiffs and Burgesses, and 8 Car.
prim. the Cause came to hearing before the late Lord Keeper Coventry who (as a
Purchaser) had a Considerable Estate of Inheritance; and a Decree was then made
by consent of all Parties, whereby the Customs of the Corporation were
affirmed, and the Right of Government of the Salt Works declared to be in the
Burgesses, and has been so adjudged upon several Trials at the Bar, and no
Judgment has ever been given to the contrary.

The Commoners, who are now Prosecutors, and would have the Government,
exhibited a Bill in Chancery about Four Years since, setting forth, That every
Person who has a quarter of a Phat of Inheritance, ought to be admitted to
Vote as a Burgess; and complaining of the like mis-management of the Salt
Works, upon hearing of which Cause 7 Junii 1687. the Bill, as to the pretense
of Burgesship, was dismissed, and it was referred to a Master of the Court, to
examine into the matter of the other Complaints, who has certified the Bailiffs
and Burgesses have acted pursuant to the Customs, and the Matter is at this
time before that Court: And if the Burgesses do any injury in the management of
the Salt Works, the Commoners may have redress either at the Law, or in Equity.

That some of the Plantiffs in that Suit, the Second of July 1687. petitioned
the late King for a Quo warranto against the Corporation, who vigorously
prosecuted the same; and also Informations against several of the Burgesses in
their private Capacities, who for making their lawful Defense, were petitioned
against to the late King, by those who obtained the Quo warranto; by which
means the Corporation was at last forced to surrender, not only the Charter
granted by King John, by which they held their Estates, but also their other
Charters of Incorporations.

There have been several Phats and parts of Phats given and allowed to the
Schoolmasters of the Free School, in lieu whereof, they have time out of mind
had Salaries paid by the Bailiffs, and if the Government be changed, that
Charity may be defeated.

As the Corporation had its Original from, and is founded upon the Salt Works,
and purely supported by them, out of which the Bailiffs, Recorder, Town Clerk,
Sergeants at Mace, and other Officers, have always had Allowances or Salaries;
and if those Allowances and this Usuage or Custom of making Burgesses be taken
away, the Corporation must consequently dissolve.


