The CASE of the Company of WHITE-PAPER-Makers: Humbly presented to the
Consideration of this present Parliament.
THE Manufacture of Writing and Printing-Paper being stablished in England,
will employ many Thousands of Poor People, and keep vast Sums of Money in the
Nation, which have been sent over Yearly into France, to pay for the said
Commodity; and (if encouraged) may in Time be so far advanced, as not only to
prove a Staple-Manufacture here at Home, but also be sufficient to furnish our
English Plantations, and other Places Abroad who now Trade with France for the
same.

His late Majesty being fully convinced thereof, granted diverse Letters Patent
to several Persons, for their respective Inventions, of making White-Writing,
and Printing-Paper: And the several Patentees proceeding upon such their
Inventions, which were for making but one and the same thing, tho by different
Methods, found, that their Separate Interests, did but Undermine and Prejudice
each other, and threatened the Ruin of the Whole; not only by raising
Workmens-Wages, and the Price of Materials, but by many other great
Inconveniences, which being proved upon several Hearings, and Debates, before
the late King, He, by the Advice of his Council, united the separate Interests,
and Incorporated them, by the Name of the Governor and Company of
White-Paper-Makers; and granted them the sole Power of making White-Writing and
Printing-Paper for Fourteen Years.

The Company having purchased, and erected diverse Mills for the carrying on the
said Manufacture; and the French King having notice thereof, did command his
late Ambassador, Monsieur Berillon, to use his utmost Endeavors to ruin the
Manufacture, who by himself, and others, with great Sums of Money, seduced and
carried away the Companies Workmen from their Mills, and raised other very
great Oppositions against them, to their Detriment and Expense of several
Thousands of Pounds, as was apparently proved before the late King in Council,
and by a Trial at Bar in the Court of King's Bench.

Notwithstanding all which, and many other Difficulties, the Company have
perfectly set up the Manufacture, and make as good Paper, of all Sorts, as any
is made in Europe: And tho by their Charter they might, with all humble
submission, insist (for their own Advantage) to keep the Manufacture solely to
themselves; yet the Company are fully resolved, for the general Good, to
establish the same in all parts of the Kingdom, in humble confidence of the
Asfistance and Encouragement they shall meet with from this present Parliament,
in granting them such an Act, for the enabling them to perform the same, as
their great Wisdom shall think fit, and do for that End make the following
PROPOSALS.

The COMPANIES PROPOSALS in order to SUBSCRIPTIONS.
WHEREAS at a General Court of the Governor and Company of White-Paper-Makers,
holden the 12th Day of December, 1689, it was resolved, That for the better
carrying on, and the more effectual establishing the Manufacture of
White-writing and Printing-Paper, in all Parts of this Kingdom (in pursuance of
Letters Patents granted to the said Governor and Company by his late Majesty)
a considerable Fund of Money be raised; and that all Persons whatsoever may
have the like Benefit and Advantage with the present Members of the said
Company, who shall on or before the 25th day of March next, subscribe upon the
following Terms, Conditions and Articles, which are to be duly kept, and
strictly observed by all Persons whatsoever, whether present Members or
Subscribers.

1. The Companies Books shall lie open (during the time above limited) at the
House of Sir Francis Child, at Temple Bar, and at the Companies Warehouse in
Abchurch-Lane in London, for all Subscribers to enter their several Names and
Subscriptions. 2. The Payment of the several and respective Sums subscribed,
shall be in four equal Payments, and paid to Sir Francis Child and Partners, at
the several times hereafter mentioned, viz. One fourth Part, on or before the
3d day of April, 1690. One fourth Part, on or before the 3d day of July, 1690.
One fourth Part, on or before the 3d day of October, 1690. One fourth Part, on
or before the 3d day of January, 1690.
3. If any Subscriber do fail to pay the first Payment, at the Time and Place
aforesaid, his said Subscription shall be totally void. 4. If any Subscriber
having paid the first Payment, shall fail to pay any of the following Payments,
a Penalty of 2 l. per Cent. for each Month, shall be charged to his Debt on
Account; until his said Subscription shall be fully satisfied and paid, or
until the whole Money by him before-paid, be thereby extinguished; and further,
he shall be incapable to give any Vote at any General Court, or Court of
Assistants, until he has paid his Penalties and Subscriptions. 5. That whereas
the present Company consists of four hundred Shares, at fifty pounds per Share,
each Subscriber is to have one Share (which is to be added to the said four
hundred Shares) for every fifty Pounds which he shall subscribe. 6. That every
Subscriber, having made his first Payment, shall have one Vote at any General
Court for each fifty Pounds by him subscribed, but no Member is to be chosen
into the Court of Assistants, unless he be interested eight Shares at least in
the joint Stock of the said Company. 7. That so soon as the first Payment of
the Subscriptions, or the Major Part of the same shall be paid, a General Court
of all the Members shall be summoned to choose such Number of Assistants, from
fifteen to five and twenty, as the said General Court so assembled shall think
fit; and the Day following another General Court shall meet for the choosing a
Governor and Deputy Governor out of the said Assistants, which Governor,
Deputy Governor, and Assistants so chosen, or the Major Part of them
assembled, are to be a Court of Assistants, who are to take care of the
management of the said Manufacture and joint Stock, and of all the Money that
shall be received upon the Subscriptions, and are to continue until the 24th
day of June next following every such Election, at which Time others are to be
chosen and elected in like manner for the Year ensuing. 8. That the Stock and
Dividends of each Member shall from time to time be obliged for such Debts and
Engagements as such Member shall or may owe or be engaged in to the Company;
and the Court of Assistants may and shall detain the same for the Benefit of
the Company, till such Debts and Engagements are fully paid and satisfied. 9.
That if any Person subscribing, have either Paper-Mills, Corn-Mills, or
Streams, (in Places which the Governor and Court of Assistants so to be chosen
as aforesaid, shall judge to be proper for the setting up the Manufacture;) the
same shall be accepted of by the Company, at such value as they shall be
appraised at by two Persons to be indifferently chosen, one by the said Court
of Assistants, and the other by the Owners or Proprietors.
WE whose Names are here-unto subscribed, do mutually Consent and Agree, and
do hereby, each for himself only, and for his own Act and Deed, and for his own
Executors and Administrators, severally, and not joindy, Covenant, Promise, and
Agree, to and with the said Governor and Company, and their Successors, to pay
the respective Sums of Money, by us hereunder severally Subscribed, to be
employed, by God's Assistance, as a Stock in the Company of White-Paper-Makers,
upon all and every the Terms, Conditions, Articles, Rules, and Penalties
aforegoing. And we do severally oblige our Selves, our Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, for each of our Selves, and not One for Another, unto the said
Governor and Company, and their Successors, to pay to the said Sir Francis
Child and Partners, to and for the Use of the said Governor and Company of
White-Paper-Makers, to be employed in, and for the carrying on the said
Manufacture, our said several Sums of Money so by us Subscribed, on the several
respective Days, and in the several and respective Proportions, and in manner
as aforesaid.

In Witness whereof we have hereunto set our Hands and Seals, in London, this
(...) day of (...) 1689.

