THE TRIAL OF Richard Langhorn Esquire; COUNSELOR at LAW: FOR Conspiring the
Death OF THE KING, Subversion of the Government, AND Protestant Religion Who
upon Full Evidence was found Guilty of HIGH TREASON, And received Sentence
accordingly, at the Sessions in the Old-Bayley, holden for London and
Middlesex, on Saturday, being the 14th. of June 1679.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for H. Hills, T. Parkhurst, J. Starkey, D. Newman, T.
Cockeril, and T. Simmons. 1679.

THE TRIAL OF RICHARD LANGHORN, Esquire;
Upon Saturday the 14th. of June, 1679. at the Sessions in the Old-Bayley,
London, the Court (according to their adjournment the preceding day) met and
proceeded to the Trial of Richard Langhorn, Esquire; in this manner.
Cl. of Cr. SEt Richard Langhorn to the Bar.

Richard Langhorn, hold up thy hand, which he did.

Thou stand Indicted in London, by the name of Richard Langhorn late of
London, Esquire;

For that you Rich. Langhorn the elder, as a false Traitor of the most
Illustrious Serene and Excellent Prince Charles the Second, by the Grace of
God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith,
your Supreme and Natural Lord, not having the fear of God in your heart, nor
weighing the duty of your Allegiance, but being moved and seduced by the
instigation of the Devil, the Cordial love and true due and natural obedience,
which true and faithful Subjects of our said Sovereign Lord the King, toward
him do and ought to bear, altogether withdrawing, and devising, and with all
your strength intending the Peace and common Tranquillity of this Kingdom to
disturb, and the true Worship of God within this Kingdom used, and by Law
Established, to overthrow, and Sedition and Rebellion within this Kingdom to
stir up and procure, and the true love duty and obedience, which true and
faithful Subjects of our said Lord the King, toward him do and of right ought
to bear, to withdraw, relinquish and extinguish, on the 30th. day of September,
in the 30th. year of his Majesty's Reign at London, in the Parish of St.
Dunstans in the West, in the Ward of Faringdon without London aforesaid,
Falsely, Maliciously, Subtly, and Traitorously, with many other false Traitors
of our Sovereign Lord the King unknown, did Purpose, Compass, Imagine, Intend,
Consult, and Agree, to stir up Sedition, and Rebellion within this Kingdom of
England, against our said Sovereign Lord the King, and a miserable slaughter
amongst the Subjects of our said Lord the King, of his Kingdom of England, to
procure and cause, and our said Sovereign Lord the King from his Kingly State,
Title, Power, and Government of his Kingdom of England, totally to deprive,
depose, and disinherit, and our said Sovereign Lord the King to death and final
destruction to bring and put, and the Government of this Kingdom to subvert and
change, and the true Worship of God in this Kingdom by Law Established and
used, to alter, and the State of this Kingdom in all the parts thereof well
instituted, totally to subvert and destroy, and War within this Kingdom of
England to procure and levy, and the same most wicked Treasons, Traitorous
imaginations, purposes, compassings, and agreements aforesaid, and to perfect
and fulfill: You the said Richard Langhorn afterward, to wit^ (...) 30th. day
of September, in the 30th. year aforesaid, and divers^ (...) before at London,
etc. Falsely, Advisedly, Maliciously, Subti^^y, (...) ^^^^terously, did Compass,
Contrive, and Write two Letters, to be sent to certain Persons unknown at Rome,
and at St. Omers, in parts beyond the Seas, to procure the adherance, aid, and
assistance of the Pope, and of the French King, and others, to you the said
Richard Langhorn, and other false Traitors unknown, the true Worship of God
within this Kingdom of England, by Law established and used, to the
Superstition of the Church of Rome to alter, and the Government of this Kingdom
of England to subvert, and our said Sovereign Lord the King to death and final
destruction to bring and put, and that you the said Richard Langhorn, in
further prosecution of the said Treason, Traitorous imaginations, intentions,
and agreements aforesaid, on the day and year aforesaid, and the said other
days and times before at London, etc. did Compass, Contrive, and Write 2 other
Letters to be sent to Rome, in parts beyond the Seas, to one Christopher
Anderton, then Rector of the English College at Rome aforesaid, and two other
Letters to be sent to St. Omers, in parts beyond the Seas, to diverse Persons
unknown there residing, and by the said respective Letters Traitorously you did
advise the said Pope, and Christopher Anderton, and other Persons unknown
residing beyond the Seas, of the ways and manner to be taken for accomplishing
the said most wicked Treasons, for altering the true Worship of God in this
Kingdom Established and used, to the Superstition of the Church of Rome, and
for subverting the Government of this Kingdom, and for the death and
destruction of our said Lord the King, and to the intent that the said
Christopher Anderton, and others unknown, should give their aid, assistance,
and adherance, and should procure other aid, assistance, and adherance, to you
the said Richard Langhorn, and other false Traitors unknown, to alter the true
Worship of God aforesaid, to the Superstition of the Church of Rome, and to
subvert the Government of this Kingdom of England, and to put our said
Sovereign Lord the King to death, and that you the said Richard Langhorn
afterward, to wit the day and year aforesaid at London, etc. Traitorously did
deliver the Letters aforesaid, to be sent to the said Christopher Anderton, and
others, Persons beyond the Seas, to perfect the traitorous purposes aforesaid,
and that you the said Richard Langhorn, further to fulfill and accomplish the
same most wicked Treasons, traitorous imaginations, purposes, and compassings
aforesaid, afterward the said 30th. day of September, in the 30th. year
aforesaid at London, etc. five Commissions in Writing, made by Authority
derived from the Sea of Rome, for constituting Military Officers, for leading
the Forces to be levied in this Kingdom against our said Sovereign Lord the
King, for the altering the Protestant reformed Religion, to the use and
Superstition of the Church of Rome, and for Subverting the Government of this
Kingdom of England, Traitorously you did receive, and Five other Commissions in
writing made by Authority derived from the Sea of Rome, for constituting Civil
Officers for Governing this Kingdom after the most wicked Treasons and
Traitorous imaginations, purposes and compassings aforesaid were fulfilled and
accomplished, then and there Traitorously you did receive. And that you the
said Richard Langhorn, afterward, to wit, the day and year aforesaid at
London, etc. The said several Commissions so received, to diverse false Traitors
of our Sovereign Lord the King, unknown, falsely, knowingly, and Traitorously,
did distribute, give and dispose for Constituting Officers, as well Military as
Civil, to the Traitorous purposes aforesaid. And that you the said Richard
Langhorn, afterward on the day and year aforesaid, at London, etc. a
Commission to Constitute and Authorize you to be Advocate General of the Army,
to be Levied in this Kingdom, to war against our said Sovereign Lord the King,
Falsely, Traitorously, and against the duty of your Allegiance, from a certain
Person unknown, did receive and had; and the same Commission then and there
falsely, advisedly, and Traitorously, did inspect and read, and in your custody
keep; and to the same Commission Traitorously did give your consent, to the
intent that you the said Rich. Langhorn, should have and Execute the Place and
Office of Advocate General of the Army aforesaid, after the Army aforesaid
should be raised against our said Sovereign Lord the King, by you the said
Richard Langhorn, and other false Traitors unknown, in Execution of the said
Traitorous Compassings, Imaginations, and Agreements aforesaid. And that
whereas William Ireland, John Grove, and Thomas Pickering, and other false
Traitors of our Sovereign Lord the King, unknown, on the 24th day of April, in
the 30th Year aforesaid, in the County of Middlesex, did Consult to bring and
put our said Sovereign Lord the King to Death, and final Destruction, and to
change and alter Religion in this Kingdom of England, Rightly and by Law
Established, to the Superstition of the Church of Rome, at London, etc. had
Notice of that Consultation; and the same Consultation for the Destruction of
the King, and for the alteration of Religion in this Kingdom rightly
Established, to the Superstion of the Church of Rome, and the Treasonable
Agreements had in that Consultaon, on the said 30th day the September, in the
30th Year aforesaid, from our said Sovereign Lord the King, Advisedly, and
Traitorously did conceal, and to that Consultation Traitorously you did
consent. And the said William Ireland, John Grove, and Thomas Pickering, on the
day and Year last aforesaid, at London, the Treasons aforesaid to perpetrate
and perfect, Maliciously, Subtly, and Traitorously, you did Abet, Counsel,
maintain and comfort; and that you the said Richard Langhorn, afterward (to
wit) the said 30th day of September, in the 30th Year aforesaid, at London,
etc. falsely, subtly, and Traitorously, you did move and solicit the
Benedictine Monks, (unknown) to expend and pay the Sum of Six Thousand Pounds,
to procure a Person Traitorously to Kill and Murder our said Sovereign Lord the
King. And whereas Edward Coleman, and other false Traitors of our said
Sovereign Lord the King, unknown, on the 29th of September, in the 30th Year
aforesaid, in the County of Middlesex, Traitorously had conspired and consulted
to procure Rebellion and Sedition, within this Kingdom of England, against our
said Sovereign Lord the King, and him from his Kingly State and Government of
this his Kingdom of England, to deprive and disinherit, and to bring and put
him to final Death and Destruction, and the Government of this Kingdom of
England to alter, and the true Religion in this Kingdom of England by Law
Established, to alter and change. And whereas he the said Edward Coleman had
Traitorously written four Letters to Monsieur Le Cheese, then Counselor of the
French Kings, to procure the aid, assistance, and adherance of the French King,
to perfect and accomplish the Traitorous imaginations aforesaid, you the said
Richard Langhorn afterward, to wit the said 30th. day of September, in the
30th. year aforesaid at London, etc. well knowing the Treasonable matters in
the same Letters contained, to the same Letters did consent, and then and there
falsely, subtly, advisedly, maliciously, and traitorously did abet, counsel,
maintain, and comfort the said Edward Coleman, to perpetrate and accomplish the
Treason aforesaid, against the duty of your Allegiance, against the Peace of
our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity, and against the form of the
Statute in this case made and provided.

Cl. of Cr. How say thou Richard Langhorn, art thou guilty of this
High Treason whereof thou stand Indicted, or not guilty?


Langhorn. Not Guilty.


Cl. of Cr. Culprit, how will thou be tried?


Langhorn. By God and my Country.


Cl. of Cr. God send thee a good deliverance.


Then the Petty Jury impannelled for this Trial, was called, the Prisoner put
to his Challenges, but challenging none, the 12 Sworn were these.
JURY.
Arthur Young Edward Beeker Robert Twyford William Yapp John Kirkham Peter
Bickering Thomas Barnes Francis Neeve. John Hall George Sitwell James Wood, and
Richard Cawthorne.
After which, Proclamation for information was made in usual manner.

Cl. of Cr. Richard Langhorn, hold up thy hand. (which he did) You of the Jury
look upon the Prisoner, and hearken to his Cause: He stands Indicted in London
by the name of Richard Langhorn, late of London Esquire; for that as a false
Traitor, etc. (put in the Indictment Mutatis Mutandis) and against the form of
the Statute in that case made and provided. Upon this Indictment he has been
Arraigned, and thereunto has pleaded Not guilty, your Charge is to enquire
whether he be guilty of the High Treason whereof he stands indicted, or not
guilty; if you find him guilty, then you are to enquire what Goods, or
Chattels, Lands, or Tenements he had at the time of the High Treason committed,
or at any time since; if you find him guilty, you shall enquire whether he fled
for it, if you find that he fled for it, you are to enquire of his Goods and
Chattels, as if you had found him guilty: If you find him not guilty, nor that
he did fly for it, say no more, and hear your Evidence.


Then Roger Belwood Esquire; of Counsel for the King in this Cause, opened the
Indictment thus:
Mr. Belwood. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury;


The Prisoner at the Bar, Mr. Langhorn, stands Indicted of High Treason, and it
is for Conspiring the Murder of the King, and endeavoring an alteration in the
Government in Church and State. And the Indictment sets forth, that the 30th of
August, in the 30th Year of the King, he and other false Traitors did agree to
stir up Sedition and Rebellion in the Kingdom, and to cause a great slaughter
of his Majesty's Subjects; To introduce the Superstition of the Church of Rome,
and Depose and Murder the King, and to alter the Government in Church and
State. And it is there said, that to accomplish these Evil Designs, he writ Two
Letters to be sent to Rome, and St. Omers, the effect of which Letters was to
procure the Assistance of the Pope, and the French King, to alter the Religion
Established by Law in this Kingdom, to Romish Superstition, to Subvert the
Government, and to put the King to Death; and that in further prosecution of
these Traitorous Designs, he writ Two other Letters to be sent to Rome to one
Christopher Anderton, Rector of the English College, and a Jesuit, and Two
others to be sent to St. Omers; and in these Letters he took upon him to Advise
the way and means by which these Treasons might be effected, and that these
several Letters were sent and delivered by him, and received. The Indictment
further sets forth that in further prosecution of these Traitorous Imaginations
of his, he did recieve 5 several Commissions in Writing, by Authority derived
from the Sea of Rome; and those were for the making of Military Officers, to
Execute these Treasons by force of Arms, and that he did likewise receive 5
other Commissions for constituting Civil Officers in this Realm, after the
Treason was committed. And that amongst the rest he did receive for himself one
Commission to be Advocate General of the Army that was to be raised. And the
Indictment further Charges upon the Prisoner, that to accomplish these
Treasons, whereas Ireland, Pickering, and Grove, and other false Traitors, had
consulted these Treasons, which I before mentioned, Mr. Langhorn had Notice of
the Treasons, and did Consent to them and Abet them, and that he did solicit
the Benedictine Monks to advance 6000 l. for the Murder of the King, for the
Alteration of Religion, and for the Subversion of the Government in Church and
State. And further, whereas Mr Coleman, (who was Executed for Treason) had
(with others) conspired the Death of the King, and the introducing of Popery,
and has writ a Letter to the French Confessor Lee Cheese, for Aid and
Assistance, that the Prisoner at the Bar had Notice of this, and that he did
consent to it, and did Abet it. This, Gentlemen, is Charged to be Traitorously,
and Devilishly done against the Prisoners Allegiance, and the form of the
Statute. To this he has pleaded Not Guilty, but if we prove these Treasons, or
any of them, you are to find him Guilty.

Then Sir Creswel Levins, one of his Majesty's Learned Council in the Law,
opened the Charge thus: prout --
Sir Cr. Levins. Way it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury;


Mr. Langhorn is Indicted for Treason, for having a part in that general
Treason that you have heard several times before of, and some Persons there
were Indicted, Tried, and Convicted yesterday, for that Treason that Mr.
Langhorn had an hand in: for the Indictment does set forth, that there were
Letters written by him to Rome to the same purpose, of which Gentlemen you have
heard so often, and will hear again.

This Treason was no less than to murder the King, to alter the Religion, to
overturn the Law, to raise an Army, by force to effect all this, and in short
to do all the mischief that men (if it be lawful to call such Creatures men)
could do. That there was in order to this, Consultations held the 24th. of
April among the Jesuits; and there it was resolved that the King should be
killed, there were Persons appointed to do it, that was Pickering, and Grove,
but they failed therein, and they prosecuted it at Windsor, but happening to
fail there also, they followed him to New Market, and Ordered that it should be
done there: And when all this failed, they took another course, his Majesty was
to be Poisoned, and as I said before, to make all this good, an Army was to be
raised of 50000 men in England, to perect this Work; but if that would not do,
they were to have Forces from beyond Sea to join with them: And Mr. Langhorn he
writ Letters to procure these Forces, and he not only did so, but he found the
effect of his Letters, and received Commissions from beyond Sea, whereof one
was for himself, to be Advocate General of the Army. All these things are laid
to Mr. Langhorn's Charge.


But I Will begin first, and show you before I come to the particular Evidence
against Mr. Langhorn, some Evidence of the general Design, and therefore we
will call some Witnesses to do that in the first place, and then bring it down
to Mr. Langhorn himself.

Call Mr. Dugdale, and Mr. Prance, (who were both Sworn, and Mr. Dugdale first
stood up.)

Sir Cr. Levins. Come Sir, what do you know of any Design to murder the King?
speak what you know concerning the Plot and Conspiracy.


Mr. Dugdale. I was in several Consultations for alteration of this present
Government, and for the introducing of Popery, and for the Murder of the King.
I was a Person in most of the Consultations to the same purpose, and heard the
very words used, and was hired to be instrumental in it, and was to have a Sum
of Money to be one of them that should do it. I was to be an actor in it, and
was to have a place appointed to do it.


Mr. Just. Atkins. What were you hired to do?


Mr. Dugdale. I was to kill the King.


Sir Cr. Levins. And who were the Persons that put you upon it?


Mr. Dugdale. There was Mr. Ewers, Mr. Gavan, Mr. Luson, and Mr. Vavasor.


Sir Cr. Levins. What were these men?


Mr. Dugdale. They are all Jesuits.


Sir Cr. Levins. Do you know any thing of an Army that was to be raised to
effect it.


Mr. Dugdale. They always did speak of an Army that was to be raised, but it
was not actually to be done, till the King was killed; that was the last
Conclusion: it was indeed at first concluded on to raise an Army, but the last
Consultation was, that there should no Arms appear, till the King was killed.


Sir Cr. Levins. You do not know any thing of Mr. Langhorn in particular? do
you?


Mr. Dugdale. No, I do not know any thing in particular of him, I have heard of
him.


Lord Chapter Just. North. Why, you brought him only to prove the general Design.


Mr. Dugdale. There was a Massacre to be, and then there should be an Army, a
pretty good considerable Army, there was no certain number that I could hear
of, but those that did escape the Massacre, should be cut off by the Army.


Lord Chapter Just. North. Where were these Consultations?


Mr. Dugdale. One was at Tixal, another was at Boscobel, at my Lord Aston's,
and Mr. Gerrards.


Lord Chapter Just. Where were these Places?


Mr. Dugdale. In Staffordshire.


Mr. Just. Atkins. Pray who were to be Massacred in the first place?


Mr. Dugdale. All Protestants, and those we could not be sure of to be Papists.


Mr. Belwood. Pray Sir, what do you know of any Letter to be writ to Mr. Ewers,
concerning Sir Edmond-bury Godfreys death?


Mr. Dugdale. I do remember a Letter that came to Mr. Ewers from Mr. Harcourt,
which did express, and begin thus, ( This very night, Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey
is dispatched) with some other words of like import; and then I sent to Mr.
Ewers about it: And do you think this will carry on the Design? I will be
hanged if it don't spoil it: No said he, he was a Person that used to be very
severe against debauched lewd Persons, and so it will be laid, as if they had
done it out of Revenge.


Lord Chapter Just. North. What day of the week was that Letter dated?


Mr. Dugdale. It was, as I can very well make it out on Saturday.


Lord Chapter Just. North. And when was it received?


Mr. Dugdale. It was received on Monday night.


Lord Chapter Just. North. What were the Contents of it, do you say?


Mr. Dugdale. It began thus, ( This very night, Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey is
dispatched.)


Lord Chapter Just. North. Who did it come from?


Mr. Dugdale. It came from Mr. Harcourt.


Sir Cr. Levins. They themselves know that he was not found here in London,
till Thursday.


Mr. Dugdale. I could not hold, it run so much in my mind, but the next morning
going to an Alehouse hard by, I there spoke of it, and immediately it was
carried to Mr. Chetwin, and he was here yesterday to make it out, that I so did.


Lord Chapter Just. North. But why did they kill him? was it expressed why?


Mr. Dugdale. I had several times heard, he was too much privy to their
Consultations.


Lord Chapter Just. North. That is, you mean, he had had too much discovered to him.


Mr. Dugdale. And so they were afraid of Mr. Coleman too; that he carried
things too high, and he was out of their favor for 2 years.


Sir Cr. Levins. Then call Mr. Prance. Pray Sir, what can you say?


Mr. Prance. There was one Mr. Messenger, a Gentleman of the Horse to my Lord
Arundel of Warder, who was employed by my Lord Arundel of Warder, and my Lord
Powis, and he was to kill the King, and to have a very good reward for the
doing of it; and I was told so by my Lord Butler: I afterward met with this
Messenger, and asked him what his reason was that he would kill the King. He
told me he was off of it now.


Sir Cr. Levins. But what was to be done after they should kill the King?


Mr. Prance. Presently there should be an Army of 50000 men raised, to be
governed by my Lord Arundel, and my Lord Powis, and them: I have heard Mr.
Fenwick, and Mr. Ireland, and Grove, to speak of this at the same time together.


Sir Cr. Levins. What was that Army to be raised for?


Mr. Prance. To settle the Catholic Religion.


Lord Chapter Just. What was to become of other Persons?


Mr. Prance. They were to be killed and ruined all: So Fenwick told me.


Lord Chapter Just. North. Look you Mr. Langhorn, these Witnesses speak nothing to
you in particular, but only that there was a Conspiracy in general, to kill the
King, and introduce Popery: If you will ask them any Question you may.


Langhorn. No my Lord, they not accusing me, I have nothing to say to them.


Mr. Prance. I heard one Mr. Harcourt say, that the King was to be killed by
several, before one Mr. Thompson, twice in his own Chamber in Duke-street. And
I heard Fenwick say, that Mr. Langhorn was to have a great hand in it.


Langhorn. Is that all you have to say, as to me?


Mr. Prance. It is all that I know of.

Then the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs came in.
Sir Cr. Levins. Now my Lord, we will call the Evidence, that shall prove the
particular matters of the Indictment, as of writing the Letters beyond Sea, of
his receiving Commissions, of his distributing them here to the several persons
to whom they were directed; of his Soliciting for the money, the 6000 l. to be
raised by the Benedictine Monks, which was either for a particular purpose to
poison the King, or to carry on the Design in general. And first we call Dr.
Oats (who was Sworn, and stood up)


Sir Cr. Levins. Sir, you hear what the matter is as to Mr. Langhorn, be
pleased to tell the Court whether you knew he writ any Letters, and received
any Commissions; speak your whole knowledge.


Dr. Oats. I hope your Lordship will be pleased to give me leave to use my own
Method.


Lord Chapter Just. Ay Ay, take your own way Mr. Oats.


Dr. Oats. Then I begin thus. In the month of April 1677, I went into the
Kingdom of Spain: in the month of September following, the sons of Mr. Langhorn
came into the Kingdom of Spain; it was September or sooner, but I will not be
possitive as to the time of their coming, the one was a Scholar of the English
College at Madrid, the other was a Scholar of the English College at
Valledolid. They came there to study Philosophy in order to their receiving of
the Priesthood. my Lord, my occasions called me into England in the month of
November following, and coming into England, Mr. Langhorns sons did give me
some Letters to Mr. Langhorn their Father; and as soon as I had rested my self
for a day or two after my Journey, I came to Mr. Langhorns's house in
Sheer-Lane. Now Mr. Langhorns Wife being a Zealous Protestant, I did whisper
his Footboy or his servant boy in the Ear, that he should go and whisper his
Master, Mr. Langhorn, and tell him, there was one would speak with him from his
sons. Mr. Langhorn, by his son, did desire me to meet him at his Chamber in the
Temple, (in the Inner-Temple-Lane it was I think) I know the Chamber however,
and accordingly I did meet Mr. Langhorn that night by the means of his half
Brother, who is brother I think by the mother and not by the Father, his name
is Smithson; and when I came into Mr. Langhorns Chamber, their Chambers being
directly opposite one to another, I was treated by Mr. Langhorn with a great
deal of Civility, and I delivered Mr. Langhorn the Letters from his sons, and I
told him that I thought his sons would enter into the Society: Mr. Langhorn was
mightily pleased with the News, being himself a great Votary for the Society,
that his sons would enter into it. Now may it please your Lordship, Mr.
Langhorn did say, he thought if they did continue in the world, that is secular
Priests, they would suddenly have very great promotion in England, for he said,
Things would not last long in this posture, that is at that time he then spoke,
I speak the words now that he said then. And now my Lord, I was with Mr.
Langhorn another time while I was in England, but in the latter end of November
old Style, in the beginning of December new Style, I went to St. Omers, and
there were Letters that he delivered me (looking upon the Prisoner) a Packet
to carry to St: Omers. And when the Packet was opened, there was a letter
Signed Richard Langhorn, in which he gave the Fathers at St. Omers great thanks
for the great care had of, and kindness they showed to his sons, and that what
they had been out of Pocket for their Viaticum, in Order to their journey into
Spain, which was 20 l. he promised them they should be repaid it, and in this
Letter he did expressly say, that he had written to Father Le Cheese in order to
our concerns, those were his words. Now my Lord the Letter that he writ to
Father Le Cheese I saw not, but only this Letter I saw, which gave an account
of that Letter he had writ to Father Le Cheese and he said Mr. Coleman had been
very large with him, and therefore it would not be necessary for him to trouble
his Reverence with any large Epistles at that time. My Lord, there was another
Letter, and I think that was in the month of March, or April I cannot be
positive as to the particular time, but it was upon this remarkable
Circumstance. Mr. Langhorn had a son that had been in Rebellion, and had turned
Soldier, or some such thing in France, and this young Gentleman came to St.
Omers, being the place where he had been educated; and Mr. Langhorn by the
intercession of the Fathers there, did order him Five pounds to bring him over
into England, upon promise of his sons submission, who had been very
extravagant in several respects. In this Letter my Lord, Mr. Langhorn did
express his great care for the carrying on of the Design of the Catholics, and
several other expressions there were in it bad enough, which I cannot now call
to mind, but they were to this effect; The Parliament began to Flag in
promoting the Protestant Religion, and now they had a fair opportunity to begin
and give the Blow; what that Blow was, I leave to the Court and to the Jury to
expound.


Lord Chapter Just. But was that an expression in the Letter?


Dr. Oats. It was, my Lord: But it was a very large Letter, I cannot give a
particular account of every thing in it. My Lord, in the month of April, or the
beginning of May, your Lordship remembers there was a Consult that has been
sworn here in this Court, to which Consult --


Lord Chapter Just. Pray speak it out.


Dr. Oats. There were several of us came over from St. Omers, and from other
parts beyond the Seas to this Consult, at which Consult Mr. Langhorn was not
present; but I had orders from the Provincial to give Mr. Langhorn an account
of what Resolutions and passages and minutes passed at this Consult; and this I
did as well as I could, and when I did so, Mr. Langhorn lift up his hands and
his eyes, and prayed to God to give it good success. My Lord, while I was at
Mr. Langhorns Chamber giving this account, I saw several Parchments lying upon
the Table in his Study.


Lord Chapter Just. You had best tell the effect of the account you gave Mr.
Langhorn in his Chamber, that you speak of.


Dr. Oats. My Lord, I told him who went Procurator to Rome, that was one
Father Carry, I told him what was the Resolve of the Consult concerning the
death of the King.


Lord Chapter Just. Did you so?


Dr. Oats. Yes my Lord, I did: I told Mr. Langhorn that several of the Fathers
were to be admonished for their irregular living, as they termed it: and to
this Mr. Langhorn did reply as near as I can remember, that he found some of
them did not live up to the rules of the Society.


Lord Chapter Just. Pray tell us more particularly what you told him. And tell us
ai near as you can, as you told it him then, the business of the Plot upon the
King.


Dr. Oats. I told him the Resolve of the Society, and of that Consult, and
what was that which was resolved, that Pickering and Grove should go on to
attempt to assasinate the Kings person, and what was to be their Reward, the
one was to have, that is Grove, 1500 l. and the other, that is Pickering, was
to have 30000. Masses: he lift up his hands and eyes when I told him this (and
I told him more particularly than I can now remember) and he lift up his hands
and Eyes, and prayed God that it might have good success.


Lord Chapter Just. Did you tell him they had Signed to this agreement?


Dr. Oats. Yes, my Lord, I told him that they had all Signed it.


Langhorn. When was this?


Dr. Oats. It was the latter end of April, or beginning of May.


Langhorn. How long after they had Signed the Consult?


Dr. Oats. A day or two after.


Langhorn. Dr. Oats, Do you know the day of the month? you have asserted the
day of the month formerly, pray do it now.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Let him go on, you shall ask him what Questions you will
by and by.


Dr. Oats. My Lord, I saw there a Commission for my Lord Arundel of Warder,
and another to my Lord Powis; the one was to be Lord High Chancellor, and the
other to be Lord High Treasurer; there was a Commission for my Lord Bellasis,
to be General, another for my Lord (...) to be Lieutenant General, and there
were other Commissions, of (...) cannot remember the particular names, but
there was a Com^^^^^^ (...) ^ecretary of State, and there was a Commissi^^
(...) at the Bar, to be Advocate of the Army.


Lord Chapter Just. By what Authority were those Commissions?


Dr. Oats. They were by Authority derived from the Sea of Rome, by virtue of a
Breve from the Pope, directed to the General of the Society, and they were
Signed I S, and with the mark of the Cross through the IHS and they were Signed
Johannes Paulus de Oliva.


Lord Chapter Just. North. That is the Jesuits mark?


Dr. Oats. Yes, my Lord.


Lord Chapter Just. North. Where did you see those Commissions?


Dr. Oats. In Mr. Langhorn's Study of his Chamber in the Temple.


Lord Chapter Just. Where? Did they lie open that any one might see them?


Dr. Oats. They lay upon a corner of his Desk, folded up.


Lord Chapter Just. How came you to see them?


Dr. Oats. My Lord, if your Lordship please, I will tell your Lordship how I
came to see them. We had notice they were come, by a Letter from one Father
Anderton, and he called these Commissions, Patents, and if it please your
Lordship, I did ask Mr. Langhorn, whether he had received them: he told me,
yes: then I asked him whether he would do me the favor to let me see them: and
because I had been privy to the Consults, and came to wait upon him by Order of
the Provincial, he did let me see them.


Lord Chapter Just. And you saw them in his Study upon his Desk?


Dr. Oats. Yes, my Lord, I did. And particularly one more I can tell of, which
his Son was to deliver to a Son of my Lord Arundel of Warder.


Lord Chapter Just. How many Commissions were there?


Dr. Oats. I cannot say, about 7 or 8 I think, I did see, and looked over.


Mr. Just. Atkins. And you knew what they were?


Dr. Oats. Yes, for those that I saw, that I can remember?


Lord Chapter Just. What was my Lord Powis to be?


Dr. Oats. Lord High-Treasurer.


Lord Chapter Just. And what my Lord Arundel?


Dr. Oats. Lord High-Chancellor of England.


Lord Chapter Just. And what my Lord Stafford?


Dr. Oats. As to my Lord Stafford, I cannot give so good an account; but as I
remember, he was to be a Play Master in the Army, or some such Office relating
to the Army.


Lord Chapter Just. North. What was the Prisoner at the Bar to be?


Dr. Oats. A Judge in the Army, or an Advocate General, so they called him.


Lord Chapter Just. You saw most of these?


Dr. Oats. I saw several of them, most of them in his custody, I cannot say
all: There was more than for these Lords, for other inferior Officers.


Lord Chapter Just. How many might there be of them, as near as you can guess?


Dr. Oats. I think he told me they were about 50.


Lord Chapter Just. What number did you see?


Dr. Oats. I saw about half a dozen, or 8.


Lord Chapter Just. Well Sir, go on.


Dr. Oats. My Lord, I am now to speak to your Lordship concerning some Letters
that he wrote to Rome, and there was --


Lord Chapter Just. Had you any discourse with him concerning the matters of any of
the Commissions of my Lord Bellasis, and my Lord Powis?


Dr. Oats. No my Lord, I had but little skill in Military Affairs, and
therefore I said but little, and I cannot give you an account word for word,
what the discourse was, for it was out of my way. My Lord, there were several
Letters which Mr. Langhorn writ to Father Le Cheese, the Answers to which I saw
in April and May; whereupon the Fathers did desire they might have the
Originals of those Copies: He gave me the Originals to carry to the Fathers, I
think it was that very day I had been with him in the afternoon; for I was with
him in the morning the Fathers did read the Letters.


Lord Chapter Just. From whom came they?


Dr. Oats. From Father Le Cheese, and from Father Anderton. And Le Cheese in
his Letter did assure him of his stedfastness and constancy, to assist the
Society for the carrying on the Cause: And that they should not need doubt, but
the French King would stand by them, or to that purpose. I cannot remember
exactly the words, but it was to that effect.


Lord Chapter Just. But they were directed to Mr. Langhorn?


Dr. Oats. I cannot Swear that directly, but he gave them me.


Lord Chapter Just. Who were Le Cheese, and Anderton?


Dr. Oats. The one was Confessor to the French King, and the other Rector of
the College at Rome.


Mr. Just. Atkins. But you saw those in the Prisoners custody you say?


Dr. Oats. Yes my Lord, I did.


Lord Chapter Just. He gave them you to deliver to the Fathers, to Whitebread and
the rest of them?


Dr. Oats. Yes, my Lord, but I cannot say who they were directed to.


Lord Chapter Just. But pray repeat what was the Substance of that Letter.


Dr. Oats. My Lord, as to the words of them, I dare not charge my memory, but
it was to this purpose, That Le Cheese would stand by the English Society, and
assist them, and that they should not need to doubt the French King, or to that
effect.


Mr. Belwood. Do you remember any Letters that were writ by Mr. Coleman to Le
Cheese?


Dr. Oats. Yes, my Lord, I remember several Letters that Coleman writ, but Mr.
Langhorn was not affected in them.


Mr. Belwood. Did he know of them?


Dr. Oats. He gave an account in his Letter to the Soceity, that Coleman had
writ Letters to Le Cheese, and was very large, and therefore he should not
trouble his Reverence with any long Epistles.


Sir Cr. Levins. What do you know of any money that was to be raised by the
Benedictine Monks.


Dr. Oats. I had forgot that.


Lord Chapter Just. You say that he said they should not need to doubt the French,
but he would stand by them with Men and Money, for what purpose pray?


Dr. Oats. I Will tell you for what purpose it was, the words of the Letter did
allege it to be for carrying on of the Cause.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. You mean the Catholic Cause?


Dr. Oats. So it was generally understood.


Lord Chapter Just. But for the other money, what say you?


Dr. Oats. Mr. Langhorn was employed as Solicitor for the Jesuits, and did
accompany some of the Society, Father Harcourt, Father Fenwick, Father Kaines,
and Father Langworth, and they went and did communicate the Secret to the
Benedictine Monks, desiring them to stand by them with a Sum of Money for the
carrying on the Design: now upon Mr. Langhorn's Soliciting them, and appearing
for them, as I have heard, 6000 l. was promised and paid.


Lord Chapter Just. By whom promised and paid?


Dr. Oats. By the Benedictine Monks.


Lord Chapter Just. To whom?


Dr. Oats. To the Society.


Lord Chapter Just. To what Person?


Dr. Oats. That I cannot say, but it was said Mr. Langhorn was to receive it.


Lord Chapter Just. Did you see the Money paid?


Dr. Oats. No, I did not.


Lord Chapter Just. Did you hear Mr. Langhorn confess it was paid?


Dr. Oats. Mr. Langhorn did say in the Month of July or August, I cannot be
positive which, but thereabouts, when he was spoke to about it, that he would
stir in it, and do to the utmost of his power for the procuring of it. And
another thing, I am sure Mr. Langhorn was very much disgusted, that Sir George
Wakeman was not contented with the 10000 l.


Sir Cr. Levins. What was the 6000 l. for?


Dr. Oats. It was for the general Cause.


Sir Cr. Levins. For the Murder of the King?


Dr. Oats. Yes, and for the alteration of Religion.


Lord Chapter Just. North. How did it appear that Mr. Langhorn was disgusted, that
Sir George Wakeman would not take the 10000 l? and what was it for?


Dr. Oats. It was to Poison the King; and he said he was a covetous man, that
it was in a public Concern, and that being it was to carry on the Cause, it
was no matter if he did it for nothing; but he said he was a narrow Spirited,
and a narrow Sold Physician.


Lord Chapter Just. When was it that he said he would stir for the Money?


Dr. Oats. It was in July, or in August.


Langhorn. My Lord, may I ask him any Questions?


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Yes, yes, Mr. Langhorn, you may.


Lord Chapter Just. North. Pray Mr. Oats, you saw such and such Commissions from
the Superior of the Jesuits, that were Signed Johannes Paulus de Oliva, pray
will you look upon this, and see whether you know it, (and a Writing under the
Jesuits Seal was showed him.)


Dr. Oats. This is the hand, the very hand, that was to the others, and they
had put such a Seal; and that is for Mr. Stapleton, to be Rector of St. Omers.


Sir Cr. Levins. Now my Lord, if you please, this was not one of those
Commissions that Mr. Langhorn did distribute to the Persons that were to have
them, no, he would let us have none of those, but it is a Commission of another
nature, it is neither for an Office Civil nor Military, but Ecclesiastical, yet
it is under the same Hand and Seal.


Langhorn. You say you came to me the first time in November? and you went to
St. Omers, when Sir?


Dr. Oats. The latter end of November.


Langhorn. When arrived you at St. Omers?


Dr. Oats. I think it was the 10th of December new Style, I will not be
positive.


Lord Chapter Just. All their defense lies in Catches upon a point of time, in
which no man living is able to be positive.


Dr. Oats. My Lord, if the 26th. of November fell upon a Monday, then it was
on the 26th. day that I set out for Dover in the Coach, as near as I can
remember, and I got to St. Omers a Friday morning following.


Langhorn. A Friday after, you say you got to St. Omers?


Dr. Oats. About that time.


Langhorn. How long did you stay there?


Dr. Oats. Till April following I stayed.


Langhorn. Without any moving from thence?


Dr. Oats. Only went to Paris, and after that a night or two at Watton, and
then came away in April. My Lord, I desire, if your Lordship please, that Mr.
Langhorn may ask the Court, and the Court ask me; for I know the Court will be
so kind, as to ask me such Questions as are reasonable, and proper for me to
answer.


Mr. Just. Atkins. That indeed is the regular way, for Prisoners should not ask
the Question, but the Court.


Langhorn. Very well, I shall observe the Method, if your Lordship please. I
desire to know what time in April he came back for England.


Dr. Oats. I came about the middle of April, or latter end, I will not be so
positive in that, and I was in England under 20 days.


Langhorn. Can you tell what day you came into England?


Dr. Oats. No, I cannot exactly, but I came in April the middle or the latter
end.


Langhorn. I desire to know who came with him?


Dr. Oats. My Lord, there came a matter of 9 or 10 of us in all.


Lord Chapter Just. Name them.


Dr. Oats. There was Father Williams, and Father March, the Rector of Liege,
and Sir John Warner.


Langhorn. What is the Rector of Liege's name?


Dr. Oats. Warren I think, I cannot tell names so exactly.


Langhorn. Go on Sir, pray.


Dr. Oats. I cannot name any more.


Langhorn. You have named them all in the Records of the Lords House.


Dr. Oats. It Is like I have, I refer you to that.


Langhorn. Did Sir Thomas Preston come over with you?


Dr. Oats. Yes, he did.


Langhorn. Did Pool come over with you?


Dr. Oats. Yes.


Lord Chapter Just. Look you Mr. Langhorn, we had all this matter spoken of
yesterday, and there were Witnesses that prove that Sir Jeremy Warner, and Sir
Thomas Preston, were there.


Langhorn. I humbly conceive, that was upon an Issue tried in another County,
by another Jury, and therefore I hope I do not amiss in urging what I can say
for my self to this Jury.


Lord Chapter Just. You are not debarred, I only told you of it. Was Sir Robert
Bret there?


Dr. Oats. Yes, I think he was, I am not confident of that. My Lord, I own
what Mr. Langhorn can bring to the Court upon Record.


Langhorn. I only ask it, because he says so in the House of Lords.


Dr. Oats. If you can show the Record of what I said there, do.


Langhorn. I do not desire him to name them now, but to know whether he does
now affirm the truth of what he Swore in the House of Lords?


Lord Chapter Just. If you can produce, as you may, if you have been diligent, a
Copy of the Record in the House of Lord, and have it Sworn to be a true Copy of
the Records, it will be Evidence for you, and shall be read; but to put him to
remember a Record without Book, must not be, it would be hard for him to
undertake that.


Langhorn. I desire to know how he came from Dover; whether in a Coach, or on
Horseback, to London?


Dr. Oats. Indeed the Question is so sudden, that I cannot be positive, but as
near as I remember, I came by Coach.


Langhorn. I will give you my reason why I ask this; because he has formerly
upon a Trial in the King's Bench, affirmed he came by Coach, in the company of
Mr. Hilsley.


Dr. Oats. No, I did never say so; but I came over in the Packet Boat, in the
company of Mr. Hilsley, but when we were come over, Mr. Hilsley went out of the
way from us.


Langhorn. I desire to know where he lodged, when he came to Town?


Lord Chapter Just. Where did you lodge the first night?


Dr. Oats. I did lie at Mr. Grove's house, when I came to London in April.


Lord Chapter Just. But the first night when you came from Dover, when you came
into London in April?


Dr. Oats. My Lord, I cannot say, I lay there the first night; but my lodging
was provided for me there.


Lord Chapter Just. You are to Answer as well as you can, if you cannot remember
it, say so. Do you say the first absolutely, or not?


Dr. Oats. My Lord, I cannot remember the first night, but I lay several
nights at Mr. Grove's.


Langhorn. Then I ask, whether he did generally lie there, during his stay?


Dr. Oats. I did lie there some nights.


Lord Chapter Just. How many times did you lie there?


Dr. Oats. I believe three or four nights, I will not be positive as to the
Number.


Langhorn. What day was the Consult?


Dr. Oats. It was the 24th. of April.


Langhorn. What day did you acquaint me with it?


Dr. Oats. A day or 2 after.


Langhorn. When did he return back to St. Omers?


Lord Chapter Just. When did you go back? about what time?


Dr. Oats. My Lord, I think it was a week in May, I cannot be positive, but I
think that was the outside.


Lord Chapter Just. They said, yesterday you affirmed you stayed but 6 days.


Dr. Oats. I do not say so, but I say under 20.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Come, have you any thing else to ask him?


Langhorn. Those Letters that he speak of, I desire to know whether he saw me
write them?


Lord Chapter Just. Those Letters you speak of, did you see him write them?


Dr. Oats. I did not see him write them, but I am sure they were his Letters,
because I know his hand.


Lord Chapter Just. How did you come to know his hand, since you did not see him
write them?


Dr. Oats. I saw the Letter whereby he ordered money to be paid, 5 l. to his
Son: And I saw the money paid to his Son, by that Order.


Langhorn. Do you know that Le Cheese, and Anderton, writ to me?


Dr. Oats. I do not say that they writ to him, but he had Letters Subscribed
by their Names, and they were said by him to come from them, and they were to
be communicated to the Priests and Jesuits; and he delivered them to me to that
end.


Langhorn. When you returned to St. Omers, how long did you stay there?


Dr. Oats. Till 23d. June new Style; which is the 13th. old Style.


Langhorn. I remember he professed himself a Roman Catholic, I see he is a
Minister: I desire to know of him when he left the Protestant Religion, and
became a Convert, as he called himself; call it what you will, when he left
being a Protestant, and became a Papist, that is it I mean?


Dr. Oats. He does it for nothing but to quarrel.


Lord Chapter Just. When did you leave the Church of England?


Dr. Oats. My Lord, if it be the pleasure of the Bench to ask me that Question
--


Lord Chapter Just. You ought to answer it, though it be nothing to the purpose.


Dr. Oats. Then I answer, it was either in February or March 1676/7


Langhorn. My Lord, I desire to know whether he had any Benefice?


Dr. Oats. Yes, I was sometime Vicar of Bobbing -- in Kent. But I suppose this
is to make me accuse my self of something, whereby I might forfeit my Living:
for my Lord, I have a right in a point of Equity still to that Living, but only
for going beyond Sea without leave of my Ordinary, I am not now Vicar of --


Langhorn. When did you come to your Vicandge?


Dr. Oats. In 1672.


Langhorn. You became a Papist in 1677. I ask this Question, whether he did
leave his Living before he turned Papist?


Dr. Oats. My Lord, I am not willing to answer that Question.


Lord Chapter Just. When did you leave your Living? did you leave it before you
went away?


Dr. Oats. It was not very long before, but the reason why I am not willing to
tell; When I left the Parish, I left it in the charge of Mr. Thomas Turner,
Vicar of Milton, and I did go near about Chichester, and served a Sequestration
there. The Air was not a good Air in that part of Kent, and I had not my
health, and that was one reason, and for other reasons best known to my self.


Langhorn. After he became a Papist, I desire to know, whether he became a
Jesuit? Were you in any Order there?


Lord Chapter Just. Mr. Langhorn, it is not a proper Question, we ought not to ask
it him: You are a man of the Law, and therefore you know it is not fair to ask
any Person a Question about a Criminal matter that may bring himself in danger.


Langhorn. I take him to be out of danger, he has his Pardon.


Lord Chapter Just. I don't know what his Pardon is, nor how far it reaches, nor
whether this be contained in it; but if Mr. Oats pleases to answer that
Question, he may.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Though he has his Pardon, he may be in danger of the
Ecclesiastical Censure.


Lord Chapter Just. He says he will not.


Langhorn. I Will give you another reason why I ask it, because in one of his
Narratives he seems to call himself so; he says, There came over 9 of us, all
Jesuits, I suppose him to be one of that Order; this I took to be a ground, why
I might properly call him so.


Lord Chapter Just. Narratives are no Evidence at all.


Langhorn. But that gave me an occasion to ask the Question.


Dr. Oats. I cannot answer it, because it tends rather to raise a debate in
the Court, than conduces to the Question, to acquit or condemn the Prisoner.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. You are not bound to answer it.


Lord Chapter Just. He tells you, he is not bound by Law to answer, and he re^uses
to answer.


Langhorn. I desire to know, whether he ever saw me, or conversed with me, from
the time he acquainted me with the Consult, and saw the Commissions in my
Chamber?


Lord Chapter Just. How often did you converse with Mr. Langhorn?


Dr. Oats. After I returned again in July and August, once or twice.


Lord Chapter Just. How often in April and May?


Dr. Oats. Twice I think, about the time of the Consult.


Lord Chapter Just. And when you came over again, how often?


Dr. Oats. Twice more I think, twice or thrice.


Lord Chapter Just. So, then he has been four or five times in your company.


Dr. Oats. He would not let me come to his house, for he used to say, his Wife
was but aumes ace turned from a Devil; and therefore he would not have me come
thither.


Langhorn. I hope he will not go out of the Court?


Lord Chapter Just. No, he will stay here, but you have done with him at present,
have you not?


Langhorn. Yes, my Lord, I have.


Sir Cr. Levins. Swear Mr. Bedloe. (Which was done.)


Lord Chapter Just. Mr. Bedloe, I ask you but one short Question, because I would
not interrupt you afterward, That Paper that you saw Signed by the Superior of
the Jesuits, where had you it?


Mr. Bedloe. I had it at Mr. Daniel Arthur's.


Langhorn. What is that?


Lord Chapter Just. It is an Instrument Signed and Sealed, just as the things were,
which Mr. Oats says, he saw in your Chamber.


Lord Chapter Just. North. And besides you must take notice, that this was found a
long time after Mr. Oats had given his Testimony publicly, for his Closet was
not searched till a great while after.


Lord Chapter Just. It is to show you what Seals they used to have to their
Commissions. Mr. Oats describes several Commissions that he saw in your Study,
so Sealed and Subscribed, and after the searching Mr. Arthurs Study, being a
Papist, that Commission is found there. Now though it be a thing of a private
Concern, a Church matter, not relating to the matters in Question, yet this
very Commission is so subscribed, and so signed and sealed, as Mr. Oats had
described those to be before in your Chamber.


Mr. Bedloe. Because it was exactly the hand and seal that I saw to the
Commissions in Paris, I did take particular notice of the Paper, and brought it
to the Council.


Lord Chapter Just. Well Sir, now go on with your Evidence.


Mr. Bedloe. First, my Lord, I Will only ask this Question or the Court, whether a
known Roman Catholic may take Notes of the Evidence in such a Cause?


Lord Chapter Just. Truly no, I think not.


Mr. Bedloe. There is an honorable Lady in that Gallery, the Lady Marchioness
of Winchester, that has took Notes all this Trial.


Lord Chapter Just. She will do her self, nor no body else any great hurt, by what
she writes.


Mr. Bedloe. I only speak it for the information of the Court.


Lord Chapter Just. A Woman's Notes will not signify much truly, no more than her
tongue.


Mr. Bedloe. My Lord, about 3 years since, I was sent by Mr. Harcourt, and Mr.
Coleman, to Le Cheese, with some Letters for the carrying on of this Design.
With these Letters, Mr. Coleman asked me, if I could go with him as far as the
Temple. I have no particular acquaintance with Mr. Langhorn, I was but twice at
his Chamber, once with Mr. Harcourt, and once with Mr. Coleman. I waited upon
Mr. Coleman to Mr. Langhorn's Chamber in the Temple: There did he Register such
Letters as Mr. Coleman brought to him, and afterward Mr. Coleman sealed them
up, and gave them me to carry to Le Cheese.


Lord Chapter Just. How do you say? when you went with Mr. Coleman to Mr.
Langhorn's Chamber, were the Letters writ there?


Mr. Bedloe. The Letters were writ first at Coleman's house, and brought open
by Coleman to Mr. Langhorn, and he read them and Registered them, and then
Coleman sealed them up, and gave them to me to carry away.


Langhorn. What Letters were these?


Lord Chapter Just. Do you know what the effect of those Letters were?


Mr. Bedloe. The Letters were read some of them at the King's Bench Bar, at
Coleman's Trial: There was one of them writ by Mr. Harcourt, another by Mr.
Coleman, to Le Cheese.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. What was the effect of them?


Lord Chapter Just. Only to let Le Cheese know, that they waited only now for his
Answer, how far he had proceeded with the French King, for the sending of
money; for they only wanted money, all other things were in readiness. That the
Catholics of England were in safety, had made all Places, and all Offices, to
be disposed of to Catholics, or such as they thought would be so; that all
Garrisons were either in their own hands, or ready to be put into them; that
they had so fair an opportunity, (as I remember that was one of the expressions
in the Letter to Father Stapleton) that they had so fair an opportunity, having
a King so easy to believe what is dictated to him by our Party, that if we slip
this opportunity, we must despair of ever introducing Popery into England; for
having a King of England so easy, and the French King so powerful, they must
not miss such an opportunity.


Lord Chapter Just. For what?


Mr. Bedloe. To send over money for the carrying on of the Cause, for they only
wanted that, all else was in readiness: And the other Letters were to the same
effect, though in other words. That Letter was in English, but the Letters to
Le Cheese, and the Nuncio, were both in French.


Lord Chapter Just. But you understand French, don't you?


Mr. Bedloe. Yes, my Lord, I do.


Lord Chapter Just. Did he Copy them out, while you were there by?


Mr. Bedloe. He Registered them before me.


Lord Chapter Just. Did he write them into a Book? and were you there all that time?


Mr. Bedloe. Yes, my Lord, I and Coleman walked in the Chamber, whilst he went
in and writ, as he did other things; for he Registered all their Accounts: There
was not a penny of Money either received or laid out, nor any thing done almost
in relation to this Concern, but he did keep a Register of it: I cannot say,
that ever he did talk any thing before me of the Kings death particularly, but
talked of the whole Design. About a Year and a half since, Mr. Harcourt sent
another Packet of Letters by me to Mr. Laghorn to be Registered; he looked
strangely upon me, and received the Letter, and sent an Answer to Mr. Harcourt,
that Mr. Williams (for I went then under the name of Captain Williams) had
delivered him such Letters, and that he should have them again to morrow, after
he had Copied them, and Registered them. Mr. Harcourt read the Letter of Answer
to me, and in the Letter it was Mr. Williams. Said I to Mr. Harcourt, I thought
I might have been Registered by my right name, because when any thing should
take effect and occasion serve, I resolved to bear my own name. Alas, says he,
this does not signify any thing at all, for as for this Register, it is not so
considerable: there shall be a new Register made, of things of weight and
moment, this is only a blind Register amongst our selves. The 2 Letters that I
brought from Harcourt, there was one of them from Sir William Godolphin, that I
had brought before from Spain.


Lord Chapter Just. Who was that directed to?


Mr. Bedloe. To my Lord Bellasis; and about three weeks after it was that I was
sent to Mr. Langhorn, to have it Registered; the other was from the Irish
College of Jesuits in Salamanca. The Letter from the Rector did specify, that
they would have my Lord Bellasis, and the rest of the Lords that were
concerned, and the rest of the Party in England, to be in readiness, and to
have this communicated with all expedition; for now they had provided in Spain,
under the notion of Pilgrims for St. Jago, some Irish Cashiered Soldiers, that
had left their Country, some for Religion, and some for their Crimes, and a
great many Lay-Brothers, whom they had procured, and gathered together under
the notion of Pilgrims, to be ready to take Shipping at the Groin, to Land at
Milford-Haven, there to meet my Lord Powis, and an Army that he was to raise in
Wales, to further this Design. And these Letters said they had almost brought
it to a Period, that they did only expect a return from England, to show in
what readiness they were here, that accordingly they might proceed.


Lord Chapter Just. Did Mr. Langhorn see these Letters?


Mr. Bedloe. He took these Letters from me, and told me Mr. Harcourt should
have them again, when he had transcribed them; and writ a Letter to Mr.
Harcourt, that Mr. Williams had brought him such Letters.


Lord Chapter Just. And he did transcribe them?


Mr. Bedloe. I suppose so, for he afterward sent them back to Mr. Harcourt.


Mr. Just. Atkins. Was it a good large Book that he Registered them in?


Mr. Bedloe. I know not what Book he Registered them in, not those Letters.


Langhorn. It is a proper Question, because said I Registered those Letters
before him.


Mr. Bedloe. I say, I saw him in his Study transcribe Coleman's Letter, whilst
Coleman and I walked in his Chamber.


L. C. J. Into what kind of Book did he Register that? Had he more Books then
one, pray?


Mr. Bedloe. My Lord, I cannot tell that, I judge it might be the same Book. I
saw the Book then, it was a large Parchment Book; but I did not see it when
Harcourts Letters were Registered. When Coleman and I came thither, he went into
his Study, and left us in the Chamber, I saw him transcribing the Papers that
lay before him: but when I brought those Letters from in Mr. Harcourt, I only
delivered them sealed up, and his answer to Father Harcourt was, that Mr.
Williams had brought him so many Letters, and he should have them again as soon
as he had transcribed them.


Lord Chapter Just. Mr. Langhorn, you would do well to show us the Book, and that
would make the matter plain.


Lord Chapter Just. North. Could you see how far he had gone in the Book, and what
Room there was left to write other Letters.


Mr. Bedloe. It was a Book at least 3 Inches thick, and as near as I could
guess, he had gotten threw 2 thirds of the Book.


Lord Chapter Just. But you should show us your Book, Mr. Langhorn.


Langhorn. I say my Lord, if I had such a Book it must needs be found in my
Study, if I had it, it must be there, for I never removed it.


Lord Chapter Just. That was not a Book fit to be left there.


Mr. Bedloe. My Lord, Pritchard did tell me, that the Commissions were come,
and that Mr. Langhorn had them, and things, says he, are now in a readiness.
Then said I, When shall I have my Commission? Said he, those that Mr. Langhorn
has are only for the General Officers; you must have yours, said he, from my
Lord Belasis.


Sir Cr. Levins. Do you know any thing of any money that was to be raised by
the Benedictine Monks; 6000 l. or what other sum?


Mr. Bedloe. My Lord, in May 1676. among the Letters I carried to Le Cheese,
one of them was directed to Stapleton a Benedictine Monk, to raise the money for
England.


Lord Chapter Just. The money, what money?


Mr. Bedloe. The money they had promised to remit into England.


Lord Chapter Just. But did they name no sum?


Mr. Bedloe. No my Lord, for they had no particular promise, but only that they
did make it their business to raise what they could.


Lord Chapter Just. And what was it? Do you know of any sum of money that was
raised, and by whom?


Mr. Bedloe. Le Cheese told me himself, that they had no reason to suspect him
or his Interest with the French King, for he had laid that sure enough. And
that when he found a fit opportunity, the money was ready to be remitted into
England, and that he had remitted some of it already to Mr. Coleman and Ireland.


Lord Chapter Just. You know not, but by what Le Cheese told you?


Mr. Bedloe. No.


Lord Chapter Just. He speaks what Le Cheese told him, that he would raise money,
and that he had sent some to Mr. Coleman, and Ireland.


Mr. Bedloe. Yes, and that the rest should follow when he found there was
absolute occasion; but he would not part with his money till they had assurance
of their being in readiness here, and likely to further and carry on the Design.


Mr. Just. Atkins. Mr. Bedloe, had you any discourse with the Prisoner about
any Commissions?


Mr. Bedloe. No my Lord, it is at least a year and an half since I saw him.


Lord Chapter Just. Did he ever own any Commissions he had?


Mr. Bedloe. No, Pritchard told me he had some.


Lord Chapter Just. You have seen the Commissions, have you not?


Mr. Bedloe. No, I never saw any in Mr. Langhorns hand.


Lord Chapter Just. Where did you see them then?


Mr. Bedloe. Sir Henry Tichbourn did show me three Commissions in Paris, Signed
by the General of the Order, and sealed with the Jesuits Seal, which made me
take up this Paper, which has been shown, tho it were a thing indifferent, yet
because it was written with the same hand, and Sealed with the same Seal that
the Commissions were that I saw in Paris.


Mr. Belwood. Did Mr. Langhorn know any thing of the Treason to murder the
King, by Pickering and Grove.


Mr. Bedloe. That I do know only y breport; but when Grove, Pickering and
Conyers were going to New Market I was at Harcourt's Chamber, and I had a
Design to go to Windsor, to observe what they did; and I did ask Father
Harcourt to give me leave to go see a friend of mine take shipping at Plymouth,
to send some Commendations by him to my Friends in Italy; then says Father
Harcourt, you cannot be spared, you must not go now, for we don't know what
return these Gentlemen will make of their journey, and what occasion there may
be for you, if there should be any good effect of it: then said I, I will go
and write, and send it by a friend down to be sent into Italy, but said he, you
must stay a while till I come back again. I am going to Mr. Langhorns Chamber
in the Temple, to take the Minutes of what they have done this morning: that
was the contrivance of sending down those people to New Market to assassinate
the King.


Mr. Just. Atkins. That is no Evidence against the Prisoner, because it is by
Hearsay.


Lord Chapter Just. It is right, and the Jury ought to take notice, That what
another man said is no Evidence against the Prisoner, for nothing will be
Evidence against him, but what is of his own knowledge. But I desire Mr.
Bedloe, as well as you can, you would repeat the effect of one of the most
material Letters Mr. Langhorn did transcribe.


Mr. Bedloe. Though I was not so exact a Frenchman in the nicety of the
Tongue, yet I understood enough to learn the sense of those Letters. The
English Letter from Stapleton, which he transcribed, was to this effect; That
Coleman and Harcourt, naming themselves We, (that is, We and the Jesuits, and
it was to the Rector, of the English Monks in particular, but I missed of the
Rector and Mr. Stapleton received it) I say the effect of that Letter was, they
would have a certain answer from them --


Langhorn. When was it?


Mr. Bedloe. It was in (76)


Lord Chapter Just. What was the effect, say you?


Mr. Bedloe. The effect was, that they would have a final Answer from those
Religious at Doway, and Paris, to know how far they had proceeded with the
English Religious, and all their Friends beyond Sea, in making Collections, and
remitting of money, for there was only money wanting; for the Arms of the
Catholics were all ready, and they had all a good mind to the Business, their
Arms and Hearts were ready, and the easiness of the King of England, and the
strength of the power of France, made it an opportunity not to be neglected:
That the Garrisons were ready to be put into such hands as they could trust.


Lord Chapter Just. Was there such an expression in the Letter, upon your Oath,
that they had such Arms, and that the Garrisons were ready to be put into their
hands, and whose hands they were ready to be put into.


Mr. Bedloe. Yes, my Lord, there were such expressions, and they would have the
Garrisons only in such hands as they co^l ^ust.


Lord Chapter Just. And did he transcribe those Letters?


Mr. Bedloe. He did transcribe those 3. while we were in his Chamber.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Was there any mention of exciting the French King by
power, to Invade this Kingdom?


Mr. Bedloe. There was in the French Letter to Monsieur Le Cheese, which he
transcribed too.


Langhorn. That was in French he says.


Lord Chapter Just. I suppose you understand French too, or else you could not do
what you did.


Langhorn. I Understand Law French.


Lord Chapter Just. Mr. Bedloe, did you never hear him discourse in French?


Mr. Bedloe. No, my Lord.


Dr. Oats. I cannot write nor read French, but I can Translate it.


Mr. Recorder. If you have any Questions to ask him, you may ask him.


Langhorn. How many were the Letters that then I transcribed?


Mr. Bedloe. There were Three, my Lord; one was to the English Monks at Paris,
another was to Monsieur Le Cheese, another to the Pope's Nuntio.


Langhorn. Were they long or short ones, I ask for this reason, because I
observe that in the Narrative, Coleman's Letters are very long, of what length
might they be.


Mr. Bedloe. They were the best part of half a sheet of Paper, for Mr. Coleman
writ a curious fine small hand, and would put a great deal of Business into a
little Paper, the Popes Nuntio's Letter was very short.


Lord Chapter Just. Did he transcribe them all before you went away?


Mr. Bedloe. Whilst we walked in his Chamber, he Registered them: We took a
great many turns about in the Chamber, and I saw the Papers before him, and his
Book.


Langhorn. Did those Letters express what the money was to be raised for, or
did they leave it to be understood; my meaning, my Lord, of my Question is
this, whether Mr. Coleman writ to him to hasten the money, and said it was for
such a particular use, or only in general.


Lord Chapter Just. He has answered it already, but he will do it again.


Mr. Bedloe. My Lord, though it was not expressed in the Letter, but only we
want nothing else from beyond Sea, but your assistance; tho it was not
expressed in the letter to destroy the King and the Protestant Religion, yet
the full of the discourse betwixt Mr. Coleman and Mr. Langhorn, was to this
effect. We only stay for money? when we have got that, we will put our selves
into a posture.


Lord Chapter Just. If you observed it, he said so before; when we asked him what
the effect of those Letters was, that all things were ready, it is a good
opportunity now for the effecting of our Design, having so easy a King to deal
with, and your King having so powerful a Treasury; do you but get the money of
him, and we shall do well enough.


Mr. Bedloe. Though it was not specified in the Letters what the money was for,
yet in the discourse between Mr. Coleman and Mr. Langhorn, it was worded so,
that it was plain, it was to destroy the Government and introduce Popery.


Langhorn. My Lord, ask whether this be all that he charges upon me?


Mr. Bedloe. I cannot say that my Lord, that this is all I have to say against
him; things may occur to my memory hereafter, which do not now.


Lord Chapter Just. But at this time you remember no more, do you?


Mr. Bedloe. No.


Mr. Just. Atkins. But to my apprehension what you said last is most material,
that is the discourse between him and Mr. Coleman, for that Rivets the whole.
When he said, that is we had but a Return of this money, then we have made our
selves safe, or words to that effect; but it was to the full meaning of this,
that the Protestant Religion could not stand any longer here, having assistance
from France.


Lord Chapter Just. So they consulted together after the Letters were transcribed,
did they?


Mr. Bedloe. Yes my Lord.


Dr. Oats. My Lord, I omitted one thing that was very material in my Evidence,
which comes in my mind since. The Congregation at Rome did contribute 800000
Crowns to be sent into England, and Mr. Langhorn did inquire concerning that
money, and had knowledge of the Receipt of it in France, as Mr. Langhorn did
say in the month of July or August.


Lord Chapter Just. Did he say it to you?


Dr. Oats. He did to Father Harcourt, Father Kaines, and Father Fenwick that
were there, 800000 Crowns come to France.


Lord Chapter Just. What said he then concerning the 800000 Crowns?


Dr. Oats. He gave an account of the moneys being lodged at Paris.


Lord Chapter Just. You hear what he says, that you gave an account of 800000
Crowns that were raised abroad, that it was Lodged and received at Paris.


Mr. Bedloe. I recollect something more now, tho I was not in Mr. Langhorns
Chamber, I met with Father Kaines one day, and said he, I must go and speak
with one Mr. Langhorn presently, and when he came out again, he brought a
Letter in his hand, and afterward we went to a Tobaccoshop in Wild-Street, and
there Father Kaines told me the effect of the Letter. He told me it was a
Chiding Letter from the Secretary de propaganda fide, Cardinal Barbarino who
had sent a chiding Letter to Mr. Langhorn and the rest of the Conspirators, for
going on no faster when they had so fair an opportunity.


L. C. J. Did you see the Letter directed to Mr Langhorne?


Mr. Bedloe. Father Kaines told me the Effects of it, and he had the Letter
from Mr Langhorne.


L. C. J. He told you so, well but this Evidence is as to the Plot in general,
but not to Mr Langhorne in particular. But that which he charges you
particularly with, is this, Your Transcribing the Letters, wherein there was an
Expression made, of your being all in readiness as for Arms and the Garrisons;
and your discourse afterward with Mr Coleman, in what a posture all things
were for the destruction of the Government, and the bringing in Popery, and
there wanted nothing but money for the effecting the whole Design. This is that
he says.


Langhorne. My Lord, I suppose he will not go out of the Court neither.


L. C. J. No, no, he will stay here.


Sir Cr. Levins. My Lord, there is one Witness that we had not ready here, when
we began to give some account of the General Plot, I pray he may be Examined,
his name is Buss.

(Who was sworn.)
L. C. J. What can you say of any Design upon the King's Life? What is your
Name?.


Mr. Buss. My name is Thomas Buss.


L. C. J. What Profession are you of?


Mr. Buss. I serve the Duke of Monmouth.


L. C. J. In what Capacity do you serve him?


Mr. Buss. I am his Cook.


L. C. J. How long have you served him?


Mr. Buss. Thirteen Years I have lived with him.


L. C. J. Well, what is it you have to say?


Mr. Buss. Being at Windsor, my Lord, with an old Acquaintance of mine, one
Handkinson that was then newly come from Italy --


L. C. J. When was this?


Mr. Buss. In September last, within a Week after the Duke came from Flanders,
and we were drinking together, for I had not seen him for many Years before,
and there was one Anthony was in the company, and said he, I am newly come from
Italy, and I am going again, and I am come to take my leave of my Friends. When
do you go away, said I? I believe I go to morrow, said he; but pray, said he to
Anthony, Have a special care of those four worthy Gentlemen. What Gentlemen,
said I? Four worthy Gentlemen, said he, that I brought over with me. What, said
I, from Italy? No, said he, they are four worthy Irish Gentlemen; They are very
worthy Persons, said he, have a special care of them, for they will do our
business.


L. C. J. What said you to that?


Mr. Buss. Nothing, for I knew nothing of it, till I saw Coleman's Trial, where
it speaks of the four Irish men that were to kill the King at Windsor, then I
bethought me of it.


L. C. J. Would you not ask him what that business was, or so?


Mr. Buss. No, I did not know at that time.


L. C. J. But no man in England but would have asked such a Question.


Mr. Buss. No he said, they were four Strangers: But, said I, did you bring
them out of Italy? Nor, says he, they are four Irish Gentlemen that I brought
over with me, worthy Persons.


L. C. J. North. And what Religion was he of that said so?


Mr. Buss. He was a Catholic, one that bought all into a College, that did so
here before he went.


Mr. Prance. He belonged to the Benedictine Monks, my Lord, in the Savoy.


L. C. J. And what was he that he spoke to?


Mr. Buss. He was a Catholic too, he was Servant to one that belongs to the
Queens Chapel.


L. C. J. North. Did you understand what the Business was they said they were
to do?


Mr. Buss. Not till I read Mr Coleman's Trial, and then I did guess these were
the persons that were to have killed the King at Windsor.


L. C. J. You saw them not, did you?


Mr. Buss. No, they were in charge of this Anthony, that is now in some place
in the Queens Chapel.


Mr. Just. Atkins. Did he speak to Anthony to have a care of them, or to you?


Mr. Buss. To Anthony, he was the person that was to take care of them.


L. C. J. Is Anthony a Papist?


Mr. Buss. Yes, a very strong Papist, and we used to be often together; but now
he is jealous, and will not come near me to talk with me as we used to do.


L. C. J. Now I understand the reason of it, why he did not ask the Question;
it was not likely he should, for it was not spoken to him, but he stood by all
the while the discourse was to Anthony, another man, and it was to him that he
spoke to have a care of the four Irish men, for they would do their Business.
What did Anthony say?


Mr. Buss. He promised he would have as much care of them, as of his own life.


L. C. J. Where is this Anthony to be found?


Mr. Bedloe. My Lord, Anthony is a Portuguese, and the Queens Confessors man.


L. C. J. When did you see him?


Mr. Bedloe. He was seen this morning; they call him Signior Antonio.


L. C. J. North. You should have an Order to take this same Anthony into
Custody, but in order to the finding of him, let him go to my Lord Ossory.


L. C. J. Mr Tisser, we give you an Order for the taking of this Signior
Antonio, you will find him at Somersethouse; for the doing of this, we do
advise you to wait upon my Lord Ossory, and tell him that you have such an
Order, but that out of Reverence to the Queen, we have also ordered you to wait
upon him, to desire him to send him.


L. C. J. North. What is become of this Hankinson?


Mr. Buss. He is abroad beyond the Seas, my Lord, for he said he was come
thither to take leave of his Friends, and was to go the next morning into
Surrey, and so away.


L. C. J. Well, what have you now to say Mr Langhorne?


Langhorne. I conceive this last Witness says nothing to me.


L. C. J. North. He speaks only to the Plot in general, as the first Witnesses
did; but that which is upon you, is as to Mr Oats, who speaks to every Article
of the Indictment expressly; and Mr Bedloe says, he did not only see you
Transcribe and Copy out that Treasonable Letter, but he carried other Letters
to you, which you promised to Transcribe; and these are Overt-acts that make
you a Party to the Treason.


L. C. J. Besides your discourse with Coleman, after the Letters were
Transcribed.


Langhorne. These two Gentlemen were Parties in this supposed Crime, the two
Witnesses which do concern me, are Mr Oats, and Mr Bedloe, and they both of
them clearly appear to have been in the same Treason that I suppose they charge
me with; I desire to know whether they have had their Pardon or no?


L. C. J. I believe they have. Mr Oats, and Mr Bedloe, Have you your Pardons?


Mr. Bedloe. Yes, my Lord, I have three.


Dr. Oats. I have two Pardons under the Broad Seal, but I don't know what is
in them.


L. C. J. North. But make your Objection how you will, whether they had, or
whether they had not, they are Witnesses.


Mr. Bedloe. I never gave any Evidence till I had my Pardon.


Mr. Langhorne. I ask for this reason, I look upon your Lordship and the Court
as my Counsel, to advise me in matters of Law, whether these be good Witnesses
or not?


L. C. J. We do tell you, that if we had not judged them to be Witnesses, we
would not have heard them.


Langhorne. They come under the same reason of Law with an Approver, having had
their Pardon; I don't say they are directly Approvers, but I conceive they come
under the same reason of Law with them, and then if the Approver be pardoned,
by the Law the Appellee ought to be discharged; and methinks by the same
reason, these men having been participes Criminis, and having got their
Pardons, ought not to be such substantial Witnesses against the Prisoner at the
Bar. But, my Lord, I have one thing yet further to ask, I desire to know
whether they have not received any Rewards, or Gratifications, for the
Discovery they have made, and the Service they have done? And whether they do
not expect further Rewards?


L. C. J. Is there any Allowance to be made to you?


Dr. Oats. I have received a Reward, by disbursing 6 or 700 l.out of my Pocket,
and I don't know when I shall see it again.


Mr. J. Pemberton. Mr. Langhorne does suppose that the Witnesses are corrupted
and bribed; Do you think Mr Langhorne, that the King will bribe his Witnesses?


Langhorne My Lord, I only propose it as a Question.


L. C. J. Would you answer that Question your self?


L. C. J. North. If you can suppose there was any Subornation or Corruption,
call your Witnesses, and prove it; but for their receiving sustenance and
maintenance from the King, that is but reasonable, and can be no Objection. And
you your self know, that an Approver, while he is in that service, has a Penny
a day, which in ancient Times was a great matter for livelihood and sustenance;
so that any Reward that they have, if you can prove it by Contract or
Subornation, you cannot make an Objection.


Langhorne. My Lord, I am informed by a Prisoner in the Gao^, that Mr Bedloe
has received 500 l.


L. C. J. If you can prove any thing do, prove what you can.


Mr. Recorder. That 500 l. was about a particular Fact.


L. C. J. But pray what is his Name?


Langhorne. His Name is Mr Reading.


L. C. J. North. He is an infamous person, he has stood in the Pillory, we
cannot take him for a Witness; but now I Will tell you for the 500 l. it is a thing
we all know of. It was a Reward for a particular business, not relating to the
Plot, but it was for the discovery of the Murderers of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey.


Mr. J. Atkins. I think Mr Prance is here, that will give an account of that,
for Bedloe discovered him.


Mr. Bedloe. I am so far from having any benefit by this discovery, that I am
700 l. out of Pocket.


Mr. Just. Else. You shall have the liberty to make what good defense you can
for your self, and prove what you can, you must not go this way to work.


L. C. J. It Is pretty reasonable for us to give a public satisfaction to all
the World, that we do nothing underhand, but that we do in this Case as in all
other Cases; any thing that is fit to be answered, they shall answer, and
perchance in this Case something more than can be strictly required of us. It Is
notorious enough, that Mr Oats and Mr Dedloe have been fed at the King's
charge, and it cannot be objected against them, and need not be winked at, for
they were Parties in the Plot. And when they come to make the Discovery,
without which we should never have known the Plot, for you know it is hard to
discover any Crime, Forgery, or the like, but by one that has been privy to
it, and a guilty person; yet these men always have been, and are in Law
Witnesses, and it is just they should have a Competency to maintain them, since
they came for the Public Good to make such Discoveries.


L. C. J. North. And that particular Sum of Money was paid to Mr Bedloe, in
pursuance of the King's Proclamation, which we all know, which was all
publicly done.


Langhorne. The Reason why I press this was, because of the Proclamation, which
was to invite Persons to come, touching the discovery of this Plot; and to
encourage them to it by a promise or reward. I think it may be reasonable
enough, where any person that is charged with a Crime does absent, to propose a
Reward for the bringing him in. But I think it is hard, that when a Prisoner is
in Custody, Witnesses should be brought in against him by such means.


L. C. J. North. You do Artificially go off from the Point, Answer the Evidence
that has been given against you, and you shall be heard; but you labor very
much, and trouble your self to make Answer to another matter that is not
pertinent.


L. C. J. Does your Defense consist wholly of this sort of matter, objecting
the incompetency of the Witnesses? Can you make no Answer to the Fact?


Langhorne. I must tell your Lordship, My whole Defense must run to disable the
Witnesses, for my Lord I was committed to Newgate the 17th of October, and I
have been kept there a close Prisoner till this day was seven-night, or Friday
the last Week, I never conversed with any Friend, or any Relation, nor knew any
thing of News, but only with some few persons sent by Authority of the House of
Commons or the Council. And I was never examined by any since I was committed.
I never heard what was charged against me, and I could not foresee what these
men could testify, because I was not confident whereupon they would proceed;
therefore I can have no Defense, unless it be by lessening their Credit, it is
impossible I should.


L. C. J. Do, lessen it if you can. If you have any Witnesses to take off their
Credit, or contradict them, call them.


Mr. Just. Atkins. But I would say one thing to you Mr. Langhorne; you seem to
put a very ill Construction upon the Kings Proclamation, as if it were to
invite and encourage persons to come and swear about a Plot, where there was
none; it was to invite people to make a further Discovery of a Plot that lay
Close, and we could not fully Discover for the preservation of the King and
Kingdom without such a means.


Langhorne. He did propose a Reward.


Mr. Justice Atkins. Ay in order to a further Discovery of that Plot which we
had Evidence of before.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. And so you would be close in all your Accounts, and none
should be rewarded that could make us any discovery of them, but presently
their Testimony must be gone. It Is very fine, but the Court overrules it.


L. C. J. Mr. Langhorne, whatsoever you object of this kind does fly in the
face, and reflect upon the integrity and wisdom of King, Lords and Commons.


L. C. J. North. For it was done by the advice of all Three.


L. C. J. If you will go on and prove any thing, but pray don't spend our time to
no purpose.


Langhorne. Call Parry and Townely, and Doddington, and the rest.


Dr. Oats. My Lord, here are Papists come into the Court with their Swords on.


L. C. J They will not draw them here.


Lord Mayor. It Is well enough, it is well enough Dr. Oats, you are safe enough
here.


L. C. J. Who will you have first?


Langhorne. I would have Hilsly set up.

(Which was done.)
L. C. J* What would you ask him?


Langhorne. Your Lordship has heard Dr. Oats affirm he came over such a time
in the Packet Boat with Mr. Hilsly. I desire to know whether that be true or
no?


L. C. J. I can help you in that, for we had him and his Companions here
yesterday, but however we will hear them again, if you will have them. Do you
know Mr. Oats?


Hilsly. I do my Lord very well.


L. C. J. When did you come over from St. Omers?


Hilsly. I came over the 24th of April, N. S.


L. C. J. Did Mr. Oats come with you?


Hilsly. No, he did not.


Dr. Oats. No, my Lord, he did leave me there, but I overtook him at Calis.


L. C. J. Look you there now, you did leave him there, but he over-took you at
Calis. Did you leave him there?


Hilsly. I did leave him there.


L. C. J. Ay, but he over took you then, did he not?


Hilsly. No, he did not.


L. C. J. He answers as he did yesterday, that he did not come over with him;
you lost your money did you not?


Hilsly. Yes, I did.


L. C. J. How did you loose it? Did you loose it at play?


Hilsly. It Is no matter how I lost it, I did not loose it at play.


Dr. Oats. I Will tell the Court if your Lordship please how he lost it, he lent
a great deal of money to a Gentleman, who went away with his money and left him
to pay the Reckoning.


L. C. J. What say you to that?


Hilsly. That is very true, and I confess it, but what is all this? nothing to
the matter, he was told this by some body else, I never saw him, nor ever any
man in the Ship saw him come over with me.


L. C. J. I Will tell you what then; first here is something now that you would
not confess yesterday, nor indeed would you confess it now, I asked you how you
lost your money; you see Mr. Oats can tell you how it was, though you wont tell
us, so that though this be a secret, he knows it, and how could he know this
secret unless he were there?


Hilsly. There is one that I met by the way that did tell him this Story.


Then one Gifford stood up. L. C. J. Did you see Mr. Oats?


Gifford. Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. What discourse had you with him concerning Hilsly?


Gifford. Why he told us of his departure.


L. J. C. When?


Gifford. After he was gone away.


L. C. J. How long after?


Gifford. Three our four days.


L. C. J. What said he to you?


Gifford. He only told us he was gone.


L. C. J. What else said you of him?


Gifford. He only said he departed out of the College then.


L. C. J. What did you say to Mr. Oats about it?


Gifford. I don't remember what I said in particular?


L. C. J. Hilsly, call up the other person that you say told Mr. Oats.


Hilsly. He is not here my Lord, but here is one that was in the Company when
he told it.


L. C. J. Who was by?


Gifford. Mr. Burnaby, who came thither the first of May.


L. C. J. Hearken to me, when you talked with Mr. Oats concerning Mr. Hilsly's
being gone from the College, was there any body by?


Gifford. I cannot tell.


L. C. J. Was Mr. Burnaby by when Mr. Oats and you talked about Mr. Hilsly?


Then another Witness started up. 3d Witness. Yes, my Lord, there was Mr. Oats
with me, and Mr. Burnaby put himself into our Company in the Garden, and he
acquainted me with this Story.


L. C. J. What said he?


3d Witness. He said he met this Gentleman, and that this Gentleman was cheated
of his money.


L. C. J. How did he tell you he was cheated?


3d Witness. I dont't know the occasion, but he said a fellow cheated him of
the money.


L. C. J. Was that all he said?


3d Witness. Yes, my Lord, but I do not remember upon what occasion, he said he
was cheated by a shirking fellow.


L. C. J. Did he name the place he met him at?


3d Witness. I don't know my Lord whether he mentioned it or no.


L. C. J. So that Mr. Oats names the place which he was never told; and unless
he was there, how could he then tell it?


3d Witness. But this does not prove that I speak against my Conscience, that
does not argue.


L. C. J. Look you, the answer is this Mr. Langhorne. You would charge Mr. Oats
with falsity in saying he came over in the Pacquet-Boat with Hilsly, and you
call up him, and he says, he did not come, but he left him at St. Omers; Mr.
Oats comes and says, it is true, he left me there, but I over-took him at Calis,
by this very token, said he, you were cheated of your money by a person that you
lent it to, who went away, and left you to pay the Reckoning. When I asked Mr.
Hilsly how he could tell if it were true that he was not with him, he answered,
he was told it by another; but when I come to know what that other person said,
it was no more than this, he said in Mr. Oats's hearing Mr. Hilsly was cozened
of his money, but did not say how, nor by whom, nor where.


Langhorne. Now to prove that what Mr. Hilsly said is true, and that therefore
Mr. Oats his knowledge must come by another hand, I desire that the Witness may
be asked how long Mr. Oats was at St. Omers.


L. C. J. How long was Mr. Oats at St. Omers?


3d Witness. From December till June he was there, except one particular day
that he went to Watton.


L. C. J. And you saw him almost every day.


3d Witness. Yes, I did.


L. C. J. You have 15 or 16 Witnesses that will say all this; but yet if you
will we will call them.


L. C. J. When went he away, do you know that?


3d Witness. He went in June, I cannot certainly say the day.


L. C. J. Well, call another.


3d Witness. Pray, my Lord, let me speak, if your Lordship please to let me
give you my Reason, why I might see him; I saw him in the Refectory; he had a
little Table by himself distinct from the rest, and dining together in a
public place, it was impossible but we should see his place empty, if he were
gone, and I know the number of my own School, and can tell whether any one be
absent.


L. C. J. What because he sat at a Table by himself therefore you think he was
there all the while.


3d Witness. Certainly if I may believe mine own eyes, I saw him there every
day.


Lord Chapter Baron. Were you there every day your self?


3d Witness. Yes, my Lord, I was, I did not miss one day I had no Infirmity.


Langhorne. My Lord, Mr Oats has affirmed that there was with him when he came
over in April, Sir Robert Brett.


L. C. J. He says only he believes so, he says positively he came over in the
company of Sir John Warner, Sir Thomas Preston, and he thinks also Sir Robert
Brett, but is not positive.


Langhorne. This he affirmed both in his Narrative, and upon Oath in the Lords
House.


L. C. J. Show any thing that he was sworn to here.


M. Just. Atkins. But what says this Lad more, let him speak, for he is very
full of it.


3d Witness. The first Day of May I saw him in the Garden with a Lay-Brother at
Kittle-pins in the view of all the College.


Langhorne. Let us examine him as to persons, and then refer it to the Lords
Register.


L. C. J. Why if you will prove something Mr. Oats has sworn there, that you
can contradict, first prove what he swore, and then contradict it.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Pray take notice you must not go to oppose him in any
thing of that Oath, unless he has sworn it here; whatsoever there be there,
except he has sworn the same here, it is in vain to object it, for he cannot be
intended to have Witness to make good what he swore there.


Sir Cr. Levins. Let us hear what he does offer.


Langhorne. Under favor Mr. Oats has acknowledged what he swore there was
true.


L. C. J. You are mistaken Mr. Langhorne, indeed when you asked him that
Question, he said as far as what concerned what he swore here, was true, and he
is bound at this time to answer no more.


Langhorne. Then as to Sir John Warner, I desire my Witnesses may be examined.


L. C. J. I suppose they may be here, and say the same they did yesterday; that
he did not stir from his house at Watton all April and May.


4th Witness. Yes, my Lord, he lived there all that while.


L. C. J. What year?


4th Witness. In year 1678.


L. C. J. That is the time that Oats says he came over with him. You saw him
almost every day did not you?


4th Witness. Yes, I did, only four days that I was absent, being sent by him
to St. Omers at a great Feast.


L. C. J. And when you came back you found him there?


4th Witness. Yes, I did.


L. C. J. You are his Gardner, are you not?


4th Witness. Yes, I am.


L. C. J. Did you stay all those four days at St. Omers?


4th Witness. I was sent to the high Kirk, and carried some Instruments for the
Music, and there I stayed four days, and the last day of April, and the first,
and second, and third of May. And I saw Mr. Oats there in the house, and I saw
him going into the Refectory to dinner.


L. C. J. He says that Sir John Warner was at home all April and May, that he
himself was absent but four days, that he left him there, and when he came
back, found him there, and that in the four days he was at St. Omers, he saw
Mr. Oats, which was the last of April* the first, second and third of May. You
don't know when Mr. Oats went away?


4th Witness. No, my Lord, not I.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Was Sir John Warner there all June?


4th Witness. My Lord, I cannot tell that, I only speak to April and May.


L. C. J. Those are the two Months that fit him.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Why how come you not to remember that, as well as the
other two, for that is since?


4th Witness. Because I took not so much notice of him in those Times.


L. C. J. How came you to take more special notice of them two Months, than of
the other?


4th Witness. Because our Rector did then come into England, and he took the
charge of the House upon him in the Rector's absence.


L. C. J. When did he come?


4th Witness. He came the 24th of April.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Pray who is your Rector? What is his Name?


4th Witness. Sir Francis Williams.


L. C. J. Where was Sir John Warner in June and July?


4th Witness. I cannot tell.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. And where was he in August and September?


4th Witness. He went out of Town, but where, I am not certain.


L. C. J. You were Gardener there then.


4th Witness. Yes, I was.


L. C. J. Why cannot you as well tell me then where he was in June and July, as
in April and May? Answer me plainly.


4th Witness. I think he was there all that time, but I cannot be certain.


L. C. J. Why not so certain for those two Months, as you are for the other?


4th Witness. Because I did not take so much notice.


L. C. J. How come you to take more notice of the one, than the other? That he
was there in April and May, rather than that he was there in July.


4th Witness. Because the Question, my Lord, that I came for, did not fall upon
that time.


L. C. J. Now he has answered plainly; when I asked the Question, Why he did
not take so much notice of those Months, as he did of April and May? He
answered me, Because the Question did not fall upon those Months; and that,
without all Question, is a plain and an honest Answer.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Indeed he has forgot his Lesson, you should have given him
better Instructions.


L. C. J. Look you Mr Langhorne, If he be to be believed, and that he does not
speak falsely, or more than he knows, it is impossible that Oats's Testimony and
his can stand together; for he directly affirms he saw Mr Oats the last of
April, the 1st, 2d, and 3d of May. Now Mr Oats says he was here then; so that
these two cannot stand together. The Question then is, Whether he be to be
believed? And whether he does not come wilfully, or prepared? the Jury have
beard what a kind of testimony he gives, when the Question was asked him, How
he came to take notice of the Months of April and May, more than of June and
July? And why he was more sure Sir John Warner was there at the one time, than
at the other? Why, said he, because the Question falls upon those former
Months, and not upon those of June or July. Now that does shake all that was
said before, and looks as if he came on purpose, and prepared for those Months,
and now this, I am afraid, will go through all your St Omers men.


L. C. J. North. Indeed I doubt it will go a great way, to shake all their
Testimony.


Sir Cr. Levins. You Gardener, what do you say was your Rector's name?


4th Witness. Sir Francis Williams.


Sir Cr. Levins. And he came over in April or May, Did he?


4th Witness. He came over the 24th of April.


Sir Cr. Levins. Why that is the time that Mr Oats came over, and he was one of
the persons that he said came over with him.


4th Witness. No, he came alone only with a certain Officer of the College.


Langhorne. Pray let Gifford be asked the same Question about Sir John Warner;
for if he did come, as he says, from Watton to St Omers, at that time he must
see him at St Omers, for he was at St Omers then. The Question is about Sir
John Warner, if he were at Watton, or St Omers, then he could not come over
with Mr Oats.


L. C. J. When did you see Sir John Warner?


Gifford. I saw him about June, or thereabouts.


L. C. J. Where did you see him?


Gifford. I saw him there in St Omers House.


L. C. J. When?


Gifford. In June or July, when he invited me over to Watton.


L. C. J. This man does not serve the turn, he does not know the Month upon
which the Question runs.


5th Witness. The first day of May there was a great Feast, St Fortunatus and
Gordianus, and then I saw Mr Oats four days, and he was there all the Month of
May.


L. C. J. Where was Sir John Warner then?


5th Witness. I cannot tell, but at St Omers I saw Mr Poole, and Sir Robert
Brett at that time.


L. C. J. Did Mr Poole come over with you?


Dr. Oats, Yes, my Lord, he did.


L. C. J. Witness, when did Mr Poole come from St Omers?


5th Witness. He came first to St Omers with Mr Whitebread, he was my Master of
Music, and he taught me, and it was impossible he should be missing without my
knowledge.


L. C. J. But he was gone to England long before that; and he could not be at
England and St Omers, at the same time.


5th Witness. You say right, he could not.


L. C. J. When came he from St Omers?


5th Witness. In the Month of June or May.


L. C. J. Or April.


5th Witness. No, it was the Month of June.


L. C. J. These are but Collateral Matters, Mr Langhorne, for you to stand upon
this, it spends time to no purpose; but the great Question is, Friend, whether
you don't mistake the Month?


5th Witness. Yes, yes, (at which the people laughed) no, no, I don't mistake
the Month, I only speak the Truth according to my knowledge.


L. C. J. How can you so precisely remember the Month of May he was there; for
when I asked you when he went away, you could hardly tell the Month.


5th Witness. Yes, my Lord, Mr Oats says, in the Month of May he was in
England, but I say I saw Mr Poole then at St Omers.


L. C. J. But the great Question is, Whether you are to be believed? We know
you answer the Question positively, but my reason why I fear you are not to be
believed, is, because you are so precise, that Mr Poole taught you all May, but
I ask you once more, Was it in June, or was it in May?


5th Witness. It was about June.


L. C. J. May is about June. Why then you cannot tell. Was it in June?


5th Witness. Yes, my Lord, it was; it was about June. And this is nothing but
what I know, for I actually saw Mr Oats there at that time.


L. C. J. I Will tell you what Mr Langhorne, use your discretion, call whom you
will, and we will hear them as long as you will; but we had Sixteen of them
yesterday, that did all speak to the same purpose, but in answer to these
Sixteen Witnesses, Mr Oats did produce, and he will produce again six or seven
Witnesses, and one of them a Papist, if not a Priest, who do swear that Mr Oats
was here in April and May; I Will tell you beforehand, do you as you will.


Then one Baille stood up, and being a Foreigner, an Interpreter was called. L.
C. J. Where did you see Sir John Warner in April and May?


Interpreter. He says he saw him actually at St Omers.


L. C. J. What all the Month of May?


Interpreter. Yes, he says he conversed with him all the Month of May.


L. C. J. And was he there all April, and conversed with him then?


Interpreter. Yes, he says every day of both Months. He says he saw him from
the first Sunday in April, to the 14th of May, and conversed with him.


L. C. J. Where did Sir John Warner go the 14th of May?


Interpreter. My Lord, he says he went for one day only to St Omers, and came
back again.


L. C. J. Ask him, How he knows this?


Interpreter. He says he was employed about a Building by Sir John Warner.


Then Carpenteir stood up. L. C. J. When did you see Mr Oats, and where?


Carpenteir. I speak as to Sir Thomas Preston.


L. C. J. What say you as to Sir Thomas Preston?


Carpenter. I saw him at Liege.


L. C. J. When?


Carpenter. All the Months of March, April, May, and June, he was still there.


L. C. J. When went he away?


Carpenter. In the time of the Vacancies.


L. C. J. When is that?


Carpenter. That is from the beginning of August, till the end of September.


L. C. J. When came he again?


Carpenter. When they came to School again, and that was in the 2d or 3d of
October.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Were you with him all that time?


Carpenter. Yes, I was. He has not been in England these three Years.


L. C. J. How long have you been there?


Carpenter. I have been four Years, and I never knew that he was absent, but in
the time of the Vacancies.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Call another Witness.


Then stood up another Witness, who being a Dutch man, and not speaking
English, an Interpreter was called for him also. L. C. J. Well, what comes he
for?


Interpreter. He says he comes to testify, That Sir John Warner was at Watton
in April; and he says he saw him there, from the 14th of April, to the 25th of
April.


L. C. J. And then to what time?


Interpreter. He says he was there till the 16th of May.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Ask him where he was the beginning of April?


Interpreter. He says he was Superior there in the House, and did Govern.


L. C. J. Ask him where he was in the latter end of May?


Interpreter. He says he was likewise in the House, save only one day, when he
went to St Omers.


L. C. J. Then he might have said, in short, he was there all April and May.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Call another Witness.


Langhorne. Call John Joseph.

(Who stood up.)
Mr. Just. Pemberton. What do you ask him, Mr Langhorne?


Joseph. That which I say is this, That Sir Thomas Preston was at Liege in
March, April, May, and June, in the Year 1678.


L. C. J. Did you see him every day in those Months?


Joseph. That I cannot well tell.


L. C. J. Did you see him every other day?


Joseph. Yes, my Lord, I believe I did once in two or three days.


L. C. J. Where was he in July?


Joseph. He was at Liege too. He was obliged to be so; but in the time of the
Vacancies in August, he was absent.


L. C. J. Then you say he was all those Months, March, April, May, June and
July there.


Joseph. Yes my Lord, those four Months I am sure of it.


L. C. J. What became of him in August, when he went, during the Vacancies,
abroad? Do you know whither he went?


Sir Cres. Levins. Do you know whether he went into England.


Joseph. I never heard that he was in England.


L. C. J. When did he return again?


Joseph. When they began School, and that is in the beginning of October.


Then another Witness stood up. L. C. J. Well, what say you?


10th Witness. I can say that Mr. Oats never stirred out of the College at
that time when he says he came to England, that is, he says he came upon Monday
the 25th of April, but he did not, for that day he went into the Infirmary, and
he stayed at St. Omers all April and May.


L. C. J. And how much longer?


10th Witness. A great part of June.


L. C. J. Was he there the 20th of June?


10th Witness. I am sure he was, but how much longer I cannot tell.


L. C. J. Where was he in February and March?


10th Witness. He was there too; in January he lay out one night, and that was
at Watton, but I am sure he did not come over the 24th of April, N S. as he
says.


Mr. Recorder. Now he says, it is New Style, not Old Style, as he said
yesterday.


Then another Witness stood up. L. C. J. Well, what do you say?


11th Witness. Mr. Poole was sick, and I can remember when his Nephew went to
him into the Infirmary before he went away from the College, and he gave him
good Counsel, as he said, and I remember that Mr. Brett was sick at Watton, and
did come home again on Horseback, and I believe he did not stir out; and Mr.
Poole was at St. Omers, I am sure I saw him once in two or three days all April
and May. He went by the name of Killingbeck.


L. C. J. But he does not positively say he saw Sir Robert Brett every day
there, he says he believes he did.


11th Witness. He came into the School and gave the Boys Questions to dispute
of.


Mr. Recorder. Call the rest of your Witnesses.


Then another Witness was called and stood up. L. C. J. North. When did you see
Mr. Oats at St. Omers?


12th Witness. I saw him almost every other day from the time he came till he
went away.


L. C. J. When was the first time you saw him?


12th Witness. The beginning of December.


L. C. J. Did you see him in April there?


12th Witness. Yes, I saw him in April there at an Action.


L. C. J. And did you see him in May there?


12th Witness. Yes, I can testify I saw him the first day of May in the Garden.


L. C. J. How long staid he there?


12th Witness. Till June.


L. C. J. How came you to take such precise notice?


12th Witness. By his very place I could not but take notice if he were missing.


L. C. J. How can you say you saw him in the Garden the first of May?


12th Witness. I Will tell your Lordship why, because there was a great Feast,
and he played at Nine-pins in the Garden, and I can tell what they played for.


L. C. J. What say you as to Mr Nevil, and Sir. Robert Brett's being at St
Omers.


12th Witness. I did not take so much notice of Sir Robert Brett, as for Nevil,
I think I saw him once in three days.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. And there is nothing said of him here.


Then another Witness stood up. L. C. J. When did you see Mr Oats first at St
Omers?


13th Witness. I first saw him in the Month of December.


L. C. J. Did you see him in April and May?


13th Witness. Yes, my Lord, I did.


L. C. J. Was he there all those Months?


13th Witness. Yes, my Lord, he was.


L. C. J. North. Was he there all the Month of June?


13th Witness. He went away toward the latter end of June.


L. C. J. North. Yesterday you said the latter end of July. Call another
Witness.


Then another Witness stood up. L. C. North. Come you, hear the Question, Did
you see Mr Oats at St Omers, in the Month of April?


13th Witness. Yes, my Lord, he was there all the Month of April.


L. C. J. Was he there all the Month of May?


13th Witness. Yes, my Lord, he was.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. And a good part of June?


13th Witness. Yes, my Lord.


Langhorne. What do you say as to Mr. Poole?


13th Witness. I saw Mr. Poole in the Infirmary the third day of May.


L. C. J. North. How came you to take notice of it, so well as to remember it
that it was the third of May?


13th Witness. It was a Festival Day. And the Feast we kept was the Invention
of the Holy Cross. We had the Action the day before, and some that were in the
Infirmary would have it Acted over again to them, and we did so. My Lord,
within one or two days after, Mr. Hilsly went away, I discoursed with Mr. Oats
about half an hour; he came out within a day or two after out of the Infirmary,
and I saw him walking in the Gallery. And again, the 2d of May I saw him
walking with one Mr. Burnaby, who arrived the day before, the first of May, and
then I saw him the 3d, 4th, and 5th; in this Burnaby's company; I saw him again
the 26th of May, with a Band about his head in order to Confirmation, for they
always have a Linen Cloth bound about their head at such a time.


L. C. J. Call another.

( Who stood up, his name was Lydcot.)
L. C. J. What can you say?


Lydcot. All that I can say is this, that between the said Month of December,
1677. and June, 1678. which is the time in Question, Mr. Oats was never out of
the College above one night, when he went to Watton in January; and this is
certain, that from the time that I saw him first, till the time he went away
for altogether, there were not two days that passed away wherein I did not see
him, except in the Month of March, and when he was in the Infirmary the 24th of
April, but then I heard that he was there --


L. C. J. Who did tell you so?


Lydcot. The man that keeps that part of the House; and coming into my Office
after my Recovery out of a Fit of Sickness a week before Christmas or
thereabouts, I saw Mr. Oats by this Circumstance, The Servitors of the House
said they were glad to see me, and Mr. Oats being in that Place at the
Refectory that was assigned to him, I asked who he was, and they told me such
an one, but I had heard of his admission a few days before. Likewise Mr. Oats
was there when Mr. Hilsly came for England, which was about the 24th of April,
by this Circumstance, that he was present in the Refectory with some of the
Scholars Mr. Richard Burnaby came to the College about a week after Mr. Hilsly
went away, and Mr. Oats was actually there then, and we did very much wonder
that he became acquainted with him so quickly after his arrival. I say Mr. Oats
was actually there when Mr. Killingbeck and Mr. Conquest came for England about
the 3d of May, by this Circumstance, that I had some discourse with Mr. Oats,
and some others of the Scholars, that Mr. Conquest would by no means get out of
his Bed betimes that day he was to go away, being unwilling to leave the
College. He was there the 26th of May by this Circumstance, that the Bishop
dined there that day, and Mr. Oats was there Confirmed that day. Mr. Oats was
there also in June my Lord.


L. C. J. Yes he was there in June, he does not deny it.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. And was he there all May?


Lydcott. Yes, my Lord, he was, and all April, except the time he was in the
Infirmary, which was 3 or 4 days.


Langhorne. What do you say as to Poole and Nevil?


Lydcott. They were there all the whole time in question, and they were never
absent any competent time to come to England, as he says.


L. C. J. North. We must not allow that, you must tell us what time they were
there, that we may know it.


Lydcott. They were there in March, April, May, June and July.


L. C. J. But did you see him every day from the beginning Christmas to the
time he went away in June?


Lydcott. Yes, except the time he was at Watton, and when he was in the
Infirmary.


Mr. Recorder. But was not Mr. Oats twice in the Infirmary?


L. C. J. He was I remember there on St. Thomas of Canterbury's Day, and I
remember he was there in April.


Sir Cr. Levins. I did here you say something of some body that was absent five
or six days, was it you?


Lydcott. I was sick in the Month of March, and I was in the Infirmary till
about the 12 or 14 day.


Sir Cr. Levins. And did you see him there all that time?


Lydcott. I excepted that time, but I heard his voice once in that time in the
next Room to the Infirmary, where I was by this Circumstance; He used to come
to a Table by himself, and it was near the Door, and Nevil and Poole were
there, as I said before.


Mr. Recorder. He speaks much more to the purpose to day Mr. Langhorne than he
did yesterday.


L. C. J. North. And much louder.


Langhorne. I hope your Lordship will take notice that he speaks likewise of
the Residence of Mr. Poole, Sir Robert Brett, and Mr. Nevil.


L. C. J. Yes I do. Call another Witness.


(Who stood up, and being a Foreigner, his Evidence was likewise Interpreted.)
L. C. J. Ask him what he says.


Interpreter. He says he saw Mr. Oats, he was there, and he remembers it, till
about the 25 of June.


L. C. J. Where did he see him?


Interpreter. He says it was either in the House, or in the Garden.


Lord Chief Just. North. When was that, that he was in the Infirmary?


Interpreter. He says, he was in the Infirmary toward the latter end of
December or beginning of January.


L. C. J. Ask him what he says about Nevil and Poole.


Interpreter. He says they were there all June, and that Mr. Poole went away in
the Month of July; and he further says, that he being a Waterman, he carried
this same Williams and March in his Boat the last Sunday in April.


Lord Chapter Just. North. Who is your next, Mr. Langhorn? let him stand up: (which
he did) When did you see Mr. Oats at St. Omers?


16th Witness. In the month of April, 1678.


Lord Chapter Just. And in May too was he?


16th Witness. Yes, he was.


Lord Chapter Just. Was Mr. Poole there all that time?


16th Witness. Yes, he was, and so was Mr. Nevil and Mr. Bret.


Lord Chapter Just. Where is Nevil now?


16th Witness. I believe left him there.


Lord Chapter Just. What are these persons?


16th Witness. The one is a Prefect, and I believe he is there still. In the
month of May I made Mr. Killingbeck a Suit of Clothes, and Mr. Oats came into
the Shop, and asked me whose clothes they were? I said Mr. Killingbecks: said
he, how can that be? they are black: said I, they must be black, for he is in
mourning.


Langhorn. Here is Mr. Grove's Wife and his Maid.

Then Mrs. Grove stood up.
Lord Chapter Just. What question would you ask of her?


Langhorn. Mr. Oats has sworn, and given us several circumstances of his
coming over, and being here at that which he calls the Consult, and that he lay
at Mr. Groves three or four nights; I desire she may be asked that question,
whether he did so or no?


Lord Chapter Just. Do you know Mr. Oats, Mrs. Grove?


Grove. No, I never saw him.


Lord Chapter Just. Were there any Lodgers lay at your house in April was
twelvemonth.


Grove. Yes, my Lord there were.


Lord Chapter Just. Do you use to have Lodgers that you do not know?


Grove. My house was full of Lodgers at that time. I did not know them till
they lay there.


Sir Cresw. Levins. Why then, Mr. Oats might be there, and you not know him.


Grove. If he lay there, I must needs know him.


Lord Chapter J. Why might not a man lie with any of your Lodgers three or four
nights, and you not know him?


Grove. Who should he lie withal my Lord?


Dr. Oats. I had a bed to my self when I lay there.


Lord Chapter Just. Mr. Oats describe the Chamber as well as you can.


Dr. Oats. It was a place taken out of another Room, where two men were taken
out that were committed to prison.


Lord Chapter Just. Were there any persons taken out of your house, and sent to
prison?


Grove. Yes, my Lord, there were.


Lord Chapter Just. In that very Room he lay out of which those persons were taken.


Grove. He did not.


Dr. Oats. Upon my Oath I did lie there 3 or 4 nights more or less.


Sir Cr. Levins. You were in a disguise Sir at that time, were you not, and
went by another name, and so the woman might not known you?


Dr. Oats. Yes, I did so.


Lord Chapter Just. You cannot make any great matter of this, she had some Lodgers
and she knew them, but he went by a wrong name, and was in a disguise.


Langhorn. Mrs. Grove says, she knew all the Lodgers that then lay there, pray
ask her if she did not?


Lord Chapter Just. Do you remember who lodged in your house in April was a twelve
month?


Grove. Yes, I do.


Lord Chapter Just. Name them.


Grove. Why, there was one pair of stairs, one Mr. Strange by Name, and one
Mrs. Fitzherbert, and above there lay my Sister.


Lord Chapter Just. What, all the month of May and April?


Grove. Yes.


Lord Chapter Just. And not in June?


Grove. I am not demanded of June.


Lord Chapter Just. She answers exactly to them two months, what say you to March?


Grove. They were there in March.


Lord Chapter Just. Who lay in the Room from whence the men were taken that were
carried to prison?


Grove. There was one Master Crupper, and another young man that lay with him.


Lord Chapter Just. Why might not that be Mr. Oats?


Grove. He was one that was a Prisoner by Mr. Oats Order. And Mrs. Fitzherbert
lay there.


Lord Chapter Just. What, in that Room whence the young men were taken out in April
or May?


Grove. Yes, my Lord.


Lord Chapter Just. Well, what say you to the other months, March, and June and
July?


Grove. I was not to be examined further than the two Months I spoke of before.


Lord Chapter Just. Look you, she says, that for April and May two Gentlemen had
the Lodging that Mr. Oats says he lay in; but for any other time she was not
to be examined: Well, have you any more witnesses?


Langhorn. Here is Mrs. Grove's Maid:

[Who stood up.
Lord Chapter Just. Maid, Can you tell who lay in Grove's house in April and May
was twelvemonth?


Maid. Yes, my Lord, I can.


Lord Chapter Just. Who were they?


Maid. There was my Mistresses Brother and Sister lay there.


Mr Just. Pemberton. Do you know them all? what men lay there?


Maid. None but Master Strange, my Lord.


Lord Chapter Just. Mistress Groves said, that her house was full.


Maid. Indeed my Lord, there was her Brother, Mr York and his Wife.


Lord Chapter Just. But who is that Fitzherbert?


Maid. She is a Gentlewoman.


Lord Chapter Just. Who lay there in March? And who lay there in July?


Maid. Master Strange, and Mistress Fitzherbert.


Lord Chapter Just. How long did they lie there?


Maid. In April, May, June, July and August.


Lord Chapter Just. She says, they lay there in March, April, May, June, July and
August, and her Mistress said, they were there but a quarter of a year, only
she said she was to be examined no further.


Langhorn. My Lord, I desire to prove a Copy of the Record in the Lords House.


Lord Chapter Just. That is not to be given in Evidence here.


Mr. Recorder. You know how far such a thing will be Evidence, manage your own
Evidence well.


Langhorn. It is an Extract out of the Journal of the House of Lords.


Lord Chapter Just. What particular do you pitch upon?


Langhorn. About those persons who, he says, came over with him from St. Omers.


Lord Chapter Just. North. Do you think it reasonable, that any man should come to
answer now all that ever he has sworn in his life? If you can show any Record
to contradict what he has sworn here, show it. Do you think he can come
prepared to justify all he has sworn in any other place?


Langhorn. He referred to that himself.


Lord Chapter Just. No, he does not.


Langhorn. But he has said over and over, that Sir John Warner came over with
him, Sir Tho. Preston, and Poole.


Lord Chapter Just. What should you urge that Book for? Can you make any other
proof?


Langhorn. I would have the persons called that took the Narrative of Ireland's
Trial.


Lord Chapter Just. If you have any more Witnesses, call them.


Langhorn. Will Not your Lordship allow me to prove by Witnesses what he affirmed
in relation to me at another Trial?


Lord Chapter Just. By no means, you must not meddle with that.


Langhorn. Pray, my Lord, why not? I will prove the words spoken by a Witness.


Lord Chapter Just. North. You must not, that is no Evidence against you, nor can
it be an Evidence for you.


Langhorn. Then you take off the Defense that I have, and make it as if I had
never any.


Mr. Just. Atkins. That is not Evidence in a Civil Cause, and therefore must
not be Evidence here.


Then came in my Lord of Castlemain. Lord Chapter Just. What do you come for, Sir?
What is your Name?


E. Castlemain. My Name is Castlemain.


Lord Chapter Just. Are you my Lord of Castlemain?


E. of Castlemain. Yes, my Lord, I am.


Lord Chapter Just. Does your Lordship come as a Witness for Mr. Langhorn? Mr.
Langhorn, do you call my Lord of Castlemain?


Langhorn. My Lord, I don't know what he comes for, whether he comes as a
Witness for me or not, perhaps he may.


E. of Castlemain. My Lord, I come to wait upon your Lordship and the Court to
give you an account, that some of the Witnesses that were summoned here for the
Prisoners are so beaten and abused without, that they dare not come to give
their Evidence, for fear of being killed.


Lord Chapter Just. That is a thing that is not to be suffered, let us but see any
person that dares but offer to meddle with them, and I Will assure you we will
take care to see them punished according as they do deserve.


Lord Chapter Just. North. It Is a very unjustifiable thing, a thing that we will
very severely punish, if they be hindered of free ingress and regress.


Mr. Just. Atkins. Indeed it is a very horrid thing that they should be so
abused, they ought to have their liberty of coming and giving their Evidence
here without any molestation.


E. of Castlemain. I can assure your Lordship, that one of them was so beaten
and bruised, that we cannot tell but it may cost him his life.


Lord Chapter Just. Nay, we must look to such a thing as that; for it is by no
means to be allowed of. If your Lordship will but tell us who they are, let us
but know them, and we will take care for the punishment of them; for we will
show our selves just and fair, and give them all the fair play that can be.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Mr. Langhorn, have you any more Witnesses?


Mr Langhorn. Call the woman that kept the white-horse-Tavern.

[who stood up.
Lord Chapter Just. To what purpose do you call this Woman?


Langhorn. I desire, my Lord, to ask one Queston of Mr Oats, touching the
Consult at the White-horse-Tavern in the Strand; How many persons met there?


Dr Oats. Before that Question be asked, I pray your Lordship would ask her,
When she came to the White-horse-Tavern to keep it?


Witness. I don't keep it now.


Lord Chapter Just. When did you keep it?


Witness. I kept it in June, and I left it the beginning of July.


Dr Oats. She does not come to the time.


Lord Chapter Just. Did you keep it all the Year before that?


Witness. I kept it seven years before, till July last.


Langhorn. I would know of him, How many might be there at that time.


L. C. J. What number of persons do you say met at that Consult?


Dr Oats. That Question, if it please your Lordship has ho reference to this
Trial, neither is it at all material, but because I have given the Prisoners so
much freedom, they impose upon me with Questions.


Lord Chapter Just. It Is a Question they cannot expect a precise Answer to from you;
But yet I would have you give them as satisfactory an Answer as you can, what
number there might be there at a time.


Dr Oats. My Lord, I think there might be at the White-horse-Tavern at a time
about eighteen or twenty.


Lord Chapter Just. Were they in one Room, or in several Rooms?


Dr Oats. They were in two or three Rooms.


Witness. Is this Mr Oats, my Lord?


L. C. J. Yes, that he is.


Witness. I never saw him in my house in my life.


L. C. J. Was there no body never in your Tavern but who you knew? What! can
you tell all the people that were ever in your Tavern?


Witness. The most of my Company were people that I knew.


Lord Chapter Just. What is your Company?


Witness. Those that frequented my house.


Lord Chapter Just. Can you say who was in your house April 24, 1678?


Witness. No, my Lord, I will not undertake that, but I will give you as true
an account as I can.


Langhorn. I Will tell you why I ask this Question, Mr Oats did say in his
Depositions before the Lords, there met fifty.


Lord Chapter J. At several times in the Day.


Langhorn. But this must all be in the morning.


L. C. J. Why so? suppose there met of that Company twenty in the morning, and
then some went away, and others came in their Room, and so they did for diverse
times in the day, is not this properly said of me, that there might be about
fifty at that Consult.


Langhorn. He says in Coleman's Trial there met fifty upon the 24th of April,
and afterward they adjourned into lesser Colloquies.


Dr Oats. I say they met there the 24th. day, but the Consult was not
dissolved till the 26th. day at night.


Lord Chapter Just. North. You must go only upon what is sworn now. And we ask the
Question upon your Proposal, How many were there at a time? and he says about
eighteen or twenty at a time. Now if he proves there were eighteen at one time,
twenty at another time, and ten at another, that makes about fifty.


Lord Chapter Just. Good woman, is your house a little house?


Witness. It Is a small inconsiderable house, there is not a Room in it that
will hold above a dozen, I never remembered so great a company was in my house
at one time but once in all my seven years, and that was a Jury of the Parish,
and they could not be together, but were divided into three Rooms.


Then there stood up a Stranger who was sworn. Lord Chapter Just. Well, Sir, do you
know the White Horse Tavern in the Strand?


1 Witness. Yes, my Lord, I do very well.


Lord Chapter Just. Do you know the biggest Room in the House?


1 Witness. Yes, I do, my Lord.


Lord Chapter Just. How many may dine there?


1 Witness. It may be twenty people, I have seen a dozen or sixteen there often.


Lord Chapter Just. Did you know the Tavern a year ago?


1 Witness. Yes, my Lord, this was a year ago.


Then a second Witness it stood up in the Court, and said, that twenty five or
thirty might dine in one Room that was backward, and another that was forward.
And a third attested, that he was at a Wedding, and there did dine above twenty
in one Room next the street. Mr. Recorder. If she make a Jury to be in three
Rooms, that is but four in a Room.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Those Juries are sixteen generally or more.


Langhorn. My Lord, I don't know this Tavern my self; but I thought it very
considerable, if they had not a Room that would hold such a number as he spoke
of, fifty.


Lord Chapter Just. But you see how unfortunately it happens, the matter had not
been much, if it had been proved; but it is very unlucky that these persons
should be here in Court by whom the other is contradicted; it had been better
it were never meddled with. That she should be so peremptory in what standers by
know to be false, makes this contradiction in one thing to give a suspicion,
that all your Witnesses may be false in all the rest.


Sir Cr. Levins. Here is a Gentleman of good Quality that says, there have
been fifty in a Room.


Langhorn. My Lord, I hope neither the Court nor the Jury will reflect upon me
for this.


Lord Chapter Just. No, it cannot do that, but it reflects upon your Evidence,
especially this woman.


Langhorn. I have been a Prisoner so long, and I know nothing but what Friends
and Relations inform me.


Lord Chapter Just. The thing was reasonably offered, but it proves so unfortunate
it will not hold. Have you any more Witnesses to call?


Langhorn. Yes, my Lord.


Lord Chapter Just. I pray call them.


Langhorn. My Lord, I desire I may examine them after the Kings Counsel have
done.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. You may say what you will for your defense, but you must
examine no new Witnesses then, Mr. Langhorn.


Langhorn. I must ask this Gentleman a Question or two, if the Court think fit.


Lord Chapter Just. Propose them to the Court, what is it you would have?


Langhorn. My Lord, it is in relation to a matter that happened at Irerlands
Trial, I know not whether it be proper, but the Question I would ask, is,
whether Ireland were here in August or no?


Lord Chapter Just. He has given you no occasion to ask this Question at this
Trial: And is there any reason that we should examine him to such a thing? Do
you think it reasonable, or according to Law, that Mr. Oats should be examined
in your Trial concerning what he then said of Irelands being here in August, or
not being here, when it is no part of his accusation that he brings against you?
Can he be imagined to be prepared for such a Justification, since he does not
at all give any Evidence of it here?


L. C. J. North. Since he gave not any occasion or use for such a proof now at
this time, it is not fit he should be examined about it: Indeed yesterday he
gave it in Evidence, because it concerned a circumstance of time that related
to the Prisoners then to be tried.


Lord Chapter Just. It Is true as my Lord says, That it was yesterday proper,
because he gave Evidence that Fenwick and Ireland were here in Angust together.
Now that did some way concern him, but you have no concern at all in it.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. That brought it in at that time, but this is a foreign
matter it cannot be here.


Lord C. J. Have you any more Witnesses, Master Langhorn?


Langhorn. My Lord, Mr. Oats has affirmed, when I asked him touching his
receiving a Reward, he said, he had his Reward, for he had been out of purse
six or seven hundred pound, and it is my desire to examine a couple of
Witnesses touching the probability of that; for he was so very poor before this
happened, that it is impossible without a Purse being made for him to lay out
six or seven hundred pound.


Lord Chapter Just. Look you, here is the thing, he gives you an Answer to which he
was not in the least bound, nor is it to be charged by you; he says he is out
700l, but that is not any Evidence, nor is the Jury to take notice of it, nor
is it to affect him. And would you have him give us an account how he came by
that money?


Langhorn. My Lord, I Will tell you how far it concerns me, the proving of his
Indigency before this thing happened, will concern me thus far, --


Lord Chapter Just. If you should prove this man in an indigent condition, what is
that to the present purpose, it goes to no part of the Evidence.


Langhorn. My Lord, I ask the Question for this Reason, for certainly if he
were so very indigent, it cannot be imagined in probability that any man would
trust him with such a great sum, unless it were to give this Evidence.


Lord Chapter Just. If you have any more Witnesses call them, and make an end of
them; if not, then you may observe what you will to the Court and Jury after
the Kings Council has done.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. But all your Witnesses you must call now.


Langhorn. Does your Lordship debar me from using this Copy of the Record of
the House of Lords?


Lord Chapter Just. To what purpose would you have it read?


Lang. Because Bedloe therein says, that he had no person more to charge either
in the house or out of the house, than what he then charged.


Lord Chapter Just. What then?


Lang. I was not one of those persons, then he knew nothing against me.


L. C. J. It Is but a memorial taken by a Clerk, and do you think that his
Omission shall be conclusive to us?


Lang. It Is the Journal of the Lords House, my Lord.


L. C. J. North. But can you think that can be used as Evidence here? If you
had an Affidavit signed by the party, and had witnesses to prove that he did
make such an Oath, you say something.


Mr Just. Pember. You cannot read that against his Testimony, you understand
that being a Lawyer. If you have any Witnesses call them, but you pick out
collateral matters, and spend our time to no purpose.


L. C. J. Really if it were a thing conducing to the point, I would very much
stretch; but it being such a kind of thing as this is, he says he had nothing
to say against any body else, and I was not named then: what is this to the
Fact you are charged with?


Mr J. Pemb. Why, it may be he did not remember it then, will you conclude him
that he should never remember it, or speak of it?


L. C. J. You see that now at these Trials, he says sometimes, this is all I
can remember at present, but by and by he recollects himself; would you hinder
him from saying then what he remembers?


L. C. J. North. Besides, upon an Affidavit or an Answer in Chancery we never
allow it, unless we have the party to prove that he took the Oath.


Lang. I desire to know of Mr. Oats, whether he did distribute any of these
Commissions, and to whom? for he has said I did.


Dr. Oats. That which I say is this, those Commissions that I named they were
distributed, but the persons I do not know; I know the Commissions were for
those five persons, and in July or August he did say he had distributed them,
but he said not to whom, only one indeed he sent by his Son to the eldest Son
of my Lord Arundel of Warder to be Commissary General, and he came back, and
said, it was delivered.


Lang. You do not speak of any other?


Dr. Oats. I do not recollect that I know of any other.


Lang. I ask for this reason, because, in the Lords house he has charged me,
that I sent my Lord Arundel's Commission, and that I sent it by my Son, and
that he saw a Letter in my Chamber of the receipt of it.


Dr. Oats. My Lord, there is some part of the Evidence that does reflect upon
the Lords, which I charge not upon Mr. Langhorn, because I would not discover
my Evidence against the Lords. He goes now to expatiate upon the Informations,
but I hope the Court wilt excuse me, because I reserve it for another Trial.


Lang. I desire Mr. Lydcot may be asked whether he did not hear Master Oats at
a former Trial, say, (for so I find it in the Narrative,) (it was at Coleman's
Trial) that he came to me the next day after the Consult, and communicated it
to me, and that he never saw me afterward.


Lord Chapter Just. Do you know any Testimony Master Oats gave concerning Master
Langhorn?


Langhorn. You are not the person that took the Trial, are you?


Lydcot. I know nothing of the business at all, I was at the Trial, but I
cannot particularly speak what was said there.


Langhorn. The Persons that took the Trial were summoned to be here. Call Mrs.
Sylliard. (But she appeared not) Call Mr. Blayney.


Lord Chapter Just. Here is Mr. Blayney, what would you ask him?


Langhorn. I would know of him what Mr. Oats has testified concerning me?


L. C. J. Do you know what Mr. Oats said concerning Mr. Langhorn?


Mr. Blayney. When, my Lord?


L. C. Just. Nay, I cannot tell.


Langh. At Coleman's Trial, Sir.


Mr. Blayney. My Lord, I was present at Coleman's Trial, and I remember Mr.
Oats did say something about Mr. Langhorn, but I have not my Book here, I
cannot tell what it was.


Langhorn. Here is the Book, Sir, here is the Narrative.


Mr Blayney. That was not printed by my Copy, Sir.


Langhorn. Who were they that did take it?


Mr Blayney. Of my own knowledge I don't know whose Copy it was, but by hear
say.


Lord Chapter Just. It was taken as well as it could be taken, but you must not
urge that which is but an Historical Narrative against him.


Mr Just. Pemberton. Mr. Langhorn, do you think to convict a Man by an History?
To say that a Man is forsworn because he does not swear as that History says he
did swear?


Lord Chapter Just. We will do you all the right, and give you all the fair play we
can; but we are of opinion that it signifies nothing, that you can make no use
of it.


Langhorn. If I can have no light, how can I imagine what they will charge me
with?


Lord Chapter Just* Have you in any other Case observed it? If a man be indicted of
Felony or Treason, any Capital Crime, he is clapped up, and is not permitted to
have a Copy of the Indictment, nor he cannot by Law.


Langhorn. They know something of what they are accused for, they are
confronted before a Justice of Peace.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Why, I Will suppose you had been examined, do you think
your Examination would have been Evidence for you here?


Then one Elizabeth Sylliard was called, but affirming, That She durst not
speak, unless the Court would promise her protection against the Rabble,
because some of the Witnesses had been abused; which the Court not being able
to do otherwise than by promising to punish those that offered to meddle with
her if She brought them before them, She was, by Mr. Langhorn 's Consent, set
aside, and not examined. Langhorn. She comes in relation to a point that
happened at Reading's Trial, where Mr. Bedloe did depose, That he did not say
all he could have said against Mr. Whitebread, and Mr. Fenwick, but that he
knew more against them than he gave in Evidence at their first Trial.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. What is that to you?


Langhorn. That I take to be a kind of Perjury in him; for they are sworn, To
speak the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth.


Lord Chapter Just. Is this material in your Case what he said about Whitebread and
Fenwick?


Langhorn. It makes it material to make him uncreditable.


Lord Chapter Just. Mr. Whitebread made that objection, but he was answered; for he
was told, That he could not tell all that he knew at that time, because he was
in treaty with Mr. Reading about the lessening his Evidence against them, and
the Lords in the Tower, and the Lords were to judge what measure they should
have from him by his kindness to Whitebread and Fenwick. If you have no more,
the Kings Counsel will go on.


Sir Cr. Levins. My Lord and Gentlemen of the Jury, you have heard the Evidence
that Mr. Langhorn has given for the making of his defense, which has been
principally to reflect upon Mr. Oats; and he first calls Mr Hilsly to prove,
that whereas Mr. Oats did swear he came over with him, he affirms he did not;
but it falls out, that Mr. Oats has counterproved him by such a circumstance
as does contradict him in what he says; for speaking of the loss of his money,
Hilsly said, some body else had told him of it; but producing his Witness for
that, he only affirms, that Mr. Oats in his company was told, that Mr. Hilsly
had lost his money, but not how nor where; but Mr. Oats gives you a particular
circumstance, that he was cheated by a person he lent his money to, and that
left him to pay the Reckoning, which Mr. Hilsley does confess was true, and
which he could not hear from the others, for the others did never know it.
Gentlemen, they have brought you a great many other Witnesses to prove, that
Mr. Oats was not in England on the 24th of April, the time he says he was, and
they all agree as to that time, though as to other times they are not so exact;
but we shall give you as plain and as full an Evidence that he was here at that
time, as that you are there now, and shall very fully satisfy you in it. For
that of Sir John Warner, and Sir Thomas Preston they are matters that were
transacted beyond Sea, to be sure they did not come over by those Names, no
more did Mr. Oats himself; therefore it would be hard to find out these
Persons, or to give you so particular an account of them that were thus in
Disguises, and had changed their Names; but truly if that were a matter done in
England, it were far more easy for us to confront their Testimony in that; for
matters that are done here lie more ready for our proof, than those that are
done beyond Sea; for the last woman that he called, which was the woman about
the White Horse Tavern, her Evidence would have gone as punctually for truth,
if it had been a matter done in Flanders, as any thing could be in the world;
but it happening to be near home, it has the ill fortune to meet with a very
sudden Answer, which is a manifest proof how they stretch to help themselves,
and in my opinion this contradiction overthrows all their Evidence. Gentlemen,
we will call out Witnesses, and prove it as plainly as any thing can be in the
world, that Mr. Oats was here at that time. First swear Will. Walker (which was
done.)


Lord Chapter Just. Do you know Mr. Oats?


Mr. Walker. Yes, Sir, I have known him seven or eight years.


Lord Chapter Just. When did you see him in England last year?


Mr. Walker. I saw him the latter end of March 1678. or toward the middle of
April following, I saw him then in a disguise, insomuch as that I knowing what
he was, and what he had been, I could not a great while recollect the face of
the man, and it was a great trouble to me, that having known him so many years,
I should not then know him. I went home, but could not recollect my self that
night; but before I rose again the next morning, I did recollect my self that
it was Titus Oats, and I presently turned my self out of my bed, and went to a
Gentlewoman whose name I did not then well know, to inquire of her about it.
After the Salutation, said I, How does Mr. Oats? said she, knocking her hand
upon the Counter, He is an undone man: Why, what is the matter, said I? He is
turned, said she, to the Church of Rome: Do you know where he is, said I? No,
said she, but he is lurking up and down the Town, and only dares appear in the
evenings. Well then, said I, I saw him later than you did; for I saw him
between St. Martins-lane and Leicester house yesterday, but he was in a
disguise: and I told her what habit he was in.


Lord Chapter Just. What time was that?


Mr. Walker. It was about ten of the clock in the morning.


Lord Chapter Just. But what time of the year was it?


Mr Walker. It was the latter end of March, or the middle of April.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. It was before the end of April?


Mr. Walker. Ay, ay, my Lord.


L. C. J. And that contradicts all your Witnesses; for they say, that he was
there all March and all April and all May, nay from December to June.


Langhorn. He has said the latter end of March, or the middle of April, I
would have him be as certain as he can.


Lord Chapter Just. He cannot be certain; for those things in point of time, you
know and all mankind must agree, that a thing done a year ago that was of no
greater importance at that time, cannot so easily be remembered, or that he
should take such special notice of the critical day. What man in the world does
remember or take notice so as to charge himself in what week or what month such
an accidental thing as this happened? But to satisfy Mr. Langhorn I ask you,
Can you speak any more particularly than you have done?


Mr. Walker. Because I would not be mistaken or do any one any wrong, I do
rather take an uncertain time than a certain, but I do think it was in the
month of April and toward the middle of the month, that is all I can say.


Langhorn. But how is he sure, since he is so uncertain in his memory, that
this was 1678, and not 1677?


Mr. Walker. Because, my Lord, it was but a little more than a year since, and
I am able to judge of the year as well as another.


Lord Chapter Just. Do you remember what you went about?


Mr. Walker. I was wont about that time of year to receive money of my Lord
Thomas Howard, and upon that Errand I came to Town then.


Lord Chapter Just. But are you sure it was Mr. Oats that you saw?


Mr. Walker. Yes, my Lord; for according to my apprehension I did know the face
when I first saw it, but I could not recollect who it was till I had refreshed
my memory, and the next morning I did so, and then concluded it was he.


Mr. Just. Dolben. How came you hither?


Mr. Walker. I was brought here for a Witness.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Did you discover this to Mr. Oats, or did Mr. Oats first
come to you, to put you in mind of it?


Mr. Walker. I had discoursed with some persons about it a while after the Plot
was discovered, and so I suppose it came by accident to him.


Then Mrs. Ives was sworn and stood up. Lord Chapter Just. Well, Mistress, what say
you?


Mrs. Ives. This is the Gentleman that told me this business.


Lord Chapter Just. What did he tell you?


Mrs. Ives. He asked me when I saw Titus Oats? I told him I had not seen him a
long time, that he was gone beyond Sea: he asked me, if I never saw nor heard
from him since? I told him, No; but of late some of his friends had told me,
that he was about the Town, and that they had seen him, but they did not know
the place where he lodged. Then said he, I have seen him since you; for I was
yesterday going into Leicester fields, and going along I saw him, for he was in
colored Clothes, and very much altered from what he had been.


Lord Chapter Just. When was this? How long was this ago?


Mrs. Ives. It was about the middle of April was twelvemonth, and I remember
it by a very good token; for his Father Mr. Oats came then to my house to see
me, and that is the first month that our new thin Cheeses come in, and I did
then ask him, if he would not come in and eat some new thin Cheese, and when he
was come in and sat down eating of Cheese, and drinking a draught of drink, I
was a saying to him, Pray, Sir, when did you see your Son? Said he, I have not
seen him of late, I heard from him a little while ago, but I have not seen him:
Then, said I, can tell you news of him. Here was such a Gentleman in my Shop
that says he met him in Leicester fields, but in a disguise, and the told me
what habit he was in.


Sir Cr. Levins. Set up Butler.

[Who was sworn.
Lord Chapter Just. How long have you known Mr. Oats?


Butler. I have known him two or three years before he went to Sea.


Lord Chapter Just. When did you see him last year?


Butler. When he came back, he came to my Master house the beginning of May
last was twelve month.


L. C. J. Who is your Master?


Butler. Sir Rich. Barker, my Lord.


Lord Chapter Just. What did he come there for?


Butler. He came to enquire for Doctor Tongue.


L. C. J. Did you know him?


Butler. Yes, I did.


L. C. J. Are you sure that is he?


Butler. This is the Gentleman.


Lord Chapter Just. And what said he?


Butler. I was in the Gate about my Coach, and he comes in and asked me if Dr.
Tongue was within: I told him no; at present I did not know him, because he was
in such a disguised habit; I knew him very well before, because he went in such
an habit as he does now; but this is the man, and Titus Oats in his name. Said
I, Mr. Oats you are welcome into England again, but he took no notice but went
forward into the house, but he made but a little stay there, and came out
again; it seems somebody had affronted him, and laughed at him, because he was
more like a Shepherd than a Minister: His hair was cut, and he had a gray Coat
on, and plain Shoes, and a flopping Hat, and so he went out of the Gate, and
would not take any notice of me, or what I said.


Langhorn. How does he know it was in 1678, and not 1677? He says it was in the
month of May was twelvemonth.


Butler. I know it by this Circumstance: In February I went down into
Lincolnshire, and I came up again the same month: Sir Rich. Barker was then
sick and in the Country, and there he was a great while, and when he came to
Town I did acquaint my Master that Dr. Oats was there to enquire for Dr.
Tongue in the strangest habit that ever I saw man in in my life.


Lord Chapter Just. How long after he had been there was it that you did tell your
Master?


Butler. It was as soon as my Master came back, as soon as I saw him, it might
be a week.


Lord Chapter Just. Was it about a week or a fortnight?


Butler. I do not know exactly.


Mr. Belwood. Then swear Cicily Mayo.

[Which was done.
Lord Chapter Just. Do you know Master Oats?


Mayo. I never saw his fact before that time, nor had I taken notice of him
then, but that there was a young man that lived with Sir Rich. Barker who had a
great acquaintance with him, and seeing him in that Garb, he called me to the
window, and said, Mr. Oats surely is turned Quaker or Jesuit by the change of
his habit; no said I, he is no Quaker, for he has got a Perriwig on.


Lord Chapter Just. Maid, when was this?


Mayo. This was before Whitsontide.


L. C. J. Which Whitsontide?


Mayo. Whitsontide was twelvemonth.


Lord Chapter Just. How long before that was it?


Mayo. It was a matter of a fortnight before, as I remember.


Lord Chapter Just. Are you sure you know him now?


Mayo. Yes, this is the man.


L. Chapter Just. North. Did you tell your Master of it?


Mayo. I was not so well acquainted with him as to speak to Sr. Richard Barker
about it, but the other Servants they told him.


Mr. Belwood. Set up Philip Page. (Who was sworn.) Do you know Mr. Oats?


Page. Yes, my Lord, I have known him these five years.


L. C. J. When did you see him?


Page. About May was twelvemonth.


L. C. J. Where?


Page. In Sir Richard Barker's house.


Lord Chapter Just. Are you sure this was the man?


Page. Yes, I am sure it was he.


Langhorn. What time in May was it?


Page. About the beginning of May.


Lord Chapter Just. And you take it upon your Oath that you saw Mr. Oats the
beginning of May was twelvemonth in Sir Richard Barker's house.


Page. Yes, my Lord, I do.


Mr. Just. Atkins. What is become of the Boy that spoke to the woman about him?


Mayo. He is dead, my Lord.


Sr Cr. Levins. Then swear Sir Richard Barker. (Which was done.)


L. C. Just. Do you know Dr. Oats, Sir?


Sir Rich. Barker. I have known him these many years, I have known him from a
Child.


L. C. J. Did you see him about a year ago?


Sr Rich. Barker. My Lord, I did not see him then; I was out of town, but as
the Servants tell your Lordship, so they told me, when I came home, that Mr
Oats had been there in a strange kind of habit, that he was either turned
Quaker, of Jesuit. I did very much admire at it, for I had seen his Father but
a little while before, and he told me nothing of it. I had a mind to have given
him a Living while he was in our Church.


Lord Chapter Just. When did your Servants tell you they saw him?


Sir Rich. Barker. They told me when I came home, which was in the latter end
of Whitsun-week, or the beginning, as I remember.


Lord Chapter Just. Was it in Whitsuntide?


Sir Rich. Barker. It was about that time; they told me the odd kind of posture
he was in, and that young Fellow that they speak of told me several passages of
Mr. Oats. (He is now dead.)


Lord Chapter Just. But when did they speak of it to you?


Sir Rich. Barker. My Lord, when I came home, two or three of them told me of
it with great admiration, as they have told your Lordship and the Court; and I
said to one of them, What! did he leave no Message? They told me he enquired
for Dr. Tongue, and asked for me, but that was all that they told me.


L. C. J. Come, was it in May?


Sir Rich. Barker. Yes, my Lord, it was in May was twelvemonth.


Lord Chapter Just. How do you know it was May was twelvemonth?


Sir Rich. Barker. It was last year, about the beginning of May.


Lord Chapter Just. North. Nay, he tells you this, when you asked him the Question,
Whether he knew Mr. Oats? Yes, said he, I did know him formerly; and when he
was of our Church I did intend to have given him a Benefice.


Langhorn. Certainly his change, that is, his becoming a Roman Catholic, could
not be a thing so strange that he should intend then to give him a Benefice.


Mr. Just. Atkins. But hark you, Sir, I suppose you remember it by your own
Sickness very well?


Sir Rich. Barker. Yes, my Lord, very well; I had a little distemper upon me,
and Dr. Needham of the Charter House came to see me; and I lay sick a matter of
six or seven Weeks, and the latter end of my sickness I continued taking of
Physic till I came to town.


L. C. J. But you are sure of the year by that?


Sir Rich. Barker. Yes, my Lord and Yesterday I should have acquainted your
Lordship and the Court, that there are some persons, not unknown to some of the
Bench, if not near allied to them, and that is Sir William Tyrrills Family, of
Lincolnshire, his Grandson, who had been at Cambridge, and then came to visit
me, though I happened not to be at home, (they being my Wives Relations) and it
was before Whitsontide, because he came to take the advantage of that Season of
the Year: and he had conversed with Mr. Oats, but he is not in Town at
present; and there are two or three of the University that conversed with Mr.
Oats at that time.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Are they here?


Sir Rich. Barker. I only tell it you for a Circumstance.


Sir Cr. Levins. Then set up Mr. Clay. (Who was sworn.)


L. Chapter Just. Do you know Mr. Oats?


Mr. Clay. Yes, I know him very well.


L. Chapter Just. How long have you known him?


Mr. Clay. Since last April was a Twelve month.


L. Chapter Just. Where did you see him then?


Mr. Clay. I saw him at Mr. Howard's, my Lord.


L. Chapter Just. What Howard? one of my Lord of Norfolk's Brothers?


Mr. Clay. Yes, my Lord.


L. Chapter Just. What is his Christian Name?


Mr. Clay. His Name is Mr. Charles Howard, my Lord.


L. Chapter Just. Where was it?


Mr. Clay. In his House?


L. Chapter Just. Where was his House?


Mr. Clay. It was part of Arundel House, it is now made a new Street.


L. Chapter Just. Did you speak with him there?


Mr. Clay. Yes, we saluted one another, and he said, Your Servant, Sir. I am
sure saw him there.


L. Chapter Just. How often did you see him in that House?


Mr. Clay. Twice.


L. Chapter Just. In April and May?


Mr. Clay. Yes, in April, and in the beginning of May.


Langhorn. I ask you if you do remember any Circumstance of it, to bring this
to your Memory?


L. Chapter Just. By what Token do you remember it, that it was April and May?


Mr. Clay. By this Token, that Mr. Charles Howard told me he was one that was
come from beyond the Seas, from St. Omers; and, said he, he has some thoughts
of being a Jesuit, but I thin. I shall divert him from that.


L. Chapter Just. How do you know that it was that Month?


Mr. Clay. It was in the latter end of April, and beginning of May.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Are you sure it was last year?


Mr. Clay. Yes, I am, it was in the year 1678.


Langhorn. Was it at Dinner, or no?


Mr. Clay. No, no.


Langhorn. Did he dine there that day?


Mr. Clay. I did not see him at Dinner, but I saw him here twice.


L. Chapter Just. Are you a Roman Catholic?


Mr. Clay. Yes, I am of the Church of Rome, but not of the Court of Rome.


L. Chapter Just. That is no new distinction.


L. Chapter Just. North. No, they have the Court of Rome distinct from the Church,
and particular Favorites of it, as other Pri^^^s h^ve, and there are those
that profess themselves of that Religion, that will not acknowledge the exorbitant
Power that the Pope claims.


Langhorn. Will your Lordship please to ask him, whether he does remember that
Mr. Oats did at that time play with Mr. Howard's Son, and instruct him, and
talk to him about his Learning, and put Questions to him.


L. Chapter Just. Did he talk or put any Questions to Mr. Howard's Son about
learning his Book?


Mr. Clay. Not any thing that I heard.


Langhorn. Was Mr. Howard's Son there?


Mr. Clay. No, not in the Room, as I think, I cannot tell certainly, my memory
is frail.


Then Mr. Smith was called and sworn. L. Chapter Just. How long have you known Dr.
Oats?


Mr. Smith. I knew him before the Fire, he was my Scholar at the School where I
was Usher.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. What time did you see him last year?


Mr. Smith. The beginning of May.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. How do you know that?


Mr. Smith. He came to see me, and dined with me.


L. Chapter Just. Where?


Mr. Smith. At Islington, at my house there.


L. Chapter Just. How long was he with you?


Mr. Smith. Three or four hours.


L. Chapter Just. What time was it?


Mr. Smith. It was, as I take it, the in Monday in May, and I give this reason
for my remembrance why it was in May, because we dined by the Fire side, being
a little cold, of which we took particular notice.


L. Chapter Just. And you wondered that you should dine by the Fire side in May.


Langhorn. Was it on a Monday in May?


Mr. Smith. It was on the first Monday in May, to the best of my remembrance.


L. Chapter Just. Was there none of the Family there besides?


Mr. Smith. Yes, there was my Wife there.


L. Chapter Just. Why did you not bring her to testify the same?


Dr. Oats. He cannot find his Wife.


L. Chapter Just. North. How long do you say was he with you?


Dr. Oats. Three or four hours.


L. Chapter Just. What did you talk of?


Mr. Smith. We talked about his Travels, about his Journey into Spain, and to
Valledolid, and Sallamanca.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Was he in a Priest's Habit, or in another Habit?


Mr. Smith. My Lord, he was in a Cinamon-coloured Suit, trimmed ^^^th green
Ribbons.


Sir Cr. Levins. We have done with our Evidence, my Lord.


L. Chapter Just. Now, Mr. Langhorn, the King's Council have done with their
Witnesses.


Langh. Pray call Mr. Charles Howard and his wife.


L. Chapter Just. I do not think Mr. Charles Howard will appear.


L. Chapter Just. North. I believe he does not think it safe to come here; we know
upon what account.

But upon calling, after a while he did appear and stood up.
L. Chapter Just. Well, what have you to say to Mr. Howard?


Langhorn. The Question that I would ask him is this; it has been affirmed
here by Mr. Clay, that old Centleman, that about the end of April, or beginning
of May last was a Twelve month, he did meet Mr. Oats at Mr. Howard's House; I
would know the truth of it.


L. Chapter Just. Mr. Howard, you have heard the Question, do you know Mr. Oats?


Mr. Howard. Yes, my Lord, very well.


L. Chapter Just. How long have you known him?


Mr. Howard. Above two years.


L. Chapter Just. When was he at your house?


Mr. Howard. My Lord, he has been at Arundel house about two years ago, and
several times since.


L. Chapter Just. Was he there about a year ago?


Mr. Howard. Thereabouts he was.


L. Chapter Just. Do you think he was there about May was Twelvemonth?


Mr. Howard. My Lord, after July I remember he was there.


L. Chapter Just. Was he there in May?


Mr. Howard. No, my Lord, not to my Remembrance.


Langhorn. Pray, Sir, when did your Son dye?


Mr. Howard. The Fifth of May was two year, 1677.


L. Chapter Just. Why, how does that appear to be any thing in this case; he did
not say that Mr. Howara's Son was there.


Langhorn. He said he was in the House, but he could not tell whether he was in
the Room or no.


L. Chapter Just. You asked him whether he talked any Lattin, or asked him any
Questions; and he says he cannot tell whether the Son were there in the Room or
no.


L. Chapter Just. North. He says, About two year ago I remember he was at my house,
and about a year ago, which contradicts all your Witnesses.


Langhorn. No, he says, About two year ago I remember he was there, and about a
Twelve month ago, after July, but he cannot remember wether he was here in
April and May was a Twelvemonth.


Mr. Howard. Mr. Oats was in my Lodging in April 1677, and then my Child was
alive, and dined together with him and Mr. Clay.


L. Chapter Just. That is two years ago?


Mr. Howard. Yes, my Lord, two years ago Mr. Oats was there with Mr. Clay, but
not since.


L. Chapter Just. Call Mr. Clay again to confront him in that.


Dr. Oats. I did not know Mr. Clay two years ago.


L. Chapter Just. You are mistaken, I believe, for Mr. Clay does pretend that he
did but just begin to know Mr. Oats in April was a Twelvemonth, and so Oats
swears too.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. And he say he knows nothing whether you had a Child dyed
or no.


L. Chapter Just. When was the time that you first knew Mr. Oats.


Mr. Clay. The latter end of April last year.


L. Chapter Just. Did you ever know him before that time?


Mr. Clay. I never did.


L. Chapter Just. Do you remember that ever you dined with him?


Mr. Clay. I do not remember the day exactly, and I do not remember that e're I
dined with him.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. But he is positive that he did not know him but a year
ago.


L. Chapter Just. Do you remember whether Mr. Howard's Son was alive?


Mr. Clay. He had a Son alive at that time.


Dr. Oats. He had one Son indeed that dyed a year before Mr. Clay and I met
there.


Mr. Howard. I speak of my eldest Son, who dyed two years ago.


Mr. Clay. I never knew him.


L. Chapter Just. Well, it is plain there was a mistake in it, he spoke of a Son
that was then and is now alive, and you speak of your eldest Son that dyed two
years ago. Have you any more Witnesses Mr. Langhorn?


Langhorn. No, my Lord, I have no more witnesses.


L. Chapter Just. Well, would you say any thing? If you would, say what you have a
mind to say.


Langhorn. My Lord, I am charged here by two Witnesses, the first is Mr. Oats;
If I can prove any one point (in answer to that which he has given in
Evidence) not to be true, then I conceive, my Lord, he ought to be set aside:
And I think it has been clearly proved, That whereas he said Sir Tho. Preston
came over with him in April, it has been clearly proved he was then at Leige^;
and whereas he has affirmed, Sir John Warner, Mr. Poole, and two or three more
that were at St. Omers came over with him, I have proved That not to be true
beyond any contradiction: Then, as the Witnesses about his own not coming over
in April, Mr. Hilsly says he came not over with him in the Pacquet-Boat; and
the other says that he was sick in the Infirmary after Mr. Hilsly came away:
These points being thus proved, I think there can be no credit given to what he
says; for I can say, and I know it to be truth, that from November 1677, to
this very day I never savv him: I have been a close Prisoner so long, and have
had but one weeks time to provide, and therefore must be fain to take such
Information as my Friends and Relations could pick up, to answer what he has
said in his Narratives, supposing he would have said the same here; therefore I
am not able to make any better defense.


L. Chapter Just. Did you never know Mr. Oats?


Langhorn. I have seen him once or twice.


L. Chapter Just. When was that?


Langhorn. In Michaelmas Term, 1677.


L. Chapter Just. Upon what occasion?


Langhorn. He brought me a Letter from one of my Sons, my younger Son in Spain,
and then he told me he was going to St. Omers: He said he could not and from
that day I never saw him till I saw him in the Court: I hope truly I have well
proved that he was not here in England when he says he was, but that I must
leave to the Jury: But surely these Boys cannot be supposed to have any design,
or to be bribed by any Reward, for I never saw the Face of any of them till now.


L. Chapter Just. North. They are all Papists, and speak in a General Cause.


Langhorn. If that be an Objection against them, I think it is hard if they are
not to be believed because they are Papists and Friends; then the other on the
contrary are not to be believed because they are Enemies. I think it is clear
that he did not lodge at Grove's house, and I think it is clear that he did not
come over in the Pacquet-Boat with Mr. Hilsly, and that Sir Tho. Preston did
not come over with him, nor Warner, nor Poole; and if any of these points be
clear for me, I think his Testimony ought to be set aside. Now as to what
Bedloe says, in truth it is impossible for me to examine any Witnesses, and
that I think will be your Lordship's Opinion* it will not seem probable that
one that was in my way of practice should become a Clerk to Register Letters,
and to keep Accounts of any particular Religious Order, as he makes me to do;
or, if I were, that I should admit Mr. Bedloe to be privy to those Accounts;
but that I must leave to the Court, my Lord, it is impossible to prove a
Negative: Mr. Bedloe is a person that I have no acquaintance with, truly I do
not know that ever I saw him before this time in all my life; though it is
possible I may have seen him, but I do not know that ever I did: Now that I
should admit such a person to such a privacy in Accounts of this nature, (if I
were guilty of them) seems very improbable; but yet, as I said, it is
impossible to prove a Negative. If I had known what he would have charged upon
me before, perhaps I might have made a better defense; and for those Witnesses
that I have had, they were prepared by such Friends as thought they would be
useful for me. These men have had time to get their Witnesses together. I never
saw one of mine till they came into the Court: I hope, my Lord, I shall find no
disadvantage in my condemned me merely for that: I disclaim all Principles of
disloyalty, and I do assure your Lordship, I do believe it is Damnation to any
one that shall go about to kill the King or deprive him of his Government; I
shall leave the rest to your Lordship and the Jury.


The Lord Chief Justices Directions to the Jury against Mr. Langhorne,
Lord Chief Just. Look you, Gentlemen; You have had an Account in the first
Part of the Evidence in general, That there was a general Design of bringing
in Propery; and in order to that, as the best and quickest Means to Accomplish
it, to destroy the King. And without doubt, they were in the right for that
Matter: To destroy the King, was the most effectual Course to introduce Popery
they could take. Whether they would do it or no, is not now any Question; but
how much Mr. Langhorn, the Prisoner at the Bar, is concerned in it; and that
depends upon the Testimony of Witnesses.


The Testimony that Mr. Oats gives against him, amounts but to thus much: I
cannot affirm (says he) that Mr. Langhorne, was at the Consult on the
Twenty-Fourth of April, at the White-Horse-Tavern, where they signed the
Agreement to Destroy the King: But this I can say, That the next Day, or within
a Day or two, I went by Order from the Fathers, Whitebread and Harcourt, to
Langhorne 's Chamber, and acquainted him with what they had Argeed upon. And he
swears, that Mr. Langhorne did lift up his Hands and Eyes, and pray to God to
give them good Success. He tells you further, That after some Talk with him
about bringing in of Popery, and destroying of the King, he had also Discourse
concerning several Commissions; that he saw about Seven or Eight of them, and
that he told him, he had more: One for my Lord Bellasis to be General, and one
for himself to be Advocate-General, with others; but those (he says) he saw,
and perused them: And though he does not know of the delivery of those several
Commissions, yet he does know of the delivery of one to his Son, to be carried
to my Lord of Arundel's eldest Son; And he does say, That Mr. Langhorn did tell
him, he had sent it; and Swears, that he had some discourse with him concerning
Killing the King.

Bedlow, he comes and Swears, That he was there Twice, and that he saw him
Transcribe Letters; and that the Effect of one of them was, That they were
prepared with Arms, and all things but Money. That the Garrisons also were
ready to be Delivered up to them, but they staid only for this, and Six
Thousand Pounds would do it, which the Benedictines were to raise. If that
came, then there was nothing wanting. They had an easy King, whom they could
destroy as they pleased; An Army in Readiness, Every thing in Good Posture, and
no time like this, to bring in Popery: Which Discourse, he says, was before
Mr. Coleman. Here is the Effect then of those Letters which by him were written
into a Book, and in which this Plot and this Contrivance was mentioned. These
were Transcribed by Mr. Langhorn (says he) while Mr. Coleman and I walked in
his Chamber. I saw him write them, and he Swears it.

Now the Matter is this; If these Two Witnesses do Swear True, then is this
Indictment of Treason highly Proved. For the Contriving To bring in Popery, To
Levy War, and To Kill the KING (which, when he was Acquainted withal, he lift
up his Hands and Eyes, and begged of God to give it good Success; and which
Bedlow says was the Effect of the Letters that he Transcribed into the Book)
Mr. Langhorn himself will not deny to be High Treason: and when this is Sworn
here by Two Witnesses, he must either Invalidate their Testimony, or
Acknowledge it Just, if you find him Guilty or the Indictment with which he is
Charged. Now the Question is, What Defense there is against it?

Mr. Langhorn says, If I can Disprove a Witness in any one material thing that
he says, then will it take off from his Credit in every thing he says. And
first as to Mr. Oats, says he, I did know him, I must Confess, but I never saw
him since the year 1677. The Thing that Mr. Oats Charges him with, is in April
or May 1678, or thereabouts; And Mr. Langhorn says, he never saw him since 77.
Why? Mr. Oats, says he, Was not here in England, and produces a great many
Witnesses that came from beyond Sea, to Testify that Mr. Oats was there in
April and May, and longer. And whereas Mr. Oats says, that there came over in
his Company with him, Sir John Warner, Sir Tho. Preston, Mr. Pool, and others.
He proves by some Witnesses, that Mr. Oats was there both Months; and by
others, that Sir John Warner was at Watton, and Sir Tho. Preston at Liege, and
Pool at St. Omers at the time that Mr. Oats says they came over with him: And
this says he, I hope will be plain Evidence why you should not believe Mr.
Oats; and the rather, because these Witnesses are such (says he as that I do
not so much as know their Faces; and you will not presume, that People to whom
I am wholly a Stranger, should come hither from St. Omers, to testify a Lie for
me.

In Answer to this, I say, It Is no good Argument for all that; for though I
believe they are Strangers to him, they are not Strangers to the Errand they
come about. They come to Defend all the Roman Catholics, whom we would hang
here for a Plot; and they are sent over for that purpose, as far as their
Testimony can go. How far that is, Though they are not upon their Oaths, (for
the Law will not permit it) I must say to you, in favor of the Prisoner at the
Bar, as I did to the Jury Yesterday, You must not take it therefore, as if it
were mere Talk and no more; nor reject them too much, because they do not
Swear: They would Swear ('it is likely) if the Law would allow it. Only one
remark I must observe to you upon their own Evidence: The St. Omers Gardener
(which is one of them) takes upon him to give a very exact Account of Mr. Oats,
in the Months of April and May; but when I came to enquire what he knew of him
in the Months of June and July, he tells you, Those were not the Months in
question.

But on the other side, Did not the Principles of their Religion so Teach, and
make us to know, that they will not stick at any Wickedness, to propagate it:
Did not the best and chiefest Doctors of their Church, Preach and Print it: Did
not his Holiness, the Pope, allow it; and never condemn any one Book in the
World, that has Asserted the Lawfulness of DEPOSING and KILLING KINGS, for
separating from their Religion: Did not they Teach and Practice all sorts of
Equivocations, and that a Lie does God good Service, if it be for the
Propagation of the Faith: Were not these Young Boys capable of having this
Doctrine instilled into them; and Were not they bred up in Colleges chiefly
to serve that End, then Mr. Langhorn had said something. Neither are these
things Artificially objected against them, for the Doctrines of their Church
are so False and Penurious, so Destructive and so Bloody; and the way they take
to come off from all Vows, Oaths, and Sacraments, by Dispensations beforehand,
or Indulgence and Pardons afterward, is a thing still so much worse, that they
are really unfit for Human Society. They should get their Pope, if they would
not have it thrown into their Dish, and have it believed by us; I say, they
should get the Pope of Rome to decry and Anathematize such Doctrines of
Deposing and Killing Kings, and Discharging Subjects from their Allegiance: But
that will never be; for his Holiness, the Pope, will keep himself where he is,
and will part with Nothing that he has of Advantage over any.

Look you, Gentlemen, thus much I cannot omit with a good Conscience to say,
The Profession, the Doctrines, and the Discipline of the Church of Rome is
such, that it does take away a great part of the Faith that should be given to
these Witnesses; nevertheless we must be fair, and should hear them, if we
could not Answer what they allege, by Evidence to the contrary. Mr. Oats
therefore to justify himself, has produced I think, Seven or Eight Witnesses,
that do prove, that he was here in the latter end of April and beginning of
May, which does contradict all their Testimony, who does say he was abroad all
along from December to June, and that they saw him every other Day.

It Is true, if we were certain that what these Young Men spoke, were indeed so
as they say, it is impossible for Mr. Oats's Testimony to be believed. If I
were satisfied that really and truly Mr. Oats was not here, but was Six Months
together there, and that he has invented this Story and made this himself; I
could no longer confide in the Man, nor find Mr. Langhorn Guilty: Yet is not
the Time really the substance of the thing, though he has made it so now,
because the Consult was the Twenty Fourth of April, which he was present; and
he did go (he says) to Mr. Langhorn within a Day or two after, to acquaint him
with the resolution of it.

To this end has Mr. Oats produced Seven or Eight Witnesses that saw him, as
they swear. He has produced a Minister, that says he saw him in a Disguise,
but having known him before, recollected him to be the Man. He has produced a
Woman that agrees with that Story; for she says, that he came and talked with
her about it, and told her then that he had seen Mr. Oats the Day before, and
gives you a token why it was about that time of the Year. Now if this be not a
new matter, and New found out, this Woman (if she swears true) does justify
the other in what he did say a Year ago, when they could never Imagine that any
great weight and moment should be laid upon that Accident of his seeing Oats in
the Street. He has produced to you the Coachman of Sir Richard Barker, that
says he knew him well, when he came to his Masters House. There he called him
by his name, That asking for Dr. Tongue, but not finding him within, he went
away presently. That he was in Disguise, That they acquainted their Master with
it as soon as he came Home, and their Master says that so they did. And the
person that then lived in the House, and now is Dead, said to the Maid: Yonder
is Mr. Oats, I think he is either Turned Quaker or Priest, what a kind of Habit
is he got into? No said the Maid, he cannot be a Quaker because he wears a
Perriwigg; but she says, he named him to her, Oats, and that this is the man,
she knew him since. It Is the same man that the Young Man spoke to her about.

He has produced farther one of their own Religion, one that is a Papist
still; and he says, he saw him twice at Mr. Charles Howard's, in Arundel House.
There was indeed some perplexity, they would have put upon it, by reason of Mr.
Howards Son being dead a year before; but the VVitness says he did not know
the Son. A Papist he confesses himself expressly to be, if not a Priest; and I
would not ask him the Question, because it is not fair to make him accuse
himself: but he does swear expressly, he saw Mr. Oats at Mr. Charles Howards in
April, or May, which contradicts all their VVitnesses. He also produces a
Schoolmaster, that tells that he dined with him the beginning of May: and I
remember it (says he) very well, for we dined by the fireside, which gave me
occasion to wonder at it in May and remember it. He says moreover, that he
stayed Three or Four hours with him, and tall'd of all his Travels in Spain. Now
must all these people be downright Perjured; it can be no mistake, but they
are all falsely forsworn, if there be not Truth in it. And when here are Seven
or Eight Witnesses positively swearing against the affirmation of so many
others, we leave the credit of both sides to you, who are the Judges of the
Fact.

There is indeed (and I will Repeat it for you, for, I would not miss any thing
as near as I can that would make for the Prisoners advantage); there is a proof
concerning Sir John Warner, and Preston, and Pool, that they were there at the
time, and there has been no answer given to it: But I say still, it is the same
thing, for if you do not believe those VVitnesses to speak true, that affirm
that Oats was there all the time, but rather believe that he was here, by
Seven or Eight people that Testify it: I say if you cannot believe he was
there, you will never change your mind for one Circumstance, whether he came
over with Sir John Warner and others, or not; for it is but a Circumstance.

Langhorn, They are not the same VVitnesses.


Lord C. J. It Is true, they are not; You have Four or Five VVitnesses that
speak apart; but two of them do say, that they knew Oats also was there at the
same time that they speak that Sir John Warner was at home.


Langhorn, Not those two of Liege my Lord about Sir Thomas Preston.


Lord C. J. No they do not, for I leave it to you of the Jury upon the whole
matter; there is little more to be said by me. If so be Credit is to be given
to these VVitnesses of Oats more than to the others, then you must find him
Guilty, and the rather, because I do a little suspect they come over instructed
to say what they do. You find they apply themselves to the thing they came for,
and not only the Gardener, but another could tell you (which has a very great
Influence upon me as to their Credit) that the months of April and May were the
months in question, and they were not to be examined any farther. So that it
looks, as if these Young men were sent of an Errand, and though you do not know
them Mr. Langorn, and are Innocent as to any tampering with them, yet I am
afraid they are come to serve the Catholic Cause as they call it. For, they
are very well taught, and they keep to those months of April and May of all the
months in the Year. Then they bring the Woman of the White-Horse-Tavern, where
the Consult of the twenty fourth of April was; and what is the use they would
make of her? why it is, that Mr. Oats should make a story of fifty Fathers
being in her Tavern at one time (but he insists now, there was a matter of
twenty) when there was not a Room in her House that would hold Ten: But you
hear how she was Answered, from Testimony rising up in the Court of themselves
that were accquainted with her House, and know, that Forty people may dine in
two of her Rooms: And the Kings Counsel observed well, how Chance it self has
put to silence this Evidence. So that when matters are alleged to be done at
home, there is not so great a difficulty as in proving things that are done
abroad.

I leave it to you Sirs. Here is a Gentleman that stands at the Bar upon his
Life on the one Hand; but if Mr. Oats say true, all our Lives, and Liberties,
our King and Religion, are at the Stake on the other Hand. God defend that
Innocent Blood should be shed, and God defend us also from Popery, and from all
popish Plots, and from all the bloody Principles of Papists, which are very
Cruel as we know by experience; and you cannot blame us to look to our selves.
For I must tell you, the Plot is proved as plain as the Day, and that by Oats;
and farther, Oats Testimony is confirmed by that which can never be Answered.
For when he comes at his first Testimony and says that upon the twenty fourth
of April such a Consult was summoned and held, it falls out that five days
after a Letter is found amongst Harcourts papers, (a principal Person in the
Design), which does order the meeting upon the twenty fourth of April, being
the day after St. Georges Feast, and gives them a Caution that they should not
come too soon to Town; That they should not appear too much in London for fear
of discovering the Design, and of disclosing that, the nature of which requires
Secrecy. Plainer than this is hardly to be writ from a Jesuit. Especially in so
dangerous a matter. And what can be answered to this Letter that is found in a
Priests Hand four days after Mr. Oats had given in his Information about it?

Put all this together, and if you be satisfied herein, you may judge the
better, as to the particular business of Mr. Langhorn, how far the Testimony of
Oats and Bedlow affect him. You know what you do. And for Bedlow it is true
what he says, that there is nothing to be said to his Evidence, because no man
can prove a Negative; and he swears expressly that he had this Discourse with
him of these Treasonable matters, Killing the King, and Altering Religion. If
this be so, and you are satisfied in that particular (and that a man may very
well be as to the substance), I do not see any considerable Answer that is
given. I say once more, there is the life of a Gentleman at stake, and there
are all our Lives at the Stake: Follow you your Consciences; Do Wisely, do
Honestly, and consider what is to be done.


Lord Chief Ju. North. With my Lords Leave, Because there has been mention
made of this Letter which goes much in Confirmation of Mr. Oats Testimony; It
is in Court, but it has not been produced at the Bar, I desire it may, if your
Lordship please.


Sr. C. Lev. It is here in Court my Lord, we will give your Lordship an account
how we came by it. Swear Sr. Thomas Doleman.

(which was done.)
Sr C. Lev. Sr. Thomas, Did you find the Paper amongst Mr. Harcourt's Papers?


Sr. Thomas Doleman. I found this Letter among the Papers of Mr. Harcourt that
were committed to my search.


L. C. J. When did you find it Sir?


Sir. Thomas Doleman. It was some five or six days after Mr. Oats had given in
his information to the King and Council.


L. C. J. Do you mark it Gentlemen? After Mr. Oats had told the Council of the
Consult in the twenty fourth of April, is this Letter found.


L. C. J. North. It Is in Confirmation of Mr. Oats's Testimony.

Then the Letter was Read, being the same with that in Page 37. In the Trial of
Whitebread, Harcourt, etc.
L. C. J. This Letter is only as to the Plot in General, and not to be applied
to Mr. Langhorn in particular.


Langhorn. Mr. Oats might very well be able to speak of this meeting, of this
Congregation as they call it, before this Letter was taken, it is easy to
believe, because Mr. Oats being at Saint Omers, I suppose the like Letters of
Summons might come over to Saint Omers, to fetch some of them over hither.


L. C. J. You say well, but if you have but the Luck to give me an Answer, to a
thing or two, you will have better fortune, and more skill than the Priests. It Is
true, he might perchance know of the Consult, if he were at Saint Omers: But
will you tell us what that Design was? And what is the meaning of the putting
those words into the Letter, That they should not come too soon to London, nor
appear too much about Town, for fear of discovering that Design, which they
knew required Secrecy in its own Nature?


Langhorn. My Lord, I will tell you, what I take to be the meaning of that
Letter. The Design was the holding of a Congregation: There were diverse of
them, and it was like the meeting of a Dean and Chapter in a College, and he
bids them not to come too long before the time, for they were certainly in very
great danger to be taken.


L. C. J. What! At that time? What Danger were they in then?


Langhorn. Yes, my Lord, the Parliament was then sitting.


L. C. J. But you know what Indulgence there was to all Papists at that time,
if they would be but quiet. Well, but put it altogether, they were to come to
London, not too soon, nor to appear too much, because the Parliament was
sitting, for fear of Discovering the Design. What, was that only for Mr.
Whitebread, and his fellows, to make an Officer! Can it be answered by that?


Langhorn. Certainly their holding of a Congregation in England, does require
secrecy.


L. C. J. Gentlemen! Here is the thing, This is only an Evidence to the Plot in
general, that there is a Plot, and you may make what reasonable use you think
fit of it. It is not a Particular Evidence against Mr. Langhorns particular
Person, Only it shows there was a Plot, and you have heard what they say to him
in particular about it. And I Will tell you one thing more, which if Oats swears
true, concerns you very much. He says they were a talking of the Ten Thousand
Pounds that Sir George Wakeman was to have for Poisoning the King when their
other attempts had failed, and that he would not take under Fifteen Thousand
Pound. You Mr. Langhorn, was very angry, and said it was a base covetous thing
in him; and it being such a public Cause, it would have been no matter if he
had done it for Nothing. I have repeated as much as I can well remember without
any prejudice to Mr. Langhorns Testimony. And so I leave it with you.

Then an Officer was Sworn to keep the Jury, who withdrew to consider of their
Verdict; and. the Judges also went off from the Bench. The Lord Chief Justice
telling the Auditory, that the day being so far spent, and the Commission
determining that night, because of the Term, Sir George Wakeman and the rest
could not be Tried till next Sessions. And after a short space, the Jury
returned, and answering to their Names, delivered in their Verdict.
Clerk of Crown. Gentlemen, Are you all Agreed of your Verdict?


Omnes. Yes.


Cl. of Crown. Who shall say for you?


Omnes. Foreman.


Cl. of Cr. Richard Langhorn, hold up thy Hand, Look upon the Prisoner: You of
the Jury, How say you? Is he Guilty of the High Treason whereof he stands
Indicted, or Not Guilty?


Foreman. Guilty.


Cl. of Cr. What Goods or Chattels?


Foreman. None to our Knowledge.


Cl. of Cr. Hearken to the Verdict as the Court has Recorded it: You say that
Richard Langhorn is Guilty of the High Treason whereof he stands Indicted: But
you say that he had no Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements, at the time of
the High Treason committed, or at any time since to your Knowledge. And so you
say all.


Omnes. Yes.


Mr. Recorder. It is a Verdict according to the Justice of the Evidence.

Upon which there was a very great Shout. Then Mr. Recorder sent for the
Prisoners Convicted before, to receive their Judgment; and they were brought to
the Bar, and the Court proceeded thus:
Cl. of Crown. Richard Langhorn hold up thy Hand. Thou stand Convicted of
High Treason: What can thou say for thy self, why the Court should not give
Judgment on thee to Dye, according to Law?


Langhorne. I have nothing to say.


Cl. of Cr. Thomas White, otherwise Whitebread, hold up thy Hand; Thou stand
Convicted in Middlesex of High Treason: What can thou say for thy self, why
the Court should not give Judgment on thee to Dye, according to Law?


Whitebread. I can say nothing.


Cl. of Cr. John Fenwick, hold up thy Hand: Thou art in the same Case with him
that went last before thee; What can thou say, etc?


Fenwick. I have nothing more to say.


Cl. of Cr. William Harcourt, hold up thy Hand: Thou art in the same Case with
the two that went last before thee; What can thou say, etc?


Harcourt. I have nothing at all to say.


Cl. of Cr. John Gaven, hold up thy Hand: Thou art in the same Case with the
Three that went last before thee; What can thou say, etc.


Gaven. I have nothing more to say than I did say. God bless the King, and the
Kingdom.


Cl. of Cr. Anthony Turner, hold up thy hand: Thou art in the same Case with
the Four that went last before thee; What can thou say, etc?


Turner. I have nothing to say.


Cl. of Cr. Then Crier make Proclamation of Silence while Judgment is given,
upon pain of Imprisonment.

Which was done on both sides the Court.
Then Mr. Recorder gave the Judgment thus:
Mr. Recorder. You, the Prisoners at the Bar: You have been severally
Arraigned, and now are severally Convicted of High Treason. And that attended
with all the ill Circumstances, that can be possible to aggravate so High a
Crime. You attempted the Life of the best of Kings; who was full of Mercy and
Compassion even to You, under whom you might still have lived peaceably and
quietly, had not your own Malice and Mischiefs prevented it. Nor were you
satisfied with that alone; for you intended thereby to make way for the
Destruction of the greatest Part of the Kingdom, by a Public Massacre, by
Cutting, the Throats of all Protestants; for that also appears to be your
Design: To effect which the nearest way, and the best Means you could think
of, was first to Kill the King. And this was to be done, for the introducing of
another Religion, as you call it; which, as we think, we more properly call
Superstition; and so root out the best Religion that is Established amongst us
by Law. And I therefore call it the Best of Religions, even for your sakes; for
had it not been for the sake of our Religion, that teaches us not to make such
Requitals, as yours seems to teach you, you had not had that fair formal way of
Trial, and of being Heard, as you now have been; but Murder would have been
returned to you, for the Murder you intended to commit both upon the King, and
most of his People. What a strange sort of Religion is that, whose Doctrine
seems to allow them to be the greatest Saints in another World, that can be
the most Impudent Sinners in This? Murder, and the Blackest of Crimes here, are
the best Means among you, to get a Man to be Canonized a Saint hereafter. Is it
not strange, that Men Professed in Religion, that use all Endeavors to gain
Proselytes for Heaven, should so pervert the Scripture, (as I perceive, some of
you have done) and make that Justify your Impious Designs of Assassinating
Kings, and Murdering their Subjects? What can be said to such a Sort of
People, the very Foundation of whose Religion is laid in Blood? Nay, lest you
should not be able so easily to persuade them so cleverly to imbibe those
Bloody Principles, you do Absolve them from all the Obligations that they
remain under, of Obedience to their Sovereign; You do therefore from the
Pulpits publicly teach, That the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, signify
nothing. It Is a strange Religion, that applies every thing to these wicked and
detestable Purposes.

There is one Gentleman that stands at the Bar, whom I am very sorry to see
with all my Heart in this Condition, because of some Acquaintance I have had
with him heretofore: To see a Man who has Understanding in the Law, and who
has arrived to so great an Eminency in that Profession, as that Gentleman has
done, should not remember, that it is not only against the Rules of all
Christianity, but even against the Rules of his Profession, to Attempt any
Injury against the Person of the King. He knows, that it is against all the
Rules of Law, to endeavor to introduce any Foreign Power into this Land. So
that, you sinned both against your Conscience; and your own certain Knowledge.
But your several Crimes have been so fully Proved against you, that truly, I
think no Person that stands by, can be in any doubt of the Guilt: Nor is there
the least room for the most Scrupulous Man to doubt of the Credibility of the
Witnesses, that have been Examined against You: And sure I am, You have been
fully Heard, and stand fairly Convicted of those Crimes you have been Indicted
for.

I rather mention these things to you, because I know not whether you will
think it necessary to have any Assistance, (I mean, such Assistance as by the
Law of the Land, is to be allowed to Persons in your Condition, of any
Protestant Divines, or of any other Protestants) to prepare you for another
World. And though what has been said proceeds from a Layman, to you that are
Professed in Religion; yet I hope, it will not be thought amiss, it being
intended for your Advantage. Let that vast Eternity, that you are ere long to
enter into, you are now on the Brink of it; I say, let that prevail with you to
consider, that there is a God in Heaven, who will call you to an Account for
every one of those Private Consultations, of which we can never come to any
certain Knowledge. Though you have put all those Obligations of Secresy, upon
your Party, which Religion could tie them by: Though you give them the
Sacrament, not only to oblige ^^em to do wicked Acts, but to conceal them when
they are done; Yet remember, there is a God in Heaven, from whom you cannot
keep them Secret. All your Ties and Obligations, all the Dispensations that you
can give to your Inferiors, or your Superiors to you, will never dispense with
that Account you are to give to the great God of Heaven.

Gentlemen, with great Charity to your immortal Souls, I desire you for the
Love of God, and in the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, Consider these things;
For, it will not be long e're you be Summoned before another Tribunal about
them: And great and dreadful is the Day of Judgment, at which you and all Men
must appear.

And I hope all persons that stand by, will take notice, that it is not the
Principles of the Protestant Religion to Murder any (let it be upon their own
Heads that profess it) for we abhor these things. And we hope these public
Testimonies of our Religion, and this fair sort of Trial, will not only Confirm
those that are Protestants now, but will prevail upon those whom they have
Inveigled into their Persuasion, to desert such a Religion, till such time as
they alter their Principles, from the bloodiness and inhumanity they are
stained with, and which these Men have instilled into all their Proselites. And
this I thought fit to premise to you in great Compassion and Charity. And I
pray God it may have that effect, which I designed; time is, that it may put
you in mind of that great immortallity that you are to enter upon ere long. And
thus having given you this hint, and the Law having had its Course upon you,
you have been fairly tried, fully heard, and have thing to say why that
Judgment should not be pronounced, which the Law has designed against such
Offenders: I am therefore in the Name of the Court to do the Duty which the Law
requires of the Court; and I do in the Name of the Court pronounce this to be
your Sentence.

That you be Conveyed from Hence to the Place from whence you came; and from
thence you be drawn to the place of Execution upon Hurdles, that you be there
severally hanged by the Neck, that you be Cut down alive, that your Privy
Members be cut off, that you Bowels be taken out and burnt in your view, that
your Heads be severed from you Bodies, that you Bodies be divided into four
Quarters, and your Quarters to be at the King's Dispose.

And the God of Infinite Mercy, be Merciful to your Souls.

After which there was a very great Acclamation.


Whitebread. My Lord, since we have not long to Live, we desire we may have the
benefit of the Company of our Friends, that they may be permitted to come at us.


Mr. Recorder. Yea it is fit they should have the Comfort of their Friends and
Relations; and God forbid, but we should do all we can to make their Passage as
Comfortable as may be. You must keep that Decoru^ that becomes such as are in
your Condition. You know you are under the public notice of the World,
therefore you must use the Liberty that is granted to you with that Moderation
and Prudence, that it is fit to use such a Privilege with; for, I shall not
deny you any lawful Favor.


Langhorn. Sir, There will be more people come to me than Ordinary, in regard
of their business that I have had in my hands; I desire they may have the
liberty to come to me.


Mr. Recorder. I would not deny Mr. Langhorn any thing that I could grant him:
If it be any business that any person would have an account of which you have
been Concerned in for them, they may be permitted to come to you.


Cap. Richardson. There is no body to be in private with him, to say any thing
but what I shall hear?


Langhorn. Yes, my Lord, I hope my Wife and Children may.


Mr. Recorder. Yes, God forbid but he should have his Wife and Children with
him.


Langhorn. Or any others that come about business.


Mr. Recorder. Yes Captain, with the Caution I have given you.


Then the Court Adjourned for London, to Guild Hall the Fourteenth of July; and
for London and Middlesex in the Old Bayley, the Sixteenth of July next: And the
Prisoners were carried back to the God. FINIS.
Advertisement.
WHereas there has been Printed, several False Copies of Speeches, pretended
to be spoken by the Five Priests and Jesuits, lately Executed at Tyburn for
High Treason:

These are to Certify, that their True Speeches, with considerable
Animadversions upon them; together with other Material Evidences relating to
them, and Mr. Ireland, etc. Discovered since their Executions, will be speedily
Published, through Permission of Authority; and Printed for the same Persons
that this Trial is Printed for.


