THE CASE OF THE English-Company Trading to the East Indies, ERECTED In
Pursuance of an Act of Parliament for Raising Two Millions, and for Settling
the said Trade.
IT having been the undoubted Right af all the Subjects of England to Trade to
the East Indies, until restrained by Act of Parliament: Many Persons carried on
that Trade, without seeking any other or greater Privileges than what they had
in Common with their fellow Subjects.

The Old Company did in May School, propose to the House of Commons to lend
700000 l. on Condition they might be Settled by Act of Parliament exclusive of
all others for 31 Years.

Whereupon the House of Commons Empowered the Committee of Ways and Means, to
receive Proposals for settling the Trade to the East Indies.

This gave the occasion to several Merchants and others, to offer a Loan of Two
Millions for the said Trade for Ten Years, (Redeemable afterward by Parliament
upon Three Years Notice) into which, all Persons who were willing to Subscribe,
were to be equally admitted.

Which offer was received, and an Act of Parliament passed for Raising the said
Sum of Two Millions and settling the said Trade; in which Act amongst other
things is contained,

Fol. 756.
1. That all Persons Natives and Foreigners, Bodies Politic and Corporate,
might Subscribe to the said Loan; And His Majesty was Empowered to Incorporate
all the Subscribers by the Name of the General Society, Entitled to the
Advantages given by an Act of Parliament for Raising a Sum not exceeding Two
Millions for the Service of the Crown of England. Fol. 763.
2. His Majesty was also Empowered to Incorporate all sech of the Subscribers as
should desire the same, to be One Company to Trade with a Joint Stock.
Throughout the whole Act, there is no Power given to Erect any other Company
or Corporation, but the said General Society and the said One Company to Trade
with a Joint Stock.

Fol. 770.
3. Those that were not willing to come into the Joint Stock, had liberty to
Trade separately; but were to make their Entries with the Trustees of the
General Society, until a Company should be Erected to Trade with a Joint Stock,
and after the Erecting of such Company, then with the Directors of the said
Company, and to be subject to the Regulations mentioned in the said Act Fol.
777. Fol. 780.
4. Also a Duty of Five per Cent, on the whole Trade is Granted to His Majesty,
to be paid over to the General Society, till a Company should be Erected to
Trade with a Joint Stock, and after the Erecting of such Company, then to the
said Company.
By all which it evidently appears, there could by the said Act be but One
Company Erected to Trade with a Joint Stock,

After the Passing the said Act, His Majesty was pleased, before the
Subscription began, to sign His Notice of the Old Company's Determination
according to the Power reserved in their Charters, and caused the said Notice
to be served upon the Old Company, before Mr. John Dubois, the Old Company's
Agent, subscribed the 315000 l. which he did in his own Name only, and not
until above One Million was underwritten, whereby the Subscribers were
Entitled to the Trade.

The Two Millions being subscribed, His Majesty, in pursuance of the said Act,
did Incorporate all the Subscribers in the Charter of the General Society; and
those who desired to unite in a Joint Stock, were likewife Incorporated by the
Name of The English Company Trading to the East Indies.

All which Considered, it is humbly conceived the Continuing the Old Company a
Corporation, is contrary to the said Act, for which the New Company have so
lately advanced 166200 l.

And whereas the said Old Company in their Petition to the Honorable House of
Commons, did as an inducement to the Bill now depending, suggest, That unless
they continued, a Corporation they could not Compel any of their Officers,
Factors, or Agents, to render them any Accounts, or make them Returns of their
Estates, and that they should be disabled from paying their Just Debts: And in
the said Bill it is declared, That several Hundred Persons being Interested in
the beforementioned Subscription of 315090 l. they cannot Manage the same, and
the Benefit of Trade accruing thereby, but in a Corporation. It is Humbly
Offered, That all the said Ends may be attained without the said Bill, for they
may recover their Effects, pay their Debts by a Settlement upon Trustees, and
Manage the Subscription of Mr. Dubois either separately, as several other
Subscribers do; or by coming into the Joint Stock of the New Company, and
Dispose of their Dead Stock at a Reasonable Value, as was Offered by the said
New Company in a late Treaty betwixt them.


