THE CASE OF THE Country Common BREWERS Humbly Offered to the Consideration of
PARLIAMENT.
THE Acts of Parliament touching the Duty of Excise, Order that every Common
Brewer, for every Barrel of Ale or Beer by him Brewed, whether Strong or Small,
that is above 6 s. the Barrel shall pay to the King the Duty of 2 s. 6 d. the
Barrel, and for every Barrel of Ale or Beer of 6 s. the Barrel, or under, shall
pay the Duty of 6 d. the Barrel; and by the same Acts every Barrel of Beer is
appointed and allowed to contain 36 Gallons to the Barrel, and every Barrel of
Ale to contain and be allowed 32 Gallons to the Barrel, each Gallon to contain
4 Quarts of the Ale-quart Standard of the Exchequer.

And for the Brewers Encouragement, and toward their Loss happening by Filling
and Leakage, the said Acts do allow and appoint that they shall have allowed
them out of every 23 Barrels of Beer, they shall so Brew 3 Barrels, and out of
every 22 Barrels of Ale 2 Barrels.

That these Brewers ever since, and before the making the said Acts of
Parliament always Brewed Beer, and not Ale, neither do they pretend to Brew
Ale, they being really and properly Beer Brewers, and ever accounted such, and
their Drink always taken to be and returned as Beer, and not as Ale, until
about 4 years last past, when, by the Advice of Interested Persons, Beer was to
be deemed and returned Ale, and 36 Gallons thereby reduced to 32 Gallons; and
in truth such has been the practice ever since, and continues to this day.

That the Gagers have also since that time further imposed upon the Brewers, by
Gaging and Returning their Worts hot from the Copper in the Backs and Coolers,
whereas the practice was always quite otherways, and as is conceived by Law,
the Gagers Return ought to be from the Tun, and no Returns to be made but from
thence.

By reason of which unwarrantable Gaging of hot Worts, and the Returning Beer
to be Ale, the Brewers lose an Eighth part of what they Brew, the Steem and
Sediment being as well Gaged and Returned as the Worts, and the Allowance given
the Brewers by the Acts also wholly taken away in such false Returns.

Great Differences have often arose between Brewer and Gager, and Applications
made by the Brewer to Persons Authorized by Law to determine such Differences,
who have often Adjudged on behalf of the Brewer, as is ready to be proved, yet
all but fruitless and in vain; the Gager still persisting in their irregular
Returns, and the Brewers exposed to the Mercy of a Gager's single Oath, to Make
and Return their Drink of what quality, and by what name they please, although
they little or never were acquainted with the Brewing Trade, to the great
Oppression and discouragement of the Brewers in their several Occupations, and
the disabling them in their ready compliance of payment to their Majesty's of
their Just Duty Assessed by Law, (which they always were, and still are willing
to do,) unless speedily relieved and helped by the Authority of this Honorable
House, which they humbly Offer to their Grave Consideration for Relief therein.


