THE CASE OF THE Duke of NORFOLK Represented to the SVPREME JVDICATVRE of the
KINGDOM, the LORDS in PARLIAMENT.
HEnry Frederick, late Earl of Arrundel by Deed in March 1647. Settles the
Barony of Graystock, on the Marquess of Dorchester, and other Trustees, to the
use of himself and his Countess for their Lives, then limits to the Trustees a
Term of two Hundred Years, in trust if Thomas his Eldest Son, or any issue male
of his Body be living at the Commencement of the Term, to permit Henry and his
Heirs Male, to receive the Rents and profits thereof until such time, as by the
Death of his Eldest Son Thomas without issue, Male, or leaving his Wife
Privement Enseint of a Son, or by Failure of issue Male, the Earldome of
Arrundel descend to Henry, and that upon descent of the Earldome to Henry, the
Trustees should permit Charles and the Heirs Males of his Body; and for want of
such issue Edward and the Heirs Males of his Body, and likewise Francis and
Bernard, and the Heirs Males of their Bodies, and for want of such issue the
right Heirs of the said Henry Frederick, to receive the Rents, and profits of
the Barony during all the Term of two Hundred years, and then the Inheritance
is limited to Henry, Charles, Edward, Francis, and Bernard successively in
Tail Male, Remainder to the right Heirs of Henry Frederick.

Henry in 1675, having both the Trust of the Term and the Freehold, and
inheritance in him; suffers a Recovery, and bars all the Remainders, and
notwithstanding Thomas died in 1677. Henry continued in possession of the
Barony of Graystock.

Henry by the Marriage agreement between himself, and the Lady Ann Sister to
the Duke of Beaufort was to Settle the Manors of A.B. and C. of about 5000. l.
per Annum value on the issue male of that marriage; those Lands being sold, the
now Duke of Norfolk being the Eldest issue male of that Marriage brought his
Bill in 1679 against Henry his Father to have a recompense of those Lands he
should have settled, and which he had sold away.

Henry proposes in Lieu of those Lands to settle the Barony of Graystock and
other Lands on the now Duke, all not above the Value of one third of the
Manors that should have been settled by his Mothers Marriage agreement.

Hereupon the now Duke advises with Mr. Sergeant Maynard, Sir William Jones,
and other eminent Council, whether Mr. Charles Howards pretense to the Barony
of Graystock were good or not? they all agree he had no Title to the Barony of
Graystock, and thereupon the now Duke accepts a conveyance from his Father in
1680. in Lieu of what should have come to him by his Mothers Marriage
agreement, so that the now Duke, if Mr. Charles Howard be released must be
undoubtedly defrauded of the Benefit of his Mothers marriage Agreement, and
this upon a compassionate presumption that Charles his Father intended this
Barony for him upon Thomas his Death without issue, and the Earldome Arrundel
descending on Henry, though contrary to all rules of Law and Equity.

This being the Case, 17 Junii,34. Car. 2 d.
the same was heard by the late Lord Chancellor Nottingham assisted by the Lord
Chief Justice of the Kings Bench; the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
and the Lord Chief Baron of the Exchecquer; the three Chief Judges agreed in an
Unanimous opinion that the Limitation of the Trust of the Term to Charles and
the Heirs males of his Body after, the same was limited to Henry and the Heirs
Males of his Body, and a dying without issue of Thomas, was void, and that the
Limitation to Henry, and the Heirs Males of his Body carried the whole trust of
the Term; notwithstanding the said three Chief Judges Opinion the Lord
Chancellor Nottingham upon his own single Opinion decreed the Limitation to
Charles good.

The now Duke of Norfolk brought his Bill of Reveiw to reverse this decree to
which Mr. Charles Howard put in a Plea and Demurrer, and the same coming to be
argued before the now Lord Keeper, the Lord Guilford, he proposed (that least
it might be thought he lay under some prejudice in this Cause, having delivered
his Opinion formerly, that the Remainder to Charles was void) that a Case
should be made and the opinion of all the Judges taken in it, but that being
rejected by Mr. Charles Howards Council his Lordship proceeded to hear the
Cause and reversed the decree. 15 Maii. 35. Car. 2 d.


It was agreed by all as well the Lord Nottingham, as all the rest that heard
this Cause, that a Term cannot be limited to go in succession from one, and
Heirs Males of his Body, to another, and the Heirs Males of his Body, but my
Lord Chancellor Nottingham insisted that the Contingency of the Earldome of
Arrundel, coming to Henry being to happen within a Life, that therefore that
Limitation was good.

The Lord Keeper, and the Lords, the Judges, insisted, that limitation to
Charles was void of a Term, it not being to take effect till the Death of
Thomas without issue; and the Trust being in the mean time limited to Henry,
and the Heirs Males of his Body was a total disposition of the Trust of the
Term, and for this they relied on the Authority of Child and Baylies Case
adjudged in the Court of Kings Bench, Hill. 15o Jac. 1. and afterward affirmed
in a Writ of Error; so that the Case was adjudged by ten of the twelve Judges.
The Case is this, a Term of seventy years is devised to Dorothy for Life, then
to William and his assigns, provided if William dye, without issue then
living, then to Thomas another Son of the Devisors, the Limitation over to
Thomas in that Case was to happen within a Life as in our Case, by the dying of
William without issue in the Life time of Thomas, yet there the Limitation
being not to Thomas till the dying of William without issue, it was held void,
because in intendment of Law that was a Limitation perpetual. This Case the
Lord Chancellor says went on several reasons not to be found in our Case, and
then instanceth five.

1. William having the Term to him and his Assigns there could be no Remainder
to Thomas. If so Henry in our Case had the term to him and his Heirs; Ergo,
there could be no remainder to Charles. 2. Dorothy there assented and granted
to William, that was by Will and an assent is there necessary; Ours is by Deed,
and needs no assent. 3. William might have assigned his interest, and then no
Remainder could take place: Henry in our Case did absolutely destroy the
Remainder. 4. William might have had issiue, and that issue might have
assigned. In our Case Thomas might have had issue, and they might have survived
Henry. 5. The main Reason, there was a further Limitation upon the death of
Thomas without issue, to go to the Daughter, which was a plain affectation of a
perpetuity to multiply contingencies. In our Case there is four Limitations
after the death of Charles (who is in the place of Thomas in the other Case.)
Viz. To Edward, Francis, Bernard, and their respective Heirs Males, and to the
right Heirs of Henry Frederick; so ours is so much more an affectation of a
perpetuity, as four is more than one, and in truth my Lord Chancellor was
mistaken in every one of the five instances, and the Lord Chancellor said Child
and Bailies Case is a single authority, and had never any resolution like it.
That Case is cited in Love and Windhams Case and Grigg and Hopkins Case in
Siderfins Reports, and is allowed to be good Law in each of those Cases, which
allowance is equivalent to a new Judgment.
And now if this Court shall adjudge this Limitation to Charles good, you will
destroy the former Rules of Law, and yet can never carry this Limitation
according to the intent of the said Henry Frederick to each of his Sons, and
their Heirs males; and the now Duke of Norfolk will be utterly defeated of all
the recompense of his Mothers marriage Agreement.


