THE CASE OF Tho. Dangerfield: WITH Some Remarkable Passages that happened At
the TRIALS of ELIZABETH CELLIER the Popish Midwife, AND The Earl of CASTLEMAIN,
At the Kings-Bench-Bar at Westminster, BEFORE Sir WILL. SCROGGS Knight, Lord Chief
Justice, etc.

In the Month of June, 1680.

TOGETHER WITH

1. Diverse Informations never yet published.

2. John Gadbury his Testimony, with all its Evasions.

3. Some Points of Law insisted upon by the King and Prisoners Counsel; and the
Chief Justice his Opinion given therein.

4. The Manner and Occasion of Dangerfield's Commitment to Prison, and also of
his being discharged again.

AND

5. Some Animadversions upon the L. C. J. words.

Written by the hand of an Indifferent Person.

London: Printed for the Author. 1680.

The CASE, etc.
HE that goes about to justify an ill Act of his own, shall not only loose
his end, but heighten and add to the former d^sgraces of his Life. And
therefore it would be but a vain Attempt sor any person of ordinary prudence
and common reason to endeavor such a thing. But when a man has done an Act
applauded by the approbation of many sober persons, and suffers only the
Reproaches of a few, and most of those his Enemies, it is but the dictate of
self-preservation to remove the weight that oppresses him. I have made my self
the public Discourse, and in some measure the public expectation both of Town
and Country, and began to do those things for which His Majesty was most
graciously pleased to deem me worthy his (never-to-be-forgotten) Favor; for
this reason I cannot think my self safe from the ill opinion even of the best
of my Friends, should I by a neglectful and careless silence, submit my self to
be overborn by those Violences and Disgraces that have been put upon me in the
pursuit of my gratitude for the greatest obligation that could be received from
a most benign and Royal Bounty. Therefore for the satisfaction of the World,
and to vindicate my self, without any thoughts of prejudice or revenge, I hold
it but an Act of common Justice to my Friends and my self, to make a faithful,
and render a true Account, of the most remarkable passages in Fact, that
concerned the Trial of Mrs Cellier, against whom I thought I was to have been a
Witness, and had refreshed and recollected my thoughts to that purpose. In the
next place I shall add some few Observations upon the Objections made against
me and my Testimony, and then leave it to all unbiassed persons to judge of my
intended both Loyalty and Integrity therein.

The Charge itself I brought against Mrs Cellier was of a high nature, and
formed into an Indictment from the Relation which follows, given in by my self,
that had been the Chief Actor in the whole concern by her means.

About the latter end of March, in the year 1678. Mrs Cellier came to me then a
Prisoner in Newgate, (that being the first time I ever saw her) from which
place in about a Months time she obtained my discharge. I was no sooner out
from thence, but I was Arrested and carried to the Counter, whither Mrs Cellier
sent her servant, who told me, that if I could forthwith obtain my Liberty, her
Mistress would purchase it at any rate, for that there was business ordered me
to undertake the Tuesday following; and if I could not get out before that day,
she could not tell if ever I should be freed by her or not.

Thereupon I removed my self to the King's Bench by Mrs Celliers Assistance, who
after I had been there about two days came to me, and giving me some Money for
the present, told me, I should have a weekly Allowance for my immediate
Expenses, but that I should not long continue there. At the same time she added
further, that I might do as much service there, as if I were forth, by
observing one Stroud a Prisoner there, who, as she said, knew much of the Life
and Conversation of Mr. Bedlow; and withal, commended me to the Advice of two
Priests, then Prisoners also there, which I was to take for the more secure
management of that business. At the same time likewise Mrs Celliers ordered me
to write to one Blazedale an Apothecary, for such Ingredients as I should have
occasion, for to lay the said Stroud in a Trance, whereby I might the better
accomplish the Defign, which was, of getting some Papers in his Custody, which
were reported to concern Mr. Bedlow in his Evidence. Some time after, as well
by order from Mrs Cellier as others, I was directed to Compound and discharge
my Debts; in pursuance whereof I was furnished with Money, which not being
sufficient to procure my Liberty, I prevailed with a Waiter to go with me to
Mrs Celliers House, and by her Instructions left at home, I went from thence to
Powis House, where I found her, and where I received as much more as quite
Discharged me; so that in four hours after she brought me into the presence of
the Lady Powis; who together with her self, returned me thanks for my diligence
in that business of Mr. Stroud.

Mrs Cellier was also present when the Lady Powis sent me to Peterly with a
Packet, and was the person the Lady entrusted to make up the Packet. Mrs
Cellier was also present when I returned from Peterly, and delivered the
Packet which I brougbt from thence to the Lady Powis and she was likewise by,
when the Lady read a Letter openly to this effect, (which I brought from the
Priest Mr. Jeane in the abovementioned Packet.)

Good store of Pamphlets must be wrote and spread abroad, persons must be
employed to go to Coffee-houses and rail against the Presbyterians, and if they
meet with any who offer to contend, matters of Treason may be ealy laid to
their Charge, and so have them secured. But there must be many persons employed
in these matters, and it will be best not to let them know one another, nor any
one singly to know more than his part.

Some short time after there was a settlement made for me among the Lords in
the Tower, in consideration of my Expenses; and amongst the rest 'twas ordered,
Mrs Cellier should have Ten shillings a week for my Diet, which was constantly
paid her.

Mrs Cellier was the person also who disbnrsed Money to get Lane a Confederate
against Doctor Oats out of Prison, the Charges of which amounted to about
Twenty pound. He was also brought to Powis-house, and there altered his name,
as well by the order of Mrs Cellier as others; and she was allowed ten
shillings a week for his Diet also. Mrs Cellier was the person that first
employed me to go to Coffee-houses, and told me it was by order of the Lords in
the Tower, that I should disperse Pamphlets, and raise Discourses to this
effect; That Sir Edmondbury Godfrey was Murdered by the E. of S's order, who
joined with the Presbyterians to overthrow the Catholics.

Mrs Cellier employed persons to write Copies of the Letters and Lists of the
Names that came from Nevil a Prisoner in the King's Bench, and sometimes she and
I put our helping hands, and both wrote; which Letters were to the same effect
with those that were taken in Colonel Mansels Chamber, and were all by some
means or other to be Conveyed into the Houses of all the most considerable
Presbyterians, for under that notion, all persons were Comprised which were not
for promoting the Catholic Interest: And this Mrs Cellier declared to me at
Powis house, which was our general Rendezvous for near two Months. Mrs Cellier
was present at another time, when the Lady Powis read a Letter which came from
Brussels, the effect whereof was thus.

If you had taken this course sooner, much Blood might have been saved; but I
doubt it is now too late, and fear that the St. Omers Testimonies having been so
baffled, has much impaired our endeavors: yet to my power I will assist, and
do advise you to go on.

Thomas Holder.

About the latter end of July, Mrs Cellier removed from Powis-house to her own
Habitation, whither I also went in a short time, some while after having been
rebuked by the Lord Castlemain, for refusing the matter proposed to me in the
Tower, no less than to Kill His most Sacred Majesty. I came home and told Mrs
Cellier that the Lord C. was displeased with me. Oh, said she, it is his
Lordships Custom to fall out one hour, and be friends the next, and then
advised me to go to Confession, and receive the Sacrament of Father Sharp at
Wild-house, which I did, and there received the same rebuke from the said
Father, for refusing the said Proposal in the Tower. At another time Mrs
Cellier was present in her own House, when the Lady Powis laughed at me, and
said, Well, well, Mr. Willoughby (by which Name I then went) will be honest,
and do us no hurt, I am sure. After that, having been with Mr. Gadbury, and
from him received another rebuke for refusing that Proposal to Kill the King, I
returned home and told Mrs Cellier of it, who replied, That Mr. Gadbury was in
his heart a very good Catholic. Not long after, I met the Lady P. at Mrs
Celliers House, where in the hearing of Mrs Cellier, she told me, I must go on
with some Intrigue against the Duke came from Flanders, to make him believe the
Presbyterians were Plotting against the KING; and then there was a Consultation
between us for carrying on the Design, though I was not to move till farther
order. The next day Mrs Cellier was sent for to the Tower, who upon her return,
told me, I must speedily procure some persons that were well habited, to go to
the Coffee-houses and Clubs to learn how things stood. Mrs Cellier was also
present, when the Lady P. told me, that I must stick hard against the D. of
Monmouth, D. of Buckingham, the E. of Shaftesbury, Lord Gray, Lord Howard, and
others; all which was to be done, when I went the first time to give His
Majesty an Account of the new SHAM-PLOT, at which time I was to inform His
Majesty, that if he had dyed at Windsor, they had posted about the Town and
Suburbs a considerable Army, with which they intended to have taken possession,
and did design to bring the same to a Commonwealth, and set up the D. of
Monmouth as Head of the Government: That the L. Shaftesbury and others were
granting out Commissions to that purpose, and that I my self had a promise of
one from a great Presbyterian; all which and more I told His Majesty by their
directions, just before his going to Newmarket; whereupon His Majesty ordered
me Money, of which I sent an Account by Mrs Cellier to the Tower; who at her
return, advised me to beware of one Colonel Halsel, for that the Lords feared
he would discover me. Mrs Cellier carried word from me to the Tower, where
Colonel Mansel Lodged, and upon her return told me, the Lady P. would meet me
in the afternoon at her House, as she did, and Mrs Cellier was present when her
Ladyship bid me go again to Father Sharp to Confession, and receive the
Sacrament, for that I was to go in a short time after to the Earl of
Shaftesbury. Soon after Mrs Cellier received a Letter, that that very night I
must go to the said Earl with this formal Complement.

My Lord, I am a stranger to your Lordship, neither introduced nor sent by any
person; but I desire to know, if it be in my power to serve you, whether I may
have your Lordships favor.

Then did Mrs Cellier deliver into my hand a short Dagger, of which sort and
fashion three or four had been brought to her, about three days before, by a
Virginia Merchant, I being present at the same time when they were delivered to
her. After I had been with the Earl, upon my return home, I told Mrs Cellier I
could not do my business, (which was indeed to stab his Lordship) but would
take some other opportunity. Of all which Mrs Cellier sent an Account to the
Tower, and as she told me, her self received for answer, That I should go
forthwith to the King, and inform His Majesty that I had been with the E. of
Shaftesbury, who had promised me a Military Employment. Then by direction I
went a second time to the E. of Shaftesbury; Mrs Cellier furnished me then also
with a Dagger. But returning again without any success, as they called it, I
received new Orders to go to the King, and acquaint His Majesty how I had been
a second time with the E. of Shaftesbury, and of a great quantity of Papers
that concerned the New PLOT, that were in Colonel Mansels Chamber, for the
search whereof my farther business was to pray a Warrant; which would not be
granted, because I could not make such Affidavit as was requisite. For which I
was well scool'd, both by the Lady Powis and Mrs Cellier, who after they had
told me several ways how I might have saved my Oath, added withal, That I was
obliged by my Religion to part with my Life for the good of the Cause.

Some small time after, the Lady P. came to Mrs Celliers House, where being all
three together, the Lady endeavored to persuade me to go a third time to the
Earl of Shaftesbury, which I refused to do; whereupon the Lady striking me
gently on the hand with her Fan, called me Cowhearted fellow, and said, she
would go herself; Mrs Cellier made answer, No, Madam, that shall not be, for I
will signify to the world the bravery of our Sex above the Men's, and go my
self and do the work. Whereupon she went out of the room for a while, leaving
the Lady and my self together to discourse the method of putting the Papers
into Colonel Mansels Room; which Papers when I had made them up, I showed them
to Mrs Cellier, who encouraged me to proceed, saying, she would warrant I
should be well rewarded for my pains, and wished me good success. When I had
conveyed the Papers into Colonel Mansels Room, Mrs Cellier came to me from the
Tower, and told me, I must go to the Custom-house, and pretend to give
intelligence of certain Prohibited Goods which were lodged in the Colonels
Chamber, to the end the Officers upon search might find the Papers.

Soon after being to attend the King and Mr. Secretary Coventry about the
Papers, and wanting some Instructions, I went home to advise with Mrs Cellier,
at what time I was taken by Colonel Warcup, one of the Justices of the Peace
for the County of Middlesex, and engaged by Bail to attend the King and Council
the next day at Three of the clock.

Upon my being brought to a Hearing, I was Committed to Newgate, whither Mrs
Cellier sent her Maid to me, and something to my support, advising me to stand
fast, promising I should want for nothing, and should be removed to the
King's Bench. After which, the Maid came a second time that day with a Note,
which ran thus.

I am in Custody, and if examined how I came to know you, will declare, I
employed you to get in desperate Debts; it cannot worst you. To color which
pretense, the Maid also brought me two Books of Mrs Celliers Husbands concerns,
and added further, that her Mistress desired me to stand fast, For her Life was
in my hands. To this Intrigue these Particulars may be added.

That I having told Mrs Cellier how I had been with the King alone at Mr
Chiffins Lodgings: Oh, said she, what an opportunity have you lost! Soon after
the Lady Powis coming in, Mrs Cellier told her the story; at which the Lady
turning short about, with her face toward Mrs Cellier, said these very words,
How bravely might he have killed the King, had he been provided! That Mrs
Cellier ordered me in our public discourse to call the King Lady Mary, and the
Duke Lady Ann. That Mrs Cellier was one of those that ordered me to Treat with
Mr. Boyce, to try if I could corrupt him to be an Evidence against Prance (a
Witness for the King.) And that she was one of those that ordered me to go and
Treat with Nicholas Stubbs, in reference to recanting the Charge he had laid
against Gifford the Priest.

This is the sum of the Charge, without any flourishing or refining, all matter
of Fact, which I intended to have made good against Mrs Cellier, in reference
to His Majesty's most gracious confidence which he had put in my future
reality. A Charge not only in my belief, but in the more venerable and sound
opinion of those that had the Conduct of the Information, and management of the
Evidence, well guarded and supported by a sufficient strength of Corroborating
Testimonies. But lest I may seem to abound too much in my own sense, here they
are all in their order. Let the world view them, and then give an equal
Sentence.

John Gadbury, Witness.
L. C. J. Mr. Gadbury, what do you know concerning this PLOT?


Gad. I know nothing of it neither one way nor other.


L. C. J. Do you know of any contrivance of Mrs Celliers to Kill the King?


Gad. No, rather the contrary.


L. C. J. Do you know of any attempt to change the Government?


Gad. I will tell your Lordship what I do know, if these Gentlemen will not be
too nimble for me, (viz. the Kings Council.) I have suffered a great deal of
prejudice of late in relation to a PLOT, but God is my witness, I know none,
unless it were a PLOT to bring Sir Robert Peyton over to the Kings Interest.
That PLOT I had some concern in, and had some knowledge of Mrs Celliers concern
in it, and she was so far from doing any thing against the Kings Interest, that
she was willing to bring over with him Three Gentlemen turned out of Commission
when Sir Robert was; so that how she could be acting for the King and against
the King at the same time, I do not understand.


L. C. J. Mr. Gadbury, you are a man of Letters, pray will you give your
Testimony of the things you do know in relation to Mrs Cellier.


Gad. Mrs Cellier was not Committed upon my accusation, therefore I hoped she
might have been Tried without my Testimony. But when I was in danger of my
Life, when I lay in the Gate House, and Mrs Cellier was reported to be a third
Witness against me, I raked up every trifle. But if I had thought it Treason, I
would have discovered it before. And as to that particular business concerning
Mr. Smith a Schoolmaster, that Smith sometime since did come to me, being my
old acquaintance, to ask my advice in it, which was to go to the Lords in the
Tower. I asked him what to do? says he, I can say enough against Dr. Oats to
serve them and take off his Evidence; and asked me if he should do it. By no
means, Mr. Smith, said I. Mrs Cellier afterward told me, this Smith and one
Phillips were willing to tell some stories or other of Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow
and I told her this very story; says she, you being acquainted with him, it is
possible you may do some good upon him; and says she, I had as lieve as Ten
Guineys that you would do it: she said she did not care if she had been at the
charge of Ten Guineys, if he would be honest and discover the truth.


L. C. J. Did she say she heard Mr. Dangerfield talk of a Nonconformist PLOT,
that would take off the Popish PLOT?


Gad. She said she had heard Dangerfield say there was a Nonconformist PLOT,
and that he was to have a Commission among them; and I think she said she had
heard him say, that he hoped under the color of that, the Popish PLOT would go
on.


L. C. J. Did she say it of her own accord, that she hoped that would carry on
the Popish PLOT?


Gad. My Lord, I cannot remember particulars; I have no reason to spare her,
but I am unwilling to speak any thing that is contrary to truth, though she has
done me the greatest injury in the world.


L. C. J. How came you to talk of a Nonconformist PLOT.


God. It was only common discourse as it was at Coffee-houses.


Record. Had you heard it before that she spoke of it, because you say it was
common?


Gad. No, not till she spoke of it.


L. C. J. Did Mrs Cellier tell you of any Popish Priests or Jesuits coming
hither from beyond the Seas?


Gad. Upon the going over of one Clay, I think she did say she heard there were
some more coming over.


L. C. J. What to do?


Gad. God knows that.


L. C. J. Did she speak of any Plot or Contrivance to kill the King?


Gad. No, she was always an enemy to PLOTS, or else I would not have kept her
company.


L. C. J. Did she say there were, or that she heard there were several Priests
and Jesuits coming over?


Gad. My Lord, I think she said she heard it. I said several times the Popish
PLOTTERS would be destroyed; but she answered, she was afraid the Nation would
be destroyed first.


L. C. J. Did she say the Nation would be destroyed first? I ask you once more;
we must Try people according to Oaths; by the Oath you have taken, when you
said the Popish PLOTTERS would be destroyed, what Answer did she make?


Gad. She said she was afraid the Nation would be so, because she saw abundance
of the best of the Nation, went out into other Nations to weaken our Nation and
spend their Money; and she feared the Nation would be destroyed before them,
(viz) the PLOTTERS.


L. C. J. What Discourse had you with Mrs Cellier passing through
Westminster-Abbey?


Gad. My Lord, my Memory has been exceedingly bruised; but I remember, my Lord,
as I was going through the Abbey in a rainy afternoon, she said, This Abbey was
formerly filled with Benedictine Monks, or something to that purpose; and,
says she, What if it should be so again?


L. C. J. Are you a Protestant or a Papist?


Gad. A Protestant, my Lord.


L. C. J. He talks as like a Papist as can be: was it, What if it should be
filled again?


Gad. What if it should be again?


L. C. J. What did you say to that?


Gad. I only smiled to hear a Woman's discourse, my Lord.


L. C. J. You make all the Company laugh. What did she say of the Temple?


Gad. That the Temple had been filled with Friars too.


L. C. J. And what then did she talk of filling it again? What did she say
concerning the Temple?


Gad. Nothing, my Lord. Here Mr. Gadbury was going to read in his paper, which
was his Original Information given before the King and Council; but the Court
told him, that would not be allowed, but he might refresh his memory with it.


L. C. J. Now tell me what she said; Mr Gadbury, keep it in your hand.


Gad. My Lord, she put it by way of Interrogation to feel my pulse.


L. C. J. What did she say else?


Gad. There was nothing but transient discourse, my Lord.


L. C. J. We must ask you what the truth is; look upon your paper, and consider
what you say, and consider that you are upon a solemn occasion, and are to
testify it in the presence of God Almighty: I would have you tell plainly what
it is, and neither to make it more, nor stifle it.


Gad. It was only transient discourse.


L. C. J. Say what it was: was it This place was once filled with Benedictine
Monks?


Gad. She said, that the Abbey had been filled with Benedictine Monks, as the
Temple had with Friars.


J. Jones. Look upon your paper. You have looked upon the paper, and pra^ tell
us what she said; did she say she hoped to see this place filled with
Benedictines?


Gad. My Lord, I don't remember that word hope.


J. Jones. How long have you been acquainted with Mrs Cellier?


Gad. Ten or a dozen years.


L. C. J. Did she never ask you any question about the life of the King?


Gad. My Lord, when the King was very ill at Windsor, and she being fearful he
would die, she did move the question to me.


L. C. J. What Question?


Gad. To know whether I thought His Majesty would live or no; but it was her
fear that he would not.


L. C. J. Had you seen the King?


Gad. No, my Lord.


L. C. J. Did she desire you to consult your Art? how then did she expect you
should give her an Answer from your Art?


Gad. From my Art, my Lord.


L. C. J. Did she desire you to consult your Art how long the King would live?


Gad. She did as I said.


L. C. J. What did you say to that?


Gad. I would not tell her.


L. C. J. What Answer did you make?


Gad. I told her I would not meddle with it.


L. C. J. She would have had you consult your Art or Scheme, or what ever it
is, to know whether the King would live or die?


Gad. It was something of that.


L. C. J. And you said you would not meddle or make with it.


Gad. Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. She desired you to make a Scheme?


Gad. No, my Lord, I cannot say she mentioned a Scheme; but she asked the
question.


J. Ray. What else did she ask?


Gad. Only that question.


L. C. J. How often do you think she spoke of it to you?


Gad. Never, my Lord, but when he was ill. I will not baffle any thing that may
conduce to the safety of the King and Kingdom.


L. C. J. Indeed it is very unconducible to the safety of the King and Kingdom,
if any go about to destroy him, and with evil intentions to ask how long he
will live; and you ought in duty to God and your Sovereign to declare: Did she
ever make any enquiries about the Kings death, more than what you have said?


Gad. No more, my Lord, but that she was fearful he would die.


L. C. J. Did she say she would go to somebody else?


Gad. My Lord, when she perceived me shie, says she, I see you are afraid of
me, I will go to some other Astrologer.


L. C. J. For what?


Gad. To satisfy her curiosity, as a great many do.


L. C. J. What curiosity did she ask besides this?


Gad. She would ask me sometimes about the conditions of our bodies, whether
they should be prosperous in the world; and several other questions.


L. C. J. Were you nice in these Curiosities?


Gad. Truly, my Lord, I was shie of meddling with any thing when I heard there
was a talk about PLOTS.


L. C. J. Was you nice to give her any satisfaction according to her hopes
concerning those things you call Curiosities, questioning whether she should be
well fed, how many Children she should have, etc. were you scrupulous in that?


Gad. I think I might not be in that particular.


L. C. J. How came it then that she should go to another Astrologer?


Gad. She asked me something about Mr. Dangerfield.


L. C. J. For what?


Gad. How to get him out of Prison.


L. C. J. Pray you, how came she to say she would go to another Astrologer? you
were not shie of answering these questions?


Gad. It was something about Mr. Dangerfield. And, my Lord, she asked me about
some Deeds or Papers which he was to search for or seize, which concerned Mr.
Bedlow.


L. C. J. She had better have gone to one of the Clerks than a Conjurer for
them; but why should she go to another Astrologer?


Gad. Because I was shie.


L. C. J. Did she not say when you refused to meddle with the death of the
King, that she would go to another Astrologer?


Gad. Yes, my Lord, she did.


L. C. J. Did you do nothing for her at that time?


Gad* My Lord, I did a Scheme then, which since I found to be for Mr.
Dangerfield; but I knew not for what it was when I did it.


L. C. J. Can you apply one Scheme to any body?


Gad. My Lord, when Mrs Cellier came to me, she gave me the time of a persons
Nativity, and I set the Figure of Heaven to that time, to know whether he were
a person fit to be trusted, her Husband being a French Merchant, to get in
Money.


L. C. J. Then for ought you knew, Dangerfield was a Woman, and the question
was, whether Dangerfield was with Child, and it happens to be a Man; how did it
fall out?


Gad. I have forgotten, my Lord.


L. C. J. When did you know it was for Dangerfield?


Gad. My Lord, never before I came before the King and Council; neither did I
ever know his Name before, for he went by the Name of Willoughby before.


L. C. J. What other discourse had you with her? did she not at any time talk
of Mr, Dugdale?


Gad. She did say she had heard of some people that were to discourse with Mr.
Dugdale, she had heard the thing, but I do not know whether she knew any thing
of it or no.


L. C. J. What discourse had you about that?


Gad. She told me there was a woman to go down to Windsor, to beg Mr. Dugdales
Pardon, for he was penitent for what he had said in some Trial or other.


Whitehal, Friday November. 7, 1679. at the Councel-Chamber.
MArgaret Jenkinson, formerly Servant to Mrs Cellier, swears, that she carried
Money from her Mistress to Mr. Dangerfield in Newgate, but does not remember
how much it was. That he was afterward in the Counter, whither Mrs. Cellier
sent this Examinant with more Money; but that not being sufficient, she brought
it back again, and afterward carried what was necessary, with an order from
her Mistress to tell him, that business was ordered for him to do the Tuesday
following, and that she would purchase his Liberty at any rate. But if it could
not be done, she could not tell if he should ever be freed by her or not. That
she did carry diverse Letters between Dangerfield and her Mistress, but knew not
what they concerned. That she did carry two small Vials to him at the
King's Bench, by her Mistresses order; that some time after she went again, and
Dangerfield desired her to bring a second Vial, which she also carried. That
Dangerfield told her, he had made Stroud drunk, having taken something that
hindered himself from being in that condition, and that he gave her some Notes
to carry her Mistress of what he had then got from Stroud.

Margaret Jenkinson.

The Information of John Woodman of Drury Lane Tailor, taken upon Oath the 17th
day of November, before Edmund Warcup Esquire.
THis Informant says, that he has known Mr. Thomas Dangerfield ever since
March last past, and then went with Mrs Cellier to see him in Newgate, where
Mrs Cellier whispered with Mr Dangerfield through a Grate; and thereupon Mrs
Cellier sent this Informant with a Quire of Paper afterward to Mr.
Dangerfield, and a written paper which he was ordered to write out: and about
three hours after, this Informant went to Mr. Dangerfield for the written paper
by Mrs Celliers order, which he carried to her at her House in Arundel-street;
but what the papers contained he knows not. And Mrs Cellier confessed, she
both delivered and sent Money to Mr. Dangerfield. She sent this Informant to
Mr. Williamson, with a Discharge for Mr. Dangerfield, for which he said he must
have Four pounds, and this Informant supposes that Mrs Cellier paid him that
Money. And this Informant saw Mr. Dangerfield twice at Powis-house about
Midsummer past, Mrs Cellier being with him. Some papers lying upon the Table
there, and this Informant having been in prison before that time, did receive
some Charity from my Lady Powis by Mrs Celliers hands; and on occasion of
returning her Ladyship thanks for her Charity, he saw the Lady Powis and Mr.
Dangerfield at Powis-house. And this Informant says, that he was acquainted
with Father Harcourt for about Twenty years last past, and wrought for him in
his Trade, and has been sometime sent by Mr. Fenwick, Mr. Ireland, and others,
with Letters to diverse places. And he has heard there was one Father Sharp at
Wild-house, but never was certainly informed of, or knew any such person as
Father Knollys. And this Informant says, he was once or twice with Mrs Cellier
at the Fleet, when she went to visit Mr. Nevil alias Pain, but heard not their
discourse. And this Informant went two or three times with Mrs Cellier to the
Lord Castlemains House at Charing Cross, where this Informant waited at the
door; and when she came down went away with her, but was not privy to her
business. That this Informant went with Mrs Cellier to Mr. Dangerfield in the
King's Bench, where she discoursed with him privately about half an hour. And at
another time this Informant went with Mrs Cellier to the Marshalsea to one Mr.
Nettervile, and farther says not.

John Woodman.

The Information of William Woodman, Son of the said John Woodman, taken upon
Oath the same day.
THis Informant says, that he lived about six weeks with Madam Cellier, and
left her about Midsummer last past; and when this Informant lived there, he
knew Mr. Willoughby alias Dangerfield, who lay in Powis-house, and was sent by
him to the Lord Castlemains with a Letter, who upon receipt of it, delivered
forty shillings to this Informant, which he delivered to Madam Cellier. And one
time Mrs Sheldon sent Joe her Servant to Madam Cellier for a Letter, which not
being ready, this Informant was afterward sent with a Letter to Mrs Sheldons,
which Letter was to be sent to Windsor. Another time this Informant was
Commanded by Madam Cellier to go to Tyburn, when Mr. Langhorn was Executed, and
was directed to stay there, and get any flesh or any other thing belonging to
him. And at this Informants return home, he found a bloody Handkerchief,
brought home, as was said, by Mr. Willoughby from the same place; and there was
that day at Dinner, Mr. Cellier, Mrs Cellier, Mr. Nevil, Mr. Webb, Mr. Dormer,
Mr. Ricaut, a Virginia Merchant, Mr. Wood, and Mr. Willoughby, at Powis-house.
And this Informant was sent by Madam Cellier to Mr. Monson in the King's Bench,
with Letters, and ten shillings at a time in Money. And he carried five
shillings for her to Mr. Kemish; seven shillings and six pence at a time twice
to Mr. Netterfield in the Marshalsea, who said, he was used to have ten
shillings a week. Another time this Informant carried a Letter to Sir John Gage
in the King's Bench from Madam Cellier, who returned the same Letter or Packet,
Sealed up with his Answer, as this Informant supposes. And this Informant well
remembers, that one time he went with Mr. Dangerfield to a Coffee house in
White-Friers, and went up three pair of stairs, and there saw a Gentleman,
being a little Blinking-man, whose Hat hung over his Eyes, whom Mr. Dangerfield
says now, was one Mr. Knowles a Priest, who came with Mr. Dangerfield to
Powis-house in a Coach, and brought a little Trunk and other goods in a bag
with him, and Lodged two or three nights there. But being a timorous man, he
would not stay, but returned again to the same house in White-Friers, and
carried his Trunk and other Goods with him: and this Informant believes the
said Gentleman was a Priest, for that he went to take the Confession of one
Newton a Painter, who dyed afterward near the Fleet upon the Fleet-ditch-side,
and the Neighbors did suspect that there was a Priest or Jesuit came then to
that House, and resolved to lay wait for him if he came again. And this
Informant saw Mr. Dormer twice at Powis-house; and he saw Mr. Webb three or
four times at Powis-house, where he Dined with Madam Cellier and Mr. Willoughby
most of the times. And this Informant heard that Mr. Willoughby had been at
Peterly at Mr. Webbs House, and the Horse he went on stood in Drury Lane, being
lame. And Mrs Jolly went once with Mrs Cellier to Mr. Nevill in the
King's Bench, at Mr. Weavers-house, where Mrs Cellier dined, this Informant
attending them, Mrs Jolly in the mean time going about to distribute Money to
the Prisoners.

Jurat. Anno and die supradict. Edm. Warcup.

William Woodman.

The Information of William Scarlet, taken before the Right Honorable Sir
Robert Cleyton Knight. Lord Major, etc. Jan. 26. 1679.
THis Informant says, that in or about the Month of April last past, this
Informant heard one Margaret, then pretended Servant to Mrs Cellier, say to Mr.
Willoughby; then Prisoner in the Counter, that her Mistress had business of
great consequence for him to do, if he could get his liberty by Tuesday; if
not, she could not tell whether he should be fetched out by her or not. At which
time this Informant says, there was a report about trying the Lords in the
Tower. And this Informant further deposes, that in order to that, he this
Informant was employed by the aforesaid Mrs Cellier, to bring an Habeas Corpus;
together with which, this Informant had the sum of fifty shillings, or
thereabouts, delivered to him by the hands of Mrs Cellier, for the Charges of
the Habeas Corpus. And farther says, that upon the day that the Habeas Corpus
was allowed, he received the sum of thirty shillings more from Mrs Cellier, at
which time the said Mrs Cellier did utter words to this or the like effect:
That if Mr. Willoughby would stick to his business, she would make him a man
for ever. And this Informant further says, that sometime after, Mr. Willoughby
requested this Informant to deliver a Letter directed to one Mrs Eliz. Sheldon,
near St. James's, to this e^^^ct: Madam, I desire you to send by this Bearer,
who is my trusty friend, the Twenty Guineys, being the Queens Charity for a
week. And this Informant farther says, that Mrs Cellier told him when any
business happened for the Bailing of Prisoners, she would employ this
Informant, if he would accept of it.

William Scarlet.

The Examination of Mary Aires before the Lords of the Council, November 2.
1679.
THat she went with Willoughby and Duddel to Nevil in the King's Bench, and left
Willoughby by, at a Coffee-house by the way, and carried a sheet of Notes taken
at Langhorns Trial, which Willoughby writ. That she carried a Letter from Nevil
to Mrs Cellier, and a Letter from Mrs Cellier to the Lady Powis. She also saw
Lane at Powis house, who went by the Name of Johnson; and that Mrs Cellier
ordered him to be called by that Name.

Mary Airs.
The Information of Bennet Duddel Joyner, taken before His Majesty in Council,
November 2. 1679.
THat he had wrought at Powis-house, and there seen Mr. Willoughby. That he
went with Mrs Airs to see a Prisoner in the Kings Bench, but knew not his Name
was Nevil: that Mr. Willoughby staid at a Coffee-House thereby; that when they
returned, they brought home Papers along with them from Nevil. That soon after
Mrs Airs went to the Tower. That he has seen Mr. Willoughby and others often
writing at Powis-house. That one Mr. Lane lay there in the House. That Mrs
Cellier was once in great fear, when she thought she had lost Lane. That Mr
Willoughby did once ask him if he could make a hand-press, in order to
Printing; to which he made answer, that he would ask the Lord P. and his Lady
if he might make such a thing.

Bennet Duddel.

The Examination of Anne Blake, Servant to Mrs Cellier, before Sir William
Waller, October 29. 1679.
THat Mrs Cellier delivered into her custody two parcels of Papers, desiring
her to lay them up safe for her, so as they might not be discovered. That she
hid one parcel behind the Pewter, in the Kitchen, and the other parcel, among
which was a little Paper-book, tied with red Ribbons for better security, she
hid in a Tub of Meal; both which were seized by Sir William Waller.

The Mark of Anne Blake.

Saturday November 1, 1679. At the Councel-Chamber.
SVsan Edwards, Servant to Mrs Cellier, made Oath, that she carried two Papers
from her Mistress to Mr. Dangerfield in Newgate, with money and two Books of
Account, that he might be perfect in them. And that she carried a Message at
another time from her Mistress, that her Life was in his hands; and that if he
did not stand fast, she was an undone woman.

Susan Edwards.

Thomas Williamson Sworn before the Right Honorable Sir Robert Clayton Lord
Mayor, Jan. 26. 1679.
DEclared upon Oath, that upon the Tenth of February, Mrs Cellier came to his
House to implov him to Bail Papists out of prison* for which she promised him
fifteen shillings for each person, and an allowance for extraordinary Expenses,
and for his encouragement gave him ten shillings in earnest. That after he had
Bailed out several, Mrs Cellier sent for him to her House in Arundel street,
and after several discourses, told him, that if he this Informant could help
her to two men of undaunted Spirits* that would Swear to some directions that
she had drawn up, to take off ^rances Evidence, hoping thereby to save the
Convicting of Berry, Hill and Green, Mrs Cellier promised the said persons
should have forty pounds, or thereabout, for their reward; and withal, he was
desired to tell the said persons, that they should not need to fear a Prison,
for that by her Interest she would so order it, that they should be only
Prisoners in the Fleet, where they should have forty shilling a week duly paid:
b^t this Informant did not perform his promise to Mrs Cellier in that respect,
though she gave him five shillings in earnest to undertake the business. That
soon after Mrs Cellier employed him to get one Mr. Willoughby out of prison,
saying, the said Willoughby must be gotten out who ever remained, and for which
the said Mrs Cellier paid him the sum of four pound, or thereabouts. That upon
this Informants telling Mrs Cellier that Mr. Willoughby was a brisk man; she
replied, that if he were not brisk, he would not be fit for our business. That
upon discourse with the said Mrs Cellier, about the death of Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey, she said, it is laid on us now, but it will appear it was done by the
Presbyterians.

Tho. Williamson.

The Examination of Richard Adams of Lincolnes-Inn Esquire upon Oath, taken the
28th day of November, before His Majesty and Lords of the Councel-Board, at
Whitehal.
THis Examinant says, that about two or three years since, he became
acquainted with Mrs Cellier, a French Merchants Wife, upon the account of being
a Lawyer, and a Commissioner upon the Statutes of Bankrupt; and about the 24th
of September last past, he was prevailed with to give Mrs Cellier a meeting at
the Devil Tavern near Temple bar, to consult with other persons about the
management of a discovery of a long concealed Estate of one Mr. Dowdeswel a
Bankrupt, and a Debtor unto Mrs Celliers Husband five hundred pound, as she
said; and at her first entrance into the room, she was accompanied with one Mr.
Dangerfield, alias Willoughby, who suddenly began the Duke of Yorks Health in a
glass of Wine; and observing that this Examinant had omitted naming the Health,
Mrs Cellier urged this Examinant to gratify the Gentleman her good friend
therein; being complied with by this Examinant, then (Dangersield) attempted to
engage the Examinant in a discourse, reviling persons of the Presbyterian
persuasion: his design not taking effect, Mrs Cellier passionately expressed
great affections unto this Examinant, declaring, that she was lately arrived in
England, and desired to know of this Examinant what was become of the old
Popish PLOT; condoling the condition of our Kings loss of Reputation beyond
Seas, for sheding so much innocent Blood, as persuaded thereunto by that wicked
Villain Shaftesbury; bidding this Examinant have patience but one Month longer,
and he should see the PLOT blown up with a witness; and that his Royal Higness
was restless until the Plotters were discovered; saying thus, Their Names are
well known unto us already, they are many in number, and great ones: and
bidding this Examinant not to stand in his own light, said she was in a
capacity of raising his Fortunes; saying, she spoke affectionately unto him,
and telling him, he was more capable of serving the Kings and Duke of Yorks
Interest than other persons were, being a cast-off at Court. To which sayings
this Examinant replied, that he never had any Concerns at Court, unless she
meant his being turned out of the Commission of the Peace, in good Company, not
with Fools or Knaves. And further says, that Mrs Cellier was full of
discourse, in extolling the great Charity of Lord Powis's Lady toward the
distressed Catholics in prison, blaming this Examinant for not improving his
Interest with his Lady, who had expressed great kindness for this Examinant.
Adding further, that this Examinants Prophetic sayings unto the Lord Powis, at
his casual meeting of his Lordship in Lumbard-street, gave him great
disturbance relating unto the death of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey. And at this
Examinants and Mrs Celliers departure out of the Devil Tavern, earnestly
desired this Examinant, to see her at her House; boasting, that the Lady Powis
often did her the honor of calling upon her at her House.

Rich. Adams.

November 4. 1679.
THe Right Honorable the Earl of Peterborough did declare at the
Councel-Board, That Mrs Cellier informed his Lordship how she had found out a
man that was able to discover very dangerous practices against the King. That
she gave a great Character of one Willoughby, who had much improved himself
abroad in the Services of the Prince of Orange, Duke de Villa Hermosa, and
other great Princes; and that this man by his often frequenting diverse
Coffee-houses, had discovered diverse great and dangerous things that were
preparing against the Parliament. That she did desire his Lordship to procure a
Warrant for making search for some Papers. And added, if such could be
obtained, all the whole matter would be discovered; but she desired the Warrant
might be obtained without the Kings knowledge.

The Information of William Kilbury, etc.
THis Informant says, that Mr. Dangerfield came to Lodge at his House on
Whitsunday last past, and that a Gentlewoman came in one Mr. Prince's Name to
take the Lodgings for him, and that he lodged there about three weeks, and the
Gentlewoman who took the Lodging said, she would assure this Informant the
Gentleman was no Priest, but said he might be a Papist, but a very modest
Gentleman; and about a fortnight after Mr. Dangerfield came thither, he went
into the Country one day, and returned the next; and this Informant believes,
he said he went to Peterley in Buckinghamshire. And whilst he Lodged there,
some persons came to him, which ^r. Dangerfield said were the Lady Powis her
Servants. And whilst he lodged in this Informants House, he was desired by Mr.
Dangerfield to find out some fit persons to get him some of the flesh of Mr.
Langhorn, or the five Jesuits Executed about that time; and two Gentlemen with
Mr. Dangerfield did go, as they said, to the place of Execution for that
purpose. And when this Informant told Mr. Dangerfield, that by reason of the
strict orders, he could not entertain him longer in his House, he being a
Papist, Mr. Dangerfield went away forthwith, and said he was to lodge at
Powis-house, whither if this Informant came he would make him welcome, and
farther says not.

William Kilbury.

The Information of Lucy Prince, etc.
THis Informant says, that she has been acquainted with Mrs Cellier about
eight Months since; and one time she brought Mr. Dangerfield along with her to
this Informants House; but this Informant heard none of their discourse. And
she says, that she went to Powis-house to Mrs Cellier while she lodged there,
where she saw Mr. Dangerfield four or five times writing. And this Informant
says, she does know one Mr. Sharp, and has heard and seen him say Mass, at
the Chapel in Wild-house, within this half year last past; and he is a little
man black haired. And the Informant has heard Mrs Cellier say, she gave him
Money to say Mass, or pray for the Soul of a person deceased. And she says,
that she saw Mr. Dangerfield and Mrs Cellier one time more writing in the
Gallery in Powis-house, and others by them. And she has heard Mr. Dangerfield
often lament the death of the five Jesuits, and Mr. Langhorn; saying, they dyed
wrongfully. And she has heard Mrs Cellier say, they were innocent of the PLOT,
and further says not.

Lucy Prince.

The Testimony of Anne Nethercoat, Servant to Captain Richardson.
MIstress Cellier being lodged with me at a certain time whilst under her close
Confinement, desired me to buy her a quantity of brown Thread, which I did;
then she having about her a Pen and Ink, wrote diverse Notes, and prevailed with
me to carry them as she should direct; but for my better security, in case any
thing should miscarry, and I put upon my Oath to swear if I had at any time
carried any Letters, she had so wound the Threads over the Notes, that they
appeared only like bottoms, and the Answers were to be sent in the same manner;
but before I engaged my self in this affair with her, I acquainted my Master
with the design, who advised me to proceed, which I did, and as often as she
delivered those bottoms to me, I gave them to my Master, who forthwith carried
them to the Council at Whitehal; the Contents of them I know not more, than
that she did in one of them request her Daughter to send Margaret Jenkinson
into the Country, and take care she wanted for nothing, (and here Note that
Margaret was a Witness against her.) And that Curtis should be allowed his ten
shillings a week, and used with great tenderness, lest he should turn Rogue as
the other had done; meaning Mr. Dangefield; (and here note, that Curtis is the
same man concerned in the Duke of Buckinghams business.) And that she should be
particularly kind to Susan Edwards, though she were both Whore and Thief, yet
she might be a great instrument toward the saving her Life, when she came upon
the Trial. Some time after this, Mrs Cellier not thinking the way of the
brown-thread safe, in regard I had seemingly pretended I could not be so often
at leisure to go with the bottoms as she would have had me) ordered it so, that
the Notes should be made up in little Boxes like Pill-boxes, that so they might
pass under the notion of Physic; and were to be left at one Howards House a
Stone-cutter, on the Fleet-ditchside, near Black Friars, for Mrs Celliers Son
in-law, whose Name was Blaredale, and an Apothecary in Arundel-street; but
these I also discovered. Now for my encouragement in this affair, Mrs Cellier
promised to make my Fortune, either by Marriage, by the Duchess of York, or
some other way, which I should think most fit, provided I would be true to her.
Then she further added for my encouragement, that the Duke of York, whom she
called Master, (and then was in Scotland) would not be long before he returned,
and that then it would not be long ere she should have her Liberty; saying, she
was so much in his favor, and so intimate, that she both had, and could be
very frequently admitted the Dukes Closet, by a certain scratch of the door,
which, she said, she always used, and he well understood, etc.

Anne Neathercoat.

The Testimony of W. Boyce, etc.
ABout the middle of last Summer, 1679. Mr. Dangerfield came to Treat with me,
in relation to Mr. Prance, and desired to drink with me privately; and thus he
Attacked me three or four times, still endeavoring to press upon me discourse
relating to Mr. Prance, wherein he seemed to express many discourses that
Prance had raised of me to my prejudice, and to this purpose.

W. Boyce.

The Testimony of Jane Stubbs, etc.
WHo says, That about the Month of June, 1679. Mr. Dangerfield came to her
Husband, who lay then very sick, and desired her Husband to tell him, if he had
not been much Tortured when he was in Prison, about the firing Fetter-lane? to
which her Hu^band answered, he was hardly used at first, but better afterward.
Then Mr. Dangerfield inquired into the condition of her Husband, and gave him
five shillings, and promised to get Money to pay the Rent of the House, which
was five pound, and to come again, but did not. And asked her Husband if he
knew Mrs Cellier.

Jane Stubbs.

The Information of Alice Leeson, Wife of W. Leeson of Clerkenwel, in the
County of Middlesex, Cook, the 8th day of June, 1680. before Sir John Frederick
Knight. Alderman, and one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the City of
London, as follows.
THis Informant says, That having some occasion to go to the Pressyard London,
some time last Term, she met with Mrs Cellier, where this Informant did ask her
how her Trial went on? whereupon she replied, I went to meet the Lions, but
they did not appear, but this Perjured Villain Dangerfield. But I am prepared
for the Lions, let them go on when they will; and truly, said she, I now study
the Law and the Statutes, to bring perjured Villains to their ends; and I go up
to Mr. Redding to assist me, and I assist him. And this Informant telling the
said Mrs Cellier, she wondered how this PLOT was so quasht, which was carried on
by Mr. Oats and Bedlow! she told her, that they the said Oats and Bedlow were
Perjured Villains; and that there were more come into their Religion since the
said PLOT, than for many years before. And that she this Informant should live
to see their Religion the most flourishing Religion in the Nation, viz. meaning
the Popish Religion, as this Informant believes.

Alice Leeson.

Having all this united force of Evidence, Testimony, and Circumstances on my
side, I came into Court, (without the least suspicion of meeting with such
exceptions against me) to do my duty as a Witness for His Majesty, in the
prosecution of an Information, to the truth of which, in substance, and by
allowance, I had Sworn before His most Excellent Majesty himself, and His most
Honorable Privy-Councel; and upon which Mrs Cellier had stood so long
Committed, by the Approbation and Act of the same Authority. But to my amazing
astonishment, and the no small surprise of others, the Prisoner, who had before
called me her good friend, and given such a Character of my Modesty, to my
new-Landlord and others, and judged me a good and undeniable Evidence on their
parts, objected against my Testimony; alleging, That if she could make it
out, that I had been Whipped, Transported, Pillored, or Perjured, I could not be
allowed a Witness against her; which produced the following Dispute.

C. J. If you can produce any Record whereby he is Convict of any thing that
can by Law take away his Testimony, do it.


Cellier. He has been Indicted for Burglary.


C. J. Dangerfield, were you ever Indicted for Burglary?


Dang. I will take it at their proof.


C. J Let every Man have his right in Gods name.


Cellier. My Lord, I can prove him Perjured.


C. J. Have you any Record to prove him Perjured? is he Convicted?


Cellier No.


C. J Then you cannot do it.


Cellier. I can prove him guilty of Forgery.


C. J. If you do not produce the Record, you do nothing.


Cellier. I have the Copies of several Records in Court, which will be Sworn
to. Which being produced, I then pleaded His Majesty's most gracious Pardon. To
that Mrs Cellier replied, she had a Copy of it, and that it did not extend to
some of the Crimes of which I then stood Convicted. And to prove her
Allegation, she produced a Copy of a Record of an Outlawry for Felony, which
occasioned the Court to order my Pardon to be read. But not having it about me,
I prayed half an hours time to fetch it, which was granted; and during my
absence, some other Witnesses were Examined.

First, Thomas Williamson Sworn for the King, and thus Interrogated.


C. J. Did you ever see Dangerfield and Mrs Cellier in Company?


Wit. No, my Lord, but I have been employed by Mrs Cellier to get persons out
of Prison, and among the rest Mr. Dangerfield.


C. J. Why was she so kind to Dangerfield?


Wit. I do not know that, my Lord, but she bid me get him out who ever remained.


J. Raymund. Why was she so earnest to get him out? did she tell you what she
would have with him?


Wit. No, my Lord.


Record. We only bring him for a Witness that she was familiar with Dangerfield.

Next to him, Margaret Jenkinson, who formerly had been a Servant to Mrs
Cellier, was Sworn and thus Examined.


C. J. What discourse have you ever heard between Dangerfield and Mrs Cellier?


Wit. I never saw them together but twice, and it is a year since I left her
Service.


C. J. When you saw them at Dinner or Supper, what other Company was there?


Wit. Her Husband was with her one time.


C. J. What did they talk about?


Wit. They talked about the Prisoners which were Condemned, which were the Five
Jesuits.


C. J. Where was it? at her House?


Wit. No, at Powis-house.


C. J. How came you there?


Wit. I carried Notes backward and forward between them.

After Susan Edwards, another Servant to Mrs Cellier, was Sworn for the King,
and Interrogated to this effect.


Rec. What intimacy have you known between Dangerfield and Mrs Cellier?


C. J. Did you ever see them together?


Wit. Yes, very often. And she said the Popish PLOT would turn to a
Presbyterian PLOT.


C. J. Who did she say that to? to Dangerfield?


Wit. No, my Lord, but I have heard him say that he would make it his business
it should be so.


C. J. What did you say to him, when he said he must turn to Rogue, and
discover all their PLOTS.


Wit. I said he would be no greater Rogue than he was before.


C. J. You were pretty nimble with him.


Wit. He thought he should be hanged.


C. J. to Mrs Cellier. Have you any Record to show that Dangerfield was put in
the Pillory?


Cellier. Yes, my Lord.

Upon that the Copy of the Record was read, for uttering Counterfeit Guinneys;
and the Copy of an Outlawrie upon Record for Felony.


C. J. Come Gentlemen, what say you to this Outlawry?


Rec. It is not the same person.


C. J. We ought to be very careful in these concerns, else we may do a work
this day may make all the Kingdom rue it.

It is a sad thing, that people of a vicious profligate Life, both hefore they
come to Newgate, and all along in their lifetime, should be suffered as
Witnesses to take away the Life of a Worm. I question whether he will come
again or no, he has been gone a great while; such are fit to be employed to
find out, but hard to be believed when they have found out.


C. J. Captain Richardson, Is this the man that broke Chelmsford Goal?


C. Rich. My Lord, I can say nothing to that.


C. J. Was he Burnt in the Hand for Felony?


C. Rich. My Lord, I believe he was.


C. J. He made me believe as though he would fly. I believe he is: we will not
hood wink our selves against such a fellow as this, that is guilty of such
notorious Crimes; a Man of Modesty, after he has been in the Pillory, would
not look a man in the face. It appears, that after he was burnt in the Hand, he
has been Outlawed for Felony, and so it does appear by the Record.

After I had been absent about half an hour, I returned with my Pardon, which
being read, instead of Vtlagaria qualiacunque pro Feloniis quibuscunque, the
sense was more contractively expressed by the words, Omnia Malesicia and
Vtlagaria qualiacunque; which omission seemed to render the Pardon defective;
it being his Lordships opinion, that the word Vtlagaria did only extend to
Outlawries between party and party, so that my Evidence was wholly laid aside.


C. J. Such Fellows as you are, Sirrah, shall know we are not afraid of you. He
produces us here a Pardon by the Name of Thomas of Waltham, and says his
Father and Kinsman are both of that Name and Place. Will you have him Sworn
whether his Father or Cozen Thomas was ever Convict of Felony? It is notorious
enough, what a Fellow this is; he was in Chelmsford Goal. I will shake all
such fellows before I have done with them. Have you any more to say, Mrs
Cellier? are there any Waltham-Men here?


Dangerfield. My Lord, this is enough to discourage a man from ever entering
into an honest Principle.


C. J. What! do you with all the Mischiefs that Hell has in you, think to brave
it in a Court of Justice?

While his Lordship was giving his directions to the Jury, I was going away, as
not thinking there was any more occasion for my stay, or that his Lordship had
any farther business with me. Presently I heard a voice,


C. J. Where is Dangerfield? is he gone? call him.

So soon as ever I returned into Court,


C. J. Have you any friends will be bound for you in a good sum of Money?


Dangerfield. No, my Lord, not in Court.


C. J. Then let him be Committed.

Immediately I was taken into Custody, and carried away to the
Kings-Bench-Prison, where I remained from Friday the day after the Trial, till
the Wednesday-morning following; at what time I was by a Habeas Corpus of my
own procuring, brought to the Bar, in order to my giving Bail. But altogether
unknown to me, there was a Copy of a Pardon produced, which I had pleaded at
the Old-Bailey, for the remitting a Fine upon me, wherein I was Pardoned for
Felonies, Robberies, and all Misdemeanors, etc. which raised another Argument.


C. J. Where was this Pardon allowed? and for what? was it allowed for Felony,
as well as the Fine, or for the Fine only?


J. Dolbin. I allowed the Pardon, and as I remember, 'twas only for the Fine.
The Clerk of the Crown remembers perhaps.


C. J. Mr. Tanner, what say you?


M. Tanner. My Lord, I think it was for the Fine only; but the Felony is
included, and therefore Pardoned I suppose.


C. J. No, I suppose not: for if it were not allowed for the Felony, as well as
for the Fine, I do not know but that the Indictment ought to be removed, and
the Pardon allowed next Essex-Assizes. However, upon his Lordships farther
consideration, I was discharged.


Being now come to what more particularly concerns my self, I shall endeavor
to keep within the bounds of respect and Reverence to the Office and Dignity of
the person to whom I am constrained to offer these Reflections, out of a deep
sense of an Injured Proselyte to Reformation, as may render me such in the
esteem of the world. And that my Defense may rather appear to be a forced
Complaint, than a Contumelious Expostulation with a Superior in so high a
degree, as being the only person that suffered under his Severity. Not
forgetting to render my most humble thanks to some of those Honorable Judges
his Brethren, whose mildness was a Lenitive that very much assuaged the
rigorous entertainment of my Loyal attendance.

I shall take the words in the same order as they were spoken.

Dangerfield, was you ever Indicted for Burglary? What the world may think of
the Question, I cannot tell, but to my apprehension it seemed very odd that
such a person should put himself to the trouble of demanding a Question, to
which he could not choose but well know, or rather was very certain, that the
Party Interrogated was no way bound to return an Answer. If then the Answer
were not within the Verge of Constraint, consequently it was Impertinent; and
if so, obnoxious: for considering the Circumstances under which the Testimony
was well known to have lain, and how easily such petty obstacles might have
been prevented, by the usual foresight of those that fail not to inspect the
Conversation of the most material Witnesses in Trials of such concernment; It
was very strange, that a person summoned after so long deliberation, as a
Witness for the King, and ready to deliver his Evidence against the Prisoner at
the Bar, for no less than High Treason, should have his Mouth stopped with a
Question, which the Prisoner her self had not power to ask, but only to prove
the matter of fact. Had his Lordship demanded of Mrs Cellier, whether she had
ever been Indicted before of High Treason, he would have looked upon it as a
great piece of Despair or Impudence, had she answered, Yes, my Lord, I have.
Yet he that would have smiled at self-accusation in a Prisoner, could think it
reason to sift the Kings Evidence to his own ruin. And I must Arraign my self
for I know not what Burglary, to gratify his Lordship, and the Prisoner, at
the same time Arraigned by the Court for High Treason.

Let every Man have his right, in God's Name. With Submission, I am apt to
believe, that here was either a mistake of the Sex, or else a supposition at
the delivery of the words, that Man in English, like Homo in Latin, is of the
Epicene Gender. Else I cannot conceive what coherence there could be, between
this distributive expression, and my Answer to his Lordships Question, I will
take it at their proof, unless he thought I deserved to be Hanged for my
obedience to the Kings Writ, to which I was (as I thought) amply enabled by his
most Gracious Favor. No Impartial man could think I came there to do Mrs
Cellier wrong, or that such a thing was in my power; for his Lordship could not
but know, she had acknowledged her Life was in my hands. So that all the wrong
she could expect from me, was to be false to the King and Kingdom; and all the
right I could have done her, was either to have devoted my self for her dear
sake, with an obstinate silence to the Halter, or to have stifled my Evidence
with some generous piece of self Homicide.

Upon the Testimony of Susan Edwards, his Lordship was pleased to spring this
Question to the Maid.

What did you say to Dangerfield, when he said he must turn Rogue, and discover
all their PLOTS? I am unwilling to let fly the least extravagant thought. But
certainly it was a particular way of Proceeding, to give the Kings Evidence an
opportunity to abuse and render the Kings Testimony ridiculous, and by a
question so remote and foreign, that at first it only created a wonder why it
should be asked; to make one of the best Collateral Witnesses the King had, the
sport of his own Court; and all this (for the wonder soon ceased) to entertain
the Auditory with a Sarcasme of a Chambermaid:

I said he would be no greater Rogue than he was before. How strong this smelt
of premeditation, I leave to the world to judge. For his Lordship could not
choose but know what the Answer would be, who had the Question so ready, when
there was not the least cause or necessity for it* For Susan Edwards was
summoned to prove the bringing the Twenty shillings in Silver, and the Guiney
to me from Mrs Cellier at Newgate, (upon my first apprehension) with
Instructions what to say, should I be asked about the occasion of our
Correspondence. She was to have proved the Message that she brought from Mrs
Cellier to me soon after,

That her Life was in my hands, and that if I did not stand fast, she was an
undone Woman. Which had it been fully Sworn, I question whether Mrs Cellier,
though I had been what they would have made me, must not have been discharged
the Jury, and reserved to a farther discovery. But to all this his Lordship had
not one Interrogatory to purpose, only amuseth the unwary Damsel, (who if she
pass henceforward for a Wit about the Town, owes her advantage solely to his
Lordship) and leads her into a Question to destroy what he ought to have
supported. As if the Maid had been summoned thither not to give her Evidence,
but only to show her Parts. Which when his Lordship had done, he could not
forbear to congratulate the Maids Wit with a Sardonick smile, give her the
great applause, You were pretty nimble with him. Whence I may with Seneca
presume to observe, that there is a difference between Passion and Sedateness;
and that apparent Heats and Transportments, are not always the ornament of a
Tribunal. Quid ergo? non irascor Latroni? non irascor Venefico? Non* Sed
procedam in Tribunal non infestus sed vultu Legis; nec quicquam magnum est,
nisi quod simul and placidum, l. 1. de Ira, c. 26.

But now directing his Speech to Mrs Cellier, with a more friendly sweetness he
enquires of her,

Have you any Record to show that Dangerfield was put in the Pillory?

As if it had been the work of that Morning to Arraign Mrs Cellier for Treason,
and try me by her Evidence. You may be sure Mrs Cellier was loath to come to
the Test; and I think his Lordship was as unwilling she should: what Records
she had, he had allowed her fairly enough before to produce, without the help
of such encouraging Questions. Though the Court be of Council for the Prisoner,
there was no such need of prompting a Woman, whose readiness in such affairs,
had been so well experienced in the same place. However, it being now
impossible for her to deny a favor so earnestly demanded, she produced a Brace
of Records; the one was a Copy of an Outlawrie for Felony, upon which his
Lordship called to the Kings Council,

Come Gentlemen, what say you to this Outlawry for Felony? Here his Lordship
seemed to Caress the advantage he had over me; he calls to the Kings Council,
as one that saw he had put them to a puzzle, and consequently certain of the
Victory. I would not willingly incur the displeasure of any man, especially of
his Lordship; but my Justification urges me to say this, that though there are
many Reasons why a Man may ask a preparatory Question, which he is able to
resolve at the same instant; yet here it carried the resemblance only of a
preparatory Formality, which the subsequent proceedings required. The knowledge
of my Offenses, were the Motives that induced Mrs Cellier to associate me with
her self, in the deep Contrivances of so wicked a Conspiracy. His Majesty
himself, who never gave me those Reproaches under the foul guilt of Treason, as
his Lordship did when Pardoned by his Sovereign, well knew my Crimes; but
beholding my penitence, gave a forfeited Life to him, who had been the bane of
a Conspiracy against his Sacred person. Else Mrs Cellier had hard measure to be
so long detained upon the acccusations of one who walked about the Town with a
defective Pardon. And it may be looked upon as a Recompense for her Sufferings,
that she was so easily delivered. Otherwise, it was a severe Case, that Mrs
Cellier, laden with so many Crimes, fouler than all mine put together, unless
what she her self had involved me in, should be brought to the Bar to encounter
me her grand Associate, her Confederate, her Intimate in the conduct of all her
mysterions Treacheries, with an inconconsiderable Outlawry, (I speak
comparatively) and all for want of a Quibuscunque, and this too in order to her
Acquittal.

We ought to be very careful in these Concerns. I dare not presume to instruct
his Lordship, nor do I; nor do thousands more question, but that his Lordship
exactly understands how far his care ought to extend. But whether needless and
overweening nicety be care, I leave the Casuists to dispute. Care may be
hurtful, where there is more care taken of the greater Criminal, than of the
less. Care may be too injurious, if I may not say presumptive, when it
over-curiously scans and descants upon a thing of so solemn a nature, as the
Pardon of a Sovereign Prince, whose only Let him be Pardoned, is like the
command of Let there be day. And I dare be bold to say, That His Majesty never
intended I should suffer that prejudice and disgrace by his Pardon, as his
Lordship has put me to.

Else we may do a work this day, may make the Kingdom rue it. I see his
Lordship continues his care; but there are many that fear, his care was too
neglectful, to let so great a Criminal as Mrs Cellier was, (for while I have
breath I must still maintain it) break all the Fences of the Law* for the mere
defect of Clerkship. And many good people there are, whose Prayers, Hopes, and
Wishes, are all to the same effect; That the Kingdom may not rue the Cavils of
that Morning, under the pretense of care and tenderness of Conscience. And the
Question may be fairly put, whether the great Archangel of the Three Kingdoms,
and the Tutelar Angels of the Nation, his chosen Assistants, showed more care
in committing so great an Offender as Mrs Cellier, and supporting my
Information; or his Lordship, in vilifying both my Testimony and Person to set
her free. The World must needs believe that his Lordship had a very high
opinion of his Prudence and Justice, to advance them above the Wisdom and
Equitable deliberation both of the King and his Council. But he had Condemned
several (at what time there was no disputing about Pardons, though far more
furiously Attacked) and therefore as many must be saved, or else Astraea's
Balance would fall from the Zodiac.

It is a sad thing that people of a vicious profligate Life, both before they
come to Newgate, and all along in their Lifetime, should be suffered as a
Witness to take away the Life of a Worm. His Lordship next will deny the King
his Prerogative; for that very person whom the King had set right in Court, he
calls one of a vicious and profligate Life; so far his Lordship differs from
the sense of the Blessed: Heaven rejoices at the Conversion of a sinner, his
Lordship storms at mine. And because I had deservedly suffered before in bad
Causes, he was resolved to be even with me, and make me suffer for once
undeservedly in a good one. I submit to his Lordship, that it would be an hard
case for such persons as he mentions, to take away the Life of a Worm. But his
Lordship mistakes Mrs Celliers Character, for she was no Worm, unless he means
such a Worm, as would have Corroded and Cankered the very Root of the Nations
happiness. And then it was a sad thing, that a person of a profligate Life
Pardoned, should not be admitted to give his Testimony against a Woman of a
profligate Life unpardoned. Here was only the difference in the Proverb; the
Worm was trod on, and his Lordship turned again.

Might I be so bold, I would ask his Lordship, who discovered the Conspiracy of
Cataline, but Curious? Flagitiis atque facinoribus Coopertus and Fulvia? Salust.

Who revealed the Treasons of Marshal Biron, but his Confident Laftin? Accable
de Crimes and de mauvaises affairs? Mezeray.

For if a Man be not of the Cabinet-Councel of the wicked, he shall never be
able to know their Intrigues; and if he know them not, far less able to
discover them. Mrs Cellier acknowledged, that had I not been brisk, I had never
been fit for their turn. He that is not through-paced in bad principles, is not
to be trusted in the Murder of a Prince; Men of Virtue certainly were not to
be invited to the attempts. But people of vicious Principles, stick as close to
them, as honest and good men to the Precepts of Virtue, which creates the
difference and safety between communicating a piece of villainy to a Miscreant,
and an honest man. From whence I collect, That no Man can be a good Witness in
Mischief against his Confederates, unless he be involved in the same Crime. And
therefore the reason is plain to all Men, why some are Pardoned for Burglary,
some for Robbing on the Highway; to the end they be good Witnesses to discover
the mis-deeds of their Accomplices. For to use his own words at the Lord
Castlemains Trial: A Man once Pardoned, is restored to his former Credit; and
so the King intends by all his Pardons.

Now if that be true, (as I would take all advantages to subscribe to his
Lordships opinion) certainly his Lordship was under a mistake, so needlessly to
quarrel with His Majesty's Broad-Seal, or at least, to make so slight of his
intentions. Doubtless it was an high reflection upon the Kings Honor, to
repeat and raise from the Tomb of silence, to the ruin of a Pardoned Subject,
the Ghosts of buried Crimes. And yet soon after he had affronted His Majesty's
most gracious Act and Deed, to declare that the very intentions of the King are
valid in his Pardons. But the grandeur of the ancient Oracles consisted in
their Ambiguity.

I question whether he will come again or no, he has been gone a great while.
His Lordship pursues his Text very smartly, and in another Man perhaps, he
would have looked upon it as a kind of Malitia praecogitata, to prosecute a
person, that to his knowledge never did his Lordship wrong, with so much
vehemence; for my part, my little reason tells me, that though it be the duty
of far my Betters, to reverence and to be careful of giving Offense to a
Personage so highly entrusted as his Lordship, yet that it is beneath the
Majesty of Magistrates so eminently exalted, to trample upon the meanest of
their inferiors. Neither do I think, with all Submission be it spoken, that
his Lordship kept within the bounds of true Decorum, to sit in that place
prepossessing the People with an ill opinion of the Kings Evidence. I am sorry
I disobliged his Lordships patience; yet I dare be bold to say, (though it be
no easy task to hurry through the streets of London) that I did not exceed the
time allowed me of half an hour, to go from the Court of King's Bench, beyond
the Royal Exchange. However, at length I did return, as far as I can guess,
contrary to his Lordships both expectation and desire, by that expression which
follows, when he said,

I question whether he will come or not. A surmise, of which I cannot fathom
the reason, for I neither had the least apprehension of the danger concealed,
or fear of my disability to make good my Charge, in regard his Lordship had not
revealed his future intentions to me. Had his Lordship had any suspicion of me,
it may be wondered he did not send his Tipstaff along with me then, as
afterward he did, and which he might as justly have done. But here Lucian in
one of his Dialogues, lends me his assistance, where he says: That he who
inveighs against the absent, does but claim the attention of the Auditory to
himself, by prepossessing their ears, and stopping them up after he has filled
them full of the worst he has to say, by which he renders them impenetrable to
any defense against the ill Character he has given. Which he calls a very
great injury, not only in his own, but in the judgment of Solon and Draco, two
wise and famous Legislators.

Such are fit to be employed to find out, but hard to be believed when they
have found out. This is a Laconism wherein his Lordship had undertaken much in
few words, and therefore the harder to be interpreted. But I humbly suppose his
meaning to be this; That they who are and have been the Discoverers of the
PLOT, and fit to be believed, so far as to say there was a PLOT, are not when
they Swear in the Prosecution of their Discovery, in regard that such a
Prosecution is the act of men of Profligate Lives. If this be the meaning of
this pithy Sentence, as I believe Salmatius himself could find no other, his
Lordship has laid a fair Foundation for the Subverting, Overturning, and
invalidating all that has been said or acted by all the Testimonies and
Evidence for His Majesty, in all the several late Trials, wherein his Lordship
himself presided: which if it should come to pass, I leave it, with submission
to his Lordship, to consider the fatality o^ the Consequences. My Lord, it can
be no good Logic to grant the Papists such a Conclusion; they are nimble
enough to lay hold upon the sayings of great and Learned Men, especially when
uttered as Apothegms; and they needed no such encouragement to prove their
Arguments. But Heaven avert, that either your Lordship, or any such Stars of
the first Magnitude in the Sphere of Loyalty, should ever live to see such a
mutation of Affairs!

Captain Richardson, is this the Man that broke ChelmsfordGoale? Lord! What a
strange Question was this, for all Men that own Impartiality to shake their
heads at? Captain Richardson must be favored by the Name of Captain
Richardson, and the Keeper of Newgate must be tempted to answer for the Keeper
of Chelmsford Goal. As much as to say, Is there no Man here that can help a
man out to vilify this Rogue? But it seems Captain Richardson could neither
answer his Lordships Question, nor his expectations. But to show how ready I am
to obey his Lordships Commands, I will freely give his Lordship to understand,
that I never did break the Goal of Chelmsford; though if I had, I know not
what kindness it would have done his Lordship, but only to render me more
odious to the Auditory.

Captain Richardson, was he Burnt in the Hand for Felony? Here was another
strange Riddle proposed, but not so difficult to unfold as that of Sphynx; for
wherefore should that Question be asked, when there was a true Copy of a Record
produced for it? but this was still to improve the ill will and bad opinion of
the People against me. My Lord could never have been the Conquering Champion,
had he not first made me the monstrous Dragon. But I owed that respect to his
Lordship, that had he put that Question to my self, I would have owned it. For
indeed, I am apt to believe, that as the Case then stood with me, any other
person, though the best Gentleman's Son in the Country, might have been liable
to the same scandal, or rather disgrace; for then I was but a young stripling,
under the Tuition of my Father, and no way privy to the Fact laid in the
Indictment, till it was actually committed by another person; who being, as I
was under my Father, Clerk to another Attorney, came to me one Evening with a
Cabinet, which, as he said, he had taken from his Mother, who was a Woman very
rigid, and careless of his Maintenance: withal he told me, I should have a
part, if I would conceal his Crime, and help him off with the Goods, which the
ignorance of my youth was by such a dazzling prospect easily tempted to
undertake, as I did; and for which the other Boy gave me as many of the things,
as he said amounted to one third part more. Now to show what a cunning gamester
I was at this sport, I was no sooner possessed of my gay Toys, but I openly
wore the Rings which came to my share, and showed my Silver Medals to the
Countrey-people, displaying my Prizes with all the folly and pride imaginable
of an unexperienced Boy, and one that understood nothing of his danger. At
length, the description of all the things being published in the Gazet, the
people of the Town well knowing I had showed them several of the Goods
mentioned in the Advertisement, carried me before a Justice of the Peace, to
whom, upon my Examination, I owned where I had them, and how I came by them;
thereupon the Justice Committed me, and being brought to Trial, I was Convicted
for Confederacy. Which is the whole and plain truth of the story, of which his
Lordship would have made such an advantage against me

He made me believe he would fly; I believe he is: we will not hood-wink our
selves against such a fellow as this, that is guilty of such notorious Crimes.
A Man of Modesty would not look a man in the face, after he has been in the
Pillory. I do find now, that his Lordship is coming to his application; but if
the Spirit of Wisdom be mild and soft, as the Sacred Oracle of Scripture
affirms it to be, I cannot imagine why his Lordship should fall into such
Raptures and Rhapsodies upon bare surmises. It Is believed I was fled, and and
therefore we will not hood-wink our selves, etc. Here his Lordships supposition
was without ground, because I did return again. Neither do I remember, that I
told his Lordship I would fly, because it was a thing I never pretended to.
Now the Logic of Reason informs me, that where the supposition vanishes, the
inferences can never be true. But grant I had been Pillored, most certainly the
Pardon reached that offense; and tho it was thought to be defective in
reference to the Outlawry. I humbly conceive it was not so fair for his
Lordship at that time to tax me for want of Modesty. I have been informed, that
one of his Lordships Predecessors was once a Robber upon the Highway, but
having obtained his Pardon fell to his Studies, rose by the Law that he had so
often broken, and became a great and famous Judge. So that Reformation ought to
be encouraged, not upbraided. For my part, though necessity prompted me to so
many vile mis-deeds, yet within my self at the same time I abhorred the Fact I
was committing; and therefore I humbly beg his Lordships Pardon, for differing
from his Lordships Judgment of Modesty. For he that has once obtained the
Pardon of a Prince, ought to be so far from secluding himself from the Converse
of Mankind, or daring to look people in the face, that he would wrong the high
favor done him, should he not make it his business to show himself the public
object of Royal Mercy, and defy all those that tax him with his forgiven
Crimes. But these Taunts and Reproaches, (though ten thousand times more
frequently thrown in my dish) shall never make me decline the just cause I am
engaged in, for the Service of my King and Country. In order whereunto, though
I were the Man that yesterday durst do an ill act, I am not to day afraid,
after a full repentance of my Crime, to look him in the face, who shall be so
unkind as to tax me with immodesty for so doing. If his Lordship knew of the
defect in my Pardon before I returned, he might have dispatched his business
sooner, and not have put himself in such a heat for his attendance upon me: if
not, I humbly conceive it was unseasonable to be so violent before the Pardon
came, and the defect were proved.

Here the Pardon was scanned, and adjudged defective as to the Outlawry.

Such Fellows as you are, Sirrah shall know we are not afraid of you. I do not
know that ever at any time I called his Lordships Courage in question; and I
appeal to all that were present in Court, whether I failed in any point of
respect and reverence to the Dignity of the persons there sitting; so that I
cannot apprehend the reason why his Lordship should believe that I thought my
self such a Terror to him. However, his Lordship has owned himself under the
Notion of those that may have reason to fear such Fellows as I am, though for
the present he declares the contrary. Such Fellows, is a comprehensive
expression; but I hope there are no more such Fellows as his Lordship
endeavors to make me, in the discovery of the PLOT; if there are, his Lordship
has not thought it convenient as yet to tell them his mind. But now I
remember, I was no such fellow once; I was allowed as a good Witness at the
Trial of Knox and Lane, and at the Trial of Munson the Priest.

So change the times, and we are changed in them.

And thus we see his Lordship is not afraid of me; who they are he does fear,
that is only for time to discover.

He produces here a Pardon by the Name of Thomas of Waltham, and says, his
Father and Kinsman were both of that Name and Place; will you have him Sworn,
whether his Father and Kinsman were ever Convicted of Felony? Here is a
Proposal made to the Kings Council, the strangest that could be imagined; his
Lordship could not but well know who was the Thomas of Waltham concerned in the
Pardon, and the chief occasion wherefore it was granted; which was, to make me
a Legal and Warrantable Testimony against a foul Traitress, that had Conspired
the Death of His most Sacred Majesty: and yet for that very reason he rejected
the Kings favor, to render it ineffectual both to His Majesty's expectation
and my advantage. However, at the same time he could have been content, that
the person whom he had resused for a Testimony in the Kings behalf, as one that
had been Pillored, Burnt in the Hand, and Outlawed for Felony, and unpardoned,
as he concluded, for the last, should be allowed to Impeach his Father, his
Kinsman, and himself, upon his own Oath; Nay, had I but said it, I question it
not but it would have been enough. Otherwise, if it were only put by way of
Irony to the Council, it only served to make an insignificant noise among the
ignorant, and I fear me comes within the Verge of a Baffle upon Royal
prosecution. I do confess, that in all my observations of the late Proceedings,
I never saw the Kings Evidence so well Hectored before.

He has been in Chelmsford Goal; I will shake all such Fellows before I have
done with them. Here Is a show of Words and Threats as great as Hail stones; let
all Men take an extraordinary care how they get into Chelmsford Goal. He has
been in Chelmsford Goal, and therefore I will shake all such Fellows. Here Is a
new most horrid and monstrous Crime, never heard of before, to have been in
Chelmsford Goal; it is no matter for what he was in Chelmsford Goal. But I
have already given the world an account, how I came into that dismal and
execrable place, and for what, and shall therefore say no more of it.

But to this terrible business of shaking; I hope it is easy to be
demonstrated, that I stand upon a sounder bottom than to be so easily shaken.
With submission, I believe it to be the same bottom on which the Interest and
Safety of my most Gracious Sovereign and Country, the Protestant Religion, and
National Government at present stand; and then let his Lordship endeavor to
shake all together if he can, I am certain to be shaken in good company. Truly
I cannot choose but check my thoughts for thinking what throws his Lordship
endured to deliver a Midwife.

Mrs Cellier, have you any more to say? Are there any more Walthammen here? To
which I answered and told his Lordship, that there was enough already said, to
discourage a man from ever entertaining an honest Principle.

To which his Lordship,

What do you think with all the Mischiefs Hell has in you, to brave it in a
Court of Justice? Thus was my mouth quite stopped, there was no speaking after
this. However, I will leave this to all the world, whether the modest Complaint
which I made of the usage I had received for coming to do His Majesty Service,
were a braving of the Court or no.

Have you any Friends will be bound with you a in good Sum of Money? I was in
good hopes his Lordships have had been over, and that he had been now going
about to turn a kind Banker, believing I might want Money in the place whither
he was sending me. For considering the safety wherein I thought my self, by
Virtue of my Pardon; and not believing his Lordship would have made such
public Reflections on the Kings Grace and Favor therefore granted, to
justify me against all Objections that would be made against me by the Kings
Prisoners: I could not imagine any other reason why his Lordship should examine
me for Security; but it seems it was to another end: for not having any
Subsidie-Friends in Court, he gave the word of Command,

Then let him be Committed. And so I was Committed to all intents and purposes;
for immediately I was taken into Custody, and hurried away to the King's Bench
Prison, where being looked upon by those inferior Beasts of Men, as one that
lay under those severe aggravations, of which the scorn and contempt of
Superior Command had so tempestuously thrown upon me, and I was presently
locked up with Knox and Lane, and several others whom they had assimulated to
themselves in Lawless conditions; who maliciously remembering that I had been a
Witness against them at their Trials, upon which they lay their Conviction, not
only rudely assaulted, but farther menaced me with nothing less than Murder.
So that finding my self an unequal Match, either for Power or Number, I
acquainted the doorkeeper with my condition, and told him withal, that it was
his Masters business as much to secure my Life as my Person, and therefore
desired to be removed to some place of more security; which soon after was done
by one Middleton, an Officer belonging to that place. Who after he had demanded
and received from me several Fees, which, as I was afterward assured, were as
unjustly extorted, as by me readily paid, according to the usual custom of
those Purse-Leeches, put me into a kind of Dungeon on the Common-side, where I
continued from Friday till Monday night, after a sort of hard usage; which I am
apt to believe, I should not have been constrained to have undergone, had there
not been a private and particular Order for it from some higher Authority than
the Marshal, as he himself told me afterward. However, upon Wednesday morning
after, I was brought by an Habeas Corpus of my own procuring to the Bar, in
order to my intention of giving in Bail. But it seems, altogether unknown to
me, there was a Copy of a Pardon which I had pleaded formerly at the
Old-Bailey, for the remitting a Fine imposed upon me, wherein I was also
Pardoned for Felonies, Robberies, and all other Misdemeanors. By which Pardon,
being general, it appeared that I was also Pardoned for the very Crime for
which his Lordship had Committed me to the King's Bench; so unexpected a check
did my good fortune put upon heat and temerity. I confess it was my happiness,
that I did not call to mind that Pardon at Mrs Celliers Trial, (if I may not
rather call it mine own) for then I presume I might have prevented my falling
under (that Misfortune I had) the hands of a transported severity. But I must
ingenuously acknowledge the reasons why I did not, and why indeed it was almost
impossible I should; for first, my Mind and Thoughts were wholly charged with
the weight of the Testimony which I thought I had been to give in against the
Prisoner. In the next place, I could not imagine, since the King had been
pleased to give me a special Pardon, that I could have had any occasion for a
general one, which I then did not know included more than my Fine. And then it
was one of the greatest surprises in the world to me, and to find his Lordship
so imbittered against me; a thing which I so little expected, being no way
conscious to my self that I had ever acted against his Lordship any thing that
might occasion so much fury, unless it were that I once endeavored to have Mrs
Cellier examined before the Lords of the Council, to give an account of what
she had once informed me in the time of our intimacy, touching a Treaty between
his Lordship and the Lady Powis, in favor of Sir George Wakeman. This I am apt
to think, went a great way, and was the main inducement to render my Testimony
contemptible and Invalid; and that which produced so many Cautions to the
Juries how they gave credit to my Oaths. And all men know, that self-interest
is that which may expose the most Sage oft-times to acts of unwariness, in
public Cases of great Weight.

Where was this Pardon allowed, and for what? was it allowed for Felony, or the
Fine only? I will not here undertake to be my own Interpreter, but leave it to
the Impartial to censure the continuation of his Lordships Nicety and
Curiosity. For he would infer, That if it were allowed for the Fine only, it
was still to be allowed for the Felony; though Mr. Tanner the Deputy Town Clerk
of London had delivered his opinion in answer to his Lordships question, That
he thought all was Pardoned that was expressed in the Pardon. His Lordship
supposed it was not, and therefore declared, that if the Pardon were not
allowed for the Felony, as well as the Fine, he did not know but that the
Indictment ought to be removed, and the Pardon allowed next Essex-Assizes.

But with all submission to his Lordship, I shall humbly crave leave to ask
this Question; What may be thought to be the intentions of a Prince when he
Pardons a Man? does he intend to Pardon the one half, and leave him to answer
the Law for the other; or is it intended in ample manner? more especially, when
it was sufficiently known the Pardon itself could not satisfy the end for
which the Pardon was granted, without it were absolutely full for all Crimes
past. The first is to make a Man believe he is Pardoned, when he is not; and
the Prince himself loses as well the aim as the intention of his Mercy and
Compassion: if the latter, then it is as fully to restore him to his former
Reputation, to avoid his being Impeached for any past Crimes, and to encourage
him to a Reformation for the future. Yet all this being granted, his Lordship
will have the Pardon however to be allowed in the Country where the Crime was
acted; as if the King intended by every Pardon he is pleased to grant, that the
Parties concerned shall be forced to go into the several Counties wherein they
have offended, and perhaps into all the Counties of England, to have their
Pardon allowed; but in regard that upon his Lordships better consideration I
was discharged, I will submit to his Lordships condescension: adding this to my
former experiences, that sometimes there may be a reason for great Men to
advise, as well as others.

And thus I have exposed, with all submission and caution possible, those
Conceptions which the Impressions of my severe and unequal usage brought to the
assistance of my most serious thoughts.

I shall now produce the Arguments maintained by the Kings Learned-Councel at
the Trial of the Lord Castlemain, upon the same Subject in point of Law, of
which the subsequent Relation gives a true account.

The Wednesday sevennight after, the Lord Castlemain coming to his Trial, I was
Subpoena'd on His Majesty's behalf, by the Advice of His Learned Council, to be
a Witness against him; and the matter of Fact having reference to the same
thing, I think fit to give an account thereof.

The Arguments in Law on both sides, and the Rosolution of the Judges of the
Court of King's Bench, about my being a Witness in the Case of the Earl of
Castlemaine.
Mr. At. G. CAll Mr. Dangerfield.


E. of Cast. Stop a little, Sir, my Lord.


Mr. At. G. Swear him.


E. of Cast. No, I hope not.


Mr. At. G. Why not?


E. of Cast. My Lord, here is an affair of Law, and that I must submit to your
Lordship and the Court, whether Mr. Dangerfield be now to be admitted a
Witness, who has been at this Court upon the like occasion, and had the
Censure that he was not to be admitted a Witness, but had his mouth stopped
then; and I hope I may be permitted to show my Reasons whether he may speak or
no.


L. C. J. My Lord Castlemaine, you must show the Exceptions you have against
him, if you will bar him of being a Witness.


E. of Cast. My Lord, he is a person that is Outlawed for Felony, and a
stigmatized Man, he has been in the Pillory, and a great deal worse, he has
been Burnt in the Hand; now if your Lordship think it should be disputed, I
desire you would allot me Council to argue the Law, and then I shall submit to
you.


L. C. J. I think it very reasonable you should have Council assigned you: for
whether he be Stigmaticus, or infamous by the Pillory, it is fit you should be
heard by your Council, whether he be a good Witness or no.


Mr. At. G. Pray, my Lord, let the Objections be first made.


E. of Cast. I told you, Sir, before, he is an Outlawed Man, he was Convicted
of Felony, and ran away, and upon that escape he was Outlawed.


Mr. At. G. When do you say he was Outlawed?


E. Cast. In the Seven and Twentieth year of the King.


Mr. At. G. We say then he has a Pardon, wherein that Outlawry is pardoned.


L. C. J. When is that Pardon?


Mr. At. G. In the 30th year of the King.


L. C. J. But, my Lord, how do you prove he was Burnt in the Hand? for that
will be the greatest Exception. If a Man for Felony come to be Burnt in the
Hand, whether that be such a stigmatizing as will render him incapable of
giving Evidence.


Mr. At. G. We say our general Pardon follows that, and so purges it. Then
the Record of the Outlawry was admitted and read, and after that the Newgate
Pardon, in which Mr. Dangersield was particularly named. Dated the 13th of
June, 30 Car. 2.


L. C. J. For his Burning in the Hand, what say you, Mr. Attorney?


Mr. At. G. His own Pardon comes after that.


L. C. J. As for the Outlawry it is Pardoned, and by that he is restored to be
a Witness again; but of my Lords desire to have Council assigned him to speak
to this point, whether a man branded and Burnt in the Hand for Felony, be after
to be received as a Witness, I see no reason but he should have it.


Mr. At. G. If your Lordship make that a doubt.


L. C. J. I do for my own part. First, in this matter I am clear, if a Man were
Convicted of Perjury, no Pardon after will make him a Witness, for that were to
do the Subject wrong. The Pardon does not make a Man an honest Man, but takes
off those Reproaches that lay upon him; for the Law is so wise, it will not
suffer needless Contumelies to be heaped upon him, as to be called Perjured
Raskal and the like, which is only to prevent abusive Language, that tends to
the breach of the Peace. But a Man once Convicted for Perjury in a Court of
Record, no Pardon ought, or ever might set him up again. But indeed, that is
not our Case; we are upon this single point, Whether a Man Burnt in the Hand,
to whom after a Pardon is granted, may be a Witness? Though perhaps it is not
so strong in this Case, as it is in the other of Perjury. For a man it may be
would not wilfully forswear himself, that has Committed a Robbery. But I think
it reasonable, and there is no reason to deny it, that my Lord should be
allowed Council to speak to the single point as the Case is here. Who would you
have assigned you my, Lord?


E. Cast. I do humbly beseech your Lordship, since you have been so favorable
as to allow me Council, that I may have assigned me Mr. Jones, Mr. Sanders, and
Mr. Darnel.


L. C. J. Well, let it be so.


Mr. Jones. If your Lordship please, we desire that his Pardon may be read.


L. C. J. Are you prepared for it to argue it now?


Mr. Jones. No, my Lord.


L. C. J. My Lord Castlemain, do you rest upon this Exception only?


E. Cast. My Lord, I stand upon both.


L. C. J. The Outlawry is expressly pardoned.


E. Cast. Then I must submit to that.


L. C. J. Have you any other Exception?


E. Cast. My Lord, I do humbly conceive the Pillory is another Exception, and
that the Burning in the Hand will render him incapable of being a Witness.


Mr. J. Dolbin. Unless they will admit that, you must prove it.


L. C. J. But see, my Lord, whether this be so necessary for your defense, as
to protract this Cause for the Argument. Your Council not being ready, the Jury
must be Adjourned, and the Trial put off. I say this to you, because I think it
is the duty of my place to discharge my Conscience, both for the King and the
Prisoner. But admitting that the Law should so fall out, to be as is insisted
upon, that he is incapable of being a Witness, yet I will say this to you, you
may give in Evidence the Records of these Convictions of whatever sort, and
they shall be read. It was said the last day, there was Sixteen; if there were
Six hundred, they should be all read, and they will go all to invalidate his
Credit, and ought to have that influence upon all the Juries that such persons
come before.


E. Cast. I do bring here Sixteen Records of his infamous practices.


Mr. At. G. We do allow that we have yet heard of but Six.


L. C. J. Now, my Lord, if you think it worth the while to put your Council to
argue this point, whether he be to be a Witness or no; or whether you think it
may be as well, supposing he be admitted, that by producing the Records you
invalidate his Credit.


Mr. Darnel. My Lord, I humbly conceive, by the Law that point may be saved to
us.


L. C. J. Mind what it is you would have saved; you would have him Sworn, and
then have it saved whether he ought to be Sworn.


E. Cast. I would not have him Sworn till the point be overruled.


L. C. J. Will your Council argue it now?


Mr. Darnel. I would humbly pray first the Pardon may be read; there are a
great many several persons Pardoned, and whether this be a good Pardon to any
one single person of all the offenses therein.

Then the Pardon was read, and the words Outlawries and Felonies were in.


Mr. At. G. That does do it.


L. C. J. Why, Mr. Darnel, do you think at Newgate they take out a several
Pardon for a joint Felony?


Mr. Darnel. Such I have seen; but, my Lord, I humbly conceive upon the
Exception of Burning in the Hand, he is no Witness. And, my Lord, I find it
has been adjudged in 11 H. 4. 41. that a Man Attainted and Pardoned, cannot be
Sworn of a Jury. And the same Question has been resolved to since, in 9 Jac.
reported in Goldsboroughs Reports, 34. And, my Lord, in Bulstrode's Second
part, 154, it is Brown and Crashers Case. My Lord Cook is reported there to be
of the same opinion; and that Book goes farther, that by the same reason the
Testimony of such an one as a Witness is to be refused also.


Mr. Justice Jones. This is Sir Henry Finch his Case, is it not?


Mr. J. Dolbin. No, that is in Godbolts Reports.


Mr. Darnel. And the reason my Lord Cook gives, is this, he says, That
notwithstanding the Pardon, he is not Probus and legalis Homo. And 12 Jac. in
Brownlowes Reports, fol. 47. the King Pardoned a Man Attainted of giving a
false Verdict; and it is adjudged there he shall not be a Witness; for the
punishment was Pardoned, yet the Court said the Guilt remained.


M. At. G. That is but a short Note in that Book, and there is not so much in
the Book as you mention.


Mr. Darnel. I wrote it out of the Book word for word as I repeat it. The King
may Pardon Simonie, but he cannot enable the Simonist to retain; and so is
Crook, 686, Smith and Shelbournes Case.


Mr. At. G. The Act of Parliament expressly makes him incapable.


Mr. Darnel. I think the King might sure have dispensed with that incapacity,
but the Pardon could not take away the Guilt.


Mr. At. G. No sure, I think he could not against the express words of the Act.


Mr. Darnel. He can dispense with the punishment; and those other Books are
clear in it, That after the Pardon the Guilt remains: and for these Reasons and
Authorities I do conceive he cannot be a Witness.


Mr. At. G. I take it, it is clearly contrary to the constant general opinion,
and the constant practice of the Law. For when a Man is Pardoned, I take it you
may not say he is Perjured, nor he is a Felon; and he cannot be reputed so to
any intent or purpose whatsoever.


L. C. J. I showed you the practice of Law in that Case was consonant to
Reason, for it was to prevent railing Language, which tended to the breach of
the Peace; but it is another thing for him to be repelled and hindered from
being a Witness.


Mr. J. Dolbin. I do take it when the King Pardons him, he makes him as if he
had never committed the Offense.


Mr. J. Jones. No, not so neither, Brother.


L. C. J. Is not his Blood corrupted if he be Outlawed? and the Pardon cannot
restore that.


Mr. J. Dolb. As to Heirship it does not, but it restores him to his ability to
Purchase, as if he had never forfeited that capacity.


Mr. At. G. And it makes him Liber and legalis Homo, for it has been
adjudged, that such an one may wage Battle, which he which is not Liber and
legalis Homo cannot do. And if he be Liber, etc. he is certainly fit to be a
good Witness. Nay, I do know in my own experience, in the point of Perjury,
after Pardon he was (and I saw him) admitted as a Witness, and that was one
Buroughs a Yorkshire Man.


L. C. J. Was it ever questioned and admitted upon debate?


Mr. At. G. I cannot say that.


L. C. J. And I have known it stood upon, and such an one rejected.


Mr. J. Dolb. I have always taken it even in the case of Perjury, that after a
Pardon he is a lawful Witness; his Credit is indeed left to be what it will be
to the Jury, and the constant course as to Felony is so. How many persons are
there every Sessions at Newgate, Convicted upon the Testimony of persons
concerned in the same Offense, and Pardoned?


L. C. J. Was it ever opposed?


Mr. Recorder. I cannot adventure to say the Question was made, but the Judges
knew them to be so concerned.


L. C. J. Will they take notice without the Question put?


Mr. Recorder. I think they are bound if the Law be so, not to let persons lose
their Lives upon such Testimony.


L. C. J. We cannot tell whether it be so or no, unless we have it stirred.


Mr. Record. I know particularly at the last Sessions, Withringtons Case who
was Pardoned, and after by his Testimony diverse others were Convicted.


L. C. J. Was the Record of his Conviction shown?


Mr. Record. They did all know it very well.


L. C. J. Was it a Felony for stealing?


Mr. Record. My Lord, it was for Robbery on the Highway: if it were in a Case
between Party and Party, except there had been Record of it made out in proof,
it had been no objection to his Testimony. But in the Case of Felony, where the
Life of the party is concerned, the Law says, the Court are of Council for the
Prisoner; and if the Court does know in fact, (as this was notoriously known)
that the Witnesses are Convicted of Felony, and in Law that a Pardon will not
make them Witnesses, they are obliged to urge it and make it known; therefore
their practice, and their not taking notice, seems an Authority, that they
ought to be allowed as Witnesses, though it is true, their Credit is left to
the Jury.


L. C. J. What think you if a man has his Ears cut off in the Pillory, and
after a general Pardon comes, which does pardon those Offenses for which he
underwent that punishment, do you think he is a good Witness?


Mr. At. G. I do think he is a lawful Witness.


L. C. J. Does the stigmatizing signify nothing?


Mr. At. G. But by the Pardon he is restored to be Liber Homo, a Freeman in
his own Person to all intents and purposes.


Mr. Darnel. That Book 11 H. 4. has expressly resolved, that he shall not be a
Juror; and the reason is, because he is not Probus and legalis homo, and I
cannot see why the same reason should not exclude him from being a Witness.


Mr. At. G. There is a great deal of reason for it; for in many Cases Men can
be Witnesses that cannot be of Jury.


L. C. J. It is very true, there are many such Cases; but show me one, where a
Man that is excluded from being a Jury-man is to be admitted as a Witness.


Mr. At. G. The Brother or other Relation of the party.


L. C. J. But show me one put by for infamy as a Juror, yet admitted as a
Witness.


Mr. Record. A Juror is to judge what a Witness says, therefore a clearer
reputation is required for him that is to be a Judge, than him that is to give
Evidence; and he that is to be a Judge of another Credit, should stand fair in
his own; so that all will depend on that, the Credit is to be left to the Jury.


Mr. At. G. And, my Lord, as to disreputation, a Villain was never admitted to
be a Juror, and yet never denied as a Witness, and that for infamy.


L. C. J. What infamy is it?


Mr. At. G. It was base.


L. C. J. But it was not wicked, he might be honest though in servitude.


Mr. At. G. He could not be of a Tales, where none almost are excluded.


L. C. J. That was, because he was not Talis as other Men are.


Mr. At. G. No, it was because he was not Liber homo, but the Pardon here
makes the party Liber and legalis homo, and so restores him to a capacity of
all purposes.


Mr. Soll. G. But my Lord Hubbard does expressly say in Searlyes Case, taking
notice that upon the Conviction there is Poena and reatus, the Pardon coming
after does take away both.


L. C. J. That is my Lord Hobarts opinion; and it is true, the very reatus is
taken away, so as never to be remembered again in order to punishment; but does
it set a man right as to Reputation, as if he had never offended? it cannot be
so in reason, if twenty men come and tell me so.


Mr. J. Dolb. Certainly he is guilty still in strictness of Conception, but the
Law says, he is not guilty, and the Law will admit such a Man to be a Witness;
but still such an one will be a bad one in our thoughts, for all the Pardon.


L. C. J. Brother, I agree with you in that; and if I were in my Lord
Castlemains case, I would admit him, and not labor farther to dispute the Law;
but when he has given his Testimony, he shall have all these Records proved
against him to invalidate what they can.

To which the Earl of Castlemaine seemed to consent, and acquiesce in the
opinion.


Mr. J. Jones. I do confess my Lord Hales in his little Book of Pleas of the
Crown, does say, that after a Man has his Clergy, he has his Credit.


L. C. J. He does so indeed, Brother.


Mr. J. Dolb. And the Case that Mr. Attorney puts of waging Battle, is as plain
a Case as can be, for none can wage Battle, but he that is Liber and legalis
homo: for it might have been objected you broke Prison, therefore you are not
Liber, etc. and cannot wage Battle; but if it were answered the King has
Pardoned it, he would be restored to be Liber, etc. which is the same Case in
reason with this.


Mr. Sol. G. That is a restitution to a Capacity between party and party, and
not as to the taking off the punishment only and a discharge from the King.


Mr. J. Dolb. It were well it were once settled, for we have it often in our
Circuits.


J. Jones. But the matter is at an end now, my L. of Castlemain consents.


Mr. Recorder. But, my Lord, it will be a thing of great consequence to have it
ruled; and it much concerns me, in respect of my place, to be at some certainty
about it; for there is never a Sessions in the Old-Bailey, but something of
this nature will occur. No Robbery can almost be discovered, but we must make
use of such as have been Accomplices; the King pardons, that he may have
Evidence against others.


L. C. J. But that is before Conviction.


Mr. Record. After Conviction, my Lord.


Mr. Darnel. My Lord, in my Lord Chief Justice Hides time, in such a case, it
was adjudged he should be no Witness.


Mr. At. G. Where is that Reported?


Mr. Darnel. I have such a Note, but I cannot tell the Cases name.


Mr. At. G. You tell us of a Case without any thing to warrant its Authority,
and that no body ever heard of but your self.

We desire Mr. Dangerfield may be Sworn; and truly if your Lordship pleases, I
have another thing to urge.


L. C. J. Have you any other Witnesses to examine?


Mr. At. G. None but what are to corroborate his Testimony. But in the common
Case of an Approver, he confesses his own guilt, and yet is a good Witness
against the Approver.


L. C. J. But there is no Conviction.


Mr. At. G. Yes, his own Confession.


L. C. J. But how far is he a Witness?


Mr. At. G. His Confession shall be Recorded, and if he does not Convict those
he approves, he shall die; and so he Swears to save himself, yet a good Witness.


L. C. J. The Law thought it convenient to discover Felonies, and such great
Offenses; which were hard to be done, but by some that were Parties to the
Offense, and so would encourage them that would discover to Convict the rest;
but here comes a person that is Convicted, and infamous by another Crime, and
would by his Evidence take away the Life of another not accused for that Crime
for which he was Pardoned, but another. And that word reatus in my Lord Hobard
is capable of an Interpretation another way; and a Man may have his guilt taken
away as to some purposes, but not to other.


Mr. At. G. But the Book says, it takes away all disabilities too.


L. C. J. I think there is a difference between a Pardon before Conviction and
after.


Mr. Soll. G. But in Mr. Atturneys first Case, even before Conviction, there
was a legal disability upon his breaking of Prison, by reason of which, he
could not wage Battle till Pardoned.


L. C. J. It is a disability upon a Presumption, not upon Conviction: for the
Law presumes a man that is innocent will abide his Trial; but if he break
Prison and fly from Justice, it argues guilt; but in a man that is Convicted,
the guilt is plain.


Mr. Soll. G. But, my Lord, the presumption runs as high to the disability in
the one case, as the Conviction in the other; if then the Pardon can take away
one disability e pari, it may the other also.


Mr. At. G. Nay, if you please to look into my Lord Hobard, you will find he
says, that the very acceptance of a Pardon implies a guilt.


L. C. J. No, pray Mr. Attorney, I do not agree in that, I would not have it
concluded, that every great Man in England that has a Pardon, is guilty of the
Offenses thereby pardoned.


Mr. J. Jones. My Lord, I take it there is a difference between a special
Pardon and a general Pardon: for by taking a particular special Pardon, there
cannot but be intended a consciousness of guilt; but if a person be included in
a general Pardon, there is no consideration of any particular Offense, and the
laying hold of that, implies not a guilt, for all have it, unless those
particularly excepted, and we cannot suppose every one guilty.


L. C. J. Truly I think the acceptance of a special Pardon does not at all in
itself, without Confession or Conviction, imply a Man to be guilty of the Crime
pardoned. For you know my Lord Cook says, No wise Man will refuse Gods pardon
and the King^ at any time, though we are conscious of no actual Crime to need
it. And besides, in these times, when no Man knows when he is safe from the
Perjuries that do so much abound, it may be prudence, without a confession or
implicitation of guilt, to get a Pardon, which we need not, but only as a
shelter against a false accusation.

Then Mr. Justice Raymund went down to the Common Pleas.


Mr. J. Jones. Because we will not go either against Reason or Law, or constant
practice, my Brother Raymund is gone down to ask the Opinions of the Judges of
the Common Pleas.


Mr. Record. My Lord Hales does in his little Book say, it restores him to his
Credit.


Mr. At. G. If it has restored him to his Credit, I hope they shall not
blemish him so much, as to make the Jury not believe him.


L. C. J. Ay, but I assure you it shall have its due weight according to the
Crimes charged upon him; all the Records shall be read, and all that can be
observed from them shall.


Mr. At. G. We do not desire but all that ought to be observed should so be.


L. C. J. Do you think we sit here to have Men laden with all the guilt of
most infamous villainies in the world come here, by their Evidence take away
Men's Lives, and their qualifications not observed?


Mr. J. Dolbin. My Brother will come up presently, and we shall hear what they
say to it.


L. C. J. We have men grown so insolent now adays, that upon what account, or
what sort of confidence to term it I know not, run all whole Societies of Men,
and persons of all Qualities, as if there were any thing in their confidence
that could render them better, than their own villainous Actions proclaim them
to be. Humility becomes Penitents, and no wicked impudent man can be thought to
repent; but these Men's Behaviors has nothing of an appearance of Repentance,
but with sauciness think to make all fly before them, and that their boldness
in accusing, shall without more ado justify the truth of their Accusation: but
God knows, they discover what they are by their insolent carriage.

Then Mr. Justice Raymund returned and delivered the Opinions of the other
Judges to my Lord and the other two Judges privately.


L. C. J. Look you, I will tell you what my Brother reports their Opinions in
the Common Pleas to be: He says, he put the Question to them in both cases,
That he is Outlawed for Felony and pardoned, and Burnt in the Hand for Felony
and pardoned. They say they are of Opinion, That the general Pardon would not
restore him to be a Witness, even as to the Outlawry of Felony, because of the
Interest the Kings Subjects have in him, and his Testimony could not be
received upon the general Pardon. But they say this further, That where a Man
comes to be burnt in the Hand for a Felony, they look upon that as a kind of a
more general discharge than the Pardon alone would amount to, if he had not
been Burnt in the Hand: If he had been Convicted and not Burnt, a general
Pardon would not have made him a good Witness; but by that and the Pardon, they
think he is made a Legal Witness.


Mr. Darnel. Notwithstanding the Outlawry?


L. C. J. That is answered otherwise.


Mr. At. G. It is discharged; come pray Swear him, (which was done.) Are you
Sworn, Sir?


Mr. Dangerfield. Yes, Sir.


Mr. At. G. Come Sir, then now tell what you know of my L. Castlemain.


L. C. J. But I conceive by their Opinions in the Common Pleas, that they think
a Pardon after Conviction of Perjury would not restore him to be a Witness,
because of the interest the Subject has in his Testimony.


Then I proceeded to deliver my Evidence, which was to this Effect.

That about the Month of June, 1679, the Lady Powis sent me with a Letter to
the Earl of Castlemain, that being the first time I had ever been to wait on
his Lordship; to which Letter I received another in Answer, and delivered it to
the Lady Powis, who read it to me as follows,

This person I like well, and though he be no Scholar, yet he may serve to
instruct the Youths as he shall be directed, by which I shall be eased of much
trouble and suspicion.

By those Youths was meant the St. Omers Witnesses, for his Lordship was their
Tutor.

His Lordship was one of those that employed me to fetch Knox and Lane out of
Prison.

Some time after that, I went to wait on his Lordship with some Letters and
Lists of Names, that came from Nevel, and upon the perusal thereof, his
Lordship ordered me to employ diverse persons to write Copies from them; saying,
it was a business of consequence, and must not be delayed. Then I informed him,
that persons were at that very time, a writing at Powis-house; then his
Lordship replied, let them go on and be encouraged, and I will pay my part,
which his Lordship did; for some time after, I sent William Woodman, then
Servant to Mrs Cellier, with a Letter to his Lordship, who in answer thereto
sent Forty shillings for his part of the Writing.

Now those Letters, and those which I put into Colonel Mansels Chamber, were
all agreeable in matter of fact, and tended only in concurrency to the
Sham-Plot.

His Lordship wrote the Compendium, and I read one part of it as it lay before
him at the same time.

His Lordship perused the Papers of Knox and Lane, who intended to accuse Dr.
Oats with Sodomy; and his Lordship was also privy, and gave consent to the
drawing up, and Swearing to the false Affidavits which Lane made before Sir
James Butler.

The next day after I had been Treated with by the Lords in the Tower to kill
the King, I went to wait on the Lord Castlemain, who having sent his Servant
out of the Room, demanded of me, why I was so unwilling to do that, for which I
was taken out of Prison. I desired to know what that was? Why, says his
Lordship, were you not yesterday at the Tower? I answered, yes, I was; and then
said, would your Lordship have me kill the King, for that is it you mean, I
suppose? Then his Lordship said, that was the business he meant; and then he
stormed, and was so furious, that I cared not to stay any longer.

That his Lordship was privy to my part of the Sham-Plot, and used in his
discourse to call the King Tyrant.

This was the true Substance of my Evidence, which being backed with William
Woodman's, the Court proceeded, etc.

FINIS.

