THE CASE OF THE BOROUGH OF New-Windsor, In the County of Berks, Concerning
the Election of their Burgesses to serve in this ensuing Parliament.
WIndsor is a Free Borough, which time out of mind has sent two Burgesses to
serve in Parliament.

The ancient right way of Electing these Burgesses, is by the common Burgesses
in general, to wit, the Inhabitants, House-holders of the Borough (being
neither Inmates, Lodgers, Sojourners, nor Alms-takers) which is most agreeable
to Law, and most usual, where there is no special Custom to the contrary; as
where they choose by Freemen, there if a Freeman decay so as to receive Alms,
yet his Vote is good. The like where they choose by ancient Burgage-Houses, in
point of Tenure, if an Inhabitant of one of those Houses receive Alms yet his
Poll is good, etc.

This Borough is likewise Incorporate by Charter, consisting of a number not
exceeding 30. chosen out of the general Burgesses, Inhabitants, and called by
the name of Mayor, Bailiffs, and Burgesses.

This Select number of Burgesses have pretended to the sole right of Election
of Burgesses to Parliament in themselves, excluding the general Inhabitancy,
and have occasioned several Competitions in Parliament, viz. Anno 1640. it was
adjudged for the general Inhabitants, against the special men: Anno 1661. for
the special men, and in the last Parliament for the general Inhabitants again:
Where observe by the way, that the Inhabitants in general, is and must be meant
the Burgesses in general of the Borough, with reference to the Burgesses
special of the Corporation of the Borough, that is, the House keepers in
general, who are in Law called the Free Burgesses of an ancient Borough; and
not every particular person that lives in the Town, as a Lodger, Sojourner, etc.

Which being premised for the clearer apprehension of the case, the matter of
Fact proceeds thus.

Thursday, Aug. 28. last, was the day of this Election, as Thursday Feb. 26.
was of the former, and perhaps may prove as fortunate to them, where there
stood in Competition, Rich. Winwood, and Samuel Starkey, Esquires, who in the
last Parliament had recovered the ancient right for the Inhabitants, against
the special Burgesses, John Carey, Esquire Master of the Kings Buck-Hounds, and
John Powney, Esquire Purveyor of Hay, and Corporal of the Yeomen of the Guard, and
who was dismissed the last House of Commons upon the said Prosecution.

Winwood and Starkey, stood to be chosen by the general Burgesses, Householders
of the Borough, and as near as could be polled no other.

Carey, and Powney, took far different measures, for having the Mayor and
Under-Steward at their devotion for the Return (who did positively refuse to
admit any Exceptions or Queries to be entered on the Poll-book, but promised
liberty of debate afterward) they were resolved to have the majority of Votes
at any rate, to which end they polled not only Inhabitants of the Borough
(those few whom they had obtained by such undue practices as no Loyal Subject
will venture to mention but in the place where they must be adjudged) but
likewise the Inhabitants of the adjacent Villages round about, Inmates,
Lodgers, Sojourners, Almes-men, Bargemen living 30 miles from thence, Citizens
of London, and in short, every person that could give an account of his name,
if he were for Carey, and Powney, was excepted.

Notwithstanding all which, the Majority of Votes yet rested with Winwood, and
Starkey, wherefore to make the business sure, His Majesty and the Queen being
then Resident in the Castle of Windsor, a place wholly exempt from the
Borough, and only part of the County at large, Carey, and Powney, Summoned in
their Servants, polling thorough all the Offices from the Board of Green-Cloth
down to the Grooms, Watermen, Letter-men, helpers in Stables, and Turn-spits
(endeavoring to persuade the World, that because his Majesty had been 40 days
resident in the Castle of Windsor; therefore by a fatal consequence all the
Servants must be Inhabitants and Free Burgesses of the Borough of Windsor,
capable to give Votes in Election of Burgesses for Parliament; whereas if it
were possible that such an Imposition could take; yet were they so often
changed in waiting, that few had been there 40 days, and besides many of them
do not Lodge in Windsor, but the Neighboring Towns.

They polled likewise Yeomen of the Guard, Gentlemen of the Horse-guard; and no
doubt, would have proceeded both to Horse and Foot; but that the other party
cried Quarter; and yielded them the majority of those Votes.

The Poll being closed, and the Poll-book so disguised, that it was hard to
distinguish, whether it were a Poll-book of the general Burgesses of the
Borough, a Roll of the King and Queens Servants, or a Muster of the Soldiers.
Winwood and Starkey took Exceptions to their Poll, and offered to justify
their own, and telling the Mayor how dangerous it was for him, whom the Law had
entrusted with the discrimination of good from bad Votes, upon every slight
occasion, to give a trouble to the House of Commons, who have the great Affairs
of the Nation Incumbent on them; desired him to take good advice upon his
Return (having time enough) and who ever had the majority of Votes of the
general Burgesses of the Borough, according to Law to return them; which they
conceiving themselves to have, demanded; and the Mayor promising to give notice
of time to discuss the Queries, and that he would afterward advise upon his
Return. They left him about 12 of the Clock on Friday, to those fair
considerations: In the mean time they prepared to make good their Exceptions,
taking out a List of particulars from their Counter-poll-books; and plying the
Mayor with continual messages, that they could make them good, and that they
were sure of the majority of Legal Electors (which they had by many Votes) viz.

Starkey 212 beside Queries. Winwood 191 beside Queries. Powney 154 beside
Queries. Carey 96 beside Queries.
The Mayor still returned for answer, he would take time, and make his Return
with good advice; declaring he did believe in his Conscience, Winwood and
Starkey had most of the Inhabitants; and that those people (meaning the King
and Queen's Servants, etc.) had no Votes.

Winwood and Starkey remained satisfied the Mayor would be just; but instead
thereof, Monday following, their names were in the London-Gazette, as chosen
Burgesses for Windsor, before they were proclaimed there, longing it seems to
publish the conquest to the World, where it was taken for granted they would be
so, and accordingly the same day, the Under-Steward having made a learned
speech among the brethren of the Corporation in their Guild Hall, signifying
that Carey and Powney had the majority of Votes, and if any Exceptions were to
be taken, the proper place was the House of Commons, they prevailed with the
Mayor to Seal an Indenture of Return of Carey and Powney, and so proclaimed
them, without any decision of the Queries, or any reason offered by the Mayor
for it; but that he durst not Return Winwood and Starkey, for if he should they
would kill him.

Which arbitrary and illegal proceeding of theirs, contains in it, not only
merit of Election, but also great matter of Grievance, being as it were one
general assault upon all the Laws made for the preservation of the Freedom of
Elections, it is therefore hoped the Honorable the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses, when they shall be assembled in Parliament, will be pleased to hear
this Cause at the Bar of the whole House; where Mr. Winwood and Mr. Starkey,
having experienced the great justice of the last House of Commons, do not
question but to be vindicated, and the Offenders for example sake strictly
punished.

The Clemency of the last House toward this Mayor, has made way for the
Justice of this; for had he suffered for his false Return then, he would have
taken more care for a true one now; for till a Bill can pass for Regulating
Elections, without doubt the way to have true Returns, is severely to handle
not only the proper Officers directly, but likewise the Contrivers and managers
of false ones, especially having not the least color of a point in Law to
warrant them: According to the good and famous example of the case of Norfolk,
in the last House; where not only the proper Officer, the Sheriff, was
committed for misdemeanour in the Election for Knights of that County; but
likewise a Doct. who had dispersed a great man's Letter, influencing the
Freeholders to one particular party, contrary to Law, was ordered to be sent
for, as a Contriver of undue practices; by which means there will be less heat
in Elections; and Gentlemen, fairly and indifferently chosen by their
respective Countries, will be returned without the charge of Petitions, the
inconvenience whereof is scarce conceiveable, but by such persons as have been
concerned in them, they being obliged to struggle not only against the
foulness of the action, but likewise with the urgency of public Affairs to get
a hearing; and to which this Cause of Election is humbly referred, with this,
that much more will be proved at the hearing than is here set down.

FINIS.

