The Case of the Common Brewers, Keeping Public Brewing-houses in the Country,
now Petitioners before the Honorable House of Commons, and their Objections
against several Clauses contained in a Bill brought into the said House for an
Additional Excise upon Beer and Ale, Humbly offered to the Members of the same.
THAT the said Petitioners, as to the Rates to be Imposed and Added, Humbly
submit themselves to the Wisdom of the said House, and will cheerfully obey the
same.

That having for several Years last past, been extremely abused by the Charges
and Returns of the Gagers, and other Officers of the Excise: As,

1. In Charging and Returning Beer to be Ale, whereby they have lost the
Allowances by the former Acts for Excise Granted them (viz.) four Gallons in
every Barrel, and one Barrel in every three and twenty, amounting to above the
eighth part of their Profits. 2. In Returning and Charging Beer by them Brewed
and Sold for Six Shillings Beer, as Ale and Strong Beer, whereby they have lost
their Allowances aforesaid, and Charged with the whole Duty for Ale. 3. In
Gaging Worts, and Charging and Returning accordingly; whereas they ought to
Gage in the Tun, and return according to that, because of the waste of the
Liquor before; and thereby your Petitioners have not had 30 Gallons to the
Barrel.
That though they have made their continual Complaints and Applications, yet
could have no Redress, by reason the Commissioners have always (though against
Law, as your Petitioners conceive) construed the former Acts, that the Gagers
Return was a binding and indisputable Charge upon the Brewers, both as to
quantity and quality. Nay, instead of Redress, they have been still charged
more outragiously, and prosecuted upon the Fines and Penalties laid upon them
by the Oaths of the Gagers (who are generally persons of small Reputation) and
admitted to no Defense.

Therefore your Petitioners did humbly apply themselves to this Honorable
House for Redress for the future, That several Clauses in this Bill (as now
Drawn) though thereby it is pretended the avoiding all Differences and Disputes
between the Gagers and Brewers, etc. touching Beer and Ale, and the Returns and
Charges thereof; yet in truth, in consequence, not only fastens the former
Abuses more unavoidably upon the Brewers, but will give opportunity for
Greater. For,

1. That no Persons are Appointed before whom your Petitioners may have their
Complaints, nor any Persons Appointed to whom they may have their Appeal: But
only that all Fines, Forfeitures, etc. (viz.) (on the Brewers parts) shall be
heard determined, etc. before the Commissioners in their several Districts, or
by Two Justices. Nay, the very Appeals by the former Acts seem to be taken
away. 2. No Penalty laid upon the Gager or other Officer for any false Return
or Liberty given to the Brewer to disprove the same, if it be false, either in
quantity or quality. 3. That the Remedy which seems to be proposed by the said
Bill (viz.) to make the Barrels of Beer and Ale equal, and the Allowances the
same, will be the Ruin of most Beer-Brewers in the Country: 1. For that
thereby they must be forced to Cut and Alter all their Vessels. 2. They must
Lose their Customers, Gentlemen and Innkeepers still expecting the same
Measure and Price; and especially in Oxon, where the Price is set upon the
Brewer; and Cambridge, where their Measure is Gaged by the University; and if
the Measure and Prices be altered, most private Families will return to
Brewing, which will much prejudice the Excise. 3. That the Allowances to be the
same, will be very unjust, because the Waste and Leakage of Beer and Ale are
very unequal, for which reason the former Acts made the Difference in
Allowances. 4. That by the Clause whereby it is to be Enacted, That if it
appear to the Gager that any Worts are missing, or not let fairly down into the
Tun, it shall be lawful for him to charge the Brewer at his Discretion. Your
Petitioners are left totally to the Mercy of the Gagers, and that without any
Remedy or Appeal; who upon all occasions will make use thereof to their own
Advantage, and your Petitioners Ruin. 5. That the only Clause in the Act of
the 15th of Car. secundi, that seemed any way beneficial for the Brewer, and to
give him liberty to discharge himself from the Oppression of the Gager, is by a
Proviso in this Bill, rendered altogether ineffectual, leaving him solely to
the Mercy of the Informing Gager, if he please to impose any Crime upon him.
Therefore your Petitioners humbly pray, That the said Bill may be Amended in
the Premises, and such Clauses added, as thereby they may have some effectual
Remedy of their said Abuses.


