Edwin Mayor.
Cur' Special' tent' die Jovis in festo Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, xxix die
Septembris Schoolo Annoque Regni Regis Willielmi tertii Angliae etc. decimo.
THis Court does desire Dr. Barton to print his Sermon preached this Day before
the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Citizens of this City, at the
Parish Church of St. Lawrence Jewry, being the Day of Election of the Lord
Mayor of this City for the Year ensuing.

Goodfellow.

A SERMON Preached before The Right Honorable THE LORD MAYOR, Aldermen, and
Citizens OF LONDON, At St. Lawrence Jewry, On the Feast of St. Michael, School.

At the Election of the Lord Mayor for the Year ensuing.

By SAMVEL BARTON, D.D.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill. School.

PROVE. xxi. 15. It is joy to the just to do judgment, but destruction shall be
to the workers of Iniquity.


SOlomon the wise King of Israel was not only a great Lover of Justice, (as
every good Man is) but had great Power and Opportunity of doing Justice among
his Subjects, by virtue of that high Office, that regal Dignity, with which he
was invested. And he had also a great Sagacity in discerning how to do it, and
finding on which side it lay, as we may learn from what is related of him in
the First Book of Kings, concerning his deciding the Controversy between the
two Women about the Living and the Dead Child. And therefore we may reasonably
suppose that what he says in the former part at least, of the Words of the
Text, was no more than what he himself had found to be true by Experience, It
is joy to the just to do judgment: i. e. It is a great Pleasure and
Satisfaction to a good and righteous Man to execute Justice impartially, it is
what leaves a savoury Relish behind it, and is very delightful and comfortable
in the Reflection upon it afterward; But destruction shall be to the workers
of iniquity, i. e. However wicked Men may possibly please themselves for a
while in their unrighteous Dealings, and rejoice in Iniquity for a time, yet
first or last, in this World, or however in the next, it will be the Ruin of
'em, if a timely Repentance do not prevent it.

This seems to be the most obvious Sense of the Words at the first reading of
'em. But there is another somewhat different from this, which they are also
very well capable of, and both the one and the other contains a Truth that is
very well worthy our Consideration; It is joy to the just to do judgment; or,
as it may be rendered, The Execution of Justice is matter of Joy to the Just;
i. e. Just and Good Men are very much pleased in seeing Justice done, though it
be by others and not themselves, and even though they perhaps have no particular
concern in it. And if we take the former part of the Words in this Sense, then
the Antithesis will be the more clear in the latter part, But destruction shall
be to the workers of iniquity, or, as it may be rendered, But it is a great
Terror and Mortification to the Workers of Unrighteousness; as if Solomon had
said, When good Magistrates discharge their Trust faithfully, and execute
Justice impartially, all honest and good Men are greatly rejoiced at it, but it
brings a sore Terror and Consternation upon the Workers of Iniquity.

Taking the Words thereof according to the full latitude of their Sense, they
present us with four things to be considered.

I. That it is a great pleasure to a just Man to do Justice. II. That it is a
great pleasure also to the Spectators, if they be righteous and good Men, to
see good Magistrates faithfully discharging their Duty in the Execution of
Justice. III. That the same is a great Terror to the Wicked and Unjust. And,
IV. That Injustice and Wickedness will first or last bring a Man to ruin
without Repentance. Destruction shall be to the workers of Iniquity.
I shall speak something briefly to each of these Propositions by way of
Illustration and Confirmation of them, and then proceed to make some
Application. And,

I. That it is a great Pleasure to a just Man to do Justice. And this it is

First, Because it is an acting according to his own Inclinations. Now it is
always pleasant to a Man to pursue the natural or habitual Inclinations of his
Mind. Merciful and Compassionate Men take delight in relieving and succouring
the Afflicted; A bountiful Disposition is pleased with Acts of Liberality, and
therefore seeks the fit Occasions and Opportunities for 'em, according to that
of the Prophet, The liberal devises liberal things. Even evil and naughty
Inclinations make it pleasant in some degree for the time, to act according to
'em. So a Covetous Man takes pleasure in hoarding up Money, though to no purpose:
One that is of a Revengeful Disposition, in acting his Revenge: A Luxurious
Person in Riot and Excess. But the difference is, Where the Habit or
Inclination is Evil, all the Pleasure that can come from acting according to
it, is quite over-balanc'd, by the Sting it leaves behind; and it is not so
pleasant in doing as it is bitter to reflect upon, and bitter in its
Consequences. But on the other side, where Reason, Religion, and Inclination
meet, there the Pleasure of acting according to such an Inclination, is entire,
and no Sorrow mixed with it, but a Man is easy and well pleased in following
the Bent of his own Heart, and does not fear he shall rue it another Day, but
though he should meet with some Difficulties and Obstructions from without, yet
he will find a Reward in the comfortable Testimony of his own Conscience:
Therefore,

Secondly, It Is Joy to the Just to do Judgment, because he knows that he does
well in so doing, and that his Action is approved by Almighty God. He knows
that he acts as becomes a Reasonable Creature, and agreeably to that Law by
which he himself must be judged. And this cannot but be a mighty pleasure to
the Mind: A pleasure which none can possibly have in doing wickedly: For
however through Error such may sometimes imagine that they do well, yet that is
the most it can amount to, they can never be sure of it, because it is not so;
and generally wicked Men either know, or at least greatly suspect that what
they do is evil, and displeasing to God, and that cannot but be a great
Disquiet to the Mind of any Man that will give himself leave to think, and
reflect on his own Actions. And hence,

Thirdly, To do Justice must needs be Joy to a good Man, because of the assured
Hope it gives him of God's Favor, who is evermore a Lover and Rewarder of the
Upright; according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 11.7.
The righteous Lord loves righteousness. his Countenance does behold the
upright. Thus Job, who was a great Ruler and Magistrate in his Country,
grounded his hope of a Blessing from God upon his having faithfully discharged
his Duty in the Administration of Justice, as we read in the 29th of Job, from
the 14th. to the 18th. Verse. I put on righteousness, and it clothed me, my
judgment was as a robe and a diadem. I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to
the lame. I was a father to the poor, and the cause which I knew not I searched
out. And I brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his
Teeth; Then I said, I shall die in my nest, I shall multiply my days as the
sand. He hoped to enjoy Prosperity and a long Life, because he had been so good
a Magistrate, and so great a Patron of Right and Justice where he lived. And
this his Hope did not deceive him, though he had indeed a great Interval of
Affliction. But,

Fourthly, It may well be Joy to a just Magistrate to do Judgment, because it is
an high Honor done him by Almighty God to be employed in doing part of his
Work. For it is God that is the great Doer of Justice to all his Creatures: He
is the Fountain of Right as he is the Fountain of Good: He is the Judge of all
the World, and will one Day do right impartially unto all: He has said that
Vengeance is his, and he will repay. Romans 12.19.
However he does not ordinarily in this Life take the Execution of Justice
immediately into his own Hands, but has appointed Deputies for it, to whom upon
that account he has said Ye are Gods. However difficult it may be to prove any
one particular Form of Government to be of Divine Right, most certain it is
that Government and Magistracy in general, are the Ordinance of God. And of
every lawful Magistrate, we may say that he is God's minister to us for good,
Romans 13.4.
a revenger to execute wrath on him that does wrong.

There are several other Reasons that might be given why it is such a Pleasure
and Satisfaction to a Just Man to do Judgment. But the same are also Reasons of
the Second thing, and therefore may be considered there. Now the Second
Proposition was,

II. That it is a great Pleasure also to the Spectators, if they be Righteous
and Good Men, to see good Magistrates faithfully discharging their Duty in the
Execution of Justice. So it is

First, Because it is a Pleasure to see others doing that which one would do
one's self, to see especially great Men and Magistrates concurring with one in
Opinion, and doing that which one knows is right and fit to be done. But,

Secondly, It Is Joy to a Just Man to do Justice, and it is Joy to all good Men
to see it done, because it is a thing so very necessary, and so beneficial to
Mankind. I shall not be large upon this Common Place: For it is obvious to the
Thoughts of all Men, that without some Execution of Justice, there can be no
Peace, no Security, no quiet or comfortable Living, no Property, no calling any
thing one's own, and thence no honest Industry, nor none of the most ordinary
Conveniences of Life. And hence it is commonly observed, that even Thieves and
Robbers, though their Trade be all Violence and Injustice toward others, yet are
forced to exercise some kind of Justice among themselves in the dividing of the
Spoil.

But it is not only those Crimes whereby Men do immediately injure one another,
that a good Magistrate will think himself bound to punish, but those also
whereby they dishonor God, or abuse themselves. For whatever we tolerate, none
certainly can plead for a Toleration of Vice and open Profaneness or
Wickedness. If we tolerate such things, we have cause to fear that God will not
long tolerate us. But a faithful and diligent Endeavor to suppress all things
of that Nature, by executing the Laws that are in force against them, is the
only way to prevent God's Judgments from falling on us. And therefore it must
needs be Joy to the Magistrate to do this, when there is just Cause for it, if
he be one that delights in doing his Duty, and Joy to every good Man to see it
done; to see Virtue and Piety encouraged, and notorious Offenders punished; to
see Truth and Innocence brought to light and cleared, and malicious Subtlety
defeated of its Designs; to see Order and Peace maintained, Vice
discountenanced, and Wickedness, if not totally suppressed, yet kept under
Hatches, and not daring openly to show itself. These are very comely and
desirable Spectacles in such a World as this, where we cannot expect that all
things should be so well as we could wish, but ought to be thankful to those
who use a diligent Endeavor to keep things in some tolerable good Order, those
good Magistrates who study to promote the Public Peace and Welfare, and to
answer the Ends of their Institution. Again,

Thirdly, There are some particular Cases wherein it is more especially a
pleasant thing to do Justice, or to see it well done. As for Instance, When
Wickedness is such as cries for Vengeance, when it seems big enough to bring a
Stain of Guilt upon a whole City or Nation, if not speedily avenged, or when
the Sufferings of some innocent Persons are such by reason of Oppressors, that
it is enough to grieve the Heart of any well-natur'd Man to observe it. In these
and such like Cases, a good Man may be in pain till he has seen Justice done,
his Stomach may so rise against some sort of Wickedness as it may happen to be
aggravated, or his Compassion may be such toward some Sufferers, or he may be
so apprehensive of Public Guilt and Infamy by reason of some Crimes, that he
may be scarce able to brook any Delay. And in such Cases to see Justice done is
very desirable and very pleasant.

Almighty God is infinitely patient, and bears long with Men, and yet when
Wickedness is grown to a great height, we find him expressing himself as one in
pain till he had executed Judgment upon Evildoers, Isa. 1.24. Ah I will ease
me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies. And even good Men (who
are always compassionate, yet) may be allowed sometimes to rejoice in the
Punishment of Evildoers. For so says the Psalmist, The righteous shall rejoice
when he sees the vengeance, Psalm. 58.10. Far be it from any good Man to
rejoice merely in the Sufferings of another, how wicked soever, and not rather
to wish for his Repentance and Amendment. But yet when Wickedness is very great
and daring, or open and notorious, so that there is apparent need of a speedy
Reformation to prevent the Judgments of God, it cannot but rejoice a good Man's
Heart to see a Check put to it by the power of the Magistrate, and Examples
made of some such Transgressors, that so they themselves, if possible, may be
brought to Repentance; and however, that others may see it and fear, and have a
care how they do the like. And the Execution of Justice therefore in such Cases
as these, finds a general Approbation and Applause; Whence Solomon tells us,
That when it goes well with the Righteous the City rejoices, Prove. 11.10.
and when the Wicked perish there is shouting.

But to proceed to the Third Proposition. That Is but the manifest Consequence
of what has been already said, viz.

III. That the Execution of Justice is terrible to Evildoers. It must needs be
so since it is they that suffer by it. Their Sin then finds them out, and brings
'em to public Shame, and their guilty Consciences many times in such Cases are
let loose to torment 'em. And happy it is for them if they can but repent and
amend their Ways, and so escape those endless Torments to which Sin else will
inevitably bring 'em. They will have reason then to be very thankful for their
Cure, though the Methods of it were never so bitter and unpleasant. But it is a
sad and a dreadful thing indeed when Punishments in this Life from the Hand of
the Civil Magistrate, are but a Prelude to everlasting Woe and Misery in the
next; which yet must be the Case if not prevented by Repentance, according to
the Fourth Proposition, manifestly contained in the Words of the Text, viz.

IV. That Injustice and Wickedness will most certainly bring a Man to ruin
without Repentance. Destruction shall be to the workers of Iniquity. This is a
Truth which has a necessary Connection with, and Dependence upon the essential
Attributes of God, his Veracity and his Justice. He has said it, and therefore
no doubt he will make it good. And we must have very unworthy thoughts of him,
if we can believe that ever he will suffer any Man finally to prosper by
displeasing him, and doing Evil, seeing he always sees it, be it carried never
so close, and always has it in his power to do Justice. It is therefore most
certain that he will one Day meet with all the Workers of Iniquity, and
convince 'em fully to their everlasting Satisfaction, that he was no idle or
unconcerned Spectator of what they did, but did always intend what he had so
often told 'em in vain, even to render to all Men according to their Works. And
then they will never call in question his Providence any more, nor have it in
their power to be Infidels any longer.

In this World it cannot otherwise be but some will escape from Justice, as it
is executed by Men. Some are too big for the Law, and some too subtle. And
Humane Laws cannot reach to all Cases: They are indeed but an expedient for a
little while to keep the World from running into a total Confusion. But
whatever Defects there may be in them, or in the Execution of them, or
howsoever Men may escape here, there is One above whom no Man can deceive, none
can bribe, nor none can be too strong for, who will not fail to do right to
all, and to make it appear plainly that 'twas every Man's Interest as well as
Duty to live soberly, righteously, and godlily in the World.

And now having spoken thus briefly to those Four Propositions which are all
manifestly contained in the Words of the Text, as they have been explained, I
proceed in the next place to make some Application of what has been said to the
present Time and Occasion. And I think if we reflect seriously upon the
Doctrine that has been delivered, it will afford us Motives sufficient to the
Duties which all or any of us are now called to. Whether it be, First, to
choose such a Magistrate as we believe will be faithful to the Trust reposed in
him, and show himself to be a Lover of Justice, a Patron of Piety and Virtue,
and a Terror to Evildoers, which is the proper Business of some of you. Or,
Secondly, To discharge this great Trust accordingly, and so as to answer the
Hopes and Expectations of good Men. Or, Thirdly, To be aiding and assisting in
the doing thereof, which is every one's Duty as he has Ability and Opportunity.
Or, Lastly, which is constantly the Duty of us all, To behave our selves so
that a good Magistrate faithfully discharging his Trust, may be no Terror, but
a Joy and Comfort to us. The Doctrine, I say, that has been delivered contains
Motives sufficient to every one of these; which I shall crave leave briefly to
lay before you, and so conclude. And,

First, All those that are concerned may here find how much it does behove 'em
to use their Endeavors that such a Person may be chosen as they believe will
faithfully discharge the Trust reposed in him; one that has the Courage to do
Justice impartially; a Friend to Truth and Right; One that is of a true Public
Spirit; a Lover of his Country, and of this great City in particular; and,
(which is the Foundation of all) One that fears God; a Man sincerely Religious,
and of unspotted Virtue, and consequently a sure Enemy to all Debauchery,
Profaneness, and Immorality; One, in short, to whom it will be joy to do
Judgment and Righteousness, and who will do what he can to prevent the utter
Destruction of the Workers of Iniquity, by exercising an wholesome Severity
toward 'em, that if possible they may be reclaimed, or, at least, to stop, as
far as may be, the Contagion of their ill Example; such an one, or one that
approaches nearest to, and deserves most of such a Character as this, will
every good Man desire to choose. For why? The Love of God, and of Religion, of
Justice and Righteousness, the desire of the Public Good, and the hopes of
averting the heavy Judgments of God, by giving some Check to growing Impiety,
must needs prompt him to it; And he will consider that if he knowingly
contributes to the setting up of one who he believes will not answer these
Ends, he thereby derives a Share of the Guilt of all upon himself, and becomes
answerable for other Men's Sins, with all the sad Consequences of them. But,

Secondly, Whoever shall be chosen to serve God and his Country in so high a
Station, I must entreat him to suffer the Word of Exhortation, and to consider
the Motives that have already been suggested to a faithful discharge of his
Duty in doing all that he can, and that the Law empowers him to do, not only
toward the promoting of Right, and Justice, and Equity between Man and Man,
and the preventing of Oppression and Extortion; (which are crying Sins) but
also for the beating down all manner of Vice and Profaneness by a vigorous
putting the Laws in execution against them, and encouraging, (not
Brow-beating,) such as are willing to be helpful in so good a Work, and to give
Information against Offenders; This is a thing highly becoming every good
Magistrate, and no more than what is required of 'em by his Majesty's late
Proclamation for preventing and punishing Immorality and Profaneness. A Work it
is which he may justly delight and glory in: For it is such an Use of his
Authority as he may be sure will be acceptable to God, and approved of all Good
Men, which ought to be a Consideration sufficient to arm us against the unjust
Censures and Obloquy of others: It Is a Work highly necessary in such an Age as
this, when so great a Torrent of Licentiousness and Wickedness has unhappily
broken in upon us, and when the Overflowings of Ungodliness do so justly make
us afraid of heavy Judgments likely to ensue. But how proper and becoming, how
noble and honorable a thing is it for good Magistrates in such a Case to stand
in the Gap, and with Phineas, to execute Judgment upon notorious Offenders,
thereby to avert the Wrath of God, and to compel them by Force and Terror to
forbear the open Practice of their Impieties, whom Words and Persuasions,
Arguments drawn from Reason and Religion, will not work upon: For there are but
too many of those who have no Faith, no Principles left for a Preacher to work
on, but their Consciences are benumbed, and their Hearts hardened; And yet they
have their Senses still, and are capable of feeling the Hand of Justice, and
possibly might, some of them, be reclaimed thereby, were it well laid on.
However, that were the way to terrify others, and to make the Works of
Darkness to retire, at least, into Corners, and keep themselves within their
proper and native Obscurity, and not crawl out into the Light, or appear
Abroad, to spread their Contagion in the open Day. This is what will make the
Countenance of a Magistrate awful, and his Appearance terrible to the Workers
of Iniquity, but pleasant and delightful to those that love Righteousness. This
is the way to procure a Blessing from God, and a lengthening out of our
Tranquillity; and this I am sure will afford to him that does it, a far more
comfortable Reflection afterward than his making the greatest Worldly
Advantage; or, in short, than any thing else can do. But,

Thirdly, The same Motives which ought to prevail with Magistrates to set
themselves, and bend their whole Power and Authority against the Workers of
Iniquity of all sorts, should also persuade every one of us, as far as we have
Ability and Opportunity, to be aiding and assisting to them in so doing, and
especially to have a care how we weaken their Hands, or any ways hinder them in
their Endeavors to do so good and necessary a Work. There is no question but
if a good Magistrate sets himself in good earnest to the beating down of Vice
and Wickedness, and promoting a general Reformation of Manners, the Devil and
his Instruments will presently be very busy in opposing any such Design. They
will traduce and misrepresent it, and endeavor to raise some Scandal or other
upon all whom they find stirring and active in it. They will pretend to smell
out some Design of promoting a worldly Interest, or advancing a Faction, and
let Men carry themselves never so innocently and unblameably in the matter,
some Quarrel or other they will pick with them, or raise some Stories whereby
to disparage them, and to blast their Enterprise. But let us have a Care how we
rashly give ear to such Insinuations, how we take up, or spread any false
Reports of this kind, lest happly we be found Fighters against God. We cannot
but be sensible of the great need there is of Reformation, and therefore, I
think, the least we can do is to commend the Zeal of those that set themselves
to promote it, and to encourage them therein. It is good for us, the Apostle
says, Gal. 4.18.
to be zealously affected always in a good matter; and that I am sure none can
deny this to be. Let us have a care therefore how we pretend to enter into Men's
Thoughts, or to judge and censure their private Intentions, which are known
only to God and themselves. So long as the Work they do is a good Work, and the
Means they use no other than what are lawful, it cannot but be very ill done to
censure it, or endeavor to obstruct it, though there should sometimes (and
it is a great Wonder indeed if there never should) be a Mixture of some
Indiscretion in the Management of it.

For my part, I cannot but look on it as a very great and wonderful Mercy of
God to these Nations, if it shall please him to stir up, and to continue such a
Zeal as there seems at this time to be among many young Persons, and others,
for the promoting a Reformation of Manners; which may in due time, with the
help of good and faithful Magistrates, give a Check to all open Impiety and
Immorality, make the Laws against 'em useful, and reduce us by degrees to a
general Sobriety, and some Sense of Religion, which at present are so woefully
gone to decay. I am sure if this be not done, it must be said of us as it was
of the Romans by the Historian, Nec vitia nostra pati possumus nec Remedia, We
can neither hold up under the Weight of so much Vice and Corruption, nor yet
undergo the necessary trouble of being cured. And then certainly we must be
ripe for Destruction. But if we have any Love for our Country, any Care of our
Posterity, any Sense of God's Honor, or any regard to the Credit of that
Reformed Religion which we profess, it behooves us to be so far from hindering,
that we should rather be ready to do all that honestly and lawfully we can, to
prevent so great and imminent a Danger, by setting forwar'd to our power, a
general Reformation of Manners. But,

Fourthly and Lastly, The last thing that I told you we should be persuaded to
by the Doctrine that has been delivered, is that which is the Duty of every one
of us at all times, viz. To behave our selves so that a good Magistrate
faithfully discharging his Trust, may be no Terror, but a Joy and Comfort to
us. That the Apostle tells us will be the Case if we do our Duty as we ought to
do, Romans 13.3. -- Will thou then not be afraid of the Power? Do that which is
good and thou shall have praise of the same. For he is the Minister of God to
thee for good; but if thou do that which is evil, be afraid, for he bears not
the sword in vain. And indeed though Magistrates may often be too remiss in
punishing Men for their Faults, yet they are very bad ones indeed that will
punish them for doing well; That Is quite contrary to the design of their
Institution, and the very end of the Law, which the same Apostle tells us, was
not made for a righteous man, to coerce or punish him, 1 Timothy 1.9.
but for the ungodly and for sinners. And therefore unless it be by reason of
some great Mistakes in Religion, or the like, it does not often happen that Men
suffer from the Hand of the Magistrate for doing well. But where the Law is
good, and the Magistrate good, there is no fear of it. It is therefore the Duty
of all Christians to endeavor to live up so strictly to the Rules and Precepts
of Gods Law as to be above the Fear of Man's. And could we persuade all Men so
to do, the Magistrate would have an easy Task. For Facile est imperium in
bonos. Good Men are easily governed. And though it be Joy to a just Magistrate to
do Judgment upon Evildoers, when there is need of it, yet it is a much greater
Joy to have no Occasion; and they are much better and happier Times when Men
will do their Duty, and be good without it. Let us therefore be of that Number,
and so shall we escape that Destruction which is here threatened in the Text,
and will certainly come upon all obstinate and incorrigible Workers of Iniquity.

FINIS.

