THE CASE OF USURY Further Debated, In a Lettter to the Author of USURY STATED.

LONDON; Printed by J. D. for Jonathan Robinson at the Golden Lion in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1684.

The Case of Usury further debated.
SIR,
I Perceive by your Preface, that you do very well approve of a modest Inquiry
concerning making Gain of Loan, whether, and how far it may be lawful: which
being so requisite to diverse good Ends and Purposes you do instance in, I hope,
as I do not condemn your Design, so you will incline to judge as favorably of
mine, which is, That there may be yet some further Inquiry made into this
Subject.

You say, The Practice thereof has gotten an ill Name, and you think there is
ground enough to fear that there are diverse found no Strangers to the Practice,
who do it with a doubting Conscience, as not fully satisfied in the Lawfulness
of the thing practiced. In order to whose Satisfaction (as also for the
vindicating of many sober and conscientious Christians from the Aspersions they
lie under upon this score) you have called in the help of several modern
learned Writers, to make it appear that what you plead for, is neither so
strange nor uncouth as some would obtrude upon the Wold's belief, and that (as
the Roman Orator observed) it often comes to pass, that what was generally
counted disgraceful, may in time be found not to be so: which Observation you
mention again in Page 119, although it seems to imply a kind of tacit
Acknowledgment, that Usury has been generally accounted disgraceful heretofore.
But for my part I have no design to cast any disgrace upon it; I judge as
honorably of those who are for the lawfulness of it, as of those who are
against it. There are and have been eminent Men for Learning and Piety of both
Persuasions. I am as great an Enemy as your self can be to all kind of
Uncharitable Aspersions; and therefore shall not undertake the least Defense of
them; but do wish the late Author of The Usurer cast, and all those who either
write or discourse at that rate, would better examine their Zeal, and not
suffer it to break forth into such high and unaccountable Strains. Yea indeed I
think there was very great reason to let such Persons understand that they are
overhasty in passing such Judgment on their Brethren, who do only differ from
them in so disputable a matter. But forasmuch as it is doubtful to many, and
does yet remain still so to me, notwithstanding your Reply to the foresaid
Author, and the Animadversions adjoined, I conceive it will not be improper to
make an Attempt, whether there may not be some further Satisfaction given to it.

And in order hereunto, I shall first of all take notice, that in Page 2. you
cite the pious and learned Vines instancing in Usury, as that which is indeed
very doubtful whether it be manifestly a Sin or no: and hereupon I find in his
Treatise on the Lord's Supper, he concludes that this is not a sufficient
ground to debar any Person from the Communion of the Church. I am altogether of
the same Opinion; but if it be very doubtful whether it be a Sin or no, I think
it is the safest way not to meddle with it.

You cite Mr. Dixon (Page 5.) declaring his Opinion on Psalm. 15.5. That there
was a judicial dispensing with Commodity put upon the Jews in diverse Cases,
whereof this was one, that they should not take Usury of a Jew, but of other
Countrymen they might. They might indeed from a Stranger, Deuteronomy. 23.20. Unto a
Stranger thou may lend upon Usury: but it does not certainly follow from
thence, that we may lend upon Usury one to another. Those accursed Nations who
were devoted to Destruction, are called Strangers in the same Book of Deuteronomy. and
there are diverse Persons of great Eminency, if not the greater number of
Expositors, who understand that place to be meant of such Strangers only.
Arguments are offered on both hands, but they do not conclude certainly either
one way or the other. Since then there is no manifest Evidence that the word
Stranger in Deuteronomy. 23.20. takes in all others besides the Jews, a Man may have
reason to be afraid of meddling with Usury, notwithstanding all the
Probabilities produced for your Interpretation of that place. Yea this Opinion,
That the Law against Usury concerned the Jews only, whatever Probabilities it
has to plead for it, yet was not, I am apt to think, the Opinion of our late
Assembly of Divines (whom your self, I believe, bear a high regard to the
Memory of, whatever others say of them) for I find in their larger Catechism
they have reckoned in Usury among those other Sins forbidden in the 8th
Commandment, and they prove it from Psalm. 15.5. He that puts not out his
Money to Usury, etc. the very same Text which you observe to be the groundwork
of Mr. J's Discourse. But if it were granted that the word Stranger extends to
all others besides the Jews, yet how does it appear to be any more than a
Toleration, or a Permission of Fact, not of Right. And to this Construction the
Annotations commonly called, The Assemblies Annotations, do incline, as you may
see on Deuteronomy. 23.20. [unto a Stranger] This was permitted for a time, partly for
the Hardness of their Hearts, as Bills of Divorce. And in the same Volume of
Annotations on Psalm. 15.5. [He that puts not out his Money to Vsury] you have
these Words, To one that was a Stranger they might put Money to use, that was
permitted. What from hence may be gathered, or whether any thing at all to make
it lawful among Christians, those that have written of this Controversy at
large may be consulted. Thus you may see this matter is not put out of doubt so
plainly, as to encourage any one to build much upon it. I shall add hereunto,
that the Usury which God's Law condemned, does in the Original signify biting,
as all do grant: from whence, tho I do not plead that it certainly follows, yet
at least it may seem to some the more probable, that the Usury there forbidden
was an Oppression: and if so, that then it does concern us now.

As to the distinction between Interest and Usury, which you call a Nicety,
page 7. it may possibly seem so to you: but the distinction is solid and
rational enough in the Judgment of many worthy Casuists, the one being an
overplus for Money lent, (which Act of lending, they plead to be in its own
nature a liberal Act, and consequently that it is a perverting thereof to make
it mercenary) and the other for Money unduly detained against a Man's Will to
his Damage. You produce Grotius arguing against this Distinction thus, That
then it shall be lawful thus to covenant, unless you repay within three days,
you shall give so much for delay. But this I conceive will not invalidate the
Distinction; for they who condemn Usury, do say, If a Man do lend only for
three days in pretense to one with whom he intends to leave it longer, and
shall then take Profit for the Borrowers keeping of it all the rest of the time
beyond those three days, he does but trifle indeed, and impose on his own
Conscience, which is privy to what he did secretly mean and intend; and in so
doing he is as truly a Usurer as if there were no such pretense made.

As for the Definitions of Usury, which you represent as very various; some
placing it in exacting Gain, others in the Compact or Covenant, and he whom you
reply to in the Expectation, which you seem to wonder at most, Page 9. they do
all come much to one and the same, according to the common and usual Definition
of Usury, sc. pactum ex mutuo Lucrum, Covenanting for Gain upon the account of
Loan. Which Covenant may be either expressed or implied. And this latter way of
covenanting may help you to the meaning of those Words [ expected, or intended]
which you say you understand not, Page 11. as also the taking what is not
exacted, but only expected, whereat you seem greatly amused, Page 137. When
it is well known, and taken for granted by both Parties, that something over and
above the Money lent is expected or intended in consideration of the Loan, tho
it be not actually expressed, this is an implicit Covenant. Mr. Fenton
expresses this Distinction thus, There is mental and actual Usury; the first
consists only in the Intention of the Heart, for he that does not indent
either by Word or Deed, yet if any hope or expectation of Gain was to him a
Motive of lending, that Man in the Court of Conscience stands guilty of this
Sin before God; as he that locketh on a Woman to lust after her, commiteth
Adultery with her in his Heart. And so Mr. Wilson states it in these Words, As
the very desire and expectation of Gain for lending only, is mental and
intentional Usury; so the imposing, or by Covenant beforehand agreeing for
Increase above the Principal, is of the nature of actual Usury. After the same
manner Mr. Greenhill states it in his Exposition on Ezekiel. 18.8. and cites these
Words of St. Austin for it, Si plus quam dedisti expectas accipere, faenerator
es. 'Twould be almost endless to quote Authors to this purpose; I will
therefore instance but in one more, and that is the learned Ames, whom you have
your self referred to in diverse places of your Book; and it is somewhat strange
methinks that you should overlook the very Definition he gives of Usury, which
is, Lucrum ex mutuo quaesitum vi ipsius mutui: which word quaesitum he explains
thus, Quaesitum dicitur hoc lucrum, non Conventum; quia non tantum usura
realis, in qua pactum intercedit, sed and mentalis quae versatur in Intention
Lucrum ut debitum ex mutuo acquirendi, ista Descriptione contineatur. He tells
you also that those words, vi ipsius mutui, are added to distinguish Usury from
Interest. To this Head may be referred what you say, Page 133. when Mr. J.
pleads that the taking of a Gift for Loan is Usury, if the Gift were intended
or expected; you reply, Let Reason judge, where it is sinful to expect a Gift,
is it not sinful also to receive it? I do not see how it is at all contrary to
Reason, that a Man may warrantably receive what he ought not to expect. I lend
my Money freely, as a pure act of Love and Kindness, expecting nothing for the
Loan: If he that has borrowed it, will of his own Ingenuity and Gratitude, put
me upon receiving some Gift from him which I did not look for, the Case is
different from what it would have been, if I had looked for it, and from the
hopes thereof had been influenced to lend him this Money. And to this purpose I
shall observe to you what Ames has determined concerning Simony, which may
give some light to the present Case; Non est Simonia, quando ex mera
Gratitudine, sine ullo pacto expresso, vel tacito, direct vel indirecte,
aliquid datur. At intentio ipsa istiusmodi donationum aut receptionum, quamvis
in altera sola part consistat, est gradus quidam hujus peccati, atque adeo non
male vocatur Simonia Mentalis, and a nonnullis confidentialis, prout
distinguitur a conventionali and reali. You see then the learned Ames did judge
a Man may without the Guilt of Simony, receive what it would have been Simony
in him to expect. So they who hold it Usury to expect a Gift for Loan, count it
not so to receive it afterward if it come unexpected.

Adventuring is easily enough distinguishable from Usury, tho you seem very
loath to acknowledge it; and supposing the Consideration for it be moderate and
proportionable to the hazard, it has never I think been condemned by any
judicious and considering Person; being a Co-partnership with another that
adventures upon the like hazard with himself of the Ships miscarrying: If the
Ship be lost, all is lost. So say you, The Lenders Principal is lost if the
Debtor break. But is this the like hazard with the former? The hazard you
mention of the Person's breaking, is in this case of Adventure too, besides the
hazard of the Ship's return: for the Man who is entrusted with the Money that
is adventured, may break, and sometimes does. But the Profit received upon the
Ship's return is not in Consideration of that hazard of the Man's breaking, but
of the known hazard to which the Ship is exposed, and the proportionable
Returns the Ship is like to make if it comes home safe. There is some
Uncertainty in all worldly things: but they who lend upon Use, do take care to
secure their Money absolutely, either by having Land bound for it, or by some
collateral personal Security, or both. They may be sometimes mistaken when they
think it very sure, and there is no worldly thing whatever but is liable to
some Casualty. It may suffice to this purpose, that the Usurer means no other
than to place it in good and sufficient and sure Hands: 'Twere not free from
all Casualty, if he did choose to keep it in his own.

You say further, Page 17. or rather quote Rivet for it, That what is cited out
of Aristotle, Cicero, Plutarch, etc. against Usury, respects not so much what
is intrinsecal, as what is accidental, and commonly attends it. The like may be
said of the Expressions of the Fathers which are very bitter against Usury,
they had respect to that Usury which prevailed too much in all Ages against
Equity, Honesty, Charity and Faithfulness; as Chrysostom upon Matthew said,
There was nothing more cruel, nothing more shameful than the Usury of his Time:
but it follows not that they understood it of all Usury, etc. Did those learned
Men and Fathers there is themselves make any Distinction, and say, They meant what
they spoke of some Usurers only? If not, it is but according to the most usual
and ordinary way of Construction to understand them of Usury in common; and to
suppose the contrary, seems very precarious: And so does your following
Exposition of the Sayings of the Heathens that are so rigid against Usury, Page
18. You find, you say, in Seneca, a general Rule for the right understanding of
such like Passages, sc. Some things are commanded beyond measure, that they may
return to their proper and right measure, etc. And as often as there is little
Confidence in those things thou requirest, more must be enjoined than is
sufficient, that what is sufficient may be performed, etc. This general Rule
you have found out would do special Service, if it were applied to all those
Purposes to which it is applicable, as to this of Usury.

The next thing I shall observe to you is, your appealing to godly Perkins,
Page 26. and Page 203. Hear blessed Calvin, and let Grotius moderate between
us, Page 143. What if he that writes against Usury should say, I appeal to
godly Bolton, or hear blessed Bishop Jewel, or let Bishop Sanderson moderate
between us, would you take those to be Arbitrators in this case? And whereas
you add further, That you dare avouch such as having Wealth in their Coffers,
and there let it lie idle, having fair and honest Opportunities to bring the
same forth, are none of the best Members in the Commonwealth, Page 33. I know
no Man will gainsay you; you need not doubt of being positive in this. But in
another place, methinks your positive Conclusion may admit of some Demur. Sc.
Page 92. What Mr. J. says, etc. avails nothing; for upon Supposition that the
Law it self [ sc. against Usury] be not political and proper to the Jews, but
universal, and in its full force unto this day; I say, that Usury in Scripture
is forbidden only with respect to the Poor. I see you are resolved to carry the
Cause one way or other. If one Interpretation will not hold, this other shall.
But before I make any Reply to that, it may not be amiss to take notice of
those manifold Expositions you produce of that Text, Luke 6.35. Lend, hoping
for nothing again. First, that it may be understood of free giving: And to
strengthen this Opinion, you compare Psalm. 37.21. The Righteous shows Mercy,
and gives; with ver. 26. He is ever merciful, and lends: both which you
think to be one and the same, and that free giving is called lending, because
of the Retribution that God shall make unto those, who thus communicate their
Goods: for we learn from Prove. 19.17. that, He that gives to the Poor, lends
to the Lord. Secondly, Hoping for nothing again: i. e. tho you have little
reason to hope for the Principal, because of the Poverty of the Debtor, whose
Necessity may require that we lend to him, tho we have just cause to doubt he
will not be able to repay it: And by so doing, we shall exceed those Sinners
mentioned ver. 34. who lend to Sinners to receive as much again. Thirdly,
Hoping for nothing again: i. e. frustrating none that come to borrow, of that
hope which they have conceived of your Beneficence. Lend, and frustrate not the
hope of any. If any have need of Loan, be not so rigid toward them, as to cut
off all hope of a Benefit to be conferred, but rather show your selves forward
in lending. Fourthly, Hoping for nothing again: i. e. not hoping to receive the
like Kindness again, (...), aequalia, as suppose the having of the like Sum
lent to you another time. Fifthly, Hoping for nothing again: i. e. desparing
nothing, or not losing all manner of hope, viz. of a just Retribution from God,
if not from Man. Here are diverse Interpretations of this Text, and yet you
speak of passing by others. And indeed you have past by one as plausible as
most of those you have mentioned; and the Opinion too of an Expositor you have
in your Book quoted oftnest of all; which is, that our Savior shows with
what Affection and Disposition of Heart Men ought to lend, viz. Having respect
to the good of the Party borrowing, and not to the Restitution of the thing
lent. But how many Interpretations soever the Text is favorably capable of, as
you express it, Page 43. yet from hence it does appear, that those who
understand not this Text of expecting beyond the Principal, are not agreed
among themselves concerning the Sense of it, but of very various Minds what
Construction to make thereof. And yet I believe, put them all together, it will
be found that the greater number of Expositors who have written on this Text,
do go the other way, and do understand it of lending, without expectation of
any thing beyond the Principal in Consideration of the Loan. If it be probable
that these latter are mistaken, yet it does not certainly appear that they are
so: and possibly their understanding of that place does bid as fair as some of
the Glosses you have produced. But what if it should be granted that Usury is
not particularly condemned in the New Testament? May it not suffice, that it is
condemned by Moses and the Prophets, and the Book of Psalms? where do we find
false Weights and Measures, or Perjury particularly forbidden in the N. Test.?
If you say, false Weights and Measures are forbidden in the N. Test. under the
general name of Injustice; so it may be said that Usury is forbidden under the
general name of Uncharitableness, or Oppression: But diverse there are, who
believe this Text to have a particular respect to Usury. You add, Suppose it be
granted, that hoping for nothing again, respects the Use or Overplus, this may
be, and yet with Restriction to the Poor, even as, give to every Man that
asks of thee, ver. 30. must be restrained to such as are fit Objects of our
Alms; and why should not, Lend, hoping for nothing again, have its Restrictions
too? I answer, so it will admit of the like Restrictions with the former, and
yet be understood to condemn taking any Overplus for the Loan from any Person:
For no one pleads that we are bound to lend to all Persons that would borrow of
us whatever they have a mind to borrow, but only to such as we judge fit Objects
to lend unto; and whatever we do so lend, to lend the same freely, without
agreeing either directly, or indirectly, to receive back any thing again over
and above what we do lend.

As to what you wish, that some would take notice of another sort of Theft,
Page 52. It Is a Reflection remote and alien from the case in hand; for which
Reason I shall make no other Observation on it, than that I conceive, if what
is intimated be true, it had been however more candid and ingenuous to have
referred that to some private Admonition.

You say, Page 54. that Mr. J's Triumph which he makes from the Council of Nice
consisting of 318 holy Men, etc. amounts to no more than this, Whoever of the
Clergy for filthy Lucre sake exercises Usury, let him be deposed: And so you
pass on in your Discourse without any other Reply to it, as if this of the
Council of Nice had been scarce worth the mentioning.

But I am loath to be tedious, and therefore shall pass to the second Answer you
give, which is, that if the Law against Usury were not political and proper to
the Jews, then you say that it did forbid it only with respect to the Poor. In
some places indeed the Poor are mentioned: but in diverse other places, and the
greatest number too, there is no mention made of the Poor. The Reply you make
to this, for which you refer to Mr. Baxter's Directory, is, that where the
Prophets reprove the Sin of Usury, it is expressed without that Limitation of
the Poor, Partly because it supposes the meaning of the Law to be known, which
the Prophets did but apply; and partly because there was little or no lending
used among the Jews but to the needy, as an Act of Charity. The first Reason is
only a Conjecture, taking that for granted, which is the very matter in
dispute, sc. That it was generally known that the Prohibition of Usury was
limited to the Poor. And if this Conjecture be right, then it must follow that
it was lawful for one Jew to take use of another Jew that was rich; and then
your first Defense will fall to the ground. The second Reason may as strongly
be urged on the contrary part, viz. therefore the word Poor was added to
Brother in some Scriptures where Usury is condemned, because the Poor were the
Persons mostly concerned in borrowing: which you do grant your self in these
Words, Page 231. Mostly it was the poorer sort among the Jews that borrowed.
And you also quote Mr. Capel for it, saying, The Law does urge it most that it
be not done to the poor Jews, because the Jews were not wont to borrow, except
it were the poorer sort. And this Construction agrees well with other
Scriptures, particularly Deuteronomy. 24.14. Thou shall not oppress an hired Servant
that is poor and needy: 'Twill not follow that they might oppress others. And
Exodus 22.22, etc. Ye shall not afflict any Widow or Fatherless Child, etc. And
in the very next place it follows, If thou lend Money to any of my People that
is poor by thee, thou shall not be to him as an Usurer, neither shall thou lay
upon him Usury. 'Twill not follow that if they did lend Money to any of their
Brethren that were rich, they might lay Usury upon them. Yea, many who think
Usury lawful now, do grant that it was unlawful for the Jews to take Use of
their Brethren, tho they were rich. You produce Rivet, Page 94. Replying, that
in such Consequences there is a Dissimilitude, because Oppression and the like
are evil in themselves, as is clearly proved from other places; but it is not
evil in it self to take any Increase for Loan, but in some cases only, into
which the rich Man while such falls not. But how does it appear that Usury is
not evil in it self? He says so it is true, and makes that a Reason to
invalidate the former Consequences: but this is the thing under question, and
therefore I conceive not to be taken for granted in the Dispute concerning it.
It Is sufficient to the present purpose, that what is evil in it self, may be
spoken against with a Limitation annexed, tho the thing notwithstanding be evil
universally: even so, tho Usury be forbidden in some places with a Limitation
to the Poor, yet it will not follow from thence but it may be evil universally?
It Is an aggravation of any Oppression, if it be a poor Man that is oppressed;
as it was a more heinous Offense to take the poor Man's Lamb who had nothing
else save that one Ewe-Lamb which he had nourished up with his Children, than
to have taken one from a rich Man, who had many and could well spare it: but
the Aggravation of such an Oppression will not serve to justify any other of a
less degree. You plead very much in diverse places of your Book for the
Equitableness of some kind of Usury, and urge this, that the Use of Money is
worth Money, and as valuable as that for which we receive Rent. But if God have
forbidden the receiving Profit for Loan, which is the matter in question, it is
not sufficient for us to say that Loan is valuable. You grant that God has
forbidden us to take use of a poor Man, if we lend him a Sum of Money to serve
his Occasions, and yet my lending him this Sum of Money is as valuable in it
self as my lending the like Sum to a rich Man. Why may I not then (if our
Judgment concerning the Equitableness of the thing may serve) take Use of this
poor Man for that which is indeed as valuable? or why may I not take Profit of
him for the Loan of Money, if it be altogether as valuable, and it be no more
evil in it self (to take Use than to take Rent) as well as take Rent of him for
my House wherein he lives? What Injustice is there in the former more than in
the latter? You will possibly say, it is a breach of Charity to make a poor Man
pay Use for Loan, tho the Loan be valuable: But can you give me a reason why
Charity should oblige me to give him the Consideration for the Loan, more than
the Consideration for his dwelling in my House, both of them being equally
valuable, unless you produce this Divine Law against Usury? And if you do so,
then you must plead that it is in force now with respect to the Poor, and so
much of it is moral; but with respect to the Rich it is not in force, that
being judicial, (thus making it partly moral, and partly judicial) or that it
was never intended at all but only with respect to the Poor. But is not this a
very doubtful and uncertain way of concluding; and the rather, for that the
great Argument of Equity holds with respect to the Poor as well as the Rich? If
it be as equitable that a poor Man should pay me ten Shillings Rent for his
poor Dwelling, as that the rich Man (who is my Tenant also) should pay me ten
Pound Rent for his House, being of answerable value; why it is not as equitable
that the poor Man should pay me Use for five Pound, as that the rich Man should
pay me Use for five hundred? I may indeed incline rather to give the poor Man
his Use, and so I may to give him his House-Rent: but according to the strict
Rules of Justice and Equity, I see not the Difference; for the poor Man has as
valuable a Consideration for the Use he pays, as the rich Man has for the Use
that is paid by him; and the Consideration too is as valuable for the Use he
pays me, as for the Rent he pays me, the Loan of Money being in it self as
truly valuable as the letting of an House. From all which it appears, that we
are not in all Cases to bring God's Laws to our Measures, and that there is but
little Reason to build much upon either of these Conclusions, That the Law is
moral in one respect, and not in the other; or that it was primarily intended
only with respect to the Poor.

And now having showed, that these Limitations applied to those Scriptures that
condemn Usury, are not so satisfactory as to put this matter out of doubt, that
the Usury you pleaded for is lawful, I shall apply my self to those principal
Arguments before me, which you offer in defense of it. And those may be reduced
to these seven following, which I shall speak to in the order I set them down,
tho they be otherwise placed in your Book, according as Mr. J's Discourse gave
you occasion to offer them.

And the first is, That it is not biting, because the Borrower as well as the
Lender may be a Gainer by it. Secondly; That the Law of the Land is for it.
Thirdly; That a Man is not bound to lend his Stock freely to those who are as
rich or richer than himself. Fourthly; That many Holy and Learned Men have
judged it lawful. Fifthly; That it is necessary to the carrying on of Trade.
Sixthly; That it is but doing as you would be done by. Seventhly; That there
are diverse Cases, some of which you instance in, wherein it is hard to make it
appear that Usury is more biting than other ways of dealing, that are approved
of by those who condemn Usury. I shall reply to each of these in their order.
Your first Argument is commonly answered by diverse Instances which are given
of unwarrantable dealings, wherein yet both Parties are Gainers, among which I
shall only mention this one, sc. buying a Presentation. You answer to this,
that tho both Parties be Gainers thereby, yet the Church is a Loser: so it is
returned to your Argument; tho both Lender and Borrower may be Gainers, yet
those Customers who buy of those Men that borrow upon Use, are bitten; and that
they must pay the dearer for what they buy; other Tradesmen who have Moneys of
their own, being as willing generally to raise the Price too, and sell as dear
as they can. And for this reason they who have writ against Usury, conclude all
Usury to be biting; whether deservedly or no, I will not say; but this is most
plain in their Writings, that they will not admit this Distinction of a
moderate Usury and a biting Usury. And for this reason you might have spared
methinks what I find Page 134. Mr. J. answers those who plead that the
Expressions of the Fathers, and other Writers by him quoted against Usury, were
to be understood of griping Usury, that there was no such matter. You reply
upon him, Are they then to be understood of Usury that is not griping? we must
pardon his Memory having told us before once and again, that all Usury was
griping. Pray consider what kind of arguing this is. Was it not very obvious
that Mr. J. meant no more than this, that what the Fathers and those Writers he
quoted, condemned, was Usury considered without this Distinction of griping
Usury and moderate Usury? You indeed make this Distinction for them diverse
times, but they have made no such themselves. Dr. John Raynolds (than whom, as
one observes, the World hardly ever saw a better Man, and a better Scholar)
concluded this distinction of biting Usury, and not biting, (made use of, says
he, by some late Divines) to be but a mere flam. And to the like purpose, says
Mr. Greenkill in his Exposition on Ezekiel. 18.8. Let Men take heed how they
meddle with Usury, and trust to a Distinction of Man's Brain, making biting
Usury unlawful, and other Usury lawful; lest by this Distinction they get Money
in their Coffers, and lose their Souls at last. The same I find in the English
Annotations on Psalm. 15.5. The common distinction of biting and more moderate
Usury, has no ground at all in Scripture, etc. Much of your Discourse depends
upon this Distinction; whereas if there were any such intended in the Law, then
you must grant, I conceive, that 'twas only what you call biting Usury, that
was forbidden to the Jews, and not that which you call moderate Usury. And if
so, I would ask you this Question, Whether you think the Jews might practice
this kind of biting Usury toward all Strangers, that is to say, toward all
those that were not Jews? If you admit that, it must be considered how we are
to understand those Scriptures, in which God required the Jews to show Mercy
and Kindness to Strangers. Indeed by this Distinction you seem to hold the Jews
and us to be equally concerned in this Law and Command of God against Usury,
and consequently invalidate your first Defense, That this Law was political and
peculiar to the Jewish Nation. The word in the Original for Usury signifies
biting, because, says Junius, Usury biteth and consumes a Man and his
Substance. And so says Ainsworth, and I believe most others that treat of it.
But what a weak Foundation is this to ground such a Distinction upon, because
the word signifies biting, that therefore there is a twofold Usury, biting, and
not biting? Especially seeing not only Neshek, which signifies biting, but
Tarbith, which signifies Increase, is condemned, Levit. 25.36. and both
mentioned together, Take thou no Usury of him or Increase, but fear thy God.
And Ezekiel. 18.13. Has given forth upon Usury, and has taken Increase, shall he
then live? etc.

Your second Argument I find, Page 103. where you plead the Law on your side
for the the taking of Use, which Mr. J. supposing the Law to admit for the
avoiding of greater Evils, you seem to wonder at that much. Greater Evils! what
greater than the Damnation of Souls? I cannot believe it. Do you not believe
that the least Oppression (taking Oppression in that sense which all do allow
of) does deserve Damnation? and do you not also believe that some Oppressions
are greater than others? If it be an Oppression to require six Pound for the
Loan of an hundred, (which some do think it is) it is a greater Oppression in
the like Circumstances to require eight or ten. But as to this Argument of the
Law's being on your side, it will not be amiss to take a little notice of your
own way of expressing it, Page 104. Whereas the Law immediately preceding this
which is now in force, allowed eight in the hundred, this last Statute forbids
taking above six per Cent. Which Toleration is granted, says the Learned Coke,
that great Oracle of the Law, for the like reason that Divorce was tolerated
among the Jews. Our Law does not encourage the taking of any Use, or undertake
to justify it as warrantable in point of Conscience, but forbids taking more
than six per Gent. Yea, the very Act of the 13th of Q. Eliz. concerning Usury,
begins thus, Forasmuch as all Usury forbidden by God, is Sin and detestable,
etc. And in the Statute of Jac. 21. there is this Proviso, which you make reply
to, Page 109. Provided that no words in this Law contained, shall be construed
or expounded to allow the practice of Usury in point of Religion or Conscience.
And the Import of your Reply to it, I conceive to be this, That tho the Law do
not allow the practice of Usury in point of Religion or Conscience; it is
sufficient that it does allow it in civil Commerce; and that it appertained not
to a Civil Court, as the Parliament is, to determine whether a Man may practice
it in point of Conscience or no: To which you add, If the Civil Law forbids
Flesh in Lent, the use thereof at that time in point of Conscience remains
lawful as before. Pray consider how well you have followed your own Argument,
and whether to apply your way of managing it to the case in hand, the
Consequence of it must not be this, That although the Law allow the practice of
Usury in civil Commerce, the thing however in point of Conscience is the same
as it was before, notwithstanding what the Law says of it either one way or
other? And yet you seem to put a great Stress upon the Law in this matter of
Usury, as if Conscience might be influenced and satisfied thereby, and there
were no difference between Legitimum and Licitum: particularly, p. 105. Let it
be considered, forasmuch as Propriety receives its limitation and application
from humane Laws, whether any Man has not the same Right to Six per Cent. in
this Land, that lends his Money, as any one has to his Lands and Tenements, or
any Goods he enjoys, by virtue of the Laws. You may be pleased to remember that
the Question, Whether Gain covenanted for Loan be lawful or no? is not to be
understood whether it be lawful by Human, but by Divine Law. And you say with
reference to the Law which forbids Flesh in Lent, that the use thereof at that
time in point of Conscience remains lawful as before. What Obligation human
Laws have on the Conscience, needs not here to be disputed; for the Law does
not command any Man to take Use. But to return to your Instance. If the Law
forbidding Flesh in Lent don't alter that case in point of Conscience, how
comes it to pass that it should have such an Influence here in point of
Conscience? You say, Page 106. It appertains to these Laws to state and
appoint, as at what rate Gold and Silver shall be valuable, so also what rate
Money lent shall bear. I would grant what you say, if there had been no more
declared in Scripture concerning lending of Money, than there is at what rate
Gold and Silver shall be valued. What you quote Dr. Hammond for, Page 1^5.
respects another Case far different from this, sc. That Christ's Kingdom is not
of this World, that he came not to interpose in Secular Affairs (such as are
the Proprieties of Men) but disclaimed having any thing to do to be a Judge or
Divider among Men. Are there no Rules then and Laws in Scripture that concern
human Contracts? Does God's Word no where interpose in Secular Affairs, but
leave all to Man's Determination? Our Savior, while he was here, would not be
a Judge, but keep to his own Calling: does it thence follow that the Law of God
does not interpose in Secular Affairs? These Words of Dr. Hammond are applied
by him to confute those who do found all Propriety in Grace, so as to justify
all their Rapins and Invasions on the Estates of those whom they did look upon
to be wicked, depriving them of their most lawful Rights and Possessions merely
upon this pretense, because they were unholy; and laying claim thereto
themselves as being gracious Persons, and thereby priviledg'd to enter upon,
and take Possession of any carnal Man's Inheritance. How little does this agree
to the purpose you produce it for? And yet this same Argument you urge again,
Page 247. and would prove it by this of Dr. Hammond. Do you think that there
are not such Laws in some Countries, or that there may not be such a Law as
will allow of unjust Gain? I mean, such Gain as is forbidden by God's Word? And
will not such Gain remain sinful and unwarrantable still, notwithstanding any
human Law concerning it? If so, then this is no certain Rule, that a Man may
safely take all that the Law will permit him to take. Yea, Dr. Ames himself,
who holds Usury lawful, to which purpose you have quoted him in diverse places,
yet among his Cautions lays down this, That it is the safest Course for him
that puts out his Money, not to require all that he may by Law, but to keep
within that which the Law permits. And Bp Tailor, whose Authority you have made
use of, as a Favourer of your Cause, in his Ductor dubitantium, lib. 3. cap. 3.
page 571. on Quest. 5. Whether is to be obeyed, the Prince, or the Bishop, if
they happen to command contrary things? says, The latter is to be obeyed, in
case what the Civil Law enacts be only a Permission, and not a Sanction and
Command: As where the Ecclesiastical Laws forbid Marriage in a certain degree,
and the Civil Power permits it, then the Subject may more safely obey the Power
Ecclesiastical: for the Civil Power does not command to marry in a certain
degree. So it is in such things which are permitted for the Hardness of Men's
Hearts, or the public Necessity. The Permission of the Prince is no Absolution
from the Authority of the Church. Supposing Usury to be unlawful (as it is
certain many kinds and Instances of it are highly criminal) yet the Civil Laws
permit it, and the Church forbids it. In this case the Canons are to be
preferred; for tho it be permitted, yet by the Laws no Man is compelled to be
an Usurer, and therefore Men must pay that Reverence and Obedience which is
otherwise due to them that have the Rule over them in the conduct of their
Souls. And whereas you plead, Page 103. That you cannot be persuaded that Men
may take so much upon them as to tolerate or permit that which is in it self
unlawful, since 'twould be a virtual Dispensation for the breach of a Divine
Law; I shall not presume to offer my Thoughts in the Case; whether they do well
or no in tolerating it, is not that which I take to be the Question we are
principally concerned to inquire after, but whether we shall do well in
practicing it. However I shall give you the Opinion of this same great and
eminent Casuist in the same Book, Page 285. The Commonwealth may promise not to
punish Usury, tho of it self it were uncharitable, and consequently unlawful.
So that as for this Learned Bishop, tho he speak with much Moderation on this
Subject (and it is fit every one should be moderate in such disputable matters)
yet whosoever impartially weighs what he has written concerning it, will have
little Encouragement from thence to practice Usury. But I desire you yet
further to consider, If you hold only such a kind of Usury lawful, as your own
Authors you quote do allow of, you must condemn such Usury as is not qualified
with those Limitations and Restrictions that they lay down: but the Law of our
Land which you do urge in this matter, and plead for the warrantableness of
taking whatever it allows, does allow the taking of Usury even from the Poor,
and whether the Borrower gain any thing by it, or no, yea, tho he lose the
whole Principal; and consequently tolerates that which is condemned by your own
Authors. This Argument therefore from the Law will go further than you would
have it. If you say, Tho the Law will suffer a Man to require Use in such
Cases, yet however he is left to his own Conscience in it, he may choose whether
he will or no: So say I, he may choose whether he will take any Use at all or
no. The Law leaves him to his own liberty and choice in the one as well as the
other. Yea, it is the Opinion of Learned Men, that our Lawgivers were fain to
tolerate this thing, because they knew not well how to reform it. I shall say
no more at present concerning this Law of ours, save only this, that it may be
the less wondered at that there is such a Proviso in it, That no Words therein
contained shall be construed or expounded to allow the practice of Usury in
point of Religion or Conscience, not only because it is against the general
Current of Writers of all Professions, but also because it is contrary to the
Doctrine of our Church, which was then (as it is still) established by Law in
her Book of Homilies, where we have these Words, If the Merchant and worldly
Occupier knew that God is the giver of Riches, he would content himself with so
much as, by just means approved of God, he could get to his Living, and would
be no richer than Truth would suffer him, he would never procure his Gain and
ask his Go^ds at the Devils Hand. God forbid, ye will say, that any Man should
take his Riches of the Devil: Verily so many as increase themselves by Usury,
by Extortion, by Perjury, by Stealth, by Deceits and Craft, they have their
Goods of the Devil's Gift, etc. Hom. for Rogation-Week, 2d Part.

Your third Argument abovementioned is, That a Man is not bound to lend his
stock freely to those who are as rich or richer than himself. But this is very
easily to be answered, viz. that there are diverse other ways of laying out a
stock of Money, besides putting it to use; which is so obvious, that I do the
more wonder at what you write, Page 208. If in all Cases, and to all Persons we
are tied up to use Acts of pure Charity, there would be no room left for Acts
of Justice; such as buying and selling, for giving, and free lending would
swallow up all the former Acts. Did ever Mr. Bolton, whom you are now
answering, or Mr. Capel (whom you afterward bestow some Animadversions upon)
or any Person else that has written against Usury, lay down any such thing,
that we must give or lend away all our Money, so as there should be no room
left for buying or selling? And yet, which is more strange, you proceed to
offer Reasons against this, which I think no Person in the World ever said or
intended. Your first Reason is, If a Man were tied up to Acts of Charity,;and
were not free to use Acts of Justice in Contracts, then the Fountain of his
Charity would soon be drawn dry: for then he would be still laying out, but not
taking in; and no Man is able to satisfy the Cravings and Expectations of all
necessitous Persons, much less of all such as would borrow freely. It Is very
sure, and this one Reason is abundantly sufficient to prove what no body will
deny: But however you proceed to a second, which is, That Charity injoyns us
not to be cruel to our Selves or Relations; tho we are to be kind to others,
yet not so as to be unkind to our selves. Did ever any Man plead that we are
bound to lend all that we have to others, or so much as will disable us from
making such competent Provision as our Conditions and Relations do require?
Yea, instead hereof you bring in Mr. Capel himself, saying the same with you;
and 'twould be wonderful strange if he were not of your Mind in this thing. I
speak (says Mr. Capel) of such as are able, for we may not stretch beyond our
Staple, and spoil all. I must not make my self poor, to keep another from being
poor, etc. But I shall not proceed hereon any further to the exercise of your
Patience.

Your fourth Argument abovementioned, That many holy and learned Men have
judged it lawful, does fully convince me that there is great Reason to judge
charitably and honorably of those who are so persuaded: but it does not prove
the Lawfulness of it any more, than that there are many holy and learned Men
have judged it unlawful, does prove it therefore to be unlawful. And here it
may deserve Consideration, that the chief of those you have instanced in, tho
they are of Opinion that in some cases it may be lawful to receive Profit for
Loan (which cases are very rarely observed, and particularly those I shall
hereafter mention under this same Head) tho I say they hold it in some Cases
lawful, yet they are very tender therein, and express themselves rather to this
purpose, that they do not see the Unlawfulness of it, than aver confidently
that it is unquestionably lawful. I have already showed how little
Encouragement any Man can have to practice Usury, that shall impartially weigh
what Bp Tailor has written of it. As for Mr. Calvin, you produce him, Page
203. pleading, that if one Man delay and withold Payment beyond the time
appointed, to the hindrance of the other, the Party damnifi'd hereby may
lawfully be considered for it: and to the same purpose, Page 219. pleading the
Cause of the Lender thus; Behold, I depended upon him, he promised to pay me at
such a day, that time is past and I can get nothing from him, he cares not tho
I and my Family starve for Hunger; therefore in such Cases Justice ought to
remedy a Man. So then, if a Man be on this wise deceived, it is a clear case,
he may take Interest again, and not for this be accused before either God or
Men. How little is this in favor of Usury? Mr. J. whom you write against,
allows the same, and calls it by the name of Interest, which he distinguishes
from Usury; and so do others as well as he, tho you like not the Distinction.
Certainly a Man can take little Encouragement to practice Usury from any thing
that Calvin has written: yea, if I had never read any other Person on this
Subject, I should resolve rather to have nothing to do with it. They who fled,
or were banished in times of Persecution, carrying Stocks of Money with them,
and wanting Skill to employ it in strange places, did put it into the hands of
others to trade with it, who gave them some Allowance for the Use of their
Money. This was a Case somewhat extraordinary, and 'twas partly with a respect
to those Men, that some eminent Divines wrote so favorably of Usury, qualified
with such and such Limitations as they have laid down. And so did Calvin, tho
he says it were to be wished that all Usury, yea the very name of it, were
banished out of the World; and that he desired nothing more than never to have
any further occasion offered him to meddle with that Subject; which I shall
give you in his own Words, Optandum quidem esset omnes Vsuras, ipsumque adeo
nomen e Mundo jampridem exulasse, ut nihil magis exoptem quam ut mihi
necessitas non sit Argumentum istud deinceps attingere. And in his Harmony upon
the Pentateuch, Certe minime videtur licitum Filiis Dei, quod propha^i quoque
Homines detestati si^nt: Simus ubique and semper exosum and infame fuisse
faerneratorum nomen. And again, Faenus quidem exercere, cum inter pudendos and
turpes quaes4us duxerint prophani Scriptores, multo minus tolerabile est inter
Filios Dei. And after he had spoken in defense of some kind of Usury qualified
according to his Rules and Restrictions, he adds these Words, Noto quidem meo
patrocinio usuras fovere, atque utinam nomen ipsum abolitum esset e Mundo. And
in another place, after he had discoursed on this Subject, he concludes thus,
Sed tenendum semper est, vix fieri posse, ut qui faenus accipit non gravet
Fratrem suum: and ideo optandum est nomen ipsum tam Faenoris quam Vsurae
sepultum esse and deletum ex hominum memoria.

Dr. Hammond you have frequently quoted, and particularly his Practical
Catechism: and yet he there says, that the business of Usury is not so clearly
stated in the New Testament, or in the Old, as that he can set strict and
certain Laws to a Man's Actions from thence. He does indeed rather incline to
think it lawful with this Caution among others, That he who lends, be (as far
as morally he can be) sure that he who pays him this Use, be able to do it
without eating out, or hurting himself, but that he makes greater Gain of it
himself; and if either by mis-adventure, or by his own neglects it be
otherwise, it is the safest course to forbear the Interest; and that in matters
of this nature it is his Duty to take the safest. Now, says he, if a Man think
himself obliged so to do, 'twill make him the more circumspect in examining the
Condition of the Person of whom he adventures to take Use, etc. And afterward,
In all this, says he, you must not think that I am so positive as in other
things I have been, etc. And I find in the Life of Dr. Hammond, put forth by
the Right Reverend Bishop of Oxford, this observed concerning him, The taking
of Use, tho he judged it lawful, yet never approved by Practice, but lent still
gratis both to Friends and Strangers. Since then that Dr. Hammond offers such a
Caution; and not he only, but Calvin too, who says further, that the Borrower's
Gain must be so much more at the least as the Interest he pays, together with
other Qualifications laid down by them and diverse others; and particularly that
of Zanchy and and Bucer, who held, That the Lender ought to share in the loss
of the Principal, if it did happen to miscarry in the Borrowers hands, viz.
that this must be their private purpose and intent tho it be not expressed; and
that forementioned one of Ames, not to require all that a Man may by Law, but
to keep within that which the Law permits; let it be considered whether a Man
had not as good never meddle with it at all, as adventure upon that which the
Principal of those who have written in defense of it, prescribe not only these
abovementioned, but diverse other Limitations and Cautions about, wherewith they
apprehend it needful to qualify and tempes it to make it passable. And it may
not be amiss to consider further, whether such as plead these Men's Authorities,
do observe the Cautions which are prescribed by them. To all this I shall add
these words of Bishop Hall in his Practical Cases of Conscience, All Usury,
which is an absolute Contract for the mere Loan of Money, is unlawful, both by
Law natural and positive, both divine and humane. And Grotius himself, whom you
have quoted oftnest of any other Author, in the beginning of his Discourse
about it, makes this Profession, Hac de re acturus illud primum praefabor,
probare me eorum Pietatem, qui totum hoc luerandi genus sublatum vellent e
rebus humanis, quando multa inde mala nasci manifestissimum est. I have thought
it the more advisable to be thus large in my Reply to this fourth Argument of
yours, because there are diverse I believe encouraged by the Authorities of such
eminent Persons, not only to allow themselves freely in what they have written
so nicely and tenderly of, but also to go beyond in several respects what these
(and diverse others who might be instanced in) have been careful to prescribe in
their respective Discourses on this Subject.

Your fifth Argument for Usury, is the Necessity of it to the carrying on of
Trade. But this, tho so strongly urged, does not so plainly appear. Tradesmen,
if they did see it good, might take other measures, and yet find their Trade go
on prosperously enough notwithstanding. It does happen so indeed (but I can see
little reason for it) that they who write for the Lawfulness of Usury, are
counted the greater Friends to the trading part of the Nation: And this is one
great Hinge you lay your Discourse upon, as if Usury were the very Pillar and
Basis of Trade, without which it would fall to the ground. Did not the Romans
flourish hundreds of Years before Usury was practiced among them (as one
observes)? and the Jews did flourish in Wealth (none more) without any
Toleration of Usury. Tradesmen have been so far concerned this way, that they
do not generally desire to hear any thing spoken against it: they have received
considerable Increase by this way of dealing, and this darling Notion of the
Necessity of it to Trade, is that they are willing to take some Satisfaction
from; tho there are some Tradesmen on the other hand had better never have
known what Usury meant. But there is no great need of disputing this one way or
other, Whether Usury be a furtherance to Trade or no. If God's Word condemn it,
it is no Man's Interest to practice it, and a weak Argument to say that Trade is
advantaged thereby: if God's Word do not condemn it, then let it be freely
practiced to all intents and purposes for which it can be rendered serviceable.
And that must be the issue of this Dispute, and not whether Trading be bettered
by it or no. Only I wish it without any prejudice and impartially considered,
whether they who are not satisfied in the lawfulness of Usury, may not be
(whatever can evidently appear to the contrary) as great Friends to Trade, as
the chiefest of those who have written for the lawfulness of it. I shall
conclude my Answer to this Argument with the words of that great and known
Casuist, Bishop Sanderson, in his Sermon on 1 Cor. 7.24. It were not possible
Usurers should be so bitterly inveighed against by sober Heathen Writers, so
severely censured by the Civil and Canon Laws, so uniformly condemned by godly
Fathers and Councils, so universally hated by all Men of all sorts, and in all
Ages and Countries, as Histories and Experience manifest they ever have been
and are, if their Practice and Calling had been any way profitable, and not
indeed every way hurtful and incommodious, both to private Men and public
Societies.

Your sixth Argument is, That it is but doing as you would be done by. And yet
you grant, Page 98. That he who lends to another, if he were to borrow himself,
would not be willing by an absolute and free will to pay Interest; for, say
you, If any would so far be-friend the Borrower, as to lend him gratis, this is
of the two more eligible, for which you produce, Quis nisi mentis inops, etc.
But this in my Apprehension does not well agree with that Argument you are now
treating of; and I should think whatever may be said of others, yet at least
such as are of your Opinion in this matter, will do well to lend freely what
they lend, because they would like it well to have others lend freely to them.
But the meaning of that great Law, Whatever we would that others should do unto
us, we are to do the same unto them, must be understood in such cases wherein
we are rightly informed, (and so the doubt remains still in a great measure
unsatisfied) otherwise I can instance wherein a Man will do very ill in doing
to another what yet he may be too well contented another should do to him.
Besides, Partiality may make me think that very reasonable, when I am on the
lending hand, which would not seem so to me if I were to borrow: and it seems
you by your good will would have others lend you freely, in case they could
persuade themselves to be so kind.

Your seventh Argument is, That there are diverse cases wherein it is hard to
make it appear that Usury is more biting than other ways of dealing, that are
approved of by those who condemn Usury. You give diverse Instances to this
purpose which are very proper and pertinent; but there is one of the Instances
you have produced that I do not see any Cogency in; which is, of a Man that
borrows upon Use a Sum of Money to purchase an Estate of Land, on which there
is Timber enough to enable this Purchaser to pay back the whole Sum again; for
here the Price paid for the Land is not a valuable Consideration; and this kind
of arguing would serve to justify the receiving more for the Loan of Money (and
yet the Borrower not be bitten) than I believe the most biting and oppressive
Usurer in the World did ever receive. It Is fit every Man that purchases Land,
should pay a Price in some good measure answerable to the real value of the
Land, and of the Timber too that is upon it: and if so, he that borrows Money
upon Use to purchase Land, may in a short time see cause to repent his Bargain.
But there are Cases, I confess, in which it is difficult to find out how Usury
should be more biting then some other ways of dealing that are allowed of on
all hands; with reference to which Cases, I shall offer these two things to
your Consideration. First, Whether the like cases might not have been pleaded
by a Jew that should have practiced Usury with his Brethren? And yet the chief
of those Authors you produce in favor of it now, do hold that it was unlawful
to the Jews. Secondly, Whether the Wit of Man may not find out diverse subtle
Arguments, and propound Cases very specious and plausible in defense of that,
which yet notwithstanding is not justifiable in it self? Yea, in Mathematical
Sciences (tho in them there be the plainest Demonstration) are Arguments
produced pro and con, which are to our Apprehensions undeniable on both sides.
But if God's Law forbid it (which is that I regard more than all Arguments from
other Topics) to what purpose is it for us to urge, that there are Cases may
be thought on, wherein we are not able to see the Iniquity of it? Neither can
you easily see wherein it is inconsistent with Equity (as I have intimated
before) to take Use of a poor Man for Loan of Money, any more than to take Rent
for his House; and yet you do not seem to like that your self, to take Use of a
poor Man. We can see but a little way, and are not to make our Apprehensions a
measure for Divine Laws. We shall be guilty of assuming too much to our own
weak and shallow Apprehensions, if we would endeavor to bring all things to
their Standard. Man's Wit is set on work (says a learned and judicious Writer)
to spin out fine and subtle Cases of Usury wherein no wrong shall appear. It Is
an easy matter to cast a Stone into a Pool, which seven wise Men will hardly
get out: and one such Case will beget many Cases like unto it self, for the Wit
of Man will work like a Mole to get into the Earth. To which I shall subjoyn
the Opinion of a worthy Person I lately discoursed with on this Subject, That
God has given this Law against Usury on purpose to try Men's Obedience: he
allows them other ways of dealing as advantageous as Usury, but this way, he
says, they shall not make use of; and does it to try their Obedience, and to
see whether they will be governed by him therein or no.

What you urge in behalf of Widows and Orphans, which I know is generally
pleaded, does not (that I can see) signify very much to the deciding of this
Controversy. Doubtless God had a tender regard to them, beyond what the most
compassionate Men in the World can have, put them altogether, and we find does
take a particular care of them; but yet he has no where excepted them as to
this matter. And to what purpose is it for us to interpose where God's Word is
silent? The greater care God has himself been pleased to express concerning
them is an Argument to trust God the rather, and to depend the more on his
Providence. And I believe it may puzzle any Man to give any satisfactory Reason
to the contrary, but that Widows and Orphans may be as well provided for now
without Usury, as they were among the Jews, or other Nations where Usury has
been strictly prohibited. The Question is, Whether Usury be forbidden us or no,
by God's Law? If it be not, then it is lawful for others, as well as Orphans and
Widows: if it be, it is as unlawful for them as others, there being no exception
at all in God's Word concerning them, with reference to this matter.

And thus you may possibly see your Arguments are not altogether so strong as I
believe you took them to be, when you speak so slightly of what has been urged
to the contrary by Bp Jewel, Page 113. But what speak I (says Bp Jewel) of the
ancient Fathers? there was never any Religion, nor Sect, nor State, nor Degree,
nor Profession of Men, but they have misliked it. You reply, And that
deservedly too, if this be meant of oppressive Usury, otherwise none is bound
to believe him, and it is hard to prove the truth of it. Somewhat like to this
is the Reply you give to Bishop Hall. Nature teaches, says Bishop Hall, that
Metals are not capable of Superfetation. You reply, If they be capable of
Fetation, it is enough; and when the Barrenness of Metals is pleaded, I may
safely think it is not meant of Metals in the Mine, for there they receive a
natural Increase, at least by Apposition. So where Ainsworth cites Maimonides,
the learned Rabbi, discoursing with some Strictness against Usury, p. 218. you
comment thus upon him, Strange it is that Eagles should thus catch Flies, and
great Rabbis learnedly discourse of Trifles. And yet I find the learned Ames,
who I think of all Men has pleaded the Cause of Usury best, discoursing as
critically, or nicely (if you will call it so) concerning Simony, where he
says, Hinc munus Simoniacum non inepte dividitur in munus a manu, munus a
lingua, and munus ab obsequio, etc. To which I shall refer you.

The next thing I shall take notice of, is the Exposition you give of what we
read in Nehem. 5. concerning Usury, where you say, that it seems to you not an
improbable Conjecture that the hundredth part of the Money, etc. v. 11. is not
to be understood of Usury, but that proportion which the Officers and Rulers
did for their Service exact from the common people. If you make the best of
this, it is but a Conjecture: and I conceive, 'twould be almost endless to show
how different it is from the main stream and current of Expositors. I shall only
mention two, which you have had recourse to your self, and therefore may weigh
more with you than others. The first is Diodat, who says, The hundredth part was
a Tax of Usury at one in the hundred by the Month. The other is the
Annotations, commonly called the Assemblies, in which some parts of the
Scripture are excellently well handled, and others as meanly, but I think 'twas
Dr. Gouge that was appointed to be the Commentator on this Book of Nehemiah;
and he was a very worthy Expositor, as appears by his solid and accurate
Exposition on the Epistle to the Hebrews, who says on this Text, The meaning
is, that they should restore all that they had taken upon Use, for they used to
take the hundredth part of what they lent every Month. That which they had thus
received for Interest, they were to restore again, and that in kind, whether it
were Money, or any other Commodity; for these four, Money, Corn, Wine, Oil, are
put for all manner of Commodities that were given for Interest. Your arguing
from ver. 10. is less plausible than your former Conjecture. What if he meant
not that he and his Brethren in Government might exact Usury of the People,
(which it is not likely he did intend) was it not proper enough for him however
to plead with them thus, If I, and my Brethren in Command with me, do not exact
that Tribute and Custom that is due to us for the Support and Maintenance of
the Government, much more should you forbear exacting such Usury as you do
require? And tho this case were extraordinary (which is another Answer you
give) 'twill not follow that those Usurers might exact in like manner at other
times. This Usury might be oppressive at all times, tho at this time it was the
more grievous by reason of the present Straits the People were under.

There Is is another thing you propose to Consideration, Page 86. which you find
in a learned Writer, whose Words you render into English thus: Hitherto may be
referred, that it is very probable from that Parable of the Talents, Mat.
25.27. not only that there was some Usury of Money Changers in common use
amongst the Jews, but also that it was not disallowed of our Lord: because
under that Similitude he requires a Spiritual Office without the least hint of
any Disallowance, the which he was wont to use in other Parables, which
illustrated Duty from disallowed Customs, as Luke 16.8.

The Argument for Usury from what our Savior says in that place, Mat. 25.27.
Thou ought therefore to have put my Money to the Exchangers, and then at my
coming I should have received mine own with Usury; has been thought to be more
properly confuted than confirmed by the comparing of this with that other Text,
Luke 16.8. And the Lord commended the unjust Steward, because he had done
wisely: for the Children of this World are in their Generation wiser than the
Children of Light; the unjust Steward being rather commended in this Text than
condemned. But if the unjust Steward's Practice be here brought in with an hint
of Disallowance, there is another Instance of the like nature where there is
not the least hint of any Disallowance at all; and that is, where our Savior
compares his coming, to a Thief in the Night. Whether Dancing, and such kind of
Races as were used in the Olympic Games, be lawful Exercises or no, I shall
not here enter into any dispute about: but, according to this way of arguing,
the Disputes that have been with reference to either of them, may soon be
resolved, for there is not the least hint of any Disallowance where mention is
made of them in Scripture, Mat. 11.17. We have piped unto you, and ye have not
danced: and 1 Cor 9.24. They that run in a Race. run all, but one receives the
Prize. We must not strain Similitudes to make every Particular agree, as a
Commentator observes on that place of St. Luke. In such Parabolical Discourses
the main drift of them is what we are to attend unto; and not apprehend that
every thing mentioned in them, without a particular Expression of Disallowance,
is approved of. As for the Money Changers, I do not deny but they were Usurers:
that seems plain enough from the Text; and there is an ingenious Writer
observes this to be the constant Signification of the word Trapezitae, or
Tablemen, in profane Authors: but he makes his Observation to a different
purpose, and urges our Savior's calling them a Company of Thieves, as an
Argument against Usury, on Mat. 21.12, 13. If we look well, says he, into our
Savior's Behavior in this Act, we shall find that as by his overthrowing
their Tables, and thrusting them out, he chastized their Profaneness; so by
his verbal Reproof, he taxes their very Employment, calling them a Company of
Thieves, Ye have made it a Den of Thieves. This [Ye] cannot be meant of the
Buyers and Sellers: Buying and Selling is a very warantable thing, especially
sure when it relates to the Service of God, as theirs did. Besides, Christ gave
them their Lesson by themselves, as St. John tells us, John 2.16. Make not my
Fathers House an House of Merchandise. It remains then that the [Ye] must be
directed to the Usurers, whom he ranks among Thieves. And this Writer concludes
this Observation thus, If any body has a Mind to salve the matter, and say,
Perhaps they were not honest Usurers, I am of the same Mind, and so at last we
are unawares agreed. You confess you see not the Cogency of the Argument you
have quoted; and I will grant you that I see not the Cogency of this; and so
let one go against the other.

But I am as little satisfied in your own way of reasoning, Page 160. where you
argue thus; It Is beyond dispute that there is too much Oppression to be found
in the Land; but whether moderate Gain for Loan be such, he knows is in dispute
between learned, pious, and good Men; and I think a Man may hold either side of
the Question, and his Salvation be little concerned in it: only I shall say,
the practice thereof on the one hand is of great Consequence to the Nation we
live in, as well as to the Estates of many single Persons; and the peremptory
condemning of all that use it, is of dangerous Consequence on the other hand,
upon Supposals that it be false. You plead elsewhere, That things may be
weighed on both sides with equal Balances. Now pray consider whether this
matter you have now in Deliberation, be not to be balanced more equally thus;
Whether all covenanted Gain for Loan be sinful, is in dispute between learned,
pious, and good Men: therefore as the peremptory condemning of it is of
dangerous Consequence, on the one hand, upon supposal that it be lawful; so the
general practice of it is of dangerous Consequence on the other hand, upon
supposal that it be sinful. Especially since you do elsewhere, sc. Page 241.
implicitly acknowledge it not clearly stated in the Word, and that which
continues disputable between good and learned Men. Which gives me occasion to
desire there might be some more satisfactory Answer given to this Query of your
own, mentioned, Page 1.128. Is it not most advisable, where there are two
ways, the one doubtful and dangerous, the other not, to choose the safest? I
say, I could heartily wish this Query might be more satisfactorily answered by
some Person or other with reference to this present Subject. It Is very
doubtful, says Mr. Vines (as you quote him, Page 2.) whether Usury be a Sin or
no. You say, Page 160. It Is in dispute between learned, pious, and good Men,
and do implicitly confess, Page 241. That it is not clearly stated in the Word
of God: it is condemned by General Councils, by the Greek and Latin Fathers, by
the Canon and the Civil Law: it is condemned both by the Established Doctrine of
the Church of England in the Book of Homilies, and by the late Assembly of
Divines in their Catechism, as also in the English Annotations, published by
some Divines of that Assembly thereunto appointed. Yea, and Rivet himself (who
has so often answered for you) does yet confess that all the Canonists and
Schoolmen on this Question as also diverse learned and orthodox Men who follow
them (particularly he instanceth in Bishop Jewel Dr. Wilson, and Bishop
Andrews) do condemn all kind of Usury whatsoever. I say then, considering all
this, does not he take the safest course, who imploys his Money some such way
(whereof there is sufficient choice and variety) as is concluded on all hands
to be lawful and warrantable? He who has a Portion lest him in Money, is not
necessitated (as your Discourse seems to imply) to one of these two, either to
lend it out upon Use, or to lend it freely: there are many other ways for him
to dispose of it to very good and reasonable Advantage; whereas such as allow
themselves in this practice of Usury, are greatly concerned to see it clearly
made out, that this Prohibition of it in God's Word does not concern them;
there being, so long as this remains doubtful, so great a Danger and Adventure
on the one hand, as is sufficient to weigh down the most plausible Conjectures
that can be offered on the other. The Testimonies you produce in favor of
Usury, are of such Men for the most part, as have written very tenderly of it;
tho they are inclined to believe that it may be lawful, yet it is only in some
Cases, and with certain Cautions and Limitations: but on the other hand, how
many are there that do hold it very disputable and doubtful, tho they will not
peremptorily conclude it to be sinful; and others that do judge it absolutely
sinful? Bishop Sanderson is generally acknowledged one of the most able,
accurate and judicious Writers that have ever written in matters of Conscience;
and he in his Sermon on 1 Cor. 7.24. after he says, that most of the Learned
have concluded Usury simply unlawful, has these words, I should be very tender
to condemn any thing as simply unlawful, which any, even imaginary Conjuncture
of Circumstances would render lawful; and would choose rather by an over-liberal
Charity to cover a multitude of Sins, than by a too superstitious Restraint
make one. Yet the Texts of Scripture are so express, and the Grounds of Reason
so strong against all Usury, that when I weigh these on the one side, and on
the other side, how nothing all that is which I ever yet saw or heard alleged
to the contrary, I cannot find in my self Charity enough to absolve any kind of
Usury, with what Cautions or Circumstances soever qualified, from being a Sin.

As for these many Scruples, you say, that Mr. J. has occasioned by his
Doctrine in tender Consciences, I have these three Considerations to offer in
Reply thereunto.

First; That it is not only Mr. J's Doctrine, but that which is delivered by so
many and so able Writers, as may sufficiently warrant a Man's choosing rather to
employ his Money some other way. In dubiis tutior pars eligenda.

Secondly; Tho a Man ought to watch against Scrupulosity, as a very troublesome
vexatious Distemper, which may also prove a great Snare to him, and use his
best Endeavors in all matters that concern him to inform his Conscience
aright; yet of the two Extremes, a Man is less endangered by this. To which
purpose our late able, learned, religious Judge Hales has expressed himself thus,
in that excellent Discourse of his, called The great Audit, I have more
trembled under the Fear of a seared than a scrupulous Conscience; because I
always counted the latter, tho more troublesome, yet more safe. I have chosen
rather to forbear that which seemed but indifferent, lest there should be some
thing in it that might be unlawful; and would rather gratify my Conscience with
being too scrupulous, then flat it by being too adventurous. I have still
chosen rather to forbear what might be probably lawful, than to do that which
might be possibly unlawful; because I could not err in the former, I might in
the latter. If things were disputable whether they might be done, I rather
chose to forbear, because the Lawfulness of my Forbearance was unquestionable.

Thirdly; They who are encouraged to practice Usury by such Arguments as you
have pleaded in defense thereof, if ever they come afterward to doubt of it,
will find greater Perplexity than those who scruple at it first of all (if it
be a Scruple) and for that Reason forbear it altother. Mr. Baxter I know allows
of some kind of Usury, and you have urged his Authority for it among others:
But what he writes in reference to any doubtful way of Usury, I shall here
apply to Usury in general, which I think may without any breach of Modesty or
Charity be said to be doubtful, and for my part, I will not say it is sinful; in
his Directions about Restitution and Satisfaction, where his second Direction
is this, Do nothing that is doubtful if you can avoid it, lest it should put
you upon the trouble of Restitution: As in case of any doubtful way of Usury or
other Gain, consider that if it should hereafter appear to you to be unlawful,
and so you be obliged to Restitution (tho you thought it lawful at the taking
of it) what a Snare then would you be in when all that Use must be repayed? I
think such as Mr. J. are not the only Persons who may be said to be the Causes
of Perplexities about this matter to Men's Consciences; but such also as do
encourage them to this way of dealing, which they are not able clearly to
justify. Men are generally desirous of Gain, and will be nibbling even at
hazardous and doubtful ways of compassing it; ready in the first place to catch
at any Arguments that may serve in some sort to countenance the Practice of
what they have a Mind to: And then some time afterward, upon one occasion or
other, the Consciences of some of them smite them for it, and will not suffer
them quietly to keep what they have gotten this way. And they who were
satisfied before by the least Argument, are not now quieted with all the
Reasons and Arguments that are offered them to justify what they have done, but
do wish they had never been so imbolden'd to it by those whose Conduct they
formerly thought they might very safely follow. I am very sensible how ill an
Office it is to create any unnecessary Perplexities to the Consciences of Men;
and that there is scarce any thing of a more perplexing nature, than the matter
of Restitution in doubtful Cafes, to such as cannot tell how to quiet
themselves as they ought to do by reason of the Predominancy of their Fears.
For my own part, I dare not say that Usury is sinful, and that what has been
gotten that way ought in good Conscience to be restored. I should be very loath,
in so doubtful a Case, to charge any Person with an Obligation of Restitution;
for notwithstanding all that I have said in Answer to your Arguments, I have
seen so much that has been pleaded in defense of the Lawfulness of Usury, as
would make me very loath to put any Man upon restoring what he has received
this way. It Is a known Maxim, Melior est conditio possidentis; and I see no
sufficient Reason to move any Person to Restitution in this case, tho he be not
altogether so well satisfied in what he has as he would desire, if it do not
appear to him to have been unlawful Gain. But this is the Issue I am willing to
bring this Dispute unto, whether in reference to the time to come (for I would
rather look forward in such uncertain and doubtful matters than backward) I
say, whether for the future any Man that considers what has been
beforementioned, will not act more advisedly in having nothing to do with this
way of dealing. And the rather, because tho he boggle not at it now, yet his
Conscience may hereafter sit more uneasy than he thinks of at present, if he
do adventure on it upon such uncertain Resolutions, as those are which I have
above taken notice of. One says Usury was forbidden only to the Poor. Another
says, 'twas forbidden to the Poor and Rich that were Jews, but only to the Jews
among themselves. A third says, 'twas not all kind of Usury that was forbidden
to any, but only biting Usury. And the Resolutions are as uncertain how to
understand when it is biting, and when it is not biting. One says, it is not
biting if it do not exceed what the Law of the Land allows; and yet the Law it
self says, that nothing therein contained shall be construed or expounded to
allow of the practice of Usury in point of Religion or Conscience. Another
says, it is the safest course for him that puts out his Money, not to require
all that he may by Law, but to keep within that which the Law permits. A third
says, He that lends his Money, should be (as far as morally he can be) sure
that he who pays him this Use, be able to do it without eating out, or hurting
himself, but that he makes greater gain of it himself: and if either by
misadventure, or by his own neglect, it be otherwise, it is the safest course to
forbear the Interest, and that in matters of this nature it is his duty to take
the safest. A fourth says, The Borrower's Gain must be so much more at least as
the Interest he pays. A fifth says, The Lender must purpose and intend
privately with himself to share in the loss of the Principal, if it happen to
miscarry in the Borrowers hands. We see, they who had a mind to say something
in desence of some kind of Usury, have made such Parings and Mincings of it,
that a Man will do better, I should think, in all respects to let it alone
altogether. And if any Person will undertake to make it appear that this is not
a Man's wisest way, and that he shall not by so doing consult the Ease and
Quiet of his Conscience best; I shall be very glad to see any thing more
rationally pleaded by him, than what I have offered; for I wish nothing more in
this matter than the clear Determination of it, which way soever it shall fall.

And now, Sir, I think it high time to draw to a Conclusion. The like
Consideration that inclined you to animadvert with so much Freedom on the
Writings of others, may excuse me to you for making these Observations on your
own. I am altogether an Enemy to that Censoriousness you write against, being
willing to join heartily with you therein; and desire, in all humble and deep
Sense of my own weak and slender Apprehensions, to esteem and honor all good
People whatsoever, whether they be of the same Persuasion with my self or no,
either in this or any other matter. For which Reason I may with the greater
Assurance desire of you the like measure again, who am

Yours, etc.

FINIS.

