THE CASE OF THE Poor French Refugees.
THEY humbly show, That they were graciously invited into this Kingdom, both by
King Charles II's Declaration, bearing date July 28, 1681. and his present
Majesty's Declaration of April 25, 1689. This last is hereunto annexed.

The Circumstances of the Refugees being now much more deplorable than ever,
their urgent Necessities force them to implore the bountiful Help of this
Honorable House, which is their last hope in their sad Extremity, having tried
all other means imaginable.

Their Number amounted, last year, to 3300 and upwards, among which there were
many Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, Ministers and their poor Families, Widows and
Orphans, whose Husbands and Fathers have lost their Lives in the King's
Service, and other distressed People, through Age, Sickness and other
Casualties: which Number is at this time much increased, by reason of other
poor People, newly come from Switzerland and Germany, invited over by his
Majesty, to be sent into Ireland, and that stay here through want of Money to
send them over.

These Distressed Protestants, and particularly the Ministers; whose Education
and Attendance to their Ministry do render them unfit for any other Work, are
so much more worthy of Compassion, that the Edict which broke that of Nants,
did command them to depart the Kingdom of France within fifteen days, upon pain
of being sent to the Galleys; so that many are come away naked and destitute of
Support. Moreover, many Persons of very good Quality of both Sexes, born to
fair Estates, and bred up accordingly without Trade or Profession, after having
been ruined by the Dragoons were forced to come over, where they have been
invited to take Refuge.

These Poor Refugees, when they received his Majesty's Charitable Allowance of
about 1000 l. per Month, it was sometimes given them in remote Tallies, which
being exchanged for Money, yielded much less; so that if you take them one with
another, each of them had not much above 3 l. per Annum to live upon, though
their very Lodgings amounted to near as much.

Being in that Condition, they have exhausted, long since the Charities of
those of the French that were in any capacity to relieve them, and without
which it is evident they had starved; and though the same Persons do, even now,
all they can toward the Relief of these their poor Brethren, yet besides that,
they have to assist both the Poor of their Nation-that were here, and those
Refugees that came into England before the Revocation of the Edict aforesaid,
and also to contribute to the Poor of the several Parishes they live in. The
Number of those that came over since the said Revocation, is so great, and
their Wants so extreme, that all the Maintenance they can afford them, bears no
Proportion with the pressing Necessity they are groaning under.

To evidence further the extreme Misery of this miserable People, they beg
leave to say, That his Majesty has not continued to them the former Allowance
of 1000 l. per Month these twenty Months last past, excepting only 2000 l. at
the time he granted them the last Brief, which, together with the Sum of 1658
l. 16 s. given by several of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and other Noble
and Charitable Persons, with the Sum collected upon the said Brief, amount to
the Sum of 7305 l. 4 s. which comes far short of yielding any tolerable
Suppply to the Needs and Numbers of so many Poor People, that have suffered the
Loss of their Estates for the Cause of the Gospel: a great part of whom have no
Linen to keep them clean, no Beds to lie on, and no Clothes to put on.

This their deplorable Case has been exposed so plain to the Commissioners of
the Brief aforesaid, that they certify the same to be true. And as several
Poor among the French Refugees are dead for want of Necessaries, so many others
lived only upon credit; and now their Creditors, even of this Nation as well as
of their own, shall suffer great Loss, if these Poor People should not be put
into a Capacity to pay their Landlords, Bakers, Brewers, and others; so that
they may expect the Hardship of a Prison, which has been the Case of some
already. And there being no body that would trust them for the future, they
must needs beg their Bread in the Streets, and thereby lie under the Abuse of
the English Beggars, or be forced to starve in their poor Lodgings, if they are
not turned out of them by their Landlords.

But after this short Account, which even Necessity, Hunger and Nakedness
(overcoming Shame) draw out of sorrowful Hearts, they declare that none pray
for Relief but such as are Superannuated, Sick, or Infants under the Age of ten
Years, and such Widows as have had their Husbands killed in this present War,
or actually incapable of any Labor.

All which is humbly offered to the Wisdom and Charitable Consideration of this
Honorable House.

WE whose Names are underwritten, being called by the Lord Keeper and several
Lords to assist in the Disposal of the Moneys collected upon the last Brief; do
attest the Truth of what is above said concerning it, and that we do believe
the Condition of the French Refugees to be as deplorable as is herein declared.

Tho. Firmin, Charles Dubois, H. Reneu, P. Reneu, Will. Faukener.



