THE CASE Of The Sheriffs, For the YEAR 1682. OR, THE Third Years Paper In
Regard to the Act for Corporations. Being the CASE also of the Dissenting
Ministers, In Regard to the Act of Oxford. In a Second and Third Sheet,
together with the First Revised, Strengththened, and Reprinted. Upon more than
ordinary pressing Cause, respecting both the Preservation of such Minsters, and
their People, and the Universal Safety of the Nation.

Thou see Brother, how many Thousands of Jews there are which believe, and
they are all Zealous of the Law. And they are informed of thee, that thou
teach all the Jews which are among the Gentiles, to forsake Moses. Do
therefore this that we say unto thee, that all may know that those things
whereof they are informed concerning thee, are nothing; but that thou thy self
also walk Orderly, and keep the Law. LONDON, Printed for Thomas
Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel,
1682.

To those Two Worthy Citizens, Who Shall be CHOSEN Sheriffs of London, For the
YEAR 1682.
WHether a Cup of Wine drunk by the Lord Mayor, or the Votes of a Common Hall,
according to the Charter, shall have the Pre-eminence to make a Sheriff of this
City, it is but a few Weeks or Days (it is like) will bring into Trial. This
Paper does suppose such an Election: and it is the great difficulty only, as
to the holding Sheriffs in point of Conscience when Elected, that is here
concerned. We Dedicate these Sheets therefore beforehand, to those who shall be
solicited to be Candidates, for their Premeditation, and after to the Chosen.
The Reasons from the beginning, for Printing this Case, are as follows.

1. To take the Oath, and Subscribe the Declaration in the literal strict
Construction, appears, in our judgment, unlawful; and consequently, unless by
some means or other the sense be made public in which a man does take them,
(and that sense also be justifiable) he must forbear.

2. The Declaration is against the Consciences of the Nonconformists in
general, insomuch as some Men who took the Oath, cannot subscribe the
Declaration; and for any Conscientious Men therefore to do it now, and not
declare their Reasons of Satisfastion, were to Sin against the Brethren if they
own them, or to disclaim them.

3. By doing this, a Man shall give occasion to others to follow his Example,
and if he present them not in his Grounds or Reasons, those that follow shall
do it without the same Reasons, and through his knowledge shall such perish.
But when ye sin so against the Brethren, and wound their weak Consciences, ye
sin against Christ.

4. The Episcopal Party are generally apt to think the Nonconformists to be
Hypocrites and Knaves, and say, These Men refuse these Injunctions out of
humor, or for their profit, but they will swallow them as well as we for
Honor, or for Advantage. If any considerate Men therefore shall Swear and
Declare, and not give us some rational Account of what they do, (or some others
for them) they must not only wrong themselves, but the whole Generation of such
Men, and cause the Name of God (in regard to them) to be Blasphemed.

The First Sheet, Being The SHERIFFS CASE.
Whether, and How they may Lawfully Qualify themselves for their Holding the
Office, according to the Act for Corporations.
IN this Act there are Two things imposed, An Oath, and A Renunciation of the
Covenant. And we must lay down this To this Rule, there is a double Extreme:
The One is of those who think, a Man must take every In^^^^^tion in the strict
litteral Construction, and can submit to it no otherwise. T^^ (...) is of such
who suppose, that if a Man can frame any Interpretation of h^^^ (...) ^t is but
reasonable, he may take the Words in that Sense, and be (...) first of these is
so rigid, that there is nothing can be imposed, but (...) at it; and the last
so loose, that nothing can be imposed, but we shall swallow it. The true Medium
is this, we must sit down, and consider what we believe to be the Meaning of
the Lawgiver; and if we can submit to an Imposition, in that Sense or Meaning
which we believe theirs, we must do it; but if we believe their Sense to be
such, as we cannot take it in that Sense, we must forbear it, and suffer. Pray
see more about this Rule, in a Book entitled, A Peaceable Resolution of
Conscience, touching our Present Impositions, Page 121. to 126.
Rule at firsT, That all Impositions of our Superiors, must be taken in the
Sense and Meaning of those that Impose them: There need be no Scruple else in
Submission to any thing enjoined. The bottom is this; The Law is the Will of
the Lawgiver; and it is the Lawgiver's Meaning, which is his Will, howsoever
the Words of the Law is expressed.

Not that when we distinguish the Words and the Meaning, we do divide them. An
Imposition must be taken in the very Words, and the Sense of the Words, but the
Sense of the Words must be the Meaning of the Lawgiver: Although there are
Words sometimes also to be understood, when it is apparent either from the
Subject Matter, or from other Acts where that Meaning is fully, or fuller
declared. The law it self now (we know) has no Meaning or Intention, but the
Lawgiver, or They that make it. The Parliament here is the Lawgiver, and this
Oath then must be taken, and Renunciation made in the Sense and Meaning of the
Major Part of the Parliament which passed the Act.

Here we must also premise thus much, That it is not for any Sheriff, Alderman,
or any other Person upon whom this Oath is imposed, (for we must begin with
That) to put a Meaning of his Own upon it, which is to be taken only in Theirs
that passed the Act; but to consider verily, what he believes to be that
Meaning, which is indeed the Lawgivers. Not to determine neither and say, This
is the Meaning; but to be able to say, I There is a Court then is set up for
every one in his own Breast, Let him go to his Conscience, and ask, What thinks
he really, as in the Presence of God, if he could ask the Imposers of these
things; whether it is their Will, that he should be of another mind, in these
Particulars that cross his Assent, or leave his Station? If his Conscience
tells him, it is verily persuaded, that it was their Intention in the
Injunction, he is to Honor God in his patient Suffering their Pleasure. But if
he is persuaded in his Soul, that this is utterly against their sills (and
was), and that the things be scruples at, or as be scruples them, never came
into their Minds unless to admit them, only they passed them in the gross,
never intending that they should put a Bar in Conscience to any, and if he
could ask them, he believes they would certainly allow him in them. Here he is
(I suppose) to put such a Sense or Meaning then upon the Injunction, as may be
favorable to his Scruples, and yield it his Submission. Ex Libro Praedict. p.
125.
Believe this to be their meaning, which is necessary to every one that takes
it, to determine for himself, that he may act in Faith in what he does.

We must add, That when we say the Parliament is the Lawgiver, we understand by
the Parliament, the King, Lords and Commons; and consequently, that the Sense
of the Law, (and so of this Oath) must be always that Sense, wherein the House
of Lords did concur with the House of Commons, and the King with Both. If there
be any Sense therefore of an Imposition, which may be supposed to be the
Meaning of the King, and not of the Houses; or of One of the Houses, and not
the Other; or a lesser part of either Houses, and not the majority of both;
that Sense must be still looked on as too narrow, and ought not to scruple the
Conscience: the true Sense obliging the Subject, being the concurrent Sense of
the King, Lords and Commons, who as assembled jointly to this end of
Legislation, not One without the Other, but all Three together as One
Corporation (and not otherwise) are the Lawgiver.

Neither is this sense to be collected, from the first floating Apprehensions
of any one, that moves a matter in the House, but from the digested Thoughts of
both Houses, after a mature Debate, and the thing has thrice passed in them
both; so that no Sense of any Imposition, but that which is agreeable to Reason,
and more especially to the Fundamental Laws of the Constitution, must be
received as the When the Scripture is said not to be of private Interpretation,
the Meaning is, that we must not put any Sense of Man, upon it, let it be never
so reasonable; but we must still take the Sense of the Holy Ghost, that
inspired it; and if you ask, What is, or How shall we know what is the meaning
of that Divine Author? The way is to compare one Text with another, and all
with the Analogy of Faith, and Economy of the Gospel. We must say the same of
Laws. The Law is not of Private Interpretation, but the Meaning of the
Lawgiver: and if you ask, how we shall know their meaning, we say likewise by
this (as one way), the comparing one Act with other Acts, and all of them, by
their Universal Consent with the Fundamental Constitution. See Ibid. 125.
Meaning of a Parliament; the Reason being, because the nature of the
Constitution is such, as it cannot be infringed by an Act or Law for the
Administration.

This is a Note to be laid in here, that by and by will be needful: And thus
much therefore farther, and no less being premised, we proceed.

By taking Arms, Let us suppose the Sheriffs believe the Parliament meant the
raising an Army, or War; and by the King, the King's own Sacred Person, as
there is nothing else indeed can be meant: And we can see no The only
Objections here which are of weight, may be reduced to two Cases. One is the
Case of Private violence, as suppose a Prince should go to Ravish a Virgin, and
she catches up the next Weapon or Instrument to defend her self. In this Case,
or the like, we answer, this Defense is not to be accounted taking Arms in the
sense of this Act. The other is a Case of Public violence; as suppose a Prince
should go about to alienate his Kingdom, or ruin his Country, or the like. We
anwer, we are not for all that to return violence upon his Person; and as for
his Officers, Followers, or Armies, the Solution must be attended in the next
Clause of the Oath.
Objection, which may not be answered from this Little, in the First Clause of
the Oath. I A. B. do swear, That I hold (These words, I hold, I believe, or the
like, must doubtlesly be understood) it is unlawful to Take up Arms against the
King, (His Authority, or Rightful Government) upon any Pretense whatsoever.

If David's Heart smote him for cutting off but Readiness Skirt, when he was
actually in Arms to defend hemself against Readiness Forces, only because he was
the Lord's Anointed: It is not in this first Clause (any one may conjecture)
but in the ensuing, where the chief Scruples against the Oath are to be removed.

In the Second Clause, By those Commissionated by Him, let us suppose they
believe the Parliament meant, and could mean, no other than such as have a due
Authority from HIm, and exercise it only according to Law: And so long as the
King's Authority, and such Commissions are one, (or the same,) we can see no
more difficulty remaining in the Second Clause, than in the former: And I do
abhor (that is, disown or disclaim) that Traiterous Position, of taking Arms by
his Authority against His Person, or against any Commissionated by Him, in the
pursuit of such Commissions: That is, Legally Commissionated by Him, in the
Legal pursuit of such Commissions.

It is not to be imagined, that the Parliament, when they passed this Act,
(that is, the Major part of them) should design the setting up an Arbitrary
Government in the Nation: But if the meaning of those Commissionated by Him, be
otherwise than thus, they must design it. An Arbitrary Power, as soon as they
passed this Clause in any Act, must be accounted to Commence, or be declared to
be always the Right of the King. A thing most absurd to be believed, and in
the contrary Belief whereof, the most scrupulous Man (we thank God) may
resolvedly take this Oath.

In the Third Clause, we distinguish an Endeavor to change or reform any thing
in Church or State, which we think conducive to the good of the Nation in a
Parliamentary way only, as is allowed by the Fundamental Law and Course of the
Realm, from an Endeavor in any other way that is not warranted by the same: to
wit, in a seditious way, or in such manner as they did in the late Times, when
they endeavored the Extirpation of Frelacy by force against, and without the
King's Consent in Parliament, (which may be believed to be the assured Sense of
the Majority in the Houses, when they passed this Act) and so long as to do so
It may be said, the Parliament raised Arms, before they declared Endeavors to
Extirpate Prelacy, and condemn the whole Parliament War, when they would have
us declare it unlawful to do that Now, which they did Then (or, as of late has
been Practiced, to use the Words of the Militia Acts): But let this be granted,
it follows, then must their Meaning here indeed be, that we are not to
endeavor any Alteration of Government in the Way they did then (which, being
out of doubt of, the Sheriffs can Swear); but nothing more, we are sure, is
condemned in This Clause of the Oath, whatsoever else be intended in the former
Clauses of it, and the Militia Acts, in regard to the Beginning of the War, as
well as the Progress of it: And as for that point, Whether in the peculiar Case
of those times, there was any thing might be lawful, or any way justifiable to
be done Then (when the King and Houses (the One Corporation) were divided, and
he had passed an Act not to Dissolve them without their Consent, which is a
Case never like to happen any more, and so no danger to put it) which Now is
certainly unlawful, is a Question we have nothing to do with, and interpose
nothing to offend any.
now, may be acknowledged (as assuredly) to be unlawful, and what ought to be
disclaimed, the offense must be over in the last part of the Oath also: And
that I will not endeavor any Alteration of Government either in Church or
State; to wit, in any manner not warranted by the Constitution of the Land, or
any otherwise, than by Act of Parliament. The Preamble of the Oxford Act,
(where the same Oath is Imposed on the Nonconformist Ministers) declaring it to
be made, for the preventing the Opportunity of their instilling into Folks the
Principles of Schism and Rebellion, may give some Credit to this Exposition:
But it is this one clear Reason or Argument we rest pon, for our Confirmation
in it. The great Thing intended by this Oath, is the Preservation of the
Government, in the Fundamental Constitution, against all Alteration. But the
Constitution of our Government being such in the Foundation, that whatever is
needful or convenient to be altered, it may be proposed to that end in
Parliament: to take away that Liberty which is universally radicated in the
whole Nation in order thereunto, were a piece of the greatest Alteration that
could be, and consequently never to be understood, as intended by the Lawgiver.

As for the Solemn League and Covenant (the Renunciation whereof, is the Second
thing here imposed) it is an Oath so long since in Being, that, it is two to one
but Both the Sheriffs that shall be Chosen, (as well as those of late before
them) never took; so that they may safely say, there lies no Obligation upon
them at all from it; And as for others that did, we humbly conceive, that being
taken in it is Complex Consideration, as it was pressed and used at that time,
for the engagement of the People to the Extirpation of the Bishops, and Change
of Church Government without the King, against His Consent and Public
Declarations, and by Force; it must needs be Unlawful, and could not bind any
body to do so: and consequently we trust, that such Gentlemen shall not offend
God, or any good Men, if they farther subscribe this Declaration, which is also
required: I. A. B. do declare, Taht I hold there lies no Obligation on me, or
on any other Person, from the Oath commonly called, The Solemn League and
Covenant, to endeavor any Change or Alteration of Government either in Church
or State; And that the same was in it self an unlawful Oath, and imposed on the
Subjects of this Realm, against the known Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom.

We confess here, that these Words, [to endeavor any Alteration of Government
in Church or State] were put in by the Author, unwittingly thinking them to be
in this Act, because they are in others, and it passed two Impressions, without
any Knowledge of ours, that it was otherwise: But now do we let them stand, de
Industria, because it appears, they are to be The Meaning of a Law (or of the
Lawgiver) may be gathered from the Preamble of some Acts; the common
understanding of the many; the special Judgment of the Wise; the Discoursing
with some of those that made the Law; which seeing it cannot be with all, or
the greatest part, that which seems most satisfactory is, when the same Persons
(or Parliament) do signify their Mind by their own Words in some other Act or
Acts: And this being the Case here, we see not but some men may be as verily
persuaded, that these Words are to be supplied, or that this was the
Parliaments Meaning, as if the Generality could be asked, and they had told
them, This it was. However, let the Medium be what it will, whereby a Man comes
to the Resolution of his Belief about the Imposers Meaning in this or any the
like Imposition, when he is once brought to a settled Persuasion and
Conviction, that This or That, and no Other was their Meaning, if he can submit
to the Wrods in the full Latitude of that Meaning, as he is fully persuaded in
his Conscience, is all they intended in such or such an Injunction; then is he
free to his own Determination. See Peac. Res. before quoted. p. 114.
understood, both from other Acts, The Uniformity Act, The Vestry Act, The
Oxford Act, which have the same Declaration with these words in it (wherein we
are yet more confirmed by that Act, where it is made a Praemunire to say, There
lies an Obligation upon any from this Oath, the Obligation being expressed, to
do thus): As also, from the Nature of the Thing; for so long as the Meaning of
the Lawgiver is the Rule we go by, let us but suppose we could go to the same
Parliament, Man by Man, and ask them, Was it your Meaning by this Declaration,
that any man, who took that Covenant, should profess, that he is not bound to
reform his Life, to repent to his Sins, to eschew Profaneness, Popery, and
Schism, or the like things they then covenanted to do, because that Oath in
some respect otherwise was unlawful; the Generality, without Question, would
Answer NO, by no means; but our meaning was only, that there lies no
Obligation on any from that Covenant, to endeavor to Extirpate Prelacy, as it
was there, or any Alteration of Government, as it is expressed by us in other
Acts. This being supposed then the undoubted Meaning, we go on.

By some of the last words of the Declaration it appears, that this Oath was
framed for the Subjects of the Realm, (we say, that this Oath ( i.e. the
Covenant) was, in the meaning of the Imposers of this Declaration, the Subjects
Oath, and consequently by the words, or any other Person, they must mean, or
any other Subject:) which appears also manifestly in the preamble of it; We
Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of the
Gospel, and Commons of all sorts, being under the King. There is one part of
it moreover express for the preservation of the King; we do suppose therefore,
that though an Oath to the same main effect, or one like it, was imposed on
this King by the Scots, that Oath must be conceived another than this, and not
the very same, being not so in every point, but an Oath indeed (as they called
it) to confirm the Covenant, when He offered this very Exception against taking
the Covenant it self, because it was an Oath for the Subjects only. And that
that Oath the King took, was indeed Another, or One purposely framed for Him,
any that will, may see in the Form of his Coronation, in Douglas Sermon. I
CHARLES, King, do assure and declare by my solemn Oath, my Allowance of the
Solemn League, and engage my self to Prosecute the ends thereof, with other
words set down there, p. 19.


And this being enough to save the Conscience in one chief Scruple, (and
chiefest one,) we will gather up again what is said before into one Argument
(which we fix upon) for a fuller satisfaction in regard to all others. To own
the KIng and his Authority in the same Oath, and yet to swear to change the
Government without His Will, and against it, is (we think) in it self unlawful.
Such an Oath was the Covenant; and Qua unlawful, it must be unobligatory.

And what indeed shall now hinder these Sheriffs to subscribe, That there lies
no obligation upon them, or others, from the Covenant, to endeavor any
Alteration of Government; in that sense as they swear before, that they will
not endeavor any, in the third clause of the Oath preceding? For so long as
the meaning of the Lawgiver, is no other than That which is made to appear
there, upon the account given, and the Endeavor which is here, and which is
there, is the same out of doubt, we do not see but the Reason which does
satisfy any Man upon the Point about taking the Oath, must be sufficient for
the Declaration also. In short, There lies no obligation upon any from this
Oath, to do as they swear ^t; It is in it self unlawful to do so; and the
Imposition of it was It must be confessed, that the voluntary Omission of these
words that are to be understood in this Declaration, and the designed
Opposition to the whole Proceeding of the Parliament in those times, without
distinguishing Right from Wrong, in the Oath, and the high Strain of the
Militia Acts, which seems to dispossess the Subject of all Defense, against any
Commission of the King, be it what it please, are enough to make any searching
Man indeed believe, that the Meaning of the Contrivers, Hatchers, and Compilers
of such Impositions, who for promoting their own Interest could find in their
hearts to be Villains to the Commonwealth, and the Souls of Men, was more than
thus: But we Answer, By distinguishing only, These are not the Lawgiver. The
Lawgiver is the Generality of Beth Houses with the King, who are never to be
supposed Underminers of our Rights, or to have any evil Meaning, but to convene
for Consultation about the Common Good; and whatsoever Laws do pass, they are
to be believed to carry in them the Reason of Public Benefit, or else they are
no Laws. Quod non habet rationem publici commodi non potest pracipi, lege
humana, say the Schools; and it is a Rule laid down to satisfy all by the Lord
Coke. Quando Lex generaliter lequitur restringenda tamen est ut cessante
ratione and ipsa cesset; Cum enim ratio sit anima vigorque ipsius legis, non
videtur Legislator id sensisse quod ratione careat, etiamsi generalitas prima
facie aliter possit snadere. Inftitut. Par. 4. C. 74.
illegal.

In the Sacred Story concerning Rahab and the Spies, it appears that no body
can be engaged any farther by an Oath, then what he agrees or consents to in
the taking it. Where he declares beforehand he will not be bound, he is free.
We cannot tell how much larger, or how much narrower a Compass others may draw
to themselves from that Instance, than we: But we will come to this Conclusion.
We have laid down the Rule we are to walk by in these Impositions, and applied
it to this Oath and Subscription. If any Man is persuaded in his Conscience,
that the Meaning of the Lawgiver was no more than thus, he may submit to them
Both, and make no stand: But if he believes their Meaning was otherwise (or
doubts that it was more than thus,) he cannot Swear or Subscribe, but with
Limitations; and he must declare those Limitations, or Forbear. But if he shall
Swear or Subscribe (supposing him one that doubts) with making a Declaration for
himself (if this Paper will not serve for All) when he Takes the Oath, and
Subscribes the Renunciation enjoined, that he does it in this Meaning, which we
have all along expressed, supposing it true, and with these Explanatory
Limitations to the meaning, if in any thing indeed it be otherwise, and so give
(or throw) in this Paper to the Persons before whom he is to do it; we are
persaded, that his Conscience may receive Satisfaction thereby in his
compliance with the In Mr. Baxter's Funeral Sermon upon that holy Citizen Mr.
Ashhurst, we take notice of this passage. Some may think that he wanted a
Public Spirit, beeause he avoided being a Magistrate, and paid his Fine
rather than take an Aldermans Place; but it was only to keep the Peace of his
Comscience -- Yet I never heard him speak uncharitably of those Worthy Men who
do what he refused, supposing that they, in words or writing, declared as
openly as they swear and took the Declaration, that they took it but in such or
such a lawful sense; though he could not do so himself.
Law in these Impositions.

Whether they receive the Paper, and admit of your sense or not, it is no
matter; for they have no Power about it, and the thing will be alike known. And
thus have we lent our hands to get the Concerned over these blocks, and yet so,
as to deliver also our Souls.

The Second Sheet, Being The MINISTERS CASE, WITH THE SHERIFFS, In Regard to
the Five Mile Act of Oxford.
BY the Act at oxford there is this Oath enjoined every Nonconformist Minister,
upon the Penalty of debarring him the coming within Five Mile of any
Corporation. J. A. B. Do Swear, that it is unlawful to take Arms against the
King, upon any pretense whatsoever: And that I abhor that Traiterous Position,
of Taking Arms by the King's Authority against his Person, or any
Commissionated by him: And that I will not at any time Endeavor any Alteration
of Government, either in Church or State. In which Oath there are three Clauses.

The First and Second Clause of it, comes to this, That it is not Lawful to
take Arms against the King, or any Commissionated by Him, upon any Pretense;
No, not upon the Pretense of His Authority in the Law. It is a Traiterous
Position, to hold even that lawful. And all this is true, plain, and to be
granted, as soon as we do but understand only what to be Commissionated is. To
be Commissionated by the King, is to have his Authority, or Authority from him,
to do such a thing. If we take Arms against one that does do any thing by the
Kings Authority, we take Arms against His Authority, and that is all one with
taking Arms against the King; and consequently, to declare it unlawful to take
Arms against the King, and against those Commissionated by him, is in effect
also but the same. The Authority of the King, and His Person, are both alike
Sacred, and both these must be held alike inviolable on all hands. The question
then only will be this, What is the King's Authority? Authority (Potestas) is
jus imperandi, a Right or Power to command: This Right or Power is given the
King by Law. It is the Law makes the King, (says Bracton), Lex facit Regem; the
meaning whereof is, that the Authority which the King has, can be no other but
what the Law does grant him. The Government (we know) with us is Regal, and not
Despotical, and the King's Power, a Power only to Govern by the Laws. If the
King then shall Commissionate any to do that which is against Law, that
Commission is void; it is a Writing, but no Commission; that is, it is without
Authority; For the King has none to give against the Law, but For the Law, who
is the Executioner of it. For a Man then to act in such a Matter wherein the
King has none to give, it is invain to plead a Commission. If he be taken, and
punished, he must thank himself: this is no resisting the King, or any
Commissionated by Him. For instance, a Prince gives Commission to Levy Money,
without a Tax by Parliament; His Officers or Soldiers come hereupon, and takes
a Man's Goods; the Man runs for the Constable, and the Constable Charges the
Neighborhood in the King's Name to assist him, and so apprehends them, and
brings them to the Justice; the Justice send them to Goal; and then the Judge
Hangs them: And all this is justifiable, because such Authority is none; and
they being therefore no Commissionated Officers, are but Thevies and Robbers;
who, when the King can do no wrong, yet they do, and are justly Executed for
it. We see then here plainly, how we may declare it unlawful to take Arms
against the King, and against those that are Commissionated by Him, upon one
and the same Reason: For when no Man may take Arms against the King, or his
Rightful Authority, and no body is indeed Commissionated by Him, but he that
acts according to the Law, and so has his Authority; it is, and must be
unlawful to take Arms against those that are Commissionated by him, as well as
against Himself. Notwithstanding that, if any act against the Law, and plead
his Commission, they be resisted by the Law, because such are not indeed
Commissionated by him.

For the third Clause of the Oath, the Constitution of the English Government
is such, as every Freeman has a fundamental Liberty by the same, to endeavor
the Redress of any Grievance, which he feels in the Administration; which
Administration comprizes under it the whole Government of the Church, as
External, and may make any Alteration thereof, when Monarchy it self belongs to
the Constitution. This Part then of the People, which they have in our
Government, reaches thus far. The Body do choose their Burgesses for
Parliament; they may inform them of these Grievances; we may Petition them for
Alteration; we may out of doubt, pray to God for their success. Our
Representatives, then are to prefer the Bills, and get them passed, if they can
do it. Thus much (let us say) is the Right of the People, no less than the
bearing the Sword, (that is, the Execution of the Government) is the
Prerogative of the King, or a Negative Voice is the Privilege of Both Houses.
It is not now ever to be imagined therefore, that it was the Meaning of a
Parliament, to divest any Englishman of this Right, to which he was Born,
because he is a Nonconformist; neither can they indeed do it. It is not to be
imagined, that an Endeavor for the Government to act, or to exercise its
proper acts, or to put its proper Power into Act, which is but to keep it
alive, or keep it in motion, should be that Endeavor, which the Majority of
Parliament would have abjured in this Oath. It is not to be imagined, that the
Parliament when they go about to preserve the Government from any Alteration,
should have any such Meaning, as must destroy its very Constitution. We
determine consequently, it must not be an Endeavor of any Alteration (supposed
needful) in this way, that is, in a Parliamentary way only, which they
intended we should renounce; but all Endeavor of altering Government in any
other way or manner, than what is warranted by the Fundamental Law of this
Kingdom. And if this Radical Liberty be left us, we see how we may, and must do
as much toward Reformation of the Church, after such an Oath is taken, as we
may, or can do before we have taken it. We cannot endeavor any thing in a
Seditious way, but we sin against God, and the King, which we dare not do; and
the way which is lawful to be taken, is open to us still. It follows, so long
as we go by the Meaning of the Lawgiver, which is the Rule laid down to go by,
we may both take the Oath, and it will do us no hurt to take it.

For Surplusage, it was proposed in the Lords House upon occasion of the Test,
and agreed upon generally, that the Meaning of the Commissionated was Legally
Commissionated, though they thought it not best to put it into a Bill for some
prevailing Reasons. The like was in the House of Commons also, as it is said.
Now though a Vote of either House be not enough to repeal a Law, it is enough
to tell us the Meaning of the Lawgiver, which does resolve this Case of
Conscience: Unto which, when we can add this also, that it is known to some,
that the King has said it Solemnly more than once, in public, and in private
both, that he was not for an Arbitrary Power, but such an one only, as the Law
gives him, (we mean in words to that purpose) what is there any Man can desire
more for his full Satisfaction in this Matter? What hinders, but this Oath may
be taken? And when they had read the Epistle, they Rejoiced for the Consolation.

The Third Sheet, With Respect to the More Scrupulous, WHETHER Sheriffs,
Ministers, or Others, That are Concerned, For this Fuller Confirmation about
the Oath.
WE are not unsensible of what moment an Oath is, and the Declaration enjoined,
who have set our selves, as in the presence of God, that must give an account
before his Tribunal for every Word that we write, in our Undertaking so solemn
a Determination as this is. We warn every Man therefore, to be true to our
Rule, and to take heed that he acts nothing, till he is first persuaded in his
own mind of what he does; For while we endeavor to give a Resolution to the
Conscience, of others, we must have a care of our own Souls.

There are two main Objections in the Case.

The First is this. The Oath, and Renunciation of the Covenant, which are here
imposed, seem to be framed in direct Opposition to the late Parliament-Cause.
The Parliament-Cause stood upon this Foundation, That the Law is above the Will
or Commissions. Upon the King's Restoration to his Throne, a New Parliament is
called, and they by this Oath, and the like Impositions, are supposed to decide
the controversy. When we are put therefore here to renounce the Position of
taking Arms by the Law, or the Kings Authority, against any Commissionated by
him, we must (upon this supposition) conceive the Parliament meant, that
Position should be abjured, whether those Commissions be Legal or Illegal; for
otherwise the Controversy is not decided. The Position of taking Arms by the
Authority of the Law, against any Commissionated by the King, was not
maintained on the Parliament side, but only in Case those Commissions were
against Law; and unless we renounce the Position of taking Arms by the Law,
against all Commissions, though illegal, we renounce ot the Position of that
Parliament.

To this Objection, we Reply in the First place; If the Parliament must be
conceived to put thus much upon us, then must we believe that they took this
for granted, that no Commission of the King, indeed may be resisted, whether
according to the Law, or against the Law; and if so, that the King's
Commissions consequently must be above Law, and his Power Absolute. But to
believe, that any Parliament should intend to allow the King such a Power, is
quite beyond sober Reason. Let him believe this who can, upon mature
Deliberation.

In the Second place, we say therefore, There is here two or three
Suppositions, that are not to be yielded. It is but a false Supposition, that
the Parliament intended a Decision of the Controversy between the Kings side,
and Parliament side, by this Oath. It were a very inadaequate Intention. It is
a false Supposition, That this was any of the Controversy between the
Judicious (or those that understood themselves) of both sides, who did
certainly agree in this, That the Authority of the King is Royal, not
Arbitrary; and consequently, that his Commmissions are valid, when according to
Law, and not else. It is a false Supposition again, That those few Men that
contrived these Impositions, or compiled these Acts, were the Parliament. It Is
true, that what is here urged may be sufficient to suggest to a Man a belief,
That the Intention of those that were the Contrivers of these Acts (this Oath,
and the Militia Preambles) might be no less, than to make the Kings Will equal
to Law; at least in the Matter of the Militia: but we say, and have said in the
Margin of one of these Sheets before, That these Contrivers or Compilers (a
few mischievous Men perhaps) were not the Lawgiver. The Lawgiver we have
premised, and set out in the first Sheet, in the beginning, with advantage
against this Supposition. We are by no means, to think that the Majority of the
Two Houses, as they agree to an Act, could consent in this to make the King's
Commissions above, or equal to Law, which were to change the Government which
is Regal, into Despotical. The Law is the Will of the King, in conjunction with
his Parliament; His Commissions are His Single Will only, and therefore less
than the Law is.

In the Third place, we answer hereupon, That if an apprehension from this
Argument should sink into the Mind of any particular Person so far as to
persuade him to think it probable, that this was the meaning of the Parliament;
yet if a contrary Apprehension sinck deeper, or another Argument be more
prevailing, he must follow the more Praedominant Conviction. But there is no
Argument so probable, but, that an English Parliament should intend to make the
King Arbitrary, is more improbable. That they never meant this, will have the
deeper impression.

In the Fourth place, We may therefore believe rather, that the Parliament
thought not of these Positions, on both sides, and the determination of them,
(which indeed is not to be imagined of the Majority, whatsoever the Contrivers,
or a few, might do) but in general, they thought of such a Position, which in
the ill Construction they would have abjured; or they intended to decry the
Position upon which War was raised, but in such a confused Understanding of it,
as that they would have it renounced indefinitely, without intending the
Renunciation of that implicit Truth in it, which they on all sides hold to be
the very Fundamental Right of the English People, according to the Constitution
of the Kingdom.

In the Fifth place, we will enlarge a little this Answer, The Parliament-side
('it is true) held it lawful by virtue of the Law, (that is, by the Kings
Authority) to resist such as are in Commission by the King; but the Wise of
them could distinguish the Case, when those Commissionated did act according to
Law, and when they did things contrary to Law; and though they held it lawful
in One Case, they did not hold it so in the Other. The King's side, on the
contrary, held it unlawful to resist the Kings Commissions by his Authority, or
by Law; but the Wise of these knew how to distinguish likewise these two cases;
and it is not to be belevied, but such as Judge Jenkins (who declares the Laws
to be above the Kings Commissions) knew and held, that in case any should come
by the Kings Commissions to take our money by force, without an Act of
Parliament, or the like, they might legally be resisted. Now, when such a
Position of the Unlawfulness to take Arms by the King's Authority, against such
as are Commissionated by Him, is required to be renounced, it is necessary to
distinguish accordingly, in regard to the meaning of the Parliament: For though
some might be willing to have it renounced universally, they that understood
themselves could not be of that mind: And if we could go to them all, and ask
them one by one, Whether they understood the Oath so as that they would have it
held unlawful to resist the King's Officers, or Forces, that came particularly
to raise Money, without any Parliament-Tax; who can believe, the Majority would
say, it was their meaning? I do not think one Man of the whole Company would
have the face to say it, whatsoever privately he intended. When the Position
then is indefinite, but in a matter necessary to be distinguished, and the
Question is, What was the Meaning of the Majority? it can come only to this,
That they would have the Position renounced in One Sense, and that Sense must
be such certainly, as the Government of the Nation, which is Regal, may be
still maintained, and not turned to Tyranny; for the Generality, beyond doubt,
never once intended to do that by any of these Impositions.

In the Last place, We will add this, to strengthen us in the rest. That it is
unlawful to take Arms against any Commissionated by the King, according to Law,
is a Sense wherein the King, and the Two Houses must agree, out of doubt: But
that it is unlawful to take Arms against any Commissionated by Him, if they
shall come with a Commission to do that which is contrary to Law, it was not
the Sense of Both Houses, we may be sure, because the House of Lords (as we
have said in the Second Sheet) declared, That by the Commissionated, they all
meant Legally Commissionated: And also, which is more, when it seemed not fit
(for Reasons otherwise, which they had) to have that word [Legally] put into
the Oath, (though they agreed in their Judgment, Nemine Contradicente, that it
was meant) they threw the Test out of the House. Had the Major Part been of the
mind, that the Comissions of the King may never be resisted, Why should this
Clause be explained? Had not the Major Part been of another mind, Why did not
the Test pass? Now, if a Man be but assured, that any one of the Houses, or the
King alone, be against such or such a Sense, it is enough to conclude for the
Negative, This was not the Sense: When a Man must find out such a Sense as
that, wherein we can believe they all Three did agree, to conclude for the
Affirmative, that This was it. The Reason of this was premised at the Beginning
of the First Sheet.

And so much for the First Objection, the Second follows. By Government of the
Church, we understand not Episcopacy only in the Substance, which the Scripture
approves; but our Diocesan Episcopacy, as now Established: Neither do we
distinguish between Alteration in the Government, and of the Government, to
come off so, which were Childrens Play. No, if any shall go about to take away
the Bishops Courts, or Officers, as their Lay-Chancellors, Commissaries, the
Archdeacons Courts, their Canons by which they act, or any of their
Established Authority; This we account an Endeavor to alter the Government.
Now, when these are things we would have altered, how can we swear we will not
Endeavor any Alteration of Government in the Church? How can this Oath be
taken?

For Answer to this, we have in the beginning laid down our Rule, and we must
have our Recourse to it, and accordingly we must consider what indeed we verily
believe in our Hearts, the Lawgiver intended. Was it their Meaning then, by
such Impositions to fix the Church so, as nothing of this kind should ever be
altered, though by Parliament, and though there should be never so much Reason
for a Redress? We cannot think so far; and if they intended not this, then
cannot All Endeavor be understood here, ( viz. that which is such only) but an
Endeavor otherways. Their Meaning must be to debar us all Endeavor of
altering even such things as these in any way, but this only, (the way of
Parliament) which is warrantable by the Constitution of the Kingdom. This we
have said, and must say it over. A Parliament is never to be believed to
consent to that which is not in their Power. The English Government is such in
its Constitution, as that Part thereof, so far as this comes to, (an Endeavor
to alter such things as these, when they are Grievances) does still lie in the
Body of the People; and the Meaning of a Parliament must never beconstrued so,
as to destroy that Liberty, which is Fundamental to the Kingdom. That which
belongs to Every Body by virtue of the Constitution, (we must inculcate) cannot
be taken away from Any by a Law for the Administration, It Is true again,
perhaps, that something in this Objection, as in the former, may be expressed,
as to make some Men believe, that the Contrivers of this Oath had yet a farther
Meaning, and might intend to bind us so by it, as to retrench this Liberty; but
we are to break those Bonds, and cast away their Cords, by remembering only,
These are not the Lawgiver. The greater Number is the Parliament, and they are
to be believed always to have a fair and equal Meaning in their Acts, and never
disagreeable to the Fundamental Constitution. We will add,

As for the very Contrivers of these Impositions, those few malicious Men that
designed by them to exclude such as are now Nonconformists, they must be
thought yet to intend the Admission of the Loyal Party, and the Judicious and
Conscientious among them that suffered for the King more especially. But if the
Meaning of these Injunctions be otherwise (in the main purpose) than we
interpret them; Those Judicious and Conciencious Men of the Conformists
themselves, could not submit to them. It will follow, by the leave even of the
Contrivers of these Acts, that the meaning which we offer (whatsoever they
might harbor in their By-purpose) must be indeed the Meaning of the Lawgiver.

To comfirm this, which has been said above (we confess) as well as here, we
will suggest something for new Strength to it. In an Act of the Thirteenth of
the King, there are two things may be inquired. One is, Whether Petitioning in
the Case of Greviance (for so much, at least as these things we speak of) by
any, not exceeding the number of Ten, is not allowed the Subject? Turn to the
Statute-Book, and examine it; and if it be, then could not All Endeavor, but
such only, which is not permitted, be intended in this Abjuration, by that One,
and the Same Parliament that passed both Acts. The other is, Whether after it
is there, Cap. 1. made a Premunuire to say, That there lies an Obligation upon
any from the Covenant, to Endeavor the Alteration of Government in Church or
State, there be not yet an express Exception, as to all Parliament Speeches,
and Endeavors to repeal Statutes, or redress Grievances? And if there be, then
cannot any one use his Reason, but he mus believe our choosing Parliament Men,
this Petitioning them, and doing the like things which lie in our Sphere to do,
in Order only thereunto, are also included. It follows still, that it is an
Endeavor consequently in some other way, and not this, (which is
Parliamentary, and granted) must be that which the Parliament intended we
should abjute, when they put us upon such Impositions.

To enlarge here a little. In that Decimo Tertio, Car. 2. Cap. 5. After it is
enacted, That no Persons shall procure Hands above the number of Twenty, to any
Petition for Alteration of Matters Established by Law in Church or State: we
have a Provided always, That this Act shall not be construed to extend to
debar, or hinder any Person or Persons, not exceeding the number of Ten, to
present any Public Grievance to any Member, or Members of Parliament. There
are Two Questions now will here go to the Quick. One is, Whether under these
Matters Established by Law, there be any Exceptions to be understood, and what
are those Exceptions? And we must distinguish (we think) thus only. Matters
Established by Law, are such as belong to the Constitution of the Government,
or the Administration. Those Matters, or Laws, which belong to the Original
Constitution, (that is according to what the People, at first (we must suppose)
agreed, when they consented to a Government) are not indeed within the
Cognizance of a Parliament to Alter them; and for that reason, such Matters
must be excepted: But as for any Matters Established by Law, that belong only
to the Administration, there is no Exception to be apprehended, when the Words
are so general without any Limitation. If any other Law or Statute be pleaded
for putting in such Exception, it must be answered by the Distinction offered.
There are no Matters (we must say) excepted by any other Statute, or rather can
(with reason) be excepted, unless they belong only to the Constitution, and not
the Administration. The Other Question is, Whether the taking away any of the
Authority of the Bishops, and Archdeacons Courts, their Officers, Canons, and
the like, is such an Alteration as belongs to the Administration of the
Government in England; that is, Whether it comes within the Cognizance of a
Parliament, or is in their Power to do it? We know, that such a thing as the
Changing of our Monarchy into another sort of Government, were not to be
proposed to Parliament, being out of their Cognizance, if the King and the
Houses were willing to have it: But do the Bishops, and their Courts stand upon
the same Foundation? It Is true, that Magna Charta may be pleaded; but Magna
Charta it self is but a Law for the Administration. It is, beyond all doubt, in
the Power of the King, and His Houses, ( i. e. the Parliament) to regulate the
whole External Polity of the Church, and so take away Diocesan Episcopacy it
self, if they pleased: And can any one indeed question, whether the taking away
some Power from their Courts, or some Officer belonging to them, or the like,
(which yet were to Alter the present Government fo the Church) is not within
their Cognizance, or that this Matter is not contained in those Matters
Established by Law, that in general may be Altered; and, in case of Grievance,
be Petitioned for, to be Altered? And if this be still permitted, the People,
according to the Statutes made in the Reign of this King, then could it not be
the Intent or Meaning of this Parliament, that All Endeavor to Alttr the
Government, when any thing is grievous in the Church, should be Unlawful; and
when we are brought to distinguish of such an Endeavor of Alteration, which is
Warrantable by Law, and that which is Unwarrantable, then are we come to the
right Understanding of the Lawgiver's Meaning, (viz.) That the Endeavor which
they require us to abjure in the Oath, is the One, and not the Other. This is
what we say all along, and stand upon it. Reader, lay thy Hand upon thy Heart,
and as thou believe this Interpretation, or believe it not, either Take or
Forbear the Oath, in the Name of God.

And what think we (after some pause upon this) of those Sheriffs and
Ministers, who are Conformists? Are there not many of them (which is before
hinted) Men of Reason and Conscience, judicious, and that fear God? And in what
sense (judge we) have the One subscribed, according to the Act of Uniformity,
the same words which the Other swears according to the Act for Corporations? It
is strange, the Nonconformist should make such a stand at that Sense of the
Oath and Subscription proposed in this Paper, as singular and doubtful, which
the Conformist receives as the undoubted and common Sense of the Kingdom, with
all the Judges and Lawyers of the Realm. If they received not this Sense, they
would refuse them no less than we; and if we received it as freely as they, we
should submit to them as they do. In like manner, for renouncing the Covenant,
What is it also they intend by it? Is it nor this, that the Covenant was an
unlawful Oath, and therefore binds no body? But let us ask again, do they think
that the Covenanting to maintain the King (which indeed helped to bring him in
again) and the Protestant Religion, and to Reform our Lives, or the like
things, is unlawful; and that therefore no Man is bound thereunto? Certainly,
they cannot think so; but the Covenanting, to Change the Government, or
extirpate Prelacy, and that without, and against the Will of the King, (which
is consequently in a way Unparliamentary) this is it they judge unlawful, and
that such an Oath can oblige no body. And is there any Nonconformist, that
understands himself, who does herein disagree with them? In the name of God
then, let us come to a right understanding on both sides, of the Oath, and of
the Declaration. Let the meaning of the Oath be no more than this, that it is
unlawful to take Arms against the King, or his Authority, any where exerted
according to Law; and that we will never go about to make any Change, either in
Church or State Affairs, but by King and Parliament. And let the meaning of the
Declaration also, be no more than this (as in the First Sheet,) That, there
lies no Obligation upon any from the Covenant to do as they Swear it; It was
unlawful in its self to do so; and the imposition of it was illegal. And when
we come to an Agreement in the sense, what should hinder us, but we may come
also to agree in practice, and do, as one another?

If any Man indeed remains yet unsatisfied in his Conscience, to do as the
Conformist does, (it may be only because he does it) we charge him,
notwithstanding all this which we have said, to forbear: But if indeed he be
satisfied as to the Sense, and pretends dissatisfaction in his Conscience, and
fear of loosing his Soul for the saving only of his Purse, we must in this
Case (or in this Cause rather, at this season) lay upon him this Charge also,
that in refusing his Compliance with the Law, he must give an account to God
for the refusing his Duty with it, both to him, and to his Country.

For our selves, if our Arguments satisfy any Man, and so he complies, we edify
that Man, and not scandalize him: If they do not, and he forbears, we do him no
hurt. It is a Man's own Conscience, is the Discerner to him of his Duty, and he
is not to regard another Man's any further than to avoid active Scandal; which
upon such a warning, that no man follow his Example, unless he be satisfied
with his Reasons, he does prevent as much as he can, in this business.

We have done after one Acknowledgment, That the Materials of these Sheets are
borrowed very much from a Book (that one of us does think, he may make bold
with), whose design is greatly to offer such a kind of Resolution to the
Conscience, touching our present Impositions, that both they that Conform to
them, and they that cannot, may see reason to retain a fair Opinion of one
another, and to hope that neither of them do wilfully depart from is, in what
they do. The Book was written many years, but Printed only about three since,
and is quoted in the Margin of the First Sheet. We have reason to tell this,
both because that which is here offered may not appear to be written (as some
may think) only to serve an Occasion, having been really the fruit of several
years digested Thoughts; and also because we may not be ashamed, if we should
confess, that we had used that Book, and made this Collection to serve so
honest an End. For, if our Conscientious and Substantial Citizens be put off
Public Offices, and the Ministers be discharged their Congregations, upon the
account of these Impositions: Either the Snare must be broken by a general
Reception of such a plain, clear, open Interpretation of them as is here
presented to all Men, or they will hold us to these Grindstones, and we shall,
both in regard to Soul and Body, to Religion and Property, first or last, be
all undone. Now, when Mattathias, and his Friends understood hereof, they
mourned for them right sore: And one of them said to another, If we all do as
our Brethren have done, they will quickly root us out of the Earth.

THE POSTSCRIPT.
HAving Printed the First of These Papers, or Sheets, Two years, and now
Reprinted it the Third year, with Amendment of some things, in the leaving out
what I judged insufficient, and supplying what I have thought needful to
confirm that which is sufficient: I have added two new Sheets, or Papers, to
the same, in regard to the urgency of the present Season, with the same Heart,
and to the same Purpose, as at the beginning. We all know, by our own
Experience, how necessary it is for the same Nations to be presented in a
various Application, according to the Doubts and Objections which are raised in
Men's Minds, for the giving Satisfaction to those, whose Consciences are really
tender, and who dissent from others, merely out of the fear of Heaven, and not
out of Humor.

I think, I have chose the Charitable Side; and that to write thus as I do, at
this Season, is not only one of the acts of Spiritual Alms, or Mercy, but a
peculiar serving my Generation. I cannot tell why, but I find my Spirit is
cheerished toward God, in this little Service, more than it uses. If it were
only present heat, upon a new thing, I should not take this notice of it: But
when this Subject is (as it were) cool, and no more affecting, than the inward
Testimony it brings with it, as to my hopes, it will do good, I cannot tell but
such Impressions may abode something. I wish, it be not this, that these
Impositions will be continued, and pressed upon us yet with more Regiour; so
that many good Men shall have Occasion for this Paper, that after no Man
perhaps, may be found that dares to attempt the like.

I know, that as the Errata of a Book can have no Amendment, when the Book it
self can; so cannot I my self see my own weaknesses, or Failings, when the
Reader of these Sheets (that sees more than I) may discover them. But so far as
I can judge, according to the Tenuity of my understanding, there is more said
in these few Sheets to the very Purpose, to which they are writ, than has been
said by others, or any where, unless by the same Paper; and I hope, that which
is said, is full and satisfactory. The proud Man, that would be praised in what
he does, does ordinarily dispraise himself, that others may commend him: But I
speak of my own Paper, as I would of Another. It is a great many thoughts I am
sure, even the thoughts of many years is digested into these few Sheets; and I
do not offer my Brethren, that which cost me nothing.

As for my writing under a Plural Name, the Reader must know, that though it be
One is the Compiler, or Author of these Sheets altogether; it is more than One
consented, and consent to the Publication. The first Sheet, after it was done
at first, was show to a Great Person particularly, whose Understanding and
Faithfulness, the Cry generally can trust in such Matters, (for it was thought
good by one of the Sheriffs chose for that year, I should do so) and he advised
that the Paper should come out thus, and not in the Name of a Single Person. He
had it a Day or two to Read, and changed nothing otherwise, but gave this
judgment of it frankly, It was well done: My Brethren, to whom I showed it
besides, were not like to contradict what he advised, but thought it very
prudent, and it came out accordingly.

I must give notice now, that P. 9. l. 20. the word [it] which is fallen out at
the Press, must be carefully preserved, lest you mistake the Sense.

Note also, That in the Marginal Note, p. 5, there to the Nominative Case
wanting to the Verb Condemn. Read therefore, and the imposers of this Oath
condemn, etc.

Note, moreover, that there needs some farther Explication in the place: For
suppose a Man to be satisfied in all other Scruples but this One, that he
apprehends in the late Times, the Parliaments Cause was the right, and not the
King's, and he cannot therefore take the Oath, because he thinks he shall
thereby Condemn that Cause. The plain Answer to this Man is, that though he
cannot but believe, that the Major Part of the Houses that passed this Oath,
were of a contrary judgment to his; yet is he not to think it was their intent,
that every one who takes this Oath should meddle with that Matter, and Judge of
that Cause, so as to condemn one side, and justify another: but that he should
only judge, think, believe, and declare, that to raise another War, or do now
as they did then (as we speak) is unlawful; and he that does not Judge so, or
cannot discern this, must forbear to take the Oath, out of Question. The Summa
Potestas in this Land, lies in the King, and his Two Houses, as one
Conporation, (we have intimated) and when they were divided, a Man may judge
the Constitution Dissolved, and the People at Liberty; and consequently, that
they might then do that, in that peculiar Case, which can never be done out of
it, without resisting the Ordinance of God; which to do, we know is Sin. This
is the Answer to that Scruple, being more darkly there expressed.

There remains only, that I supply here the Fifth Reason (according to the
First Paper) for Printing these Sheets, that for want of Room was left out in
the Epistle.

It pleased Providence to call some Persons to the Office who have been the
better enabled (to speak modestly) to Hold the same, upon the satisfaction
which is couched in this Paper; and if it be of great Concern at this time,
that such Men do Hold Sheriffs, who are willing to deny their own Advantage,
(not seek it) for the sake of the Public: It is yet of greater concern that by
the publishing our grounds for their satisfaction, many in distress about the
Oxford Act, may be relieve, and a Way opened for many of the like substantial
Citizens, of known Piety, Loyalty, and Ability, to be brought into
Corporations, throughout the Nation, to the great service of the King and
Kingdom.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page, 9 line. 20. read. Swear it, p. 24. l. 9. for expressed 1. so pressed.


