The CASE of Sir William Drake Knight, concerning his Election and Return as
Burgess for the Borough of Agmondisham in the County of Bucks.
Humbly offered to the Consideration of the Honorable the Knights, Citizens,
and Burgesses in Parliament Assembled.
AGmondisham is an Ancient Borough. The Chief Officers are two Constables. The
Electors are all the Inhabitants not receiving Collection. A Precept coming to
the Constables for Electing two Burgesses to Serve in the present Parliament.

The day of Election was Thursday the Seventh day of August, 1679.

The Competitors were Sir William Drake, who upon the Poll appeared to have 74
good Votes. Sir Roger Hill admitted to be duly Elected. Algernoone Sydney
Esquire, who had only 70 Votes and of them 12 were excepted against.


The Poll was taken in the Forenoon, and some Queries were made against some of
the Electors; Proclamation was made for any other that had right to Vote to
come in, and none coming the Poll was closed by Consent of all Persons
concerned and left (...) in a Gentleman's hands, and by like Consent it was
agreed to meet at three a Clock in the Afternoon to inspect the Poll, and
Examine the doubtf^^ (...), and that no further Votes than those in the Poll
should be admitted on any hand.

In the Afternoon at the time appointed all Parties appeared, and one Nash then
offering to Vote for Mr. Sydney (...) refused by (...) Ag^ which occasioned
some dispute, but Sir William Drake then pressed that the Poll might be opened
and the questionable Votes examined, and that such as appeared to have the
Majority of good Votes might be returned, and for that purpose the Poll was
produced; But by the means of Mr. Sydney and some present on his behalf the
younger Constable(having by surprise gotten the Precept into his hands) was
prevailed withal, (before the Poll was cast up, and the questionable Votes
examined) to return Sir Roger Hill and Mr. Sydney, notwithstanding Sir William
Drake desired the Poll might be first inspected and examined, and was ready and
offered to make out the Exceptions against 12 of Mr. Sydney's Votes, so that
Sir William Drake not being able to procure Justice from the younger Constable,
applied to the other, and the Poll being produced. opened, cast up and
examined, the Numbers and Exceptions appearing as above, the other being the
first and Chief Constable of the Borough, proclaimed and returned Sir Roger
Hill and Sir William Drake, to be duly Elected.

The Cause upon the Merits of the Retorn and Election is appointed t^ be heard
Wednesday the Third of November, 1680. at Three in the Afternoon.


