A LETTER TO A FRIEND CONCERNING USURY.

Wherein are mentioned all the Arguments formerly written for and against the
Abatement of Interest.

Collected out of Four Tracts on that Subject:

One by Sir Thomas Culpeper Senior, in 1621. Another by Sir Thomas Culpeper
Junior, in 1668. The Third by Sir Josiah Child, in 1668. And the Fourth by Mr.
Thomas Manley, in 1669.

By R. C.

LONDON. Printed in the Year 1690.

SIR,
I Return you many Thanks for your Information, by which after some time spent
in search, I found out all those Pamphlets about Interest, which you discoursed
of; and in return of your Kindness, I have sent you in short the Contents of a
Tract against Usury, written by Sir Thomas Culpeper, in the Year 1621. and
presented to the Parliament in the 21st of King James the First, with a Preface
to a Discourse about Usury, written by Sir Thomas Culpeper, his Son, in the
Year 1668. And also some Arguments from brief Observations concerning Trade,
written in the same Year by Sir Josiah Child, as is supposed, with all the
Objections against the reducing of Interest, out of a Pamphlet ititled Interest
of Six per Cent. etc. written by Thomas Manley, Gent. in the Year 1669. Being
an Answer to the former Pamphlets; by the reading of which you will be enabled
to be a Judge of the Controversy.

Sir, The Arguments in a Tract against Usury, Printed in the Year 1621. which
was presented to the High Court of Parliament, for the reducing of Interest
from Ten per Cent. to Eight, are these:

I. A high Interest decays Trade: The advantage from Interest is greater than
the Profit from Trade, which makes the Rich Merchants give over, and put out
their Stock to Interest, and the lesser Merchants break.

II. Interest being at Ten per Cent. and in Holland at Six, our Neighbor
Merchants under-sell us; they can afford their Wares cheaper.

III. Interest being lower in Holland than in England, their Contributions to
War, Works of Piety, and all Charges of the State, are cheaper unto them than
unto us.

IV. Interest being so high, prevents the Building of Shipping, which is the
Strength and Safety of our Island, most Merchant-Ships being built in Holland.

V. The high Rate of Usury makes Land sell so cheap, being not worth more than
Fourteen or Fifteen Years Purchase: Whereas, in Holland, where Interest is at
Six, it is worth above Five and Twenty: So that a low Interest raises the
Price of the Land: Where Money is dear, Land is cheap.

The Objections against bringing down of Interest, which he takes notice of,
are these:

1st. That Money will be suddenly called in, so all Borrowers will be greatly
prejudiced. To which he answers, That it is not provable that the Lenders will
call in their Money, when they cannot make greater Interest any where else,
besides their Security upon Land is made better.

2d. Objection, That as Money will be hard to be borrowed, so Trade and
Commerce hindered; and the Kings Occasions for Money will not be supplied. To
this he answers, That there will be fewer Borrowers; for the Value of the Land
being raised, the Debts upon it will be sooner discharged; and there being less
occasion for Money to be lent upon Land, it will the more easily be borrowed by
the King's Majesty, Traders, or others; especially by the King, when he always
gives more than Legal Interest.

3d. There is much Money of Foreigners, which when Interest is abated, will be
called for, or carried out of the Land, and so make Money scarce. To this he
answers, That the Money of Foreigners is not brought into the Land by ready
Coin, or Bullion, but by Goods, or Bills of Exchange; and when it is paid, must
be returned by Goods, or Bills of Exchange, and there will not be the less
Money in the Land.

These are the Chief Heads of this Pamphlet, which was printed Threescore and
Ten Years since.

Sir, The next is a Discourse written by Sir Thomas Culpeper, his Son; which
because the Arguments are much the same, I shall not trouble you with them; but
I have transcribed the Preface verbatim; by which you may perceive the Sense of
the Writer.

The Preface to a Book, Entitled A Discourse, showing the many Advantages which
will accrue to this Kingdom, by the abatement of Usury.
IT is now about Forty five years since, ( viz. 21 Jacobi) That my deceased
Father (being a Member of the Parliament for that year) first attempted the
bringing down of Interest from Ten to Eight in the Hundred; and Published a
Discourse thereupon: Wherein his endeavors (assisted by many Patriots of that
time) so well succeeded, that a Law was then made for that Purpose.

It passed with all the Opposition imaginable, and nothing was left
un-objected, or un-answered, which the Will of Man could devise, for it was an
untroden Path, and must be hewn out by dint of Reason, in regard none of those
Arguments, wherewith Experience has since happily furnished us, in great
Plenty, could then be produced.

At the passing of it, he has often told me, That a Member of that Parliament,
of as great Authority and Esteem as any then sitting, and a Principal Opposer,
spoke to this Effect, That though he could not protest, yet he desired, it
might be remembered, That he had foreseen and foretold the Inconveniences that
would ensue: To which it was by my Father replied, That he desired it might
likewise be remembered, That he had Prophesied the many happy Effects of it,
(viz.) To the King, in the improvement of his Customs: To the Landlord, in the
advancement of his Rents, and price of his Inheritance: To the Merchant, in
quickness of his Trade, and benefit of his Returns: To the Borrower in the ease
of his Condition, etc. And Issue was joined concerning his Majesty's Customs of
Exportation, as a Measure of all the rest: Not many years after they met again;
and my Father pleasantly asked him; whether he had lately been at the
Custom-house: which he as readily apprehending, most ingeniously yielded the
Cause.

Soon after this there was a long Vacancy of Parliaments: till the year 1640.
At which time my Father (being strengthened with success, and further incited by
Intelligence from Holland, that they had there newly abated their Interest) set
forth another Treatise, to evince the necessity of reducing Money from Eight to
Six; the Groundwork whereof was, That till we brought Interest to the same
Rate with the Dutch, our design was lame, and our Grand Competitors would still
have the start of us: The Business was ready for the Mint, and would cortainly
have passed, but that it was intercepted by unnatural Discord.

Hitherto the necessity of it did not so visibly appear; it was as yet but
convenience, for the Dutch had then their hands full of their War with Spain,
which (though prosperous enough) was some Curb to their growth in Commerce;
Germany was so harassed and embroiled, that it could neither Trade nor Till;
France so exhausted, that it bought of us much more than it sold; Sweden a mere
Limb of the French Interest; we alone (sitting under the Shadow of our own
Vines) might afford to give them all great odds; for all the Markets of the
World were full of our Growth, and thin of theirs: The Kings Customs yearly
greatly advanced; the Gentleman daily raised his Rent, yet duly received it,
which the Farmer cheerfully paid, and the Merchant (their Factor) thrived with
his Principal; Our Land was yearly improved, and with it Our Manufacture
increased; Our poor generally employed, and not turned a Charge upon the Land;
Our Debtors daily cleared themselves, either by sale of Land, or fortunate
Industry: So as, in a short time, There would have been no decay, no leading
into Captivity, and no complaining in our Streets.

Betwixt 1640 and 1660, was a vast Gulf of Twenty Years ruin and distraction
in this Kingdom; during which time (not to mention our own Declination, ( viz.
Anno 1647, happened the Peace at Munster, whereby the Dutch (being unmolested
and secured from Spanish pretense) were at leisure to intend their Trade, and
undermine Ours. Germany has had time to Re-people, Re-build, and Re-plant.
Sweden is become an Independent Power, of much weight in the Balance of
Christendom. And France first making Peace with the Emperor, then with Spain,
(by the Sovereignty of its Dominion, the largeness and compactness of its
Territory, and the pre-eminence of its Soil and Climate) is in a few Years
become dangerous to us all.

Anno 1652. The Grandees of that Junto found themselves in a dangerous Dilemma:
For, as on the side, they saw, That without encouraging Trade and Navigation,
their New Machine of a Commonwealth must soon fall; so neither, without the
utter Oppression of the Nobility and Gentry, could it long stand: They
therefore (for the present Exigence) contrived an Expedient, by continuing all
the Burdens upon Land, and abating Interest to Six per Cent. They meant, no
question, (when they had once accomplished their purpose of ruining their Enemy
the Landlord) to bring it lower; as yet it was not seasonable; for scarce any
Land-Taxes, with very low Interest, would greatly and suddenly hurt him: But
sure they were short-sighted if they did not see, That Land-Taxes would destroy
Trade, though not so immediately, yet as effectually as high Interest; And
that, if by Embasing our Land, we discourage its Improvement, we nip our Trade
in its very Bud.

Anno. 1660. His Majesty being happily restored, and the Kingdom settled, my
Father forthwith resumed his design of further abating Interest, as the
greatest of Blessings both to King and Kingdom: But my Lord Culpeper dying,
(who, he knew had the same Thoughts, and through whose Assistance only he hoped
to effect it) he soon gave it over, finding (as he said) that the World was
then intent upon other Game than Trade; and despairing that himself should live
to see it: Yet, before his death he recommended the Prosecution of it to me,
(his Executor) together with the Payment of his Debts; Adding sometimes in
jest, That the Usurer and he were not yet even; for he had only scratched the
Usurer; the Usurer had stabbed him: but he hoped he might (without Breach of
Charity) will me, if I could, to revenge his quarrel, by doing good to the
Usurer against his will.

Accordingly he made it the main drift of his private discourses with me, in
the last period of his Age (being 87 Years old when he died, about six Years
since) to arm me for his Encounter, by possessing me not only with the
Evidence, but the Importance of the Argument, by telling me frequently, That
when he was forgotten, it would be revived; That he wished it were not too late
considered; That it would at once Reform a thousand Abuses; That he did not see
how a Register could be, till low Interest first made way for it, by clearing
Encumbrances: That he marvelled Sir Walter Raleigh, who wrote so many notable
things concerning Trade, Navigation, and Fishing, never harped upon this
String; That he could boast to have been happily instrumental in the recovery
and preservation of many thousand Acres of excellent Marsh-Land, but to his own
loss, by unhappily exposing himself to the Canker of Interest, that Interest
being high, borrowing chargeable, and all the burdens laid upon Land, it was
time for Gentlemen in debt (if they meant honestly) to wear Linsey-Woolsey, and
eat Eggs and Sallets; to which we must all come by degrees: for so the wary
Spaniard in a barren Country, supports himself against the extremity of Taxes.

In the same Year, viz. 12 Car. 2. (Six per Cent. being then generally
practiced) That Convention holding it necessary to continue the said practice,
confirmed it by a Statute Entitled An Act for Restraining Excessive Usury: The
Preamble whereof is as follows. Forasmuch as the Abatement of Interest from
ten in the Hundred, in former times has been found by notable Experience,
beneficia to the Advancement of Trade, and Improvement of Lands, by good
Husbandry, with many other considerable Advantages to this Nation: especially
in the Reducing of it to a nearer proportion with other States, with whom we
Traffic. And whereas, in fresh memory, the like fall from Eight to Six in the
Hundred by a late constant practice, has found the like success, to the
general Contentment of this Nation, as is visible by several Improvements. And
whereas it is the endeavor of some at present, to reduce it back again in
practice to the allowance of the Statute still in force, to Eight in the
Hundred; to the great discouragement of Ingenuity and Industry in the
Husbandry, Trade, and Commerce of this Nation. Be it therefore, etc. Confirmed
13 Car. 2. Cap. 14.

After my Fathers decease, I endeavored what I could to propagate so fruitful
a Plant, and try if it would grow at London; which, I take it, is not so far
Northward as Amsterdam; but for want of Eloquence, I found my self always
contradicted and foiled; though I must needs say never convinced.

The most popular Argument I met with, was this, That Eight per Cent. were far
more seasonable in our scarcity of Money: Since, 1. High Interest brings Money.
2. Money brings Trade. To the first of these Propositions, I could have
answered, That the Money mentioned must be either Gotten, Given, or Lent:
Gotten, I fear it cannot be at Eight per Cent. because I see, that even at Six
per Cent. our wisest Traders (who both by their Stocks and Experience, are best
able to manage Trade) daily decline it, and betake themselves to Interest, as a
more steady Income, leaving younger Men (who commonly are more sanguine) to
feast themselves with Hope, and buy their Experience. Given, I doubt it is not,
for I hear of slender Charity now stirring. If it be Lent, it must be re-paid
with greater Interest, than the Use of it will yield; and that mars all. To the
second I could have shown the vast difference, where Trade brings Money, as it
does in Holland, and once did here; and where Money brings Trade, as it does
still in Spain. But I found the Torrent was not to be stemmed, and so reserved
my Purpose for a calmer Season.

By this time the War with Holland was begun, and all Discourses silenced with
the Sound of Cannon; the Event whereof was neither so good as we sometimes
hoped, nor so bad as once we feared; but compounded of strange Disappointments
and Deliverances: Of all which, the most profitable Use we can make, is this;
That though we prevailed sufficiently by Blows and Booties, yet we were first
wearied with the Expense.

And no marvel, if we duly consider the vast disproportion of our respective
Charges: For 3 to 6, or 4 to 8, bears the same Analogy as 30 to 60, or 40 to
80. Now if the States by commanding Money at 4 per Cent. could in Building,
Rigging, Victualling, Paying, etc. do that for 40 l. which must cost His
Majesty 80 l. (and I wish he had Money so cheap) I suppose, (the Forces being
otherwise reasonably balanced) scarce any Goodness of Ships, Valor of Seamen,
or Advantage of Situation and Ports, will countervail such Odds.

Some Months after the Peace was proclaimed, presuming that our late
Experience, and present Exigence, could not but conduce to my Design, by
disposing many who were averse, to receive Impressions contrary to their former
Judgments, and affording me (at least) some Illustrations; I went to London,
with full purpose to promote it; but found my self happily prevented by one Mr.
Child, a Merchant of known Abilities in Trade, and choice Conversation, who
(rising as it were out of my Father's Dust) did by his own Sagacity find out
this hidden Vein; and lighting afterward, by mere chance, upon one of my
Father's Treatises, modestly reprinted it, with its proper Date, and annexed it
to his own excellent Treatise, entitled, Brief Considerations concerning Trade
and Interest of Money: Whose honest Endeavors for his King and Countries
Service, I am bound to assist with my utmost Skill and Power; and in pursuance
thereof, have composed this Tract, which, with all humility, I present to your
Wisdoms.

In a Postscript he takes notice of this Objection.

That since the Law of the Land has settled the Rate of Interest, the Usurer has
a Property by Law to Interest; and it would be as much wrong to make a Law to
abate Interest, as to take away so much of the Rent of every Man's Land: And
such a Law would be a great Prejudice to Widows, Orphans, and others, who live
upon Interest, and know not how otherwise to employ their Stock.



To this he answers, That as to Orphans, it can be no prejudice; because, as
the Law of England now stands, Executors are not obliged to pay Interest.

Secondly, That there is no Property or Right to Interest by the Laws of the
Land; but the Right does solely arise by the Covenant and Agreement of the
Party. Both by Ecclesiastical and Statute Law, Usury was counted unlawful; and
those Statutes that afterward limited Interest to 10, 8, and 6 per Cent. did
only take away the Penalties from the former Statutes, but did not make it more
lawful.

By the ancient Canons of the Church, the Usurers were in the same Condition
with the Excommunicated: They were denied the Sacraments, disabled to make
Wills, and not permitted Burial in Church or Churchyard.

By the Statute of the 3 of H. 7. it was Ordained, That all Usury should be
extirpated. By the 11 of H. 7. He that lends his Money upon Usury, shall
forfeit one half thereof.

The Statute made in the 3 of H. 8. takes off the former Penalties, and limits
Interest to 10 per Cent. but in the same Statute declares Usury unlawful.

In the 5 of E. 6. the Law of H. 8. was Repealed; and it was then Enacted, That
no Person should take Interest, upon the Penalties of losing the Principal, be
Imprisoned, and Fined at the King's Pleasure.

In the 13 of Eliz. the Law of E. 6. was Repealed, and that of H. 8. was
reinforced: But in that Statute Usury is called a Vice, and a detestable Sin;
and provides, That it may be punished by the Ecclesiastical Law.

The Statute in the 21 of King James the First, by which Interest was reduted
from 10 to 8, relates the great Mischiefs from high Interest, and provides,
That no Words in the said Act should be construed to allow the Practice of
Usury, as to the Point of Religion.

The Law made in 1652. being the same with that of the 12th and 13th of Car. 2.
which reduced Interest from 8 to 6, takes notice in the Preamble, of the great
Advantage to the Nation, by the bringing down of Interest; and restrains, under
Penalties, the taking above 6 per Cent. but gives no more Legal nor
Ecclesiastical Right, than the former Statutes.

By this it appears, that Usury was accounted a Crime; so that the abating of
it, is but the lessening of the Sin; and if there was any Right from those
Laws, it was very uncertain: And how severe soever the Lowering of Interest
from 6 to 4 per Cent. may be to Widows, Orphans, and Younger Brothers; yet they
will still have as much Rent for their Money, as the Gentry and their Elder
Brothers have for their Land; for the Land of England does not yield more than
4 per Cent.

The next Remarks are from Brief Observations concerning Trade and Interest of
Money; written, as is supposed, by Sir Josiah Child, in 1668.

Amongst the several Means which he recites for the promoting of Trade, he
concludes, That a Low Interest is the chiefest; and lays down this Position,
That the Abatement of Interest is the Cause of the Prosperity and Riches of the
Nation; and that the bringing down of Interest in this Kingdom, from Six to
Four, or Three per Cent. will necessarily, in less than twenty Years time,
double the Capital Stock of the Nation. He proves this very clearly, by several
Arguments, which will be too long to recite. I shall therefore only mention two
of his Instances.

First, That where Interest is high, the People are poor, and Money scarce; as
to instance in Spain, Scotland, and Ireland, where Money is at 10 and 12 per
Cent. the Inhabitants are poor, ill fed and clad; though Ireland and Spain are
both very fertile Countries, and to the latter all the Gold and Silver of the
Indies are brought; and yet there is seldom any but Brass Money seen in the
Country. On the contrary, in Italy and Holland, where Money yields not above
Three per Cent. the People are Rich, full of Trade, and their Land sells from
Thirty five to Forty Years Purchase.

Secondly, That by the several Abatements of Interest in England, we have so
increased in Riches, that now 2000 l. is esteemed no greater Portion than 500
l. was Fifty Years ago; and a Knight now exceeds a Lord of those days in rich
Clothes, Plate, Jewels, etc. and that we have almost a hundred Coaches for one
we had then.

And if Interest were lowered to Three or Four per Cent. the Nobility and
Gentry may presently, in stead of Fifty, write One hundred. The Merchants, who
bear the Burden of the Day, by trading upon Interest, will find their Yoke
lighter. The Mariners, Shipwrights, Porters, Clothiers, Packers, and all sorts
of Laboring People, would be more constantly employed; and the Farmers would
sell the Product of their Land at better Rates. He concludes with answering of
several Objections, which are the same as are before recited.

Sir, The next Recitals are out of a Book entitled, Usury at Six per Cent.
etc. written by Mr. Thomas Manly, in 1669. wherein he designs to answer the two
Books before-recited, one written by Sir Tho. Culpeper junior, and the other by
Sir Josiah Child, which he does so confusedly, and to so little Purpose, that I
cannot find any thing considerable to take notice of, only in the Main, his
design is to excuse the Usurer, and to lay the blame of the decay of Trade from
the dearness of the Commodities, which he says does arise from the high Prises
of the Workmen and Labouror Wagges; and the Merchants and Traders living too
well, spending too much of foreign Commodities, and drinking too much Wine; so
that he would have the People to be starved, and go in Thredbare Clothes, and
drink nothing but Water or Small Bear, that they might be the better able to
pay Interest.

But because the main Design of his Treatise is to prevent the abating of
Interest, that I might be impartial to both sides, I have recited every one of
his Arguments, which he devides into Nine.

He begins, The many Mischiefs that will ensue from the abating of Interest are
these.

1. It will draw the Treasure of the Nation into a few Hands, (than which
nothing can be more pernicious,) occasion the hoarding of it up in the Misers
Chest; by which I perceive he thinks the Userers will lock up their Money,
rather than lend it at Three or Four per Cent. but the Usurers are wiser Men,
and have learnt the Proverb, That it is better to have half a Loaf than no
Bread; neither is Three or Four per Cent. so contemptable a Gain to be so
slighted, for many Gentlemen are now contented to Let out Money at Four per
Cent: And the East India Company gives no more than Three per Cent. at this
time.

2. It will make Money scarce to be borrowed: that is answered before, for the
Lenders do now put out their Money at Three and Four per Cent. before such a
Law is made, therefore will not refuse it afterward.

3. It will expose, both at present and in the future, an infinite number of
Widows, Orphans, and other impotent Persons, to great want and extremity: This
Objection was before answered by Sir Thomas Culpeper.

4. It will encourage our Gentry to run into debt, by making most of them
bolder in borrowing.

5. It will oblige the Nobility and Gentry to provide greater Portions for
their younger Children.

6. It will introduce a thousand tricks amongst the rank Usurers, Brokers, and
Scriveners.

7. It will cause the Dutch to withdraw their Money from us.

8. It only can retard the Building of London, etc. But this is no Objection
now, nor ever would have been, if London had not been Built, no more than the
other are before-recited.

9. And lastly, It will expose the Gentry who shall be in debt at the passing
such a Law, to many and great inconveniences. The Reasons are, that he thinks
the Money will be called for, and not lent again by others, though the Security
be enlarged by the lowering of Interest, which raises the value of Land.

Sir, These are his Arguments, the Weight of them I Will leave to you to judge;
all that I observe from the Four Pamphlets is this;

First, That the Land of England, when Sir Thomas Culpeper wrote his Discourse,
was at Fifteen and Sixteen years Purchase, and I see now that it is worth
generally Two or three and Twenty, which does solely arise from the abating of
Interest.

Second, That Interest was at Six per cent. in Holland; but after it was
reduced to Eight in England, it was reduced to Four in Holland; and now being
at Six here, it is there at Three: So that they have always kept the same
advantage in Trade, from our over Ballence by Interest, well understanding the
Profit they have from thence.

Third, That the Dutch sent Money here in England in those days, and the
lowering of Interest did not cause them to call it home; but it were better for
this Nation if it would, for then they would return their Effects in our Native
Commodities, and not keep their lean Kine to be made fat by Interest, as Sir
Josiah expresses it. For if Money had not been then reduced, every 1000 l.
from the Interest of 10 per cent. would have been now a Million; according to
Old Mr. Audley's Observation, that One hundred Pound, put out at Ten per cent,
would make a Hundred thousand Pound in Seventy years, so long it is since
Interest was first lowered.

Therefore the Memory of Sir Thomas Culpeper ought to be in high Esteem with
this Nation, being the first, by his sagacity, that brought down Interest, or
else perhaps the whole Land of England by this time had been mortgaged, if not
sold to the Dutch.

Lastly, Sir Thomas his Arguments for abating of Interest from Ten to Eight,
which were, That it would raise the Price of Land, and promote Trade, etc. are
the same as are now used to reduce Interest from Six to Four, and experience
has shown their good Effects; and therefore we have Reason to expect the like
advantage, the Objections were the same then as now, and therefore can have no
greater Force, nor worser Effects.

Sir, I have exceeded the Bounds of a Letter, which I could not avoid, to bring
the chief Contents of Twelve Sheets into Two, without being unjust to some of
the Authors, and rendering my Endeavor unacceptable, giving you an imperfect
Account, which was the chiefest of my Care to avoid.

SIR, I am your most Obedient Servant. R. C.
Land. Oct. 20. 1690.
FINIS.

