The Case of the ENGLISH WEAVERS and FRENCH MERCHANTS truly Stated.
THe Design of the WEAVERS in their Bill, contained in the Preamble, is the
encouragement of them in their Trade, which is confessed by all to be
necessary, and very beneficial to the whole Nation, which they say is much
discouraged by the frequent Importation of Forreign-wrought Silks, especially
from FRANCE, most of which are privately conveyed hither without paying of
Custom, by which means the FRENCH MERCHANTS are sufficiently enabled to
undersell the WEAVERS in their Home-made Commodities, and consequently carry
away the Trade of these Nations.

The FRENCH MERCHANTS, in answer to this, say, The WEAVERS of ENGLAND are under
a great Mistake, and that their discouragement is not because the FRENCH
MERCHANTS do not pay their Customs, but because the WEAVERS live too high, and
are not so good Workmen, etc. And as the WEAVERS in their Preamble refer to the
Custom House Books for proof, so have they ingeniously done likewise.

Therefore here follows a true Account of the particular Entries of all
wrought, as well as unwrought Silks in the Port of London, from Michaelmas
1668, to ditto 1669. together with the Places from whence they came; by which
it will truly appear, whether the ENGLISH WEAVERS or the FRENCH MERCHANTS are
under a Mistake: And it is humbly submitted to serious Consideration, it being
conceived by some eminent Merchants and Tradesmen in and about this City, to be
a Matter of very high Concernment to Trade, and the general Interest of the
Nation.

Wrought Silks, Foreign Manufactured, Imported from l. w. l. s. d. Italy 39457
3123: 13: 7 Holland 10557 1002: 18: 3 East Indies 14370 512: 8: 7 Flanders 226
21: 9: 2 France 6400 608: 0: 0 Total 71010 l. weight of wrought Silks, which in
Subsidy paid the King 5268: 9: 9

Thrown Silk Imported and Manufactured in England from l. w. l. s. d. Italy
87216 3452: 6: 0 Holland 2878 113: 18: 8 Flanders 3027 119: 16: 4 Total 93121
l. weight of Thrown Silk, which in Subsidy paid the King 3686: 1: 0

Raw Silk Imported and Manufactured in England from l. w. l. s. d. Italy 14563
345: 17: 5 Turkey 249502 5925: 13: 5 East Indies 248 5: 17: 9 Total 264313 l.
weight of Raw Silk, which in Subsidy paid the King 6277: 8: 8

Ferret Silk Imported and Manufactured in England from l. w. l. s. d. Flanders
7012 l. weight, which is Subisdie paid the King 333: 1: 5

l. s. d. Total of Silks Imported and Manufact. here, 364446 l. weight, which
in Subsidy paid the King 10296: 11: 2 Total of wrought Silks Imp. Manufact.
abroad, 71010 l. weight, which in Subsidy paid the King 5268: 9: 9 Difference
in weight between them 293436 l. weight, Difference in Subsidy paid 5028: 1: 5

OBSERVATIONS.
BEsides, to the Entries of Silks wrought up here, may be added the great
Revenue that comes to the KING, by Dying Stuff imported, which amounts the same
year to 9193 l. 6 s. 8 d. a great Quantity whereof is used in the Dying of the
Silks here Manufactured.

It is worthy Observation, that the wrought Silks imported are doubly rated to
the Silks that are manufactured here; so that there has been entered at the
Port of London, of wrought Silks 20101 l. weight less than one fourth part of
the Silks wrought here.

Now the FRENCH MERCHANTS say, that we make not so many as they import, and it
is too true; because we are prevented by their unfair Dealing: nay it is verily
believed, and by some of themselves confessed, that we make not one sixth part
of the Silks that are worn in these Nations; but suppose there were one third
part made here, how greatly then is the KING wronged, and his Subjects, the
Handicrafts men, discouraged, when instead of accompting at the Custom-house
for 60000 l. per ann. and upwards, they pay but little more than 5000 l.
Subsidy? for the Additional Duty is not to be accounted in this Calculation.

From hence it appears, that the FRENCH MERCHANTS are greatly mistaken in their
Grounds of the ENGLISH WEAVERS Discouragement in their Trade; for certainly
55000 l. per ann. and upwards, with the Additional Duty added to it, escaping
Customs, will enable them to carry on their Trade, and consequently encourage a
Foreign Interest when the ENGLISH ARTISTS must sit still, although as good, if
not better Workmen than the FRENCH, as may be proved if occasion offers.

But to take particular Notice of the FRENCH Manufactures of Silks imported, if
the Merchants and Traders therein be observed, they will be found to be most
guilty of the occasion of the WEAVERS Complaint by their Bill; Therefore here
follows a true Account of what they have entered at London and other Ports, from
Michaelmas 1668, to Ditto 1669.

London 6400 l. w. Tot. 36462 l. weight of wrought Silks, which in Subsidy paid
the KING 3463 l. Dover 29877. Rye 185.

It is modestly conjectured, that the FRENCH MERCHANTS Trade for at least
double the Quantity in Silks more than the Natives, and yet they enter not one
ninth part in weight of Silk to what the ENGLISH do, nor pay little more than
one third in Subsidy to the King, so that did they make a true Entry, whereas
they pay 3463 l. they ought to pay 62334 l. per annum; so that they pay short
of their Duties in Subsidy 58871 l.

But if they object, that a great part of this Silk is wrought up in Ribbons,
Laces, etc. against that may be set the vast Quantities of their Ribbons,
Laces, etc. which are imported without paying any Duty, because prohibited: And
besides allow them to take off one half, for the Manufactures of Ribbons, and
Laces made here, which is the most they can reasonably do; yet notwithstanding
they answer not their Duty by 29435 l 10 s. per ann. in Subsidy, besides a
Moiety thereof for Additional Duty.

It is observable, that far greater Quantities, of French Silks are vended in
these Nations than of Italian Silks, and yet enter not so much in Weight:
neither do the Italian wrought Silks so much prejudice the Native Artists,
because few or none of those kinds, or sorts, of Silks are here manufactured:
But by the frequent Importation of French Silks and Stuffs (which are chiefly
paid for with Moneys, not with other Commodities) the English Artists are
greatly discouraged, as from others, so especially from the making of
Fashionable figured Silks and Stuffs, in which they are sufficiently skilful,
and most inclinable to: therefore the Discountenance of the French Silks and
Stuffs is chiefly aimed at by the WEAVERS Bill.

These things considered, it makes the WEAVERS wonder that the FRENCH MERCHANTS
should, in their Paper, say, the King would lose 120000 l. per ann. if a Seal
for their Goods be appointed (which they know is the only way to prevent their
Goods from escaping the Customs, and many other inconveniences by the French
Trade) whereas by the Account aforesaid it appears, there was paid in Subsidy,
for all Silks from Foreign parts, but little more than 8000 l. in one year.

Nor do the WEAVERS design a Monopoly (as is reflected) by this Seal, they
being no way fond of that trouble, but willing to wave the same, if any other
way may be found as effectual to the End designed by their Bill, that is,
Security of His Majesty's Customs and Encouragement to English Artists in their
Trade. After a serious perusal hereof, it is hoped the FRENCH MERCHANTS Reasons
against the WEAVERS Bill, will be weighed in the Balance with the grand End
intended; and then no question but they will be found too light: All which is
humbly submitted.


