THE Deposition, and farther Discovery OF THE LATE Horrid PLOT, By One Mr. C^,
Late Servant to Sir Tho. C^ IN YORKSHIRE, Who Arrived at London, on Thursday
the Third of this Instant July, and was Examined before Sr. Robert Claton;

Wherein he declared that his said Master offered him the Sum of one Thousand
Pounds to Violate HIS MAJESTY'S Sacred Person:

And likewise he gives farther Information, that Twelve JESVIT-PRIESTS are some
few Days since come Over from St. Omers, and other Places Adjacent, with a
Diabolical Resolution to Assessinate the Life of His Sacred Majesty, before the
Perrogation of this Parliament be Expired.

With an Account of their Designs therein.

AS LIKEWISE The Account of Mr. Richard Langhorn's discovery, on Thursday, as
before dated; wherein he shows the vast Revenues of the Jesuits in England.

As also a true Relation of a dreadful Fire at Cottering in Northamptonshire:
With many other Circumstances.

London, Printed for F. F. [1679]

The Deposition, and farther Discovery of the Horrid Plot, etc.
STill though the Plots of wicked and Pernicious are secretly contrived, yet
Heaven Sifts them out though lodged in air upon a Dragons Wings, or in the Cave
of Everlasting Night; no private Fate can lurk beyond its view in obscure
Caverns and the darkest Cells; its Penetrating luster comes: and as the
Princely Prophet does confess, Not Height nor Depth, nor Rocks nor Caves, nor
Hills, no nor the Wings of Morning in the utmost parts of earth, can e're
secure from an all seeing God; and can the Roman cruelties designed and laid by
Fiends and Men against a Sacred Prince, his Vice Roy here below, e're take
effect, when in his wrath he to untermands the same. Oh! no, as soon may Stars
drop from their chrystial Spears, or all this Fabric cringe into a Chaos, for
in his defense will he make bare his arm, and arise like a mighty Man to break
the Teeth of his conspiring Foes; the which in part we have already seen, and
in part his (...) that durst to stretch an arm against anointed Power, or bend
an evil thought) have felt, since first their cruel Practices were brought
to^^g^t among which take this N^^ Discovery of a later Stampas, as follows.

ON Thursday the 3d. of this Instant July, 1679. came a certain Man to Town,
and coming into an Inn in Bishops-Gate-Street; after he had some time refreshed
himself, desired to speak with the Master of the Inn, who being called, in a
short time came to him and requested his business? the aforesaid Person,
Clement by name, told him he desired some private conference with him about a
Business of great importance: to which the Innkeeper readily condescended:
Whereupon they being in private, the aforesaid Clement told him, That he was
Servant to one Sir Tho. Glascoone in Yorkshire, and that he had been for some
time Privy to the carrying on of the late Plot, and that his coming up to
London was to make a Discovery and farther Deposition of great Importance,
touching his Majesty's Sacred Person. The Innkeeper hearing this, advised him
to go to Sir Robert Claton, who was a very Worshipful and well affected
Gentlemen, and before him upon Oath to declare what he knew, and that he ought
not to conceal any thing that might turn to the prejudice of his Sovereign:
whereupon he taking the Inn keepers advice, immediately went, and before his
Worship made his farther Discovery as his knowledge led him of the emenent
Danger that was threatened, the substance of which was as follows: First, That
his Master relying upon his fidelity (the which in other affairs he had always
preserved invocable) offered him if he would undertake for the Romish Cause to
Assessinate and Murder his Majesty, (a thought which no Pious Christian could
conceive without horror) that for so doing he should receive the sum of 1000
l. gratuety or reward from the Fathers of the Romish Church, with many other
Graces and Privileges: Secondly, That he had a certain account of Twelve (or
thereabouts) Jesuits, lately come over from St. Omers, and other places
adjacent, on purpose, and with a diabolick resolution to destroy his Majesty,
seeing (as they most impiously sugested) that the extremity of occasion
required it, for that they understood the Parliament were preparing a Bill to
bar any Roman-Catholique from possessing this Crown, therefore they had but one
Card to play, the which they resolve by one means or other to effect before the
Prorogation of the Parliament was expired; by the effecting of which: they
might place the Crown upon his head they had ^o long designed, and put a period
to all objections that in that nature might hereafter rise: This Deposition
thus taken, Sir Robert (out of the abundance of his tenderness and Loyal care
for the preservation of his Majesty's person, upon which the welfare of Three
Kingdoms do depend) went immediately and Communicated it unto the Lord High
President of his Majesty's Privy Counsel, who being advertised thereof, called
a Counsel, at White Hall, on Friday the 4th. of this Instant; and dispatched an
Express to his Majesty to acquaint him therewith, and of the Circumstances
aforesaid, and to entreat his Majesty to have an especial care of his Royal
Person, upon which the good of all his faithful Subjects did depend. This
Deponent farther affirms, That he can produce Four other credible Persons that
will confirm the Truth hereof, and as Coherent evidences join with him, etc.

These are farther to inform the Reader, that Mr. Richard Langhorne late
Counselor of the Temple, and now Prisoner in Newgate, who received Sentence
for being a Conspirator in this Plot; was upon Thursday the 3d. of this
Instant, carried before his Majesty's Counsel, then sitting at Hampton Court;
where after some Examination and promises of Grace, he delivered up certain in
Papers, wherein was specified, that the Jesuits Lands, Houses, and other
Personal Estates here in England, amounted and were of greater Value, per
Annum, then the Revenue of both our Universities, viz. Oxford and Cambridge put
together: And that he himself had purchased for them, and in their Names, with
Moneys they ordered to be returned him within these few years, to the value of
68000 l. per Annum: and this is credibly thought to be great part of it
Expended yearly in hiring Villains to fire the City and Suburbs, to Murder
those good affected Subjects, who most resist their damnable practices.

His Majesty, as is supposed, upon his humble request, has sent his Royal Order
beyond Sea, to command the said Langhornes Sons (who have been for a long time
at the English Seminary in St. Omers,) that they forthwith repair into England,
whose absences it is thought have so long hindered his Confession, for he not
being ignorant of Popish cruelty, may paradventure expect that if he should
Impeach any one there, or as the Jesuits term it, break the Holy League by a
free Confession, that they would use in revenging some cruel extremity upon his
Sons, the which he has always, according to a Fatherly Inclination been tender
of: but when they are Arrived a further Confession is expected:

POSTSCRIPT.
THese are also to acquaint the Reader, that there has lately happened a great
Fire at Cottering in Northampton shire; the which lasted very vehement for the
space of three or four hours, in which time the raped Flames consumed about
Twenty (if not more) Houses: the Fire began upon a very strong substantial
House, in which house it is credibly reported that no Fire had been made that
day, no candle lighted, therefore it is strongly conjectured to have been set
on Fire by some Popish Agents, those Harbegars of ruin, whose contagious
Nostrils belch quotidian Flames. But the truth of its being set on Fire as yet
remaiteth in dispute.

FINIS.

