official blazon official blazon
The CASE of the City of London,
In Reference to Their Debts due by Them to the Orphans of the said City, and
Others.
BY the Custom of LONDON (Allowed and Confirmed by diverse Acts of Parliament,
and particularly Saved in the Act 12 Car. 2. which took away the Court of
Wards) The Lord Mayor and Aldermen are Guardians of the ORPHANS of all Freemen
of the said City, And have the Care and Government of them and their Estates;
and every Free-man's Executors are bound by Recognizance to pay his Childrens
Portions into the CHAMBER of London, Or else become bound with Three sufficient
Securities, (Citizens of London) to pay them when they come of Age: Pursuant,
and in Obedience to this Custom, the Portions of great Numbers of Orphans of
the said City, have been Paid into the said Chamber, whereby the Chamber is
become Indebted to them, As follows:

The Debt owing from the Chamber of London is, Principal-Mony to Orphans 508314
12 4 to Others 97300 13 11 605615 6 3 And Interest for the same at Lady Day
last, about 143260 0 0 Total 748875 6 3 By the great Sums of Money exacted from
the Chamber during the Civil Wars, the Chamber of London became Indebted in the
Year 1660, the Sum of 180000 l. Which Debt in Anno 1665 (by Payment of
Interest, or finding Money to Orphans, pursuant to the aforesaid Custom, and by
diverse extraordinary Expenses after the Restoration of King CHARLES the Second)
Amounted to 265000 l.

The greatest Part of the City of London being Burnt down in Anno 1666, As also
the Cities Public Buildings, with the greatest part of their Revenue, The
Chamber was forced (before the Grant of the Coal Revenue) to Disburse diverse
Great Sums of Money (All which were taken up at Interest) to Recover the City
out of its Ruins, in Rebuilding their Prisons and other Public Buildings,
Clearing and Paving the Streets, Repairing the Common Sewers, and other Public
Works. And whereas before the said Fire, the Fines received upon Renewing of
Leases were a great Support to the Chamber; Most of the Cities Houses being
Burnt down, The City was forced (for Encouragement of Tenants) to make Long
Leases thereof without Fines, whereby the Chamber has ever since been deprived
of a considerable Income thereby.

The Cities Rights and Liberties having in the Reign of King CHARLES the Second
been frequently Questioned and Invaded (the better to subject the City to
Arbitrary Power,) And at last Judgment upon the Quo Warranto given against
their being a Corporation; They were forced (for their necessary Defense
therein) to Disburse very great Sums of Money out of the Chamber of London; By
which Means aforesaid, and the constant Payment of Interest, The Debt (which in
1665 was 265000 l.) is now Swelled to near 750000 l.

All the Freehold Lands and Tenements belonging to the Chamber of London do not
amount to 4000 l. per Annum; Near 1000 l. per Annum whereof is charged with
Charitable Uses, and the Residue is for Support of the Cities Government; Which
yet the City (if it shall be thought Convenient to leave Its Government without
that Support) will Sell toward Payment of the said Debt. The WIDOWS and
ORPHANS (to whom this Debt is Owing) are many Hundreds in Number, and very Many
of them have no other Subsistence to Depend upon; Wherefore it is Humbly hoped
the PARLIAMENT will Compassionate Their and the Cities deplorable Case, and
afford a Relief suitable to the Greatness of the Debt; Which They Presume the
rather to Hope, in Regard the Citizens of London have (on All Occasions) been
Serviceable to the Public, and particularly in Their Guards, during All the
Time of Prosecuting The Popish Plot, And upon Occasion of the late Disturbances
before His Present MAJESTY'S Arrival to this City, Which has Cost the Citizens
near 300000 l.

The Debt being so vastly Great, and the Creditors so Numerous, It will not be
possible to Preserve the City, and Support its Government against the Multitude
of Actions that will be brought, Whereby the Corporation must be Torn in
Pieces, without the Parliaments Favorable Assistance, to Enable the City to
Pay off the Debt. And it is Humbly Submitted, Whether the Support of the City
of London, ( and of Its Government) be not for the Interest and Benefit of the
Whole Kingdom?

Printed by SAMVEL ROYCROFT, Printer to the Honorable City of London, 1689.


