I Have perused this Report, and do License George Grafton to Print the same.

Jan. 23. 1689/90. Hen. Pollexfen.

THE CASE OF THE Quo Warranto Against the City of LONDON. WHEREIN The JUDGMENT
in that CASE, and the ARGUMENTS in LAW touching the FORFEITURES and SURRENDERS
of CHARTERS, are Reported.

LONDON, Printed for George Grafton, near Temple Bar in Fleet Street, 1690.

Mich. 33. Car. II. in B. R. rot. 137. Sir Robert Sawyer Knight, His Majesty's
Attorney General AGAINST The Lord Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of London.
The Information in Nature of a Quo Warranto sets forth,
THAT the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London, by the space
of a Month then last past and more, used and yet do claim to have and use,
without any Lawful Warrant or Regal Grant within the City of London aforesaid,
and the Liberties and Privileges of the same City, The Liberties and
Privileges following, (viz.)

I. To be of themselves a Body Corporate and Politic by the Name of Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London. II. To have Sheriffs Civitat.
and Com' London. and Com. Midd', and to name, elect, make and constitute them.
III. That the Mayor and Aldermen of the said City should be Justices of the
Peace, and hold Sessions of the Peace.
All which Liberties, Privileges and Franchises the said Mayor and Commonalty
and Citizens of London upon the King did by the space aforesaid Usurp, and Yet
do Usurp.

THE Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens they appear by their Attorney, and
Plead, Plea.


I. As to their being a Body Politic and Corporate, they prescribe and say,

1. That the City of London is, and time out of mind has been an Ancient City,
and that the Citizens of that City are, and by all that time have been, a Body
Corporate and Politic, by Name of Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the
City of London.

That in Magna Carta de Libertatib' Angliae, in the Parliament holden 9 Hen. 3.
it was enacted quod Civitas London' habeat Omnes Libertates suas antiquas and
Consuetudines suas.

That in the Parliament 1 E. 3. That King by his Charter De Assensu Prelatorum
Comitum Baronum and totius Communitatis Regni sui, and by Authority of the same
Parliament, having recited that the same Citizens at the time of the making
Magna Carta, and also in the time of Edward the Confessor, William the
Conqueror, and other his Progenitors, had diverse Liberties and Customs, Wills
and Grants by Authority aforesaid, That the same Citizens shall have their
Liberties according to Magna Carta -- And that for any Personal Trespass
Alicujus Ministri ejusdem Civitatis; Libertas Civitatis illius in manus ejusdem
Domini Regis Ed. 3. vel heredum suorum non caperetur, sed hujusmodi Minister
prout, qualitatem transgressionis puniretur.

They Plead also,

That in the Parliament holden 7 R. 2. Omnes Consuetudines Libertates
Franchesia and Privilegia Civitatis predict' tunc Civibus Civitatis illius, and
eorum Successoribus, Licet usi non fuerint vel abusi fuerint Authoritate
ejusdem Parliamenti, ratificat' fuerunt.

Then they Plead the Confirmations of several later Kings by their Charters, as
of

King Henry VI. by his Charter, Dated 26 October. 23 H. 6.

King Edward IV. by his Charter, Dated 9 Nov. 2 E. 4.

King Henry VII. by his Charter, Dated 23 July, 20 H. 7.

King James I. by his Charter, Dated 25 Sept. 6 Jac. 1.

King Charles I. by his Charter, Dated 18 October. 14 C. 1.

King Charles II. by his Charter, Dated 24 Jan. 15 C. 2.

Ac eo Warranto they claim to be, and are a Body Politic, etc. and traverse
their Usurping upon the King.

II. As to the having, electing, making and constituting Sheriffs of London and
Middlesex, they Plead,

That they are, and time out of mind were a Body Politic and Corporate, as
well by the Name of Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens, quam per nomen Civium
London. And that King John by his Letters Patents under the Great Seal of
England in Court produced, dated 5 Julii, Anno regni sui primo, granted to the
Citizens of London, that they should have the electing, making and constituting
Sheriffs of London and Middlesex imperpetuum.

Then they plead this Liberty and Franchise confirmed to them by all the
aforementioned Statutes and Charters ac eo Warranto they claim to make and
constitute Sheriffs.

III. As to the Mayors and Aldermens being Justices of the Peace, and holding
Sessions, they plead,

That the City is, and time out of mind was, an Ancient City and County, and
the Citizens a Body Politic.

That King Charles the First by his Letters Patents, Dated 18 October. 14. Car.
I. Granted to the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London, That
the Mayor and Aldermen of London, such of them as had been Mayors, should be
Justices of the Peace, and should hold Sessions, and eo Warranto, they claim to
be Justices, and hold Sessions.

TO this Plea the Attorney General replies. Respons.
And as to the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of London, being a Body
Politic and Corporate,

First takes Issue that they never were a Body Corporate, and for this puts
himself upon the Country. And then goes over and pleads,

That the Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens assuming upon themselves to be a Body
Politic and Corporate, and by reason thereof to have Power and Authority to
convocate and assemble, and make Laws and Ordinances not contrary to the Laws
of the Kingdom, for the better Government of the City and Citizens, and for
preserving the Kings Peace -- Under color and pretext thereof, but respecting
only their private gain and profit, and against the Trust in a Body Corporate,
by the Laws of this Kingdom reposed, assumed an unlawful and unjust Authority,
to levy Money upon the Kings Subjects, to their own proper use, by color of
Laws and Ordinances by them de facto, ordained and established. And in
prosecution and execution of such illegal and unjust Power and Authority by
them Usurped 17th of September. 26 Car. II. in their Common Council Assembled,
made, constituted and published a certain Law by them de facto, enacted for the
levying of several Sums of Money of all the Kings Subjects coming to the
Public Markets within the City to sell their Provisions, (viz.) Of every
Person for every Horse-load of Provisions into any public Market within the
said City brought to sell, 2 d. per day. For every Dosser of Provisions, 6 d.
per day. For every Cart-load not drawn with more than Three Horses, 4 d. per
day. If drawn with more than three Horses, 6 d. per day. And that these Sums of
Money should be paid to the use of the Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens: And if
any refused to pay, then to be removed from his Place in the Market. And that
by color of this Law the Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens for their own private
Gain, had Illegally by the space of Seven Years next after the making this
Ordinance, received diverse great Sums of Money, in all amounting to 5000 l. per
Annum, in oppression of the Kings Subjects.

And further, That whereas a Session of Parliament was holden by Prorogation,
and continued to the 10th of January, 32 Car. II. and then prorogued to the
20th of January then next:

The Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens, 13 Jan. 32 Car. II. in their Common
Council assembled unlawfully, maliciously, advisedly and seditiously, and
without any lawful Authority, assumed upon themselves Ad censendum and
judicandum dictum Dominum Regem and Prorogationem Parliamenti per Dominum Regem
sic fact'. And then and there in Common Council Assembled, did give their Votes
and Order, that a certain Petition under the name of the Mayor, Aldermen and
Commons of the City of London in Common Council assembled, to the King should
be exhibited, in which said Petition was contained,

That by the Prorogation the prosecution of the public Justice of the
Kingdom, and the making necessary provision for the preservation of the King,
and of his Protestant Subjects had received interruption. And that the Mayor,
and Commonalty and Citizens in the same Common Council assembled did
unlawfully, maliciously, advisedly and seditiously, and with intention that the
said Petition should be dispersed amongst the Kings Subjects, to induce an
opinion in them, that the said King by proroguing the Parliament had obstructed
the public Justice, and to incite the Kings Subjects to hatred of the Kings
Person and Government, and to disturb the Peace of the Kingdom, did Order that
the said Petition should be printed, and the same was printed accordingly to
the intent and purpose aforesaid.

By which the Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens aforesaid the Privilege, Liberty
and Franchise of being a Body Politic and Corporate did forfeit, and
afterward by the time in the Information, that Liberty and Franchise of being
a Body Politic, did usurp upon the King. Et hoc, etc.

And as to the other two Pleas, (viz.) The making and having Sheriffs and
Justices of the Peace, The Attorney General Imparles to Mich. Term.

THE Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens, Rejoinder.
as to the Plea of the Attorney General, pleaded in Assigning a Forfeiture of
their being a Body Politic and Corporate,

Protestando, That those Pleas by the Attorney pleaded, and the matter in the
same contained, are insufficient in the Law to forejudge or exclude the Mayor
and Commonalty and Citizens from being a Corporation.

Protestando etiam, That no Act or Deed, or By-Law made by the Mayor, Aldermen
and Common Council is the Act or Deed of the Body Corporate.

Protestando etiam, That they the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of London
never took upon them any unlawful or unjust Authority to Tax the Kings Subjects
for their own private Gain, or did ever levy or exact from the Kings Subjects
coming to Markets such yearly Sums as in the Replication are alleged -- For
Plea say,

That London is the Metropolis of England, and very populous, and Celeberrimum
Emporium totius Europae.

That there are, and time out of mind have been, diverse public Markets for
Provision and Merchandise within the said City to be sold.

That the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens have been, time out of mind, and
yet are, seized of these Markets in Fee, and by all the said time at their own
Costs and Expenses have provided and have accustomed, and ought to provide at
their own costs Places for the holding the said Markets and Stalls, and
Standing, and other Accommodations for persons bringing Provisions and
Merchandises to the said Markets, and Supervisors and other Officers for the
better preserving and ordering the said Markets, and of the great concourse of
persons coming to the same; and for the sustaining and supporting of the said
costs and expenses, by all the time aforesaid have had, and ought to have,
reasonable Tolls, Rates or Sums of Money of persons coming to the said Markets
for their Stalls, Standings, and other Accommodations by them for the better
exposing their Commodities had and enjoyed.

They further say, That the Citizens and Freemen of London are very numerous,
(viz.) 50000 and more.

That within the said City there has been, time out of mind, a Common Council
assembled as often as necessary, consisting of the Mayor, Aldermen, and of
certain of the Citizens, not exceeding 250 persons thereto annually elected,
called the Commons of the said City.

That there is a Custom within the said City for the Mayor, Aldermen and Common
Council to make Bylaws and Ordinances for the Regulation and Government of the
public Markets within the City.

That these Liberties and Customs of the City were confirmed by Magna Carta,
and the other Statutes in the Plea abovementioned.

That by reason of the burning of the City in September. 1666. and the
Alterations in the Market-Houses and Places thereby occasioned, for the
establishing and resetling the Markets within the City, 17 September. 26 Car. II
the then Mayor, Aldermen and Commons in Common Council Assembled, according to
the said Custom, for the better Regulation of the said Market did make and
publish an Ordinance, Entitled An Act for the Settlement and well-ordering the
Public Markets within the City of London; by which said Ordinance reciting
that for the accommodation of the Market People with Stalls, Shelters, and
other Necessaries for their Standing in the Markets, and for the amendment,
paving and cleansing the Marketplaces, and for the support and defraying the
incident Charges thereof, there have been always certain reasonable Rates and
Duties paid for the same. And to the intent that the said Rates may be
ascertained and made public to all Market-people, and the Collectors
restrained from exacting -- It was Enacted and Ordained by the said
Common Council, that the Rates and Sums in the Replication should be paid to
the use of the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens; or upon refusal, to be
removed out of the Market. And they aver, that these are all the Rates or
Duties paid, and were reasonable Sums to be paid; and these they have demanded
and received for the use and purpose aforesaid, as was lawful for them to do.

As to the other matter alleged by the Attorney General in Assigning the
Forfeiture, they say,

That within this Kingdom, (viz.) at the Parish of St. Michael Bassishaw,
London, there was an execrable Plot and Conspiracy prosecuted by Papists to
destroy the King, and to subvert the Ancient Government, and suppress the true
Religion in this Kingdom Established.

That Sir Edmundbury Godfrey took Examinations of Witnesses, and Informations
of the same; and also of the burning of London by the Papists.

That diverse of these Conspirators had lain in wait for him and murdered him,
to the intent to suppress his Examinations, and to deter other Magistrates from
acting in the Discovery.

That Green and others were tried, and hanged for this Murder.

That Coleman and others were also tried, and executed for the same Conspiracy.

That William Lord Powis, Lord Arundel of Warder, Lord Petre, Lord Bellasis
were Impeached by the Commons in Parliament of High Treason for the same
Conspiracies, and sent to the Tower.

That the King in his Speech to that Parliament had recommended to them the
further pursuit and examination of that Conspiracy, declaring he thought not
himself nor them safe, till that matter were gone through with; and therefore
that it was necessary that the said Lords in the Tower should be brought to
their Trials, that Justice might be done; and the Parliament having made an
Address to the King, wherein both Lords and Commons declared their being deeply
sensible of the sad condition of the Realm, occasioned chiefly by the
Conspiracies of a Popish Party, who had plotted and intended the Destruction of
the King, and Subversion of the Government and Religion of the Kingdom; and
thereupon a Solemn Fast kept pursuant to the Kings Proclamation, grounded upon
the said Address, and diverse Bills prepared to be passed into Laws for
preservation of his Protestant Subjects.

These Impeachments and Bills being thus depending, and the Lords in the Tower,
not Tried, the Parliament was upon the 10th of January prorogued, as the
Attorney General above in his Replication has alleged, by reason whereof the
Citizens and Inhabitants of the said City being faithful Subjects to the King,
were much disquieted with the sense and apprehensions of the Danger threatening
the Person of the King, his Government and Realm, by reason of the Conspiracies
aforesaid, as is by both King and Parliament affirmed and declared; and
conceiving no better means to prevent, than by the Sitting of the Parliament;
and having received a Petition from diverse faithful Subjects, Citizens of
London, to the same effect: And it being lawful to Petition, the Mayor, Sir
Patience Ward, and the Aldermen and Commons in Common Council assembled, for
the preservation of the King and his Government did cause to be written the
Petition in the Replication mentioned, which is set forth in haec verba; and
did Order, that after the same was presented to the King, it should be Printed
for the satisfaction of the troubled Minds of the said Citizens; and traverse
the writing or making any other Petition, or making this to any other end or
intent than they have pleaded.

THE Attorney General as to the Plea of the Mayor, Surrejoynder.
and Commonalty and Citizens pleaded to the making and publishing the Ordinance
about the Markets,

Protestando, That the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens were not seized of the
Markets, nor at their charges provided Stalls and Necessaries, or Marketplaces.

Protestando etiam, That the said Rates and Sums were not reasonable.

For Plea says, That by a Statut made 22 Car. II. it was enacted that Places
for Markets should be set out, and 2 d. per Chaldron upon Coals for the charge
of that, and many other things was given; and that they received a great Sum
out of that Duty for the purpose aforesaid; and yet for their own private Lucre
took the Money by the Ordinance.

And traverseth, that the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens time out of mind
habuerunt and habere consueverunt Tolneta Ratas sive denariorum summas per
ipsos Majorem Communitatem and Cives superius supposit. per prefatam Legem,
sive Ordinationem predict' Assess. and in certitudinem reduct prout per
placitum suum superius rejungendo placitat' supponitur.

And to the Plea of the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens pleaded to the
Residue of the Attorney's matter assigned for a Forfeiture, as aforesaid,

The Attorney Protestando, That the aforesaid Prorogation of the Parliament was
for urgent Causes concerning the good of the Kingdom, and thereby the
prosecution of public Justice not interrupted.

And Demurrs to the said Plea of the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens by them
pleaded as to the Petition.

Rebutter.
THE Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens, as to the making and publishing the
Ordinance for the payment of Moneys by those that come to the said Markets, say
as before,

That the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens have, time out of mind, had, and
accustomed to have, reasonable Tolls, Rates, or Sums of Money of all Persons
coming to these Markets with Victuals and Provisions there to be sold, for
Stalls, Standings, and other Accomodations by them had for exposing their
Victuals and Provisions to sale. And of this they put themselves upon the
Country, etc. To this Mr. Attorney demurrs.

And as to the Plea by the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens pleaded to the
Residue of the matter by the Attorney General, assigned for Forfeiture, they
join in Demurrer.

Memorandum, That when the Demurrer in this Case was joined, (viz.) Mich. Term.
34 Car. II. Mr. Sergeant Pemberton was Chief Justice of the King-Bench. But
before Hillary Term, that it came to be argued, he was removed, and made Chief
Justice of the Common-Bench; and Sir Edmoud Saunders, who had been Counsel for
the King, in drawing and advising the Pleadings, was made Chief Justice of the
Kings Bench.

De Termino Sancti Hillarii Annis RRs. Car. II. 34. and 35. Annoque Dom. 1682.
In Banco Regis die Mercurii 7. Februarii. Dominus Rex versus Majorem
Communitat' and Cives Civitat' London.
THIS Great Case was twice only argued at the Bar: First, by Mr. Finch the
Kings Solicitor, for the King; and Sir George Treby Recorder of London, for
the City. And next, by Sir Robert Sawyer the Kings Attorney General, for the
King; and Henry Pollexfen for the City.

Mr. Solicitor. The Questions in this Case, as I think, will be, Mr.
Solicitor.
I. Whether any Corporation can be Forfeited? II. Whether the City of London
differ from other Corporations as to point of Forfeiture? III. Whether any Act
of the Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council in Common Council Assembled, be so
much the Act of the Corporation as can make a Forfeiture? IV. Whether the Acts
by them done in making the By-Law, and receiving Money by it; or in making the
Petition, and causing it to be Printed and Published be such Acts, as if done
by the Corporation, will make a Forfeiture of the Corporation?


The First of these Questions truly I should not make any Question at all, but
that this Case has been a Case of so great expectation, every man has
discoursed about it, and the prejudice that some have entertained concerning
it, have drawn them to assert the Negative Proposition. Therefore, my Lord,
because this strikes to the whole, though I think it has no Foundation in Law,
I will beg leave to remove this Objection out of the Case.

I. First of all, No Corporation has any other Creation than any other
Franchises have, and subsist upon the same Terms that other Franchises do.

II. There is a Trust or a Condition in Law, that is annexed to, and grows upon
all Franchises, that they be not abused, and the Breach of them is a Forfeiture
of the very being of the Franchise.

III. And as there is no Foundation of that Opinion in Law, so the Mischiefs
would be great, if the Law were otherwise. For,

First, That no Corporation has any other Creation than other Franchises have;
it is undoubtedly true that the King is the Original and Commencement of all
Franchises; they have their beginning from him, the Books are clear and full in
it: I need not quote them, though there are many, Kelway 138. 17 Ed. 2. 530. in
the Reports of those times set forth by Mr. Sergeant Maynard. Now, my Lord,
there can be no Corporation, but by the Kings Letters Patents; for even the
Prescription does suppose there was the Kings Patent to create it at first. And
therefore the proper Inquiry will be about the Second thing.

II. How far the Breach of Trust that is annexed to a Franchise, is a
Forfeiture of that Franchise.

First of all, There is no Rule in Law more certain, than that the Mis-user of
a Franchise is a Forfeiture of that Franchise. This the Statute of 18 Ed. 2.
does very well prove, which was an Act of Grace to restore Franchises to those
that had lost and forfeited them. There it was restrained Ita quod libertat'
non sint abusae. And my Lord Coke 2 Inst. in his Observations upon the Statute
of Westm' 1. That Chapter of it that concerns Towns that exacted more Murage
than was granted, fol. 223. says, They shall lose that Grant for ever; says the
Mirror. of Just. which my Lord Coke there quotes, that is no more than the
Common Law; for the Law wills that every Man should lose his Franchise, that
does misuse it: So the Abbot of St. Albans Case, 8 Hen. 4.18. The King seized
the Franchise into his hand, because the Abbot, who had the Goal, would not
give Pledges to make Deliverance, and for detaining his Prisoners a long time
without making a lawful Deliverance. And so 20 Ed. 4. 6. The Abbot of
Crowland's Case for detaining Prisoners acquitted; after Fees paid the King
seized the Goal for ever. These two are cited by my Lord Coke 2 Inst. 43. And
in Sir George Reynel's Case, 9 Report, Fitzherberts Abridgment, Titl' coron'
placit' 233. A Layman was taken in a Robbery, the Ordinary challenges him as a
Clerk, whereas he was a Layman: It was ruled, that for his false challenge the
Ordinary should lose his Temporalities to the King, and lose his Franchise to
challenge Clerks for him and his Successors for ever. Thus far is plain, That
Franchises, if misused, are forfeited; and that though enjoyed by Persons in a
corporate capacity, as appears by the Cases put. And then as a Corporation may
forfeit any Franchise they are seized of in right of the Corporation so may a
Corporation forfeit the Franchise of the Corporation it self, upon the same
ground and reason in Law; unless any one will say, The Franchise of being a
Corporation cannot be misused; and that would be a very strange matter to
assert.

Every Corporation is entrusted with a Franchise to make Laws for Governing the
Subject within its Jurisdiction. If that Power be exercised to the Subjects
prejudice, as it may be, it were an hard matter if there were no Law to redress
that Grievance. Suppose a Corporation under their common Seal should authorize
a Rebellion, would any Man say that were no forfeiture? It Is said indeed by
Pigott, 21 Ed. 4. f. 13. Arguendo, upon a Case (where the Question is Whether a
Corporation should avoid a Bond entered into by the Mayor by Duress) That a
Corporation can neither commit Treason or Felony; but upon the same reason that
he urges, That a Corporation cannot act at all, that is, abstractedly from all
the Members of it; for so this Notion is, that a Corporation is a Body in
consideration of Law only, and not reality; and therefore the particular Act
even of the Head of that Body shall affect him personally only. But this is
only a Notion of his arguing; but it is the best opinion of that Book, that
Duress to the Members did so affect the Corporation, that it should avoid the
Bond.

Now, my Lord, a Corporation may be surrendered; and surely that that may be
surrendered, may be forfeited; and I shall offer you some Authorities in this
case, 12 E. 3. rot. claus. memb. 36. A Writ is directed to the Constable of
Dover, reciting, That the Cinque Ports had seized diverse Goods of several
Merchant Strangers Portugueses, and others, and the Writ commands that Right
should be done, or else the Franchise should be seized into the Kings hands, 6
Ed. 2. rot. claus. No. 5. The Liberties of the City of Bristol were seized, and
the custody of it granted to (...) for diverse contempts and injuries done per
Majorem Ballivos and Communitat' to the King, and so the close Rolls of R. 2.
m. 6.

There is another Case that comes further, Pasch. 9 Ed. 1. Majus rot. 25. I
find it likewise among my Lord Chief Justice Hales Collections that he has
given to Lincoln's Inn Library; I took it out of that Book: It Is in the
Collection of the Adjudicata in the time of Ed. 1. fol. 28. a. Thus it was:
There was the Abbot of St. Austin in Canterbury had made an Agreement with the
men of Sandwick about paying ten Hogsheads of Wine yearly to the Abbot; and
there was due to the Abbot some thirty Marks, and he had Judgment, and
Execution went out; and thus it is in the Book, Vic. de -- Mandatur quod Levari
fac' 30 Marcas de bonis ipsius ad opus Abbatis pro pretio 10 Doleorum Vini
annuatim solvend' And they made rescue when the Sheriff came to execute the
Writ, and they were sued for that, and the Judgment of the King and his
Council, which was by Parliament, for it was adjourned into Parliament, was
Quod Libertas de Sandwick sorisfact' sit. And there is this Observation, tho it
be written with the same Hand, which is not his, but the Clerks that
transcribed it, Judicium illud extendit contra Barons 5 Portuum and eorum
libertates ut mihi videtur. These are the Words of that Book: And this will go
a great way with the City of London as to their confirmation of Magna Charta;
for the Cinque Ports are confirmed by Act of Parliament as well as they.

But, my Lord, there are many Cases of like nature, and that even in the Case
of the City of London too, as I shall show you by and by. Now tho these are not
Judgments in Quo Warranto's to out a Corporation of a Franchise of being a
Corporation, yet it shows that these things were forfeitures of all the
Franchises of a Corporation; for a Seizure is never but where there is matter
of forfeiture found upon Record, as in Sir George Reynel's Case; or to ground a
forfeiture, upon which to bring a Quo Warranto, as in our Case. But in the Case
of 9 Ed. 1. there it does appear Judgment was given by the Parliament, that the
Liberty should be forfeited, not that it should be seized into the Kings hands
only.

Now, my Lord, where all the Franchises of a Corporation are forfeited, what is
the Corporation? Truly, it is nothing, it is but a Name; a Corporation without a
Power to act, is nothing at all: Indeed I do not find any Judgment in a Quo
Warranto of a Corporation being forfeited, yet, my Lord, it does not follow
from thence that this cannot be by Law; for many Quo Warranto's have been
brought against London, and other places too, to out Corporations of their
Franchises, but it has always ended in submission to the King, and so they
have been at quiet. All the Quo Warranto's in Mr. Attorney Palmer's time, after
the Kings Restoration, against the several Corporations, they all submitted;
and yet that was to question the very being of their Corporations.

Now, my Lord, pray consider a little upon the Rule of Law: It should seem very
strange if a Corporation should neglect to come into Air, or into the Kings
Bench the same Term that a Quo Warranto is brought against them, they must be
outed of their Franchise for ever, as it is said, 15 Ed. 4. 6, and 7. And yet,
when all the contempts and oppositions imaginable are found upon Record that
this should not be a forfeiture, that seems absurd that a Neglect in Air
should do it, but all the Oppressions and Offenses in the World, when found
upon Record, should not do it.

But, my Lord, the mischiefs that would follow from hence are very great: How
many Oppressions and Offenses would be daily committed, if every Corporation
were a Franchise and Jurisdiction independent upon the Crown? and the
punishment truly of some particular Men for those Offenses, would not be
adequate, where the power of offending and misgoverning should still remain;
sure that were no adequate redress of such an inconvenience. And to this
purpose, my Lord, I shall humbly offer a Case, and it is that great Case between
the Earls of Gloucester and Hereford, Hill' 20. Ed. 1. in B. R. rot. Wallie 14.
It Is likewise in Riley's Placita Parliamenti 83, 86. The Case is this in short,
They both claimed the Liberty of Returna Brevium, and they had incurred great
contempts in refusing to obey the Kings Writs, and Judgment was given against
them, That the Liberty should be seized for this reason, which I think will go
a great way in this Case, and for which I offer it, Quia puniendus est Dominus
Libertatis in eo quo deliquit. I think, my Lord, as I said, that will go a
great way in this Case, to show the Reason of the Law.

My Lord, If the granting of too many and too large Franchises were a mischief,
as certainly it was by Law, and as appears by the Commons Petitions 21 Ed. 3.
rot. Parl. No. 17. where they pray, That new and large Franchises may not be
granted, because it tended to the overthrowing the Common Law, and great
Oppression of the People. And the Kings Answer was, That care should be taken
for the time to come. I say then, if this were such a mischief, that there
ought not to be granted new and large Franchises, much more would it be a
mischief if these Franchises should not be under the control of the Law when
they exercise such Oppression. And so my Lord I shall leave that point; for I
think it will be pretty clear, that a Corporation may forfeit their being of a
Corporation.

2. I shall next than consider, whether the City of London be in any other
plight than any other Corporations. I think truly there is no difference at
all. Now this Question does depend upon what they have set forth by their Plea.
And that is the confirmation of Magna Charta cap. 9. Civitas London habeat
omnes libertates suas antiquas and consuetudines suas. And then their Act of 1
E. 3. upon which my Lord Coke in his 4 Inst. 253. says, that the Franchise of
this City shall not for any Cause be seized into the Kings hands. And then
theirs of 7 R. 2. which says, that the City shall enjoy its whole Liberties,
Licet usi vel abusi. This is their Foundation upon which they would distinguish
this City from all other Corporations. Now as to these things, I give these
Answers.

First for Magna Charta, that plainly is no more a confirmation to them than
it is to other Cities and Corporations. For not only the City of London is named
to have its ancient liberties and customs preserved, but it is likewise Omnes
aliae Civitat', etc. And all Cities, Buroughs and Towns, and the Barons of
Cinque Ports, and all other Ports, should have all their Liberties and Free
Customs. So my Lord Coke agrees it in his Comment. And in what he cites out of
the Mirror of Justice, and other ancient Authors of our Law, they should enjoy
their Franchises which they had right to by lawful title of the gift and
confirmation of the King, and which they had not forfeited by any abuse. So
that the Act which confirmed them did not purge former forfeitures, much less
did it license other abuses.

Then for their Acts of 1 E. 3. and 7 R. 2. I shall humbly offer this, That as
they are in Truth no Acts of Parliament at all, so they will not concern this
Question, whatsoever my Lord Coke says concerning them. But I shall give some
instances before these Acts, to show that they never had such an unquestionable
Power as they now dream of, and then some instances in after times, that there
either were no such Acts, or no such sense at least is to be put upon them as
they have strained to make.

First it appears 15 E. 1. that the Franchise of the City of London was seized
into the Kings hand, and Johannes de Britton was made Custos Civitatis London,
who was no Freeman; and this implies that the Franchise was seized into the
Kings hands, for they had a power to choose de seipsis by Charter from King
John a Citizen to be a Mayor or chief Governor, but here was another Governor
appointed them.

Then Rot' Pat' 26 E. 1. Rex pro bono servicio Civit' London' reddit eis Civit'
suam London habend' dict' Civibus ad volunt' Regis. Test Rege. So that both
the City and all its Franchises were seized at that time; for he restored the
very City of London to the Citizens habend' during his Will and Pleasure. Thus
my Lord it stood in the time of E. 1. Then in the time of E. 2. seized again;
14 E. 2. memb. 21. of the Pat' Rolls in 21 Rex dimisit Civibus London' Officium
Major' Civitat' London', 15 E. 2. Rex dedit licentiam eligendi Major' London'.
And in the second part of Pat' Rolls 15 E. 2. m. 5. The King recites, That
whereas in the Fourteenth year of his Reign he had replevyed to them the Office
of Mayor Usque quindenam Sancti Martini, and also recites which Office was
seized into the Kings hands by the Justices of Air in the Tower of London, and
he was willing to continue it longer to them, ex gratia speciali he did grant
them the said Office Quamdiu. etc.

Then the second part of Pat' Rolls in 20 E. 2. it is recited, that the King
had seized the Office of the Mayoralty, and had replevied it from time to time;
and that one Hamond de Chigwell was made Mayor, the King had excepted of him
for Mayor, Et Rex volens eis gratiam uberiorem facere, grants him the Office of
Mayor.

Now my Lord, these seizures show plainly that the Franchises of the City were
forfeitable; for either they were seized upon matter of Record found for a
Forfeiture, or else upon some matter which was to be a ground of a Forfeiture.
So then they were absolutely gone, and I do not find that these were ever taken
out of the Kings hands by Process of Law, but were restored by Grace and
Favor; for till the 20 E. 2. it appears, that they so long continued in the
Kings hands, and he absolutely disposed of them.

Here is now a Favor to them, and a plenary restitution. Thus it stood in the
Reigns of E. 1. and E. 2.

Now the next thing will be for their Act of 1 E. 3. which they back with my
Lord Cokes observation upon it, that it was Authoritate Parliamenti. Now truly
my Lord, there is no such Act of Parliament that is any where extant. For it is
not in Print, neither are there any Parliament Rolls of E. 3's time till 4 E.
3. And he that cites it, my Lord Coke himself, cites no Roll at all for it; so
that where we shall find this Act of Parliament, truly I do not know. But this
Act at best amounts to no more, than that for any personal Trespass of
Officers, the Liberties of the City should not be seized; but that signifies
nothing, for that is not our Case. There are Acts of the Corporations not of
particular Officers; though I cannot but observe how the Law was taken to be at
that time before this their pretended Act, even for the Offense of private
Officers, and that appears to be the Law too in the Case of 9 E. 1. which I
cited before, which was only the Offense of the Mayor of Sandwich, who refused
to answer for a Trespass and a Rescue, was committed, and the whole Liberty
seized.

Now this Act of 1 E. 3. be it what it will, though they would take it in that
sense, that no forfeiture should be incurred for the Trespass of an Officer,
yet I find quite the contrary thereunto, and that it has not prevailed even in
that sense. For 5 E. 3. rot. claus. 14. there the King did discharge one from
the Office of Mayor, and commands the Aldermen and Comminalty to choose
another. Now this my Lord I take to be not so much a punishing of the Officer
as a breaking in upon the Franchise it self. But I shall show more fully in the
Reign of R. 2. that this was done.

Yet I will first take notice of the Statute of R. 2. which is the next thing
that they rely upon; and this, with submission, is no Act of Parliament
neither; for though my Lord Coke in his 4th Inst. 205. says, this is the
Statute mentioned in our Books, which supports the Customs in London to devise
in Mortmain, and other Customs against Acts of Parliament, and cites
Authorities in the Margent; yet, my Lord, I have looked, and can find none of
them to speak to the purpose for which they are cited, but the Book of 7 H. 6.
fol. 1. where the custom of London to devise in Mortmain is in Question, and
there it was ruled a good custom, because of the Statute that confirms it after
the Statute of Mortmain, but says, that Book Quere the Statute, to that they
were not well apprized of the Statute in those days, tho this were the
foundation of all the resolutions of that kind.

It appears by the Roll that it is no Act of Parliament in the nature of it,
for its 7 R. 2. N. 37. it is a Prayer of the Commons, That there might be a
Patent granted to the City, confirming their Liberties, Licet usi vel abusi
fuerint. And the Answer was, Le Roy le veult; but this is no Act of Parliament,
it is no more than a confirmation of the Letters Pa^ents, which had been primo
R. 2. Besides further, there never was any Patent granted in pursuance of this
Act: And yet it is plain, that if it had been to, it would only have extended to
Forfeitures that were past, but could never amount to a Dispensation or License
for the future. And, my Lord, this appears by these Authorities and Records
that I shall now cite. The 1 part of Pat. Rolls. 16 R. 2. Membrano 36, 37.
whereby it fully appears, That notwithstanding these pretended Statutes, there
was no such Privilege in the City, but that for the Offenses of their Officers
or themselves, the Franchise should be seized.

But, my Lord, I must a little observe, that truly the City have attempted to
raise themselves above the fear of any Judgment in any of the Kings Courts; for
in primo R. 2. Parl. Roll 126. there they Petition for a Confirmation of their
Charter, with a Clause of licet non usi vel abusi, which was that they then
would have to be done in Parliament for them. But they do likewise desire in
their Petition, that notwithstanding any Statute, Privilege, Charters,
Judgment made or to be made to the contrary, their Liberties might be
confirmed; of this it is said the King will advise. There is in 1 R. 2.
Parliament Rolls 121. as pleasant a Petition as the other, they there do
desire, that the interpretation of their Charter may be left to themselves; and
where it is doubting, such meaning as they should put upon it should be
allowable. But to that the Kings Answer was, That he would make the
interpretation of his own Charters according as his Counsel should advise. So
that I observe, they would feign have been absolute, but they could never do
it. It has always been denied them. So that from what was done at this time
and after 7 R. 2. it does appear plainly, that there was no difference between
the City of London and any other Corporation, only this is really the greatest.
But as all greatness is the Kings Favor; so when men forget their duty in
abusing the Kings Favor, this great Court is the place to put them in mind of
it. I come then to the third Question:

III. Whether the Act of the Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty in Common Council
assembled, be an Act of the Corporation, so as to make a Forfeiture of the
whole? And with submission my Lord, that will be pretty clear too upon these
Reasons:

1. First of all, the whole Corporation is fully represented by them,
notwithstanding the disparity of number set forth in their Rejoinder.

2. Again, All Bylaws and Ordinances made for the good Government and Order of
the City, are certainly the Acts of the Corporation; but the sole power of
making those Laws is in the Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council, and therefore
sure the whole power of the Corporation is in the Common Council.

3. They have the sole power of the Corporation-Seal. They can bind all the
whole Corporation by any alienation to, or charge upon their Inheritance; and
by consequence they may surrender all or any of their Franchises, and then as I
said, they may forfeit them.

4. They have pleaded that there has been time out of mind a Common Council,
consisting of the Mayor, Aldermen, and two hundred and fifty Citizens, who are
called the Commons of the City. So that it shall be intended now, that as they
have prescribed for it as incident to their Corporation, it was part of their
Original constitution to be thus represented by them, and ruled and governed by
their Laws: But there is another reason for it, and that is, that it is an
inseparable incident to a Corporation, employed in Law without grant, that they
have a power to make Bylaws to bind the Corporation, without which there were
no government in a Corporation; and therefore a mis-user of that power must be
a forfeiture of their Corporation, because it is a breach of their Original
Trust: 22 Assis. pl. 34. there is this Rule given, and a true one it is, Where
there are many Franchises granted which do not depend one upon another, there
the mis-user of one is a Forfeiture of that one which was mis-used; but where
there are several parts of a Franchise depending all upon the said Franchise,
if any part be misused, the entire Franchise shall be forfeited. As for
instance, if a man have a Fair, a Court of Pypowders is incident to it, the
misuser of that Court of Cypowders, is a forfeiture of the whole Fair it self;
for where any part is abused that is incident to an entire Franchise, that
abuse forfeits the whole. And this is the Opinion of Palmers Reports in the
Case of the Corporation of Maidenhead, where it is doubted whether the Market
was forfeited for taking too much Toll, because the Toll was not inseparably
incident to the Market, and so was not dependant upon the entire Franchise, and
there the rule is taken as I have said before, that the mis-user of a part of
an entire Franchise, or a power that is incident to it, is a forfeiture of the
Franchise.

Then my Lord, if they cannot forfeit here, the whole power of the Trust of the
Corporation is reposed in them, and may be misused by them, to the Oppression
of the Kings Subjects, and there is no remedy, if they shall not be punished at
all. For it is much harder to say, that several Acts of all the particular
persons, should forfeit the Corporation, than that their Joint Act should do
it. But this my Lord, is an Act contrary to the trust upon creating the
Corporation, and may be a mis-user to the prejudice and oppression of all
people; and if this should not forfeit the Corporation there is no remedy at
all, but the power remains of oppressing as it did before.

Now my Lord, I think, with submission, I have made it pretty plain; and as
they are not distinguished from other Corporations in point of privilege as to
forfeitures, so this is their Act, and shall bind them, being done by their
Representatives.

IV. Then the fourth point will be, Whether these Offenses set forth in the
Replication are Forfeitures?

1. The first is, the making of that Law in the Common Council for the levying
of sums of money upon the Kings Subjects, and the actual levying of those sums
accordingly; and this they justify under their prescription to have reasonable
Tolls, as they set forth in their Pleadings, from all Persons that come to
their Markets to sell Provision there, and power to reduce their Tolls to a
certainty by an Act of Common Council. This is their Justification; so that, my
Lord, the first thing to be considered is,

I. What right they have to these Tolls or Sums of Money assessed by the By-law;
and then

II. Whether if they have no right, their taking upon them to make a Law be a
Forfeiture?

For their Right, that depends upon a prescription to have reasonable Toll, as
they set it forth, and this as they have pleaded, it appears to be no Right at
all; for a Prescription to have Toll and Tollage, not showing how much in
certain, is void; for reasonable Toll is not incident to a Market, but the
Party has it by the Kings Grant, and so 'twas adjudged in this Court, Mich. 39.
and 40. Eliz. cited by my Lord Coke in his Second Inst. 220. So if the King
grant a Toll, if he do not in his Grant ascertain how much shall be taken for
Toll, that Grant is void: And so is the Prescription too, as you may see in the
Corporation of Maidenhead in Palmer's Reports, fo. 79. grounded upon 9 H. 6.45.
and 11. H. 6. 19. and so he cites the Opinion of Popham in the Case of Heedy
and Weeldhouse, for no Subject can prescribe to have Toll, but by the Grant of
the King.

But, my Lord, this is not properly a Toll neither, nor in the nature of a
Toll; for that is always paid by the Buyer, and never paid before a Sale; but
here all that comes to the Market, whether they buy or not buy, sell or not
sell, they must pay by this Law. My Lord, I confess there may be a custom for
Persons to pay for Standings in a Fair or Market, as that Case was 9 H. 6. 45.
but yet that must be prescribed for in a certain Sum, which is not done here.
And this customary Payment is in the same nature as a Toll traverse, or a Toll
through, which cannot be in an uncertain Sum; for they are all by prescription,
and a Grant of them now uncertain would not be good.

But, my Lord, however, Judgment upon these Pleadings must be given against the
City; for either the Prescription, as they have set it forth, is good, or it is
not good; if it be good, then the Traverse that is taken is well taken, to wit,
that they have no such Custom, and they ought to have taken issue upon that
which they have not done; for, my Lord, they have taken issue thus, That, time
out of mind, they have had reasonable Toll of all Persons coming to the Market
to sell their Provision, without tying of it to the reasonable Toll assessed
and reduced to certainty by the Law; and this is naught; for tho they had a
reasonable Toll in general, taking the Prescription to be good, yet if either
that reasonable Toll in the use of it were not taken in that manner, or to that
value that they assess by their By-law, then have they done wrong; and
therefore our traverse is proper to their reasonable Toll, that they had not,
time out of mind, such a Toll as they set forth; for it must be such a
reasonable Toll as may answer to that which is assessed in the By-law, and that
they have not put in issue. For the King, when once he has granted a Market,
cannot after grant Toll to that Market, because it is a free Market, and the
People have right to come to it as a free Market; neither can they, when once
by custom they have exercised their Power of assessing reasonable Toll, alter
that at their pleasure; for it being once set, all People have right to come
upon such terms: And if they increase the Toll, under pretense to reduce it to
certainty, it will be void; for they may lower their Price if they will, but
they can never come to increase the Penalty. If therefore they have done all in
not taking issue upon the Traverse, which does take in the full substance of
their Rejoinder; if it be good, then Iudgmene must be given against them upon
that reason; so then, my Lord, the Question will be,

Whether the making of a Law to raise Money at large upon the Subject be a
Forfeiture of the Charter? And truly, my Lord, that it is. For

I. It Is the usurping of a Power that they neither can have, nor have by Law.

II. It Is a Breach of the Trust annexed to the Corporation; for it is a Misuser
of the Franchise to the oppression of the Kings Subjects; and therefore the
Charter must be forfeited, and not the other Franchise; not the Franchise of a
Toll, for they have none; not the Franchise of the Market, for that would be
nothing. If the Market be forfeited, it must either be extinguished or kept; if
it be extinguished, it is a punishment to others that did not offend; and if it
be kept, the it be forfeited, it is no punishment to them that do offend: And
it is a Question whether a Market may be forfeited for taking unreasonable Toll,
and that appears in the Case of Maidenhead. And as my Lord Coke says upon the
Statute about taking Outrageous Toll, the Franchise should be seized only till
it be redeemed by them.

But my Lord however, without going far into that matter, this Offense lies not
only in taking the money, but in taking upon them, and usurping a power to make
Laws to raise money. They have taken upon them a Legislative Power to oppress
their fellow Subjects, that is their Offense, and that is a mis-user of their
Franchise. My Lord, in the Case of Ship money, it was not the Quantum of money
that was raised that was complained or quarrelled at, but it was the manner of
levying of it without an Act of Parliament. The Logic and Consequence of that
was it which was so much debated and stood upon. So here, the abuse and the
offense is the making the Law, and the consequence of that; for by the same
reason that they have a Prescription to lay so much, they may have a
Prescription to lay ten times as much. So that upon what I offer upon this
point, I conceive it ought to amount to a forfeiture of their Charter, and the
loss of their Corporation.

Then the next thing will be that which is the last matter, that is the
Petition, and that is of a strange Nature; where the Offense is not only in
Presenting, but in Printing and Dispersing of it; it charges the King with
interrupting the public Justice of the Nation, and the making the Necessary
Provisions for the Security of his Protestant Subjects; for, my Lord, to say,
that the Prorogation of the Parliament, which is the Kings Act, who surely has
alone, and none but he, the undoubted Prerogative of Calling, Proroguing, and
Dissolving Parliaments; to say that Act of his was an Interruption of Justice,
is all one as to say, the King did interrupt: and it is done by them as a
Corporation; it is the Act of the City in their Common Council in the Name of
the Corporation; and as we have pleaded it, the Mayor, Citizens and Commonalty
in Common Council did do it, which sure is the Corporation, as they would have
it. And that I rely upon for the reasons I offered before upon that point.

Then the matter of this Petition is, the taking upon them to censure the King
and his Government by this Petition. The Printing and Dispersing it, is now
publicly Scandalizing and Libelling the King; for it is in the nature of an
Appeal to the people: it is unlawful to Print any man's private Case, while it is
depending in any Court of Judicature before it comes to Judgment, because it is
an Appeal to the people. And that was my Lord Chief Justice Hales Opinion in
Colonel Kings Case. And the ill consequences of such proceedings are so many,
and the danger so evident in these Licentious days, that I do not know indeed
whether it may tend.

The fact is confessed by them in their Rejoinder, but they say they did it to
alleviate men's fears, and quiet their minds absque hoc, that they did it aliter
vel alio modo. Surely my Lord this is no sort of excuse in the world, nor is it
capable of any. They have owned the thing, but they have excused it in the
manner of doing thereof. And I may venture to say the Traverse is impertinent:
Suppose a Man be Indicted for publishing a Libel, and the owns the Fact, but
does traverse absque hoc, that he did it malitiose, or with an intent to
defame, that surely would be an idle thing; for those are constructions that
the Law puts upon it, and are not matters traversable, or to be put in issue.
But if the Fact be done, the Law says it is maliciously done, and with such an
intention. Therefore a confession of the Fact is a confession of all the
consequences that the Law puts upon the Fact.

My Lord, this can amount to no less than the forfeiture of their Charter, not
only for the greatness of the Offense, but because otherwise the Law would be
unequal; for if this were the Case of a private common Person, he must be fined
and imprisoned during the Kings pleasure, as was the Case of Harrison in I.Cr.
503. for words spoken of Justice Hutton. Now, my Lord, a Corporation is not
capable of suffering this Imprisonment, and therefore it is a much greater
Offense in them, as the Body is greater than any particular Member: And then,
that which is a greater Offense would have a less Punishment if the Charter it
self were not forfeited, than it would if a particular Person were punished.
And give me leave to apply here the Reason of the Earl of Gloucester's Case,
that I cited before, Quia Dominus Libertatis puniretur in eo quo deliquit. So
they shall lose their Charter for the abuse of that Power that was entrusted
with them by their Charter. Therefore upon the whole matter, I do humbly pray
your Judgment for the King, that they may be outed of their Franchise of being
a Corporation.

Sir George Treby Recorder for the City.
THE first thing that I shall, I hope, maintain, is,

I. That a Corporation, or the Being of a Body Politic it not forfeitable.

The Nature of a Corporation in its Existence, Powers and Actions is to be
considered.

A Body Politic or Corporation is created by the Policy of Man, 1 Inst. 2. The
Persons Incorporate are created a Body, and are of capacity to take or grant,
do, or act, according to the Powers and Authorities in their Creations given
them, and to no other purpose, only a Capacity, and not properly a Franchise.

1 Inst. 250.

Brook therefore in his Title of Corporation, makes his Title, Corporation or
Capacity.

2 Bulstrode 233. The Body is invisible, therefore cannot appear in Person.

Dissolution of a Corporation there may be: As where the Persons incorporated
all dye, Corporation of necessity is thereby dissolved.

1 Inst. 13. b.

Rolls Ab. 1. 514.

But no Book or Case mentions Dissolution by Forfeiture.

In the time of H. 8. when the Corporation of Monks, Nuns, and other Religious
Houses were dissolved,

Had it not been a very easy way, if this Doctrine of dissolving by Forfeiture
would have done it, thereby to have effected the Kings purpose?

It was but to have issued out a Commission, and thereby find but one illegal
Act or Miscarriage done by the Corporation, and thereby the Corporation
dissolved.

But in Henry the Eighth's time, or afterward, the Surrenders made by
Corporations was of their Lands, not of their Corporations or Bodies Politic,
as appears

2 Anderson 120.

Dean and Chapter de Norwich's Case, 3 Rep. 74.

For tho they surrendered their Church, and all their Possessions and
Franchises, yet the Corporation remained, not thereby dissolved.

Fullcher and Heyward, Jones 198. Palm. 491. Davyes Rep. 1. b. And Encounter le
Opin. Die. 273. 282.

And therefore to this time, viz. 3 Car. I. when these Cases were adjudged and
argued, the Law was taken to be, that a Corporation could not be dissolved by
Surrender.

And the Statute 27 H. 8. 31 H. 8. 34 H. 8. for dissolving the Monasteries,
none of them mention Surrender of the Corporations.

And the the word Forfeiture be in those Statutes, thereby is not meant
forfeiture of Corporation, but forfeiture of the Lands of the Abbots by
Attainder, viz. Abbots of Glassenbury, Colchester, and others, attabited upon
the matter of the Kings Supremacy.

And so it appears, Rolls 2 Rep. 101.

But if it should be admitted, That a Corporation may be surrendered, and
thereby extinct and destroyed, it is no consequence that they may be forfeited.

For there are many things surrenderable that are not forfeitable: As Annuities
granted pro Concilio impenso and impendendo, which are persnal Interests, and
so fixed to the Person, as not transferrable by Grant, Forfeiture, or otherwise.

Much more then of a Corporation, which is far from being grantable or
forfeitable; it is the very Capacity or Existence, and inseparable in its
Nature from the Persons incorporated.

Worseling Manings Case, Lane 58. Rolls, Abr. 1. 195.

Alien obtains Letters Patents of Grant of Denization, Proviso, That the
Grantee do his Legal Homage, and be obedient to the Laws of the Kingdom.

He never does his Homage, nor is obedient,

He shall not hereby forfeit or lose his Denization or Capacity that he has
granted him by his Patent.

II. That this Information now brought is insufficient, and no Judgment against
the Corporation can be given upon it.

It cannot be maintained against the Corporation as now brought, but should
have been against the particular Persons.

Rex verse. Cusack, Rolls, 2 Rep. 113. 125. Palm. 1.

In a Case of great Authority, and upon a Writ of Error out of Ireland upon a
Judgment in a Quo Warranto against the Corporation of Dublin, a Quo Warranto
was brought against Cusack and others, Aldermen of Dublin, who pretended to
have Privileges, and a Guild, and to be a Corporation; and this, I presume, is
for their being a Corporation; for there is a Cur' advisare vult upon that, and
so it is not put in the Case; but it is also brought for several Liberties that
they did pretend to claim, that they only, and no others, should sell and buy
all Merchandises there, and no body should buy of another, or sell to another,
but to them; that all Merchandise should be brought to their Common Hall there,
etc. Now as to those Liberties, they are forejudged, that the Liberties should
be seized, and they outed: As to their claiming the Corporation, there is a
Cur' advisare vult, so the Case is in Palmer; but in the other Book, Rolls 115.
there it is agreed, If a Quo Warranto be brought to dissolve a Corporation, it
ought to be brought against particular Persons; for the Writ supposes that they
are not a Corporation, and it is to falsify the Supposal of the Writ? to name
them as a Corporation. Now here this Writ supposes them to be a Corporation, or
else they could not be Defendants, and then it comes and falsifies that
supposal, by assigning that they are no Corporation, nor ever were; or if they
had, they have forfeited it; and so all the foundation that this Writ stands
upon is destroyed. My Lord, in this Case of Cusack I am assisted further with a
Report of it in my Lord Chief Justice Hale's Book; a Report of very great
Authority with all Men of our Profession, and there he says expressly, If a Quo
Warranto be brought for the Usurping of a Corporation, it must be brought
against particular Persons, because it goes in disaffirmance of the
Corporation, and Judgment shall be given, that they be outed of the
Corporation; but if it be for Liberties that are claimed by a Corporation, it
must be brought against them as a Corporation.

It Is in my Lord Hales Common Place Book, which is in Lincoln's Inn Library, fo.
168. placito 7. My Lord, this is our very case; if you go about to say our
Corporation is forfeited, or must be dissolved; nay more, you say it has either
never been, or by forfeiture it is lost so long ago, then here is nothing can
come before the Court. This Information is brought in dis-affirmance of the
being of the Corporation, and therefore there must be set up some body capable
of being a Defendant in such a Suit, and that is, particular Persons, which
ought to have been named, as was in that Case of Cusack: For as the Judgment of
Ouster of particular Liberties given against particular Persons will not bind
the Body of the Corporation; so the Judgment of not being a Corporation will
not be good to charge or oblige particular Persons, unless it be given against
particular Persons that usurp the Corporation. The Individual Freemen of London
cannot possibly be bound by this Judgment; for they are not here before you,
nor were they ever sued: For it is the Corporation that is here made Defendant;
and I do not consider the number that make up that Body, that London's being
populous alters the case; for the case is the same if it were the Corporation
of Quinborough, or any other petit Corporation. Suppose 20 Men be a
Corporation, or pretend to be a Corporation, and you come to enquire by what
particular means these Men pretend to be a Corporation, or as the words of this
Quo Wartanto are, usurp to be a Corporation, you must not say, that they are
one, and then say they usurp it; for it is not the Corporation that usurps to be
a Corporation, that is impossible, but it is the particular Persons that usurp
to be the Corporation, when indeed they are none. A Corporation may usurp a
Market, or they may usurp a Leet, but they cannot usurp themselves.

It appears, my Lord, in Mr. Townsend's Book of printed Presidents, a laborious
thing it is, and wherein he has collected all the Presidents he could meet
with of Quo Warranto's, and there is but one in all that Collection that was
brought against any Persons upon the score of their being a Corporation: And
what is that? how was it brought? not against the Corporation that was, but
against the Corporation that never was, that is to say, a parcel of People that
took upon themselves to be a Corporation, when indeed they were not, and that
is but one single President neither. In Coke's Entries, 527. Tit. Quo Warranto,
the King against Helden and other Burgesses of Helmesly for usurping to be a
Corporation, by the name of the Burgesses of Helmesly: How does the Attorney
General there bring his Writ? he brings it against particular Persons. My Lord
Hobart, who was then Attorney General, never thought he could have maintained
his Quo Warranto, or expected Judgment against them, if he had brought it
against the Burgesses of Helmesly generally, and then have said, that they were
no Corporation; but he brings it against those particular Persons, and
thereupon they come in and disclaim their being such a Corporation, and the
having the other Liberties; and the Judgment is, That of those Liberties those
particular People should be ousted, and should not intermeddle with them.

Now, my Lord, what Judgment can be given in this Case, that the Mayor,
Commonalty and Citizens shall not intermeddle with the being of Mayor,
Commonalty and Citizens? It Is a very reasonable Judgment that Helden and those
particular Persons should not intermeddle with such a Liberty, or be in such a
Corporation; but if such a Judgment he given against the City here, that would
be as much as to say, That you have never been what you are, or you shall never
be what you are, that is the English of it.

And, my Lord, I am sure as there never was but one Quo Warranto that we can
find any printed President of against the being of a Corporation, so that very
President is not against those that really were so, but particular Persons that
usurped to be so. And if you search all the Records of this Kingdom, and all
the Books in all the Offices, you will never find any that is brought against a
Corporation, for being a Corporation, upon pretense that they might be made
none by a Forfeiture; and no Prerogative of the King shall extend to excuse
this, but his Action shall abate, if it be not right brought, as well as the
Subjects, and so is Plowed Com. fol. 85.

Further, my Lord, I have another Authority in this point, and that is in the
Case of the Corporation of Maidenhead, which has been so often cited by Mr.
Solicitor, and it is in Palmer, 80, 81. where it is said, When the Attorney
General has supposed them to be a Corporation, it is not usual to plead them
to be a Corporation; otherwise if he had questioned them as Inhabitants of such
a Town, then they ought to enable themselves: Those are the words of that Book:
And what can be more plain? Here the Attorney General supposes us to he a
Corporation, his Replication flies in his own Face; and he having supposed it
at first, he is bound not to question us for our being a Corporation at any
time after. As to the business of forisfecerunt, it is a strange and a new word
that never came into any Quo Warranto before, that I know of; but we will
accept the new word, but not the thing, and that they have forfeited by such
and such Acts; this sure will be very hard upon us; for if it be a Forfeiture,
it must relate to the time of the thing done, to the time of the making the Act
of the Common Council, to the time of the Toll levied, or to the time of the
Petition; and if it do so, it must relate like a Forfeiture for Treason; it
must reach all mean Acts, all the Leases that we have made since are gone; all
the Judgments that we have given in any Cause are Coram non Judice, and void;
all the Acts of the Corporation are overturned by this forfeiture, and we have
been under a vast mistake all this while. We have had no Mayors nor Sheriffs,
no kind of Officers, no manner of regular and legal proceedings; but we have
been under a great mistake ever since this money was ordained or levied. We
have forfeited all; and that it is so, is plain, because in all Quo Warranto's
wherein persons are convicted for usurping of Liberties, there is a Fine set
upon them for continuing that Usurpation, and reason good; then if it be an
Offense for continuing the liberty, we must be fined for doing it ever since
the Forfeiture, when if Mr. Attorney General's Rule be right, there has been no
such Corporation; but we ought to have discontinued all our acting as a
Corporation, and laid it down, and so every step that we have taken since has
been irregular, and every Act void.

If so be an Action be brought against Baron and Feme, and the Plaintiff should
in his Replication say, they were divorced several years before, has he not
undone all his pleading? Here then is our Case, Mr. Attorney General admits us
to be sueable, and yet charges us to have no capacity to be sued. I do implead
you, but you have no right to be impleaded; here he brings us into Court, and
when he has brought us here, he quarrels with us for being here; he makes us
Defendants, and then questions whether we ought to be so; and so his great
Charge against us is, that we are what he would have us to be, and what he has
made us to be; for if a Month before the Information, the Corporation was not,
but the very being of the Corporation was usurped, how come we at the Months
end to be Defendants? Here comes a new creation interposed in that time, and
makes us parties sueable in the Court, when by the Charge in the Information we
were not so a Month before.

And then my Lord the Information is not quite so had, but the Replication is
worse; first he takes Issue that we never were a Corporation at all; and the
next thing is, if ever you were a Corporation, you have ceased so to be,
because you have forfeited it so and so several years ago. This is just then to
put a common Case (and I confess a very familiar one it is) If I should being
an Action against a man, and when he has pleaded, I should by way of
Replication set forth, there never was any such man as the Defendant, and take
Issue upon it; or if there were, that he was dead Ten years ago: And yet this
is the substance of Mr. Attorneys Issue, and his Replication.

My Lord, the Authorities before cited in Palmer, Cokes Entries, Rolls, and my
Lord Hales Common-place-book, are not all; for I have some other that never saw
the light in Print yet, and that is the Case of the King against Bradwell and
others, Trin. 18. of this King. A Quo Warranto was brought against them for
usurping to be a Corporation, or Company of Musicians; it had been a strange
thing if the Quo Warranto had been brought against that Corporation, and then
the Attorney General had said they were no Corporation, nor never were; there
they did think best and fittest to go against Bradwell, and the rest, and that
by name and only so, not against the Body Corporate. So in that Case of the
Corporation of Worcester, which was lately tried before your Lordship in this
Court; When the Quo Warranto was brought against such men for usurping to be
all Aldermen and Common Councilmen, if the Attorney General had once called
them Common Council-men, it had been a great repugnancy for him afterward to
say that they were none, or if they were, that that privilege of theirs was
lost so long ago. So in the Case of the Quo Warranto against the Bermudas
Company; it was against a Corporation, and against particular persons by name
both. These things have been considered, and doubtless they have gone on in an
ordinary way. I must confess, I was not privy to that particular Case, but by
the Report of that Case, which I have seen, I have been informed that the
Corporation never appeared; for they said, it is not sense for us to appear; for
it being a Question by what Warrant we are a Corporation, it is not the
supposing us a Corporation that do usurp, but the particular persons that do
usurp, if it be at all usurped. Now my Lord if that had been a regular Suit, no
doubt but there would have been Judgment against the Corporation, which there
was not. And certainly the Replication of Forfeitures was not good against the
Corporation, but against the particular persons only.

All Mr. Solicitors Authorities for Seizing hol^ ^^ue, if the Corporation would
never appear: And what is the reason it should be brought against J. S. and J.
N. but because Corporations do never appear in such a Case, in regard it were
not congruous they should appear; for the Quo Warranto must intend it so, That
they were not a Corporation in being, by implying a Forfeiture. Then say I, no
Judgment at all can be given upon this Score, Non admittitur exceptio ejusdem
rei cujus petitur dissolutio, a man shall never be admitted to controvert that
to be in being, which he himself desires should be destroyed, and so has
allowed it to be. Shall Mr. Attorney be admitted to deny the supposal of his
own Writ? and truly I think I might very well leave this part of the Case, and
this point, to Mr. Attorney General himself; for if he will have any thing to
be answered by us, he must maintain us to be a Corporation capable of
answering; and so I have reason to expect that against his own Replication he
will be pleased to support the being of our Corporation, and so dismiss as
hence.

II. My Lord, I have done with this Point, and now I come to the Replication,
which indeed is a kind of a new Quo Warranto, for it brings in new matter, and
therein they do charge two Forfeitures, the one is by reason of the abuse of
the Market, the other is by reason of the Petition: My Lord, I shall answer
both of them, That we were seized of the Market, that is pleaded and that is
agreed: That we were seized of Tolls, and were to have reasonable Tolls, that
is agreed too; that there is a custom in London to have Common Councils, and
that this was by Common Council is agreed; all this is agreed by the Demurrer;
that this Toll (though by the way I must confess, and will agree with Mr.
Solicitor, that it is not properly to be called a Toll; for a Toll is only for
Goods sold; and when they are sold, in recompense for the Officers attendance
for the testification of the Contracts, and the entering them in their Books.
But I agree, this is not such a Duty for Goods bought and sold, but it) is for
the accommodation of Persons repairing thereunto for their Stalls; and if I
would call it by any particular Word, I had rather call it Stallage than any
thing else: It is for those Accomodations which we have been at vast charge in
preparing and providing, and for the maintenance of requisite Officers, and for
the cleansing of the Markets. Now Mr. Solicitor objects, That we cannot
prescribe for a Toll uncertain, and he cites the Case of Murage, and the like;
and so I must confess, where Murage is granted, it is commonly a thing certain,
so is Pontage, and the like; but I believe (if I had thought that it would have
been a point insisted upon) I could have brought you Instances where Murage,
and such like things, have been granted in general, and they would have been
ancient ones indeed: And there is a necessity for it in some cases; for when a
Town will repair its Walls, the charge may be greater or less, as the
particular Accidents may be, and so perhaps a certain Duty would not do it.
When a Wall is to be built, there the Duty may be certain; but when it is
built, to keep it in Repair, the Duty of Murage may be uncertain, according to
the charge; and if the case be not so, it will come little to our purpose,
which is a Duty upon a great and a continuing charge. I will name him some
things that he must agree, and I know he will grant, are uncertain, as Pickage
and Stallage, which are Duties for picking in my Earth to dig holes for the
Posts of Stalls to be fixed in: now there can never be, nor ever was any
circumscribing in those matters, for circumstances in every of those cases must
govern it. If I have occasion for my Stall to use a foot of ground, one sort of
Sum is necessary; if ten feet, another Sum; it ought to be equal indeed, but it
could never be good if it were limited to a Sum certain; and in all grants that
ever were of Pickage and Stallage, they were never reduced to a certainty, and
those are things too that relate to a Market.

And so I take it to be for Keyage, Anchorage, and the like; for when there are
Posts or Places for Ships, to which they may be fixed, the Owner of the Port
may have a compensation for that, but that must needs be uncertain, according
to the circumstances; if a Ship be bigger or lesser, if a Ship stay a Month or
a Day, it is not fit the same rate should be paid, nor is it usually granted by
particular words, Co. Ent' 535 and 526. placit' 4. The King against the City of
London for the Water-Bailage, and other things. They pleaded only a Right in
general, and do not say what the Particulars were; and yet one of the things
demanded in the Quo Warranto, was, as I said, the Water-Bailage, which sure if
any thing ought to be certain, that ought. In that Case it was good Pleading,
though I think I could say more against it, than this thing that is in the
nature of Stallage; so that all that Mr. Solicitor has built upon that must,
I think, needs vanish.

My Lord, I do not think but London ought to be, and is as much under the
obedience and correction of the King, as any City; but yet I believe in these
Cases of their Customs, you will give that allowance and indulgence to it that
all your Predecessors have done, which is greater than they have given to any
other Corporations in the Kingdom, and that because it was London; that there
should be such a thing as a Foreign Attachment, I think is hardly allowed in
other places; I am sure I have known it denied in some, that a Contract in
Writing should be equal to a Book Debt; that a Feme Merchant should sue or be
sued without her Husband; or if he be named, he should be only named for
conformity: You take notice that London is a Port-Town, and that Men that Trade
there, sometimes go beyond Seas, and in their absence their Wives trade by
themselves, and perhaps carry on distinct Trades while they are here: And so
they may do in other places may be, but only for the sake of London do you take
notice of these things there and not elsewhere; their Penalties that are sued
for in their Courts, a great many of them are such as would not be well
maintained in other Courts, or in any other place, and yet they are maintained
there, as namely, That their Penalties should be sued for before the Mayor and
Aldermen, when the benefit of them goes to their use; and yet that is allowed
in the Eighth Report, notwithstanding the grand Objection, That they are in
some sort Judges and Parties, Rolls 2 p. Abr. Tit. Prescription Letter H. fol.
266. No. 2. and 3. The City of London may prescribe to have a Court of Chancery
in London of matters tried in the Sheriffs Court, though such a Court cannot be
granted by the Kings Letters Patents; but the Mayor and Citizens of York cannot
prescribe for such a Court, because it were very dangerous that such petty
Corporations should have such Courts. And whatsoever is said by my Lord Hobart
in his Reports 63. I do affirm there is no Act of Parliament that erects a
Court of Chancety in London, or the Cinque Ports; if Mr. Solicitor had
strugled with me about the being, or not being of that Act of Parliament, I
would have agreed with him that there was no such, sooner than some that he
says are none. The Customs of London have been upheld; and I must confess I
think that is very strange, even against the general Words of an Act of
Parliament, 2 Inst. 20. A Jailer in London may permit his Prisoner, that is in
Execution, to go at large with a Battoon in any place within their
Jurisdiction, and it is no escape. And so is Plowdens Com. 36. A Citizen of
London may set up one Retail Trade, though he was bred to another,
notwithstanding of the Stat. 50. of the Queen. And for a General Rule take that
that is said in Palmer 542. Those of London may prescribe against a Statute,
and the reason is, because their Liberties are confirmed by Statute, and other
Towns are not. In Rolls Rep. 1 p. 105. Sprike against Tenant, my Lord Coke
being then Chief Justice, says, We take notice of the Customs in our Courts,
and other Courts in West-minster-Hall, and in London. Fleetwood Recorder of
London says a very strange thing in 1 Leon' 284. Hollinshead and Kings Case,
and in 4 Leon' 182. That the King's Courts ought to take notice, that those of
London have a Court of Record; for if a Quo Warranto issues to the Justices in
Air, it does not belong to them of London to claim their Liberties, for all
the Kings Courts have notice of them. And truly I have been informed, I mean by
Copies of Records, that when the Justices in Air came to the Tower, this was a
Privilege allowed to them, they were not bound to set forth their Liberties as
others were.

My Lord, I think this, as it is pleaded, is a Duty very justifiable, and very
well payable, by virtue of this Custom. I do agree, as I said, a Toll is
properly for Goods sold, and this is a Custom for the accommodation of those
that brought Goods to be sold, and it is like that 1 Leonard 218. my Lord
Cobhams Case, a Duty paid for the standing in the Cellar, and there that is
held to be good. In Rolls 2 p. of the Abridgment 123. Letter B. Hickman's Case.
The Lord of a Manor may prescribe to have the eighth part of a Bushel of Corn
in four Bushels that are brought to the Market within the Manor in the name of
the Toll, and that is for Stallage only, for it is said there, whether it be
fold or not. And in the same Book, fol. 265. the City of Dublin set forth, that
they are owners of the Port of Dublin, and that they maintained Perches in the
said River, to direct the Ships in the deep Channel, and that they kept the Key
and the Crane, and therefore in consideration of that, they prescribed and
demanded three pence in the Pound for all Merchandises in the said Port, and it
was held good. Now I agree Toll-through that cannot be prescribed for simply and
generally, but by Toll-through I mean as you know, for passing and re-passing
through only, and not for staying; but yet even that may be prescribed for too,
in consideration of repairing a great Highway, or a very foul way, or
maintaining a Bridge, and the like. And therefore if our Considerations here be
as good, as that we maintaining those great places may prescribe for this duty,
as for passing through the Streets, though it were no Market.

There is a famous Case reported in Rolls 1 p. fol. 1. and 44. And it is in 2
Bulstrode, and also in Moor, it was the Case of the Bellman of Litchfield: A
Prescription is made, that the Corporation of Litchfield has a Market, and
they ought to repair the way to it, and to appoint a Bellman that should sweep
the Marketplace, and that for this the said Bellman, time out of mind, had
taken of those that brought Corn to the said Market, and opened their Sacks to
sell a pint of Corn, if but a Bushel or under, if more a Quart. So that if it
were opened and not sold, yet he was to have that Duty, and that Prescription
was adjudged to them by all the Judges, and yet it does not appear there,
whether the repairing that way cost them 5 s. or 5000 l. and yet by intendment
they would not account it unreasonable, though it might have been urged it was
very unequal; if they could take a Pint for that which was under a Bushel,
perhaps they would take by that means, half of what the party bought; but if
there were fifteen Bushels they had but a Quart, and this was objected as to
the inequality of it; and yet they all passed over that by a reasonable
intendment, and would not deny the Prescription to be good. And the Case of
Cranage in Dyer, and the Case of 21 H. 7. 16. are admitted to be good Law,
where the Town of Gloucester prescribed for a Toll of Boats passing by the
River near the Town.

Now my Lord for ours, there was very great reason to induce it, the great
alterations that were made in London by the Fire; and it was not the first time
that London was burnt: And if there should be War, and so great Alterations and
Confusions, there were great cause that the City, that lays out great Sums, and
must be at such a public Charge, should not be losers by it.

And we do set forth more than they do in the Case of Litchfield, that we
provided the Marketplaces at our own charge; and if they will use them, they
must expect to pay some compensation for it; that we do keep Officers, and pay
them for cleansing and keeping Order in the Markets: And above all that, we
provide Standings and Stalls, and such Accomodations, and that I am sure is a
Provision no Lord of a Market is bound to make unless he will, and therefore
the Market-people that are accomodated by it have great reason to pay for it;
and we pay all the Taxes for the Marketplaces, for the ground is ours; and
that is not alleged in the Pleading indeed, but it must be implied, because we
pay the Taxes, and they that have the Standings are not liable to pay the
Taxes: And so is the Judgment in Rolls, 2 p. 238. and the 2d Abr. 289. And in
the Case of Cusack Justice Dodderidge says, That the redeeming of one Fair from
the Abbot of Westminster cost the City of London 8000 l. for he had a Fair at
Westminster, and a Market for 40 days, and that during that time no Sale should
be in London, or the places adjacent, and a great Rate it was if it were so.
The measure of a Toll is according to my Lord Coke 2 Inst. 58. when the thing
demanded for Wares or Merchandises does so burden the Commodity, that the
Merchant cannot have a convenient Gain by Trading therewith; and thereby Trave
is lost or hindered, then it is an evil Toll. But here indeed the Market-people
are better accommodated than ever they were; and Trade is so far from being
discouraged, as that it is increased, as is employed in the Replication; for
it is said, we receive 5000 l. a year, which if it were so unequal, would not
certainly be paid, nor could be, if there were not great Trade there. So that
the increase of Trade is the thing complained of in this Quo Warranto. And the
truth of it is, I have examined and looked into the Fact of these things, and
there is nothing in this By-law, but what was really anciently paid, except
only in one Instance, whether it were 6 d. or no, that was paid when a Cart was
drawn by two Horses, which now is but 4 d. and if we have increased the Toll,
which I doubt whether it be so or no, it is only in a very trifle.

Now my Lord, this Case I think is a stronger Case than that in 5 Rep. the
Chamberlain of London's Case, there is no consideration of Stalls, or cleansing
the place, but only they had an Officer to search and view, and that was a new
appointment of their own; they could not prescribe for it, but it was thought a
penny was a reasonable recompense, and the Subject had a benefit by it; and if
he would bring his Cloth to London to be sold, he should come thither to have
it viewed, and give a recompense for it. Now London is all Market indeed, every
Shop is a Market; and it has been well said of the Judges several times in
Westminster Hall, that London is the Market of all England, and there is never
an Acre in England but is the better for that.

As to the Imposition upon Coals, that is but an inducement, and an inducement
is never to be relied upon; it is not to be stood upon. And Mr. Solicitor did
very honorably decline it, and did not make any thing of it, nor trouble the
Case with it.

When the City did make this Act of Common Council, they did consult with their
Counsel for matter of Law, and with their Officers and Fellow-Citizens for
matter of Fact, and did adjust these rates, and enacted them to be paid, they
being reasonable ones, and according to the ancient Usage; but if they were
mistaken, it will be no cause for you to give Judgment against them for many
other reasons; As first, you cannot judge this to be unreasonable. I have not
heard one word said that this is an unreasonable oppressive Toll. Here is money
levied, what then? If it be a reasonable sum, it is not so great, it does not
deserve the name of Oppression. I say it is not so great an Oppression, if they
should have been mistaken in the form of instituting the levying of it, if they
might have done it under their Common Seal, and now they have done it without
that by Act of Common Council. Nay, it does not deserve that you should judge
it unreasonable; you cannot do it here, for the considerations are meritorious
and equivalent to it, the great charge they were at in Building, and they still
daily are at in cleansing and repairing and providing Stalls. But however, the
Case is not so disclosed here, that you can judicially determine this to be an
unreasonable Toll. According to the Rule in Cokes Magna Charta 222. the Toll of
a Market need not be certain, only it must be reasonable. And what shall be
deemed reasonable, the Judges must determine if it come judicially before them.
So shall reasonable Customs, and reasonable Fines, and reasonable Services, and
reasonable Time to remove Goods, and the like, they must be judged by the
discretion of the Justices upon the true state of the Case before them. Now
this Case must have all its Circumstances stated and agreed by Demurrer, or
found by Verdict. And so is 4 Rep. 27. b. and Hobart 135. and 174. as in the
Case of Copyholders Fines, the quality and yearly value of the Land must
appear, or else there cannot be Judgment whether it be reasonable or no. In the
13th Report fol. 3. and Croke Car. 196. where the Question was, Whether the
Lord of a Manor might assess two years and an half value of Copyhold Lands,
according to the Rack-Rents for a Fine upon Surrender and Admittance, and upon
non-payment to enter for the Forfeiture; as suppose Land, it be rented at 20 l.
a year, here is 50 l. demanded for admittance; there it appeared judicially
that it was unreasonable, and so it was adjudged, because the value was
certain. But who can here say, whether the providing of Markets cost 5 s. or
500 l. it is that estimable. Perhaps we have over-bought all these Tolls that
they call unreasonable; we over it to be reasonable, the Demurrer agrees it to
be so, and you must intend it to be so, unless the contrary be set forth
clearly in its circumstances; for he that will have a Forfeiture, must show the
circumstances to make it out.

My Lord, Another thing is this, to answer Mr. Solicitor in that point, I say,
an unreasonable By-law is no reasonable cause or color for forfeiting a
Corporation, admitting it to be unreasonable, though I grant it not. My Lord
Hobart in Norris and Staps Case, Hob. 211. says, that though power to make Laws
is given by special Clauses in all Incorporations, yet it is needless; for that
is included by Law in the very Act of Incorporating. For as reason is given for
the natural Body for the governing of it, so Bodies Corporate must have Laws as
a Politic Reason to govern them. Reason is a faculty in them as it is in a man,
and may err; and therefore says he, if the King do grant Letters Patents of
Incorporation to persons, and he does thereby make Ordinances and Bylaws
himself, they are subject to the same construction and rule of Law, as if they
were made afterward by the Corporation. For the King can no more make an
unreasonable By-law than a Corporation; but if the King do, shall that affect
the Corporation, and make the Corporation void by way of repugnancy, or an
instantaneous breach of Condition? no it shall not. And therefore as they may
receive unreasonable Rules from the King, without defeating of the Corporation,
or having their being thereby vacated, so they may make unreasonable Bylaws
without the same danger of destroying the Corporation. The cases are very many
wherein Bylaws have been judged unreasonable; the truth of it is, there is a
great misfortune in the perusing and making of those Bylaws; by some means or
other there is something discerned that still proves an Exception to it, as we
see in the Case of the Carmen and the Woodmongers; their By-law was made and
re-made, and corrected again and again, before it would be made to hold Water
in this Court. So in the Tailors of Ipswich's Case and Bradnox's Case, which
was here lately. All these have been adjudged void; but what then? In all these
Cases it was never said, hereby your Corporation is destroyed, you have erred
in making a By-law, and therefore you have lost your being of a Corporation.
Besides, if there were but a color for it, and it were any thing tolerable,
surely that were enough to make us excusable in such a matter. If it has been
received as we agree it has, the Officers are Trespassers, every individual of
them are suable, and any man may bring his Action against them. But they that
come to the Market think not fit to complain; if they did not like the Market,
they would not come at all; and if they did not like the Payment, they would
not come neither; and there is no levying of any thing unless they do come.

Now, my Lord, I will admit the levying and the receiving, and yet I say this
is no forfeiture; for here is a mistake of Law, or a mistake of Fact, by color
whereof Money is received: This by no means will work a Forfeiture of a
Corporation, for at that rate every Penalty that has been levied by a By-law
will be adjudged a levying of Money without Law, and so forfeit the Corporation,
which has not been done in other cases of Bylaws, and those much worse than
this; because most of those Bylaws were made for levying Money upon Men for
exercising a Trade; and it is much more to say that you should levy such Sums of
Money upon every stroke of honest industry, whereby a Man gets his Livelihood,
than that you shall pay so much for your accommodation in my ground for the
better vending your Goods. This has been held good in some cases, but in
others it has been held naught; and this has all been received and levied to
the use of the City too, and so it is a levying of money, whereby they have a
great advantage; nay, it is worse still, because it is imposed by force, and
recovered by force; but here it is a voluntary Penalty, no force, no compulsion,
only the being removed from their Standings, no other Penalty, no Imprisonment,
or the like; but if you do not like the conditions, you may be gone; I desire
you to walk out of this Market, if you don't like the price of the Provisions;
and to be gone from the Stall, if you don't like the price of the Standing. We
were not bound to provide these Stalls for you, but having provided them, if
you don't like them, you may leave them; but here is other cases, the man is
imprisoned, and sued by Action for the Penalty; here at any time if you don't
like your may be gone.

My Lord, I am very confident that if this be so, that all moneys levied by a
Corporation without Law are forfeitures; or where the Law is mistaken, then I
dare boldly affirm, that we never were a Corporation two months since London
was London, but by virtue of some old sleeping By-law or other that has been
set on foot, moneys have been levied, which perhaps will not be in strictness
allowed good: And if all these had been Forfeitures, we had been in a strange
condition, not one month or two should pass over us, but we had forfeited it;
and never can there be perhaps a month to the end of the World, but we should
still be forfeiting. And what is said of us, may be said of any other
Corporation that happens to make Bylaws. And I am sure in former times there
were moneys levied with a witness, I mean not the late times of Rebellion only,
but an hundred years ago, strange exorbitances of that nature were committed by
London and other Corporations; then they went by way of Information, but never
was it thought that it could affect the being of a Corporation: If it should do
so, I do not know whither it will go at last. The greater or the lesser Sum is
not that that will difference the Law. Is it a Forfeiture to receive 5000 l.?
Why is it not a Forfeiture to receive 500? Why not to receive 5 s.? Why not to
receive 5 d.? No bounds can be set for that, if it be a transgression of the
Law; here is a Tort and a Wrong done by your By-law, that you have levied 5 d.
and therefore all this great Inheritance of London, this that is the greatest
Inheritance of the Kingdom is forfeited for a Trifle, upon three half pence, or
a Basket of Eggs.

Nay my Lord, To go further I say, if this be a Forfeiture, I say it is only a
Forfeiture of the Market; nay, not so much neither, it is only a Forfeiture of
the Toll: my Lord, I cannot but once more mention that excellent Notion of my
Lord Hobart, That the Power of making Bylaws is included in the Act of the
Corporation; for as reason, says he, is given to a natural Body to govern it,
so a Politic Body must have Laws, as its reason, to govern it. Now then the
making of these Laws is but the exercise of that reason, declaring the mind of
the Corporation, for the direction of the Officers of it what to do and what to
take; and it is but like the mind of a man that directs his hand what to do. For
this is not like the Duty of Stallage, that relates to the Public, and relates
also to something that before they had no interest in, but only relates to the
administration of a private property, and directs the manner of that
administration. They are Lords of the Market, and that is casual to them, it is
not necessary for them so to be. If any Corporation bid their Officers levy so
much money; suppose they bid them take more Toll than is due, or levy more money
for Rent than is due for the Land, why this might be looked upon as a great
Breach of Trust and Encroachment: They should have had but 6 d. and they took 7
d. and this done by Act of Common Council, which is their way of expressing
their mind; yet surely it would be no Forfeiture, because the Land is their
own, and the administration of it belongs to them only in point of interest and
property. Suppose a Gentleman has a Market, and his Reason, which is his
By-law, as my Lord Hobart says, puts him upon taking of Toll, but he does a
little mistake the Law or the Custom, he bids his Servant take so much, which
perhaps may be too much for Toll, does this destroy his capacity of Suing and
being sued? You may as well say such a particular person shall not plead, or be
impleaded, if he do so and so. Nay this, if he were a Denizen, does not forfeit
his Denization, and yet a Denizen is as perfectly a creature of the Kings as a
Corporation is. It is Basilicon Doron, it is the bounty and kindness of the
King to one born out of his Dominions, to give him the capacity of a Subject,
to sue and be sued, and the like, which cannot be forfeited, even for breach of
Conditions in the Letters Patents of Denization. For this is within Versellin
Mannings Case, if he does not observe the Laws of the Land; it is true, he must
be punished for it, but he shall not be undenizen'd.

My Lord, There is a Statute which I think is a most plain Declaration of the
Law in this Case, and it is the Stat. of West' 1. ca. 31. Some call it the 30th,
because they differ in the numerating and heading of the Chapters. It Is the
Statute concerning those that take Outrageous Tolls in Market Towns. The
Statute says, Le Roy prendra le Franchise del' March en sa maine. The King
shall seize the Franchise into his own Hands. My Lord Coke in his Comment upon
that Statute says, He shall seize the Franchise of the Fair or Market till it
be redeemed by the owner, that is all. But this is intended says he, upon an
Office to be found; for in Statutes, all incidents shall be supplied by
intendment.

Now in the Quo Warranto that was brought against the Corporation of Maidenhead
in Palmer's Reports, there is this very case. That Corporation took an
outrageous Toll, too much Toll, or that that was not justifiable, for going
over their Bridge. Yet it was so far from being imagined that this should be a
forfeiture, (and yet the Case is the same, let any man distinguish it that can)
that it was a Question whether the Market was forfeited or no, as you may see
in that Book, fol. 82. And there it is said by Dodderidge, and at last it was
agreed by all the Court, that it should be a forfeiture only of the Toll, and
not of the Market. And I desire that that Folio may be noted by your Lordship,
and that you will please to look into what is said in that Case, for it is
debated before, and it seemed as if they would have forfeited the Market by it,
but not the Corporation, and yet that was not forfeited neither. And to this I
will apply that rule that Mr. Solicitor himself did mention, Puniatur in eo quo
peccat. You have offended in the Toll, therefore you shall suffer in the Toll,
not in the Market, to be sure not in the Corporation. For if it were that it
should affect the Market, it would be because it has some relation to a
Market, as a Toll has; but how can this possibly affect or touch the
Corporation? The Statute indeed goes thus far, and says, Whosoever shall take
Outrageous Toll shall forfeit the Market; but then shall we come and add,
Whoever shall take outrageous Toll, shall forfeit his capacity of holding a
Market, or any thing else? Do they complain of us for taking the Legislative
power upon us, and therefore we shall forfeit our Corporation, when the Statute
it self has appointed the punishment, and says only, the Market shall be
forfeited, and so make a new Law themselves? Statutes are supposed to be penal
enough of themselves, and all penal Statutes are to be taken equitably as to
the penalty, and not stretched beyond the Letter. And wherever a Statute
inflicts a penalty, and says you shall forfeit so much, as my Lord Hobart says,
the Common Law shuts up the Negative, that you shall forfeit no more. How then
is it possible we should forfeit that, which if it were forfeitable at all, is
not within the provision of this Law?

It Is true as Mr. Solicitor has said in the Book of Assizes that he cited in
Vet. Not. Brev' 161. It is said you shall forfeit in the case of a mis-user,
(where the Liberties are not depending one upon another) only the Liberty that
is abused, but how that can be applied for him I understand not; for nothing
can be more flat and plain against him: If so be we should forfeit our Toll or
our Market, be it so; nay, if we should forfeit our Liberty of having a Common
Council; what then? how is it possible to bring it up to a Forfeiture of the
Corporation? You shall forfeit a Court of Pypowders, if you forfeit your
Market, because it is incident to it, and dependent upon it, and subject to what
dangers the Market it self is subject to; but the being of a Corporation,
nothing can transcend that. To be sure what is incident to it, cannot transcend
it; it is but a Subject to that which is is superior.

For example sake, my Lord, I will cite you a Case, which is the Case of the
City of London too about the measurage of Coals. It is Sir Julius Caesar's
Case, 1 Leon' 106. And I choose to cite that Book; for though it did not come
out with your Lordships Authority, yet my late Lord Chancellor gave this just
account of it, That it was one of the best of our later Reports. Sir Julius
Caesar libelled in the Admiralty against the Officer of the City for measuring
Coals upon the Thames. Fleetwood came to the Bar, and prayed a Prohibition, and
Edgerton the Solicitor on the other side complained, that the Mayor of London
did take a Fine for this measurage, and made an Office of it; and this he
conceived was Extortion (which is the thing complained of here in so many
words) and being upon the Thames, should be punished in the Admiralty. As to
that the Judges replied, by no means, and Wrey and Gawdey said, if it be
Extortion in the Mayor, there is no remedy for it in the Court of Admiralty,
but in the Kings Courts, and it shall be redressed here in a Quo Warranto says
Gaudy. It Is true, a Quo Warranto might well have been brought for redressing
that Extortion, but it could not mean thereby that the Corporation should be
dissolved: And that it was so understood is most plain, for accordingly a Quo
Warranto is brought. You have it in Cokes Entries fol. 535. and 536. placit' 4.
And the City of London appeared and pleaded, and prescribed to it; and
thereupon the Attorney General that then was, my Lord Coke himself, was
satisfied, and confessed their Title, and Judgment was given for them; and
since it has been held good, and they have enjoyed it in peace; and this I
hope is a good Example for Mr. Attorney to follow in this Case.

My Lord, I come now to that part which I come least willingly to, I mean that
of the Petition; and that which I have to say in it, is this my Lord. First I
say, That this Petition is justified in the Pleading, and I hope it is very
justifiable; if it were but excusable, it is enough. That it is justifiable to
Petition the King in our necessities and extremities is plain from what my Lord
Hobart says, fol. 220. He says it was resolved by the Court in Renham's Case,
that it was lawful for any Subject to Petition to the King for a redress in an
humble and modest manner: For as it is there said, Access to the Sovereign must
not be shut up in case of the Subjects distresses. Now the Common Council are
not less privileged than any other sure, but rather more in this kind of
Addressing and Petitioning: I cannot tell what Crime to make of this, there is
so much alleged against us.

I did very well observe truly, and would always observe and remember in all
such Cases, what my Lord Keeper here said to your Lordship, That Council should
not so much speak, as if they would abett the Guilt of their Clyent, rather
than advocate for their innocence.

My Lord, If the words themselves that are alleged are not words that are
unlawful to be delivered or spoken, then all this that they are dressed up with
of the intention to censure the King, and to bring him into dislike with his
People, all that must go for nothing, and are not to weigh in the Case. Now the
Words are these, That there was a Prorogation, and by means of this, there
being depending so many Impeachments of Lords and others, and Bills in the
Parliament in both Houses, which could not be perfected any where but there;
the prosecution of the public Justice, and the making Provisions necessary for
the preservation of his Majesty and his Protestant Subjects, received an
interruption. Now, my Lord, I conceive these Words are not Words that in
themselves are unlawful: And for that your Lordship will be pleased to consider
our Plea; I need not repeat it, you have it before you: If they are in sense
and substance the same Words that have been spoken by the King, and the Lords
and Commons in Parliament; he that will not be satisfied with that Authority,
will not be satisfied with any. Then what do we say? We say that the
prosecution of the public Justice received an interruption; does not the King
say so, and more in his Speech we have set forth, wherein he recommends it to
both Houses, that Justice may be done? What is the meaning then but this, if
the further prosecution of the Offenders goes not on, Justice is not done? and
so we speak but the Kings Words. We say they are not tried, or they were not
tried, they themselves complain of it to this day; and therefore Justice did
receive an interruption. I am confident, without reflection, that Honorable
Person my Lord Danby in this point has said Words much more liable to
exception, though truly Words that I believe deserve no rebuke. He has
complained that Justice was not done in his Case, because he was not tried, and
that when he desired to be tried too, but his Liberty taken away, and he
forfeited that which was dearer to him than Lands or Honors, his Health,
whereby he endangered his Life, and lost all the comforts of Life. If it were
lawful for him to say, as certainly it was, That Justice was not done in his
Case, why might not the City say so? Either these Lords ought to be condemned,
or they ought to be acquitted; it is hard to say Justice is done, when they lie
so long in Prison, and are not either acquitted or condemned.

Then we say this, That the making Provision for the preservation of the Kings
Person, and of his Protestant Subjects received an interruption. To this part
we give this Answer: We set forth, That there were Bills depending in the
Parliament for this purpose, and that is agreed to us by the Demurrer; and that
these Bills could not pass into Laws, any more than the Lords could be tried
but in Parliament. Why then if so be it be so, that the matter cannot be done,
nor provision made, but (as that Proclamation that issued for the Fast said,
and as the Addresses of both Houses for the Fast do say) By the blessing of God
upon the Counsels of King and Parliament; if these Counsels, or the King and
his Parliament are interrupted, this is not done. To make such an high Crime of
this I do not understand; I would not be thought to speak any thing to justify
that which is really a Crime; but this is that I say, It Is not in Law unlawful
for us to petition the King, or address to him: But, my Lord, to take off the
edge of this business, I shall beg leave to read to your Lordship a Speech of
the Kings, made the 6th of March following, and therein there are these Words,
The further Prosecution of the Plot.

My Lord, let any man read, and spell, and see how in substance the Words in
our Petition differ from the Words of the King, making those Laws necessary for
the security of himself and the Kingdom, and this spoken the 6th of March, when
this very Petition now complained of was presented in January or February
before, and there was no Parliament between. No man will say, that there were
Laws sufficient for the security of the King and Kingdom, when the King himself
speaks of the necessity of making such ones: So then, those Laws that were
preparing received an interruption. The Lords were not tried, is not that an
interruption of Justice? since they could be tried no where else, as must be
granted; and the King recommends it to them as not done, but necessary to be
done. So the King said before, and so it is employed here. There is no such thing
said in the Petition, That the King did interrupt Justice, and the proceedings
of the Parliament; It Is an Inference and a Consequence made by Wit and Art, not
that the King did interrupt, or intend to interrupt Justice; but it says, by
the Prorogation of the Parliament, the public Justice received an Interruption.

My Lord, Suppose at that time there had been a Pestilence here, and the King
had been as much resolved to meet his two Houses as they him, but by reason of
the Pestilence he were necessitated and forced to make a Prorogation. Then
there comes such a Petition from the City and says, That by reason of this
Prorogation, those Bills that were depending did not pass, and the public
Justice received an Interruption: What is the Offense of this? It Is all true.
If there be Bills depending, and Impeachments that can no other where be tried,
they do receive interruption by a Prorogation. Can any man say this is false?
The charge in the Replication is, That we did falsely and maliciously say, what?
that which is true, and that which the King had said before, and that which the
Lords and Commons said after him, That till those things were done they were
not safe; and those things as yet were not done.

My Lord, There is this further in it, the Petition is set forth in haec verba,
and therefore I may take any thing out of it to explain it, and restore it to
it self; for this indeed is a very restrained construction of the Petition.

It says, when this interruption by the Prorogation was received, That the King
for urgent causes, and very good reasons, did Prorogue the Parliament. It is
his Prerogative to do so, and God forbid but he should have it. I think without
doubt, we should be more at a loss for want of that Prerogative than we can by
the use of it; it is mine, and I believe every good man's Opinion, that that
Prerogative is very necessary and profitable for us all; but it is the
consequence of it that this interruption of Justice is received; nay, we are so
far from saying that the King did interrupt Justice, or intending it, that we
say, we do hope the Kings gracious intentions were only to make way for the
better concurrence of his Majesty and his Parliament. The King does, for great
causes, and best known to himself who has the Prerogative, Prorogue the
Parliament; whereby as a mere consequence, not as the Kings intention, the
public Justice is interrupted: Nay, this we affirm was with a good intention
in the King, that he might the better be enabled to concur with his Parliament,
as is set forth in the Petition. Can there be any thing more properly said?
It Is the greatest justification of the Prorogation that can be. The King has
prorogued the Parliament: What to do? Why Justice has in view received an
Interruption, but not in the intention of the King. We know what the meaning of
it is, and so we set forth in our very Petition, it is to gain time, that he
may the better concur with his Parliament. It Is a great commendation of the
Kings purpose, instead of charging him with Injustice, that he did resolve to
concur with his Parliament for such ends, and accordingly did Prorogue the
Parliament.

Now the Attorney General has put in that it was ea Intention; there is the
sting of the business to put in those words, to make that which we may lawfully
speak, of it self to be an Offense; but truly that signifies just nothing: It
can never hurt a thing that is true; it has great Authority in it if it be
applied to a thing that is unlawful; but if in substance it be true, and the
thing it self justifiable, those Words make nothing in the Case; and I think I
need not argue that point, but refer my self to the great Case that was in
Westminster Hall, and that is the Reversal of the Judgment given in this Court
against my Lord Hollis, which was a Reversal in Parliament, and is Printed, and
the last Impression of Mr. Justice Coke's Reports by order of Parliament, and
there they explode all the notion of ea intention, and this business. A man
speaks words that he might speak in Parliament (though I know not whether he
might or no) but the great thing is, If words that in themselves are
tolerable, to be spoken, be spoken, you shall not come and say they were
spoken with an ill intention; though, as I shall show by and by, this has a
kind of Fatality in it, and that is this, That it is done with an ill mind by a
Corporation that has no mind at all.

Mr. Attorney General. Just now you said it had a mind, and Reason was its mind.

Mr. Recorder. I said as my Lord Hobart says, that a By-law to it is a mind, as
reason is to a man, but it has no moral mind. My Lord, then I say, the
Citizens of London were indeed at that time under great consternation, by
reason of the Conspiracies that had been discovered in Parliament, and in the
Courts of Justice; and it had been declared by the late Lord Chancellor at the
Trial of the Lord Stafford, which your Lordship may very well remember, That
London was burnt by the Papists, and therefore 'twas no wonder that they were
desirous that themselves and the Kingdom should be put into great security
against those Enemies. This, my Lord, I confess is a tender point, and I would
not speak a word in it without a Law-book to back me. I remember that my Lord
Hobart says, That Zeal and Indignation are fervent Passions. The City of London
had great Indignation against the Papists for this Conspiracy against the King
and Kingdom, and the Religion established by Law. There was no disaffection in
the City at this time when this Petition was made sure, and I wonder that any
man should say, that knows London, and was acquainted with it then, and looks
upon this Petition which passed nemine contradicente, that they had such an
intention as is insinuated; And pray let him read the Names of the worthy
Aldermen that then sat upon the Bench, and the other Names of the Common
Council-men then present, and then let him say, if, without Reflection, the
King have more loyal Subjects in the City of London than these men were. And do
you think if there had been in it any Sedition, or any of those ill qualities
that make up the ill Adverbs which are joined to it in the Replication, not one
of all those loyally-dispos'd men would have spoken against it? But alas, all
of it passed nemine contradicente.

My Lord, I say that if the matter of it be justifiable, as I think it is, then
all these words will signify nothing, if there were never so many more of
them: And the presenting and carrying of it to the King, that is no Offense,
that is not so much as pretended to be one. And, my Lord, I think it a very
harsh Translation of the word into Latin, when the Petition says, That the
Parliaments Proceedings, or the public Justice received an interruption, to
put that word of Obstructionem in; truly I think a better word might have been
found to express the soft expression in the Petition; and they need not have
put that hard violent word Obstructionem, when to make English of it they
translated it Interruption.

But, my Lord, they do admit I say, That the making and presenting of it to the
King is not the Offense so much as the publishing of it, by which it is exposed
to many others besides. Now to excuse that, the Answer we give is this; and
it is that which will carry a very reasonable ground of Justification in it.
Certain Citizens that were private Men had petitioned the Common Council, and
thereby they were importuned to make known the desires of the City to the King,
and it was reasonable to make known to those Citizens what the Common Council
had done to prevent false Rumors, which we knew were rife enough in those
days; and to show that there was nothing ill in it, we did Print it. And it is
also all driving at the Common Interest, at the Kings Safety, the Preservation
of the Church and the Government established: All this they did desire might be
known to these Citizens, and all others that enquired about it; and therefore
they Printed it, to evidence that there was nothing of ill intended in it. And
I do wonder I must confess, that this Objection of the publishing of this
Petition should be so much insisted upon; for they say, That the Mayor,
Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London did it, and say not any thing of
the Common Council that they did print it: Now they that did vote it, knew it
without printing; and it is alleged in the Pleadings, and confessed by the
Demurrer, That the Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens of London, that is, the
Corporation, consists of above 50000 Men, which cannot well be intended
otherwise. Why then, here is a Petition that is agreed to be well enough lodged
as to the Persons that voted it, it being the liberty of the Subject to
petition; and if this had been only presented to the King, though it had been
by those 50000 men, nay, if it had been by 10000 men, who had been the
Corporation, It had been well enough, so it had not been printed, but only kept
private to themselves: Why then it is very strange, that what is known to all
London, so great a part of the Kingdom, should be lawful, but it should be
heinously unlawful to send the news of it further. It went further than the
City of London, and therefore it is such an Offense as shall be a Forfeiture of
the Corporation. My Lord, there is the Case of Lake and King, the Petition to
the Parliament was scandalous in it self, yet it stood protected, being
presented to the Parliament; and it was lawful to print it, provided it were
delivered to a Committee of Parliament, or only to those that were Members;
though it is said there, that the printing of it is a great publishing, for the
Composers, Correctors, and other Persons that are concerned in the Press read
every Letter of it. But it was answered, That Printing is but a more
expeditious way of Writing; and if he had employed 20 Clerks, it had been a
greater publishing than three or four Printers. Possibly the Printers might not
read it, or not be able to read it well, or not all of them read it at that
time.

Now here my Lord, Sure it was lawful to acquaint the Citizens what they had
done, if you take it to be the Act of the Common Council, and the Common
Council to be the Representative of the City. It was always agreed by the House
of Commons, that any Member might send the Votes to those that sent them
thither, and whom they represented; they have blamed indeed men for sending the
debates, but never for communicating the Votes: And what they may do by
Writing, that they may do by Printing. Why then might not the Citizens of
London, who by Custom choose those Common Council men, well desire to know, and
might well know what they had done; and then what they might do by Writing they
might by Printing; for that is but another way, though a more suitable and
compendious way of exhibiting any thing that you would have go to many. And if
it be lawful to impart it to all the City, and all the City does know it,
though it does go further it is no matter; for what is known to London, may very
well be known to all the Nation besides without Offense, if it did go further.
Besides, it shall never be intended it was published further, or that any
others knew of it; for it is said to be published in the Parish of St. Michael
Bassishaw, in the Ward of Bassishaw, and that is in London, to the Citizens of
London; and so they only talked of it amongst themselves. Besides, the main
thing I go upon, which is, if there be no ill in the thing it self, the ea
intention can make no crime by a bare affirmation, which we deny; and if it
might be well said or done, it is lawful to Print it, and the Publication is no
Offense neither.

My Lord, The next point I come to is this, That a Corporation cannot possibly
commit a Capital Crime, or any other Crime against the Peace: And I shall offer
this Dilemma, Either it was done seditiously or not; if not, then there is no
sufficient Assignment of a cause of forfeiture; if it were, then it is a crime,
for which the Offender is indictable; and that I say is absolutely impossible
for a Corporation to be guilty of. And here I will throw in also that business
of the Toll, and I will for argument sake, admit the taking of a wrongful Toll
to be Robbery, and then let the argument go on. I have heard it said within the
Bar occasionally, that a Corporation is entrusted with the Government, and that
they may commit Treason, and raise Sedition, as Mr. Solicitor has said; I
suppose it must be under their Great Seal: But I confess, I believe it is
rather spoken to amuse than to satisfy; but I really think it is no ill, nor
unjustifiable thing for me to say, nor against the Government to affirm, That
it is impossible a Corporation can commit Treason, or that it is entrusted with
the Government in any such kind.

But first my Lord, I shall show you what Opinion former times had, and that
because such an Opinion as this has been broached of late days.

Lord Chief Justice. Mr Recorder, Will you be much longer? Because I must sit
here at Nisi prius this Afternoon, and yet I would feign hear the Argument, if
it would not be too long.

Mr. Recorder. No my Lord, I have almost done, and will cut short.

In 21 E. 4. fol. 13. b. it is said by Pigott, That a Mayor has two abilities,
the one to his own use, to take and to grant, and to do as another natural
person does; and then the Mayor as Mayor and Commonalty, has another Capacity
to their common use and profit; and that is but a name, an Ens rationis, a
thing that cannot be seen, and is no substance; and for this name or
Corporation it is impossible they can do or suffer any wrong, as to beat or be
beaten, as such a Body; but the wrong is made to every member of the Body, as
to his own proper person, and not as to the name of Corporation; nor can the
Corporation do a personal wrong to another; nor can they commit Treason nor
Felony as to the Corporation, nor against any other person. And if a Writ of
Debt be brought against the Mayor and Commonalty, or other such Body, upon an
Obligation, and they plead it is not their Deed, and it is found their Deed,
they shall not be imprisoned as another single person shall. The same Law is if
they are found Dissessors with force, they shall not be imprisoned; nor in a
Writ of Ravishment of Ward they shall neither be imprisoned nor abjure the
Realm; for such a Body is hut a name, to which such an act cannot be done. So
says Catesby in the same Book. In a Writ brought against them no Capias shall
issue, because they are but as a dead person in Law, and the Appearance upon a
Capias cannot be otherwise than personal. And so to this purpose says the Chief
Justice there, If this Body will do any thing, it must be done by Writing. And
all along it is the Tenor of the whole Case, that a Corporation cannot commit
Treason, or any other Crime. But the reason of the thing is above any
Authority. Suppose that they under their Common Seal should commit Treason, and
you bring an Indictment of Treason against the Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens
of the City of London, what Judgment shall be given against them in their
corporate capacity? What? it shall be that Suspendatur per collum Corpus
politicum. And then, what execution shall be done upon that Sentence? What must
they hang up the Common Seal? Nothing else you can do can affect them; but in
their private capacity, there they may be punished as single persons.

A Penal Statute says, That he or she that offends against the Law shall
forfeit so much, or incur such a Penalty: Is a Corporation Male or Female? that
it should come under such a provision; but the real reason of the Law is this,
it is a civil Being, it is Ens civil, it is Corpus politicum, it has civil
qualities, but it has no moral qualities, and all Offenses consist in the
immorality of them, and there must be malice to make that immorality. No words
or Acts are Treason or Felony, unless there be a traitorous mind or a felonious
mind, and therefore a madman cannot be guilty of Treason or Felony. Sergeant
(...) brought an Action for these words, That he had spoken Treason; it was
moved in Arrest of Judgment, that this cannot be Actionable; for he might speak
Treason in putting a Case; ay, that were well, said they, if it could be
understood so; but we must intend it that he spoke Treason, as his own words ex
cord suo, which makes it Treason; for Treason consists in the immorality of
the mind.

Another reason is what Pigot said, as I said before, That a Corporation is but
a Name, an Ens rationis, a thing that cannot see or be seen, and indeed is no
substance, nor can do or suffer wrong, nor any thing where a corporal
appearance is requisite. What my Lord Dyer says in Moor 68. that he never saw,
is, I believe, true in general, that no Man ever did see, that a Corporation
could be bound in a Recognizance or Statute Merchant; and why? because it must
be acknowledged in person: And so in this case, The Guilt follows the Person,
but cannot a mere capacity. In all Crimes the Offender must appear in person,
and plead in person, and suffer in person; but you can never bring the Mayor,
Commonalty and Citizens into Goal, to appear and plead to an Indictment to
receive a Judgment, or suffer Execution. Can a Body Politic that is invisible
appear in person?

Obj. But then there is this great Objection, By this means, they say, if there
be no punishing of them, there is no Government, and they may commit Treason
under the great Seal, they may raise Armies, and instigate a Rebellion, and all
with impunity.

Sol. My Lord I say no, and I give two Answers to it that are not to be replied
to; and the first is this:

1. All these Persons that are met together, though they are met corporaliter,
in their corporate capacity, ^^r the Acts of the Corporation at that time; yet
when they go out of their corporate business and commit Treason or Felony, the
Crime does not egredi personas, every one of them is a Traitor or a Felon; and
notwithstanding they appeared there under the pretense of a Corporation, yet
they are all liable in their private several Capacities, every one of them must
be indicted personally, and suffer personally: For when they go about to do
such a thing, it is out of the business of the Corporation, and they must answer
for their own particular Offenses. But,

2. I have another Answer to give to it. This Objection is to be retorted on
the other side, That if a Corporation authorize the levying of War under their
Common Seal, shall be affected by it in their politic Capacity, they are
liable to the Law in that Capacity only, and must suffer in that Capacity only:
And the consequence of that is, they are discharged in their private Capacity;
and this is a Law of Indemnity and Protection for all Crimes, for a man cannot
be liable two ways for Treason or Felony, or any other Crimes; if he be not
liable in his private, he is in his public Capacity; if not in his public, he
is in his private. And what is the consequence of that? This is a Dispensation
for a Corporation met together in a Body, to do any illegal thing, or to commit
any enormous Crime; for the Kings Counsel says this, We are responsible for it
in our politic Capacity; and what Execution can then be done to punish that
Corporation with such a punishment as the Law inflicts, that is, Imprisonment
or death, any more than upon an Action of Debt brought against them upon a
Bond, and Non est factum pleaded, and found for the Plaintiff, they can be
imprisoned, and the like. So that this shall protect and shelter them in the
commission of any Capital Offense; for if they are to suffer for it as a
Corporation, you must take Judgment against them as the Law gives it; and how
will that be done against an invisible Body? What will be the Execution against
the Corpus Politicum, that can neither see nor be seen?

I think this mighty plain; and I must confess, I wonder how it could ever
enter into the mind of any man, that a Corporation could commit a Corporate
Crime. I have as it became me, in regard of the duty of my place, and before
that, for my own Learning, read Stamford's Pleas of the Crown, my Lord Cokes
4th Institutes, Poulton de Pace Regni, my Lord Hales's Pleas of the Crown,
Dalton's Justice of the Peace, and other Books of that Subject, but I defy any
man to show me in any of those Treatises concerning Criminal Matters, any
resolution, that ever a Corporation that could be concerned, that they should
be brought before a Justice of Peace, or proceeded against upon any Law for
Treason or Felony, or be hanged in their politic Capacity.

My Lord, I shall conclude all my discourse of this kind, (and I have almost
done, because I perceive I encroach upon your patience, with an observation I
have made upon the 19 H. 7. c. And and it is the Statute that makes provision
against Corporations, that made Bylaws against the Prerogative. That Statute
says, that some Corporations did so; now an higher Offense than that, sure
cannot well be described; and there that Law says, that those that do so, that
make such Bylaws against the Prerogative, shall forfeit for so doing for every
Offense Forty pound, unless they are confirmed by the Chancellor and Treasurer,
and Chief Justices, or any three of them. Now to what purpose was this Statute
made; if the making of an ill By-law (and worse cannot be than a By-law against
the Kings Prerogative) should be a forfeiture of the being of a Corporation?
How vainly did the King and Parliament employ themselves to make a Statute that
a Corporation should forfeit 40 l. for such an Offense? No Man will say they
had rather take that Penalty than another, when they might have a greater, if a
greater could be had by Law. If they might have had a Quo Warranto, and thereby
destroyed the Corporation, surely they would not have stood for the Penalty of
40 l. for they might easily have got more money: No, they might have said, We
will never pass it by, unless you will give us 4000 l. or a far greater Sum;
nor shall you have your Corporation again, without you give us a considerable
recompense for it: And when the process and the proceedings were so expeditious
and easy to come at it in a Quo Warranto, as it was easy in those days, why
should they put the King to the delays in an Action of Debt for so small a
Penalty as 40 l.? So that I take it to be a direct Judgment of the Parliament
in that Case, that no Corporation should or could be forfeited for the making
of any By-Law that was irregular, though it were even against the Kings
Prerogative.

But to hasten to a conclusion, I have all this while, my Lord, supposed, that
the Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens of London have done this, but it is not so;
this is not the Act of the Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens, it is not the two
hundredth part of the Corporation, it is but the Act of the Common Council; and
we have distinguished our selves by pleading, that it does not consist of above
250, when the City contains above 50000. I must confess the Council is not
taken notice of much in Law; as is seen in Warren's Case, 2 Crook 540. and 2
Rolls 112. Warren being one of the Common Council of Coventry, and displaced,
sued out a Writ of Restitution, and upon that Writ it was returned, that by
custom the City might place and displace ad libitum; they there held that the
custom was good: But it is not so of a Freeman or Alderman, because he has a
Freehold; but a Common Council is a thing collateral to a Corporation, and the
Office of a Common Council is nothing but only to give assistance and advice,
which they may refuse at their pleasure. In Estwick's Case in Style 32. and 2
Rolls 456. it is said, That it is a place merely by custom, and that the Common
Council is properly but only a Court of Advice; and, my Lord, you shall never
intend more than that they were a Court of advice: All the rise of their Power
is but by custom, and that custom is pleaded to give advice for the benefit of
the City, and make Bylaws for the good of the Corporation, and that is
confessed by the Demurrer, and you shall intend no more than what is opened in
the pleading.

And then it is evident this was done by a very small part of the Citizens of
London, and that does no way affect the whole Corporation sure. In James Baggs
Case, 1 Rolls, fol 226. it is said, That if a Patent be procured by some
persons of a Corporation, and the greater part do not assent to it, that shall
not bind a Corporation. And if so be a Charter sealed, and sent by the King,
because not accepted in pais, by the greater party, bind not, Shall an Act done
by a few, and an Act done that tends to a Forfeiture, bind the whole in point
of their being? There is no ground to say, that the Common Council represents
the City, no more than a Council does his Client, or an Attorney his Master;
only as far as is for the benefit of the City, they are chosen and entrusted to
make Bylaws; if they offend, they are but Ministers and Officers, and so they
are within the Statute of Ed. 3. which I mention, though I think we have no
need of that in the case to help us; if they make a unreasonable By-law, it is
void, and every man that is aggrieved by it may have his Remedy, may bring his
Action. Shall you supply this by an intendment, that they have such a relation?
That they are the Representatives of the City of London? That they have a power
to forfeit the Corporation? No, my Lord, by Law they are part of the
Corporation, but they have no such power to forfeit the Corporation. A custom
shall never be construed to enable a man to do a wrong; and a great wrong it
is, that they that are trusted, and trusted but for a year, and trusted but for
the good of the Corporation, of which they are part, should give up the being,
or what is worse, forfeit the being of that Corporation. The custom of Kent
that makes an Infant capable of making a Feoffment, shall never enable an
Infant Tenant in Tail, to make a Feoffment, so as to work a discontinuance of
the Estate Tail, and put the Heir to his Formedon. Every illegal Act of theirs
is beyond their Commission, and a nullity of that is all in respect of
themselves; and it is as if they the had never done it as to the Corporation,
for they are by no means the Corporation; for tho they use the Comm Seal in
some cases at some times; so do the Court of Aldermen in other cases; but it is
only in other cases wherein they are particularly entrusted. If an Act of
Common Council say, that I shall have such and such Lands of the Cities, that
Act fignifies nothing but as a direction and advise; when it is under the Common
Seal, it is an Act of Corporation, and proceeding by advice of Common Council,
it binds.

Now, my Lord, this is the more unreasonable, because we know that the practice
of the Common Council in London, being to advise for all the Inhabitants, they
are chosen by the unfree-men as well as others; and it is a strange thing that
they should have a capacity to give away the liberty of the Citizens, when they
are chosen by others as well as them; they had no such trust for them; nay, all
trust they had was to keep their Liberties, and not to destroy them. Has any
Man a trust to destroy himself? sure no Man is trusted by God himself to be
felo de se. And certainly then you can never understand it to be in the nature
of a Trust to destroy another; and the least Citizen, my Lord, has as much and
as true an interest in the Corporation of the City of London, as the greatest:
And therefore 250, if they had been much the greater number of the Citizens,
would signify nothing to the rest of the Body.

My Lord, I shall only say this little more, here is no crime charged relating
to them as a Corporation: Here is indeed a fine word used, that we did this
contra fiduciam in corpore politico repositam, but all this is but an imaginary
Trust, the King never gave them a power or authority, or entrusted them to make
Bylaws that were unreasonable; he gave them a power to make reasonable
Bylaws, and so he does every Corporation. And the same Law that gave them the
power, limits that power, and says, if they go beyond that power, it is a
nullity. And these Acts relate not to them as a Corporation; the Petition is
not so much as said to be against any trust reposed in the Corporation,
certainly there never was any such Trust. Did ever the King entrust them to
advise him about the matters contained in the Petition? and if not, then it is
not contra fiduciam; therefore it relates to particular persons: If it be an
Offense, I hope it is none of the Corporations.

But then the levying of Money, that is contra fiduciam; they took upon them an
illegal and unjust power in the Common Council. Suppose it so, how does this
belong to the Corporation? it is an encroachment upon property, it is the most
arbitrary thing in the world. Whether they have the Market, and the Dominion of
it or not, is matter of Fact, and being pleaded, is confessed by the Demurrer:
And then for the power of making Bylaws, that is a thing that cannot possibly
be taken from them while they are a Corporation; it is that which must be in
them as a Corporation, like the faculty of Reason in a Man to express his
Resolutions by. And it is no more, than if a man that has a Market, bid his
Servant go and remove such as have Stalls there, unless they will pay so much.
That direction is as good a Law as this, and as bad a Law as this, and no more.
There is nothing else in it but the direction of the Officers, what they shall
do in the ordering of the Markets, and disposing of the Cities Property.

Then as to the former method of expressing themselves, whether it be by Act of
Common Council, or under the Common Seal, or by their natural Voice, it is all
one, it is not a thing that concerns them as a Body Politic: But if it were
illegal and mistaken, I say, the Penalty is only, that it shall be void. What
the Common Council, nay what the Corporation does within the limits of its
Authority is good, what beyond that it does, is void. If I command my Servant
to distrain for Rent, and he kills a Man in the doing of it, this, as to me, is
void; but as to himself, that is chargeable upon him. And what I say of the
Common Council, I say of the Corporation it self, That it is a Capacity, and a
limited Capacity; it is the act of the Members, not of the Corporation, if they
do wrong. The Common Council can act for the good of the City, and the City can
do no more, if they themselves should meet, Crook, Eliz. fol. 85. The Queen
makes a Lease for years of Lands to the men of Chesterfield, by the name of
Aldermen, and they by that name grant all their Interest to Clerk; says that
Book, this is void; for the Queen granting them a Lease as to the Aldermen of
Chesterfield, this makes them a Corporation, and gives them a capacity to take,
but not to grant. And so Rolls Abr. 1 p. 513. And therefore no Corporation is
to be considered as a Corporation, but only when it acts according to the
capacity allowed to it; and as to the rest, it all turns into their private
capacity, but it affects not the Body, nor has any such relation as to bind it.

My Lord, All the Question here is, Whether there shall be such a Person in
Esse as this Corporation? Whether the City of London shall subsist as such a
Person, to sue and be sued, to plead and be empleaded? There is nothing of
Government or Misgovernment in the case, but it is all about our Capacity, and
nothing else, whether we shall be Defendant or Plantiff in any Court.

My Lord, Magna Charta and all the other Acts that have gone in confirmation of
it, show the great care of the Government in all Ages to preserve the City of
London, and I look upon them as so many Declarations of the immortality of it,
and all other Corporations. I shall use a strange Argument perhaps at first
hearing, but it is to me a great Evidence for us, that Magna Charta does not
confirm our being, but our Liberties and Privileges; it says, That the City of
London shall have all its Liberties, it confirms its Leets, its Markets, and
all those things, that is, it confirms all that it has; it has not saved
indeed, if a Corporation indeed be built upon a Corporation; but that
particular Liberty may be destroyed, as that of Bridewel, and the like, but it
does more than confirm its being, for it does implicitly declare, That that was
impossible to be forfeited: They confirm what needed confirmation; but for
their being there was no need of that, it only confirmed the supervenient
Liberties, with out which it might be a Corporation; but as to its being, it
meddled not with that: And if it were not so, it were an unreasonable thing that
we should have so many Acts of Parliament that give such particular Powers to
the Mayor and Commonalty of London; and scarce any Act of Parliament that
relates to the Public, but London is mentioned, and taken care of in it. Are
not all these Declarations that London should stand for ever? Would not any one
have said else, Pray what do you put such confidence in London for? There is
not such a fickle thing upon the Earth as the being of the Corporation of
London. If they lay but 6 d. upon a Joint of Meat they are gone, and there is
not a month in the year but they forfeit their being.

The Act for Administration has a Proviso, that says it shall not extend to
London: Why does any Man think that this Law was not intended to be as
perpetual for London, as for other parts of the Kingdom? They did not question
but London would be a Corporation as long as England was England.

It would be a strange thing in the Example of it, that the World should be
taught by one instance, that a Corporation can be ruined, when so many People
put their Trusts in those Corporations, and so many vast Inheritances depend
upon them. And I think the King and the Government, or those you call so, are
more concerned to preserve London, than all the Persons that are in it. I would
not speak it in this place by way of Argument for my Client, but I think I
could maintain it in all places; only I hope and believe I shall have no need
for it.

My Lord, All Innovations, as this must certainly be a very great one, are
dangerous: This Frame of Government has lasted and been preserved for many
hundreds of years, and I hope will do so as long as the World lasts. My Lord, I
need your Patience, but I have just done. Here is a Charge that is very little
indeed, there is nothing in the matter of it, but the great consequences are
fitter to be meditated on than spoken of. And therefore for these Reasons I do
pray, That these Liberties may be adjudged to us, and we may be dismissed out
of this Court.

Termino Paschae next ensuing.
Mr. Justice Dolben being discharged the beginning of the Term, and Sir Francis
Withens in his place.

Sir Robert Sawyer Attorney General, for the KING.
I. THIS Information is not brought for the taking away or destroying the
Corporation; for tho it be true that there be in it the words, Et penitus
excludatur, yet that is but form; the intention is only to prune and take away
the Excesses and Abuses, and therefore no danger of falling into such
inconveniences, as suggested on the other side.

In Rolls Abr. Tit. Prerog. 204. It appears by Petitions in Parliament, that
London and Norwich, and other Cities, have had their Liberties seized into the
Kings hands for some abuses and miscarriages in the Cities, and sometimes
restitution granted, other times refused, and answered, that they were in good
condition.

These Petitions were 13. and 18. E. 1.

The Liberties of the City are not intended to be destroyed, but preserved and
maintained, and this Suit designed to that end.

II. That this Information brought against the Corporation by the name of Mayor
and Commonalty and Citizens, is good and well brought.

What is alleged against it out of my Lord Chief Justice Hales his Book, is
not any opinion, but a Nota upon the Case of Cusack.

And in the Case of Cusack, the Judgment is against the particular persons
named, and alios Cives, although not named. But further,

It is not necessarily intended, that though they are sued by the name of Mayor
and Commonalty and Citizens, that they are sued as a Corporation or Body
Politic. For by those words, [the Citizens and Inhabitants] are comprehended
and expressed; and an Information lies well against Inhabitants or Citizens,
without naming any persons by particular name; and there are diverse Presidents
of Quo Warranto's so brought.

Mich. 27. Eliz. C. Entries 537. Quo Warranto contra Inhabitants Burgi de
Denbeigh, Quo Warranto they claim a Court of Record, and other Privileges.

Mich. 15. Car. I. Quo Warranto against the Corporation of Chard. By 2 Car. I.
the like name of the Corporation against Canterbury. But it is true, that in
these Cases are no proceedings to Judgment.

But Trin. 6. Jac. Quo Warranto against the Corporation of New Malton, and
thereupon Judgment is given against the Corporation.

III. Next that the Replication alleging Forfeiture is not repugnant to the
Information; for though the Forfeiture should determine the Franchise, yet it
remains not vested in the King until the Forfeiture appears upon Record by
Office or Inquisition finding it, or by Judgment upon Information; and
therefore this Information well brought against the Corporation.

IV. That a Corporation or Body Politic may be forfeited, is beyond all doubt.

A Corporation is a visible Body of Men, and every of the Members thereof has
a Freehold in it.

Sir James Baggs Case, Co. Rep. 11.

Co. Rep. 10. 14. That all their Acts are performed by natural Persons: That
all Corporations derive their Commencement from the Kings Grants.

49 E. 3. 3.

Br. Corporation 34. And are erected for better Government, either of persons
inhabiting within such a Township or place, or that are of such a Trade or
Mystery.

1 Inst. And the Books cited to prove that it is a Capacity, do not prove it
not to be a Franchise or Liberty.

But on the contrary, all Books that speak of it agree it to be a Franchise,
Privilege and Liberty which the Persons incorporate have by the name of their
Corporation.

If then a Franchise or Liberty, then nothing more common and certain, That
Franchises or Liberties abused, are thereby forfeited.

1 Inst. 9.

21 E. 4. 13.

Co. 10 Rep. Sutton's Hospital Case.

That Corporations have been Dissolved.

1 Inst. 13.

2 Inst. 431, 432.

Co. 3 Rep. Dean and Chapt. de Norwich's Case.

That Corporations may be surrendered is plain, from the Cases of Heyward and
Fulcher, Jones.

Palm. 506.

That the Causes for which Franchises may be seized, are the same for which
they are forfeit, as for Non-user or Abuser.

And therefore Forfeiture and Seizure alike.

For Contempt of the King, the Court may seize the Liberties of a Town.

2 E. 4. 5. Case de Bailiffs de Reading.

15 E. 4. 6. Seizure of Liberties for not Appearance, and if not replevyed the
same Air they are forfeit. This shows that the same default that gives Seizure
gives Forfeiture.

A Seizure by award of a Court before Judgment is but quousque, and the Court
may restore; but a Seizure after Judgment is final, and the Court then cannot
grant Restitution.

5 E. 4. 7. Where the Liberty is usurped and gained by Tort, there the Judgment
must be an Ouster.

But otherwise where the Liberty was once of right, but forfeited by Abuser;
there the King shall have it.

Case de New Malton, Judgment there was only a Seizure.

Case de Cusack. Judgment fuit penitus excludatur, because usurped and no title.

By the Seizure the King is in the possession. Sir G. Reynel's Case, Co. Rep.
And the Corporation cannot act during such Seizure; for they have not their
Mayor or Officers by which they can act; and that is the reason they Petition
to be restored in E. 1. ad pristinum Statum.

Rolls Abridgment, Prerog. 204. 2 E. 4. 27.

1 Institutes 253.

15 H. 3. Rot. Cl. Memb. 2. Village of Hereford seized into the Kings hands
quousque etc.

By the Seizure the Corporation est Civiliter mortua, and cannot act.

Corporations are instituted for a particular end, viz. For good Government and
Order. They are as an Office erected, and the Actors Officers to that purpose.

All Offices have a Condition in Law incident to them, to be forfeited for
abuser or mal-user.

Co. Rep. 8. 44. Co. Rep. 9. Earl of Shrewsburies Case.

And by the same Law Corporations forfeit for mal-user or abuser.

No difference betwixt Corporations aggregate or sole, and the one forfeit for
the same mis-user or abuser as the other. And as to the Mischiefs that will
ensue if the Law otherwise,

It is no answer, That the persons offending may be punished in their private
Capacity.

For if they still remain a Corporation, they may Assemble, Consult, raise Money
and Men, to the hazard and danger of the King and his Government, and still
continue a formed Body, too much thereby advantaged to serve such purpose.

Presidents and Cases of Forfeiture.

Case of Sandwich, Pasch. 3. E. 1. Rot. 55. upon an Information, the Judgment
was, Consideratum fuit per Dominum Regem and Consilium Domini Regis in
Parliamento, quod Majoritas and Libertas de Sandwich capiatur in Manus Regis.

Villa de Cambridge, Inst. 4. 428. M. 8 R. 2. Plea to the Jurisdiction
rejected, and Judgment that their Liberties shall be seized.

Ryly placita Parliamenti 277. Judgment that the Liberties of Winchester shall
be seized quousque and restored again.

Mich. 18 E. 3. Rot. 162. in B. R. Judgment against Ipswich, that the Custody
thereof shall be seized.

2 Rolls Prerog. 204. diverse Seizures: 1 Crook 252. it is there cited, that the
Liberties of the Town of Norwich were seized 27 H. 6. for not suppressing a
riotous Assembly there.

F. Avowry 129. Iter of Lancaster, Quo Warranto against Northampton, Judgment
of Seizure quousque etc. for mis-pleading, 2 H. 7. fol. 11.

Mich. 15 Car. 1. B. R. Quo Warranto against the Town of Berkhamsted, but no
Judgment entered.

Usual Proceedings in Air, to Seize, Fine, and Restore.

Rast. Entries 540. Seizure of a Leet for not having a Tumbrell.

And all the several Cases, and the very Acts cited that prove Seizures of a
Corporation, prove also that they may forfeit.

V. That the Acts of the Common Council are the Acts of the Corporation.

Corporations have by their Charters Prescription or Custom, Common Councils to
assemble, advise and consent; they are as Delegates for the rest of the Body;
they are the Active Corporation, they make Bylaws, and dispose of the Lands
and Concerns of the Corporation; in them the Corporation acts; 9 H. 6. 3. 5 H.
7. 26. 48 E. 3. 17. 1 Cr. 540. Warren's Case, Rolls 2 A br 456. Tit.
Restitution.

Object That the Stat. 1 E. 3. insisted on by the other side, whereby they
would have it, that the Liberties of the City should not be seized for any the
Miscarriage of the Officers.

Resp. In answer to this Objection,

I. It is no Statute, but only a Charter, and that Charter not granted to the
Mayor, Aldermen, and Commonalty, but only Civibus London.

II. That it extends not to this Case; for by the words, [Officers and
Ministers] the Mayor, Sheriffs and Aldermen (being ordinary Officers of the
City, by whom the Kings Writs and Precepts are executed) are the Persons
intended. But this extends not to the Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council, which
are the visible and active Corporation.

Stat. 38. E. 3. c. 10. explaineth this to be so, for that is express. Mayor,
Aldermen and Sheriffs; and that the Liberties of the City shall not be seized
for their miscarriage till their third Default.

But the Stat. 1 H. 4. c. 15. repeals the former Stat. of 28 E. 3. also the
Stat. 1 E. 3. if it were any, puts the City of London into the same condition
with other Cities.

VI. That the Facts and Crimes charged in the Replication are Forfeitures.

They are Offenses of a high Nature. To oppress the Subject by raising Money for
their own private Gain, is quite contrary to the ends of their being a
Corporation, which is the good Government and Preservation of the Subject; but
to make use of this Power to oppress and raise Money for private benefit, is a
great Abuse of their Authority and Franchase.

And they cannot excuse themselves as for a Toll: For Toll cannot be claimed,
except it be a Sum certain; it must be some little petit Sum claimed for Toll.
These Sums are too great and unreasonable to be claimed for Toll.

The Statute of H. 7. that gives a Forfeiture of 40 l. for using an unlawful
By-law, did not alter the Law that was before. It gives a new and further
Penalty, but takes not away the old.

And as to the Custom alleged for assertaining Tolls, Duties, or Sums
reasonable to be paid, such Custom is unreasonable for the Uncertainty and the
Nature of it.

VI. The Petition is malicious, and apparently Seditious, stiring up the People
to a drink of the King and his Government.

Stat 3 E. 6. c. 1. provides against derogating from, or depraving the Book of
Common Prayer.

1 Cr. 223. Sir William Marsham versus Budges, against Standalizing a Justice
of Peace.

Much more is it to deprave, Libel, or Scandal the King or his Government. And
for these great Crimes committed by the City I pray Judgment against them.

Mr. Pollexfen, upon another day for the City, his Argument.
IN this Case, when I consider the greatness and consequence of it, That it
affects the King, the Parliament, the Laws, the very Government under which we
have lived, this great City of London, and all other Corporations and People of
England, and their Posterities, for ever. I cannot but be troubled that I
should be the Man to whose Lot it should fall to argue it; but that which
comforts me is, that your Lordship and the Court, upon whom the Judgment of
this great Case depends, will help out my Defects, and according to what is
required in the great Places you bear, take care and provide, that by your
Judgment the ancient Government and Laws of this Kingdom receive no Damage or
Alteration.

The King's Counsel have on their side only some general words out of old
Records of Forfeitures and Seisures of Liberties, which are of uncertain and
doubtful sense; but there is not on their side produced any one Precedent,
Judgment, or Opinion, to maintain the point in question, viz. That a
Corporation, or Body Politic, ever was determined, or dissolved, or taken away
for a Forfeiture. No, not in the maddest of Times, in the Times of Edward the
2d. and Richard the 2d. when the Tumults and Disorders were so great, that they
not only seized and took away Liberties and Franchises, but the Lives of
Princes, Nobles, Judges, Lawyers, and all that stood in their way: In those
times, though they have hunted and searched with all diligence, not one
instance of a Corporation taken away, or dissolved by a Forfeiture is cited. So
that from hence I hope I may safely conclude, that I argue in this case for the
old and known Laws, as they have been ever practiced through all Ages, and
against that which never has been practiced or known, which is a great
Encouragement to me.

The Pleadings being very long, I shall only repeat so much of them as I use,
when I come in order to speak of them.

I. The first thing proper to be spoken to is the Information it self, and
therein I make this Question?

Whether as to that part thereof that charge the Corporation with usurping
upon themselves the being of a Corporation, whether that be properly brought
against the Body Politic, as this is, or ought to have been brought against
the particular Persons?

I do agree, that as to the other things mentioned in the Information, the
having Sheriffs, Justices, etc. The Information is properly brought against the
Corporation: And I do also agree, that it may be good as to those things,
though bad and insufficient as to the charging the Corporation with Usurpation
of their Being, without lawful Warrant or Authority. And that I may come
singly to this Question, I do put out all the other Franchises in the
Information, and take only what concerns this point, and then the Information,
as to this point, charge,

That the Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of London, by the space of a Month
last past before the Information, did use, and claim to have and use, without
any Warrant or Regal Concession within the City of London, the Liberty and
Franchise following, viz. to be a Body Politic Re, Facto, and Nomine, by name
of Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens, and by that Name to plead and be
impleaded; which Liberty, Privilege, and Franchise, the same Mayor, Commonalty,
and Citizens, upon the King by the time aforesaid have and yet do usurp.

This is the Substance of the Information as to this point; and,

Whether this Information thus brought, as to this matter, be sufficient in the
Law, upon which a Judgment can be given, or ought to have been brought against
particular Persons, is the Question.

I conceive it ought to have been brought against particular Persons, and is
insufficient as it is, and that no Judgment can be given upon it, supposing the
Defendants had demurred, or pleaded nothing to it.

To make out the Insufficiencies, I desire to consider what it imports:

1. The very bringing the Writ, and exhibiting the Information against the
Corporation, imports and admits the Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens, to be a
Body Politic, capable to be sued and impleaded, respondere, and responderi,
otherwise there is no Defendant, no Person in Court, against whom the Suit is
brought. It is not enough that the Person sued be a Person by supposition, or a
pretended Person, but none in reality. If a Writ or Information be brought
against a Baron and Feme, this must admit that they are Baron and Feme really
and truly; and if there be any thing after in the Writ or Information, that
shows that they are not truly and really Baron and Feme, but that they do
wrongfully and unduly take upon them to be Baron and Feme, when in truth they
are not, this would be contrariant and repugnant, and abate the Writ or
Information. The like is supposed by the bringing the Writ or Information
against the Body Politic; it supposes and affirms them really and truly to
be such, and the subsequent Affirmation that they usurped, so to be, and are
not so really, is contrariant and repugnant.

2. When in the Information it is alleged, that the ayor, Commonalty, and
Citizens, the Liberty, Privilege, and Franchise of being a Body Politic Re,
Facto, and Nomine, and to be sued and impleaded, upon the King have and yet do
usurp.

To usurp or do any Act of Necessity, imports and admits a precedent existence
of the Persons that does usurp, or do the Act, to the Act done. Particular
Persons may usurp, and take upon themselves that which they have no right unto:
The Persons that do the Act did before exist, and had a Being. And when a
Corporation is said to usurp, it of necessity must be supposed to have a
precedent Being. The sense of Usurpation in a Quo Warranto, is the Subject's
taking upon him Franchises without Warrant.

My Lord Coke says, Inst. 1.277. b.
That Usurpation in the Common Law has two significations:

1. The one when a Stranger presents to a Benefice, and his Clerk instituted
and inducted, he gains the Advowson by Usurpation.

2. The other when any Subject without lawful Warrant does use any Royal
Franchises, he is said then to usurp upon the King.

So that an Usurpation supposes of necessity a Subject or a Person precedently
in esso, that uses the Franchise, or that does usurp. That which is not in
esse, that has no existence, cannot use any Franchise, cannot usurp. The very
alleging that they usurp, does admit of necessity an Existence precedent in
the Corporation, such as can usurp, or Act, and therefore this Information is
inconsistent with it self.

3. But another reason to prove that it ought to be against particular Persons,
and cannot be against the Body Politic, is drawn from the Judgment that must
be given upon this Information, if Judgment for the King. The Judgment must
have two things in it.

1. To damn the Corporation, Quod penitus extinguatur and excludatur from being
a Corporation for the future; for being wrongfully usurped, it cannot be
continued: A Judgment to continue Wrong and Usurpation can never be a right
Judgment.

2. A Fine to the King for the usurping it for the time past.

This Judgment may and ought to be given, where the Information is against
particular Persons, for usurping upon themselves to be a Corporation, and they
shall be fined and imprisoned; but this cannot be where the Information is
against the Body Politic; for by the Judgment the Body Politic is
extinguished and dissolved, and no Fine can be imposed upon that which is not:
So that hereby the King must lose his Fine, which the particular Persons
usurping ought to pay, and the Law is agreeable always to it self, and the
means answerable to the end. I suppose no man will affirm, that where a Suit or
Judgment is against a Corporation, that the Fine or Execution shall be against
all, or any particular Member.

For the Precedents and Authorities in this point,

1. I do agree, that there be Precedents in the Crown Office of Quo Warranto's
brought against Corporations in such manner as this is brought, for usurping to
be a Corporation, and to claim diverse other Liberties.

Quo Warranto against the Bailiffs and Burgesses of Stratford, P. 2 El. r. 1.
for claiming to be a Corporation, and to have diverse Liberties and Franchises,
thereupon a Plea put in, and a confession of their Claim by the King's Attorney.

The like against the Corporation of Reading, the like Plea and confession, M.
3 and 4 El. r. 4.
the very next Term after the Information filed.

Against the Corporation of Horsham, a Plea and confesson by the Attorney. H.
14 Jac. r. 37.


The like against the Corporation of Dover, but nothing done upon it besides
Plea put in. H. 19 Jac. r. 26.


H. 20 Jac.
The like against Bath, a Claim put in, and confessed.

H. 20 Jac. r. 58.
The like against Brackley, and a Noli prosequi.

T. 3 C. 1. r. 22.
The like against Baston, a Claim put in, and confessed.

The like against New Sarum, Imparlance, and nothing more upon it. T. 2 C. 1.
r. 47.


T. 6 Car. 1. r. 43.
The like against Bridgport, Claim and Confession.

M. 2 C. 1. r. 36.
The like against Biddeford, a Claim and Noli prosequi.

The like against Witcomb; they plead themselves a Corporation by another Name,
M. 8 C. 1. r. 42.
and traverse the Name in the Information; nothing more on the Roll.

And it is probable there may be more like these, but if of any authority, they
are for me, and not against me.

1. For that they all being for claiming other Liberties, as well as to be a
Corporation, and being good and sufficient as to the other Liberties and
Privileges that the Corporation claims; though insufficient for this of
claiming to be a Corporation, they must be proceeded upon, if the Attorney
pleases.

But is any to be found where only the claiming to be a Body Politic, and
nothing else; or if other things questioned, yet only proceeded in as to this
particular of claiming to be a Body Politic, as in this Case? That will be
like.

2. In all these nothing is done; a Claim or Plea put in, and that confessed,
or Non pross. or not proceeded upon to Judgment. Perhaps not proceeded in
because insufficient, and so are Authorities for me: For there being so many of
these, which are either Non pross. or not proceeded in, perhaps the Reason
might be, because insufficient in the Law, as to the Corporation, and so are
Authorities for me in this Case. But one there is found,

Quo Warranto verse. Bailiffs and Burgesses of New Malton in Yorkshire; T. 6
Jac. r. 3.
Quo Warranto they claim diverse Liberties, as Courts, Markets, and others, and
amongst the rest, to be a Body Politic. They put in a Plea, and make their
Claim by Prescription; Issue's joined, and tried by Nisi prius at York and
found against the Corporation, and a Judgment entered,

Quod Libertat' and Franchesii predict' in manus Domini Regis capiantur and
seisiantur, and quod Ballivi and Burgenses capiant' ad satisfaciend' Dom' Reg'
pro Fine suo pro Usurpacion' Libertat' and Franchesii predict'

There is no mention of this Case in any Book or Report as far as I can learn;
so that this passed sub silentio.

Next, how can this Judgment be good?

1. How can that be a right and lawful Judgment, which shall be given for the
continuing a thing that is by the very Judgment adjudged to be unlawfully
usurped, and a Fine for it, it is directly oppositum in Objecto.

2. How can the Corporation be seized into the King's hands? Extinguatur and
excludatur is proper; the Corporation cannot be in the King.

3. How could the Bailiffs and Burgesses be fined, when they were vanished and
gone there is no Corporation in being; that which is laid upon a Corporation
cannot be levied upon the particular Members.

I have made enquiry after this Borough of New Malton; it is a small Borough,
within the Manor of the Ancestors of my Lord Eure; it did anciently send
Burgesses to Parliament, but from the time of King Ed. 1. to the beginning of
the Long Parliament 1640. it sent none then; upon Petition a Writ ordered, and
they then and ever since have chosen Burgesses; my Lord Eure being Lord of the
Manor, and offended with them, did prosecute this Quo Warranto, and they
having neither Lands, Revenues, or Estates to defend themselves, he easily
prevailed, they never in truth being incorporate, nor having any Charter. But
that which I give for answer to these Precedents is,

1. They are all, where not only the being of the Corporation, but also diverse
other Liberties were in question; so that the Informations were good in part,
and not worth the while to question whether good, as to that part of their
being a Corporation. The Fine upon them for usurping the other Liberties, would
have been more than they could bear or pay.

2. That this is but one Judgment, and in a case of a small Borough, and that
Judgment, as entered, not agreeable, but inconsistent with the Rules of Law or
Reason. The Body Politic could not be feised into the King's Hands, but
whenever a Judgment is given for the King, for a Liberty which is usurped, or
extinct in the Crown. The Judgment must be quod extinguatur, and that the
Person that claimed them deinceps Libertat' and Franchesiis predict' nullatenus
intromittat', sed ab usu earund' a modo omnino cessat quodque, the Person that
used them pro usurpacion' Libertat' and Franch. predict' super Dominum Regem
capiat' ad respondendum dict' Dom' Reg' de Fine suo pro Usurpatione Libertat.
and Franch. predict'. That this is the Form, C. En. 559. a 537. 527. b

3. That this Judgment of New Malton passed sub silentio, for there is no
mention of it in any Book, nor does it appear that ever the Question was moved
or debated. And for Precedents in matters of Practice and Process, they are of
Authority; but in point of Law, unless they have been upon Debate, are of
little authority to prove what the Law is. Rep. 4. 94. Slade's Case, L. 5. E.
4. 110.

But on the contrary, all the Precedents that are in any printed Books of
Informations, where brought to question, whether Body Politic, or not, are
against particular Persons by name:

Against Christopher Helden, and others.

C. En. 527. Pal. 9. fo. Roll. 2. r. 113, 115. Roll. 2. 455.
Quo Warranto against Cusack, and others.

Quo Warranto against the Virginia Company was brought against Nic' Farther, and
others, Quo Warranto they claimed to be a Corporation?

Some of them pleaded insufficiently, upon which there was a Demurr, and a
Question, How the Judgment should be entered? for that the Master and chief of
the Company were left out of the Quo Warranto.

By which it appears, that it ought to be brought against the Master, and
particular Members, by Name.

Next for the express Authorities in this Case, to prove it cannot be against
the Corporation.

Roll. Rep. 2. 15. is express, That if a Quo Warranto be brought to dissolve a
Corporation, the Writ ought to be brought against the particular Persons, for
the Writ supposes that it is no Corporation.

The difference there taken, when the Attorney General supposes the Defendant
to be a Corporation, otherwise when he questions them as Inhabitants of a Vill.
then they ought to enable themselves, they must then show themselves a
Corporation, also prove it.

Fol. 168.
My Lord Hales, in his Commonplace Book in Lincoln's Inn Library, says thus:

Nota, Sc. Quo Warranto soit port pur usurper de un Corporation serra port
verse. particular Persons, quia in disaffirmance del Corporation, and Judgment
serra done que serra ouste; mes si le quo Warranto soil port pur Liberties
claim per Corporation, serra port verse. le Corporation.

This is positive.

This, if it were only my Lord Hales's Judgment, were of no little Authority,
but I think it is a Report taken upon the Case of the Quo Warranto against
Cusack, and others.

But Mr. Attorney finding, as I believe, that all the Precedents to be against
him. For in them all there are either non Pross. or no Proceedings to Judgment,
the Causes whereof, or at least some of them, probably might be the
Insufficiencies of these Informations.

And finding also the Authorities in Print which have been cited to be all
against him, and none for him, endeavored to maintain the Information as
brought not against the Corporation, but against the Citizens or Inhabitants of
the City in their Natural Capacities, and to that purpose cited the Case, C.
En. 537. of a Quo Warranto against the Inhabitants of a Village, Quo Warranto
they claimed to be a Body Politic.

And argued, That a Quo Warranto lies against the Cives of such a City, or
Burgenses or Tenants.

This seems to be rather a sudden conceit, and altogether undigested, and not
well considered.

But in answer thereunto, and to prove that this Writ is brought against the
Defendants as a Corporation, and cannot legally be taken in any other Case.

If a Mayor and Commonalty plead that they are seized in Fee, Leo. 1. 153.
they need not say in Right of their Corporation, the Name shows them to be a
Corporation, it need not be alleged.

An Action there brought by the Guardians and Fellowship of Weavers; the Book
says, Hob. 211.
That they need not set themselves out to be incorporate, the Name shows it so
of Cities, says the Book.

So then, when the Writ is brought against a Mayor and Commonalty, or Mayor,
Commonalty and Citizens, the Law takes notice of them to be a Corporation, and
the Writ against them as such; the Name shows it.

But against Inhabitants of a Village, a Writ brought by the Name that cannot
be taken to be other than Inhabitants, the Name so shows it; and in such Case,
some of the Inhabitants, by Name (viz.) A. and B. appear in Person, in their
own, and Names of the rest of the Inhabitants, and plead, and are Defendants,
Co. En. 537. So did they, as appears in that Precedent. No appearance ever was
of Inhabitants in other manner.

But in this Case here are no Persons that do appear by Name, but the
Corporation appear, and make an Attorney under their Common Seal. The
Corporation, and no particular Persons, are the Defendants before you, or else
you have no Defendants before you; for there is none appearing in Person, here
is no Defendant, nor none against whom you can give Judgment; but all the whole
Proceedings vain and against no body.

So that if we should admit, as Mr. Attorney argues, That this Information is
not brought against the Corporation; then there can be no Judgment for want of
Defendants appearing in their Natural Capacities; you must have it against the
Corporation, or no body. A Mayor cannot be but where there is a Corporation;
therefore this Notion impossible, as I conceive.

So that if there were nothing else in the Case, if the Information be ill
brought, they can have no Judgment against us.

2. But admit that the Information as to this Point be sufficient, Then I
proceed to consider the other parts of this Case, The Plea.

That contains the Defendants Title (viz.) That she is a Corporation time out
of mind, and many Confirmations by Acts of Parliament and Charters, It is not
denied but that the Title made by the Plea is good.

But next the Replication, that contains,

(1.) An Issue upon the Prescription (viz.) That the Citizens of London have
not been time out of mind a Corporation by Name of Mayor, Commonalty, and
Citizens, etc.

(2.) A Pleading over, That the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens taking upon
them (assumentes super se) to be a Body-Politick, and to have Power to make
Bylaws.

1. Color inde, but for their private Gain, and contra fiduciam per Dominum
Regem and Leges hujus Regni in them reposed, took upon them to raise Money upon
the King's Subjects by color of an Ordinance by them de facto made, and in
Prosecution of this usurped Power.

17 September. 26 C. 2.
The Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens in their Common Council assembled, Published
a Law for Levying Money upon the King's Subjects that came to the Markets
within the City. (viz.)

De qualibet Persona, for every Horse Load of Provisions brought into any
Public Market within the City to be sold, 2 d. a Day, for every Dorser of
Provision 1 d. a Day, for every Cartload drawn with not more than three Horses
4 d. a Day, if with more, 6 d. a Day.

That if any refused to Pay, he should be amoved from his place in the Market.

That by Color of this By-Law, the Mayor, and Commonalty and Citizens have
Extorted great Sums of Money for their own private Gain, amounting to Five
thousand Pounds per Annum.

2. And farther, That whereas there was a Session of Parliament holden 21
October. 32. C. 2. and continued till the 10th of Jan. 82. and then by the King
Prorogued to the 20th of that instant January.

The Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens, Jan. 13. in their Common Council
assembled, malitiose, advisate, and seditiose, absque legali Authoritate, in se
assumpserunt ad censendum and judicandum dict' Dom' Regem nunc, and
Prorogationem Parliamenti, by the King prorogued; and in the same Common
Council, Vota and Suffragia sua dederunt and ordinaverunt.

That a Petition sub nomine the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
London, in Common Council assembled, to the King should be exhibited: In which
Petition it was contained,

That by that Prorogation the Prosecution of the public Justice of this
Kingdom, and the making necessary Provision for the Preservation of the King,
and his Protestant Subjects, had received Interruption.

And that the Mayor Commonalty, and Citizens, in the same Common Council, did
unlawfully, malitiose, advisate, and seditiose, with intent that the same
Petition might be published and dispersed among the King's Subjects, to induce
in them an Opinion, that the King had by that Prorogation obstructed the
public Justice, and to incite hatred against the King's Person and Government,
and to disturb the Peace, did order that Petition, containing the said
scandalous matter, to be printed, and thereupon to those ill Ends and Purposes
they caused it to be printed and published:

By which the Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens, the aforesaid Liberty and
Franchise of being a Body Politic forisfecerunt, and after, by the time in the
Information, have and yet do usurp it.

Before I come to the matter, I would speak to the Pleading herein, and in the
subsequent Surrejoinder: And for the Pleading in it, I think it is as singular
and unpresidented as the Matter of it is.

This Replication, supposing the matter had been the Act of the Body Politic,
and good and sufficient, yet, as pleaded, is insufficient, and not warrantable
by any Law or Practice ever known. It contains,

1. An Issue, viz. no Corporation time out of mind.

2. Two Causes of Forfeiture of the Corporation, admitting they once were a
Corporation.

So that though the point in question be but one, viz. whether we are lawfully
a Corporation or no Corporation, though the Plea is single, that we are a
Corporation by Prescription time out of mind, yet here is to try this point,

1. An Issue.

2. A double Plea, alleging two Causes to avoid it for a Forfeiture.

This I conceive cannot legally be done, though in the King's Case. I do agree,
the King has great Prerogatives in Pleadings, and as far as ever they have
been allowed or enjoyed, let them be so still; but that the King can to the
same matter both take Issue, and also plead over at the same, that I deny.

It is most reasonable, that the Law should be careful to preserve the King's
Rights; but on the other side, I think it is not reasonable, that the Law
should admit or allow as legal any way of Proceeding that should destroy or
render the Subjects right indefensible, be his right as good as it may be. If
so be that Mr. Attorney may both take Issue upon the Fact, and also plead over,
I would, by your leave, ask how many Issues, and how many Pleas over the King's
Attorney may have?

Suppose the King bring a Quare Impedit, or Writ of Right, or any other Action,
the Defendant makes his Title, which is usually done, by many Grants and
Conveyances from one to another, to bring it to himself.

May the King's Attorney now take as many Issues as facts issuable, plead as
many Pleas as he pleases, and all this simul and semel? It Is true, that in
this case Mr. Attorney has assigned only two Breaches, or Causes of
Forfeiture; but he might, if he had pleased, by the same Reason, have assigned
200. If this may be, Are we not all at Mr. Attorney's Mercy? If this may not
be, then how many Pleas? Is it in Law defined?

In favorem Vitae a man may plead a special Plea, and plead also not guilty,
but not several special Pleas; but that there is any such Prerogative for Mr.
Attorney, in Suits betwixt the King and his Subjects, I can find no Instance or
Authority for it.

For though it be true, as I have said, that the King has great Prerogatives
in pleading, yet it is as true that this is not boundless; but that if in the
King's Writs there be mistakes, or his Writ or his Action misconceived, he
shall be bound by it in like manner as Subjects are or shall.

Partridge against Strange, and in the same Book in my Lord Berkley's Case,
Com. 84. a. 236. a
it is expressly said, That though the King has many Prerogatives, concerning
his Person, Debts, and Duties, yet the Common Law has so admeasured his
Prerogative, that it shall not take away or prejudice the Inheritance of any.

The King has a Prerogative that he may wave his Demurrer and take Issue, or
wave his Issue and demurre upon the Plea: But, says the same Book, he must do
it the same Term, Com. fol. 236.
not in any other Term, for then he may do it in infinitum, without end, and
the Party hereby may lose his Inheritance; and for that the Common Law will not
suffer the King to have such a Prerogative.

These are the words of the Book.

And in the point that this Prerogative must be made use of the same Term, and
that the King's Attorney cannot vary in another Term, and wave his Issue, is 13
E. 4. 8. Bro. Prer. 69. 28 H. 8. 2.

So in making Title to a Quare Impedit, he at the end of the Term waved his
first Title, and made another.

But it is true also, Rex verse. Bagshaw. Cr. 1. 347.
that as to the point of Waving Demurrers, and taking Issue in another Term,
there is authority that he may so do; but whether it may be done or not in
another Term is not material to our case: But the use I make of these Cases is
to prove that the King's Attorney should not have both together simul and
semel, as in this case he has done; he must wave one before he can have
another Plea.

For those Debates about his varying his Plea by waving his Issue and
demurring, or waving his Demurrer and taking Issue, signify nothing, if he may
in one Plea, and at the same time, take Issue, and demurre, or plead over to
the same matter or point, as is done in this case; therefore those Books
strongly prove, that the Prerogative that the King has is by waving or
relinquishing one, and choosing the other; and therefore not to have or use all
together and at once, as is done in this case.

The King shall be bound by one Issue, 9 H. 4. 5.
he shall not have diverse.

So that as this Replication is at the same time simul and semel to the same
matter, to take Issue that we were not a Corporation time out of mind, and to
plead two matters of Fact for Forfeiture, is the first attempt that ever was of
this kind, and in its consequence confounding the right of the Subject, and
leaves him perhaps only but a color of Law, but most difficult, if not
impossible by it to be defended, let his Right be what it will, if Issues and
Pleas without number may be by the King's Attorney joined and pleaded, and the
Subject must answer, the very charge besides will undo the Subject, and wrest
him out of his Estate by the Law that should preserve him. This point, if I
mistake not, will deserve consideration, if it be new, and the first project
(for so I beg leave to call it) of its kind, for I know no Book or Instance of
the like, unwarrantable by old Laws and Rules of Pleading. The old Laws and
ways are good and safe, Eventos varios Res nova semper habet.

Perhaps the consequence and mischiefs attending this way of joining Issue, and
at the same time pleading over as many Pleas as Mr. Attorney pleases, are as
great as any other in this case, and not less to be minded or regarded. As of
the one side great are the King's Prerogatives, and most necessary to be
preserved, and maintained; so it cannot be denied but that the Law has set
Limits and bounds, which must be kept and observed in pleading, which is the
Method and Mean of preserving and determining Rights, without which no man can
be preserved by the Law.

But supposing that several Causes or Forfeitures may be assigned, yet they
must be all Facts done at the same time, or they confound one the other; for if
the first Fact was a Forfeiture, thereby the Corporation was determined, and at
an end, and the subsequent could not be the Act of the true lawful
Corporation, for that was forfeited, determined, and gone, by the precedent
Forfeiture: And if so, that it was forfeited and gone by the precedent Act,
viz. the making the Ordinance September. 17. 26 C. 2. Then how could it act and
forfeit it self six years after, in the Year Thirty two? This seems impossible.

But to avoid this:

Mr. Attorney in his Argument does hold, That though the Act be a Forfeiture,
yet till there be a Judgment, or something on Record to determine the
Corporation, (and in this case the Judgment to be given shall do that Work,)
till such Judgment the Corporation remains. Then taking it as Mr. Attorney will
have it, and as the truth is, supposing a Forfeiture, until that Forfeiture
appear on Record, or that there be some Office or Inquisition that finds it,
and that returned, and on Record, were it of any Estate in Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, or Offices, it is not determined or vested in the King, but
continues. This is quite contrary and contradictory to all that you have done,
and the very Foundation of this Quo Warranto; for if you admit, as then you do,
that the Forfeiture ipso facto, did not determine, but that it must be this Quo
Warranto, or Judgment upon it, that must determine the Corporation, and that
the Corporation, notwithstanding such Act, was or is in being; then they have
not usurped upon the King; they are the same Corporation they were; they have
the same power to act they had; they have the same Warrant and Right they had,
only subject to a Judgment against them, that may be given hereafter, for a
Fact already past; for since that an Usurpation is a sortious and wrongful
using a Liberty or Franchise upon the King, without lawful Authority. Then

Supposing such an Act of Forfeiture does not ipso Facto determine or dissolve,
but a Judgment, or some other Act of Record, must first be had, before such
dissolution; then till such Judgment, or Act of Record, they are lawfully a
Corporation in being, and their lawful Warrant remains, and they did not, nor
could so long usurp their Being, and then hereby is your own Information
destroyed and abated: For there you say that they did by the space of a month,
without any Warrant, use and usurp the Liberty to be a Corporation. But hereby
you grant that it was not used unlawfully, nor usurped, but notwithstanding the
Forfeiture the Corporation lawfully continued, unless there had been some
Judgment, or other Act on Record to determine it.

This I rest upon as impossible to be avoided.

Is it possible that a Corporation or Body Politic can at the same time be
lawfully and rightfully such, and not lawfully and rightfully such? Can right
and wrong be the same? Can the same thing rightfully be or have its Being, and
at the same time not rightfully be or have its being? Can we possibly be at the
same time, viz. the time mentioned in the Information, a lawful Corporation,
and yet an usurped or unlawful Corporation? Could we then have a lawful and
rightful Authority to be a Corporation, and at the same time have no lawful
or rightful authority to be so?

These seem to be contradictions, and if so, are the most difficult of all
things to be believed or imposed; therefore to be plain in this matter, either
tell us that we are yet till Judgment a Corporation or Body Politic lawfully
and rightfully, or not. If you say we are, then as yet we are no unlawful
Corporation, nor have usurped to be one, as in your Information and Replication
you have alleged. We have not then unlawfully taken upon us to be a
Corporation, and therefore cannot have Judgment against us, or be fined for
having or being that which we lawfully have or be, as you now admit we are,
consequently you must go some other way, you have destroyed your own
Information, and can have no Judgment upon it.

But perhaps this concession of Mr. Attorney, that the old and lawful
Corporation and Body Politic is still in being, and shall so continue, till by
Judgment or Matter on Record determined, may only be some sudden thoughts; for
not only the Matter, but the whole Proceedings in this Suit being at least
unexperienced, and perhaps much out of practice, it might easily happen, that
in an hasty Proceedings all things might not be thought on, nor all the
Objections or Inconveniences foreseen, and perhaps the consequence of the
Position, that a Miscarriage, or doing an unlawful Act, should ipso facto
forfeit the Body Politic or Corporation, might make a man start, and cast
about how to avoid it, and flying from one danger run into another. These are
things ordinarily happening, and perhaps have in this case happened, and were
the cause of this confession, that the old and lawful Corporation is yet in
being, which is contrary to the whole frame and scope of both the Information
and Replication, and probably never thought on or intended when the Information
or Replication was made, being quite contrary and inconsistent with the frame
and foundation of them both,

If it be holden according to this concession, that the old and lawful
Corporation was not by the supposed Acts of Forfeiture dissolved and determined
ipso facto, but remained and continued lawfully a Corporation, and yet is so;
then we have not usurped, but are a lawful Corporation during the time in the
Information, and not as therein supposed by Usurpation, and without lawful
Authority; and thereby the Information confounded and abated.

But supposing, according to what the Information and Replication suppose,

That the Acts of Forfeiture did ipso facto dissolve and determine the
Corporation, for they will (at last I doubt) come to that again; for this
present thought that it shall be forfeit, but not dissolved or determined till
Judgment, will be subject to almost all the same inconveniences; for when
Judgment given, the Forfeiture must relate to the time of Offense, and to avoid
all mean Acts as in other Cases it does. But to pass over.

(3.) Supposing the Information good, the Replication good, and the Matters
alleged for Forfeiture to be as in the Replication alleged.

The next thing I pray leave to speak unto, is,

Whether the Matter alleged in the Rejoinder be not sufficient to justify or
excuse the two Facts alleged for cause of Forfeiture.

I conceive they are.

The Pleadings here must first be stated,

(1.) As to the Ordinance or Bylaws for the Toll in the Markets. As to that
the Defendants in their Rejoinder have alleged.

That the City of London is, and was always the capital and most populous City
of the Kingdom. That there are and always have been great public Markets
within the said City. That the Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens, are and always
have been seized of those Markets in their Demesne as of Fee; and at their own
proper Charges provided Marketplaces, Stalls, Standings, and other
Accomodations for Persons coming to those Markets; and Overseers and Officers
for better regulation and keeping good order, and cleansing the same. That for
defraying those Charges, they have, and always had and received diverse
reasonable Tolls, Rates, or Sums of Money of all Persons to those Markets
coming, for Stalls standing, and other accommodations by them had for exposing
to Sale their Victuals and Provisions in those Markets. That the Freemen of the
City of London are numerous, above fifty Thousand. That there has been time
out of mind a Common Council, consisting of the Mayor, Aldermen, and certain
Freemen annually Elected, not exceeding the number of two Hundred and fifty,
called the Commons. That there is a Custom within the City, that the
Common Council make Bylaws and Ordinances for the better Regulation and
Government of the public Markets, and for the appointing convenient places and
times when and where within the City the Markets shall be kept; and for the
assessing and reducing to certainty reasonable Tolls, Rates, or Sums of Money
to be paid by Persons coming to the same Markets, for their Stalls, Stations,
and other Accommodations by them had for exposing to Sale their Victuals as
often as, and when to them should be thought expedient, so as their Ordinance
be useful to the King and his People, consonant to reason, and not contrary to
the Laws of the Land.

That this Custom is confirmed by Mag. Char. Stat. 1. E. 3. Stat. 7. R. 2.

That after the Burning and Rebuilding London, and the alterations thereby
made, Controversies did arise within the City concerning the Markets and the
Tolls. That thereupon Sir William Hooker, then Mayor, and the Aldermen and
Commons in Common Council assembled, did make an Ordinance, Entitled, An Act
for the Settlement and well ordering the several Public Markets within the
City. By which reciting, That whereas for accommodation of Market-people, with
Stalls and Necessaries for their standings, for clensing and paving the same,
for defraying incident Charges about the same, reasonable Rates had always been
paid. To the end the Rates to be paid might be ascertained, That the
Market-people might know what to pay, and the Officers what to take; to avoid
extortion, it was ordered there should be paid by the Market-people for their
Stalls, Standings and Accommodations in the Markets,

For every Horse-load of Provision under public shelter 2 d. a day; for every
Dosser 1 d. a day; for every Cart-load drawn with not above three Horses 3 d. a
day; with more Horses 4 d. a day, and upon refusal to pay to be removed. Then
they aver that these Rates are reasonable. That they are all the Rates that are
paid by such Market-people to the use of the City. That these Rates they have
received since the making these Ordinances. That there is no other Ordinance
for raising Moneys for such Provisions exposed to Sale in their Markets in any
manner made.

To this Rejoinder Mr. Attorney has sur-rejoyned, and taken it by
Protestation, That the City were not seized of the Markets, nor at their own
Costs provided Stalls and other accommodations; and that the Rates by the
Ordinance appointed were not reasonable. For Plea sets sorth, An Act of
Parliament made 22 Car. 2. Enacting, That to the end apt and convenient Places
within the City should be put out for Buildings, and keeping the Markets; and
that the Royal Exchange, Old Bailey, and common Gaols and Prisons within the
City should be made more commodious for the enabling the City to do these
things, they should have a Duty out of Coals imported betwixt May 1670. and
Mich. 1687. into the Port of London, 12 d. per Chaldron; which Duty they have
accordingly received, amounting to a great Sum, and notwithstanding that Duty,
without Title or Right, the Defendants made the By-Law for their private Gain,
absque hoc, that the Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens have time out of mind
had, or accustomed to have,

Tolneta ratas sive denariorum summas per ipsos Majorem Communitatem ac Cives
Civitatis predict' superius supposit' fore per praesat' legem sive ordinationem
predict' assess. and in certitudinem reduct' prout per placitum superius
rejungend' supponitur.

The Defendants they rebutt and say, That they have always had reasonable
Tolls, Rates or Sums of Money of all Persons coming to their Markets to sell
their Provisions for their Stalls and accommodations: Et de hoc ponit se super
patriam: Le Attorney Demurs.

Upon his Pleadings the Questions are, Whether the matters alleged by the
Defendants, in Justification of the Ordinance, or By-Law, be a good
Justification in Law or not. If it be, Mr. Attorney in his Sur-rejoinder has
given no answer to it at all, he has neither confessed it, nor denied it. The
Rejoinder says, That the Defendants are and always have been seized of the
Markets in Fee.

That they at their Charge provided Marketplaces, Stalls, Standings, and
Officers for the accommodations of the Markets, and cleansing them. That for
defraying those Charges they have always had diverse reasonable Tolls and Rates
for Standings and other accommodations. That the Common Council have, as often
as expedient, always made Ordinances for regulating those Markets, and for
assessing and reducing to certainty reasonable Tolls, Rates and Sums of Money
to be paid by the Market-people for their accommodations.

That according to this Custom, they made the Ordinance and by-Law,

Mr. Attorney in his Sur-rejoinder has not denied any part of this; but offers
a traverse to that which is no where alleged or supposed. It is never
pretended that the City have had time out of mind the very Tolls and Sums of
Money for Toll assessed by the Ordinance. There is not a word in the Rejoinder
to that purpose, but to the contrary; (viz.) That they in their Rejoinder claim
a Power by Ordinance of Common Council to assesse and set the Rates of these
Tolls and Payments as often as and when to them shall seem expedient. It is
admitted in the Rejoinder, that these Sums were not time out of mind, only
they had Power to set, and assess, and ascertain, as often as expedient.
Therefore when Mr. Attorney traverseth our having time out of mind the Tolls,
Rates and Sums of Money by the Ordinance assessed, and in certitud' reduct'
This is plain, besides any thing claimed or pretended unto, If he had intended
to traverse what we have alleged, that we have had time out of mind diverse
reasonable Tolls and Sums of Money for Stalls and Accommodations: Or if he
would have traversed the Instance alleged for the Common Council assessing
those Tolls, as often as expedient, that was plain and easy to do; but that
he has not done: He has only traversed whether the Tolls, Rates, and Sums of
Money, by the Ordinance assessed, and reduced into certainty, have been time
out of mind. This is the proper sense of his Traverse, but if doubtful in its
sense, his Traverse is naught for that cause; for dubious words can make no
Issue for the Jury to try, else men should be tricked and ensnared by doubtful
words to pervert right. So that if the matter alleged in the Record, be
sufficient in Law to justify the making this Ordinance, or By-Law; then what
is done therein by the Act of Common Council is lawfully and rightfully done,
and no Forfeiture. I do agree, that for a Lord of a Market to prescribe to have
a Toll uncertain, and as often as expedient, to ascertain it is no good
Prescription.

But that is not our Case; I do distinguish betwixt that and this Case: Where
there is by Custom, confirmed by Acts of Parliament, (for I shall show that
they are Acts of Parliament, notwithstanding what has been objected against
them,) a Power and Authority vested in the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Common Council, to regulate and order the People, Trades and Markets in the
City, and the Places and Conveniences and Officers from time to time, and
consequently to regulate and ascertain the Tolls or Rates to be paid by the
Market-people, to prevent Extortion and Disorders.

That such Custom is legal. The Chamberlain of London 's Case.

An Ordinance that no Broadcloth shall be sold in the City before it be brought
to Blackwell-Hall to be searched, Rep. 5. 69.
and a Penny for every Cloth to be paid for Hallage, under pain for forfeiting
6 s. 8 d. a Cloth, to be recovered in the City Courts.

Though objected that this was an Imposition of payment of Money upon the
King's Subjects, yet adjudged good, and a Procedendo granted,

An Ordinance that no Unfreeman shall use a Trade in London, adjudged good.
City of London's Case, Rep. 8. fol. 1.


A multitude of Ordinances they have for regulating all manner of Trades, and
of Rates and Prizes. And as much reason there is to object against them, as
this Ordinance, or the Custom in this Case: But the City of London have a
Government and Power of making Ordinances, for governing and regulating Trades,
buying and selling within the City, placed in the Common Council, and confirmed
by Act of Parliament; and therefore not like the Case of any private Lord of a
Market. But it is true, their Ordinances must not be unreasonable. The Payments
that are imposed by this Ordinance, are only imposed upon those that are under
shelter; it is reason a recompense should be paid, and there is no
unreasonableness or injustice appears in the Ordinance, but a reasonable
recompense. But the Custom or Power of the Common Council is not denied, as I
take it: For, they have not denied the Power to regulate and ascertain the
Tolls or Sums of Money alleged to be in the 5Common Council, if they had,
that must have been tried: Nor have they denied the Rates set to be reasonable.
So that I think as to this matter, we have well entitled our selves, and
justified our making our By-Law, and taking the Tolls or Rates thereby
appointed; and nothing in the Surrejoinder against us to the contrary objected.

But for confirming and making good our Customs, in the Plea there are three
Acts of Parliament pleaded.

1. Magna Charta: 2. Stat. 1. E. 3. 3. Stat. 7. R. 2.
The King's Council have not denied Magna Charta to be a Statute, but have
denied the other two to be Statutes, or Acts of Parliament; and the reasons
given by them are,

Obj. 1. Because not in Print, nor Roll of it to be found; or because no body
knows where to find it.

Resp. 1. Private Acts of Parliament do not use to be Printed, few are.

2. No Roll to be found; Suppose there were not, does this after so long a time
conclude there was none such, especially since Mr. Solicitor was pleased to
acknowledge that there are no Parliament Rolls of E. 3. till 4 E. 3.

It is true that almost all the Parliament Rolls of H. 3. E. 1. E. 2. and till
4 E. 3. are almost all lost. But besides in those days public Acts were not
only entered upon the Parliament Rolls, but from thence transcribed, and sent
under the Great Seal to be published by the Sheriffs of the Counties, in the
Cities and Boroughs, and also by Writ to the Courts in Westminster Hall to be
there entered and recorded, of which there are many found, especially in the
Exchequer, and hence came the rule in Law, that Judges ex Officio, are bound to
take notice of general Acts of Parliament: But for private Acts they were put
under the Great Seal, and the Parties interessed had the same to produce. But
that these in this Case should be questioned to be Acts, is strange. But to
prove them Acts: First,

1. As to the Act 1 E. 3.

1. We have pleaded it under the Great Seal of King E. 3. that made it with a
profert hic in Cur' and shown it with our Plea as we ought; and this is
Evidence sufficient of it self. If the same produced under the Great Seal put
to it when made, be not sufficient Evidence to satisfy, what can be?

Trin. 1. E. 3. r. 61, 62.
2. But in this Case it is enrolled upon record also, Inter placita Corone
penes Camerarios in Scaccario; it is enrolled there.

Obj. But perhaps it may be objected also, That this was no Act of Parliament,
but only a Grant or Patent in Parliament; because it is that the King de assensu
Prelator' Comitu' Baron' ac totius Communitat' regni in praesenti Parliamento.

Resp. That Acts of Parliament observe not any certain Form.

Jones, 103.
In the Case of the Earldom of Oxford express, that there was variety in Penning
Acts of Parliament in ancient time, Dominus Rex per Consilium fidelium
subditor' suor' statuit, and other forms there, are yet good Acts. But that
they were anciently in form of Patents or Grants in Parliament, Magna Charta,
C. 1. is in form of a Charter or Grant. The form of the Act of Parliament 11 E.
3. for creating the Prince, Prince of Wales, begins, Edwardus Dei gratia, etc.
in form of Patent, Princes Case, R. 8. fol. 8.
and is De communi assensu and consilio Prelator' Comitu' Baron' and aliorum de
consilio nostro in presenti Parliamento, and adjudged a good Act of Parliament,
and the Authorities and Reasons to prove it an Act of Parliament are fol. 18,
19, 20. so full, that it might be thought that this Objection would never have
been made. And that this is in the same form that all the rest of the Acts of
this very Parliament of the 1 E. 3. are, Membr. the 17.
appears by the Patent Roll of the same Parliament. A Charter granted by the
King de assensu Prelator' Comitu' Baron' Communit' Regni in Parliamento apud
Westm' to enable the City to apprehend Felons in Southwark.

An Act in the same form for the annulling the Conviction of Treason that was
against Roger Mortimer, in the time of E. 2. Rot. Claus. 1 E. 3. M.


An Exemplification then entered of an Act made in the same form in the same
Parliament, Rot. Pat. 2 E. 3. P. S. 1. M. 17.
for the annulling the Attainder of Thomas Earl of Lancaster, attainted tempore
E. 2.

Diverse other Acts of Parliament in the same form made 1 E 3. Rot. Pat. 2 E. 3.
P. S. 2. M. 11. Inst. 2. 527. 639.
for annulling diverse other Attainders that were tempore E. 2. so that as to
this Act of Parliament 1 E. 3. I think the Objections are answered, and that it
is an Act as pleaded.

And as to the other Act 7 R. 2. that that is no Act of Parliament, only a
Prayer of the Commons that there might be a Patent granted to the City,
confirming their Liberties, licet usi vel abusi fuerint; and the answer was, Le
Roy le vieult, and object for Reasons against that being an Act of Parliament,

Obj. 1. It wants the assent of the Lords.

2. It is only a Prayer of the Commons to have their Liberties confirmed, and
the King's answer le Roy le vieult, but nothing done to confirm it.

Resp. 1. As to the first Objection.

Supposing it true that there is no mention made of the assent of the Lords,
yet the Act is a good Act.

1. It appears to be in Parliament ad instantiam and requisitionem. Communitat'
Regni nostri in presenti Parliamento.

2. The answer in Parliament that is given by the King to the making all Laws
is given to this, [le Roy le vieult.]

3. And next, it is admitted to be upon the Parliament Roll, 7 R. 2. Number. 27. I
have before said that Acts of Parliament are not in any certain form; sometimes
entered as Charters or Grants, sometimes as Articles, sometimes and frequently
as Petitions; the Books I have already cited prove it. But according to the
Course of Parliaments, let it be in what form it will, let it begin in which
House it will, yet it must go through both the Houses of Parliament before it
can come to the King for his Royal assent. If either House rejects or refuses,
there it ends, it comes not to the King; nor is the Royal assent in these great
operative words [Le Roy le vielut] in Parliament given to any thing but what
the whole Parliament have assented and agreed unto. So that this is an
Objection grounded upon a Reason contrary to all the course of Parliaments,
which shows that the Lords assent was to it though not mentioned.

Selden's Mare Claus. 249. gives a full Resolution herein: Certissimum est,
says he, that according to Custom no Answer is given, either by the King, or
in the King's Name, to any Parliamentary Bills, before that the Bill, whether
it be brought in first by the Lords, or by the Commons, has passed both
Houses, as it is known to all that are versed in the Affairs and Records of
Parliament. And in the Prince's Case, before cited, there the Act is said to be
de Assensu and Consil' of the Lords, but does not name the Commons, And this
Answers the other Reason also, viz. That it should only be a Prayer and
Petition also, to have a Charter of Confirmation granted: For since the Forms
are in manner of Petitions, since the Royal Assent or Words, Le Roy le vieult,
is never put to any Bills in Parliament, but such as are thereby made and
passed into Laws, the giving the Royal Assent is sufficient in this Case to
prove it a Law. But for farther Evidence,

1. We have it under the great Seal of King R. 2. thus penned. Ad instantiam
and requisitionem Communit' Regni nostri Angl' in presenti Parliamento nostro
pro majori Quiet and Pace inter Legeos nostros, focendis, and pro bono publico
de assensu Prelatorum Dominor' Procerum and Magnat' nobis in eodem Parliamento
assistentium, etc. So that hereby it is fully proved, and shown, that though
the Assent of the Lords be not mentioned in the Copy, yet that it was had, and
under the Great Seal of R. 2. it so appears. We have also in our Book of the
Acts of that time in the City, Lib. H. f. 169. a and b
the Proclamation made upon the first promulging this Act, in the time of Sir
Nicholas Brembre, Lord Mayor, and therein it is also entered in the same words,
as before, under the Great Seal of R. 2. de assensu Prelator', etc. Next our
Books and continual Practice ever since. It Is true, that in the 7 H. 6. fol. 1.
when it is said, that the Customs of London were confirmed by Statute, Quaere
what Statute; but it is not there made a Quaere whether this were a Statute;
Instit. 4. 250. Rep. 5. 63. Rep. 8. 162. all say that the Customs of London are
confirmed by Parliament, 7 R. 2. Justice Jones 283. has it verbatim out of the
Parliament Roll. The constant course of pleading the Customs of London is to
plead a confirmation of them by this Act of Parliament: So that as to this
point there is not any one Book or Opinion, before this day, in favor of what
is affirmed, that these are not Acts of Parliament; and our Plea stands good in
Law, and the Ordinance, and By-Law, and Custom good, and then no Forfeiture
thereby.

3. But suppose and admit, that this By-Law be the Act of the Corporation, be
not good and sufficient in Law, nor in Law justifiable, Quid sequitur? Then it
is void in Law. Then if it be void in Law, How can it make a Forfeiture?
Suppose a Lessee for years, or for Life, makes a Feoffment, but it is not duly
executed for want of Livery and Seisin, by which it is void in Law, Can this
make a Forfeiture of the Estate of the Lessee? Suppose a Corporation Tenant pur
auter vie makes a Feofment which is void for want of Livery duly made, Will
this forfeit their Estate? A void Act shall not destroy or forfeit a precedent
Estate. A Parson that has a former Benefice accepts a second Benefice
incompatible, Die. 377. b.
was instituted and inducted, but did not read the the Articles, his first
Benefice was not forfeit or void hereby because by the Statute the not reading
his Articles had made his Institution and Induction void. So that then whether
this By-Law or Ordinance were good or void in Law, perhaps is not much
material; it cannot make any Forfeiture of the Corporation, it can have no such
effect: for if it be a good and lawful By-Law, no Forfeiture can be for doing
a good and lawful Act. If the Ordinance be not warrantable by Law, then it is
void in Law, if void in Law, a void Act can make no Forfeiture.

Obj. But you received and exacted from the Kings Subjects Sums of Money by
this Ordinance.

Resp. Suppose we did, and that we had no right to have this money, if an
Officer, by color of his Office, receive more than is due, it is Extortion,
and a Crime punishable: But if a Person that is no Officer take money that is
not due, or more than is his due, the Parties injured have their Remedies by
Action; but this is no Crime for which any Forfeiture or Penalty is incurred by
the person that so takes or receives the money. Suppose a Lord of a Manor
exact or take greater Fines or Sums of Money from his Copyholders or Tenants
than he ought, they have their Remedies by Actions against those that receive;
so if a Corporation receive or take moneys supposed to be due, but in truth is
not, how can this Forfeit any thing.

Obj. But you took upon you a Power and Authority to tax the King's People, and
to take and receive the money so taxed.

Resp. This is but the same thing, only put into greater words. It is still but
the making of an unlawful By-Law, and thereby appoint money to be paid which
ought not, or more than should be; and the turning of it, or expressing it in
stately words, of taking upon you, or usurping Authority to impose upon, and
tax the King's People. Whosoever does any act or thing, he takes upon him, and
does also execute the Power and Authority of doing that act or thing which is
comprehended in the thing done. The making a By-Law, or Ordinance, whereby more
is ordered to be paid than ought, or money appointed to be paid where none is
due, is still all the fact and thing done, and if that make no Forfeiture of
the Corporation, or Crime punishable by Indictment or Information, except only
as the Statute 19 H. 7. c. 7. which I shall hereafter mention, has appointed
for Forfeiture of 40 s. The taking or usurping the Power to do it, cannot be
more, or effect more, than the doing the thing which comprehends it.

(2.) As to the other Cause alleged in the Replication for Forfeiture, the
Petition printing and publishing it.

In the Replication it is alleged, That a Parliament the 10th of January was
prorogued to the 20th of January. That the 13th of January the Mayor,
Commonalty, and Citizens of London, in their Common Council assembled,
malitiose, advisate and seditiose, took upon them ad judicand' and censand' the
King, and the Prorogation of the Parliament by the King so made; and that the
Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of London, so in the said Common Council
assembled, did give their Votes and Order, That a Petition, in the Name of the
Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London, in Common Council
assembled, should be exhibited to the King. In which Petition it was contained,
That by that Prorogation the prosecution of the public Justice of the Kingdom,
and the making necessary provisions for the Preservation of the King, and his
Protestant Subjects had received Interruption. And that the Mayor, Commonalty,
and Citizens of London, in Common Council as aforesaid assembled, did
maliciously, and seditiously, to the intent the same should be dispersed among
the King's Subjects, and to cause an Opinion that the King obstructed the
public Justice, and to stir up Hatred and Dislike against the King's Person
and Government, did order the said Petition to be printed, and afterward they
did print it, and caused it to be published.

The Defendents in their Rejoinder to this Breach set forth and alleadg,
Rejoinder as to the Petition.
That there was a Plot against the Life of the King, the Government and the
Protestant Religion, and set forth all the Proceedings upon it, the Attainders
and Impeachments of the Lords in the Tower in Parliament depending, the
Proclamations declaring the Dangers by this Plot, that they could not otherwise
in humane Reason be prevented, but by the Blessing of God upon the
Consultations and Endeavors of that great Council the Parliament, and
commanding a General Fast to be kept in London the 22d of December, and that it
was kept accordingly. The Proceedings in the Parliament toward the Trial of
the Lords, and preparing Bills to be enacted into Laws, for preservation of the
King and his Subjects against these Plots and Cospiracies. That diverse of the
Citizens, loyal Subjects, being much affrighted, and troubled in their Minds,
with the apprehension of these Dangers, did exhibit their Petition to Sir
Patience Ward, then Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen, and Commons in Common Council
then assembled, containing their Fears, and Apprehensions, and Expectations,
from the King and that Parliament, did petition, that the Common Council would
petition for the sitting of that Parliament, at the time prorogued. And
thereupon the Mayor, and Aldermen, (naming them) and Commons in Common Council
assembled, from their Hearts truly loyal to the King, and for the satisfaction
of the Citizens, who had exhibited that Petition, and of intent to preserve the
Person of the King, and his Government, did give their Votes, and order a
Petition should be exhibited to the King in the Name of the Mayor, Aldermen,
and Commons in Common Council assembled, and set forth the Petition in the Name
of the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons in Common Council assembled in haec verba:

Wherein among other things it is contained, That they were extremely surprised
at the late Prorogation, whereby the Prosecution of the public Justice of the
Kingdom, and the making provisions necessary for preserving the King's Person,
and his Protestant Subjects, received Interruption. And did farther agree and
order, That that Petition, after it had been presented should be printed, which
was so ordered with intent. That false Reports concerning the Petition might be
prevented: The Enemies of the King and the Conspirators from proceeding in the
Conspiracy deterred: The Troubles in the minds of the Citizens alleviated, and
the Citizens know what had been done upon their Petition. That the Petition was
delivered to the King, and afterward printed. That this is the same Petition
and Printing in the Replication mentioned absque hoc, that any Petition of or
concerning the Prorogation of the Parliament was made, ordered, published or
printed in any other manner than they have alleged, as the Attorney General
supposes. To this part of the Rejoinder, Mr. Attorney has demurred generally
by the Demurrer, the Fact alleged in the Replication is admitted to be true.
And it is true, that there are no words, that are written or spoken, but are
subject to various Constructions: But I take it that no words, whether written
or spoken, ought to be taken in an ill sense, if they may reasonably be taken
in a better, Nemo prefumitur esse malus; and therefore the words must stand as
they are penned: and having first expressed their Feats, and next their Hopes,
from the King and Parliaments proceedings in Trial of those that were
Impeached, and making Laws for their Security, and how they were surprised at
the Prorogation, then they say, That by that Prorogation, the prosecution of
the public Justice of this Kingdom, and the making necessary provisions for
the preservation of the King and his Protestant Subjects had received
Interruption. It is mentioned only as a consequence of the Prorogation, it is
not said or expressed that the King did interrupt, for I think there is great
difference betwixt the one sort of expression and the other. An ill Consequence
may attend a good, and commendable, and most necessary Act; but no Consequences
can make an ill Act good; and therefore the expressing the Consequence, does
not necessarily condemn or declare the Act to be an ill Act. Suppose that in
the time of the great Plague a man had had a Suit in Westminster Hall, wherein
all his Estate had been concerned, and had said or writ, That by the
adjournment of the Terms by the King, the Proceedings of the Courts of Justice
in his Suit had received an Interruption, had these words been punishable? The
adjournment was then the most necessary and commendable Act that could be for
the preservation of the King's Subjects in that raging Pestilence: and the Act
it self being so good and necessary, though there were such Consequence as to
that particular Suit, the writing or saying that it had such a Consequence,
such an Interruption, did not, I conceive, condemn, judge, declare or express
the Act to be ill. Suppose a man had had a Bill depending in that Parliament to
be Enacted for the enabling him to sell his Land to pay his Debts, to free him
from a Gaol: Or, suppose that some one of the Lords impeached in that
Parliament had made a Petition for the Sitting of the Parliament, and had
therein expressed as a reason and ground of his Petition, the like words as in
this Petition. What would the Court have judged of it, are not the Cases much
the same? if they are, there will be no distinction of persons in Judgment; I
am sure there ought nor. Perhaps when this Petition was made, there might be
too much heat in the minds of men, and it is true, that heat increases heat,
and fire kindles fire; it is time for all sorts to grow cool and temperate, and
to weigh and consider we are or should be considering men. This Petition was
made Nemine contradicente, and undoubtedly among such a number as the Common
Council, there must be men of variety of Tempers and Dispositions: But for the
greatest number of the Aldermen and Common Council, think of them, we know the
men, many of them; can we imagine that they had either the least ill thought or
meaning toward the King, his Person, or Government, in this Petition, or the
printing it. And as for the printing it, that, my Lord, stands upon the same
Reasons and Grounds: For if there be nothing ill or unlawful in it contained,
then the printing and publishing of that which contains nothing ill or
unlawful, is not, as I conceive, ill or unlawful. Printing is but a more
expeditious way of Writing, and is good or bad as the matter printed is good or
bad. The Defendants in their Rejoinder have set forth their whole case, the
Reasons and Grounds of what the Common Council did, and the manner and intent
of their doing it; all which Fact cannot be denied to be true, but is now
confessed by the Demurrer. It has not, nor can be said, but it is well
pleaded, and might have been traversed and denied if not true: But it is
confessed by the Demurrer to be true, and therefore that must be taken to be
the Fact, and not as alleged in the Replication, and then so taken, I submit
it to your Judgment.

(3.) But the next thing considerable is, Whether, supposing and admitting,
that if done by the Body Politic, it had been a Miscarriage, or a Crime,
whether, not being done by the Body Politic, nor under the Common Seal, but by
Common Council, whether thereby the Being of the Corporation shall be forfeit?

A Common Council in Corporations is generally a select number of the Body
corporate, constituted to advise and assist the Corporation in their ordinary
affairs and business. There is no certain Rule nor Measure of their Power,
wherein all the Common Councils agree. In some Corporations the Common Council
have greater authority, in some less, according to the several authorities by
the respective Charters where the Corporations are by Charters; or by Custom,
or Usage, where the Corporations are by Prescriptions: But in all they are a
subservient number of Men, constituted and authorized for particular ends and
purposes. And in this case I think the Court can take notice of the Common
Council no otherwise than upon the Record they appear to be. The Replication
does not say what they are, but would go in the dark, by intention and
presumption, the best way and method to arbitrary Determination. The Rejoinder
says, that the Citizens and Freemen are a great number, fifty thousand, and
more. That there has been time out of mind a Common Council, consisting of the
Mayor, and Aldermen, for the time being, and of certain Freemen, not exceeding
250, annually elected to serve as Common Council-Men, and are called the
Commons of the City. That time out of mind there has been a Custom, that the
Mayor, Aldermen, and such Citizens, so elected to be of the Common Council,
according to custom, have been accustomed to make Bylaws and Ordinances, for
the better regulation of the public Markets, for appointing times and places,
and assessing and reducing into certainty reasonable Tolls, Rates, and Sums of
Money, payable for Stalls and Standings, in the Market. For any things appears
upon the Record, this is all they have power to do: Non constat to the Court
that they have any other power or authority over Lands, Estates, or any thing
else. Next, If this which in the Rejoinder is alleged, of the Being and
Power, be true, and so admitted, then what they did in making the Ordinance,
was done by good and lawful power and authority, and then can be no Offense:
But if to make the Ordinance be an Offense, and an unlawful Act, you deny the
Custom to be good, and say, the Custom is void, and against Law, and for that
Reason the Ordinance illegal. Then non constat that they had any power at all
to do any thing, and then a Common Council to advise without power to do any
Act: and if so, How can a parcel or part of a Corporation, not authorized to
do any Act, do an Act that shall forfeit? Suppose a particular Company, as
the Mercers, had done this, could this be a Forfeiture? But if to avoid this
you will say, that the Court shall take notice of the Common Council of London,
to have the management of the business of the Corporation belonging to them.
This I think the Court cannot do, and I cannot see how possibly they can, as a
Court, judicially take notice hereof. Suppose our Question had been concerning
another Corporation, could the Court then, as a Court, judicially have taken
notice of the Power or Authority of their Common Council. Mr. Solicitor in his
Argument held, That there was no difference betwixt London and another
Corporation, except that London was the biggest. Then put the case of any other
Corporation, could the Court judicially have taken notice of their Power or
Interest, without having it specially set forth? Is it possible the Court can,
since they differ one from the other, as much as their Charters or
Constitutions do differ, of which there is hardly to be found two in England
that do agree in their Powers? If it had been of another Corporation, of
necessity the constitution of the Common Council must have been set forth. If
you are upon a By-law, made by any other than the Body Politic it self, must
not the Power and Authority of those that made it, be shown, and set forth in
Pleading, in any case where there is occasion to use it? How otherwise could
the Court judge or determine of it? So that taking the Law to be as the other
side says, that London differs not from any other Corporation; it is no where
alleged in the Pleading, that they have Power to make Bylaws, for the
ordering and governing the City, or that they can bind all the Corporation in
sale or disposition of their Lands, or have the power of the common Seal:
Therefore when the King's Counsel argue from these Powers, their Power of
forfeiting, they argue quite out of the Record; they have no where alleged or
pleaded what they are, or what Power they have, as they should have done, if
they had so intended. So as to this particular here is nothing before the
Court, nothing upon Record, to show how or which way the Body Politic should
be concerned in these Acts of about two hundred and fifty of their Members,
called the Common Council. Wheresoever any Bylaws or Ordinances are pleaded,
the Power to make these Bylaws or Ordinances is pleaded, and so are all
particular and derived Authorities, whenever occasion to plead them, and
necessary they should be so: For it is Fact that the other side may and ought to
be at liberty to deny it, if he see cause; and therefore if they will have it
that the Common Council have abused some Power or Authority they have, thereby
to forfeit the Corporations, they ought to have shown it; to say that notice
shall be taken, or it shall be intended or presumed, is in truth a Presumption
upon the Court, as if the Court should take notice of intend or presume what
the King's Counsel would have, which the Court cannot, nor will do, more in
this than in other cases. But supposing the Court will take more notice of
London than any other Corporation, and will take notice of the Common Council
there, and of their Power and Authority; and I will suppose as the other side
do, That they have the Power of making Bylaws, of leasing, granting, and
managing the City Lands and Revenues, and of sealing with the common Seal, and
that this they have by Custom; Then surely, say the other side, they have the
Power of surrendering and forfeiting the Corporation. If I should answer, surely
and without doubt they have not, this would not argue they have not; but the
Argument should come of the other side, to prove they have; they have not, nor
can produce any Case or Opinion to prove it; and the very thought that they
could is so new, that I believe none can be found like it. But let us consider
the nature of this Thing a little par, ticularly, though general Discourses are
most easy and florid-yet perhaps a particular Enquiry may best discover. Admit
that they have the Power the other side say they have; yet they are not the
Corporation, but a part constituted for these particulars ends and purposes for
which they are empowered. Corporations had their Creations by Charter; that
gives them their Being, and the Form, Method, and Power of Action. Suppose that
the first Charter of Incorporation that was granted to London did grant, that
the Citizens should be incorporate, and a Body Politic, by the Name of Mayor,
and Commonalty, and Citizens, that there should be a Mayor, so many Aldermen,
and so many of the Citizens, annually elected, that should be a Common Council,
and that they should have Power to make Bylaws, to demise or grant their
Lands, under the common Seal, in the name of the Corporation. If they do any
Act not within their Commission, is not that void? Suppose a Grant made to the
Common Council, would not that be void? Suppose a Grant made by the Common
Council in the name of the Common Council under Seal, or in the name of the
Corporation, but not under Common Seal; is not all this void? This I only
instance, to show that their Charter and Authority is their Power and Warrant,
they are to act by; did ever any man hear of, or see a Charter giving the
Common Council power to Surrender the Corporation? or was it ever thought of
before these days? If then no such power by the Charter given, if they cannot
do it without power given them, show me their power, or else I think I may
conclude sure they cannot Surrender the Corporation without power. But the
Common Council in London that is by Custom, and their power is by Custom. Then
if the Question be, what is their power? it is answered, what they have used
and accustomed to do, that they may do; what they have not used or accustomed
to do, that they cannot do: for if Custom and Usage be the authority, that
authority can go no farther than their Custom and Usage goes. Then put the
Question, have the Common Council used to Surrender or Forfeit the Charter, no
body can say it; what reason then is there for any man, to say they can do it?
It is probable that the Common Council in London, had first their Institution
from some By-Law or Ordinance, though now not to be produced, but consumed by
time. But be it that, or any other imagined Commencement, can it be imagined
that those that gave them their Original authority, gave them power to
surrender the Corporation, or forfeit it. Suppose that the power given them did
authorize them not only to make Bylaws and Ordinances for the good order and
government of the Corporation, to grant or demise their Lands and Revenues, but
had some general words in it to act and manage the matters of the Corporation.
Is it not against all sense to suppose that that which is deputed and
constituted for the well-ordering and managing of the Corporation should have
power to surrender it. Then as the Counsel of the other side argue, that
because they may surrender they may forfeit: By the same reason, I hope I may
argue, if they cannot surrender or dispose of the Corporation, they cannot
forfeit. Next, Those Acts of the Common Council are not done neither in the
name, nor as the Acts of the Corporation, nor under any Seal; but do import in
themselves only to be the Acts of the Common Council. The Ordinance, That is
made by the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons in Common Council assembled. The
Petition is the Petition of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons in Council
assembled. Their Leases or Grants are in the names of the Corporations, and
under the Common Seal and the Common Council only Ministerial to the
Corporation in ordering, managing and disposing all for the benefit and
advantage of the Corporation, to avoid the Inconveniency of assembling the
numerous Body. But that any thing that has but a ministerial power for the
service and benefit of their principal, should have power to dispose of, sell,
convey or surrender, and destroy their principal, is no consequence in Law or
Reason. No Deputy-assistant or Bailiff has such power, if he exceed his
authority, his Act is void. Is it not so with all Authorities and derived
Powers? what they do beyond their authority cannot bind those from whom they
derive it. It cannot be the Act of the Corporation, for a Corporation cannot
make a Petition, no more than they can make a Deed, or subscribe a Writing,
except under the common Seal.

Corporations cannot make a Lease at will, 12 H. 7. 25, 26. 9 E. 4. 39.
license a Man to enter upon their Lands, or do any like Act, but under their
common Seal. Nor can they commit a Trespass or Disseisin but by Command
precedent, or Assent subsequent under their common Seal. How then can this be
their Act? There is nothing in it that imports it should be theirs, nor ever
intended to be theirs; it is not done by them, nor in their names, but by the
Common Council, and in the name of the Common Council. If we may take notice of
what is out of the Record, we know that they have in London a greater Assembly
than the Common Council, viz. The Common Hall, wherein the Common Council are
no more than others. Can the Petition of the Mayor, or Mayor and Aldermen, in
their names be taken to be the Act of the Corporation? if that cannot be, why
should the Petition of the Common Council in their own names be any other than
their own Petition, as their Ordinance and By-Law theirs, and not the
Corporations.

The Case of Corporations takes notice of their Power, as Common Councils, Rep.
4.77.
to exclude the Commonalty and the rest of the Corporation. 13 C. 2. cap. 5.
The Act allows the Common Councils ordering Petitions. But where is it to be
found that it was ever said or thought on before, that they could forfeit or
dissolve the Corporation?

(4.) But supposing all that I have said against me: And suppoposing the Acts
of the Common Council to be the Acts of the Corporation: And supposing those
Acts, viz. The making the Ordinance and Petition not justifiable or excusable;
Then the great Point will be, whether they or either of them are such
Miscarriages or Offenses in Law for which the Charter, that is the very being
of the Corporation, shall be forfeit.

This I call the great Point, for I think it to be as great in Consequence as
ever any at this Bar, as if Magna Charta were at stake; for in my
apprehension, not only London, but all the Corporations of England, and the
Government of England will be deeply concerned in the Question. For let us but
consider what a vast part of England is concerned in the Corporations of
England.

1. Ecclesiastical or mixed, as Archbishops, Bishops, Dean and Chapters,
Parsons, Vicars, Universities, Colleges, Hospitals of all sorts.

2. All the Cities and considerable Towns and Boroughs in England.

3. The very Frame of our Government is concerned; for one of the Estates of
the Kingdom, viz. The Commons in Parliament, consists of Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses; the Citizens and Burgesses are usually chosen by them that are Free
of the respective Cities and Corporations, and where not chosen by them, yet
the Elections are generally under their Power and Influence, and the Return
made by them.

Perhaps also a Peerage is a sort of Corporation. Perhaps the World it self, at
least this little World, will no longer be able to subsist in health than the
due Order and just Temperament of the several Parts and Powers therein, are
preserved, and contain themselves within their own Bounds. The taking away or
Infeebling any principal Part brings a Lameness and Deformity, Pain and
Disorder upon, and at length confounds the whole. The Laws answer their ends,
whereof the principal is the preservation of the Government which preserves the
Laws, they cannot subsist one without the other; therefore whatsoever it is
that tends to the Subversion, or leaving at Will and Pleasure that which is so
considerable in our Government as Corporations are, ought to be thoroughly
considered.

The better to examine and consider this great Point: In the first place, the
Reasons given on the other side are,

Object. 1. That if Corporations be not forfeitable for their Miscarriages,
they will attempt and do extravagant Acts, raise Sedition or Rebellion, and
there will be no adequate Punishment to their Miscarriages.

Resp. In answer to this Reason,

1. There is no illegal Act that they can attempt or commit, but that they are
under the same Severities and Corrections of Law as any other the King's
Subjects not Incorporate are. Though it be true, that the Corporation it self
is only a Body Politic, an invisible Body, yet the Members of it they are
visible. If they as Members of that Corporation commit or do any ununlawful
Act, they are punishable for it in their own private Capacities. If they make
any Ordinance or By-Law to raise Money unlawfully upon any of their Members, or
others, the By-Law or Ordinance is void. If they receive or collect any Money
by it, the Receivers and Collectors are to answer it, they are to be sued as
any other Subject. Suppose a Lord of a Manor or Market make an unlawful Order
to collect or take Money from his Tenants or Coppyholders, or unreasonable
Tolls in his Markets. This Order is void in Law, and those that collect or
receive any Money by it, are answerable for it, and the Parties grieved have
their proper Actions and Remedies, and perhaps the Markets, or at least the
Tolls may be siesed, or forfeit for this Miscarriage. This is the Provision
that by Law is made against such Exactions, and this is just and adequate and
reasonable. And if a Corporation make such Ordinance, By-Law, or Order, and
thereby there is the same receipt or Exaction, the Subject has the same
remedy, and there is the same Forfeiture of Toll or Market, as in case of any
natural Person, or Lord of a Manor, and the Provisions by Law made are just
and reasonable, and adequate in this Case of the Corporation, as of the other.
The like for any Offense that can be committed, it must be done by particular
Members, and they must answer for it. And this is no new Opinion, 21 E. 4. 14.
express that a Mayor and Commonalty, or other Body Politic, cannot commit
Treason, although all the Commonalty do commit Treason, every of them is a
Traitor in his own person: I might cite other Authorities to this purpose, but
they have been already cited by Mr. Recorder in his Argument; and though the
Counsel for the King would make these Books to be but some slight Opinions, yet
unless they could show some Authority, Book, or Case to the contrary, their
despising or little valuing what they can find no Answer for, will not render
the Authority and constant Opinions of our Books of less esteem than they ought
to be. It Is no excuse if they do an unlawful Act, that they are Members of a
Corporation, or did it as a Corporation. No body can say this will excuse them;
so, that notwithstanding their being a Corporation, they are subject to the
Law, be the Offense Treason, Sedition, or any other Crime or Offense as, any
other the King's Subjects are; every particular Member that acted or committed
that Offense, is answerable to the Law for it. The particular Members that
commit the unlawful Act, and all that act under their Authority, are subject to
the same Law as all other the King's Subjects. And therefore this reason, that
else there will be no Punishment upon them adequate to the Offense, and
consequently a Mischief and Inconvenience is but a shadow, and nothing
proportionable to the Mischiefs and Inconveniences attending the position of a
Forfeiture of the other side. But consider the Injustice that would be of the
other side, if this should be so; we know Assemblies determine their Act by the
major Vote, and great struggling there is, as we too frequently see in their
Debates and Resolutions, and carried by majority of one or two Votes, sometimes
by surprises and undue management, sometimes by fear and terror: Suppose an
evil Act so carried or managed, is it reason that all the whole Corporation
should be hereby forfeit? and thereby all other men to whom they owe any Debts,
must lose them, and the many Interests and Livelyhoods depending upon the
Corporation, the Customs, Courts, Offices, and Privileges belonging to it,
endless to enumerate, shall all be undone and destroyed.

Obj. 2. The next Reason that has been given is, That it is a general Rule in
Law, that the abusing or misusing of a Franchise, is a Forfeiture of the
Franchise.

Resp. 2. This is true in the sense that the Books do say it; for if a man
misuse or abuse a particular Franchise, he shall forfeit that particular
Franchise; but he shall not forfeit any other except it be depending upon and
incident to it. And the Cases cited prove nothing farther.

22 Ass. p. 34. Br. Fran. 34.
That when a man has diverse Franchises not depending one upon another, and
misuseth one Franchise, he shall not thereby forfeit the rest, but only that
which he misuseth. 8 H. 4. 18. Rep. 9. 96. b 24 E. 4. b Inst. 2. 43.
And therefore the Cases cited; Where the Abbat of Crowland and the Abbat of
St. Albans had Franchises of Custodies of Gaols; one would not be at the cost
of a Commission of Jail-deliver, the other did detain in Prison after legal
Discharge, and Fees paid. This was a misuser of those Franchises and
Forfeitures. So also perhaps if there be a Franchise that has Incidents to it;
as, Pypowders to a Fair, Pillory to a Leet. An abuser of the Incident, as the
Court of Pypowders, or the not having a Pillory, may forfeit the Market or the
Leet. If the Lord of a Market take outrageous Toll, Stat. West. 1. cap. 31.
Inst. 2. 219.
he shall forfeit the Market. But does this prove, that if a Corporation have
Fairs, Markets, Gaols, or Leets, and misuseth any of them, that the Body
Politic, the Corporation shall be forfeit. If this be so, the Abbats, they
being Corporations, in the cases of the Abbat of St. Albans, and Crowland,
should have forfeited not only the Liberties of having Gaols, but the very
Corporations, or Bodies Politic, of being Abbats; a conceit never yet
imagined. Can you say the City of London is either dependent or incident to the
Markets; or the contrary, that the Markets are incident or dependent upon the
Corporation, that they cannot be one without the other? Can this be said? If
this cannot be said with reason, how can then the taking these Tolls admit they
were outrageous, and a Forfeiture of the Market forfeit the Corporation? The
making the Ordinance, supposing they made it, is but the mean by which they
took it. Your Books only prove the abuse of a Franchise, a Forfeiture of that
Franchise, or Incidents to it, and no other: But the Inference in this Case is
not the Forfeiture of that particular Franchise; but of the being of the
Corporation that owned the Franchise: which is a plain Non sequitur, unless you
say the Corporation is incident to the Market. Arguments from general Rules are
the most fallible, especially in Law; and that this is such, I hope most
plainly to show in the distinguishing the different nature of Franchises; which
I shall do presently, only taking in my way their next Reason that they offer,
and answer both together: which is,

Obj. 3. That a Corporation is a Franchise; that it commenceth by Grant, and
therefore Forfeitable and Surrenderable as other Franchises are; and if they be
Surrenderable, then also are they Forfeitable.

Resp. I do agree, that Franchise is a large word, it is of the like sense of
Liberty or Privilege. Therefore in Quo Warranto Franchises, Liberties, and
Privileges seem to be of the same sense. To be a Subject born, and to have
Liberty and Privilege of a Freeman, and no Villian, is a great Franchise; and
therefore in Law, when a Villain is made Free, we say he is Infranchised, he
has the Franchise, Liberty and Privilege of being a Freeman. An Alien he is
made Denizen by Letters Patents, a Person attainted is Pardoned by Letters
Patents, and a restitution in blood granted and made a new Creature. By these
Grants the Alien and the Person restored have such Franchises Liberties and
Privileges granted them: that though before they were not capable to take hold,
or enjoy, or Act as natural born Subjects or Freemen, yet hereby they have such
Capacity granted: Next, I think it will be granted that this Franchise,
Liberty, Privilege, or Capacity, is not surrenderable or forfeitable, except
only in Cases of Treason or Felony, where they forfeit their Lives; by these
instances this is proved, That it is no true position that whatsoever is
grantable is surrenderable, and if surrenderable forfeitable; which is one of
the Reasons given by the King's Counsel, why a Corporation is forfeitable, for
these Franchises or Privileges are by Grant, and yet not surrenderable or
forfeitable; and this also shows that Arguments general and from general Rules
are most fallible, and fit only to take weak apprehensions. But next consider,
what it is to be a Body Politic or Corporation. A Body Politic is framed and
constituted in similitude or likeness of a natural body, with Capacity to take
hold and enjoy, and act as a natural body, and can no more surrender or forfeit
his being while the members of that Body are subsisting, than a natural body
can while alive. It is only a Capacity framed and created in a multitude to be,
and act as one person, they are incorporate and made one Body Politic that
have Power, and Capacity or Franchise of acting taking holding and granting;
this is their Franchise, admit it so, but differs from others. Franchises and
Liberties of all other Natures are Estates and Inheritances grantable and
conveyable from one to another as other Estates are, this is no such thing
grantable or transferrable; other Franchises and Liberties affect the King's
Subjects, and are Privileges claimed, wherein the King and the rest of his
Subjects not claiming the Franchise, are more concerned than in this of being a
Body Politic; for other Franchises either convey some Profit from the King, as
Felons, Goods, Waifs, Estrays, Wrecks, or the like: Or affect his Subjects, as
Courts, Gaols, Returns of Writs, Fairs, Markets, and the like. But this of
being a Body Politic, is only a Capacity to be a Person capable of having and
holding what may be granted unto it; and of granting and acting as a natural
Body, and affects the King, or other his Subjects, no otherwise than giving
Capacity to take, hold and enjoy what they can get as other Persons capacitated
may. Other Franchises, Liberties and Privileges are distinct and separate
Estates, and if any one be forfeit, as it may for misuser, the rest are not;
except incidents and appurtenances. But if the being of a Corporation be
forfeited, All their Estates, Lands, Goods and Chattels are gone at once: So
that though you admit and call this a Liberty or Franchise, it is nothing like
in its nature to those things generally known and understood by the name of
Franchises or Liberties; and general Sayings are generally to be understood of
such things as are generally so taken and called. If then there be such great
and apparent difference betwixt this of the being a Body Politic, supposing it
being in a general and large sense, a Franchise, Liberty or Privilege, and
other particular Franchises, admitting that which is said, that the Misuser of
a Franchise is a Forfeiture, holds generally true, yet it is not in every
particular true, where there is such apparent difference and reason to
distinguish as betwixt the being of a Corporation or a Body Politic, which is
only a Capacity, and other particular Franchises, which are Estates; there is
also apparent reason to distinguish betwixt one and the other, they being so
much differing one from the other in nature and reality. But next, That this
was never taken in Law to be such a Franchise, Liberty, or Privilege as was
comprehended under the general meaning of Franchise or Liberty. By Sta. of
Glost' Writs were to go to all Sheriffs forty days before the Eire of general
Summons, 6 E. 1. Inst. 2. 278.
for all to come in at the Eire to claim their Privileges; and the second day
of the sitting of the Justices in Eire a Proclamation made to the same purpose.
In the Comment upon that Statute it appears, Inst. 2. 281. 282.
that if the party did not appear, his Franchises were seized into the King's
hands, Nomine districtionis, and if not replevied sitting the Eire, they were
forfeit or lost for ever. If the party did appear, and did not claim, then they
were lost for ever. In all the Proceedings in Eire, there is no such thing can
be found: That the Corporations did come in and make Claims to their being
Corporations or Bodies Politic, or that ever any were seized if it be seisable
into the King's hands, or was forfeit for not Claiming. Fulher and Heyward's C.
Palm. 491. It appears, that the Dean and Chapter there Surrendered their
Charter, and all their Manor Lands, Possessions, Privileges, Franchises and
Hereditaments, Spiritual and Temporal, and this with intent to Surrender, that
there might be a new Corporation erected; as is recited in the Letters Patents
of new Erection. In this Case, Rep. 3. 75. And. 2. 120. Jones 168. resolved,
that by this Surrender the old Corporation was not surrendered. This Judgment
does conclude, and must be given, either because by the word Franchise, and the
other general words, the Franchise of being a Corporation was not comprehended;
or if the word's sufficient, and did comprise it, that it could not by Law be
Surrendered. This I think sufficiently shows that Corporations were in Law as
Persons natural are, and in like manner claimed, and that the being a Body
Politic or Corporation, was not to be claimed, comprised, or meant within the
general words, Franchises, no more than the Liberty or Franchise of Denizen, or
Manumission. Next, No instance can be given of any seizure of any Corporation
or Body Politic for any Forfeiture, Seizure of their Liberties, or putting
Officers upon them, is quite another thing, as I shall show presently: So that
these general Sayings in Law Books, that Misuser of a Franchise forfeits the
Franchise; neither in Law or Reason extends to the being of a Body Politic or
Corporation, but is applicable only to particular Franchises of other natures;
and the other reason, that that which is grantable is forfeitable, is as
fallacious as before appears.

3. For the Records cited to prove that the Corporation or Body Politic may be
Forfeited, I will state those that are most Effective, and do them right
therein.

Johannes Dennis, Mayor of Sandwich, P. 9. E. 1.
and three more, were attached to answer Domino Regi de placito transgr' and
unde Robertus de Stokho, Sheriff of Kent, qui sequitur pro ipso Rege, complains
that he had sent his Bailiffs (naming them) to make Execution of the King's
Writ, in Villa de Stanore, qui est Barona domini Regis, and that the
Defendants, with Swords drawn, took away the King's Writ, and trod it under
their feet, and would not suffer it to be executed, unde dicit quod
deterioratus est, and damnum habet ad valentiam 2000 Marks. The Mayor appears,
and pleads to the Jurisdiction, that he ought not to answer this matter, except
in the Court of Shipway. The Sheriff replies, That Stanore is the King's
Barony, belonging to the Barony of St. Austins, and relyes upon a Record before
Justices in Eire, where an Amerciament upon that Vill' was formerly set. The
Mayor refuses to plead over. Then a day is given over: Then it is entered thus,

Posteaque coram Domino Rege and ejus Consil' Quia Barons del' Cinque Ports
nec aliqui alii in Regno nostro possint clamare talem libertatem, quod non
responderent Domino Regi de contemptu sibi fact' ubi Dominus Rex eas adjornare
voluerit; Et quia predict' Barons non protulerunt aliquas Chartas a Regibus
concessis, in quibus non fuit excepta Regia Dignitas, consideratum est quod
respondeant; and quia le Defendants would not answer any other where than in
Shipway, consideratum est quod habeantur in defensionem pro convictis de
predict' Transgr' and Contempt'. Et quia the said John Dennis is convicted of
the said Offense, and the fact of the Mayor, in those things which touch the
Commonalty, is the fact of the Commonalty, consideratum est quod Communitas de
Sandwich amittat Libertatem suam, etc. Then follows, Postea, in presentia of
the Bishop of Bath and Wells, then Chancellor, and others, cum Assensu Regis,
an Agreement betwixt the Abbat of St. Austins, the men of Stannore and
Sandwich, de omnibus contentionibus. And then goes a long Agreement betwixt the
Abbat and the Men of Sandwich and Stannore, concerning their Jurisdictions and
Courts:

Et si aliqua pars contra concordantiam illam ire vel facere, alia pars habeat
suam recuperare per breve Domini Regis de Judicio exeunte de isto Recordo. Et
pro hac predict' homines vadiant predict' Abbati 100 Marks, which the Abbat
remits for 10 doliis Vini, pretii 30 Marks, to be paid at the Feast of St. John
the Baptist. This is the Record at large; and for the Extract in the
Collections at Lincoln's Inn, whether it be of this Record, or any Execution
that went out upon it, non constat: But that I think it could not be upon this
Record; for the Record is not 30 Marks annuatim, as the Abstract is, and the
Entry of the videtur at the conclusion, quod Judicium extendit contra Barons,
Quinque Portuum, and eorum Libertates, ut mihi videtur, that is not my Lord
Hales his Note, nor does it appear whose it was. Out of this Record how can a
man infer that a Corporation shall be forfeit for the Miscarriage of the Mayor,
or Officer, how does it appear from hence, that they should lose or forfeit
their being a Corporation. By amittat Libertatem all that is meant thereby is
their Liberty in Stannore, or the Liberty they claimed to be impleaded in the
Court of Shipway, and the Note in the Extract, videtur quod Judicium extendit
versus Barons, must be, I think, taken to be as to their Liberty in Stannore,
or to be sued only in the Court of Shipway. I have taken the more notice of
this Record, because it has countenance of a judicial Proceeding; but as to
all the other Records cited,

A Writ to the Sheriff of Gloucester, reciting, That the King, 6 E. 2. r. Clau.
Membr. 5.
for injuries and contempts done by the Mayor and Commonalty of Bristol, the
Liberty of that Vill' by Bartholomew de Baddlesmere, Custos of that Vill' into
his hands had seized. The Writ commands the Sheriff, that the Custos should
have the Execution of Writs, as the Mayor and Bailiffs used to have. And the
times of Henry the Third, Edward the First, Edward the Second, and Richard the
Second, there were frequent Seisures of the Office of Mayor, and the Kings did
put in a Custos in the place of Mayor, or made a Mayor, and these are called
Seizures of Liberties.

King Henry the Third put in a Custos over London, 49 H. 3.
which continued till the 54th of his Reign, and then taken off, and the City
restored to its Election.

Edward the First put in a Custos, 15 E. 1.
and continued so to do till the 25th Year of his Reign, and then taken off.

The 14th of Edward the Second a Seizure of the Office of Mayor by Henry de
Staunton, and his Fellows, Justices in Eire in the Tower, and Mayors put in by
the King till the 20th of Edward the Second, and then restored: But for that of
Richard the Second, give me leave to digress, and give you the state of it out
of the City Registers, which are more full than these cited.

A Writ from the King to the Mayor, Sheriffs, 16 R. 2. July 22. Lib. H. fol.
269. b City Reg.
and Aldermen, commanding them to come with twenty four principal Citizens,
before the King and his Council at Nottingham, in crastino Sancti Johannis
Baptist' tunc prox' sut', and to bring sufficient authority from the Commonalty
to answer such things as should be objected. They appeared, and had a Letter of
Attorney, ubi pro diversis defectionibus in Commissione suo sub communi
Sigillo, and aliis de causis, the Mayor and Sheriffs were discharged of their
Offices, and committed diversis Prisonis; and afterward, the first of July,
Sir Edward Dallingrigg, made Custos by the King, came to the Guildhall, and his
Commission being read, he was sworn before the Aldermen, secundum quod Majores
ante jurare solebant; the King also made the Sheriffs, and they were also
sworn. This is also entered in the City Register, Lib. H. fol. 270. b

It appears that the King first swore the Custos, 16 R. 2. r. Cl. M. 30. Ind.
and the Sheriffs, to be true to him, and also turned out the Aldermen. And
that the Proceedings were before the Duke of Gloucester, and other Lords, by a
Commission, to enquire of all Defaults in the Mayor and Sheriffs, in the well
governing of the City, awarded upon the Statute made by the King's Grandfather,
and that they were convicted by their own Confession, and thereupon the Liberty
of the City seized.

The Pardon and Restitution entered, 19 Sept. 16. R. 2. Lib. H. fol. 272. a ubi
supra.
and thereby it is recited, that the Proceedings were upon the Statute, and the
Judgment was, That for the first Offense they should forfeit one thousand
Marks; for the second two thousand Marks; and for the third Offense, that the
Liberty should be seized.

The Statute 28 E. 3. cap. 10. enacted, That the Mayor, Sheriffs, and Aldermen
of London, which have the Governance of the same, shall cause the Errors,
Defaults, and Misprisions in and about the same, to be corrected and redressed
from time to time, upon pain, that is to say to forfeit to the King for the
first Default one thousand Marks, the second Default two thousand Marks, and
for the third Default the Franchises and Liberties of the City shall be seized
into the King's hands. And that the Trial of these Defaults shall be by
Enquests of foreign Countries, and the Pains levied upon the Mayor, Sheriffs,
and Aldermen. Upon this Statute were the Proceedings of R. 2. grounded. The
other side have likewise much relied upon another Seizure made of the Liberties
of the City of Cambridge.

A great Riot committed by the Town, upon the University, 5 R. 2. Rot. Par. N.
45. Inst. 4. 228.
heard in Parliament by way of Petition, and form of Articles exhibited by the
Scholars against the Mayor and Bailiffs. Upon reading of which it was demanded
of them what they could say why their Liberties should not be seized: After
many Shifts they submitted themselves to the King's Mercy. The King thereupon,
by common consent in Parliament, seized the same Liberties into his hands, as
aforesaid, and then granted diverse Liberties to the Universities, and certain
Liberties the King granted to the said Mayor and Bailiffs, and increased their
former. These are the most substantial; it would be too tedious to repeat all,
for there have been in those days, but not since, many like Seisures of
Liberties, as these; only general, but nothing particular to our purpose, and
though not cited, I shall also mention those in Crook.

Certiorari to the Mayor of Fith; they disobeyed the Writ, Cr. 1. 252. Tyndals
Case.
and gave scurvey Words; and thereupon Mr. Noy cited two cases of Seisures of
Liberties. The Bishop of Durham had contemned the King's Process, and
imprisoned the Messenger. An Information exhibited against him, the Offense
proved; adjudged he should pay a Fine, 33 E. 1. rot. 101.
and quod capiatur, and should lose his Liberties for his time; because Justum
est quod in eo quod peccat in eo puniatur. Another in Banco Com' a Prohibition
awarded to the Bishop of Norwich, 21 E. 3. rot. 46.
and he excommunicated the Party that brought the Writ; the Party brought his
Action, adjudged against the Bishop, that his Temporalties should be seized
till he absolved the Party, and satisfied the King for his Contempt, and that
the Party should recover 10000 l. Damages. I answer to them,

1. They were all above three hundred years ago, except that of 16 R. 2. which
is above two hundred and ninety, and no such thing ever done since, what stress
or weight can be given to such Proceedings? To what Rules of Law, since known
or practiced, can we bring these Proceedings? Are they now legal Precedents for
the like things to be done? The Writs out of old Records for the Ship Money,
and the Knighthood-money, had as good Records to warrant them, and much more
plain to the purpose than these. The Precedents of Edward the Second, and
Richard the Second, either of their Lives, or of their Deaths, or of the Lives
or Deaths of some of the Judges of those days, ought, as I conceive, to be no
Examples. And for H. 3. E. 1. E. 2. and R. 2. and those times, they were times
of great troubles and disorders, and what was then done is no Rule or Precedent
for this Court, or any other Court of Justice, to go by, unless by later times
allowed or approved. No Law-book or Report of any judicial Proceedings, either
of E. 2. or of E. 3. or any later Book of Law that I have yet heard of, or met
with, (and I doubt not but if there had been any, the King's Counsel would have
made use of them,) has ever given so much credit or countenance to these
Proceedings, as to take any notice of them. To make use of old Records or
Precedents, the Grounds or Reasons whereof cannot now be known, to subvert any
Law or Government established, is neither advisable nor commendable. But for
answer to them:

Resp. As to that of 16 R. 2. that you see is grounded upon the Statute 28 E.
3. c. 10. and can signify nothing to the present purpose, for there, according
to that Statute, they condemn the Mayor, Sheriffs, and Aldermen upon their
Confession, that they had misgoverned the City. The Mayor and Sheriffs being
committed to Prisons, and this done before Dukes and Earls, by special
Commission to that purpose appointed, and convicted by their confession, for
the first, second, third Offense all at once, Is this of good Authority in Law?
And for the others, that of E. 2. was before Justices in Eire at the Tower, the
Office of Mayoralty seized into the King's hands, and replevied from year to
year. And that Seizure that was made by King E. 1. for what Reasons or Grounds,
or by what sort of Proceedings, does not appear; all that does appear of it is,
that de facto Custodes and Mayors were put upon the City, but quo jure who can
tell. We know these times were times of trouble, in the Barons Wars.

The Barons, Simon Mountford, Earl of Leicester, being their General, 48 H. 3.
faught a Battle with the King at Jews, and took the King and Prince Edward
the first both Prisoners.

The Barons differing among themselves, 49 H. 3.
and the Earl of Gloucester joined with the Prince, who got out of Prison,
another Battle was fought at Evisham, and the great Earl Mountford slain; and
then at Winchester by Paliament all his Party and the Liberties of the City of
London seized, and in such times as these, and which followed in E. 1. E. 2.
and R. 2. it is not to be marvelled if there were many Seisures and Custodes
put on the City, it is more a marvel they were not destroyed. The Statutes made
in these times, show not only the Disorders, but that the Liberties mere
greatly Infringed, or else there would not have been Statutes to confirm them;
whether the Infringing or Seizing were the Cause or Effect, is hard to know;
but just before in those times there were undoubtedly many extravagant Acts of
all sides, which produced Magna Charta, made the 9 H. 3. for confirming of the
Liberties and Privileges, not only of London, but of all other Towns: and after
these times, in the three Reigns of the three succeeding Kings, how many other
Statutes for confirming the Liberties and Privileges of the Cities and Towns
were made 1 H. 4. cap. 15. The Penalties and Forfeitures imposed by the Statute
28 E. 3. cap. 10. upon the City of London put into the same Condition with
other Cities and Boroughs as to Penalties and Seisures.

A Statute confirming to all the Cities and Boroughs, the Liberties and
Franchises which they by former Grants or Confirmations had, viz. 4 H. 4. Cap.
1.

Confirmed in like manner, by 7 H. 4. Cap. 1.

Again confirmed in like manner, by 3 H. 5. cap. 1.

Again confirmed by Statute of 2 H. 6. Cap. 1.

By which it appears what a sense and memory they had of the Seisures that had
been of their Liberties and Privileges, that they never thought them
sufficiently confirmed; but they were sufficiently confirmed; for from the time
of R. 2. to this day we do not find any Seizure of any Liberties or Franchises,
or Custos made or put upon them. That which was in those days of Violence done,
show them the worst of times, but are no Precedents for the best. But next,

Supposing and admitting these Records of these times of good Authority, and as
authentic Precedents as can be, they are so far from proving against me, that
I hope to make it most plainly to appear, that they are strong and plain
Authorities and Evidence against them, and for me.

It is ordinary in Disputing or Arguing to lose the point disputed or argued.
That I may not commit so great an Error, but may evines and make plain what I
have affirmed,

Give me leave to look back to the Information and Replication, and from thenee
to make the Points that we argue single, clear and open.

The Information that says that we usurped upon the King to be a Corporation
and Body Politic, but in truth are none.

The Bar sets forth the title to be a Corporation by Prescription time out of
mind.

The Replication that endeavors to avoid the Bar, by allowing that we were
once a Corporation lawfully; but that by our Miscarriages, we have forfeited
our being a Corporation, and thereby became none, and after that usurped to be
one.

So that, that which the other side maintains, is, That by our mis-feasances we
have committed a Forfeiture of our old lawful and rightful Corporation. This
I deny; the Affirmation is upon them to prove, and they producing no Record
that expresses any such Forfeiture of a Corporation, but only Records generally
saying, that the Liberties should be Forfeited or Seized, the question is, what
the meaning is in these old Records of Forfeiting and Seizing Liberties. Mr.
Attorney was pleased to take it, and so did Mr. Solicitor, as I think, that
Forfeiting and Seizing were much one. I shall not dispute it; but whether in
any of those Records the Corporation or Body Politic were by these words taken
to be forfeited. Mr. Attorney was so careful to avoid the Consequents of a
Forfeiture of a Corporation, which are so great and destructive, that he would
not by a Judgment in a Quo Warranto against a Corporation have the Corporation
determined, no more than he would by the Forfeiture ipso facto have it
determined, but that there should be some Seizure into the King's hands; but
what that is, or how to be understood, I cannot imagine. For if the Corporation
be not to be dissolved and determined, in whom should it rest or remain after
such Forfeitures, or during such Seizure, shall it after Forfeiture remain in
the same Persons that it was in, shall it subsist, live and act as before? or
shall it be in limbo Patrum, or in Nubibus? Is a Corporation transferrable to
any other Person or Persons? Can a Corporation be conveyed or transferred? that
is impossible; and so it appears in the Dean and Chapter of Norwich Case, and
Fulcher and Heyward, and 1 Inst. in the Case of the Homage Ancestrall before
cited. That a Corporation is not transferrable from one Body of Men to another;
therefore the King cannot possibly have it, nor can he grant it. Ay, but says
Mr. Attorney, it shall be feifed, and in the King's hands; what is meant by
these words? How can it be in the King's hands, if not transferrable? Next,
What shall the King do with it, shall he grant it to others? No, that is
impossible, by the Cases cited, it so appears the King may make a new, but he
cannot grant an old Corporation, because not transferrable. Then if he cannot
grant, if it be not transferrable, if a Corporation or Body Politic so by Law
framed in similitude of a natural Body, then it is no more transferrable than a
natural Body is. The Body Politic cannot be taken out of the hands of the
Persons (...). From hence then, if this be so, it will follow of necessity that
the Corporation, if it cannot be transferred to the King, or by the King's
Grant out of the Persons in whom it is to (...), it (...) remain where it is,
or be dissolved. Next, that which I shall show is,

That by the words forfeiting and seizing Liberties in those old Records, it
cannot be meant forfeiting and seizing a Corporation or Body Politic they
still continued. But that which is the true sense of these words, Forfeiting,
and Seizing Liberties in those Records was, if the abuse or misuse were of a
particular Franchise, as of Courts, Prisons, Markets, or the like, the King had
them forfeited to him. If the abuse were by a Corporation, they Acted by their
active Parts, by their Mayors, Bailiffs, Sheriffs, Coroners, or the like; the
King seized these Offices, turned the Corporation Officers out, and put others
into their Places. This was the Course in the Eires, where these Seisures in
those days usually were. But for seizing Corporations as forfeit, there has
been no instance of it in any time, but the contrary is most evident. For the
Corporations, notwithstanding the supposed Forfeitures or Seisures, remained
still in being; and this is evident even to sense. The Seisures that have been
mentioned, have been of London, Bristol, Gloucester, Cambridge and Cinque Ports,
Ipswich and Winchester.

1. First, I offer to your Consideration, whether these Cities of London and
Bristol, Gloucester, Cambridge, and also the Cinque Ports, ever since have not
continually in all Pleadings, Claims and Titles, made themselves a Title by
Prescription; Are they not by Prescription to this day? Do they not claim their
Markets, Tolls, and all their Privileges by Prescription? Do not the Acts of
Parliament that immediately follow these Seisures made by H. 4. H. 5. H. 6. in
the times succeeding, all confirm their Privileges, not a word of granting new
Privileges, but confirm the old; which shows plainly, that in those days the
Corporations were not, thought or imagined to be determined or dissolved.

By these Seisures or supposed Forfeitures, the enjoynment or possession for
the space of three Hundred years, is evidence sufficient of their remaining and
being Bodies Politic by Prescription, which they could not be, if they were
forfeited as pretended. For by Forfeiture, they must mean the losing their
Corporation, or being divested; no other sense can be, or ever was of
Forfeiture; Could they forfeit them, and yet keep them? Could they lose them,
and yet have them? if they could not, then it is plain that since they always
have had them, they never forfeited or lost them. But for farther Evidence
hereof, I shall make most plainly to appear, That during the very times of
these Seisures, the Corporations remained and acted as Corporations; and that
at that time, it was never thought or imagined, that during the Seisures the
Corporations were forfeit; all that was done was, that the Election of their
Mayor or of their Sheriff was de facto taken from them, and either a Custos, or
a Mayor, by the King put over them, and continued till those Kings displeasures
were over, and then they chose these own Officers again; But no thought then of
forfeiting the Corporation. By the City Books, as well as Records, this is most
evident. The putting a Custos by King E. 1. continued for the space of Eleven
years, from the 15 E. 1. to the 26 E. 1. and then they chose their Mayor again.
By the City Books it appears, that their Court of Hustings all along continued,
as at other times, Lib. A. fol. 50, 51. 135.
Aldermen all along.

Radulphus de Sandwyco Custos Civitat' London, 18 E. 1.
Henricus le Walleys, and others, Aldermen (naming them) and universales
Communia ejusdem Civitatis, make a Conveyance of an House to John de Bangwell.

The Court of Aldermen holden before the Custos and Aldermen. 18 E. 1. Lib. A.
fol. 110.


With the King's Remembrancer in the Exchequer, 16 E. 1. r. 1.
Cives London venerunt coram Baronibus and presentaverunt Johannem de Canluar'
and Willielmum de Betoyne ad respondend' pro Civitat' predict' and Com'
Middlesex, de his quae ad Officium Vicecomitis pertinent, and ad hoc faciend'
prestiterunt Sacramentum.

Ibidem, 18 E. 1. To. 1.
The Presentment and Swearing two other Sheriffs.

Ibidem, The like. 21 E. 1. To. 3.


Ibidem, The like. 23 E. 3. To. 3. 21 E. 1. Lib. C. fol. 19. b.


Auby le Artheir attachiatus fuit ad respond' Communitat' Civitat' London' de
placito, for that he, being no Freeman, Merchandized in the City.

Another like Suit against an Vn-freeman. Lib. C. fol. 7. b


A Writ of Right in the Hustings, 22 E. 1.
brought by the Corporation. Communitas Civitat' London per Radulphum Pecocks
Attornatum suum petit versus Hugonem Episcopum de Bedlam unum Messuagium, etc.

All the Aldermen, 26 E. 1. Lib. E. fol. 38.
and twelve Citizens were called before the King and his Council, and the King
restored them the Election of their Mayor, and they chose Henry de Gabeys
Mayor. And on Monday following comes the King's Writ, whereby the King for good
Services, Reddidimus and Restituimus Civibus London Civitatem una cum
Majoritate and libertatibus suis quas certis de causis dudum capi fecimus in
manum nostrum. So that hereby it most evidently appears, the Corporation was
not forfeit, lost, or dissolved, only a Cuilos put over them which acted in the
place of Mayor; and when removed, they chose their Mayor again.

The Liberties not forfeit, only seized into the Kings hands; so says the Writ
dudum capi fecimus in manum nostrum. The Record of Cambridge I have looked
upon, It plainly appears in it, that the Corporation was not forfeited and
dissolved, as you suppose. For it appears, that when they submitted to the King
to do with their Franchises what he pleased; yet it was salvo to the Mayor and
Bailiffs, their response to all other Matters. And afterward, at the same
time, the King grants to the same Mayor and Bailiffs diverse Liberties, by which
it appears that the Corporation was not forfeit, but still in being,
notwithstanding the Seizure and Forfeiture.

14 E. 2.
The Seizure that was by King Edward the Second, was in no sort any Forfeiture
or Determination of their Corporation; but either under a Custos, or under a
Mayor put in by the King.

Lib. E. fol. 11. b
The Custos, Aldermen, and Commonalty appeared, and turned out some of their
Aldermen.

Lib. D. fol. 6.
They chose and swore their Sheriffs, and by this time they had a Mayor again;
but the Office of Mayoralty, granted them by the King.

16 E. 2. Lib. E. fol. 146.
The King grants to Nicholas de Farringdon, the Office of Mayor quamdiu nobis
placuerit.

20 E. 2.
They had a Writ restoring to them the Office of their Mayor again.

16 R. 2.
Then for the Seizure of R. 2. that continued but from the 22d of July unto the
19th of September following; and the form or color of Law that they had for
that, was the Statute of Edward the Third; 28 E. 3.
and the Custos put in sworn at Guildhall, and took the Oath of the Mayor, Lib.
H. 269. b. 16 R. 2.
as appears in the Book which I cited; where it is mentioned to be upon that
Statute.

But for farther Evidence,

In the Treasurer's Remembrancers Office in the Exchequer, 4 E. 3. rot. 2.
in Bago de Quo Warranto in Itinere Northampton and Bedford, Quo Warranto
versus Villam de Bedford; in that Record are these things: First, That the
Village of Bedford had not at the last preceding Eire made claim of diverse
Liberties, and thereupon in that Eire adjudged, quod omnes Libertates non
clamat' capt' fuissent in manus Domini Regis, and had not been replevied, but
Corporation not seized. Thereupon the Corporation offer a Fine of 8 Marks to
the King, pro licentia clamandi their Liberties, and admitted to fine: But then
it appeared, that the Mayor, and the Coroners had sat in Judgment, and
condemned men for Felonies committed out of the Jurisdiction; and thereupon

Consideratum est, quod predict' Libertas de Infangtheife, and Officia Major',
Ballivorum, and Coronatorum ejusdem Ville capiant' in manus Domini Regis. Sed
quia caetere Libertates and consuetud' Ville predict' absque Ministris pro
communi Utilitate Populi ibidem nequeant conservari, the Court puts Johannem de
Tound Custos, Johannem Wymound and Richardum Rounds Bailiffs, and Nicholas
Astwood and William de Knight Coroners, who are all sworn to execute those
Offices, and to answer the King the Profits. Hereby it appears, that the course
was not to forfeit or dissolve the Corporation. They never were so
unreasonable; for hereby all their Lands and Goods, and all the Debts owing by
them, or to them, would all be lost: All they did was, they put in Officers to
preserve the Corporations. So that I think there is nothing more plain, that
though the Liberties were seized, and that Officers, Custos, or Mayors, were
put upon them; yet the Corporations, or Bodies Politic, or their Liberties,
were not forfeit, or determined: If they had been either forfeited, or
determined, could the Writs of Restitution have set them up again? The old
could never be restored or set up again, but by Act of Parliament; they might
have had new Charters, and have been made new Corporations, but the old could
never have been restored, if once forfeited, as now imagined. So that the Point
betwixt us is, Whether the Records of E. 1. E. 2. and R. 2. of Forfeitures and
Seisures of Liberties, supposing the Causes or Offenses for which they were
seized were very great and provoking, as in all probability they were, do prove
that thereby the Corporations were forfeit, dissolved, or determined? It
appears they were not forfeit. You can never avoid it. If abusing the Franchise
or Liberty of being a Corporation be a Forfeiture, as you affirm, and that they
were seized for being forfeit; then the Offenses that were committed by these
Corporations in those Princes times, were Forfeitures, and consequently the
Seisures dissolved the Corporations. They could not forfeit and lose their
Corporations, and yet keep them. And that they still had their Being, is most
evident by the Records of those times, showing, that they acted, and enjoyed
their Corporations under those Seisures, only a Custos instead of a Mayor, all
other things the same. That they have in all Ages ever since been allowed to be
Corporations by Prescription, never denied or questioned. That the Acts of
Parliament immediately following, confirming their Privileges, never questioned
their having them. Never any thoughts of making void any Forfeitures by these
Acts, or any new Grants, but always pleaded by Prescription. These things
plainly show, that the Offenses committed in those times did not forfeit the
Corporation; and all that dark Authority they have out of those Records is
directly against them, proves only that these Abuses gave only Cause of Seizure
of some Offices, but no Forfeiture of the Corporation, that still continued.

Having thus answered those old Records, and shown that they are of Authority
for me against them. And since it has been stirred in this Case, whether a
Corporation, or Body Politic be surrenderable or not? And insisted upon by the
other side that it is, and from thence an Argument drawn to prove, that if
surrenderable, it is forfeitable. Whether it be surrenderable or not, perhaps is
also doubtful, that I think a man cannot argue from it any thing. First I am
sure there is no great reason why it should be; for since that men that are of
the Corporation take upon their coming to be free an Oath to preserve the
Rights, Liberties, and Privileges of it; and since the Active Members are
entrusted for all the other Members that elect and chose them, and also for
their Successors; I cannot see how a man can satisfy himself in so doing.

Rep. 11. 98.
Sr. James Baggs Case; They forfeit their Freedom by doing contrary to their
Oath and Trust.

If every Freeman by his Oath and Trust be obliged to seek the Benefit of the
Corporation, to surrender is against the Oath. The Law seems to have a care of
preserving Corporations, and therefore provides that the taking any new
Charter, though there be many Alterations in Offices and Names, yet does not
surrender the old. But were it of any other Franchise, the taking anew of the
same thing is a Surrender of the old.

Dean and Chapter of Norwich Case, Rep. 3. 73.

Jones, 266.
Fulcher and Heyward's Case seems a strong Case to prove it not surrenderable.
And though the Bishop did not in that Case join in the Surrender, that cannot
hinder; because the Bishop is no part of the Corporation, and therefore cannot
hinder them to surrender if they will.

4 H. 26. 22. b
A Vill' Incorporate, by the name of Bailiffs: The King de nova Incorporates
them by the name of Sheriffs; Are their Privileges that they before had gone?
no Dieu defend, says the Book. But this being not my question, I intend not to
debate it thoroughly, but to keep to the point of a Forfeiture of a Body
Politic or Corporation, and farther to examine the reasonableness and justice
of this Doctrine of Forfeiture, and see how adequate and just it is; for that
is the thing, I perceive desired.

1. First, Their Position is, That a Corporation or being of a Body Politic,
is a Liberty or Franchise, and if abused or misused, is forfeited, determined
and dissolved.

That I may a little understand this Position, and consider of Abuse and
Misuse, and of the extents and consequences of it. By Abuse or Misuse, every
Act that a Corporation does, that is not justifiable by Law, is, as I take it,
an Abuser or Missuser. If a Corporation receive any Money that is not due to
them, if it be by virtue of any By-Law, that is a Forfeiture, though it be but
a Groat. What if they by their Common Seal command their Servant to enter into
such Lands, or Distrein such a man's Cattle for Rent not due; Is not this a
taking upon them to oppress the King's Subjects, and to extort from them their
Lands or Moneys where not due? this is a Misuser. A Body Politic, as I have
said, is but a Person created in resemblance of a natural Person, to have a
Capacity to take, hold, and enjoy to particular ends and purposes. And hold or
enjoy is not possible, without acting; and all that Act must of necessity be
subject to Errors sometimes, in their actions as natural Persons are. And must
it be so penal to them that every Error, Misuser or Abuser, must be a
Forfeiture? Can it be reasonable or just in Law that this can be? Laws are made
for Preservation, not for Destruction; if every Abuser or Misuser forfeit, be
it a small Transgression, is it either reasonable or probable that any Law
shall punish it with destruction of the Body? The greatest Offense, be it
Treason or Rebellion, or the least illegal Act, Offense, or Misdemeanour, must
have the same measure of Punishment by this Rule, and the Law then does not
distinguish. If a natural Body, or Person, has a Market and orders his
Servants to take such Tolls, and he takes them; What would this Crime be,
besides Forfeiture of his Market? Why should a Corporation then not only in
such Case, or for any Offense or Miscarriage to the value of a Penny, forfeit
and lose, as in the Case of High Treason, his Life or Being, Lands, Goods and
all? This cannot be agreeable to any Rules or Reason of our Law; and therefore
I take it, it cannot be the Law. The next thing is the Mischiefs and
Inconveniences.

2. The Mischiefs and Inconveniences that must attend this Doctrine or Law of
Forfeiting and Surrendering, if the Law be so.

1. First, Let us consider, whether this at one stroke do not make all the
Corporations in England, of all sorts, forfeit at once, and perhaps many years
since. Is there any Corporation in England that has not Offended or
Transgressed? all manner of Corporations fall under this Rule. If they have
transgressed or done any such Act as makes a Forfeiture, (as every miscarriage,
for any thing I can see to the contrary, does,) whether the Corporation be ipso
facto dissolved by the Offense committed, or else by the Judgment, which must
relate to the Offense, to avoid all mean Acts done by the Corporation. All that
they have done since such Miscarriage they have done without right; and all
that they think they have a Title to as a Corporation, they are mistaken in,
they have none. Perhaps if a Parliament should be called, those forfeited
Corporations can lawfully send no Burgesses. I do not know whether I am
mistaken or not, I only offer this to Consideration amongst others: As, give me
leave to venture a little farther upon these Considerations of Surrenders and
Forfeitures of Corporations. Can a Bishop, Dean and Chapter, Prebendary,
Parson, etc. surrender his Corporation or Body Politic? If they can, most of
them, perhaps, are of the foundation of the Crown, and had their Lands from
thence. We have many Statutes made to restrain their Alienations: Those of
Queen Elizabeth did not extend to hinder their Alienations to the Crown; but
perhaps, out of hope of Preferment, they aliened to the Crown till the Statute
of 1 Jacobi cap. 3. took away that Power also of conveying to the Crown: Can
these forfeit the Corporations? Perhaps we are Sinners all, or at least as the
balance at some time or other may be holden, may be found too light; we are
upon a point that goes to posterity, fear, and favor; what may it do, and
what may it not do? If they may surrender a forfeit, what effects may this
have upon the whole Ecclesiastical Estate? If this had been known in the days
of King Henry the Eighth, perhaps there would have been no great need of Acts
of Parliament to make him Head of the Church, or to have dissolved the
Monasteries. Suppose that Colleges, Hospitals, and other Corporations founded
for Charity, can surrender or forfeit; the present Masters and Fellows, and the
Heirs of the Donors may truck; what effect may this have upon them? what ways
may they find out? Also Cities and Boroughs; what Divisions and Contentions
has it already produced, some for surrendering, others for defending what
Animosities are about it: The end of the Law is to preserve Peace and Quiet.
Divisions and Dissentions frequently end in the Destruction of both Parties.
The Citizens and Burgesses are, I think, three parts of four of the House of
Commons. It is considerable what Effects this may have in Parliaments, our Laws
and Posterities perhaps not a little concerned herein; and if so, surely this
is a great Case. But if only the City of London, give me leave to see what the
ill Consequences and Mischiefs will be. Arguments from Mischiefs and
Inconveniences are forcible Arguments in Law.

Inst. 1. 11. 60.
So says Littleton, and my Lord Cook upon Littleton; and men must be desperate
and sensual that despise future Mischiefs and Inconveniences, and many other
places there cited. First, all their Lands will be gone and revert to the
Donors, and their Heirs.

By Dissolutions of Corporations, all their Privileges are gone, Jones, 190.
and their Lands revert to their Donors, F. N. B. 33. k. Inst. 1. 13. b.
or Lords of whom they were holden. Secondly, All their Markets, Tolls, and
Duties that they claim by Prescription, whereby the Government, and the Honor
of the City, the Public Halls, Gates, Prisons, Bridges, and other Edifices,
are in a great measure maintained. Thirdly, All the Debts owing to the City,
and all their personal Estate by the death or dissolution of the Corporation
will be gone, but who shall have them: perhaps, non difinitur in jure.
Fourthly, all the Liberties and customary Privileges that the Freemen of the
City, their Wives, and Children claim, (viz.) to have customary shares in their
Husbands or Fathers Estates. To be exempt from Tolls. In other Towns, Ports and
Markets; to exclude Foreigners and Vnfreemen from using their Trades in London,
and many others. Fifthly, All the Acts of Parliament that give particular
Powers and Authorities to the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen, or Common Council, or
Corporation respecting either the Government or Justice of the City; as about
Ministers, and payment of their Dues, Buildings, Paving of Strats, Sewers,
Ensurance Office, and many others. Sixthly, What shall become of the Orphans,
and all the Moneys and Debts the City owes, and all the Charities in the City?
We have seen the City burnt, and may remember what a Swarm were unhived
thereby; but we never yet saw it dissolved, nor are the consequences
measurable. And though it please his Majesty upon the Dissolution of this to
grant a new Charter, yet it will be impossible any of these things can be
preserved: Their Lands, Estates, Debts, Privileges, Customs, are all personal,
and annexed to the Corporation, and must live and dye with it; the said Acts of
Parliament are all fixed to this Corporation, and so are the Charities, and
cannot, as I conceive, be ever transferred to any other to be new created. A
new Corporation can be in no succession or privity with the old.

If a Body Politic be once dissolved, though a new one be founded of the same
Name, Inst. 1. 102. b
that can have no succession to the old, nor come in privity to it: Therefore
is it that in the Deau and Chapter of Norwich Case, and in Fulcher and
Heyward's Case, the Preservation of the old Corporation is insisted on. If
every Abuser committed by a Corporation, be a Forfeiture, Determination, or
Dissolution, Is there any one in England not forfeited and dissolved? Abuse is
a word of wonderful large sense; when the Law speaks of a Franchise abused or
misused, it is applicable to a particular Franchise, as to a Market, Court, or
the like, and if that Franchise be misused or abused, in Oppression or misuse,
contrary to the ends of it, some certainty there is in it: But the Abuse of a
Corporation extends to all its Acts, and all Estates of the Corporation, and
all the Privileges of all the particular Persons, and all that are concerned in
them, are sufferers for every Abuse, or Misuse, or Mis-act, or Trespass, how
small soever. Who can tell in the Actions of a Person what may be taken to be
ill or illegally done, or an Abuse? Who will trust a Corporation, if its
Duration and Existence be so fickle and infirm, that every Abuser or Misurer
shall forfeit it? There will be no need of Officers to be amoved, thereby to
determine this Corporation at will and Pleasure, this Position contains enough
to do all. These great consequences attending this Doctrine of Forfeiture, are
Reasons to prove the Law otherwise.

Obj. But, says Mr. Attorney, (if I understand him,) we do not intend to
destroy the Corporation, though we say in our Pleading that you have forfeited
your old Corporation, that you have without any lawful Authority usurped upon
the King, and pray in our Replication, that de Liberate Privilegio and
Franchesia illa, (viz. the being a Corporation,) abindicantur and excludentur.
These are but words of form, we only will lay the King's hands gently upon it,
and seize it, but the Corporation shall not be destroyed or dissolved. Resp.
This is wonderful, and a great Compliment to the City, as I take it; let us
not flatter or deceive one another. We are not now in the irregular days in the
Records mentioned, nor in such fort of Proceedings as in those distracted
times. Let us not go by blind conjectures, out of old Records, and bring in
unknown ways. We are now in a Quo Warranto, which, as Mr. Attorney truly says,
is in the nature of a Writ of Right; and a Writ of right is the highest.
Writ that is in the Law, Rep. 9. 28. Inst. 2. 282, 495.
and the Judgment therein, and in this Quo Warranto must be conclusive to all
Parties. If given against the Defendants, it must conclude them for ever, and
dissolve their Corporation, and if given against the King, he shall never
hereafter bring it in question for any cause precedent. Cook's Entries 527. D.
has a Precedent of it, Consideratum est, quod the Defendant de and in
Libertatibus, Privilegiis and Franchesiis pred. in Informatione predict'
specificat' nullo modo se intromittat, sed ab iisdem penitus excludatur. The
like against Ferrers, and the Virginia Company, and many others may be found.
M. 21 Jac. r. 9.
The Court cannot alter the Judgment, it will be erroneous if they do. And to
talk of a Judgment of a Seizure, what is the meaning of it, or such Judgment?
Is it final or not final? The Court must give a final Judgment, that the Party,
if he think fit, may have his Writ of Error. The Court will not take any of
your old Records to go by, if any such to be found, that would warrant any
other Judgment: Therefore a Seizure, without such a Judgment that determines
the Corporation, cannot be any way brought to pass, as I believe, nor can I
understand in whom, by your Seizure, you would have the old Corporation to
subsist. Transferred from the Persons in whom it now subsists I think is
impossible, but dissolved by your Judgment it may be: And I hope your Lordship
will not be induced by singular unwarrantable Things. That a Judgment should be
given that shall neither dissolve the Corporation, nor continue it, that shall
neither be for Plaintiff nor Defendant, that shall leave the Corporation
neither alive nor dead, but in Transitu, or Limbo Patrum: A Judgment Quod
capiantur, or quod Libertates and Franchesii predict' seisiantur in manus
Domini Regis.

Was there ever any the like? What shall be understood by it? Shall we be
afterward a Corporation? Shall our Magistrate continue? Shall we have our
Lands, Markets, Tolls, Customs, or Franchises, or not? Or shall we be none, and
yet not dissolved? I must confess I am confounded in these Notions.

Next, As to the Authorities in Law for me:

1. I take it to be a great Authority for me, that there is no Precedent, or
Judgment, or Book Case, produced or found, that ever a Corporation was
forfeited. It lies upon the other side to produce it, or show it, and no doubt
they would, if there had been any, but there is none by the Authorities they
cite; you may easily perceive, any sort would not be omitted.

2. The Nature of a Corporation, as our Books do describe it, shows it not
forfeitable. I take it plain out of the Case of Sutton's Hospital, and the
other Books there cited. Rep. 10. 92. b. 21 E. 4. 72.
A Corporation aggregate is Invisible, Immortal, and rests only in Intendment
and Consideration of Law, cannot commit Treason or Felony, be Outlawed,
Excommunicate, has no Soul, cannot appear in Person, cannot do Fealty, cannot
be Imprisoned, not subject to Imbecility or Death. Br. Corp. 24. 34.
They cannot commit any actual Trespass or Disseisin, except under their common
Seal, by command precedent, or assent subsequent; when our Books say, that they
are a Body Politic, and rest or have their being in Intendment or
Consideration of Law; thereby is meant, that that they are by Law enabled to
Act to particular ends and intents, answerable to their ends and creations.
Their ends or creations are only to be subservient to the public Good, and
Government and Preservation of the City or Town Incorporate, of the Members
thereof. And if there be any Act done by the Members that are the active part
of such Corporation, to any other intent, end, or purpose: This, not the Act of
the Corporation, but of the particular Members, and they only answerable for
it. And as to particular Offenses and Miscarriages in this Case alleged, it
cannot be denied, but that the particular Members are answerable for it; and if
they, then according to all Books, they ought not to be doubly chargeable or
answerable in both Capacities. And the Case cited out of Bagg's Case, of a
Freeman convict of Perjury, and thereupon Disfranchised, does not prove that
they shall be punished in a double Capacity, for the Corporation is not thereby
punished, but preserved. The being of a Body Politic, is only a Capacity, and
in resemblance of a natural Body, and no more forfeitable than a natural Body.
It is seizing and forfeiting of Liberties that we meet with, that is such as
are generally spoken of; as Markets, Courts, Jurisdictions, and the like: And
in the old Records, by seizing the Liberties of a Corporation, is meant, the
taking from them their Officers, and putting in others upon them for a time.
But a forfeiting, dissolving, and determining the Body Politic, never was yet
done or known, nor, as reasonable to believe, ever entered into any man's
thoughts till now; for I have already shown, that Offenses and Miscarriages
that were committed by the Corporations in those troublesome Times of E. 1. E.
2. and R. 2. for which their Liberties were seized, were not Forfeitures and
Determinations of those Corporations, they all remain Corporations by
Prescription to this day: And I have also taken notice, that the Acts of
Parliament that were made in the succeeding Kings Reigns, of H. 4. H. 5. and H.
6. are only Acts of Confirmation to the Cities and Boroughs, of the Liberties
and Privileges. From that time till within these three years, I believe it
never entered into any man's thoughts that a Corporation was forfeitable; for
farther proof whereof, diverse other Statutes, and the whole series of matter is
Argument.

15 H. 6. cap. 6.
The Statute of H. 6. that provides against Abuses and Exactions made by
Societies Incorporate by their Bylaws and Ordinances, and appoints a
Forfeiture of ten Pounds, and of their power to make Bylaws. To what end
should this be, if the Corporations themselves were forfeited, or thought so to
be.

The Statute of H. 7. recites the Statute of H. 6. 19 H. 7. cap. 7.
and the Exactions and Abuses by Fellowships, by their Bylaws and Ordinances,
and Ordinances, and appoints a Penalty of forty Pounds upon a they exact Money
by an unlawful and unwarranted By-Law, not examined and signed by the
Chancellor and Chief Justice.

The Statute of the 12 H. 7. cap. 6. sets forth grievous Exactions by the
Fellowship of Merchant Adventurers, 12 H. 7. cap. 6.
by their Bylaws, and imposes a Penalty for the future.

The Statutes 22 H. 8. 4. 28 H. 8. 5. show like Exactions by Corporations upon
Apprentices by their Ordinances and Bylaws, provides Remedy, and enacts
Penalty. If in those times it had been thought or imagined that a Corporation
had been forfeitable, every of these Offenses forfeited it, what need farther
Remedy. In the Case of Hoddy and Wheehouse, of excessive Toll by the Town of
Northampton. Moor. 474. 39 Eliz.
In the Quo Warranto against a Corporation, Palmer. 77.
though the Question was concerning their taking Toll, and whether they had
forfeit their Market, or only their Toll, no thought of forfeiting their
Corporation ever mentioned.

So that I think I may conclude with the tumultuous times of E. 1. E. 2. and R.
2. what was then done, does plainly show the Corporations were not forfeit or
dissolved. That by all the Acts of Parliament, and Proceedings in almost all
the Reigns of any length or duration, from that time to this very Case, the
Opinions and Thoughts of men were otherwise; as by the Statutes and
Transactions appears, Not one Opinion, Book, or Authority produced, or to be
found.

The great Concern not only of this great City, but of all other Cities, Towns,
and Corporations Ecclesiastical and Temporal, all depend upon it. And which is
more than all, the very Government by Law Established, will be in great danger
of Alteration by it.

I have argued long, and tried your Lordships patience; the weight and length
of the Case, and rareness of the matter, there never having been the like
before in any Age, will, I hope, excuse me. But besides the whole frame and
foundation that the other side have laid, being all built upon general
undigested Notions, as I take it, viz. That Abuser and Misuser of Liberties
forfeits them, without distinguishing betwixt one thing and another. That the
words Forfeiting and Seizing Liberties, found in old Records, should be
Authorities to prove forfeiting Corporations or Beings of the Body Politic,
though no such thing then, or at any time since, till very lately, ever thought
on or imagined. It was necessary for me to open and set forth these general
notions, and to explain and distinguish; which, I hope I have done, that it may
appear what the sense of them is, how far they agree with Law and Justice, and
how far not. And if in the doing hereof, or the setting out the repugnant or
inconsistent Matters or Opinions arising in this Case to maintain this Quo
Warranto, I have expressed my self in any other manner than became me, I humbly
beg pardon for it; and that it may not reflect upon the Cause, nor prejudice it.

Upon the whole Matter,

If this Information brought against the Body Politic for Usurping to be a
Body Politic, ought to have been brought against the particular Persons.

If it be repugnant or contradictory, that a Corporation can usurp to be a
Corporation; that a Body Politic or Being can usurp to be a Body Politic or
Being, before it had a Being, or to be that same Body Politic or Being, which
it was when it did usurp.

If forfeiting a Franchise, or Liberty, or other Estate, cannot determine or
vest that Franchise or Estate in the King till the Forfeiture appear on Record.
Then the old Corporation supposed to be forfeited, if it were so, did
notwithstanding, and yet does continue in being, there being no Record to
determine it; and consequently that which is pretended a new one by Usurpation
is impossible.

If by Seizure into the King's hands (as pretended) the Continuance of the
Corporation be intended; How inconsistent is it with Law or Justice to continue
any thing in the King that is wrongfully usurped, and the Parties to be
punished, fined, and committed for usurping.

If Mr. Attorney's Replication taking issue upon our Prescription to be a
Corporation, and going over and alleging several distinct Causes of
Forfeitures, cannot by Law be maintained; and in the Example does introduce a
way to bring all men's Estates subject to Mr. Attorneys will and pleasure. For,
let any man's Right be as good as can be, it will be scarce possible to defend
it, if such Pleadings as in his Replication be allowable by Law.

Then be the matter in Law as much against us as possible; yet Mr. Attorney can
have no Judgment for him upon this Information.

Next, Supposing the Information all good in Law. Yet,

If the Judgments, Records, and Authority that have been cited by them for
Seisures, do plainly show that Seisures and Forfeitures are very different in
their Natures. That the Corporations all continued notwithstanding the
Seisures: And the Seizure was only the Kings putting in Mayors and Officers to
act in them instead of the others Elected or Constituted by the Corporation,
and they remain Corporations by Prescription to this day, and never were
forfeited, dissolved, or determined by such Seisures.

If the General Authorities in Books that the Misusing or Abusing a Franchise
be truly applicable to Franchises (that are Estates and Interests grantable or
conveyable from man to man) and never were intended of such a thing as is
rather a Capacity or Being, than a Franchise.

If there be no Case, or Precedent, or Opinion to be found for it. If of the
contrary, the particular Cases cited prove, that where the Corporations have by
Miscarriages forfeited particular Franchises, they do not forfeit their
Corporations. If there be scarce any Corporation in England, that have not at
some time or other done something they should not, or omitted to do something
they should, and thereby forfeited their Corporation, and consequently all are
Usurpers, and their Corporate Acts since done all void.

If the Corporation here has done nothing, but that the Mayor, Aldermen, and
Common Council, are only Delegates, Deputies, or Ministers of the Corporation
for particular purposes.

If Servants, Deputies, or Delegates, do that which they have no Authority to
do, they must answer for it in their own Persons; but their Masters, or those
that deputed or delegated them for another purpose, they are innocent; they
shall not suffer by it, though no Acts of Parliament had been in the Case.

If the Acts of Parliament against Seizing the Liberties of the City, for, or
by reason of any miscarriage of their Officers or Ministers, extend to these
Acts of the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council.

If so be that these Acts were the Acts of the Corporation; Yet with
Submission, if they have shown a good and legal Right by their Custom and
Title, to make Bylaws for regulating and settling the Markets and Tolls, and
that which they have done be as pleaded reasonable, and that there was
reasonable Ground at that time for their Petition which they have set forth.

If all these particulars that I have now summed up be against me, then
Judgment must be against me; though I know not what that Judgment can be.

But if any one of these particulars, thus repeated, be for me, and against Mr.
Attorney; then Mr. Attorney can have no Judgment against the City; But Judgment
must be for them. Which I humbly pray.

The next Term, viz. Trin. 35 C. 2. Chapter Just. Saunders dying the day of the
Judgment given, or the next day after, Mr. Just. Jones, Just. Raymond, and
Just. Withens, being in Court, Just. Jones pronounced the Judgment of the
Court, and Just. Raymond, and Just. Withens affirmed, that Chapter Just. Saunders
was of the same Opinion with them, and that they all agreed,

1. That a Corporation aggregate might be seized.

That the Stat. 28 E. 3. c. 10. is express, that the Franchises and Liberties
of the City, upon such Defaults, shall be taken into the King's hands.

And that Bodies Politic may offend and be pardoned, appears by the general
Article of Pardon, 12 C. 2. whereby Corporations are pardoned all Crimes and
Offenses.

And the Act for regulating Corporations, 13 C. 2. which provides that no
Corporation shall be avoided for any thing by them mis-done or omitted to be
done, shows also that their Charters may be avoided for things by them
mis-done, or omitted to be done.

2. That exacting and taking Money by the pretended By-Law, was Extortion, and
a Forfeiture of the Franchise of being a Corporation.

3. That the Petition was scandalous and libellous, and the making and
publishing it a Forfeiture.

4. That the Act of the Common Council was the Act of the Corporation.

5. That the Matter set forth in the Record did not excuse or avoid those
Forfeitures set forth in the Replication.

6. That the Information was well founded. And

Gave Judgment that the Franchise should be seized into the King's hands, but
the Entry thereof respited till the King's Pleasure was known in it. Just.
Raymond and Just. Withens declare, that they were of the same Opinions in
omnibus.

And accordingly after Entry made by Mr. Attorney,

That as to the Issue joined to be tried by the Country.

As to the claiming to have and constitute Sheriffs.

As to the having the Mayor and Aldermen to be Justices of the Peace, and to
hold Sessions, quod ipse pro Domino Rege ulterius non vult prosequi.

Judgment is entered. Ideo consideratum est quod prefat' Major and Communitas ac
Cives Civitat' Lond' as to the Issue aforesaid, betwixt our Lord the King and
them joined, and as to the Liberties and Franchises aforesaid by them claimed,
to have and elect Sheriffs, and to have their Mayor and Aldermen to be Justices
of the Peace, and hold Sessions,

Eant-inde sine die salvo jure Dom. Regis, si al', etc.

Et quoad dictas separales materias in lege unde tam pred' Att' Gen' quam pred'
Major and Communitas and Cives Civitat' pred' posuerunt se in Judicium Curiae,
the Court advise till Trinity Term, and then pro eo quod videtur Curiae hic
quod prefat' Major and Communitas ac Cives Civitat' pred' forisfecerunt Domino
Regi nunc Libertat' Privileg' and Franches. pred' ob causas in Replicacon'
prefat' Attorn' Gen' superius specificat' quod Placita prefat' Major' and
Communitat' ac Civium Civitat' pred' superius rejungendo and repellando in ea
part placitat' materiaque in iisd' content' minus sufficien' and invalid' in
lege existunt ad precludend' dict' Dom' Reg' a Forisfactura pred' aut ad Major'
and Communitat' ac Cives Civitat' pred' ad clamand' Libertat' Privileg' and
Franches. pred' sibi allocand' and adjudicand' manutenend' maturaque
deliberacione superinde prius habit'.

Considerat' est, qd' Libertat' Privileg' and Franches. pred' sore de seipsis
unum Corpus corporat' and Politic' in re facto and nomine per nomen Majoris
Communitatis and Civium Civitat' Lond' ac per idem nomen placitare and
implacitari, respondere and responderi per eosd' Majorem and Communitatem, ac
Cives Civitat' London pred' superius clamat' capiantur and seisiantur in manus
Domini Regis and quod prefat' Major and Communitas ac Cives Civitat' Lond'
pred' capiantur ad satisfaciend' dict' Dom' Reg' de Fine suo pro Usurpatione
Libertat' Privileg' and Franches. predict'.

Postscript.
THE Question concerning the Surrender of Corporations or Bodies Politic, not
being directly in the Case, but in the Arguments on both sides insisted on, it
may not be unnecessary to state that Point, and collect what has been in the
Debates or Arguments alleged on either side, that the easier View and
Judgment may be made of it.

By Surrender in this Question is by both sides meant and intended, some Deed
or Instrument in writing, whereby a Body Corporate or Politic can surrender
and dissolve it self.

It is agreed that a Body Politic may be dissolved, either by the Death of the
Persons incorporate, or their Refuser to act, nominate, or elect Officers or
Ministers, so as there remain not sufficient, authorized or enabled by their
Charter or Constitution, to preserve their Being: This is admitted to be a
Cesser, or Dissolution of the Corporation, and such a sort of yielding up, or
Surrender, is admitted possible.

But whether by any Deed or Instrument in Writing it can be done, that is the
Question intended.

For the Surrender, It has been alleged,

1. That the Being of a Body Politic is a Liberty, Privilege, and Franchise,
that had its Commencement by the King's Charter, or by Prescription, which
supposes a Charter; and if it have its beginning and Creation by Charter, which
is the Kings Deed that grants it, by Deed again it may be regranted and
surrendered.

And it is a Maxim in Law, Unumquodque dissolvi potest eod' modo quo ligatur.

And instances in Fairs, Markets, Leets, and such like Franchises, granted by
Charter, which, say they, may be surrendered by Deed, or Regrant.

2. That it is necessary that it should be dissolvable by Surrender, perhaps a
Town may come to decay, and not be able to defray the charge that the Support
and Maintenance of the Corporation may require; for every one sees that
Ornaments and Officers must be, and these cannot be bought, or maintained,
without Estates, and poor men are not able, without ruin to their Families, to
bear the Magistracies and Offices; And therefore necessary there should be a
Power in them to surrender.

3. That the Books and Cases in Law do prove, That a Corporation, or Body
Politic, may surrender itself, and thereby be dissolved.

Die. 273. There the Case is thus stated:

The Deanery of the Cathedral Church of Wells was dissolved by the Surrender of
Fitz-Williams, tempore H. 8. And the Prebend of Currey, in the same Church, was
also surrendered by Goodman, Prebendary there, 1 E. 6. And in this Year the
Dissolution of the Deanery was confirmed, and the Deanery extinct by Act of
Parliament, and a new Dean erected and created, to which new Deanery the Lands
and Possessions of the old were annexed, amongst other Possessions, and the
Nomination of the new Dean and Successors, given by that Act to the King, and
that he should have the same Power in Choro and Capitulo, as the old Dean had,
saving to all Strangers, other than the Bishop of Bath and Wells, the old Dean,
and the old Prebendary, and their Successors.

In this case it is admitted, and taken for granted, that the Deanery, and also
the Prebend were surrendered.

Die. 282. There the Archbishop of Dublin had two Chapters, viz. the Dean and
Chapter of St. Patrick, and the Dean and Chapter of Christ-Church, and both
these used to confirm the Bishops Leases. The Dean and Chapter of St. Patrick,
by Deed under their common Seal, gave and surrendered all their Church, Houses,
Lands, and Possessions, to the King, without license or consent of their
Bishop, being their Ordinary, and Patron of the most part of the Prebends.

After this Surrender their Church was used as the Common Hall, for the four
Courts in the Term there; and a Lease is made by the Archbishop, confirmed by
the Dean and Chapter of Christ-Church only, and whether the Successor of the
Archbishop were bound by this Lease, was the Question.

The Judges in Ireland were divided in Opinion, and thereupon the Case sent
over for the Opinion of the Judges here, and the Opinions and Resolutions of
five Justices, viz. Catlyn, Dyer, Saunders, Welsh, and Carus, certified to the
Lord Deputy of Ireland, under their Hands, were, quod non fuit aliud Capitulum
in esse tempore confirmationis Dimission' pred' nisi Christ-Church tantum, quia
Corporatio and Capitulum Sancti Patrick fuit per donum and sursum reddition'
Decani and Capituli pred' legitime dissolutum absque consensu Archiepiscopi.

Jones 168. The Opinion of Justice Jones there, That a Corporation may be
dissolved by an Act proper, viz. by Resignation.

On the other side, it has been answered,

1. Admitting it to be true, that to be a Body Politic, is a Liberty,
Privilege, and Franchise, created by Charter, which is the King's Deed.

Yet it does not follow that it may be surrendered by Deed.

For the Charters that incorporate the Citizens, or Inhabitants, of such a
City, Town, or Place, and make them a Body capable of taking and having Lands,
Goods, or Chattels, to sue and to be sued, and to have a Common Seal, and to
act according to the Powers, Ends, and Purposes in their Charters contained,
only give them a capacity for those Ends.

The Liberty, Privilege, and Franchise that they have goes no farther.

They cannot transfer this Privilege, or Franchise, to any other Persons.

These are only personal Franchises or Capacities, fixed in the Persons in whom
they are granted.

Like to Patents of Denization granted to Aliens, whereby a capacity is granted
to have, hold, and act, as a natural born Subject.

Grants of Enfranchising a Villain.

These are Grants that cannot be surrendered.

These are Franchises and Capacities like this.

These are Exceptions to the General Rule, Unumquodque dissolvitur eodem modo,
etc.

So also of Fairs, Markets, Courts, etc. They are created by Charter, they may
be granted over, or granted to the King; but if they be regranted to the King,
they are not extinct, but remain in the King.

Abbot of Strata Marcell's Case, Rep. 9. 25. b shows the difference thus:

When the King grants Franchises that were, in the Crown before the Grant, as
Bona Felonium, Deodands, Wreck, etc. and these come again to the Crown, they
are merged in the Crown, and the King is seized of them jure Coronae.

But when a Privilege, Liberty, Franchise or Jurisdiction, was at first erected
or ordained by the King, there, by the coming of it again to the Crown, they
are not extinct, and instanceth in Fairs, Markets, Hundreds, Leets, and similia.

They are not dissolved or gone, for thereby Subjects would be prejudiced: For
if the Court should be so granted, and thereby dissolved, the Subjects
Judgments and Suits in those Courts would all be lost.

These are other Exceptions to that general Rule, Unumquodque etc.

2. That the Reason given for the Surrenders of Corporations from the poverty
that may happen for the convenience of some Corporation is answerable; for that
does not very frequently happen: But when it does happen, if they are weary of
it, they may let it alone, and not act or choose Officers, it will cease of it
self, need not be at the charge or trouble of a Surrender.

But on the other side, the Inconveniences are very great, and are some of them
before specified.

The Establishment of the Church is all in Corporations, Bishops, Deans,
Chapters, Prebends, Parsons, Vicars; if these be surrenderable, as by the Cases
cited, without consent of Bishops; (a Prebend is, as to his being, but as a
Parson, or a Vicar.) The Universities, Colleges, Hospitals, all the Cities,
considerable Towns, Trades, and Mysteries, are Corporations; if these be
surrenderable, it affects our old Government.

3. As for the Books and Authorities. Die. 273. the Dissolution of the
Corporation thereby surrendered, is only mentioned in putting the Case, it is
not debated, nor was it material in the Case: For the Act of Parliament there
settled the new Dean and Chapter, and the Prebendary, and the matter of the
Case arises upon the Deprivation of Dean Goodman, and the appeal and reversal
of that Sentence, there is not as much as any Opinion in the Case concerning
the Dissolution or Surrender, whether good or bad.

But what may reasonably be inferred from that Case is, That the Surrender and
Dissolution thereby was not good in Law; for if it had, what needed the having
an Act of Parliament to secure against the old Dean and Prebendary; which
appears in the Case was had. And,

Co. Rep. 3. 75. b. in the Case of the Dean and Chapter of Norwich, This Case
of Dyer is cited, and there expressly said, that that Surrender was not thought
good, till confirmed by Act of Parliament.

And as for the other Case, Dyer 282. of the Surrender of the Dean and Chapter
of St. Patrick.

The Opinion of the Judges there given, is by all the Judges, 3 Car. 1. in the
Case of Heyward and Fulcher, in Jones, 168. denied to be Law, and said to be a
private resolution.

So that these two Cases in Dyer, having been by those later Authorities
denied, remain no Authorities. And as for the other Authority, viz. The opinion
of Justice Jones 168. that a Corporation may be dissolved by a proper Act, viz.
by Resignation.

That is true; taken in the sense he speaks it, it is spoken of a Dean and
Chapter resigning to the Ordinary, viz. The Dean resigning his place of Dean,
and the Prebendaries of the Chapter, resigning their Prebends to the Ordinary;
whereby their Churches and Prebends became void, and to be supplied by the
respective Patron, collating or presenting, as in Cases of Resignation, by any
Parson or Vicar to his Ordinary.

But this is nothing of a Surrender of the Body Politic to the King, and
thereby dissolving the Corporation, and destroying all supply, by new
Presentiments or Collations.

And this appears by the very words of Justice Jones there; for when he says
they may be dissolved by a proper Act, viz. by Resignation; the next words are,
or by death of the whole Corporation, and the King being Patron, it is in his
Election whether he will collate de novo, or not, and till he collates the
Corporation is in suspense; but if the Bishop be Patron, then the Bishop upon
the Resignation, has power to collate, and thereby to continue the
Corporation: So that it is very plain, that the Resignation he speaks of, is
not meant for any Surrender to the King, or any thing that determines the
Corporation, except the Patron will not collate, and thereby suffer the
Corporation to cease.

But of the contrary, that a Corporation cannot be dissolved by any Surrender.

The Suppression and Dissolution of the Abbeys, Priories, and Monasteries, by
H. 8. was no Dissolution of their Bodies Politic.

Br. Extinguishment, 75.

Br. Corporation, 78.

Davies, Rep. 1.

Moore's Rep. 282. Though their Houses and all their Possessions were gone, and
the Persons either discharged of their Orders, or sent into other Houses; yet
resolved, that the Corporations remained. And it can scarce be imagined, but in
some of those Cases it would have been practiced, or at least something said
about surrendering their Body Politic, if it had been then thought
surrenderable.

But the Cases of the Dean and Chapter of Norwich, Rep. 3. 41 Eliz. before
cited.

And the Case of Heyward and Fulcher before mentioned in 3 Car. 1.

Jones, 168.

Palm. Rep. 500, 501.

Anders. 2. 120.

Have been cited as Judgments against Surrenders by all the Judges of the
King's Bench.

The Case was, That the Dean and Chapter of Norwich, 3 Junii 1 E. 6. surrendered
to the King their Cathedral Church, and all their Manors, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, Franchises and Liberties, Spiritual and Temporal, by whatsoever
names they are known, or which they have or ought to have in the Right of their
Church.

And by the Case 41 Eliz. Co. Rep. 3. 74.

And the Opinion of all the Judges of the King's Bench.

3 Car. 1. adjudged that this was no Surrender of the Corporation.

Obj. That the words of the Surrender do not show any intent to surrender the
Corporation, but only the Possessions.

Resp. The being of a Corporation, is a Franchise or Liberty.

And there is an express Surrender of all Franchises and Liberties Spiritual
and Temporal, by what name soever known, which they have in the right of their
Church.

And this was a Spiritual Franchise, which they had in right of their Church.

Next, This Surrender was made with intent to dissolve the Corporation, and to
have a new one erected; this appears by the new Charter of Erection, made in
November following; which recites the Surrender made to that intent.

It is not any where in the many Arguments of that Case, alleged that there
wanted words in the Surrender to do it, which would have been, if that had
been the Ground of their Judgment.

In the Case cited out of Dyer 282. there the words of the Surrender were, that
they surrendered their Church, Houses, Lands, and Possessions, which are not
half so large and ample words as in this Surrender are contained; and the other
side cite that as an Authority to prove a Corporation surrendered, and admit
the words there sufficient, and deny them to be sufficient here, though much
more large, express, and general.

The arguing there in Palmer 501. that it is against the Nature and
Constitution of Corporations, that by the words put in their Charters, by their
very Constitution are to have perpetual Succession, perpetuis temporibus
duratur, and which by their Oaths they are sworn to preserve, that they should
be felo de se.

And the express words of the Judges reported in these Books, show their
Opinion, that the Corporation could not be surrendered.

Jones, 168. Dodderidge Justice, there says, that the Dean and Chapter cannot
surrender their Corporation.

Palm. 501. Whitlock Inst. there says, For that that the Dean and Chapter are
Counsel to the Bishop instituted to that purpose, they cannot dissolve
themselves, for the Politic Corporation is the Soul to the Body, that cannot
be granted or severed; though the King can create a Corporation, he cannot
dissolve it. And Jones Inst. there 502. says, That the Dean and Chapter were
Counsel to the Bishop, and cannot destroy themselves; if they could, great
Inconvenience thereby will ensue to the Church.

FINIS.

