The CASE of the Goldsmiths of the City of London, who in obedience to the
Laws, make all their Works both of Gold and Silver, up to the Standard goodness.
Humbly offered to the Consideration of both Houses of Parliament.
1. That great numbers of his Majesty's Subjects are Employed, and have their
Livelihood by making and selling the Works of Gold and Silver, whereby vast
quantities are now in use amongst us, which if honestly made of the
Standardgoodness, it may be truly accounted one great part of the Ornament and
Riches of this Kingdom.

2. That upon consideration thereof, the Goldsmiths of London have been of old,
and now are, or ought all to be of one Incorporation; and the Wardens of that
Company are entrusted by their Charter and the several Statutes of the 28 Edw.
I. cap. 20. and 37 Edw. 3. cap. 7. and 2 Hen. 6. cap. 14. and 18 Eliz. cap. 15.
to inspect, view and try all Gold and Silver Works throughout England: But by
reason of some defects in those Laws, in the Powers thereby given for Searching
and Seizing all Works made courser then the Standard thereby appointed, and the
great temptation of the Gains by Adulterating those Wares, great Evils do
ensue: (to wit)

3. That the evil-disposed Goldsmiths in and about the City of London, and
throughout this Kingdom, do presume to make great quantities of most sorts of
Silver-Works of a very base Allay, not worth 3 s. the ounce, and of Gold not
worth 3 l. the ounce, and sell the same as Standerd-Gold and Sterling-Silver;
the value of which Deceit was (at a late hearing before his Majesty in Council,
of a Complaint between the said Wardens, and the well-disposed working-
Goldsmiths of London) computed to be about 20000 l. per annum, which no Person
there did contradict.

4. That the said well-disposed Goldsmiths did then before His Majesty allege,
(as in truth it is) their condition to be very lamentable; For if they, in
obedience to the Laws, (and the Oath imposed on them by the said Wardens at
their making Free) make all their Works of the Standard-goodness, they shall
lose their Trades, and so be brought to extreme poverty, by the evil-disposed
Goldsmiths making their Works of a very base Allay, and selling cheaper, yet do
get near double the Profit the honest Goldsmiths get, in every ounce of Work:
And if the well disposed Goldsmiths, by the great necessity of their
Livelihoods, are forced to fall to Cheating and Cozening, by putting Brass or
Copper in their Gold and Silver Works, they not only go against their said
Oaths, and so disquiet their Consciences by so great a Sin, but are exposed to
reproach and shame, by follwing a Trade supported by Fraud, which the
evil-disposed Goldsmiths make no scruple at, but use all the artifices
imaginable to all in Authority, to prevent an honest Reformation.

5. Upon hearing the Premises at the Councel-Board, and the Allegations of the
said Wardens, (by their Council) that they had not power to suppress these
Deceits; his Majesty was then pleased to direct, that Endeavors be forthwith
used to obtain an Act of Parliament, for effectually suppressing the said
Frauds, which will be to the great Honor of this Kingdom, encouragement of
Trade, and a creditable Subsistence and Livelihood to several thousands of his
Majesty's Subjects, and amongst which, to the honest disposed Goldsmiths
aforesaid, who are impatient to see our Nation outdone by the French, in the
fineness of all their Gold and Silver in Works, which is always as good and
sometimes better than the English Standard aforesaid.

6. And lastly, That all Persons may be more fully convinced of the necessity
of relief in the Premises by Parliament, see a full Discovery of the several
and subtle Frauds in the Gold and Silver Works, and all the Laws now in force
for redress thereof, comprised in a late Treatise entitled, A Touchstone for
Gold and Silver Wares, the 2 d. Edition, composed by a well-disposed Goldsmith,
on purpose to procure a Reformation in the (...)


