coat of arms of City of LondonTHE CASE OF THE CITY OF LONDON.
In Reference to the DEBT to The ORPHANS, and Others.

BY the Custom of LONDON, Confirmed by diverse Acts of Parliament, The Lord
Mayor and Aldermen are Guardians of the ORPHANS of all Freemen of the said
City, and have the Care and Government of Them and their Estates.

By that Custom, the Executors of every the said Citizens are Bound, either to
find sufficient Sureties to the Chamberlain for the ORPHANS Portions; or
otherwise, To Pay the same unto the Chamberlain of London as a Deposit, to be
kept for Them until Security be found, or their respective Portions become Due.

In regard the Estates of the Citizens were mostly Personal, and liable to be
Wasted by Widows and Executors; That Custom has been very necessary, for the
Protection and Preservation of the Persons, Estates and Marriages of many
Thousands of Orphans.

The CHAMBER of London, for many Ages, had an Unquestionable Credit, and was
clear from all Debts until about the Beginning of the Troubles between England
and Scotland.

By occasion of the Troubles then arising, Debts of a great Value (Owing to the
City) became Desperate, a Necessity was put upon Them of very great Charges and
Expenses to the Then Government: And the Troubles continuing and increasing
till the Rebellion in Ireland broke out, They were constrained by the Powers to
whom They were subject, to lay out many other great Sums of Money, whereby They
then became much Indebted.

Nevertheless the Credit of the City continuing, many Executors (unwilling or
unable to find Security) besought the Court of Aldermen to take the Orphans
Money upon Interest, which ought to have been only a Deposit; Who were thereby
induced to take the same at Interest, which has amounted to the greatest part
of the Debt now Owing.

Not only this Burden of Interest for Orphans Portions was unduly brought upon
the Chamber; but the Cities Revenues, by the long continued Troubles, were
greatly Lessened; And the dreadful Fire of London happening: By the concurrence
of so many Public Miseries, They were rendered almost Desperate to Answer so
great Demands.

Yet the Court of Aldermen ceased not their continual Endeavors, to find the
best Ways and Methods (by Retrenching their Charges, and Improving their
Revenue) toward satisfying the said Debt; And did continue Paying both
Principal and Interest till after the Quo Warranto brought against the City, to
destroy their Being: Which not only put them to great Charge; but ruined their
Credit, and rendered them for ever incapable to answer those Demands, unless by
the Assistance of the Parliament.

For that Reason, The City of London have since that Time made Their
Application to every Parliament, and in the First Parliament of Their
MAJESTY'S, a Bill for that purpose was Twice Read in the House of Commons; And
the City having laid before Them their Revenue, the Particulars for the Relief
were Agreed upon in a Grand Committee of that Whole House: To which the House
Concurred, and (as we believe) the Bill had passed there, if it had not been
prevented by a Prorogation.

And the City have Endeavored, That the same Bill might be Received by this
Present House of Commons; Who did the Last Session several times Appoint a Day
for the Consideration of that Matter.

And notwithstanding the City has not Received any Money of ORPHANS (or Others)
at Interest, or by way of Deposit, since Christmas, 1683; Yet since that Time
(by getting in Debts formerly Owing to the City, Retrenching Expenses, and
Improvement of their Revenue) They have Paid to All Orphans (whose Portions in
the Chamber of London exceeded not Five and Fifty Pounds) Their Whole Debt,
Amounting to

Ten Thousand Six Hundred Seventy Three Pounds, Two Shillings and Eight Pence;
And have further Paid to the ORPHANS, and Others, for Interest, Ninety Seven
Thousand, Two Hundred and Fifty Pounds.

And this Present Court of Aldermen do humbly Insist, That they have done, and
do still use Their utmost Endeavors, to find out all Concealments of the
Cities Rights, and believe Themselves sufficiently Instructed in All the
Interests and Concerns of the City, from whence any Profit can possibly arise
to the ORPHANS; And that there can neither be justly Objected against them any
Failure of their Duties therein, or the least Wast or Misemployment of any part
of Their Incom; or that there has been any Defect in giving Reasonable
Encouragement to any Persons, who can do any further Service for the Orphans.

Printed by SAMVEL ROYCROFT, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON, 1691.


