THE CASE OF THE QUAKERS RELATING TO OATHS STATED: Wherein they are Discovered,
To oppose Prophetical, To pervert Evangelical, To falsify Ecclesiastical, and
To contradict their own Doctrine.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Brom, at the Sign of the Gun at the West End of
St. Paul's, 1696.

SECTION I. Christians of the highest rank and greatest Prosiciency, way
lawfully in some cases confirm the Truth with an Oath.
Arg. 1.
SAint Paul both knew the mind of Christ, 2 Cor. 1.23. And served God in the
spirit, in the Gospel of his Son, Romans 1.9. yet he was so far from pleading
that of the Essenns mentioned by Josephus, Bell. Jud. lib. 2. c. 7. who
professed, that [quicquid dixerint validius esse omni juramento and supervacuum
esse ipsis jurare] their word was stronger then the oath of other men, and
therefore it was superfluous for them to swear: Or that of the Scythians, who
told Alexander (as Quintus Curtius reports) that their love of veracity was so
eminent, as their affirming a thing was in stead of an Oath. Or the custom of
the Heroic Age wherein (as Homer relates) the shaking of their Scepter or
shaking by the hand, did more oblige men to speak the truth, and perform
promises, then the most sacred Oaths could oblige succeeding degenerate Ages.
So far (I say) was S. Paul from pleading such examples or his own exemption
from his performance of this office of charity, to common humane infirmity,
which in many cases requires the inter position of an oath in order to the
procuring an indubitable persuasion of the truth: as he frequently confirms
what he asserts in such like forms of sacred oaths as these, [God is my
witness,] Romans 1.9. [I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also
bearing me witness in the holy Ghost] Romans 9.1. [ I call God for a record upon
my soul, that, etc.] 2 Cor. 1.23. [The God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ
knows that I ly not] 2 Cor. 11.37. [As God is true our word toward you, was
not yea and nay,] 2. Cor. 1.18. [Before God I ly not] Gal. 1.20. [God is my
record] Phil. 1.8. [Ye are witnesses and God also] 1 These. 2.10. upon which St.
Austin, Jura^ autem ipse Apostolus in Epistolis suis, and sio ostendit quomodo
accipiendum quod dictum est. [Non Jurate omnino.] (Augustine de mend. cap. 15.)
for the Apostle himself did swear in his Epistles, and thereby demonstrate, how
that is to be understood where it is said, swear not at all. That these forms
of speech are sacred oaths, is manifest from Genesis 31.50.53. where Laban and
Jacob are said to swear in these forms of words [So God is witness betwixt me
and thee,] and [ the God of Abram, the God of Nahor, the God of their fathers
judge betwixt us] and [ Jacob swear by the fear of his father. Isaac, that is,
by God whom his father worshipped. And (to spare the labor of making more
quotations.) from the definition of an oath: which in Philo's phrase (de
legibus particularibus) and in the common notion of mankind, is nothing else
but a calling of God to witn^sse to the truth of what we say. From which, if
eminency of Holiness would excuse any man, it would have excused S. Paul, who
before the writing of those Epistles, had given greater testimony of his
sincerity, veracity, and love to truth, then any man living can (either in
truth, or with Christian modesty) lay claim to. Who can have the face to say?
That he has delivered the truth with greater demonstration of the spirit and
of power, in words which the Holy Ghost teaches: (1 Cor. 2.4.13.) That he
has, by manifestation of the truth, commended himself to every man's conscience
in the sight of God (2 Cor. 4.2.) more, then this chosen vessel did? which of
them, that tell us, we may take their word and spare their oath, dares vie with
him in the perils, pains, hardships, labors, losses, which he sustained for
the truths sake? If then S. Paul (notwithstanding Christ's prohibition, and that
he could plead more for men's taking his bare yea and nay, then any man now
living can plead) did yet frequently confirm his sayings with an oath; what
more then Essaan, then Scythi^^, then Luciferian pride, possesses those
monsters of men, who have the impudence to plead their own eminency in grace,
as that which exempts them, from calling God for a record against their soul,
when the considerableness of the thing requires it; From exhibiting to the
divine Majesty that part of incommunicable honor due to his sacred and
dreadful name. Away with that smoakie pride out of Gods house, let it not be
so much as named amongst Saints whos^ character is humility.

Arg. 2.
Without the interposition of an oath it is impossible i^ many c^s^^ that
Justice can be administered according to the rule of the Gospel. To instance in
one for all. Exodus 22.10, 11. [If a man deliver unto his neighbor an ox, or
ass, or sheep to keep, and it die, or be hurt, or driven away, no man seeing
it: then shall an oath of the Lord be between them both, that he has not put
his hand to his neighbors goods, and the owner of it shall accept thereof, and
he shall not make it good.] It is the righteous Gods will, that Justice be
administered, in this, and the like cases, now under the Gospel, as well as
formerly under the law: but in such like cases, it cannot be determined
according to the Evangelical rule, who shall bear the loss, without the
interposition of an oath. For if the man's bare word be taken for the proof of
his innocence, the controversy will be decided by one only witness: directly
against Christ's precept: Mat. 18.16. That in tho much of two or three witnesses
every word may be established. And therefore the guiltless party, in such cases
as this (where no man but himself is privy to his innocence) must in
vindication thereof, take i^ God to witness with him: that so the matter may be
decided by two witnesses at least, to wit, by him that makes oath, and by God
whom he calls to witness with him. Briefly we must either make Christ by this
prohibition [swear not] to patronize such injustice under the Gospel, as God
would not patronize under the law; or proceed to the determination of
controversies contrary to Christ's rule: or else put an end to such like strife,
by the interposure of an oath. And therefore swearing in such cases is so far
from being a sin, as it is a necessary duty, not to be neglected without
manifest injustice: to the preventing whereof, and the doing of right betwixt
man and man, nothing is more contributary then Evangelicall grace: so far is
sanctity from exempting its possessors from the discharge of those offices of
charity, which they owe to themselves and their neighbor in such cases.

Arg. 3.
That which the spirit of Christ in the old Testament-Prophets (1 Peter 1.11.)
did commend, as that which should be the practice of the choice servants of God
in the Christian Church called from amongst the Gentiles, after his rejection
of the Jews, may lawfully be done by the holiest Christian.

But the spirit of Christ in the old Testament-Prophets did command swearing by
the God of truth, as that which was to be the practice of Gods elect servants
in the Christian Church, after his rejection of the Jews and choosing the
Gentiles.

Therefore the holiest Christian may lawfully swear by the God of truth.

The major is undeniable, the Assumption I prove, from Isaiah 65.15. [And ye
shall leave your name for a curse to my chosen] that is, The people that I
shall choose from amongst the gentiles shall use your name (the name of a Jew)
in execrations, when they have a mind to denounce a curse, they shall do it in
this or the like form, [the Lord make thee like a Jew whom he has cast off and
m^de a vagabond upon earth] parallel to that, Jeremy 29.22. of them shall be
taken up a curse (that is, the form of a curse) by all the captivity of Judah;
saying, the Lord make the like Ahab and Zedekiah (two false prophets) whom the
king of Babylon roasted in the fire. [For the Lord God shall slay thee and call
his servants by another name,] that is, God will dissolve the Judaick Church
and Commonwealth, so that his people shall no longer be discriminated from the
rest of the world by the name [Jew] but by another new name that which was
given at Antioch, where the disciples were first called Christian, by which
name ever since the people of the God of Abram, have been called and
differenc't from all other people upon the face of the earth. [That he who
blesses himself in the earth, shall bless himself in the God of truth: and he
that swears in the earth shall swear by the God of truth.] The sum of this
whole Paragraph is briefly this. You Jews boast of your privileges, of my
electing you out of all Nations to be my peculiar people; and you please your
selves with these conceits, that if I cast you off, I shall have none to
worship me in the whole world, I shall break my promise made to Abraham. But
know ye that Abraham has another seed then carnal Jews; and when I cast you
off I will take the spiritual seed of Abraham (his children by faith) to be my
people; who shall be known from others by the name [Christian] by these I will
be secured, not (as I am now by you) in a corner of the world, Judaea, but in
the earth, for the uttermost parts of the earth shall be my possession, and
whosoever through the wide world, under the Christian name, shall call upon the
name of the true God, shall bless themselves in his name, and swear by him as
the God of truth, as that God, who by choosing gentile-beleevers to be his
people, keeps faith with Abraham. See Calvin, S. Jerome, i^ locum. Oecolampadii
hypomnemata, etc.

Arg. 4.
That which the spirit of Christ, that was in the prophets foretold should be
done in the time of the Gospel by the Lords people, as an evidence of their
conversion unto the Lord, may lawfully be done by Christians.

But the spirit of Christ which was in the prophets foretold that in the time
of the Gospel, the Lords people should swear by his name, as an evidence of
their conversion unto the Lord.

Therefore a Christian may lawfully swear by the Lords Name.

The major is beyond all possibility of doubt, if it be considered how it is
limited, for I do not say, that whatsoever the prophets foretold should come to
pass, may lawfully be done (for I know they foretold the treason of Judas, the
Jews rejecting of Christ, etc.) but, that whatsoever they foretold should be
done as a sign of grace, as an evidence of their conversion that do it, may be
done without sin: For sin cannot be an evidence of grace; works of darkness
cannot demonstrate him that does them to be a child of light. The truth of the
minor is clear, from Jsaiah 45.23. I have sworn by my self, the word is gone
out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not return (shall never be
repealed) that unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear. From
which Text that I may manifest the indubitable truth of each branch of my
assumption, Let it be observed.

1. That this prophecy is to receive its accomplishment in gospel times. For
God speaks here to the ends of the earth, bids them look to him and be saved,
promises salvation to the Gentiles, calls the dispersed of the nations to
come near, and swears that every knee shall bow unto him. Now the ends of the
earth the nations dispersed did not look to God, were not brought nigh till
Gospel Times, till then not the gentile world, but only the Jewish people did
bow the knee and swear to the God of Israel, to the Lord Jehovah. Before the
coming of Christ and the gentiles embracing the Gospel, they were without God,
aliens and strangers to the commonwealth of Israel, and the Covenants of
promise, afar off, etc. Ephesians. 2.11. etc.

2. That swearing to the Lord is here prophesied of, as that divine service and
homage, by the performing whereof gentile-converts were to declare their owning
of, and conversion to the true God. St. Paul quotes this very Text to prove
that all men (Gentiles as well as Jews) owe service to Christ, Romans 14.9, 10.
He is Lord of all (that is all nations are to do him homage) for it is written,
As I live (says the Lord) every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall
confess to God. It were blasphemy against the Holy Ghost to say, that the
Apostle perverts the prophets words: but he knowing the mind of the Lord in
this text, renders that word in the prophet, [every tongue shall swear,] (which
denotes an eminent act of saving confession) by a word which comprehends the
whole service of God: thereby implying that swearing by the Lord is one part of
divine worship, and so eminent a part of confession to God, as it virtually
contains all other acts of such confession; and that we confess our belief in,
and subjection to the true God, as well by swearing by his name, as by any
other act of divine worship we perform to him. Briefly, the plain sense of the
prophet, as S. Paul expounds this text, is this, That as the Gentiles, till
Christ (that light that lightens the gentiles) served dumb idols, confessing
them to be Gods, by bowing the knee, by swearing to them: so after Christ's
calling the gentiles to the Obedience of the true God, man should turn from
idols, and acknowledge the living God to be, what his names and attributes
import, infinitely knowing, just, powerful, etc. by transferring unto him those
divine honors, of bowing the knee and swearing, which before their conversion,
they conferred upon false Gods.

3. That God himself swears by himself (then which infinite wisdom cannot
devise a more obliging oath) that the Gentile-Church as well as the Jewish
synagogue should by swearing to the Lord make confession with the mouth unto
salvation, that by two immutable things he might more abundantly show unto the
heirs of the promise the immutabilitie of this his Council and
predetermination, that Christians should homage him with this kind of divine
service: and give them as full assurance as it is possible for God to give of
the acceptableness of this part of sacred worship, And if this be not
sufficient to put an end to all controversy touching this question, [whether a
Christian may lawfully take an oath,] I shall despair of ever prevailing with
such obstinate and reprobate-minded men, by the plainest demonstrations I can
lay before them: for how can I hope to convince him with the strongest
reasoning, who dare reason against Gods oath: Howbeit, That the matter to which
God here swears (to wit, that under the Gospel men shall, in token of their
conversion to the living God, swear to him) may be more plain; I shall give a
further proof thereof out of Isaiah 19.18. etc. In that day shall five Cities
in the land of Egypt speak the language of Canaan, and swear (...) the Lord of
hosts: There shall be an altar to the Lord in the midest of the land of Egypt,
and a pillar to the Lord at the border thereof. And it shall be for a sign and
for a Witness unto the Lord of hosts in the land of Egypt. For they shall cry
unto the Lord, and he shall send them a Savior. And the Lord shall be known to
Egypt, and the Egiptians shall know the Lord in that day, and shall do
sacrifice and oblation, yea, they shall Vow a Vow unto the Lord and perform it,
and he shall be entreated of them, and shall heal them. Upon which text I note.

1. That this prophecy concerns Gospell-times, Onias indeed that
mock-high-priest, alleged this prophecy to Prolomy Philometer, and applied
the accomplishment of it to that mock-temple which he built at Heliopolis, in
imitation of that at Jerusalem, Joseph. Antiq. l. 13. c. 6. and that discreet
and sober Jewish priest Josephus himself in his Jewish wars ( l. 7 c. 30.)
seems to approve of that interpretation. But how wide such Expositors were of
the mark of truth, and how unapplicable this Prophecy is to any time, but that
when Egypt was called by the preaching of the Gospel to the acknowledgement of
the true God, has abundantly been demonstrated by Eusebius in his Demonstratio
Evangelica, and the rest of the ancient Christian Apologists, upon these
reasons.

1. Onias erected an altar in Egypt out of a factious opposition to the true
high priest Simeon and the Jerusalem-Jewes of his communion, and occasioned a
schism from the Judean Church, as Josephus confesses: Bell. Jud. l. 7. c. 30.
But the effect of erecting the altar mentioned in this prophecy was the
uniting the Egyptians and Jews into one Church, verse. 23. In that day (when
this altar shall be erected to the Lord in the midest of Egypt) there shall be
an highway out of Egypt to Assyria, and the Assyrians shall come into Egypt and
the Egiptians into Assyria, and the Egiptians shall serve (the Lord) with the
Assyrians. In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt and Assyria, even a
blessing in the midst of the land: whom the Lord of h^sts shall bless, saying,
blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hand, and Israel mine
inheritance. Nunc Christo regnante totus nundus uno altari contentus est:
(Oecolampad.) now under Christ's kingdom the whole world is content with one
altar.

2. After God had chosen out Jerusalem for the place where he would be
worshipped, the Jews were prohibited by the Mosaicall law to sacrifice any where
but there; And therefore all the sacrifices that were offered upon the altar,
that Onias erected in Egypt, were an abomination to the Lord. But God promises
in this text, to have respect unto the oblations offered upon this altar,
whether by Jew or Gentile; and therefore the acceptable sacrifice and oblations
here mentioned, can be no other then that pure oblation, which after the coming
of Christ should every where be offered, when Gods name should be great amongst
the Gentiles, Mal. 1.11. Nor the altar here specified any other then that which
S. Paul mentions, Heb. 13.10. We have an altar whereof they have no right to
eat, which serve the tabernacle; that is, Chri^ts Table-throne of grace,
whereon we offer to God his Creatures of bread and wine, and in the Sacramental
use of them, celebrate the commemoration of Christ's one oblation of himself
once made for all, and our selves unto God, as a living sacrifice, together
with our contributions of charity, a sacrifice wherewith God is well-pleased.
Respondeant Judaei, lege praeceptum est ut altar non fiat, nisi in loco, quem
elegerit Deus, and hostiae tantum a sacerdotibus Levitici generis immolentur.
Ecce Esaias aperte d^cet quod Aegiptii colent Deum and hostias and mumera
offerant. St Aegiptii Sacerdotium habeant; impletur and in illis Pauli
testimonium dicentis: translato Sacerdotio, necesse est ut leg is translatio
fiat. Hieronymus in locum, Let the Jew, if he can, answer this, says S.
Jerome, In the Law there was a precept, that no altar should be set up but in
the place that God should choose; and that the beasts should be sacrificed only
by the Priests of Levies stock; But lo Esaias says plainly, that the Egyptians
shall offer sacrifices and oblations; If the Egyptians have a Priesthood, that
Testimony of S. Paul is fullfilled in them, saying If the Priesthood be
changed, there must of necessity be a change also of the Law.

3. Not the Egyptians but the Jews sacrificed on that altar which Onias
erected: but upon the altar to be erected, according to the tenure of this
prophecy in Egypt, the Egiptians were to do sacrifice and make oblation unto
the Lord.

4. During the continuance of the Mosaical law and the standing of Onias his
temple and altar in Egypt, and before the erecting of the Christian altar and
the standard of Christ in Egypt, the Egiptians cried for salvation unto their
Idols not unto the Lord, made vows to them swear by them: they spoke the
language of the heathen not of Canaah: neither had they a Savior sent unto
them, till God sent Chr^^^ to bless them. Nor did Israel, Egypt, Assyria, and
other gentiles serve God together in the communion of one Catholic Church. Nor
did God bless the Gentiles (as he promises here he would bless the Egiptians
and Assyrians) by the name of his people, till Christ took down the
partition wall, made of twain (Jew and Gentile) one body, and called them a
people that were not formerly the people of God. It is manifest out of S.
Jerome, (upon this text) who converst with the Palestine Jews, that their
Expositors applied this text to the days of the Messiah: but when our
Apologists upon that concession proved the blessed Jesus to be the Christ; some
of them applied it to the end of the world: at what time they conceive their
Messiah will come, upon the very same mistaken scripture-texts, upon which our
Millenaries ground their expectation of Christ's personal reign.

2 I note from thisprophesie: that swearing to the Lord is here commended as a
sign, witness, and argument of Egipts conversion to the Lord of hosts: And it
shall be for a sign and for a witness to the Lord in the land of Egypt, that
is, it shall be a witness that the land of Egypt is become the Lords
inheritance, that the Egiptians have dedicated themselves to the Lord: that he
is their God and they his people [It shall be for a signe] this has relation
to the whole clause afore-going: not only to the pillar erected, which is
mentiond immediately before, as if the sense were [this pillar shall be a signe]
for the altar in the midst of Egypt, the Egiptian Cities, speaking the language
of Canaan, and their swearing to the Lord, are as much signs as that: Nor does
the prophet speak in the plural number [they shall be signes] as if he meant
the two last particulars joined by a conjunction copulative, the altar and the
pillar, but in the singular [It shall be a signe] that is, the whole series of
those divine dispensations; when the Egiptian cities shall speak the holy
language, when they shall swear to the Lord, erect an altar and pillar to the
lord, this shall be a sign of Egipts submitting to Christ's scepter Ni^^l alud
vult, quam mutatum cultum idolorum and translatum in honerem Dei. Oecolam. in
locum. the meaning of all this is, that divine honor and worship which they
had given to their idols, they should alter the property thereof, and transfer
it to the true God. Is any thing more obvious then that Egypts swearing,
erecting altars and pillars to Idols, was a sign of her owning those Idol
Gods? or that Egipts speaking the language of Gods people, setting up an altar
and pillar to the Lord, her making vows and paying them, her offering
sacrifice and oblations to the Lord, were trophyes of Christ's victory over
Egypt, and signs of Egypts submission to Christ: with what show of reason then
can we except swearing to the Lord out of the catologue of those signs, seeing
that is spoken with the same breath, belongs to the same thing, and therefore
must be put in the same case, and be interpreted, (Monumentum, and professio
publica quam Egiptii, statuent ad testandam fidem and communionem suam cum Deo
and Ecclesiae ejus, Junius in locum. as well as any of the rest: A monument and
public profession which the Egiptians were to erect to testify their faith and
their communion with God and his Church.

2. Swearing to the Lord is in this Text made a branch of speaking the language
of Canaan. They shall speak the language of Canaan, (...), swearing by the name
of the Lord, as the authentic Translation of the Septuagint renders it, which
Christ and the Apostles perpetually used in all their quotations of ^he Old
Testament, as that which had been current through the world for above 200.
years before Christ's Incarnation, without contradiction of the Jews, and not
so obnoxious to adulteration afterward, as the Hebrew Copies were, who were in
the custody of the Jews alone, and in a language which none understood but
themselves; and therefore as apt to be corrupted, as the Jews (out of an odium
to Christian Religion) were apt to corrupt them: as it is manifest they have
done in most of those Texts which concern the Messiah; though this by good
providence has escaped their lime-twigg-fingers: for the Hebrew now extant
retains the participle, jurantes; So that to swear by the Lord of hosts is to
speak the language of Canaan, that pure language which God promised to restore
to all Nations at the coming of Christ; That pure and undefiled Religion which
was at first revealed man in Paradise; for before Christ all Nations but the
Jews, the inhabitants of Canaan, swear by other Gods, and to swear by the Lord
of hosts was the proper idiom of Jury, where that God was well known, I know
Jerome has a conceit that Nebuchadnezzar after his conquest of Egypt, sent a
colonie of syrians and Arabians into certain Egiptian cities, who introduc't
the use of their tongue into those Cities; But he learnt this of the Jewish
tradition-mongers (of whom he was too great an admirer, and through his
credulity received oftentimes false aims) who put this Exposition upon this
clause, on purpose to divert it from bearing witness to the truth of the
Gospel. And he must be a very great stranger to the propriety of prophetic
language, that knows not, that the language of Canaan imports in their dialect
the speaking after the mode and form of Gods people, and that therefore Egipts
foregoing her native gentile-tongue, and using the speech of that people, over
whom God had a peculiar Sovereignty, in swearing to him after their form, was a
sign of Gods conquest of the Egiptians, of his translating them from his
dominion of Satan into the Kingdom of his dear Son: so far is swearing by the
Lord of hosts, or in the name of the true God, in cases of importance, from
being a sin, as it is an evedence of the Christian worlds conversion to, and
recognition of that God.

Arg. 5.
The holiest Christian may lawfully, and laudably do that, which the spirit of
Christ that spoke by the prophets, has made the doings of in Gospell-times,
the condition of Gods accepting men for his people.

But the spirit of Christ in the Prophets has made men's learning to swear by
his name, such a condition, as upon the fulfilling thereof, he will number men
amongst his disciples, account them his people that do, and root out and
utterly destroy them that do not learn to swear by his name.

Therefore the holiest Christian may lawfully swear by Gods name.

The major is plain, for it is impossible that God should tempt men to sin by
making the committing thereof the condition of the grand and comprehensive
promise, such as this is of being his people, which includes all the benefits
and privileges of that relation. This were to allure us to fin by stronger
motives then Satan can possibly lay before us.

The minor I prove from Jeremy 12.16. And it shall come to pass, that if they
will diligently learn the ways of my people, to swear by my name (in this or
the like form) the Lord lives; as they taught my people to swear by Baal, then
shall they be built in the midst of my people; but if they will not obey, I
will utterly pluck up and destroy that nation, says the Lord.

It is beyond all possibility of rational doubt, that this Prophecy relates to
the time of the Gospel, for it is directed to the Gentiles, of whom Gods people
had learnt to swear by Baal, called by God, his evil neighbors, verse. 14. that
is, Nations bordering upon Judea, his own inheritance, his own land, whom he
blames for touching the inheritance which he had caused his people of Israel to
inherit, that is, for turning the Jews out, and taking to their own possession
the Holy Land, as did the Assyrians and their confederates in the Jewish Wars,
the Samaritans, Phoenicians, Ammonites, Edomites, etc. whom he threatens to
pluck out of their own land, as they had driven the Jews out of theirs, and to
pluck out the house of Judah from amongst them: this God performed at their
restoration from the Babilonian captivity: To these Gentile-borderers (I say)
God directs this threat, verse. 14. Thus says the Lord against all my evil
neighbors that have touched, etc. and this promise, verse. 15. And it shall
come to pass, after that I have plucked them out, I will return, and have
compassion upon them, and bring every man to his heritage, and his own land.
After the mention of which restoration of those Gentile-borderers; does
immediately follow this promise, and if they will learn the ways of my people,
to swear by my name, etc. This promise then concerns that time when God would
return to, and have compassion on the Gentiles, when he would call her beloved
that was not beloved, and them a people that was not a people, and is made to
them that had withdrawn Israel from the worship of the true God to their Idols,
in whom they had persuaded them to put confidence, by whom they had taught them
to swear, in such forms, as Baal lives, by the life of Baal, etc. and
manifestly imports this sense. If as you Gentiles have taught my people (the
Jews) to swear by your Gods, you will learn of them (when the law shall go out
of Sion into all the world, by the ministry of the Apostles) to swear by my
name, then you shall be built up amongst my people. Yea, the matter of this
promise being the ingrafting of the gentiles into the Church, the laying of
them as living-stones in Gods spiritual temple, the building of them upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets in the midst of Gods people: it could
not possibly take effect while the partition wall stood, nor have its
accomplishment till Christ by the blood of his Cross had removed the enmity,
and making peace, had reconciled both Jew and Gentile unto God, in one body.
Ephesians. 2.16.

2. A dilligent learning to swear by Gods name, is here made the condition of
Gods promise of grafting the gentiles into the stock of Abraham, of his
accounting them his spiritual seed, of his building them up amongst his
people, of his giving them a name and a place in his house: as being that which
is the way of Gods people, nay the ways of Gods people, the Old Testament-way
and the New Testament way, of their protesting what God they serve, in
contradistinction to the ways of all other people; each of which swear by the
name of that false God, whom they respectively served; and in distinction from
all other ways of confessing the true God: men may confess God in prayer, in
thanksgiving, in attendance upon the Word and Sacraments, and yet not glorify
him sufficiently, in order to Gods accepting of them as true worshippers, in
order to his reputing them living-stones, fit to be laid in the walls of his
house, the Church; except to those forementioned and all other ways of
expressing their homage, they add this, of swearing by his name, except withal
they dilligently learn to acknowledge his omnisciency, omnipotency, justice,
and divine vengeanee, by appealing to those dreadful attributes, by swearing by
his fear ul name, when they are lawfully thereunto called, where this most
solemn invocation of the divine majesty is denied him; he esteems all other
acts of invocation not serious enough to oblige him that tenders them to a
sincere confession: Men may possibly dissemble in their bare word-professions
of God and his attributes, and therefore he puts Christians here to the utmost
trial of their sincerity, by this most awful address to him: He that swears by
his Name, calls God for a witness against his soul, dares him to his face,
challenges the divine vengeance to do its worst, in case he swear falsely; and
therefore God esteems this as the highest and most august act of Divine worship
that the creature can possibly exhibit to him, and as that which eminently
contains all others, and comprehends the whole condition of the Gospel, all the
ways of Gods people confessing to him. Hence S. Austin in Psalm. 63.12.
interprets, qui jurant in eo, by qui fit Christianus, he that swears by him,
that is, (says he,) every professed Christian: Nam juramentum sumitur pro toto
cultu ut in Esai. 45.23. jurabit omnis lingua; for swearing by God implies the
whole worship of God, as in Isaiah; Every tongue shall swear to me; which is
the reason why he singles out this lesson, as that which whosoever learns
diligently, shall have the benefit of the book, be numbered with Saints, be
written amongst the living in Jerusalem, be built up as a lively stone in the
midst of Gods people; or if you will have it in David's phrase, Psa. 63.12.
Every one that swears by him, shall glory or (as the Septuagint is rendered in
our Liturgy) shall be commended as precious stones, opposed to refuse stones:
But I overdo my undertaking, in giving reasons, why God makes the learning of
this lesson, the condition of this promise: It is sufficient to justify
swearing by Gods Name, from the imputation of sin, that it has pleased him, to
make the learning thus to swear, the condition of his accepting us as sincere
disciples, of his ingrafting us into his Evangelical Church.

3. The not learning those ways of Gods Old and New Testament people, to swear
by his Name, the non-acceptance of this gracious proposal, the non-attending to
those terms, the not-observing of this condition, the not-obeying God in
observing the command here implied, of diligently attending to learn the way of
confessing to God, renders men obnoxious to the dint of this fearful doom: I
will utterly pluck up and destroy that nation, says the Lord: whatever Nation
or generation of men, (be they Familists, Anabaptists, Catharists, Quakers)
will not learn diligently to swear by the name of God, to swear the Lord
lives, and the like Christian forms, they may perhaps bolster one another up
with vain hopes, of Gods accepting them, with groundless presumptions, that
they are the people of God; but God does here reject them, and dismounts all
their proud confidences; those Babel-builders architects of confusion, may
strengthen one another hands in carrying up their castles in the air, in
planting their Sodom-vines, but when their backslidings from the common faith
are multiplied to the full sum, when their measure of apost^cie is filled up,
when God has by these his scourges debated to his measure with his Church, for
her humiliation and purgation, and has done his work, his whole work upon mount
Sion, that he intends to make them isntrumental to; he will pluck up all such
plants, pull down all such buildings, and utterly destroy all such peole. He
who will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain, will not let them
escape unpunisht, who will not learn to swear by it, in judgment,
righteousness, and truth. They shall perish who run foul upon this Scylla, as
certainly, as they who fall into that Caribdis. A truly-sanctified conscience
steers a middle course betwixt these extremes, and while it fears an oath, in
vain and profane swearing, after the guise of heathens, fears also not to learn
this way of Gods people, to swear religiously by his name. To this course we
are directed by the compass not only of those texts that I have alleged, but
of those also which are urged by the Quakers, and out of which they squeeze
objections against this prophetical doctrine, which the holy Men of God, who
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, have thus plainly delivered: which
that I may make manifest, it will be requisite that we take the measure of
those Evangelical Scriptures which are forced to speak against the Prophets.

SECTION II.
The Texts which they commonly urge, are.

S. Mat. 5.34.But I say unto you, swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it
is Gods throne, neither by Jerusalem, etc. But let your communication be yea,
yea; nay, nay; for whatsoever is more then these, comes of evil. S. James
5.12. Above all things, my brethren, swear not at all, neither by heaven, nor
earth, nor any other oath, lest ye fail into condemnation. Sol. 1.
IF I would argue ad hominem or (in Solomon's phrase) answer a fool according to
his folly: I need give no other solution of their paralogisms grounded upon
these texts then this: They deal with those texts, as the devil did with that
which he quoted to Christ, Mat. 4.6. out of Psa. 91.11. He shall give his
angels charge over thee, etc. For as he perverted that to a damnable sense by
leaving out that essential part of it, In all thy ways, So these men wrest
these portions of Scripture, by making a stop at swear not at all, and leaving
out the words following, neither by heaven, etc. which were spoken with the
same breath and are an essential part of the sentence: which entirely stands
thus: swear not at all, neither by heaven nor earth, etc. and prohibits
swearing at all, by these or any other creatures. But what makes this against
swearing by the Lord? here is nothing forbid, but what was forbid in the law,
when swearing by the Lord was not only lawful, but expressly commanded, as the
objectors confess, and is manifest from Deuteronomy. 6.13. and 10.29. yet then
swearing by them that were not God, was prohibited, and therefore charged upon
the Jews as a sin, Jerem. 5.7. how shall I pardon th^^ for this? thy children
have forgotten me, and sworn by them that are no Gods. Heaven, Earth,
Jerusalem, etc. are not God, and therefore Christ's forbidding us to swear by
them or any other creature, is consistent as well now as it was formerly with
the command of swearing by the Lord. And whereas they urge that of S. James,
nor any other oath, as if that made any kind of oath unlawful; there is
nothing more obvious to him that piously searches the mind of God in sacred
writ, then this observation: That there are many propositions laid down in
general terms, whose sentence must be limited to the matter in hand, or else
they manifestly contradict the light of nature, and other sacred Texts. As,
when Christ says, John. 10.8. All that ever came before me were theives and
robbers. If we expound that saying, without any limitation at all, we must
necessarily thence infer; that Moses and the Prophets, and John the Baptist
were thieves* for they came before Christ: But if we confine it to the subject
on which Christ discourses, viz. I am the door, the way, etc. then the sense
will be found as importing no more but this, that all who came before Christ,
pretending that they were, the door, the way, that is, the Messiah, the Christ,
or that great shepherd, etc. were theives. When St. Paul says, all things are
lawful for me, if, by all things we understand all things without exception, it
will follow, that it was lawful for him to steal, lie, murder, blaspheme, and
what not; when he says, I become all things to all men, if we expound his
words without limitation, the consequence will be, that he became a drunkard,
an Epicure, an Atheist, an Apostate, to gain such kind of men. But if we limit
those sayings to the subject upon which he treats in those places, the sense
will be such as becoms the Apostle of the holy Jesus, viz. all things that God
has not prohibited, such as I am now speaking of, are lawful for me, I am at
liberty to do them, or leave them undone, as stands most with conveniencie, so
far as either Jew, Grecian, or Barbarian, retain any true principles, I am
theirs, and urge those principles, as my own, upon them, in order to my drawing
them to embrace the gospel. So when S. James says, nor by any other oath,
this universal must be limited to the preceding words, viz. swear not by heaven
or earth, and contains a prohibition to swear by any other oath of that sort
which he had named, but not any other sort of oath as that form of oath is,
which I urge the lawfullnesse of, for it is apparent that S. James does here
epitomize the saying of Christ in S. Matt. and having mentioned swearing by
heaven or earth, he comprehends the remainder of Christ's instances, swearing by
the temple, by Jerusalem, or the hair of our head, in this abbreviation, or any
other oath, as if he had said, swear not at all, by heaven, earth, or any other
of those forms of swearing, by the creature, that Christ forbad the use of, in
his Sermon on the mount, when he published his royal law, or indeed by any form
of that kind From the bare letter therefore of these texts, nothing can be
inferred contradictory to my assertion, for they prohibit swearing by any
creature, and I maintain the lawfulness of swearing by the Lord of all
creatures: and to them that stick in the bark of the words themselves, as the
Quakers do, no other answer need be given to stop their mouths, but this.

Sol. 2.
But that I may satisfy persons of more sober minds, and speak the whole and
naked truth, ex animo, I give this as the full and adequate answer to all
fanatic reasonings from these Texts, against solemn and reverential swearing,
that Christ and S. James are so far from prohibiting the reverential use of
Gods name in solemn oaths, as they establish it, while they forbid all
irreverentiall swearing, by so much as Gods creatures, forbid to swear at all,
though it be but by the creature lightly, and in common discourse, upon this
reason, because he that swears by heaven, swears by him whose throne it is; he
that swears by earth, swears by him whose footstool it is, because, though Gods
name be not expressly mentioned in such forms of oaths, yet it is implied, and
therefore we are not to use such forms in our common speech, any more then the
name of God himself, which in the opinion of all but professed Athiests, is not
to be sworn by, but with reverence, and in extreme necessity. For the removal
of ambiguity and stating the case, before I come to prove this assertion, let
me premise these observations.

1. The Scriptures make a wide difference betwixt swearing by the true and
swearing by a false God, in point of lawfulness: but none is point of the
obligatoriness of the oath; because he that swears by a false God does conceive
him to be the true, and under that notion appeals to his heart-searching
knowledge, omnipotency, etc. and therefore the true God interprets it as an
affront offered to him, when perjury is committed, in the use of the name of an
idol: Excellent is that observation of the imitator of Solomon, Wisdom 14.28.
The worshippers of idols do lightly forswear themselves; for insomuch as their
trust is in idols which have no life: though they swear falsely, yet they look
not to be hurt: Howbeit for both causes shall they be justly punished; both
because they thought not well of God, giving heed to idols; and also unjustly
swore in deceit, despising holiness; For it is not the power of them by whom
they swear, but it is the just vengeance of sinners, that punishes always the
offense of the ungodly; understand him to speak of the Athiestical Idolater;
for as to the superstitious Pagan, he thinks that Idol he swears by to be a god
indeed; prorsus perjurus es quia per illud quod sanctum putas falsum juras:
Aust de verb. apost. Ser. 28. thou art altogether perjured, because thou
swearest falsely by that which thou think is holy. Hence, as Judicious
Grotius observes, the people of God would never swear by the Gods of the
Gentiles, but if they, with whom they made contract by oath, could not be
induced to swear otherwise, themselves would swear (as they ought) by the true
God, and take an oath from the gentile, such as could be had: which yet they
looked upon to be as good a security, in respect of its obliging the gentiles
conscience, as their swearing by the true God was, in respect of its obliging
their conscience: as we see in the covenant betwixt Laban and Jacob, where
Laban swore by the God of Chaldea, but Jacob By the fear of his father Isaac,
to put it beyond all doubt, that he swore not by that God whom Nahor, Terah,
and even Abram himself worshipped, before his call out of Chaldea; for Isaac
never feared or served other God but him, who made heaven and earth; and yet he
accounts Labans oath to oblige Laban to the performance of the covenant betwixt
them, as well as his oath did oblige himself, Genesis 31.53. Hence that saying of
Sophocles in his Hippodamia: the mind is incited by swearing diligently to
avoid two evils, to be blamed by men, and to offend the Gods: and that of
Cicero, Offic. 3. quod affirmato qu^ si Deo test promisseris, id tenendum est:
thou must keep that which thou positively promises before God as witness.
Hence perjury amongst the heathens is reckoned amongst those crying sins, which
divine vengeance never permits to escape unpunisht, and which sometimes God
visits upon the posterity of guilty parents.

2. As to the forms of swearing, whether Gods name be expressly mentioned in
them or only implied, by mentioning some of his creatures, with respect to him:
as when we call earth or heaven, etc. to bear witness to what we say. I do not
find any difference made betwixt them, either in point of lawfulness or
obligation, by the people of God, or God himself, in any age, either that
before the law, or that under the law, or this under the Gospel. So far were
the Old-Testament-Saints from thinking the use of such like forms (wherein not
God but the creature, with relation to God, was named) to be prohibited by, and
a transgression of that divine law. Deuteronomy. 6.13. Thou s^^lt fear the Lord thy
God, and serve him, and shall swear by his name; that is, only, as our Savior
expounds that text. Mat. 4.10. As the holiest of them never scrupled to use
such forms themselves, or gave the least hint of their disgusting that practice
in others. The good Shu^amite swore by the life of Elisha, 2 King. 4.30. As the
Lord lives and as thy soul lives: Elisha by the life of Elijah, 2 King. 2.2.
Hannah by the life of Elie. 1 Samuel 1.26. As thy soul lives my Lord I am the
woman. Abner by the life Saul, 1 Samuel 17.55. As thy soul lives, oh King, I
cannot tell. Abigail by the life of David, 1 Samuel 25.22. As the Lord lives,
and as thy soul lives: Uriah by the life of David, 2 Sa. 11.11. Per salutem
tuam and per salutem animae tuae non faciem hanc rem; By thy health, and by by
souls health, I will not do this thing. It were endless to give all the
Instances that offer themselves.

And if the New-Testament-Church had not been of the same persuasion, viz. that
such kinds of Oaths are not comprised in the prohibition either of Moses or
Christ, S. Paul would not have let that form fall from his pen, 1 Cor. 15.31.
(...), I protest by your rejoicing, or more properly, I swear. Ambiguitatem
Gracus sermo dissolvit; as S. Austin well observes, Sermon. 28. in verb. Apost.
The greek text removes all ambiguity, for (...) in that tongue is a note of
swearing, (...) per Jovem, (...) per Deum: you converse (says he) daily with
Grecians, and though you cannot speak nor understand greek, yet this you
understand, that a Grecian swears when you hear him say, (...); and therefore
let none of you doubt but that the Apostle swears, when you hear him say,
(...), I swear by your rejoicing: Nor would the Primitive Christians, (who
(under the Pagan persecutions,) rejoiced to suffer the most exquisite torments
that witty malice could invent, rather then be persuaded to swear by the
heathen gods, or the Genii of the Emperors,) have sworn (without the least
scruple of conscience) by the health of the Emperor; (as Tertullian in his
Apology for them against the Gentiles, cap. 32.) assures us they did. Sed and
juramus sicut non per genius Caesarum, ita per salutem eorum quae est angustior
omnibus geniis: We do not only pray for the Emperors health, but we also swear
by it, which is a far more sacred form of oath, then that which you Gentiles
use, when you swear by the Emperors Genii, and therefore we refuse to swear in
that form, because we Christians know, that they are devils whom you call
Genii; But yet we swear by the health of the Emperor, which is more worth then
all the Genii: The form of the military oath which Christian Soldiers took even
in Constantines time, is thus laid down in Vegetius: Per Majestatem Imperatoris
quae secundum Deum generi humana diligenda est and colenda; By the Majesty of
the Emperor, which according to Gods Ordinance humane kind ought to love and
reverence: If we would not therefore incurr that guilt, of condemning the
generation of the righteous, that have been in all generations, which the man
after Gods heart deprecates; we must subscribe to this, that in such forms of
swearing, though we name some creature, yer we swear not ultimately by that
creature, but by that God whose creature it is: Hence S. Austin Sermon. 28. in
verb. Apost. qui per lapidem jurat si falsum jurat perjurus est, non te audit
lapis loquentem, sed punit Deus falentem. He that swears by a stone, if he
swear falsely is perjured, the stone indeed to speak properly does not hear thee
speaking, but God hears thee forswearing, and punishes thee for thy cousenage,
as if the stone by which thou swaredst had heard thy words; and repercusts them
into the ears of God: alluding to that of Joshua, chap. 24. 27. Behold this
stone shall be a witness unto us, for it has heard all the words of the Lord
which he spoke unto us, etc. But what need I call in humane; when we have as
plain divine Testimony of this Truth as can be expressed by tongue, given in by
Christ himself, Mat. 23.21. Whosoever shall swear by the temple, swears by it,
and by him that dwells therein; and he that shall swear by heaven, swears
by the throne of God; and him that sits thereon.

3. But the Pharisees made so great a difference betwixt these forms of
swearing, in point of obliging the conscience of him that swore to a
persormance of promissory, and to speaking the truth in assertory oaths; as to
teach that swearing in any form but that which they called Corban, or that
wherein God was expressly named; did not bring him that took it into an
obligation of performance. This strange doctrine of theirs is fully stated, and
substantially confuted by our Savior, Mat. 23.16. Woe unto you blind guides,
which say, whosoever shall swear by the temple, it is nothing; but he that
shall swear by the gold of the temple, or by the gift that is on the altar, he
is a debtor, that is, obliged to pay his vows. By the gold of the temple they
did not mean that wherewith the temple was overlaid (for that was a part of the
temple, and as blind as these guides were, they could not be such stark-mad
fools, as to think swearing by a part was more binding then swearing by the
whole;) but that wherewith the temple-treasury was endowed, a part being put
for the whole; gold, for the gold, silver, and other donatives belonging to the
sacred treasury, whether they were already brought in thither, or laid up by
order of the Sanhedrin in other places (as for more safety the sacred
pole money or half-shekel, which every Israelite paid every year for his soul,
to the use of the temple, was in times of war deposited in some strong hold,
till a sufficient convoy could be procured to bring into the sacred treasury,
either whole or in parcels, as they had occasion to employ it, either in
repairing the temple, or in buying of sacrifices, Joseph. Antiq. l. 14. c. 12.)
or but so much as was devoted to the temple by vow, though not yet paid into
the collectors hands; of which we have a notable instance, Mark 7.11. But ye
say, if a man shall say to his father or mother, it is Corban, that is to say,
a gift by whatsoever thou might be profited, he is free from the duty of
relieving his indigent parents, and you suffer him no more to do ought for his
father or mother; that is, if a man's parents in their necessity shall ask the
honor of maintenance and beg relief of his son: if his son shall say, Oh
father, that which thou desire me to relieve thee with, is a gift, I have
consecrated it by vow to the sacred treasury, and am obliged to pay it thither,
and therefore cannot without sacrilegious perjury divert it to thy maintenance.
Theophrastus as he is quoted by Josephus against Appion, l. 1. makes mention of
this Oath, (...) or (...), by Corban, or the gift, as sacred amongst the Jews,
and therefore amongst other peregrine forms of swearing forbid by the laws of
the Tyrians, door-neighbors to the Jews. The Pharisees (I say) taught, that
Corban the gifts of the temple, and gifts upon the altar, were so sacred, as
whosoever did swear by them, became thereby a debtor, that is, was obliged to
performance; and this was the only form of oath wherein the name of God was
not expressed, which they esteemed binding: as to all other forms whether by the
temple or altar, by heaven or earth, or any creature, in either of them men
might bandy them at pleasure, without the least regret of conscience, or
purpose of performing them.

From this doctrine, their Proselites were drawn into an opinion that they
might call heaven and all therein, save God himself; earth and all therein save
Corban to bear witness of their sincerity in making oath, by their names, and
yet still remain as free from obligation to perform those oaths, as if they had
not swore at all, but only past their bare word: and from this opinion into a
custom of larding their common discourse wsth all such oaths, as if they had
been no more then ornaments of speech, then flowers of Rhetoric; as if
swearing by heaven had not implied swearing by him that dwells therein.
Jurejurando supplentes orationem (Philo Jud. de deca logo.) quasi non satius
esse mutilam relinquere. Sceptram non purat est Deos (as the Poet speaks of a
perjured King,) He did not think that swearing by his scepter, was swearing by
God, who put the scepter into his hand: (...) (as Apollonius in Philostratus,
l. 6. censured Socrates:) He did not think that when he swear by a cock or
goose, and such creatures, he swear by their Creator, but did purposedly choose
to swear by such things, that he might not bring himself under an obligation to
keep his oath, as he conceived he must have done, if he had sworn expressly by
God.

4. This being the state of the malady, the great Physician of souls applys
himself to the confutation of the opinion which bred and fed it, in the 23. of
S. Matthew, where he refels that Pharisaical gloss, which made void the Law of
God: and in the 5. of S. Matthew, he decries the custom of their Proselites,
grounded upon that gloss, nay indeed the general custom of the Jews in our
Saviors time; for the Pharisees being reputed the Puritans of that time, the
strictest sect amongst them, it cannot be otherwise deemed in reason, but their
doctrine, and the Disciples practice, had a general influence upon all that
would seem nicely religious, and made this disease of common swearing, by
heaven, earth, temple, or any creature, but the Corban, in a manner Epidemical;
and we find the Scribes and their Scholars, as deep in this mire as the
Pharisees; for our Savior joins them both together in preaching up this nice
distinction, betwixt swearing by the temple, or altar, and swearing by the
gifts of the temple, or gifts upon the altar; this last form of swearing they
accounted binding, but the first as nothing; to swear by the temple they said
was nothing, they taught that that was not swearing by God, and therefore did
not make him that swore, a debtor by oath, to the performance of his word. That
Epidemical practice, I say, of such customary swearing by Gods creatures
without any respect to God (as if this had been no appeal to the Creator, and
as it were a pawning of those invisible things of God, of which the meanest of
his handiworks bears the impression) which this doctrine drew after it, is that
to which Christ administers a remedy in this prohibition, wherein he forbids
swearing in our ordinary converse, by the meanest creature (and by consequence
much more by the name of God himself, though he mention not that form of
swearing, because the Jews never swear by that name but solemn oaths.) but not
a reverentiall swearing when we are lawfully thereunto called. For the evincing
the truth and sutablenesse of this, applying Christ's prohibition to common and
not solemn swearing, I shall produce arguments taken from those very passages
in both the forementioned texts, which the Quakers wrest to the favoring of
their contrary opinion.

Arg. 1.
That Christ prohibits oaths in common speech only, is manifest from the kind
of oath that that law speaks of, which Christ clears from the false gloss of
the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 5.33. out of Levit. 19.12. and Deuteronomy. 5.11. Thou
shall not forswear thy self, he shall perform unto the Lord all thy oaths: For
swearing by nonperformance of an oath, speaks the oath here mentioned not to
be assertory but promissory. Now in all Judicatures, the Jews were daily called
upon to make assertory oaths, touching matter of fact; for the decision of
controversies, but as to solemn promissory oaths (such as Moses administered
when he made all Israel avouch God for their God; such as Joshua took of the
Israelites, when he made them renounce the Gods of Canaan and Caldea, and swear
to serve and adhere to the God of Abraham; such as some religious Kings of
Judah and Ezrah made the Jews take when they swore them to the Covenant) they
were so rare and extraordinary, as the last of that bind that we read of, was
that which Nehemiah administered to them that had married strange wives, Neh.
13.25. I made them swear by God, etc. which was near 400. years before Christ's
Incarnation, and therefore there could not be at the time of Christ's preaching
any one Jew living, who had transgrest the law of God in solemn swearing to a
promise, and not performing his Oath. Yea the Jews were by the favor of the
Romans exempted from taking the military oath, because the taking of it in the
gentile form, and the keeping of it in some cases (as marching or fighting on
the sabbath day) was deemed contrary to the law of God. as Dolobella writes in
his letter to the Ephesians, Joseph. Ant. 14.17. and Josephus tells us, that
upon the like reasons, the Jews procured of Lentulus a dismission from the
wars. Religionis ergo esse immunes a militia pronunciavi, etc. Autiq. Jud. l.
14. c. 17. I have past this sentence from the tribunal, this the Jews be
exempted from the military oath upon the account of their religion. Dolobella
in his decree of discharging the Jews, pleads the example of the Roman
Generals his predecessors. The first time that the Roman Emperors forced the
military oath upon the Jews, was upon occasion of a vagrant Jew, with his
confreers, abusing the piety of Eulvia a Roman Matron: near the expiring of the
reign of Tiberius, and the government of Pilate, when the Emperor banished them
the City, and the Confulls listed 4000. of them for the wars the greatest part
of whom chose rather to suffer death then take the military oath. Joseph.
Autiq. l. 18. c. 5. Briefly, no people upon earth were more scrupulously tender
of taking solemn promissory oaths then the Jews were at that time that our
Savior gave them this prohibition, and taxed them for not performing to God
their oaths. And therefore to apply Christ's discourse here to such kind of
oaths, is as preposterous as the laying of a plaster to the toe when the head
is wounded: but the applying of it to their stipulations by oath in their
private contracts, betwixt man and man, in their common converse, and mutual
trading, was so proper and seasonable, as nothing could be more: for in this
case they were lavish of their oaths and regardlesse of performing them, beyond
all humane belief; and if our Savior had not read the riddle, and told us what
shifts they had to baffle the law, and pave their own consciences, so as they
could without straining, swallow such camel-oathes, as by beaten, by Jerusalem,
and make no bones, either of taking or keeping them; It could hardly enter into
our minds to conjecture at what door this conceit entered into theirs; that
those kind of oaths were not the oaths of God, and therefore did not bind the
votaries to pay their rows unto the Lord, but might be broken without the
guilt of perjury.

2.
The applying of Christ's prohibition to solemn Oaths, either promissory or
assertory, or to any but common discourse-Oaths, makes Christ himself a
transgressor of the law; I tremble at the thought of this consequence which as
naturally flows from the Quakers hypothesis, as light from the sun: if we
consider at what time Christ preached his sermon in the Mount, to wit, while
that sacred polity of the Jews, which God himself erected, was yet standing,
while those municipall laws under obligation, to which (as well as the
ceremonial) Christ was born, were yet in force; while Jerusalem was yet the
City of the great King, and the Jews under the government of God established by
Moses at God's command; in order to the keeping of peace, and execution of
justice, wherein God had instituted Judicatories greater and lesser, and
prescribed rules for the Judges to walk by in their administrations, amongst
which this was one; that all controversies that came before them, should be
determined by the oaths of witnesses: Had Christ therefore at this time
prohibited the taking of oaths, in this case, it would have been an obstruction
to all legal proceedings, according to that form of process instituted by his
Father: It had been the proclaiming of indemnity to thieves, murderers,
blasphemers, and all sorts of wicked and injurious persons, and a turning of
hell loose in that Kingdom of God; for by the standing and yet unrepealed laws
of that Kingdom, questions of that nature could not be brought to a
determination, nor malefactors to condign punishment without oath. It had been
a pragmatical and precocious dissolution of the whole frame of the divine
polity before the time appointed by God, and assigned by his prophets, a
turning God out of possession of his Kingdom of Judea, before he had erected
his Kingdom in the gentile world, and by consequence an unpeopling all the
visible dominion he had on earth, and leaving him destitute of subjects. For
the veil of the temple was not yet rent with the force of Christ's expiring
breath, the handwriting of Ordinances was not yet cancelled by the blood of
the cross, the law either ceremonial or municipall had not yet lost its
obliging force upon all them that were born under it (as our Savior was, till
by his death he had purchased exemption from it and dominion over it) and
therefore had Christ or any of his Disciples been called before the Judicatures
to bear witness in a case, wherein the civil law of Moses required an oath;
they would have thought themselves obliged in conscience to have given oath. If
he had been made a Judge for the dividing of the inheritance betwixt the two
contending brothers, he would in obedience to the law have taken the oaths of
witnesses, if there had been occasion for it. If he would have undertaken to
have determined the case of the woman taken in adultery, as he asked for the
accusers, Woman where are thy accusers? so he would have asked for their
witnesses, and have called the witnesses to their oaths. Briefly, as they that
expound Christ's prohibition of solemn Oaths, do by their refusing to learn to
swear by the Lord, declare themselves to be none of Gods people, none of
Christ's Disciples, but unchristen themselves, so by fastening this sense upon
our Saviors words, they un-Christ the blessed Jesus, and make him a sinner in
stead of a Savior, ranking him with those false Christ's, who under pretense of
greater purity, sought the dissolution of the civil polity, whose stories you
may see in Josephus.

3.
After this prohibition, we find S. Paul, who received his Gospel, not from
man but God, approving of, and appealing to the evidence of witnesses, in such
Courts, as he knew no evidence would be taken but by Oath, which certainly he
would not have done, if he had conceived Christ to have forbidden the use of
solemn oaths; when he pleaded his cause before Lysias, he appealed to the
testimony of the then high priest, Simon the son of his quondam mast^^
Gamaliel, and the whole Sanbedrin (Josephus in the history of his (...) life)
to bear witness, that he had been educated a Pharisee, and had been a zealous
persecuter of the Church, in going with the highpriests orders and letters at
that time that Christ appeared to him; of all which the high priest and all the
estate of the Elders can boar me witness, Act. 22.5. In his apology before
Felix, he challenges his accusers to prove the matters of fact they charged
him with, Act. 24 13. Neither can they prove the things whereof they now accuse
me; he blames them for not bringing up witnesses (the Jews of Asia who found
him in the temple) to allege if they had ought against him, and challenges
all that were then in the Court, to say, if they found any evil-doing in him,
while he stood before the Council, verse. 19.20. In his answer before Agrippa;
he appeals to the testimony of those that knew him from his youth, Act. 26.5.
who knew me from the beginning if they would testify: S. Paul knew very well,
that in a matter of life or death (as this was) no evidence would pass in
Court without oath, and therefore if he had thought solemn swearing to have
been made unlawful by this prohibition of Christ, he would rather have
undergone a thousand deaths then tempt so many to make shipwreck of their
immortal souls, by calling them to that unlawful act.

4.
None of those forms of swearing mentioned here by Christ, nor any of like
nature, would pass for current or legal before a Jewish Magistrate, but only
such forms, as wherein the Name of God was invok't expressly. The Law was so
clear, Thou shall swear by the Lord thy God, as whoever should in any Court of
Judicature render any other form of oath, that form might have been excepted
against by him against whom it was given, as insufficient, to end the
controversy depending, as void in their Judaical law, which being of divine
institution, it was not within the verge of humane power, either to dispense
with, or alter the forms of proceeding therein expressed. From this custom of the
Jews in open Court, to swear by no other name, but that of God, the maker of
heaven and earth, and (...), Appion accused the Jews of singularity, as hereby
discriminating themselves from all other Nations, who did not so strictly tie
up themselves to that form of swearing in their Judicatories, Joseph. l. 2. in
Appion. Philo Judaus in his Allegories of the Law, lib. 2. pronounces all them
accursed that say, they swear by God; but it is usual for the wisest Jewish
Scribes to run beyond their wits, in allegorizing the Law, because they do not
look to Christ the end of it; Howbeit he recovers himself, in his treatise of
the Decalogue, where speaking of solemn swearing before a Judge in a case of
controversy, he defines it, a citation of God, to bear witness in doubtful
cases and aggravates the sin of perjury in that case, from the infamy which it
casts upon his name. And in his Treatise of special laws, where he advises,
that when the necessity of the thing required an oath, men would not presently
have recourse to God himself, but use some other form, and rather call in some
of Gods creatures to be a witness, does give sufficient hints, that he speaks
there of elective oaths only, which men use in private, and not such as men
are called to take in the course of law; and therefore puts in this proviso,
Salvis legibus, when the law allows thee another form, that is, in thy ordinary
communication, manifestly implying, that no form was good in law, but that
wherein God himself was named for a witness. And indeed both Judge and
litigants must have been out of their wits, if they had laid the decision of
controversy upon such oaths as were prae-declared to be of no validity, as
these forms were which Christ prohibits. Briefly, the Jews were accoustomed in
their mutual converse only, and not solemnly before the magistrate, to swear
by the heaven and earth, Therefore this prohibition of Christ reaches only
elective, and not solemn and necessary oaths.

5.
The reason which Christ annexeth to his prohibition, and prefixeth to his
command, that our word should be yea and nay, is an evidence that Christ here
speaks of common discourse, swear not by heaven, for it is Gods throne, etc. As
if he should have said, the reason why such like oaths, are so common in your
mouths, is this conceit, that you swear not by God in the use of such forms,
and therefore are not obliged by them any more then by your bare word. But I
tell you that heaven is Gods throne, and therefore he that swears by that,
swears by him that sits thereon, etc. nay, your head and every hair that
grows thereon is Gods creature, and he that swears by that, appeals to its
maker: you cite God to bear witness every time you use such oaths, and God is
not lightly, and upon every slight occasion in men's common speech, to be
summoned in to bear witness, as the Pharisees themselves confess, in their
avoiding such oaths in their ordinary communication, as they think are appeals
unto God. And therefore now you have learnd that in swearing by the creature,
men swear also by the Creator; as you would not be found guilty of taking his
name in vain, disuse your tongues in your common talk from such forms, and let
your ordinary word be yea or nay.

6.
The motive that S. James urges, argues that it is commos swearing that he
prohibits, lest ye fall into condemnation, (...), or according to other Copies,
lest ye fall into hypocrisy, (...). If we follow the first reading, the
emphasis will lie in the verb (...) from (...), whence comes our English (with
a little variation, to trip or unawares stumble; lest unexpectedly ye fall flat
into the guilt of perjury, and while you dream not of it, become obnoxious to
that damnatfon, which is the wages of taking Gods Name in vain: For while you
fancy, that so long as you use not Gods Name, but only swear by heaven and
earth, it is nothing, (when in very deed he that swears by heaven, swears also
by him that dwells therein) you precipitate your selves hoodwinkt into the
abyss of perjury, every time you call any of Gods creatures to witness to a
falsity, and he that upon such grounds as the Scribes and Pharisees have laid,
inures himself to common swearing, cannot be in extreme peril of setting Gods
seal unwittingly to many an untruth; If we follow the other reading, lest ye
fall into hypocrisy, which with Grotius, H. Stephen, and others, I rather
incline to; (It Is more likely that an hasty Scribe might overslip [(...)] and
he that should read the Copy after him divide (...), to make it sense, into
(...), then that any should have the boldness to insert it.) It will bear more
resemblance to Christ's Discourse about the Pharisaical mode of swearing, for
which he calls them hypocrites, and for teaching, that men might use such forms
without laying thereby the least obligation upon themselves to perform their
promises. Now as this doctrine betrayed their Proselites to a customary use of
oaths, so by that custom they contracted an habit of lying, even then when
they seemed to be most serious, and to give their words the greatest
confirmation: So that in effect their whole communication was a constant trade
of hypocrisy and dissimulation. And while they pretended one thing (to give
assurance by oath that they would fulfill their promise) and yet intended
another (to lay no obligation upon themselves) by that kind of oath, what was
this but to play the knave under the vizor of an honest man?

7.
No less plain Testimony to this truth, does S. James his pref^ce to this
prohibition administer, But above all things my brethren swear not, (...), etc.
(...) is no where else in all the Scripture rendered [above] but [before] and it
should be so rendered here: For the Apostle does not by this phrase denote the
priority of dignity of this caution (as if he would have us esteem more highly
of this precept then of all the rest; for he commands several things of equal;
if not more importance, and which it concerns us as much to observe whether we
weigh the considerablenesse of the duties, or the pronenesse of men to be
negligent in the observance of them.) Quid est ante omnia nolite jurare? jurare
enim pejus est quam furari? quam adul^^ari? non dico falsum jurare: Jurare
dico; Jurare pejus est quam hominem occidere? absit, hominem occidere furari
adulterari peceatum est, jurare non est peccatum, August. Sermon. 28. de verb.
Apostoli, c. 8. what means this, abovc all things swear not? Is swearing
(forsooth) worse then adultery? I say not, is false-swearing? but Is swearing?
Is swearing I say worse then manslaughter? God forbid! what means then this,
above or before all things? isto verbo cautus nos facit advers^^ linguam
nostram, si de manu aliquid faceres, facilius manni tui imperares ne faceret;
lingua facilitatem habet motus, in udo posita est, facik in lubrico labitur, as
S. Austin resolves in the same Sermon: By this caution the Apostle would have
us set a watch upon our tongue; If thou were bid to withold thy hand, thou
might more easily command that; the tongue is nimble and quick in motion, it
is placed in a watery Element, it stands on a slippery place, and easily
lapseth; But yet it is as apt to lie, slander and calumniate, as to swear: This
form of speech therefore does most properly import priority of place and time
in our communication, which the Apostle would not have us assign to swearing;
as if he had said, Now that I am persuading you to patience by the example of
the Husbandman, of the Prophets, of Job. etc. verse. 7, 8, 9, etc. Let me give
you this caution, that you would take heed of humouring the impatience of your
spirit by permitting it to hurry you forthwith to swearing upon every
provocation, though it be but by such petty Oaths, as the Pharisees have taught
you; Let not an Oath lie uppermost upon your heart, and come first of all
before all things out of your mouth; Try all other ways of satisfying those
with whom you converse, of the truth of your speeches, before you attest it by
Oath: quantam ad me pertinet juro, sed quantum mihi videtur magna necessitate
compulsus; Cum videro non mihi credi nisi faciam, and (...) qui mihi non credit
non expedire quod non credit, etc. As for my own part I sometimes swear, (but
so far as I am able to judge) not but when I am compelled with the greatest
necessity, when I see that I cannot be believed except I swear, and that it
stands not with my neighbors good, that he does not believe me, Id ibid. An
oath is the greatest bond of fidelity amongst men, and therefore we should have
recourse to it as our sacred anchor, when nothing else will establish men in
the truth of what we say; That faith which we make by oath is the most perfect
that can be given, says Halicarnassensis. The most firm, and therefore should
be the last pawn of our veracity, says Procopius Persicorum, l. 2. But does it
follow, that because we must not swear at all, not by any kind of oath, first
of all, or before all other ways of procuring credit to our words, that
therefore we may at the last extremity have recourse to a solemn Oath.

8.
The argument that our Savior urges to persuade us, that we swear not at all,
but let our communication be yea, yea; nay, nay; evinceth Christ to intend in
this prohibition, common, but not solemn swearing. For whatsoever is more then
these comes of evil, or, the evil one, that is, of the devil. For except we
understand Christ to speak here of such voluntary asseverations as men make in
their ordinary discourse, and not of such as either the weight of the case, or
the necessity of justice call for; we must be constrained impiously to assert,
that in all those passages prae-alledged in S. Paul, where he called God to
witness, came from an evil spirit; that our blessed Savior so often as he
said, amen, amen, which is more then yea, yea; had those words put into his
mouth by the evil one; that the elect Angel which Christ sent from heaven to
communicate the knowledge of future things to S. John, was inspired by the
devil, when we swear by him that lives for ever. Is it a hard matter now to
choose, whether we should think, that the chosen vessel, the elect Angel, yea,
the Archangell of the Covenant, were led by an evil spirit, to say more then
yea, yea; nay, nay; Or that those men are led by a spirit of error, and under
Judicial blindness, that cannot see, that the words of Christ must
necessarily be referred to voluntary rash oaths, in our common discourse, upon
slieght occasion, without reverence of the divine Majesty, or intention to
ratify some tr^th or promise of weight? But that which will give a clearer
light to this text, and be a more full demonstration of the truth that I am
contending for, is this observation.

That Christ affirms whatsoever is more then these, in the case wherein he
prohibits the use of more to be intrinsecally, and of its (...) nature, of an
evil original. For he does not ground this position [whatsoever is more, is
of evill] upon either his prohibition or command; As if his meaning were, that
it is therefore evil because he has now forbid the use of more; but on the
contrary, he grounds both his prohibition [Swear not] and his injunction [ let
your communication, etc.] upon this argument, because whatsoever is more then
these, is of evil; and presses the intrinsecal evil, that is naturally, in
that which he prohibits, (antecedently to his forbidding of it,) as the reason
of his prohibition. He does not say, I have now forbid you to swear, or to use
any more then yea and nay, and therefore the use of more is evil; But, the use
of more in the case that I speak of, is evil, and therefore I probibit it:
whence it unavoidably follows, that in all cases wherein Christ here forbids
swearing, it was ever a sin to swear* a sin in the Patriarchs, and
Old Testament Saints, before this prohibition, as well as it is in us
Christians since; that is, rashly, profanely, irreverently, in our ordinary
communication: and that Christ has not made that kind of reverent swearing a
sin to Christians, that was the duty and commendation of his ancient people.

1. It is manifest, that all rash swearing, whether in Jew or Christian,
proceeds from the evil heart of him that inures himself to it; from that
pride, athiesm, and hypocrisy that lodges in the breast, does the mouth utter
all vain, fruitless, and precipitate oaths and asseverations; and therefore,
he that fears God, will abstain from all customary oaths, not only for fear of
the event ( ne jurando ad f^cilitatem jurandi veniatur ex facilitate ad
consuetudinem ex consuetudine in perjurium decidatur, S. Austin de mend. c. 15.
lest by swearing we contract a facility to swear, and fall from a facility to a
custom; and from custom into perjury,) but in regard to that evil fountain,
(the profaneness of the swearers hearts) whence all such slink calves of the
lips are cast. In a word, the Russian disgorgeth oaths from the same Principle,
that the Fanatic powers out extempore prayers, neither of them consider, that
they are before God, while they invoke his name, and therefore they are so
ready to offer the sacrifice of fools. As there are certain forms of words, at
the using whereof, evil spirits, (by virtue of diabolical institution)
present themselves, so all forms of invoking God, either by Oath or prayer,
exhibit the divine presence to us, of which presence, if they had regard, the
one would not think it nothing to swear, nor the other to pray unadvisedly;
neither of them would be so hasty with the^r mouths, so hasty to utter,
quicquid in buccam, if they did consider they were before God. My ranking them
together will displease them both, but let them wreak their spleen upon
Solomon, who has coupled them as brethren in iniquity, as alike guilty of
Athiestical profaneness, and has prescribed the same method of cure for them
both, if they have wit or grace to apply themselves to ire observation of his
rules. Eccles. 5.1.

2. And it is as manifest from the In tances of Christ and Saint Paul, that
more then these sometimes, and in some cases, proceeds from good, from a divine
principle, from an honest and gracious heart, to wit, when strong asseverations
even by oath are used.

1. Reverentially, as a solemn invocation of Gods name, as the celebration of
the highest and most august act of divine worship and adoration that can
possibly be tendered to the divine majesty.

2. Deliberately, with due consideration and preponderation of the weight of
the thing, the importance of our Neighbors bekeving it, the probability that
he will be prevailed to believe us, upon the interposition and assurance of the
oath, etc. Et ideo non insetitur jurasse nisi scribens ubi consideratio cautior
non habet linguam pacipitem. We do not find, (says S. Austin de mend. c. 15.)
that S. Paul did swear, but when he was writing, because the pen is not so
great a blabb as the tongue: men are more circumspect of the words that fall
from their quill then of them that drop from their lips.

3. Sincerely, with a purpose to lay as great an Obligation upon thyself to
keep thy promise, and swear truly, as thy making oath imports to thy neighbor,
when thy mind and words are both of a color, and the impressions of thy soul
correspond with the expressions of thy mouth; when thy conscience can tell thee
that thou speak before God in thy heart what thou utterest to thy neighbor
a words.

All these conditions concurred in our Saviors and S. Paul's asseverations, and
therefore though they were more then these, yet they proceeded not of evil,
but from a good and honest heart, and were all wanting in those Pharisaicall
oaths which our Savior condemns, wherein they had neither reverentiall
thoughts of God (for they conceited they did by those forms swear by God) nor
weighed the matter and ponderated circumstances, but upon every slieght, upon
no occasion bolted out fruitless oaths: nor did they intend to bind themselves
to a performance of their word, for they accounted themselves as sree after
such oaths as if thoy had never made them. Such kind of additions to our yea
and day, are of themselves evil, and therefore forbidden; But the ground and
reason of Christ's prohibition does not reach the other sort of additions.

9.
That I may make the two Testaments kiss one another at partting, and bring
the ends of my discourse together, Let it be considered from the prophesies
before-quoted, That to interpret those Evangelical texts as prohibitions to
Christians to swear in any case, draws after it these blasphemous consequences.

1. That Christ who came to accomplish and seal prophesies, to fulfill what
was spoken by the mouth of the prophets, which have been since the world began,
did contradict by his precepts and prohibit the accomplishment of those
prophesies, that foretold, that under the Gospel, when Gods name should be
great in all the earth, his elect and chosen servants should swear by the God
of truth, as an evidence of their conversion to him from idols.

2. That S. James was by the Holy Ghost (which Christ promised should lead his
Apostles into all truth) to forbid that, ( viz. to learn to swear after the way
of Gods people the Lord lives) under pain of falling into condemnation, or at
least into hypocrisy; which the Spirit of Christ in the holy Prophets persuades
Christians to do, under pain of utter destruction, in case of neglect, and by
the promise of being built up in the midsts of Gods people, in case they would
dilligently, learn to swear by his name: which the same spirit commends to
Christians as a sign of their sincere and cordial acceptance of the true God
for their God.

3. That if the Christian Church does not perform homage to the God of truth by
swearing as well as blessing in his name; If their tongue does not as well
swear as their knees bow to him, then the Christian people are not the people
of the Messiah, the Messiah is not yet come, but still to be expected; then the
blessed Jesus is not that Christ of whom the prophets speak, but as the Jews at
his arraignment, and their posterity blasphemously style him, a deceiver, and a
counterfeit; For by the prophets it was foretold, that at his exhibition and
vocation of the gentiles to the knowledge of the true God, the gentiles called
by his name should swear by the God of truth throughout the carth, etc. Yield
but this much to a Jew or Pagan that the Christian law forbids worshipping of
God, by swearing by his name, forbids any other confirmation of what we affirm
but yea yea, nay nay; and you do not only deprive the Christian Cause and
Church of one of her strongest bulwarks, of one of those demonstrations of the
spirit ( the spirit of prophesy in the holy men of old, whereby the Champions
of the Christian faith have inrefragably proved against all assailants, that
Jesus is the prophets Christ, viz. because since his calling of us gentiles by
his gospel, we have worshipped the true God by swearing by his name; but also
administer to Infidells an unanswerable argument for them to prove, that that
Jesus whom we Christians worship for the Christ, is not indeed the very Christ,
viz. because he has forbid that worship to be exhibited, which the prophets
foretold men should learn to tender the God of truth, at the coming of that
Christ, whom they speak of. It is not possible to imagine any thing more
unlike, or opposite to one another, then that Christ and his disciples, which
the prophets describe, are, to what this gloss of the Quakers presents Jesus
Christ and his disciples to be. In the reign of the Prophets Christ, Gods
chosen ones of the Gentiles are to do him homage, to acknowledge their
subjection to him, dependence on him, awe of him, and his dreadful attributes,
by swearing by his name; But in the reign of the Quakers Christ, the world
indeed may take its own course, but they whom God has called and chosen out of
the world, are not to swear at all. The people of the Prophets Christ, at what
time he should publish his royal law, and men should be taught of God, were to
learn to swear, the Lord ^^veth, and to be made to ply this lesson with a
promise to be built up, of they learned it diligently, with a threat, to be
plucked up, if they did not, But the people of the Quakers Christ, are taught
of God, that they must not learn this lesson, and are terrified from their book
with demouns against it, as evil, as leading to destruction, etc. For the
opposition is so palpable, as I need not illustrate it with more Instances. It
can now therefore be a matter of no great difficulty to determine, whether
exposition and practice, grounded upon these expostions, is more justifiable.
That of the Christian Church in all ages which so expounds Christ's words, as
not prohibiting her to give to God the honor that is due to him, by a
reverentiall invocating of his great name, in sacred and solemn oaths, to the
end that the sayings of the prophets may be fulfilled, and our Jesus
demonstrated to be the Christ; or that of the Quakers whose gloss defrauds God
of his due homage, robs the King of Saints of one of the prime Jewels of his
crown, presents the ever-blessed Jesus in the form of an Impostor and false
Christ, leads directly to the gulf of grossest infidelity and denial of Christ;
and sets the Old and New-Testaments, the Prophets and Evangelists at greater
odds, then the Manichaeans did; making the Gospel to contradict those holy
Prophets, to whose testimony our Savior constantly appe al'd, for the decision
of that great question, whether he was that Christ that was to come? putting it
to this issue, that he would forego the claim, and give them leave to call him
deceiver, if he did not exactly answer that model, which the Prophets had drawn
of him that was to come; if they could discern one line in the whole body of
his person, of his doctrine, of his followers, disproportionable to those
features with which the pensil of the Prophets had painted the Messiah, John
5.39, 46. and John 10.37. and Mat. 11. 4. All that our Savior did, all he
suffered, all he taught, was by rule of prophecy, doing, suffering, teaching
no other things then what the Prophets said he should, Act. 26, 22. and
therefore that must needs be an unclean beast that does not divide the hoof,
that is, that interpretation of any Evangelical Text, is bancful to the soul
that is not supported by the Prophetical as well as Apostolical Writings; much
more that which goes and pusheth at the Prophets, with so manifest a
contradiction as that does, which interprets Christ to forbid his Disciples to
do, what the prophets say, he should teach his Disciples to learn, to wit, to
swear the Lord lives, to speak the language of Canaan in swearing to him, to
confess unto him by swearing by his Name; The performance of which homage to
the divine Majesty, that it might be more august, reverential, obligatory to
the Votaries, and satisfactory to all in point of an indubitable determination
of controversy; It is and always was the will of God, that Oaths should be
reserved and sequestered to the service of God, and the public weal of
mankind, and not squandred away in our ordinary converse; which will of the
holy God, when the Scriber and Pharisees had made void by their Traditional
glosses, our Savior vindicates, and restores to its primitive luster, by
wiping of that dust, and renewing this prohibition, Swear not at all, (that is,
in your common talk) not so much as by heaven or earth, or an hair of your
head, but let your common word be yea yea, nay nay.

SECTION III.
WHen I had blown off the dust of false glosses from those sacred Texts, which
the Quakers pervert to the condemnation of the universal practice of the Church
of Christ, I hoped I had done enough to the Vindieation of this part of divine
worship, and to the undeceiving of that deluded party; But their stating the
case; relating to Oaths and swearing, and presenting it to the serious
consideration of the King and both Houses of Parliament, speaks them ambitious
to be thought to have better company in their way of expounding Christ and
Saint James, then I am sure ever set soot in it, or cast an eye toward it
(except it was asquint) even Primitive Christians, Martyrs, and Fathers, who
were (as they say) of the same mind and judgment with them. It will be
requisite therefore that I demonstrate the impertinency of those Examples which
they allege, and the want of either ingenuity or honesty that they bewray in
making of them.

Example 1.
Policarp being demanded to swear by the Emperors good fortune or Caesar's
prosperity, denied, saying, he was a Christian, and so was committed to the
flames because he would not swear, etc.

Answer.
It is a bad omen when men stumble on the threshold, as they do here in this
first Example, in their alleging whereof they commit more palpable errors
then there are sentences.

1. Whereas they interpret [good fortune] by prosperity, as if the Preconful
had required no more of him but to swear by Caesar's prosperity: Eusebius in the
place quoted, has [(...)] which his Translator renders, Jura per Caesaris
genium, swear by the genius, the good demon, or good fortune of Caesar; which
form of oath Policarp and the whole Army of Martyrs refused to take, because
that which the Gentiles styled genii, the Christians knew to be devils, which
were worshipped under the names of good Angels; as has been already observed
out of Tertullian, and every schoolboy construe that verse, Te facimus fortuna
deane coeloque locamus; we make thee a Goddess of fortune (which is the
english of (...)) and place thee in heaven, a doughty argument: Policarp would
not swear by an heathenish goddess, or their Gods, who were devils, and
therefore Christians must not swear by the true God, when the quite contrary
follows: For God would not grudge idols that honor, if it were not his own
peculiar.

2. Their comparing the oath which the Preconsul tendered to Policarp, to that
form of oath which is in use in this kingdom, as they manifestly do, in that
parenthesis [which was then their national oath] asperseth the King and both
Houses of Parliament with the crime of heathenish idolatry.

3. Their expounding the Preconsul his speech [take thine oath and I will
discharge thee] defy Christ, who said, swear not, as if Policarp had refused
to swear upon the account of Christ's prohibitition, and not upon the account of
the impiety of the form of the oath it self; or as if to swear at all, though
by the true God, had been to defy Christ; or as if swearing and refusing to
swear at all, had then been the mark of distinction betwixt heathens and
Christians: when indeed the true criterion was this, that the gentiles would
have had the martyrs swear by the idols, but the martyrs would not swear but by
the God of truth: these I say are most manifest perversions of the texts both
of Eusebius and M. Fox.

Example 2.
Pontius and Blondina refused to swear, being often urged, Eusebius. l. 5. cap. 10.

Answer.
It should be cap. 1. where Eusebius reports their Martyrdom, and gives rhis
reason why they would not swear, Vrgebanturque per ge^tilium idola jurare, they
were urged to swear by the Idols of the Gentiles.

Example 3.
Basilides a Soldier, being required to give an oath in a matter concerning
his fellow soldiers, denied to do it, plainly affirming he was a Christian,
Eusebius. l. 6. cap. 5. for I must make bold to set down the book which they have
omitted, Fox vol. 1. fol. 71.

Answer.
Eusebius his words are, (...), cum a tem militonibus suis Sacramento
adigerctur; being urged by his fellow soldiers to take the Military oath,
which was wont then to be by the Idols and the Emperors, says M. Fox in the
place quoted. I do not remember that ever I met with so many authorities
together so wickedly falsified, as these are.

Example 4.
In the Plowmans Complaint is this, viz. Lord, thou give us a commandment of
truth, in bidding us say, yea yea, nay nay, and swear for nothing; but Lord,
etc.

Answer.
This I confess comes home to the point, if the allegation be faithful, but if
this Plowman be Chaucers Jack-Vpland, (as by his style he seems to be) I never
read that he was Canonized a Martyr, or dubbed a Father of the Church, though he
be the dad of English Poets; nor do I think his Romance will pass amongst
rational men for good authority.

Example 5.
John Wicliff was condemned for holding forth, that all Oaths which be made for
any contract or bargain betwixt man and man, were unlawful, Fox vol. 1. fol.
587.

Answer.
This was indeed the 41. Article charged against him; but what is this to
solemn swearing when we are lawfully called to it?

Example 6.
William Swinderley, the 14. Article against him was, that he should say, that
no man ought to swear for any thing, but simply without an oath to affirm or
deny. Fox vol. 1. fol. 614.

Answer.
The Answer which (in the place quoted) he returned to that charge, shall be
mine; Often (says he) have I said, and yet will, that men should not swear by
any creature, and that no man should swear in idle, as well nigh all people
uses.

Example 7.
These general received doctrines by the poor Christians in this nasion was,
that neither Pope, nor Prelate, nor Ordinary, can compel any to swear by any
creature of God, or by the bible-book. Fox. vol 1. fol: 687.

Answer.
Both poor and rich Christians of the Church of England, do retain the same
doctrine at this day, and when either Pope, Prelate, or Ordinary, impose any
other form of oath upon you but what is established by law, and wherein you are
urged to swear, not by any creature, but by God, Creator, and Redeemer, you may
complain and be relieved.

Example 8.
William Thorpe, when Tho. Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury bid him lay his
hand upon the book that he might swear thereby, replied, Sir, A book is nothing
else but a thing coupled together of many creatures, and to swear by any
creature, both Gods Law and man's is against it. One Article against him was,
that he preached in S. Chads Church in Shrewsbury, that it is not lawful to
swear in any case. Fox. vol. 1. fol. 689.690.692.701.

Answer.
It was ingeniously answered, and pat to the Archbishops urging him to swear
(not as the law ordains upon) but by the book. But yet withal, that holy Martyr
in the place quoted has these words. [Sir, this thing I say here, before these
your Clerks, that how, where, when, and to whom men are bound to swear, I will,
through Gods grace, be ever ready thereto.] And as to the Article, he denied
that ever he Preached any such doctrine, either at Shrewsbury, or any where
else, but only, that by S. James his authority, it is not lawful to swear by
any creature; nor in any case, where the taking of an oath could be excused to
them, that have power to impose an oath. In which point I cordially concur
with him.

Example 9.
Elizabeth Young, Anno. 1558. refused to swear, and persisted in that refusal,
etc. Fox. vol. 3. f. 910.

Answer.
One of the oaths that was tendered her, was, what books she had sold, this she
refused to take, because she would not betray her Christian friends; and the
other oath they would have had her make was, whether she was a man or woman?
this she refused, because that might be determined without an oath, to wit, by
being searched by women, and therefore she offered her self to be searched,
denying to give them any other satisfaction but that, and her bare ashrining
her self to be a woman, because what was more then that, in that case, was of
evil. Fox in the place quoted.

Example 10.
The Waldenses professed it to be no way lawful for a Christian to swear,
whose defense Bishop Usher undertakes, De success. cap. 6.

Example 11.
One Article urged against the Protestants of Piedmont, Anno 1655. was, that
they believed, it was not lawful to swear any thing. Morland, hist. pa. 217.

Answer.
I join these, because they of Piedmont are the Relicts of the old Waldenses,
against whom this was wont to be charged by the Papists, that they were wholly
against all swearing. In which point the Archbishop of Armagh undertakes to
vindicate them: but how? not by maintaining the opinion, but by proving it to
be a calumny cast upon them by their adversaries. Frater Nicolaus Eymericus, 2.
part. derect. inquisitor. Haeresis Waldensium, tertia dicitur quod jurare in
judicio, sive extra judicium, in quacunque causa, est illicitum and mortale
p^^catum: quartus eorum error est, quod de jerare in judicio coram juditibus de
dicenda veritate and revolandis complicibus suis in hac secta, non est
illicitum and peccatam, imo licitum and sanctum. Friar Nicolus Eymericus (in
the second part of his directions to the Inquisitors,) reckons this to be the
3d heresy of the Waldenses; That to swear, whether it be before a Judge or
extra-judicially, in any case, is unlawful, and a mortal sin. Their fourth
error is, That to swear falsely before a Judge in open Court, when the Question
is about confessing truth, or revealing their Accomplices and fellow-Sectarians,
is not unlawful or a sin, but lawful and sacred. This Bishop Usher relates in
the place fore-quoted, page 162. on purpose to evince the slanderous pens of
Roman Scribes, from the incoherency of their calumnies, and (...) the extreme
unlikelihood that they who held it lawful (in some cases) to forswear, should
hold it unlawful (in any case) to swear. If you did not see this to be the
defense which that learned Primat made, where are you eyes? if you did, where
is your conscience? and where do you think must be our wit, if we believe those
men upon their bare word, who belie so many Authors in writing?

Example 12.
Erasmus, Plato, Meander, Antonius, Hesiod, Theognis.

Answer.
This rancking Erasmus with heathens, smells rank of the Jesuits spirit, whose
devise it is to paint him hanging betwixt heaven and hell, as being neither
Papist nor Protestant, in their verdict, and by consequence either a Mohammedan
or Pagan. But whatever his judgment was, as to Papists or Protestants, it was
far enough from the opinion of the Quakers; for where he speaks of the
unlawfulness of swearing, of the uselessnesse of oaths, he speaks of swearing
in our ordinary communication, as is manifest from that clause [In your
bargains,] ye need no oath, ye need no execration, which the Quaker Apologist
either ignorantly or maliciously omits. I appeal to the place by him quoted,
(his Annotations on Mat. 5.34.) As to the rust of those authorities that are
joynd with his, they are answered ( Sect. 1. Argum. 1.) where S. Paul's practice
is opposed to them which ought to be of more weight with Christians then all
the sayings of all heathen Poets and Philosophers.

Example 13.
S. Austin in Psa. 88. It is well that God has forbidden men to swear, lest by
custom of swearing, etc. de mendacio. lest by swearing ye come to a custom.

Answer.
The very words here alleged, evince, that S. Austin speaks of common
swearing, and certainly he must be beside his Text, if from the Old Testament
he infer the unlawfulness of all kind of swearing; what his judgment is about
oaths, in his Treatise de mendacio, has been already declared.

Example 14. and 15.
The Albines in France, and Michael Sadler in Germany.

Answer.
Your Authors say only, that that charge was alleged against them, but not
that it was proved.

Example 16, 17, 18.
Jerome, Chrysostom, Justin Martyr, Walter Brute.

Answer.
When you name the Texts of these three Fathers, we shall examine whether you
faithfully report them: As to Walter Brute, It is true, he affirmed what is
alleged, but with protestation, that he would retract that opinion, if he were
convinced of the error of it; and accordingly did, upon conference with the
Bishop of Hereford, submit himself to the determination of the Church, as
appears from your own Author, Fox vol. 1. page 653.

The Last Example.
The Order of Middlebrough, which is no ways applicable to the Quakers Case,
who have refused to pay Church-duties, and thereby robbed the Royal Exchequer,
which is partly supplied out of tenths and first fruits.

But why do you urge these Examples, or trouble his Majesty and the Parliament
with your Plea, to be exempted from taking an Oath? because (forsooth) your
conscience will not allow you to swear, when you actually do swear in as solemn
and august a form as it is possible for the tongue of man to express, even then
when you say you dare not swear, page 8. God who is the searcher of hearts
^^^ws, that it is with holy respect, etc. just like that sullen boy, whom when
his mother commanded to say, good morrow, to his godfather, persisted in a
silent dump, till he was soundly basted, and then blubberd out this outcry, I
cannot say, good morrow, not I.

FINIS.

