A SERMON Preached at St. Mary-le-Bow, TO THE SOCIETIES FOR Reformation of
Manners, October. 2. 1699.

By SAMUEL BARTON, D.D.

Published at the Request of the said SOCIETIES.

LONDON: Printed for Matthew Wotton, at the Three Daggers near the Temple-gate
in Fleet Street. 1700.

EPHESIANS. v. xi. And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
rather reprove them.


BEING desired to Preach one of the Quarterly Sermons For Reformation of
Manners, I must own, that the greatest Motive I had to induce me not to refuse,
was the Consideration, that if I should, I thought I might fall under a just
Reproof from this which I have read, and other parallel Texts of Scripture,
which require us to be so far from partaking with others in Sin, that we should
rather set our selves to oppose it all we can. And though I cannot pretend to add
any thing to what has been already said by some Right Reverend Fathers, and
others my Reverend and Worthy Brethren upon this Subject; Yet, as I take it for
an Honor to appear in so excellent a Cause, and amongst so good Company; so I
hope, that though but the same things in substance that have been said before be
repeated again, and in a more homely Dress, it may yet have some good effect,
and help, in some degree to farther that excellent End, which both as Men, and
as Christians we are all bound to seek the Promotion of, even the beating down
of Vice and Profaneness, and the Increase of Piety and Virtue.

Without farther Preface therefore, I shall proceed to speak to the Words of
the Text. And in so doing I shall,

I. Show you what is meant by Works of Darkness. II. Why they are so called.
III. Why they are said to be Unfruitful Works of Darkness, and how well that
Character agrees to 'em. IV. I shall explain to you what is meant by having
Fellowship with such Works, and what are the ordinary Ways and several
Instances wherein Men are tempted to have that. And, V. I shall show, That
Christians should have a care of being drawn in by any such Temptations, and
instead of that should upon all occasions show their utter dislike of these
Works of Darkness, and be ready to reprove them, and to prevent as far as
possible the Commission of them. Of which Doctrine I shall in the last place
make some brief Application to the present Occasion. I begin with the First,
Viz.
I. To show what is meant by Works of Darkness. And here all will agree with
me, that by Works of Darkness, Works of Sin and Wickedness are meant, and that
of the more gross and heinous sort. Sin every one ought to know (for it is the
Definition given by St. John) 1 John 3.4. is nothing else but A Transgression
of the Law. And therefore St. Paul says, Romans 4.15. Where no Law is there is no
Transgression, or no Sin. But nevertheless all Sins are not alike, or of equal
guilt or heinousness in their nature. And that because there is a difference in
Laws, a difference in the manner of their Promulgation, and a difference in the
manner also of our transgressing 'em. There is a difference in Laws: For some
are concerning things of greater weight and moment than others are, and upon
which the Lawgiver is therefore supposed to lay a greater stress than he does
upon others. And hence the Violation of such Laws is so much the worse. There
is a difference in the Promulgation; for some Laws may not be so clearly and
fully made known to all the Subjects of 'em as others are, and hence the breach
of 'em may be the more pardonable and excusable. There is a difference also in
the manner of a Man's transgressing a Law: For he may do it wilfully and
deliberately, and after many warnings given him, or upon little Temptation; or
he may be surpised into it contrary to his general Purpose and Resolution.

Now though every Transgression of the Law of God may be truly said to be a Work
of Darkness, yet that name scarce uses to be given to Sins of Infirmity or
Weakness, to every Failing or Imperfection, but rather to gross and heinous
Sins, When a Man may be truly said to transgress God's Law, because he comes
not up to the full perfection that it requires, or when in some lesser
Instances he unwarily and unwittingly offends, as by a rash word suppose, an
imprudent Action, a little mis-spence of time, or not taking an opportunity to
do all the good one might; These though they are Faults and have the nature of
Sins, yet the Scripture is hardly so severe as to style these Works of
Darkness, except it be in the general, as belonging to that kind, and partaking
in a degree of that nature. But that which most properly is to be understood by
Works of Darkness, is gross and notorious Wickedness, such as are those several
kinds reckoned up by the Apostle in the beginning of this Chapter; but more
fully in the Fifth of the Galatians under the Name of Works of the Flesh,
Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft,
Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings,
Murders, Drunkenness, Revelling, and such like. Here are Sins, you see, of all
the three kinds, that are commonly reckoned, i. e. against God, our Neighbor
and our selves. 1. Here Is Acts of Impiety toward God, such as Heresy, by
which is commonly understood, and may be understood here, False and Wicked
Opinions concerning God and Religion, Fundamental Errors; Idolatry, or the
Worshipping false Gods, or the true one in a false and forbidden manner, a way
dishonorable to him; Witchcraft, or hold Correspondence with Evil Spirits, the
Enemies of God. To these we might add Blasphemies, and open Profaneness in
Swearing or Cursing, as also gross neglects of God's Worship, a general
Indevotion, and customary mis-spending that time which should be dedicated to
God's Worship and Service. Again 2ly. Here are Sins of Injustice or
Uncharitableness toward our Neighbor, such as are Adulteries, Murders,
Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions. And Lastly, Here are
Sins against ourselves, or in the Government of our own Persons, such as
Fornication (though that perhaps may be reckoned also in the former kind)
Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Drunkenness, Revellings, and all manner of
Intemperance.

Now these and such like gross Sins are most properly to be understood by Works
of Darkness.

II. I next proceed to give you the Reasons why they are so called. Now

1. One (and that a main reason) is because they are such Works as in the
general Opinion of Mankind are reckoned vile and dishonorable, and are wont
therefore, many of 'em, to be forbidden by Humane Laws; And hence Men generally
are both ashamed and afraid to commit 'em in the open Daylight, or in the
sight and view of others: But if their evil Inclinations, or any Temptation
prevail over 'em, so as to make 'em practice such things, yet so long as they
have any shame left, they creep into Corners, and seek to do it in the Dark,
and hide their Wickedness all they can from the sight of Men. Thus St. Paul
tells us, That they that are drunken are drunken in the night, 1 These. 5.7. And
Job, That the eye of the adulterer waits for the Twilight, saying, no eye
shall see me, and he disguiseth his face, Job 24. And speaking of Thieves, says
he, In the dark they dig through houses, which they had marked for themselves
in the day time, they know not the light. For the Morning is to them as the
shadow of death; if one know them they are in the terrors of the shadow of
death. There is Fear indeed as well as Shame that hinders Men from acting this
sort of Wickedness openly; and Shame itself indeed has always a mixture of Fear
with it; it implies a fear of Disgrace, and that curbs and checks Men, and
keeps 'em from committing openly the more gross and heinous sort of Sins, and
from glorying in 'em when they have committed 'em, unless they can meet with
Companions as wicked as themselves, or think themselves too strong for any that
would oppose 'em. Men naturally love to have the good Opinion of others, and
dread the being hated and abhorred of Mankind, which would be the effect of
many gross and open sorts of Wickedness. And therefore what they practice of
that nature they endeavor to keep as secret as every they can: Yea many seem
desirous to hide their own Wickedness as much as possible even from themselves,
it is such an odious and shameful thing. And therefore they will scarce dare to
look into their own Consciences, or consider their own ways. They have so ill a
Face, and carry such a Deformity in 'em, that they cannot well bear to look at
it, And therefore they sometimes invent to themselves miserable Excuses, or
take up most senseless and absurd Opinions, only to hide the ugliness of their
Vices, that so deformed a Spectacle as their own Souls are, if seen in a true
Glass, may not be a perpetual Terror to 'em.

Now it is true, that wicked Men are but Fools in all this, to think, that what
they hide from Men, they can hide from the all-seeing Eye of God too; Or,
because they can make a poor shift to deceive themselves a little, that
therefore they shall be able to impose upon him, and blind his Eyes. And this
therefore shows us another Reason why the Works of Wickedness may very well be
called Works of Darkness, Viz.

2. Because they proceed from a darkened Mind, a Mind that has some way shut out
the Light, at least, does not suffer the Light of Truth to shine bright and
clear as it ought to do. For the thing is so evident, That a Man ought to be
obedient to the Laws of his Maker, and that all Sin is Unreasonable in the
highest Degree, and extremely Foolish; This, I say, is so evident, if a Man
will consider any thing, that he can hardly forbear seeing it. But Wicked Men
therefore (especially those that are so in an high and notorious Degree) are
wont to be afraid of Thinking and serious Reflection, do not care to Examine
impartially the Principles on which they go, nor to compare their Actions
strictly with the Rule, but rather huddle up the Matter, and suffer their Lusts
and Passions, or some Foolish and Licentious Notions, plausibly set off
perhaps, by the Wit of some of their Atheistical Companions, to darken and
hoodwink their Understandings, so that they do not clearly discern the Folly
and Unreasonableness of their own Practices, but go on in a blind and
inconsiderate manner; which is quite contrary to the way of good Men, Whose
path, as Solomon speaks, Prove. 4.18. is as a shining light, which shines more
and more unto a perfect day. And hence it is, that such in Scripture, are
called the Children of Light, and of the Day, 1 Thessalonians. 5.5. Whereas wicked Men
are called, The Children of Darkness, as being such in whom the Prince of
Darkness, or the Ruler of the Darkness of this World, as he is called, has
blinded their Minds. Yea, they are called Darkness itself in the abstract; at
the 8th verse of this Chapter. For the Apostle tells the Ephesians, That whilst
they were in their Heathen State, and lived Ungodly and Profane Lives, they
were Darkness. Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord.
And this Darkness which possesses the Souls of wicked Men, is so palpable and
plain to all that have their Minds well enlightened with the knowledge of the
Truth, that they cannot choose but wonder at it is prevalence, and admire the
Sottishness, and Ignorance of those that are so blinded. Whence it is, that the
Psalmist speaks it by way of Admiration, Psalm. 14.4. Have all the workers of
iniquity no knowledge? Implying, that a very little might have served to show
'em, That 'twas both their Duty and their Interest to act in another manner.

And thus the Works of Sin and Wickedness, may be styled Works of Darkness, as
proceeding from a darkened Mind. And they may be also called so,

3. From their tendency and aptness to darken it still more and more. For this
is certain, That nothing can more tend to cloud and darken the Reasonable Soul,
than an habitual Indulgence to such Practices as are directly contrary to
Reason, and suffering Brutish Lusts and unruly Passions to bear sway and
overruled the Understanding. This is the direct way to extinguish, as far as it
can be done, the Light of Reason, to put out that Candle of the Lord, as far as
a Man is capable of doing it. And there want not those who too plainly show us,
that it may be done in a great measure. They could not else go on so securely
in their wicked Courses as they do, if they had not gone a great way toward
extinguishing the Light, and caused it to shine but very dimly; if they had not
stifled the reluctance of their Consciences to the practice of Notorious
Impieties. Nevertheless, it is true, they cannot so stifle Conscience, or put
out the Light of their own Minds, as to secure themselves, that it shall never
trouble 'em no more. Conscience will be awakened, and the Light will shine
again, either happily here to bring 'em to Repentance before it be too late, or
else to their endless Torment and Confusion hereafter. Yea, there want not
Instances of those who have had their Consciences thus awakened to terrify and
torment, and begin an Hell in 'em in this Life, without bringing 'em to a true
Repentance. They being such, as in the Apostle's Expression, Heb. 10.27. have
had nothing left 'em, but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery
Indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries.

4. And this minds me of a 4th Reason why, works of Sin and Wickedness may be
styled, Works of Darkness, viz. Because without Repentance, they will certainly
bring Men to that State of Woe and Misery, which the Scripture calls by the name
of (...), outer Darkness. Whether to signify its distance, and the Exclusion
of those that are there, from the Regions of Light and Glory Above; Or whether
it be said by way of Allusion and carrying on a Metaphor. The Kingdom of
Heaven, we know, is wont to be compared to a Festival Entertainment, and is
called The Marriage Supper of the Lamb, at which they who are Admitted, shall
sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. But it was the Custom, at such
Festival Suppers, to light up many Lights in the Room, or Place where the
Entertainment was. And then in comparison with that, all without was very dark.
And thereto the Phrase of outer Darkness, may be supposed to allude. But be
that as it will, it is certain, That as the Scripture sets forth Almighty God,
as dwelling in Light inaccessible; so it describes Hell, the Residence of the
Prince of Darkness, as a Place void of Light, and tells us, That for Wicked and
Ungodly Men, is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever, Jude 13. Whether
literally to be understood it matters not, so long as we understand by it, That
it is a Region of Woe and Sorrow, as void of all Joy and Comfort, as a total want
of Light can make it. And this affords us therefore a 4th Reason why, the works
of Sin and Wickedness, whose tendency is to bring us to this Place, may be
styled Works of Darkness.

III. I come now in the next place, to show you why they are said to be
unfruitful works of darkness, and how well that Character of Unfruitfulness
agrees to 'em. The truth is, the terming 'em unfruitful, is (a (...)) a Figure
whereby we speak less than we intend should be understood. For doubtless, our
Apostle did not intend, we should look on these Works of Darkness, as only
unfruitful and unprofitable, as if that were the worst that could be said of
'em, that they did us no good, since it is plain, by what has been said already,
that they do us the greatest mischief. But his meaning therefore was, to
insinuate hereby to us, that as they bring us no good Fruit, are wholly
unfruitful, as to that, so they are very fruitful of Evil and Mischief to us.
It Is like what you read in the 7th. of Jer. v. 31. God says there of the People
of Israel, That they built the high places of Tophet -- to burn their Sons and
their Daughters in the Fire, which I Commanded them not, says he. Whereby, He
does not intend (as some weakly enough would infer, from such kind of
Expressions) to intimate, That Men ought not to do any thing in the Worship of
God, which they have not an express Command for, from him, in his written Word.
But the full meaning is, That He was so far from having Commanded it, that He
had expressly and peremptorily forbidden it, as the vilest Abomination.

I should show you therefore, how that this Character of Vnfruitfulness, agrees
to the Works of Darkness in both senses, both as it signifies a Barrenness, as
to any true Good, and also as it may be here farther understood to imply, their
productiveness of the greatest Evil. But I should be too tedious should I go
about to show you this particularly concerning every one of 'em. I shall
therefore speak but briefly, and in the general. Now, as the Duty of a
Christian consists of three parts, viz. His Duty to God, to his Neighbor, and
to himself. So Sin and Disobedience (which are the Works of Darkness) may in
like manner (as has been already intimated) be divided into Works of Impiety
toward God; Of Injustice or Uncharitableness to Men; Or else, Mis-governments
of a Man's own Person.

And First, For Works of Impiety toward God, which are some of the blackest
and foulest of the Works of Darkness, such as Blasphemy, Profaneness, Total
Indevotion, and neglect of all Religion, Cursing, Swearing, and the like. What
fruit can a Man expect to reap from these things? These sure bring neither
Pleasure nor Profit with them. It must be a strange Complexion of Soul that can
cause a Man to take delight in this sort of Wickedness, and a very great and
unusual accident, if he gains so much as any temporal advantage by it. But this
Fruit he is sure to reap, viz. That whatsoever Distress befalls him, he has no
God to go to, no Providence to put his Trust in, no Hope nor Help left, unless
he can change his Principles, repent, and become a new Man, which is one of the
hardest things imaginable for such People to do. Considering therefore how
great Distresses and Calamities Human Nature is ever liable to, what Wise Man
would ever be without the Comforts and Supports of Religion under 'em? or would
not think it the most miserable and forlorn Condition to be as without a God in
the World? Which is the utmost (though the most vain and absurd hope) of
Atheists, Infidels, and Irreligious People. Thus you see the First sort of the
Works of Darkness, not only do us no good, but they strip us of that which is
our best and only Support and Comfort in a day of Trouble and Adversity, even a
good Conscience and Hope in God, besides that they consign us over to endless
Misery.

In the next place consider what are the Fruits of Injustice or
Uncharitableness. Why a little present Gain, or the quicker getting of an
Estate, is the most that can be pretended. But if we will allow others to be
unjust too, and to act by the same Principles, we may soon lose all that we
have gained; And then we know not how soon we may come to want that Charity our
selves which we deny to others in their need. Besides, if we believe that there
is a God, to whom Righteousness and Goodness are essential, we can never sure
imagine he will suffer any Man to be finally a gainer by his Unrighteousness or
Unmercifulness, but will reckon with him severely for it. And what a folly is
it then to triumph for a little while in that which must unavoidably have so
woeful a Conclusion!

The Third and Last sort of Works of Darkness, is that which consists in the
Mis-government of our selves, through Indulgence to the Sensual Appetite.
Concerning which all I shall say at present is, That Epicurism, Voluptuousness,
with Excess in Eating and Drinking, as they seldom fail to bring great
Miseries upon Men in this Life, in their Bodies, Estates and Reputations; So
forasmuch as they wholly unfit Men for their Duty, and lay 'em open to all
sorts of Temptations, they cannot but be the ready way to endless Ruin and
Misery hereafter. And then they may very well according to the utmost sense of
our Apostle in the Text be styled Unfruitful Works of Darkness.

I proceed now to the Fourth thing proposed; Which was,

IV. To show what is meant by having Fellowship with such Works of Darkness,
and what are the ordinary ways or several Instances wherein Men may be tempted
to have that.

Now there are several ways wherein Men may be said to have Fellowship with the
Works of Darkness. As,

1. And most grossly, when a Man actually joins with others in any wicked Design
or Practice. It may be he is not the first mover in it, but he is put upon it
by others, and he concurs with them, and bears his share. This is in the
strictest sense an having Fellowship or Partnership with others in Wickedness.
And this therefore is here strictly forbidden in all cases whatsoever. We are
to have no Fellowship with the Works of Darkness, nothing to do with them. We
must not think to excuse our selves by saying, that we were drawn in by others,
or that we complied with such as would have taken it ill of us if we had not,
and whom we were loath to disoblige. In all such cases, we must remember that of
Solomon, Prove. 1.10. My Son, if Sinners entice thee, consent thou not. Though
there be never so many of them, whatever Interest they may claim in us, be
their Baits never so enticing, or their Pretenses never so plausible, yet if we
are satisfied that the thing they would have us join with 'em in is Evil and
Unlawful, we must by no means have an hand in it, but rather take the Advice
which the same Wise Man gives us at the 15th verse of the same Chapter, My Son
walk not thou in the way with them, refrain thy foot from their path. Or as you
have it at the 14th and 15th Verses of the Fourth Chapter; Enter not into the
path of the Wicked, and go not in the way of evil men. Avoid it, pass not by
it, turn from it and pass away. It Is good to keep at some convenient distance
from it, lest we be tempted, and unwarily fall into it. It is much better for
us, that we should be thought a little morose and sour, of an uncompliant and
unyielding Temper, than to be drawn into sinful compliances, or to bear a part
in any thing that is unjustifiable and unlawful. But

2. We are not only then truly said to have Fellowship with the Works of
Darkness, wheh we our selves are Actors in 'em, and join with others in
committing 'em, cooperating together in the same unlawful Practices; But also
when any way, by Word or Deed, we abet or encourage any in Wickedness; when we
show 'em Favor or Countenance, give 'em any Direction or Counsel in it. In
such a Case, Though the sinful Action be not our own, yet we make our selves
Partakers in it; we have a share in the Guilt, and must expect to have it also
in the Punishment. It may be Caution or Policy may hinder Men sometimes from
acting that which is evil, but if they secretly abet or encourage it, however
they may escape with Men, they make themselves guilty in the sight of God. Yea

3. Not only the Positive encouraging and abetting of Wickedness by Word or
Deed makes a Man Partaker in it, and renders him guilty of having Fellowship
with the Works of Darkness. But the not hindering, not forbidding it, if he has
Authority, not using his endeavor to discourage and discountenance it. For
this every good Man is bound to do, even to set himself all he can, by his
Example, and by his Authority, and by all the Influence he can tell how to have
upon others, to promote Virtue and Holiness, and to put a stop to the growth of
Vice and Wickedness. And therefore it is not enough that we forbear what we
believe to be evil our selves, and do not positively abet and encourage others
in the Practice of it, for we may do it tacitly and implicitly, by our
Connivance, and by neglecting to admonish and reprove such as are under our
care, not telling 'em of their Faults nor warning 'em of their Danger, nor
showing our selves desirous of their forbearing sinful Courses and amending
their ways.

4. And Lastly, We may be said to be partakers with others in Sin, and to have
Fellowship with the Works of Darkness, when we knowingly, or carelessly, for
want of reasonable and prudent Caution in our Behavior, give any scandal or
offense to others, or lay any stumbling block in their way, that may probably
induce 'em to the commission of any Sin. It Is easy to do this, by some
ambiguous Words, or Deeds, that are liable to misconstruction, or
misinterpretation. The greatest Scandals indeed, are given by downright doing
Ill, setting an ill Example before others, or joining in such wicked and
unjustifiable Practices as are apt to make Men speak ill of the Professors of
Religion, and endanger many's Apostatizing from it. And woe be to him by whom
such offense comes. But there may also be Scandals given and Occasions of
Falling set in the way of others by doubtful and ambiguous Words or Deeds,
which though not Evil when rightly understood, yet may be very liable to
misconstruction. And the truth is, no Man can be cautious enough, wholly to
avoid giving Scandal to some or other, in this manner. But nevertheless, it is
our Duty to use what Christian Prudence we can, and reasonably may, to prevent
any such thing. And if we have, as we ought to have, a true love to our
Brother's Soul, and a tender regard to the Interest of Religion, we shall use
what Circumspection we can to prevent any such Evil. We shall, as the Apostle
exhorts, Heb. 10.24. Consider one another, and mark each others Temper, as far
as we know how, to that purpose, that we may provoke unto Love, and to good
Works.

And thus having showed you, what are the several ways wherein Men may be said
to have fellowship with the Works of Darkness, or may be tempted to make
themselves some way or other partakers in Wickedness; I proceed to that which
was proposed to be done in the 5th. place,

V. To show, that Christians should have a care of being drawn in by any such
Temptations, and instead of that, should upon all occasions, show their utter
dislike of these Works of Darkness, and be ready to reprove them. Have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. That
this therefore is a Duty, is evident enough from the plain Words of the
Apostle, and from what has been already said upon 'em But I shall Consider the
Arguments which he himself urges in this Chapter, to persuade to the Practice
of it. The 1st. of which is, The Consideration of that Dreadful Punishment,
which unless prevented by Repentance, must certainly overtake both them that
work these Works of Darkness, and those also that have fellowship, or are
partakers with them. To this purpose, he tells 'em at this 5th. Verse, That no
whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor coveteous man, who is an idolater, has
any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God: They must therefore be
Excluded from the Kingdom of Heaven, and Sentenced to that everlasting fire,
which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And because some were ready to
make frivolous Excuses and Apologies for some of these Sins, as Fornication, in
particular, which the Heathens made but a slight matter of, he adds therefore,
at the Verse next following; Let no man deceive you with vain words, for
because of these things comes the wrath of God upon the Children of
disobedience. And then it follows, Be ye not therefore partakers with them. As
much as to say, For if ye are, you make yourselves accessory to their
Damnation, and to all the sore Judgments that may overtake them also in this
Life. And as ye are partakers with them in their Sin, so you must expect also
to be sharers in their Punishment. The Argument therefore is exceeding strong,
and such as if we have any regard either to the Soul of our Neighbor or our
own Souls, must prevail upon us. If we would not ruin them everlastingly, and
ourselves also with them, we must have a care of being partakers with 'em in
Sin.

There is also a Second Argument urged by the Apostle to the same purpose, in
this Chapter, very fit to work upon Ingenuous Minds: And it is taken from the
great Indecency that there is in Christians (Professors of so much Purity, and
the Disciples of so Holy a Master) having any thing to do with the Works of
Darkness. Thus you read at the 3d. Verse of this Chapter. But Fornication and
all Uncleanness, or Coveteousness ((...) which may signify any inordinate
lusting after, or desiring more than is convenient in any kind, and being
placed here in such company, is by many Interpreters understood to signify,
not Avarice, but such inordinate Lusts as occasioned Rapes, Incest, Adultery,
etc. things too commonly practiced at the Idol-Feasts: But) let not these
things be once named among you, says he, as becomes Saints. For such all
Christians are, or should be; and if they are not, their Christianity will do
'em no good. And it becomes all such to keep at the greatest distance they can
from all Impurity in Thought, Word, or Deed, and from all the Defilement of the
Works of Darkness. And the same Argument in effect, is urged again, at the 8th.
Verse, to enforce the preceding Exhortation (Be ye not therefore partakers
with them) for ye were sometimes darkness ( i. e. in your former Heathen State)
But now are ye light in the Lord ( i. e. Ye have now had the Light of the
Gospel shining amongst you, having been Baptized into the Profession of it,
which is called, a being Illuminated, or Enlightened, Heb. 10.32.) Walk
therefore as Children of Light. And let it appear, that there is a difference
between your former, and your present Conversation. Behave yourselves as
becomes those that make such a Profession of Purity and Sanctity. And
certainly, it is not fit for such to have any thing to do with those Works of
Darkness, before spoken of, but rather they ought by their good Example, to
call Men off from them, and by seasonable Admonition, and plain Reproof, where
they have any Authority, or can reasonably hope for any good success, to
endeavor to deter Men from such Practices, and to convince them of the great
Folly and Danger of them; and upon all occasions to be ready to show their
utter dislike and Detestation of them. For in vain are they called The Children
of Light, except they abhor the Deeds of Darkness. In vain are they Listed, as
the Soldiers of Christ, if they treacherously give Encouragement to his
Professed Enemies, or are ashamed, or afraid to appear, upon occasion, in the
Cause of God and Religion.

VI. And this brings me to the last thing that was proposed, which was, To make
some Application of the Doctrine that has been delivered to the present
Occasion.

Now the design of our present meeting is to give what furtherance and
encouragement we can to that good Work, which out of an honest and Religious
Zeal has bin undertaken and carried on with good effect, by many Pious and
Well-disposed Persons, viz. The endeavoring as far as may be, by putting good
and wholesome Laws in Execution, to suppress and put a stop to the Works of
Darkness: Or at least, to cause those that will practice 'em, to keep
themselves, within their own proper Sphere, and act 'em in the dark and in
private Corners. What they do there, we must leave to the Judgment of God, who
sees 'em in their closest and secretest retirements, and will one day bring to
light the hidden things of darkness, and take vengeance on all the Workers of
Iniquity. But when these Works of Darkness, grow so Impudent, as to crawl
abroad into the Light, they then greatly defile the Land, they show Men to be
come to a prodigious Pitch of Wickedness, and to have cast off all sense of
Shame, and they involve all those in a participation of the Guilt, that are
Witnesses to such Wickedness, and do not all they can in their Places and
Stations toward the discountenancing and suppressing of it.

Here therefore, Magistrates are chiefly Concerned, to use all the Authority
they have, Yea, to put it forth and exert it to the uttermost, in the Cause of
God, and against open Profaneness and Irreligion. It Is from God, that all Just
and Lawful Authority is derived, and He will therefore, certainly expect it
should be used in his Service, and will look on them as no better than Traitors
to him, that use it otherwise. Neither will it suffice for any to say, That
they do Punish Vice and Profaneness according to Law, when Delinquents are
brought before 'em, and the Matter fully Proved, For this may be true; And yet
they may be ready to discourage such as would bring 'em Informations. They may
plainly show an Aversion to the Work of Reformation, and put many needless Rubs
and Difficulties in the way of it, though they dare not openly and avowedly take
part with Evildoers.

But this is not like Men that have a Zeal for God's Glory, a sense of the
heinousness of Sin, of God's just Displeasure against open and notorious
Impieties and the Danger such things bring a Nation into. This is not like the
way of those good Magistrates we read of in Scripture, who set themselves with
all their Might to carry on the Work of Reformation, and to prevent God's
Judgments impending on the People. This favors not of any sense that a Man has
of their Blood being required of him, who are misled, or drawn aside, or
encouraged in Sin by his Remisness. A Magistrate should be a Man of Zeal and
Courage and always glad of an Opportunity to show himself A Terror to evil
Works, and a Praise unto them that do well. For it is always to be observed,
that we speak now of putting Laws in Execution against such things as are known
and granted on all hands to be Evil; things which however some may endeavor to
palliate and extenuate, yet none is so impudent as to justify 'em, none so
absurd as to pretend to make Conscience of practicing 'em. Some there are that
have Scrupled the taking an Oath in any Case, but I never heard of any that
thought it a Duty to Swear idsely in common Discourse. Nor can Drunkenness, or
Tippling or Profaning the Lord's Day, or Filthiness, or Fornication, or Scoffing
at Religion, and Ridiculing the most Sacred Mysteries thereof be pleaded for as
Duties.

If therefore Men will not be Zealous against such things as these, how can we
hope to find any good Zeal in 'em? If they are grown indifferent as to such
Practices, and care not how much such Vices spread, how can they be thought to
have any Religion at all in 'em? If neither the Love of God nor of their
Neigbour will excite 'em to set themselves against such notorious and open
Wickedness, what pretense can they have to Christian Charity?

But after all, though a Magistrate have a Sense of these things and be Zealous
for Reformation, yet it is but little that he can do without the help of others.
Profane and Irreligious People, if once they find him bent against 'em, will
take care to keep out of his way, and hide their Works of Darkness from his
Sight. And there must therefore be Informations given, and Proofs made by
others, before he can do much toward putting Laws in Execution against Vice
and Profaneness.

Now this is the Work which some here present, and many more both in this City
and in other parts of the Kingdom, have very laudably and worthily engaged
themselves in. The Work I am sure is good and highly necessary at this time,
when we are called upon by Public Authority to do all we can toward the
Suppression of Vice, Immorality and Profaneness, which are owned in his
Majesty's Proclamation to have increased and prevailed much of late Years to
the great Dishonor of God, the Scandal of our Profession, and the endangering
heavy Judgments to fall on us. And as the Work is so highly seasonable, so I
cannot see any good Objection, that is or can be made against it, or any just
cause of suspicion, that you engage in it through any other Motives, but a just
sense of the great need of it, and an Holy Indignation against those Works of
Darkness which every good Christian must and ought to abhor.

Shall any think it Pragmaticalness to meddle, when that which ought to be
dearest to us, the Cause of God and Religion is so nearly concerned? When such
notorious Scandals are brought upon our Profession, and there is such imminent
danger of God's Judgments overtaking us by reason of our Impieties? As well we
may think it Pragmaticalness to endeavor to quench a raging Fire, or to put a
stop to the Infection of a Contagious Disease. And it is nothing but the want of
a due sense of the great Evil and Danger of such gross and heinous Sins, that
makes any put a difference in these Cases, and content themselves with a
Laodicean Lukewarmness in matters of such Concernment

But the Name of an Informer, is by many held in great Detestation, and they
cannot bear the Reproach of being reckoned in that number. Now it is true, if
the business were to inform against People, otherwise innocent in their Lives,
but Worshipping God, according to their Conscience, in a way not allowed, and
perhaps erroneous, I should not blame a Man for being somewhat shy in such a
Case; Or if 'twere to be an Informer upon any Penal Statues about indifferent
Matters, however, all such may not be to be condemned; yet I would be no very
zealous Advocate for 'em.

But here the Case is quite otherwise. For here that which you are desired to
Inform against, is a known and confessed Evil; and it is only in such Cases,
when there appears no better way of reclaiming the Offender: And the End and
Design of it, is not the getting any Gain to yourselves, but the promoting a
most needful Reformation, and the preventing thereby God's heavy Judgments from
falling upon us all. It Is great Charity therefore to the Public, Yea, and
Charity also to the Persons Informed against (since gentler Methods will not
do) to endeavor to have 'em Punished according to the Law. And if the Laws
were well made, and but in pursuance of the Laws of God, it cannot but be a
laudable thing in any one, to endeavor what in him lies, to have 'em put in
Execution But still, some will be ready to Object, That there is little hope of
doing any great good this way. We may make a great stir and disturbance among
our Neighbors, but the World is not like to be much mended by any of these
Methods.

And this now is spoken like one whose Principle it is to let the World go as
it will; but not like a Christian, who knows it is his Duty to be as the Light
of the World, and the Salt of the Earth. We know not how great Effects God may
sometimes bring about by Means that to us appear very unlikely, and improbable.
But when He shall be pleased to stir up the Spirits of any Number of Persons to
go about so Great and Good a Work as this is, I would be loath to be found in
the number of those that should slight and discourage it, and not rather do all
they can to promote those good Ends that Providence seems to have in it. Let us
have a care we be not found Fighters against God. But I am sure, all they who
set themselves to beat down Vice and Wickedness, and Profaneness, are Fighters
for him; and if they do it but in such a way as is agreeable to the Laws of God
and Man, they Fight Lawfully. And it is our Duty to help 'em, and pray for their
Success.

There has already been, though not all the Success that is to be wished for of
so Pious an Undertaking; yet more perhaps, than could well have been expected
in so Corrupt an Age. And if God has any Mercy in store for these Nations, and
does not intend to give us up to Destruction, we have reason to hope, That this
is the Way his Providence has found out to fit us for Mercy; And that He will
accordingly, more and more Excite a Spirit of Reformation, and stir up the
Minds of all Religious and well-dispos'd Persons, of what different Persuasions
soever, to join Unanimously in it. Which would be an happy presage of Good to
these Kingdoms, Yea, to all the Churches of the Reformation: In which, the too
great Unreformedness of Men's Lives, after such a Restitution and Reviving of
Pure and Primitive Christian Doctrine, has doubtless, been the thing that has
provoked God to suffer the Reformation to lose so much Ground, as it has done
of late Years, and to have such a terrible Havoc and Devastation made of it,
and such a Dreadful Persecution of it is Professors, as there is in our
Neighbor Nation, and in other Places. The Consideration of these things,
ought, I am sure, to awaken us, and cause us to Amend in time, and to do all
that in us lies to promote a general Reformation, before Judgments overtake us.

And may Almighty God in his great Mercy, increase the Number, and strengthen
the Hands of those Faithful Magistrates, that out of a true Zeal for his
Honor, and the good of Men, do set themselves with Heart and Hand to so
Excellent a Work, and of those also who are assistant and helpful to 'em
therein. May He bless their Endeavors, and give 'em such Success, that his
Anger may be turned away from us, that we may become a Reformed People in our
Lives, as well as in our Doctrine, and He may delight to dwell in the midst of
us. This is a Prayer, in which, The Children of Light, I am sure, will heartily
join with me And this God of his infinite Mercy Grant through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Matt. Wotton at the Three Daggers in Fleet Street.
A Demonstration of the Messiah, in which, the Truth of the Christian Religion
is Defended, especially against the Jews, containing all that was Preached at
the Lecture of the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire; By the Right Reverend Father
in God Richard Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells. The 3d. and Last part now in the
Press.

-- His Sermons Preached on several Occasions. Oct.

A Guide to the Devout Christian, in Three Parts; containing Prayers for
particular Persons, for Families, and a Discourse of the Sacrament. By John
Inet Chanter of the Cathedral Church of Lincoln.

The Christian's Pattern, in Four Books; written Originally in Latin by Thomas
a Kempis. To which are added, Prayers and Meditations for Sick Persons; By
George Stanhope, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty; In Octavo with
Cuts, sold for 5 s. The same Book Printed in a smaller Letter. Price 2 s.

The Occasional Papers, No 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

The Heinousness of Injustice; A Sermon Preached before Mr. Justice Turton, at
the Assizes held at Lincoln, School. By Laurence Echard, Chaplain to the Lord
Bishop of Lincoln.

Remarks upon an Essay concerning Humane Understanding: In a Letter Addressed
to the Author. No. 1, 2, 3.


