The CASE of Thomas Bulkley, late of New Providence, Merchant, briefly
represented to the Right Honorable the Lords of His Majesty's Council of TRADE.
THE said Bulkley, (for his Loyal and Zealous Activity in the Discharge of his
Bounden Duty to the King and Queen of England, etc. to the Lords Proprietors of
the Provinces of Carolina, and the Bahama Islands in America, and to His
Majesty's Subjects Inhabiting the first named Province, in the Accusation and
Prosecution of Cadwallader Jones, late Governor of the said Islands, who was a
Wicked Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, Felonious Conspirator, confederate with
Pirates, Burglarious Robber, and Guilty of other Heinous Misdemeanors,
contained in sundry Articles of Accusation Exhibited against him) Under the
said Jones's Usurped Power (being Rescued out of Custody) has been Barbarously
Imprisoned 485 days, without any lawful Cause alleged by the Accuser upon his
Oath, or the Testimony of any Witnesses; And in the said term of his
Imprisonment, his House, etc. therein, has sundry times been Broke open in a
Felonious manner, by Armed Pirates., Instigated to the doing thereof by the
said Rescued Criminal, and his Traiterous Accomplices, the Principal whereof was
John Graves, who was the False and Malicious accuser of the said Bulkley. The
Affrightments of which Burglarious Assaults on the House, were the cause of
Convulsion Pits, Painful Languishing Sickness, and finally of Death, to the
said Bulkleys Wife. By all which Monsterous dealings of the said Jones, Graves,
etc. the said Bulkley has lost his Virtuous Wife ( Barbarously Murdered) by
the Burglarious Assaults of Pyratical Ruffians; His own Health by Extreme hard
and Long Imprisonment, his Reputation by False and Malicious Accusation of High
Treason, his Trassick and Commerce, as a Merchant, has been wholly Confounded,
and his Estate Wasted in Extravagant Expenses, occasioned by his Wifes
Sickness, and his own Imprisonment, and by other Losses and Damages amounting
to the, value of Four Thousand Pounds; for Reparation whereof, and Condign
Punishment of those Miscreants, who were the Authors, Abettors, Actors, and
Accessories. He has applied himself to the Succeeding Governor of the Bahama
Islands, viz. Mr. Nicholas Trott, and to the Lords Proprietors Ministers of
Justice at Carolina, who having all of them denied him the benefit of the Laws
(which are said to be the Birth Right of every English Man) he has been
Constrained to leave the place of his Settled Habitation, Lands, Houses, Goods,
and Debts there, being of great Value, and to Travel from thence 3000 Miles
over the Seas in coming to England, where he has spent two Years in Addressing
to, and Attending on the Lords Proprietors, who have been so Vngenerous, as to
Disregard his Meritorious Services, and Matchless Sufferings; and so unjust as
to Reject his most reasonable Propsitious, viz. That they would put him into
such a post of Authority and Power as may enable him to have the benefit of the
Laws against all those in their said Provences, who have done Irrepairable
Wrongs to the said Bulkley; and also against all those who have denied him
Justice against them, contrary to the Duty of their Offices, and the obligation
of their Oaths, for Dispencing Justice freely and imparcialy to all the Kings
Subjects, suing for it in the Limits of their Jurisdictions. And seeing there
has been a total failure of Justice in all the Derivative Channels, the said
Bulkley now repairs to the Fountain of it, which is a Living Spring, from
whence it does and shall ever flow to the Relief of all His Majesty's Oppressed
and agrieved Subjects, of whom, none have Served him more Loyally, Dilligently,
and Constantly, nor suffered for so doing, as has the said Thomas Bulkley, who
has not only Sustained the Losses and Damages aforesaid, but thereby for the
space of Five Years has been and still is out of all manner of Profitable
Employment, whereby to Maintain himself and his Offspring: In which deplorable
Condition for Relief, he has Petitioned to, and now humbly depends on his Most
Just, Generous, and Merciful Sovereign Lord the King, in whose Service he will
esteem it his greatest Terrestial Honor and Happiness to Spend the Residue of
his Life.


