QUAERIES PROPOUNDED, TO GEORGE FOX AND HIS Ministers. To answer from a paper
wrote by George Fox, entitled, An Epistle from the People called Quakers to
all people to read over, of what they hold concerning God, Christ, his Death,
Resurrection, Redemption, Salvation, Justification, Blood, Faith and Hope.

By a LOVER of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who was born of the
Virgin Mary, by the power of the holy Ghost, for the CHRIST and Man's SAVIOR,
as that promised Seed, that God to Adam said should break tde Serpents head.

LONDON, Printed for Anna Brewster, at the Golden Bellows in Fore-street,
against the first Postern near Cripplegate. 1669.

Quaeries Propounded.
BUt being not ignorant that these assertors affirm the witnessese in
conscience to be God, Christ light and Savior, and as such teach obedience for
Salvation; which witness being but a man's own Spirrit, as to it that worm of
conscience that never dies, I must against this doctrine testify that the
witness in conscience in it self is neither God, nor Christ, nor breaker of the
Serpents head for as aforesaid the witness in the conscience being that worm in
the heart that gnaws the conscience when its book is set open, as Solomon calls
a wounded spirit that who can bear? is but the spirit in and of man that God in
man has placed as man is his creature, to bear witness for God and for it
self; and being forewarned by God from his law placed in man's heart to keep him
obedient thereunto, which he not obeying is left without excuse, it bearing
record to the condemning Justice of God for original sin, and in that man will
not receive the grace tendered by God through Jesus Christ, who is the way, and
means that God of grace has found out to save man, by believing on his name:
is from the pride of his heart, and self-willed of spirit accounting it two low
for his exalted heart; and thus from his pride put off from him so great grace
that God has offered to him by Christ, and thence despises his flesh, and
trampled his blood under his foot, as not sufficient for him in it to trust not
allowing him for Savior; but [if anything] only an examples: And thence being
turned from him, the way, by whom comes eternal life, set up the creature all
spirit in conscience for Christ, and his light.

But in that you say, you own all that the Scriptures teach, I [hoping these
misapprehensions may therefore be reduced to truth, am put upon the asserting
this point, that the witness in the Conscience is not the Creator, but that,
that the Creator has made and putting confidence upon it for God and Christ,
it being but a created spirit that God in man has placed, sets up the works of
his hands for God instead of himself; and consequently makes man to be God and
Christ: not considering that God has made nature but a substance for producing
of his creatures by his word, by whom he created them in their multiplicities
of distinctions; colors, and shapes, and having created man a ruler of his
host, he as Sovereign Lord over him, establishes a law, as his holy decree to
him, not to aspire beyond the right of his make, upon penalty of incurring
eternal death; which came to pass by transgression: but God seeing into what a
deplorable state man had brought himself into, of grace promised to him, a
restorer that should break the Serpents head; who being Christ, that promised
seed as born of the Virgin Mary, the anointed for a Savior, is him, the Christ
of God that he gave for a Savior to the ends of the earth; who being him, God
gave the power too open the book, and to break of the seals, he is he that
brings man out of the prison house of nature, into his holy habitation of
grace: and he being anointed for a Savior from his receiveing of the Spirit
without measure, does show in that he received, that Christ is man, and not the
eternal father as God; for his receiveing from gift proves the giver one thing,
and him to whom it is given another: and he being the second Adam though Lord
from heaven, as he is God, it as he is the son of man is that second Adam to
restore man which the first Adam brought into the curse: he is humane as being
made of woman that was of the lineage of David and in that capacity the taker
away of sin, for says the Scriptures, as sin by one man reigned over all and
death by sin, so by one man)that is Christ) shall life reign over many; and as
by one man all did dye, so by one man shall all be made alive; and not as it
was by one that sinned so is the gift, for the judgment was by one to
condemnation, but the free gift is of many offencies unto justification; he
having bought us by his blood, which being blood of his body that was united to
the Godhead, he, as he is thus united is God and man in that person; and
therefore the blood he shed forth of his person for an atonement with God,
being blood in this high conjunction, was not blood as man's is blood, but was
the blood of God: from whence it is not unsufficient that it cannot atone, but
has with God attoned for man that in it has faith; it being the blood of the
Lamb of God that has taken away the sins of the world, who suffered by Pontius
Pilate, who hung him on a tree.

From whence we quaery, for that you say, you own all that the scriptures
preach of Christ, his Birth, Miracles, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection and
Blood, with all the promises that relates to him.

Whether you own Christ, God-man; in his Person to consist of nature divine and
nature humane, and in that capacity to be the Christ, or the light in the
conscience without the two natures in that person to be Christ and Savior?
explain, for says the scriptures that as to his manhood he came of the stem of
Jessey, and as to his godhead that he was the word made flesh.

Whether the first promise that God made to Adam of the seed of the woman's
breaking the ^erpents head, was spoke to him of Christ that was to come as the
son of Mary? or was it spoke of something within that Person to be the Christ
without relation to that Person? explain.

And since the Prophets depend^d on God for salvation by Christ that was to
come, whether it was not Christ in his person they looked unto for the Savior,
and not the light in Christ without the person of Christ? explain, since they
foretold of him as that wonder that God would bring to pass, that a woeman
should conceive with a man-child and bring him forth without the help of a man.

And since as it does appear by Abraham that this was their faith, by what
Christ spoke of him, that seeing his day he rejoiced; and by Job that said,
that he knew that his Redeemer lived, and that he should see him at the last
day, whether if Christ be not Christ in person, what is become of the Patriarks
and Prophets since for salvation on him they put their trust? explain.

Since in his body as the scriptures say, he bore our sins, and carried our
griefs, and was smitten for our transgressions, through whose stripes we are
healed, for that God laid on him the iniquity of us all, whether he be to be
believed for Christ in this his personal capacity according to the Scriptures,
or that the light in the conscience (a measure of which every man has that is
born into the world) be he the Christ, of which nothing in the Scriptures?
explain: for that the Scriptures say that by the death of the body upon the
cross he reconciled us unto God, and that he foretold his death, and that he
would raise it up from death in three days.

Whether Christ as he is King, Priest and Prophet whom God has made higher
then the Heavens, be the Christ that appeared to his disciples after his
resurrection from the dead in that body he bid them handle and see, saying, it
is I myself, for a spirit has not flesh and bones as I have, or the light in
your consciences is the Christ that God has exalted higher then the Heavens as
King, Priest, and Prophet? explain.

And in that Christ was transfigured in his Apostles sight with the appearance
of Moses and Elias on the Mount, whether was he transfigured as Christ in his
person without them, or was it the light in his Apostles consciences within
them explain, Since they said, Master it is good that we stay here, let us make
three Tabernacles, one for Thee, one for Moses, and one for Elias.

And in that it is said concerning Christ's ascension, while he was speaking
these things he was taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight; and
this same Jesus shall so come in like manner as you have seen him go into
Heaven, whom the Heaven must receive until the time of restitution of all
things, whether he thus ascended be not now Christ the glorified of the Father
WITHOUT us, as well as he was Christ when he was upon earth WITHOUT them?
explain.

And in that he said, I ascend to my Father and your Father, to my God and to
your God, whether he spoke of himself as the Christ personal in ^ body without
them, or of a Christ you call light within you? explain ^or that the faith of
his Disciples was on him as Christ without them, ^s their Doctrine by the
Scriptures at large does show.

And if the light that was in his Apostles consciences was not Christ; but he
their Master who taught them to believe on him to be (...) the Christ, that
believing they might be saved, whether you by affirming that the witness in you
is Christ (which witness you call light) ^e not a Christ of your inventions,
and ANOTHER CHRIST ^hen what is the Christ of God? explain.

And in that it says, he that has not the spirit of Christ is none of his,
and that none can receive the spirit, but he who beleiveth on Christ, who is
the giver of the spirit, whether the spirit you walk by is the spirit of Christ
or the power of Magic? explain, since you deny him to be the Christ that in
his person was the offering for sin, and the Savior of the world, and instead
of him set up the light of nature to be the Christ, and its power for your
Savior,

Whether the revelation that was given to John, was given by Christ the
glorified of the Father in his person in heaven, or from John's light in his
conscience, John being on earth? explain.

Whether the Lamb that sits upon the throne of the ancient of days, who was
dead and is alive and lives for evermore be Christ, and giver of eternal life
to them that believe and follow him in the regeneration, or the light in
conscience, a measure whereof every man has that comes into the world, be
Christ? explain; for that the light in every man's conscience is the light of
creation; but the gift of God is the spirit of Christ that brings unto the
traveling soul the light of Christ by revelation, according to the promise
through beleiving on him.

Whether the blood of Christ that attoned for man with God was blood, quatenus
blood, from and off his humanity, or the life of Christ as Christ is God, is it
(without the blood of his humanity) the attoner? explain; and if it be the life
in Christ as Christ is God that attones, and the blood of Christ as Christ is
man not that, that does atone show how the life of God is blood, and unto what
use it served, his shedding of the blood of his manhood?

Whether the righteousness of Christ that Christ puts upon his Saints be not
the righteousness of Faith by believing on him as justifier, from his perfect
obedience to God, by his fulfilling the requirings of God in the Law? explain;
for that it is written, blessed is the ^^rn whose sins are pardoned, and whose
iniquities are covered; again blessed is the man to whom God imputes not sin.

Quaeries upon the fifth page.
WHether since you say that God has so loved the World that he has given his
only begotten Son to dye for the World, that they ^^at believe on him should
not perish but have everlasting Life, whether, that Son of God be Christ that
the Angels told the Shepherds was that ^ay born for a Savior, whom they should
find laid in a manger, who was wrapped up in swaddling clothes, whose name God
said should be called Jesus, or is the light in conscience that within you, he?
explain.

Whether he that was conceived of the Holy Ghost and born of the Virgin Mary,
as he persona ly walked upon the Earth in substance of a Man be Christ, and the
only begotten Son of God, and Man's Savior is thus he was without them, or is
the light in conscience the Christ and the Savior as it is light in conscience
within man? explain.

Whether Christ or the Apostles at any time taught the light in man for the
Christ and the Savior, or Christ the man in person without them, for the
Christ and Savior? explain.

Whether Christ that came into the World to save the World, who while he was
in the World, was the light of the World, being gone out of the World unto his
Father, be not now the light of the World by the ministration of preaching
through the operation of his Spirit, as he was the light of the world when in
the world by the ministration of preaching of his death, sufferings and
resurrecition? explain: Since his being in the world was to work Salvation for
the world by his death, and being gone out of the world now manifests the
Salvation, which while being in the world he wrought being risen from the dead.

Whether the Faith of Gods elect that purifieth the heart and gives victory
over the world, is not the hand that receives the power, by believing on
Christ the giver of the grace to beget us unto God, children of the Kingdom, or
is it by believing the witness in man, which yo^ call the light in conscience
which is but the spirit of man, that which Solomon calls the Candle of the
Lord, that gives victory over the worl^ in the heart? explain.

Whether the Holy Ghost that proceeds from the Father, and the Son, as
proceeding from Father and Son be in the efflux both Father and Son? explain.
Since you deny in print three subsistences in the one divine essence; and that
they are not distinct in their operations as three, father, word, and spirit.

Whether the water blood and spirit that bore witness to Christ o^ earth, were
properties of his humanity, or of his divinity? explain* And if of his divine
natue and not of his humane, what was it of Ghrist that cried upon the cross,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me.

Since the Scriptures say that it behoved the Christ to dye, and it being
unpossible for God to dye; whether the light in conscience which you call
Christ, be the Christ that so dyed, or the person be the Christ that dyed?
explain.

Whether, since there is but one Gospel, is it the power of the light in
conscience, according to your Doctrine, or is it the death, burial and
resurrection of Christ according to the Scriptures, yea or nay! explain.

Whether the price that bought man to God be the blood of Christ's person, since
it was of the body God prepared to do his will, or was it the life of God in
that body that was blood? explain: And if the life of the Godhead is blood,
show us how it came to be blood, since without blood there is no remission.

Whether the Lamb that purchased his Church by his own blood to present it
without spot to God, was Jesus of whom the Prophet said, he was led as a Lamb
to the slaughter, and as a sheep before the shearers, he opened not his mouth,
Or the light in man is this Christ off whom the Prophet spoke? explain. For
that of him in his personal appearance, John the Baptist said, behold the Lamb
of God that takes away the sins of the World.

Whether the word without Mary's substance for his body is the whole Christ, or
the word with the substance taken of Mary be the Christ? explain. For of Christ
the Scipture speaks in two distinctions as of two natures in the acting, though
one in conjunction in the act, as he is the word, God in Christ, and as man,
Christ in whom God was as written god was in Christ reconciling, and Christ him
by whom the world was reconciled to God, and the word being one with and in
Christ, whether the whole Christ through the words assuming the humane Nature
to his divine, be not God; the divine and humane nature making up the whole
person of Christ? explain.

And since it is written of the Son, thy Throne O God is for ever and ever; a
scepter of righteousness is the scepter of thy Kingdom, thou have loved
righteousness and hated iniquity, therefore God even thy God has anointed thee
with the oil of gladness above thy fellows, whether this Son of God is he that
took upon him in his person for man's redemption the state of a servant,
accounting it no robbery to be equal with God and his fellow; or is it the
light in conscience (you say is Christ) who is this exalted Man Gods fellow,
whose throne is for ever? explain.

But for your asserting of many Scriptures that relate to Christ for the
redemption of man, I know no professors that deny them, as they teach faith to
him, the Son of God: But your bringing them to color your selves in your
opinion of the light in you to be the Christ that I suppose they do deny, and
bring them for a witness against you for your convincement: And I having this
knowledge, see not wherein you are wronged in being charged to deny God and
Christ in a place above stars, Sun, Moon and Elements, since what is said by
you to the contrary speaks not of place but power, and your saying you own his
ascension, and yet denied his personal body to be ascended, puts me upon this
Quaery.

Whether you own Christ as a person ascended up into a Heaven, that is, a place
of residence whereinto he is ascended far above stars, Sun, Moon and Elements?
explain.

From the 5 page to the 8 I pass over, being but the same spoke to before: But
that you say in the 8 page Christ is the true light that enleightneth every man
that comes into the world, you err not, knowing the Scriptures; for they say
not that Christ made all things; for that as Christ is man, he is made, but as
the manhood is united to the word who is God, and that the two natures in
Christ are not to be divided, so it may be said that he made them by his head,
and the head of Christ is God: For we find no where in Scripture that it is
said, of Christ as he is Man of the Virgin Mary, that in him was the life that
inlightneth every Man, but in reference to the word that dwelt bodily in him.

From whence we quaery, whether this Christ of whom John said was the Christ,
be he, or the light in Man the Christ that G. F. says is the Christ? explain:
and if the Christ that G. F. says is the Christ be he, I desire to know of G.
F, or his Disciples what is become of the Christ whom the Scriptures bears
record to be he, Since you deny him in heaven the exalted of God, for his
Christ in a person.

Whether, since you say it is the light that enlightneth every Man that comes
into the world, and the light is Christ, by this assertion is not the light
God, and God the Christ? explain.

And if the light be God, and God is Christ, and not the person the Christ,
then, when Christ dyed was it not God that dyed, and him that was nailed upon
the Cross? explain. Since it is written of him that is the Savior, that by
death he destroyed him that had the power of death; to wit, the Devil. And if
it was God that dyed, and buried as dead, who or what was there in Heaven or in
Earth that did or could raize up God from the dead? explain.

And your saying that with the light they saw the blood of Christ: I say they
did: For he whose Testimony is true was by when the Lord was put to death, who
says, That which we have seen with our eyes and looked upon, and handled with
our hands, and have heard from the beginning declare we unto you, that your
fellowship may be with us, and our fellowship is with the Father and the Son in
the light: Therefore whether by the light in Man does Man come to see Christ
and his blood in himself, that Christ shed for cleansing from all sin, or by
Faith, see the merit of the blood shed upon the Cross, to the receiving the
promise to wit, the Spirit that cleanses the conscience from all sin?

Whether Christ is the true light as he is the Son of God personally come in
flesh without man, or the light in the conscience be the true light and Savior
that is in Man? explain.

Whether since we are to wait upon Christ for the receiving of his Spirit, is
Man to wait upon the light in his conscience as his Christ and giver of the
Spirit or upon Christ who is without him as the Christ and sender of the true
Spirit? explain.

Whether Peter's witness in his conscience, who confessed to Christ to be the
Son of God, who had the words of Eternal Life, was not as much God and Christ
as the witness in you? explain.

Whether Peter trusted in the witness in his conscience for his Savior, or
expected Salvation by it, and not in Christ, that said unto him, when thou art
converted strengthen the brethren? explain.

Whether Cornelius that feared God, and walked righteously before him, in
Prayers, Fastings, and giving of Alms, from an awakened conscience that stood
in subjection to God, had Salvation from the light in his conscience, or from
Christ the Son of God, whom Peter preached to him for Savior without him?
explain.

Whether Cornelius did believe the witness in his conscience to be God and
Christ. and to this witness as God or Christ Fasted, Prayed and gave Alms, that
by his works his witness as God or Christ should save him, or did he believe on
God who has made the Heavens and the Earth, whose dwelling is in that high and
lofty place of Eternity? explain.

And being said, Zacheus, this day is Salvation come to thy house, whether it
was Christ that brought Salvation, who that day came to him, he being the
Savior that gives Salvation, or Zacheus light in his conscience that that day
brought Salvation unto h^ explain.

Whether the witness or light in Paul's conscience that lead h^ to persecute the
church of Christ, from his zeal he had to Go^ being instructed in Moses Law,
was God, Christ, or Savior, Christ, even Jesus of Nazareth who spoke to him in
a bright shini^ light out of Heaven, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
explain.

Since it is said Christ in you the hope of Glory, whether Christ be in Man
before he is revealed by God in Man? explain? For is written that the Spirit of
Christ the World cannot receiv^ because said he they do not believe on me.

And Christ being revealed in Man, whether it means himself i^ person, or his
Spirit who give the knowledge of God in the Fac^ of Christ, by bringing in the
light of Christ in which he is gloryf^ed into tho heart, that fills the heart
with exceeding joy in believing? explain, Since that Paul says, While in the
body absent fre^^ the Lord, and thence desires to go hence to be present with
the Lord.

And in that the body must be put off, for that it hinders the inward Man in
its being with the Lord; Quaery, what is this inward man? Is it a creature or
is it God? Is it the Spirit of Man that God said he would not always contend
with, for if he should i^ would fail before him, and the Soul that God has
made: or is it Christ? explain. And the inward man of the heart being absent
from Christ the Lord whilst it is in this body, whether Christ as he is in his
own being be not distinct and apart of himself without and separate from his
creatures, and the Man in heart distinct and apart as a creature, and own self
subsistence? explain.

Whether the ownness of Christ and his Saints be such an incorporated unity,
that from their conjunction with him they are o^ Christ without seperability?
or whether the Union of the Saints (...) God and Christ be the heavenly
enjoyment, wherein the is fel^wship with God and Christ in the light? explain.

Since in divine writ it is said of God, I the Lord create the darkness, (...)
form the light, whether the light that God formed is not natural? (...) since
it is also said, if the light in you be darkness, how great is that ^dness;
which light in man being his sight, is it of any other quality (...) the light
of nature which God has formed? explain.

And the light in man being but a formed light that God has created, ^hether
this light be Christ the son of God, as the word that was ^od, that with the
creature is become the Christ and man's Savior? ^^plain.

And since of man it is written that he is the Image of God, whether he (...)
the Image of God, as God is God in his Deity, or is the Image of ^od in a
creatural form from Gods principles of nature? explain.

And if man be the Image of God in his Deity, as God is God, who out and beyond
all nature and creature, how is it possible otherwise be, but so many men so
many Gods? explain: and if this could in ^y possibility be admitted, then is
not the omnipotency in the crea^re as a God? and if so how is it possible for
him to be condemned?

And since the light and darkness is the creation of god, and but his ^eation,
it is manifest the creation is not he himself; and the creature ^ing a
substance created out of nature, having in him darkness and ^ght, whether the
creature in his creat be as a creature any thing more, ^t a creature consisting
of a natural make? explain.

And since the Body returns to dust, and the Spirit to God, that gave (...)
what is the nature of that body, and its properties, and what is the nature of
the Spirit, and the properties of it, in that it goes to God, ^at gave it at
the breaking of the body, since it never dies but abides ^ever? explain.

And since you say that the soul of Man is not a creature; and that the soul is
saved or damned, and that the soul is of an Eternal subsistency whether if the
soul is no creature, is it God, and if God does he sav^ part of himself in some
men, and part of himself in others damn? explain.

For the rest of your Paper, I pass it over, acknowledging that these
principles for yours have been published to the World before now to wit. 1.
That the light of or in conscience (a measure whereof every man has that comes
into the world) is Christ the Justifier, the advocate, the mediator, the
Redeemer and the Savior. 2 That the sufferings death, resurrection and
ascension of Christ, and his blood i^ but the professors stuff. 3. That Christ
was not Christ in his person but that which was Christ was something that was
in his person 4. That Christ dyed not for satisfaction but for example. 5. Tha^
the mercy of God without any satisfaction by Christ, made to God for man does
save the creature, as the creature is obedient unto the ligh^ in his
conscience. 6. That the Father, Word Spirit, are not thre^ distinct operators
in the Divine essence. 7. That the blood of Christ does not at one for man with
God, and that his body is not ascended into heaven: These I acknowledge arr
published for your principle to the world before now.

And in that you packed up together so many Scriptures, as if yo^ believed
Christ and salvation by him, as they bear record to him; knowing you dance as
in a Net; concern my self to direct these Quaries unto you for explanation,
that the truth which is pure in it self may not be veiled through false
glosses; and you returning a Christian like answer to what is here presented in
truth and simplicity, without Serpentime twinings and false glosses, will give
us hope that at length, (...) you believe the scriptures that you have so
largely in show brought you may come to sit down with the children of Christ in
the Faith tha^ leads up unto Eternal Life, which if it may appear, I shall hope
you insides may come to be much better known, then they are now, being through
Faith washed in the blood of the Lamb, whatever your outside ^e.

And you, my old Acquaintance, to you I write as one from God that have found
mercy, from believing and depending upon his Name by Jesus Christ, who is the
glass, that you may see his glory in him being ^is glass, in whose Face the
glory of the Father only can be seen; and ^^owing that your inward Man of your
hearts is in bondage by the ^onds of darkness in your inward deeps; and that
those bonds cannot ^e broken by any but by Christ that has the key to open the
book and ^o break off the Seals, I do pray that the eyes of your minds may be
en^ightned to look up to him by that ingrafted word of Faith, which ^akes of
him (as the hand (his Spirit to unlock the shut up gates of our hearts, that
the King of Glory may come in; which hitherto being lock^d up, the Prisoner of
hope cannot come forth; although it has the promise from the covenant that God
has made to Christ, that by his blood ^e will send it forth out of the deep
Pit wherein there is no waters.

And therefore I say to you that the Principle upon which you bot^om, being not
Christ, but light of and in Nature, is nor that that can ^eliver your Souls out
of the Jaws of Death, and bring you into the ^and of rest, for worm Jacob, the
hidd n man in the heart obtains ^ot unto Gods salvation, although for it is
ordained from ^he purchasement of our Lord Jesus Christ, till that the bright
^eams of the Lord, the Christ shines into the heart, from the Lamb that sits
with God upon the Throne; for the goodly Tents of Jacob is a ^abitation of
light in the Lord; and Christ the Lord, who is his light when he appears brings
the light for his rest, the streams whereof make ^lad the City of my God, which
light of Christ being from above, ^s the supernatural light, whose issuing
beams no man knows, nor can ^now but the elect of God to whom it is given
through the Faith that (...) in him.

And my old Friends; I would that I might freely speak to you without offense,
then would I say that the light that is in you as you are creatures by make
from the first Adam is not the light of which I speak that is his habitation
for his Saints: For he that said, I am the light, and he that believes on me
shall not walk in darkness but I will raise them up at the last day, is Christ
Jesus who was put to death in the flesh, b^ justified in the Spirit, that he
may give light and life, to all them the believe on him, and in Faith obey to
the receiving of the promise, b^ of the light of and in man he says, if the
light in you be darkness how gre^ is that darkness, but of the light that
proceeds from the Sun, thus he spea^ the light shines in darkness, and the
darkness comprehends it not; whi^^ being the light that does accompany the
gospel is the salvation of the Saint that the gospel has purchased for them,
of which he said, ear has not hear nor eye has not seen what the father has
prepared for them that love him Which being the light of the Gospel far excels
the light in Natu^ which God as Sovereign Lord has planted in man's heart for
man guide to lead him out of himself to Christ the second Adam by who^ the
entering in is into the rest that God has prepared for them befo^ the World was
made.

And my old friends, I would that none of you fall short of entering into his
rest by unbelief through the zeal you bear to your Preacher that teach you an
entrance by work of obedience to the light of Natu^ in you, for verily such
Preachers preach to you voluntary humil^ that they may glory in your flesh:
Wherefore it does remain to y^ to walk in the way that is appointed that leads
up into his rest! least any mistakes by witchcraft in Spirit you take the way
of your own i^vention, and fall short of entering into his rest: For that it is
cert^^ that by no other way under Heaven we can enter into this rest; b^ by
Faith in him who is both Lord and Christ: For him has God s^ed; Wherefore look
ye up unto him who is arisen from the dead, a is ascended into the majesty on
high, where the principalities a^ powers and thrones fall down and worship the
ancient of days, and Lamb that sits upon his throne, For Christ of whom we
speak has (...) off the Grave, and is arisen from the T^mbs in which he was
laid; Christ of whom you speak (the light in you) it is in the Grave, and
Grave-cloaths wraps it up in the deeps of your heart, from ^here cannot come
forth but by him, who is the Resurrection of the deed, wh^ voice being heard
within your hearts; your dead hearing the voice the Son of God comes forth and
lives: and without his voice (...) you up, you dye eternally, whatever you say
from your believing in ^itness of your consciences for your Savior? For here
it is not of ^n thrt wills nor of him that runs, but of God that shows a
mercy. ^ake heed that no man deceive you? For the Spirit foreseeing what ^ould
be in the latter days, foretold a departure from the Faith, and at men should
rise up bringing in most o amnable Errors, denying the ^rd that bought them;
and many should follow their pernicious ways, of ^em the way of truth should be
evil spoken off. For verily he that enters ^to his rest must come in by
Christ, the door, without which there is no ^^p: But you rejecting him and
taking to your selves another way ^nnot enter in into his rest, although the
gates stand open.

And you that say you have the power to do wonderful things, and ^rophesie in
his Name, are not you they of whom he speaks, that when the Son of man, shall
sit upon his Throne, and all his Angels with him that shall come and say; Lord,
Lord, open unto us? To whom he shall answer, Depart from me ye workers of
iniquity, I know you not, who has required these things at your hands, for did
you do the things you did at all ^^to me.

Therefore unto you, my old acquaintance write I this, that you may escape the
errors of percition least in you be found an evil heart of unbelief: departing
from the living God, and so you fall short of that rest that God has prepared
for those that love the Lord Jesus, and believe that God and our Father has
sent him, the love of his bosom to be the savior of the World.

Brethren, the grace of God the Father, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, keep your
hearts by the holy Ghost by, says unto the end; that so the Crown of ever
lasting life you may not fall shor^ off through unbelief; for what shall it
profit a Man to gain the whole World and lose his own soul, search the
Scriptures, they teach of him; compare your opinions with their Doctrine
believe their authority; for they are faithful witnesses unto his Name. Be
faithful to him that has called you to the gospel of his dear son, by whom is
the gift of Eternal Life. Peace be unto all men from God our Father, and from
our Lord Jesus Christ in the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, Is the prayer of him
who wishes your tranquillity in God, known by the name off

R. C.


And before I close this Paper, I cannot but give a hint of this most hideous
impious blaphemy that is started up from those Monsters of conceit, who declare
themselves the two witnesse^ spoken off in the Revelations; and that they are
the two prophets, who have received commission to damn and to save whom they
will, and do exercise their pretended commission upon them by Magic, cursing
them that will not receive them as they give themselves out to be And that they
are the last ministration and dispensation that shall come: Who being poisoned
in their understandings from a corupted heart do not stick blasphemously to
affirm that when the Lord Jesus Christ dyed for the sins of the World, that the
total God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ dyed also; And that when he took
his Journey unto the Earth, he left the government of heaven to Moses and Elias.

But in that of God it is said, I the Lord change not, therefore O you sons of
Jacob you are not; consumed: Therefore I present to these profane men these
Quaeries, to wit. 1. Whether if the Almighty God who has made the Heavens and
the Barrh, and upholdeth all things by his power, did dye, what was therein the
heavens or the earth that could uphold the works of his hands; And if that he
did dye, who or what could raise him up from the dead. 1. If the total God that
is eternal dyed, was not the infinite become finite. 3. If it had been possible
for God to dye, and that he did dye, we^ not he that was, and is, and is to
come, who it the Alpha and Omega, and the beginning and the ending, extinct. 4.
If that he dyed and is raised from the dead, was not that that raised up from
the death greater then he. 5. If death prevailed over him, and that by death he
was dead was not death greater then God. 6. If death laid some hold upon him,
that by its power his life was at an end, what could have broken death asunder
for the redemption of Man.

But Christ having foretold that in the latter days false Prophets, and false
Christ's should come, which prophecy of Christ we see accomplished this day,
Therefore I leave these blasphemous magic Prophets, unto their own pit
entombed in Satan's darkness.

FINIS.

