THE CASE OF THE Clothiers, Weavers, Hosiers, Merchants, Drapers, Mercers, and
other Dealers in the Woollen Manufactures; with Relation to the Bill now
depending, for the Transfering the Collection of the Duty of Aulnage to the
Custom House, and giveing a Recompense to the Crown for the same.
THe Office of Aulnage was Constituted for the Measuring, Edw. 3.
Weighing, and Searching of Cloth; And to the intent that the Dealers therein
might not be deceived, the Seal was put on, to signify the Goodness thereof,
and the Duty paid in Consideration of the performance of that Service.

The Subsidy of Aulnage was granted to the Crown, in consideration of the
Releasing Forfeitures, that were grievous to the Dealers in Cloth.

The Office of the Aulnager is now become altogether unnecessary, and no ways
Answering the End of its first Constitution, and is only continued for the
Collecting the Duties due as aforesaid, and the Seal now only signifies, (as a
Cocquet at the Custom-house) that the Duty is paid.

The manner of Collecting these Duties, is not only very chargeable to the
Crown, but Extremely Oppressive and Burdensome to the Subject, and a great
hindrance to the Trade of the Woollen Manufactures. 1. These Duties are very
Chargeable in the Collecting, as appears by Accounts delivered by the Farmers
of the said Duties, (to the Committee appointed by the House of Commons) by
which Accounts they set forth, That they Collected in one year, from the 25 of
December, 87. to the 25 December 88, 12344 l. Besides the Duty on Stockings,
Blankets, and Rugs. By Accounts likewise delivered by the Farmers to the said
Committee, it does appear that they made clear of all Charges, from the 25 of
March 86, to 25 March 89, (taking the mean proportion) per annum 7350 l. So
that the Charge in Collecting, comes to per annum, above 5000 ^. The Rent that
is now paid by the Farmers to the Duchess of Richmond, who has the Grant from
the Crown, is per annum 3138 l. The Fine that was paid for a Lease of Twenty
one years, was 9000 l. which being reduced to a Yearly Rent comes to per annum
900 l. Rent and Fine comes to per annum 4038 l. Out of which a Small Rent (by
the Patent) is Reserved to the Crown, not exceeding per annum 200 l.

The manner of Collecting these Duties is very Grievous to all the Dealers in
the Woollen Manufactures For,

That in many places for the Payment of a Half penny or Penny Duty, they are
forced to carry their Goods to several Offices, at great distance from their
Habitations to be Sealed, by which means their Goods are much damaged, their
Inventions Exposed their Markets often times lost, which is much more Grievous
than the payment of the Duty.

That in other places they are forced to send for Seals many Miles, and many
times the Aulnagers not having Seals, the Clothes for want thereof, have been
sent up to London, or other places, where they have been Seized, and the
Clothiers put to great Charge and Trouble to have them again.

That they make frequent Searches at the Dressers, Dyers, Pressers, etc. And if
by any accident the Seals be droped off, as it will of times happen they Seize
and carry away what they find Unsealed.

That they make frequent Searches at Inns, Search Wagons, or Horse Packs upon
the Road, Search Fairs, Markets, BlackwelHall, Custom-house Keys, Merchants and
Factors, Shops and Warehouses, and where else they please, Seize and carry away
what they find Unsealed.

That they enter into and Search all Retailers Shops, and Warehouses, rifle all
their Goods, disturb their Markets, Seize and carry away either whole Pieces or
Remnants if Unsealed, although they have been Sealed; this being such an
Extraordinary Grievance, the Retailers have been forced to Yearly Contributions
to be freed from so great an Inconvenience.

That all Goods Seized are presently Compounded for, or else carried to the
Aulnagers Houses or Offices, where the Owners are forced to attend and
Compound, at what Rates these Aulnagers please: Or if they refuse, then are
their Goods returned into the Exchequer, as Forfeited to the Crown, where they
must Sue for them; which Remedy being in most cases worse than the Disease,
forces the Complainants to suffer the loss of their Goods, (many times
unjustly) rather then be at so great a Charge and Trouble to obtain them again.

That although it has been made appear that the Goods have been Seized
wrongfully, yet have they refused to deliver them again until certain Fees, as
they pretend is due, for Porteridge, Warehouse Room, etc. be allowed.

Thus are all the Dealers in the Woollen Manufactures oppressed, and all this
for a Small and Inconsiderable Duty, not amounting to Five Shillings for a
hundred pound value.

Thus are the Wheels of Trade clogged with an unnecessary Office, and
Unreasonable Officers, who under the specious pretenses of Collecting and
Increasing the Revenue of the Crown, have been, and still are very Industrious,
to Collect and Increase their own Profits and Gain, to loss, discouragement and
vexation of many Thousand Laborious Subjects.

For Remedy of all which Mischiefs it has been proposed, That the Office and
Seal should be wholly taken away, and that the Duties should be made payable at
the Custom-house, for such Manufactures only as are Exported.

For which purpose a Bill has been Four several times before the Parliament in
former Sessions.

A Bill for the same purpose is now depending, and if the Rates that are now
incerted in this Bill, had been Collected at the Custom-house in those years in
which the Aulnagers set forth, That they made clear of all Charges 7350 l. they
would have produced near 8000 l. per annum, as by Accounts abstracted out of
the Custom-house Books is most plainly to be demonstrated.
The Rates that are incerted in this Bill, amounts unto about 2000 l. per
annum, more then the Rates that were Incerted in the Bill that was depending in
the last Sessions, and comes to about 500 l. per annum more than the Aulnagers
made clear of all Charges in those years when their Exactions were very great.

It is therefore humbly hoped this Bill will soon be passed into a Law, and the
Dealers in the Woollen Manufacture thereby delivered from the Burdens and
Oppressions they have for a long time labored under.


