The Case of the Inhabitants of (...) Parish of Croyden, in the Co^^^^ (...)
concerning the Great (...) under, by reason, of the (...) ^^^^^tions, and
violent illegal and (...) Prosecutions of Doctor William (...) care of the said
Parish:
Humbly Presented to the Consideration of Parliament.
THe said Doctor William Cle^^^, in the Times of the Late Rebellion, obtained a
Sequestered (...) in Northamptonshire; in which he behaved himself much unlike
Clerg^-Man as will appear by the Articles annexed (...) which were in those
Days Exhibited against him: However (...) Continued to Persecute the Poor
People, (...) Majesty's most happy Resta^^ation to his Crown and (...) when
Doctor Whitford, the Person Sequestered out of the said Living (...) above
seventy years of Age, and living, was restored to his Benefice: Which (...)
Living, he entertained one Mr. Preston to be his Reader, who accepted (...)
^^^ved and Officiated there in that capacity, but Clewer would never pay him
his Wages, so that he might have Starved, if some of the Parishioners (to whom
by (...) he did sometimes Read Common Prayers and Divine Service) had not given
him relief, for which Clewer caused him to be sent for up to London by a (...)
and being so Old that he could not Ride on Horseback, he was brought up in a
Cart stuffed with straw, and kept at London till utterly ruined, and than they
released him.

The Articles Exhibited against the said Clewer by the said Parishioners, were
as follows.

Articles Exhibited against William Clewer, Minister of Ashton in the County of
Northampton.
FIrst, that the said Clewer is a very Covetous Man, and does endeavor
unjustly to exact and extort Sums of Money and other things from the said
Parishioners, and others that he has to deal for.

The said Clewer did unjustly demand a Cow for a Herriot, of Sarah Honor a Poor
Widow, whose Husband was then lately Dead, and Died so Poor that the Parish was
forced to Bury him at their Charge: he leaving his said Wife with five small
Children, and nothing to maintain them but that one Cow, and it was never known
that any Herriot was there paid.

And the better to procure his End therein, the said Clewer Promised her, that
if she would let him have the Cow, he would procure her a Warrant from the
Justice of the Peace, that the Parish should pay her weekly one shilling for
the maintenance of her self and Children.

The said Clewer has several times unjustly detained and withheld the Wages of
Laborers from them who had Painfully and Faithfully done their Duties.

He caused a Poor Widow (whose Husband was there lately Dead, and she her self
^eing then very Sick and Weak and almost blind, and left in Debt fifty pounds
at least, having four small Children unable to maintain themselves) to pay him
the tenth penny for a Calf which she sold toward the Payment of her Husbands
Debts; and enforced her to pay two pence for the Head and Pluck which she had
reserved for her self.

The said Clewer has pulled down a great part of the Parsonage House, and
converted the Materials thereof to his own use.

The said Clewer notwithstanding his Parsonage at Ashton, is Worth one Hundred
and Twenty Pounds by the Year at least: yet for lucre of Money did undertake to
serve another Cure of Twenty Pounds by the Year, by means whereof he served
neither of them as he ought to do.

The said Clewer is a very Contentious Man, and does much vex and trouble, and
disquiet his Neighbors, Parishioners and others, by unjust Suits and Malicious
troubles. For,

The said Clewer did in a Clandestine way, procure a Bond which was made to a
Sergeant at Arms for security, and such one Budworth, who was Surety herein;
upon the same, and recovered Fifty Pounds of him, and caused him to spend Fifty
Pounds more at least, notwithstanding the Sergeant at Arms was never Damnified
one penny thereby.

The said Clewer has at the last Assizes in the County of Northampton indicted
a Gentlewoman of his Parish of good Parentage, and of Worth and Quality, for
Felony, for Stealing of his Horse; and himself, and his Wife, and Maid gave
evidence thereupon, and would have brought the Gentlewomans Life in question if
he possibly could have done it: and when the Grand Jury had returned the Bill
Ignoramus, he gave out in Speeches, that he had sufficiently disparaged the
Gentlewoman by what he had done.

That he has commenced Suits against diverse of his Parishioners, who were
willing to pay him his just dues, because they would not pay what he would
unjustly have exacted and extorted from them.

He has refused to pay just Debts owing by him, and has declared, he would
rather spend one hundred Pounds in Law, than pay five Pounds when he is sued
for it, though it were due.

The said Clewer is very weak unable and insufficient for the Ministerial
Function, and idle, and will not take pains therein as he ought to do, nor
perform what of Duty he ought: For

He does ordinarily Preach other Men's Works, Verbatim, that are in Print, which
the Parishioners have in their Houses, and can read at Home.

He has several times in his Sermons uttered and spoke nonsense.

He has neglected his Cure upon several Lords Days, to prosecute contentious
Suits and Quarrels, and for his own ease, and procured none to supply the same.

Refused to Baptize the Child of a Visible Believer, being tendered and the
Father present.

Refused to Baptize the Child of a Soldier that was in Service, because the
Father was not present, and the Child died within few days.

The said Clewer is scandalous in his Life and Conversation? For,
FIrst, He is a Liar, and a common speaker of Untruths.

Secondly, He did Privately keep in his House one Mistress Bernard, Widow, six
or seven Weeks together, and denied that she was there: and afterward kept her
publicly, having no relation to her, and now keeps her as his Wife, but
whether they were ever Married according to the Laws, is not known.

That he the said Clewer has been Drunk, and abused himself with excess.

The Kings Majesty being restored, the Sequestered incumbent Doctor Whitford
entered upon the said Living, and Doctor Clewer being thereupon to seek for a
benifice came to London, and then pretended himself to be a zealous Son of the
Church (though for ten years before he had possessed the Sequestered Living, and
Violently Prosecuted his Reader, for Reading Common Prayer as aforesaid) and
not being well known about London, hearing that the Vicarage of Croydon was
Void, made Friends to the Earl of Clarenden then Lord Chancellor of England,
to obtain the same, which he effected by the help of a Gentleman, (to whom he
promised a good Reward for his pains, to be paid him so soon as the
Presentation should be Sealed) which Gentleman having obtained the
Presentation, the Doctor got it from him; but never paid him to this day, as
the Gentleman reported.

That having got this Presentation to Croydon, he hastened thither: the
Vicarage consists only of small Tithes, which at the utmost Value, is not worth
above Eighty Pounds; this for some time was paid the Dr. per annum, who when he
had been a little in the Parish and had got all the Parishioners Names into his
Book, fell to his old Practices of Oppression and Extortion, bringing
frequently Vexations Suits against all or most of the Parishioners (because
they would not comply with his unconscionable and extravagant demands. Under
these Horrid Oppressions the Parishioners having many years suffered, and some
hundreds of the Inhabitants ruined thereby, they joined together, and caused
the said Doctor to be indicted for a Common Barrater, was to have come to a
Trial in Hillary Term 1673, at the King's Bench Bar: accordingly the Jury was
summoned, and the Informers ready to have made good the Indictment by above
three-hundred Witnesses: but about two days before the said Trial should have
been, a Noli Prosequi was entered, by means whereof the Trial was stopped.

This Noli Prosequi was obtained by fraud also, for Clewer finding that the
Parish were resolved for to prosecute, came to one Mr. Bickerton, who was then
one of Mr. Baron Turners Clerks, tells him thereof, adding that he was like to
be undone thereby, for that the Rogues (as he called them) would swear him to
be a Common Barrator: then asked him whether he believed there could be such
Rogues in England? To which the said Bickerton replied, that he always
suspected that a mischief would come upon him, for his continued Vexations
continued to his Poor Parishioners, and wondered they had not done it sooner;
adding, that he believed they had just cause to proceed against him, by what he
understood of his ways in proceeding against them in the Exchequer. Whereupon
Clewer asked if there were no way to stop the Trial for that Time? begged his
assistance if possible to do the same, promising to give him ten pounds for his
pains if he succeeded therein: Upon which Mr. Bickerton advised him to get a
Noli Prosequi, for which purpose a Petition was drawn, setting forth that the
Parishioners were Litigious, factious People, would pay him no Tithes, but
forced him by means thereof to sue for his dues, and now had indicted him for a
Common Barrator, merely for bringing such his lawful Suits against them;
therefore prayed Proceedings might be stopped. This done, the said Doctor gave
Bickerton a note under his hand to pay him ten Pounds if the Suit were stopped
that Term, and away he went with the Petition to a Person that presented it to
his Majesty, (who, being misinformed, and thinking that the said Doctor might
have just occasion to sue as by Petition he pretended) did order Mr. Attorney
General to enter a Noli Prosequi; and accordingly a Noli prosequi reciting his
Majesty's Command was granted, and the Suit stopped, which done the said Doctor
went back to Bickerton, and crying, told him his Majesty denied the Petition,
and that the Trial was not stopped, desired therefore his Note again that he had
given him for his ten Pounds, which Mr. Bickerton delivered, as thinking Clewer
had spoken truth, and so cheated him of his ten Pounds promised him upon
account as aforesaid,

The poor Parishioners of Croyden, they were greatly troubled not knowing what
to do, being stopped from proceedings at Law, thereupon went to Counsel, and were
advised to have Petitioned the Parliament then sitting, as lying under a
Grievance, and being denied the benefit of the Law for their redress, but upon
Application made to the Lord Keeper and Mr. Attorney General that now are, and
acquainting them with the Truth of the Case, they did assure the Parishioners,
that his Majesty was surprised with the granting of his Noli Prosequi, and
undoubtedly would take the same off, if addressed unto in Council.

Whereupon the 21 of March 1672, a Petition was exhibited to his Majesty,
praying that the Noli Prosequi might be taken off, and the Parishioners left to
the Law, or that he would graciously be pleased to hear the Cause, and relieve
them according to Justice.

To which Petition was annexed the Articles following.

Articles of high Misdemeanor humbly exhibited to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, and the Right Honorable the Lords of his most Honorable Privy
Council, by the Inhabitants of the Town of Croydon in the County of Surrey,
against Doctor William Clewer, Vicar of that Town.
THat the said Doctor by unjust Vexations and numerous Suits by him frequently
brought against his Parishioners, extorts more from them than what either his
Predecessors claimed, or had, or is his due.

2. He frequently after he has been punctually paid his full dues, arrests his
poor Parishioners, and forces them to pay the same over again, together with
great sums for charges, which he pretends he has been at, declaring he will
have of them what he pleases, for he cannot live on his Dues.

3. He has served several of the poor People with pretended Processes, and
compels them to pay him money when there is nothing due to him from them, and
extorts money for the Process, whenas there was never any Process pursued other
than what was made by himself, which is to the great abuse of his Majesty's
Courts at Westminster.

4. That he does very often sue out many Writs out of the Exchequer against
several of the Parishioners that owe him not a farthing, puts them to vexation,
trouble and charge, and then never exhibits any Bill against them.

5. That because one of his Parish would not Swear for him what he would have
had him, he vowed he would sue him as long as he lived, and so has continued
to do ever since, to his almost utter ruin.

6. That he frequently arrests poor People for Tithes, puts them to great
charges when as they owe him nothing; and such as are able to make opposition
he never declares against, but forces the rest to compound and give him what he
pleases.

7. That he has Attached the Goods of several persons for Tithes pretended to
be due to him, whenas none was due from them, hereby put the People to charge,
done damage to their Goods; and when Replevins have been brought, then he has
never appeared or declared.

8. That he has imprisoned several Persons, and detained their Goods in his
house till he has forced them to give him what money they have, and seal Bonds
to him for other sums of money by him demanded, when there has not been one
penny due to him.

9. That having come to an agreement with several persons for their Tithes to
take such a sum for them yearly, he has received the sum of money agreed upon
for several years together, and afterward denied the same, and sued the
persons for their Tithes in kind, and the arrears thereof; and some of the
People with whom he agreed, being illiterate, trusted him to write the
agreement, he set down double the sum that was agreed upon, got their mark to
his Book, and sued the Persons, and forced them to pay the same, together with
such unreasonable charge as he demanded of them.

10. He has Cited several of his Parishioners into the Spiritual Courts for
pretended Crimes, because he could not have his unjust demands of them, and
when he has so cited them, has taken sumes of money of them to excuse them
being prosecuted in the said Court.

11. That having let a Lease of his Tithes to one Mr. Wood for a certain Rent,
Wood by virtue of that Lease received Tithes of the Parishioners, and paid him
his Rent, after which he sued the Parishioners over again for the same Tithes,
and forced them for quietness to pay him, declaring the only way to be quiet
was to pay both Wood and Him.

12. Several poor People having in the time of the late dreadful Sickness
buried their relations in the Woods, the said Doctor in the time of their
necessity was so far from extending his Charity toward their relief, that he
forced them to pay unreasonable Fees for their Burials, as if they had been
buried by him in the Churchyard; those that would not comply with him, he sued
and extorted great sumes of money from them for his Charges as well as Duties,
before he would clear his Prosecution.

13. He denied to receive his Tithes in kind of several of his Parishioners,
though duly tendered to him, and he desired to accept of them; demands of them
what moneys he pleases in liew thereof; And if they do not pay what he demands,
he sues them at Law; and if they agree and pay for one, two, three, four, five,
or six years at the rate compounded for, then at the six years end he demands
of them the arrears of Tithes, pretending the Tithes to be of greater yearly
value then what he compounded for: and if the People will not pay what he
demands above his composition-money paid for these years past, then he sues
them till they by frights, and being put to unreasonable trouble and charge,
were enforced to give him what he demanded rather then be undone by contending
with him; that being the lesser evil of the too, by him put to their choice.

14. Here by this violent Persecution of diverse poor men, has forced them to
leave their Wives and Children, and seek shelter in remote places, to the utter
ruin of their Families.

15. He demands of the poor Inhabitants the tenth Penny got by their day
labor, and threatnes to compel them to bring their Milk into the Church Porch
to sell, and there deliver him his tenth: from some he has extorted great sums
of money, on pretense that he had been at Law with them seven years, whereas
they were never served with any Process; others he has served with Process
after they had newly paid him his demands, to put them to further vexation and
charge. One Process which he had taken out against a man, he altered it, and
made another man pay the charges as if it had been originally made out against
him.

16. He frequently extorts great Sums of Money from his Parishioners for
Marrying out of the Parish; and those that refuse to pay him what he demands
for that Offense, he refuses to receive their Tithes, and then sues them for
their Tithes and that together.

17. Such persons as refuse to pay the said Doctor his unjust Demands, he will
not suffer the Clerk to receive his just Dues, threatening to sue both for his
Money and Clerk's Dues, when as both has been tendered, and might have been
received without any Suit.

18. He has arrested several on pretended great Actions, and thereby kept them
in Prison, and yet on the Trial could prove nothing against them; to the utter
ruin of these poor People imprisoned; and has forced several persons to pay
him five pounds, where his due is but twelve pence.

By these and the like Extortions he makes his Living above 250 l. per annum,
which never was worth to any his Predecessors above 60 l. and enricheth himself
by the ruins of his Parishioners, especially the poorer sort that live on the
Common, whom he endeavors to enslave because they are not able to contend with
him at Law.

That Petition and Articles were read.

The Kings most excellent Majesty, his Royal Highness the Duke of York, and
eighteen more of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council were present, and
the Order following was made.

At the Court at White Hall, the 21 March, 1672.
Present
The King's most Excellent Majesty. His Royal Highness the Duke of York. Lord
Chancellor. Lord Treasurer. Duke of Lauderdale. Duke of Ormond. Earl of
Bridgwater. Earl of Northampton. Earl of Anglesey. Earl of Carlisle. Earl of
Arlington. Earl of Bathe. Earl of Craven. Lord Viscount Falconbridge. Lord
Newport. Lord Berkley. Mr. Secretary Coventry. Mr. Chancellor of the Duchy
Master of the Ordnance. Sir Thomas Osborne.


THe Inhabitants of the Town of Croydon in the County of Surrey, by their
Petition this day read at the Board, humbly complaining of the many
Oppressions, Extortions, violent and unwarrantable Proceedings of Dr. William
Clewer, Vicar of the said Parish of Croydon, against the Petitioners, under
pretense of recovering his Tithes, insomuch that in a short time (if Relief be
not given) most of the Petitioners will be forced to leave their Dwellings, or
be inevitably ruined, as some of them with their Families have already been; It
was thereupon Ordered by his Majesty in Council, That the Petitioners do
forthwith deliver in to the Clerk of the Council attending, the Particulars
wherewith they intend to charge the said Dr. Clewer, to the end he may have a
Copy thereof timely enough to come prepared to make his Defense thereunto on
Friday the 4th of April next: which time his Majesty has appointed to hear the
said Complaints, and does command that all Parties concerned do then give their
attendance.

John Nicholas.

According to this Order, a short Paper was delivered in to the Clerk of the
Council, whereby the Parishioners declared they would insist upon,

Oppression, Extortion, common Barretry, Subornation of Perjury, Forgery,
Felony, and some more such like petty Crimes of his Doctorship.

But before the Cause came to be heard, the Act of Grace came out; and
Barretry, a thing never pardoned by any former Act of Grace, was pardoned
thereby.

The fourth of April 1673. his Majesty was graciously pleased to come early to
the Council, and together with his Royal Highness, and twenty more of the Lords
of the Privy Council sat, with unspeakable Patience heard the Charge against
the said Doctor made good, which was done by the Oaths of several persons in
every particular mentioned in the said Articles, and many others (if possible
more wicked and heinous than the former) was proved against him.

1. As first, he being one of the Trustees for the Almshouses in Croydon,
would not suffer Almes-men to be admitted till he had forced them to promise to
allow him one half of the profits of the said Almshouses, and took Bond for
the same; which done, he admitted them; and would have turned one Edward Humfry
out of his Almshouse when he could no longer afford to pay him four shillings
a month according to the said Bond, which Humfry is now turned out by the said
Doctor.

2. That when at the Sacrament money has been collected for the Poor, he took
a third part of it to his own use, saying, None was poorer than the Vicar, and
kept it; which has since prevented men's Charity.

3. That he sent for a man from London pretending he would pay him some money
which he owed his Father who was dead; the poor man came to Croydon to his
house, and was made welcome, and had good meat and drink; after which he was
carried by the Doctor into the Garden, made eat Fruit; which done, he sent him
away without a penny of money: but that was not all, for soon after he arrested
the poor man in an Action of Trespass of two or three hundred pounds damage
for coming into his ground, kept him a Prisoner till he was forced to seal him
a general Release, and so cheated him of his Debt, which was about thirty
pound, and grew due to his Father Mr. Preston as aforesaid, for officiating as
Curate for him at Ashton in Northamptonshire.

4. They proved that the Doctor had two special Bailiffs that do all his
business, one of them has been burnt in the hand, the other a vile Rogue as is
in the Country; these Arrest his Parishioners, then bringing them to his house,
there they are kept Prisoners till he force them to agree to what he pleases,
which done, he draws them into Judgments instead of pretended Notes: and these
are they whom he uses, together with a most excellent Gentlewoman Mrs. Reams
's Daughter in law, who went there by the name of Mrs. Clewer, who by the
report of the whole Country and People at Westminster, had a Child before her
Marriage, lay in at Westminster, and the Doctor was much with her, and she went
for his Wife, though her Mother was then alive; now lives in the Doctors house,
wholly governs him, to say no worse, makes him oppress the People as she
pleases, and is his constant Witness to all his Agreements.

5. They proved that when the Doctor has gone into the Pulpit to Preach, he
has dropped bundles of Writs out of his Pockets taken out against his
Parishioners; and being taken up and perused, have been found to be razed in
the Dates and in the Names, and new Dates and new Names put into them: which
was a frequent thing with him, he making twenty Warrants out against twenty
Persons upon one single Writ, and making each person pay seven shillings six
pence for charges, when the Writ cost him not above three shillings; so that he
got above seven pound by a Writ, and made a property of his Majesty's Court of
Exchequer, to the enriching himself and impoverishing his Parishioners. And
after, when he should have been Preaching on Sundays, did use to ride to
London to follow Suits against his Parishioners, leaving them without any one
to Preach or read Prayers for them.

6. That he sent for the Parishioners to come to his house to pay their Tithes,
and when they had so done, frequently Arrested some of them in Actions of
Trespass for coming upon his ground, thereby putting them to great charge, and
ruined some of them.

7. That he hired a Carrier to bring his goods to London, which was done, and
in London an old Desk was stole out of the Carriers Warehouse, by his letting
his goods lie there three weeks after brought up; but the man that stole it was
caught, the Desk brought back to the Inn, was opened, not knowing whose it was,
and there was only in it a pair of Slippers and one old Law Book. The Doctor
arrests the Carrier, declares against him for 190 l. pretended to be in the
said Desk. The Carrier telling his Landlord thereof, he produced the said Desk
with the things aforesaid in it; so that Suit ceased.

8. He has caused the Gentry to leave the Town, to the Ruin thereof, spoiled
the School, so that no Gentlemen's Sons come at it. He has caused Lands and
Houses to fall in their Rents, brought down the Price of them in their Sale
above three years Purchase; makes Tenants that they will take no Lease, unless
Landlords will Covenant to secure them against him; which they dare not do, and
so the Houses and Lands stand empty and lie waste. And he has forced the
Parishioners to leave their Parish Church, and to keep from receiving the
Sacrament, insomuch that there are not above ten or twelve in the Parish
besides Almspeople (who are obliged) that will come to the Church or Sacrament;
but if a stranger at any time do Preach, there comes at least six, seven, or
eight hundred.

Lastly, That the said Doctor endeavored to part Husbands from their Wives,
raising false Stories of them; offered himself to sue out Divorces.

And many more Crimes of this nature.

These matters, and also the aforesaid Articles, being clearly proved, the said
Doctor only for defense offered, that the Parishioners would pay him no Tithes;
thereupon was forced to Sue them for his Dues, and prayed time to make defense.

Whereupon the Order following was made.

At Whitehall the fourth of April 1673.
Present,
The King's most Excellent Majesty. His Royal Highness the Duke of York. His
Highness Prince Rupert. Lord Chancellor. Lord Treasurer. Duke of Lauderdale.
Duke of Ormond. Marquess of Worcester. Earl of Ogle. Earl of Ossory. Lord
Great-Chamberlain. Earl of Bridgwater. Earl of Northampton. Earl of Anglesey.
Earl of Carlisle. Earl of Craven. Earl of Arlington. Earl of Carbury. Viscount
Hallifax. Mr. Secretary Coventry. Mr. Chancellor of the Duchy. Master of the
Ordnance.
HIS Majesty having this day heard at large the complaints of the Inhabitants
of the Parish of Croydon in Surrey, against Doctor Clewer, Vicar of that Place,
concerning several exorbitant Courses by him practiced for recovery of his
Tithes, was pleased to refer the whole matter to his Grace the Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury, and to the Earl of Shaftsbury Lord High Chancellor of England;
who requiring the said Doctor, and some of the principal persons of the said
Parish, to attend them, are to endeavor to settle the business for the future
quiet of the Parishioners, and that there may be a constant maintenance for the
Vicar there: which if their Lordships shall not be able to effect, they are to
return their Opinion and Advice to his Majesty what they conceive fit to be
done therein.

John Nicholas.

With this Order his Grace the Lord Arch Bishop of Canterbury, and the Right
Honorable the Lord High Chancellor of England being attended, they were
pleased to appoint a day in May last past, when both parties, with their
Witnesses, should attend their Lordships at Lambeth-House, where the matters
aforesaid were made manifest. As also,

That the said Doctor Clewer was a notorious and common Theif, that used to
come into Booksellers Shops and steal Books and carry them away, several
Masters of Shops gave Testimony thereof. To which the Doctor being to give
answer, declared that true it was, that he was sitting in a Shop, reading a
Book, and saw a Gentleman come by that he had occasion to speak with, and in
haste ran after him and forgot to lay down the Book and carried it with him;
but the man presently followed him and took it of him. But alas, good
Gentleman! he had often had this chance of following his Friends with other
men's Books under his Cloak. If he had done so but once, it might have passed as
forgetfulness: But it fell out very unluckily, that at Mr. Sawbridge his Shop
at the Bible on Ludgate Hill, he came in and took away a Book of good value,
carried it beyond Fleet-Bridge, and there was overtaken, and brought back, and
begged Pardon, declaring who he was. Mr. Sawbridg thereupon, loath to bring any
scandal upon a man of his Coat, went with him into Fetter-Lane to a Gentleman's
House to inquire of him, and finding that he was Doctor Clewer, and Vicar of
Croydon, resolved to make no more noise of it, if he would ingenuously confess
what Books he had formerly stolen from him; for that he had often been at his
Shop, and he had often lost Books, but never knew who to charge with them.
Thereupon he promised he would go home, look over all his Books, and bring him
the names of them, as also money for them; that he never came there again, or
sent the Catalogue of the Books he had stolen, but he did send his Wife to the
Shop with about thirty nine shillings, and she paid the same for the Books he
had stolen: so that it was not always forgetfulness, or running after Friends
that made him carry Books out of the Shops.

The said Doctor being then asked, why after so many Arrests, and so may suits
against his Parishioners, he never brought any one of them to Trial whereby the
modus decimandi might have been settled? It was proved against him, that being
demanded the same question in the Exchequer, he declared most falsely and
Scandalously of his Grace of Canterbury, that his Grace had directed him not to
do it, because the then Lord Chief Baron, (now Lord-Chief-Justice Hales) was an
Enemy to the Church of England.

Upon the whole matter, his Grace and the Lord Chancellor proposed to the Parish
to settle a certain Maintenance upon their Vicar for the future, that so no
more suits might arise. To which the Parishioners most willingly assented,
provided the Doctor might be removed and have no benefit thereof; and proposed,
as poor as he had made them, yet to be rid of him, and to have a good Learned
Orthodox and Peaceable Man settled amongst them, they would make a certain
allowance of an hundred and twenty Pounds per annum, to be paid to the
succeeding Vicar by quarterly Payments without charge and trouble.

No sooner was this Proposal made, but Doctor Clewer, who the World knows is a
Notorious Liar, (and the old Proverb is, A Liar had need to have a good memory)
starts up; and although just before he had told their Lordships he was forced
to bring his Actions, and to have multiplicity of Suits because his
Parishioners would pay him nothing, that although he had offered them his
Vicarage at 60, 50, nay 30 l. per annum, they refused to take the same; he told
them that 120 l. was nothing, for that the Parish had offered him 180 l.
themselves.

Note, The Doctor let the Tithes for three years to one Wood at 60 l. per
annum, and the said Wood received the Tithes of the Tennants, paid him his
Rents, and afterward the Doctor sued the Parishioners, and made many of them,
to their utter Ruin, pay him the said Tithes over again, though they had Woods
discharge for the same.

Nevertheless to be rid of the Doctor the Parish then proposed to allow an
hundred and sixty pound per annum to the surviving Vicar.

The conclusion of this meeting was that the Parishioners should draw up their
Proposals in Writing, put them under their hands, and present them to the Lord
High Chancellor of England: accordingly they were drawn up and signed by above
three hundred Persons, and presented to his Lordship, and a Copy to his Grace
of Canterbury, and one other Copy annexed to a Petition was presented to his
Majesty in Council, the Purport whereof was as follows.

1. That provided Doctor Clewer were presently removed, the Parish would allow
the succeeding Vicar successively, if a Sober, Learned, Orthodox and
Peaceable-Man, an hundred and sixty pounds per annum.

2. That Doctor Clewer should have no advantage of the said offer.

3. That they would consent to an Act of Parliament or Decree in Chancery or
Exchequer to settle and confirm the same.

4. That till such Act or Decree could be passed, to the intent the said Doctor
might not be continued, twenty of the most able Parishioners would become bound
to the surviving Vicar to pay him an hundred and sixty pound in lieu of all his
Tithes or other Dues, until the said one hundred sixty pound should be
confirmed by Act of Parliament, or Decree aforesaid.

5. That whereas the said Doctor pretended great arrears of Tithes and Dues
owing to him, and many Actions were brought by him against the Parishioners for
the same, every Person concerned therein would be determined by the Judgment of
any two indifferent Persons, as the said Lord's Grace of Canterbury and late
Lord Chancellor should appoint to hear and determine the same without further
charges and trouble in Law.

This seemed very reasonable and satisfactory to his Grace and the Lord
Chancellor, and thereupon Doctor Clewer being sent for by the late Lord
Chancellor, was told thereof, and advised to surrender to his Grace of
Canterbury, which if he would do, was offered another Living of 120 l. per
annum in Northamptonshire, then in the Lord Chancellors gift, and his Grace of
Canterbury should present one other able Orthodox Man to Croyden, to be named
by the then Lord Chancellor, (his Grace of Canterbury being so convinced of the
badness of Doctor Clewer, as he resolved never to present him to any other.)

This being the Medium most graciously proposed by His Majesty in Council, for
the ease of his Poor Subjects.

This offer the Doctor promised to accept, and to go to the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury and resign accordingly; but as he ever has been false, so in this
he manifested it in breaking his word both with his Grace and the Lord
Chancellor, so that they could do nothing.

And truly till it was considered what the reason might be, it was wondered that
he that might have had a Living of 120 l. per annum certain, to part with about
60 or 80 l. per annum gotten with contention, should not accept the same: but
afterward it appeared plainly that he was so well known in Northamptonshire,
that the People would have stoned him out of the Country if he had come thither.

Hereup^n the Parishioners of Croyden, once again most humbly Petitioned his
Majesty in Council, and annexed their Proposals aforesaid, showing how
inevitably they must be ruined if he were continued, and prayed his Removal.

Whereupon the 28 of May 1673, It was ordered as follows.

At the Court at Whitehall 28 of May, 1673.
Present
The Kings most Excellent Majesty. His Royal Highness the Duke of York. Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury. Lord Chancellor. Lord Treasurer. Lord Privy Seal.
Duke of Lauderdail. Earl of Ogle. Earl of Bridgwater. Earl of Bath. Earl of
Carlisle. Earl of Arlington. Earl of Craven. Earl of Carbury. Viscount of
Hallifax. Lord Maynard. Lord Newport. Lord Holles. Mr. Vice-Chamberlain. Mr.
Secretary Coventry. Mr. Chancellor of the Excheq. Mr. Chancellor of the Duchy.
Mr. of the Ordnance. Sr. Thomas Osburn. Mr. Speaker.
Whereas, upon hearing the Complaints of the Inhabitants of the Parish of
Croyden in the County of Surrey, against Dr. Clewer Vicar of that Place,
concerning several exorbitant courses by him practiced for recovery of his
Tithes: it was the 4 of April last referred to his Grace the Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury, and the Lord High-Chancellor of England, to endeavor to settle
the Business for the future quiet of the Parishioners, and that there may be a
constant Maintenance for the Vicar there. And the said Inhabitants by their
Humble Petition this day read at the Board, Praying his Majesty to receive a
Report from the Lords References of their Proceedings therein, and to suspend
the said Doctor, and give the Petitioners leave to proceed at Law against him,
or otherwise to relieve them; it was thereupon Ordered by his Majesty in
Council, that it be again referred to his Grace the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor of England, who
calling all Parties before them, are to endeavor to compose and settle the
said Business according to the Proposals made by the said Inhabitants of
Croyden: but if they cannot effect the same, then it is Ordered that the said
matter in difference be heard at this Board on Wednesday the 11th of June next,
at which time all Parties concerned are to give their attendance.

Edward Walker.

Before the time for this Hearing came, unluckily it fell out that Dr. Clewer
having taken a little too much of the Creature in London, being upon his
Journey home, just as God would please to have it (to show what he deserved)
against the Gallows near Newington-Butts his Horse threw him, or he fell off
from his Horse, broke his Leg in three pieces, and put his Shoulder out: there
he lay and none would help him, the people thereabouts knowing him so well that
one cried, There lies the Vicar of Croydon with his Leg broke, I would to God
he had broken his neck; the Church would then be no more scandalized by such a
Rogue, nor the poor People tormented. Others wished more severe things, which
savoured not of Christianity, therefore we will not mention them; but certain
it is no one would help to remove him till they were paid beforehand, because
he is counted so great a Knave that none would trust him; nor would a Coachman
take him up to carry him to Dr. Welden's house (the Parson of Newington) before
he had ten shillings in hand, which is not half a Mile: And when he was at
Doctor Welden's house, he sent for one Doctor Thorland the Bone-setter from
London, who found him in a very ill condition, but very glad he saw him at all:
for it happened about twenty years since an accident of the same nature befell
him in Northamptonshire, of which the said Doctor Thorland cured him, but to
this day was never paid for it: Nevertheless the good man, as became a
Christian, pitied the Doctor, and seeing his misery, applied himself to his
Cure, and effected the same in about three months, when he demanded for his
pains in this and the former Cure fifty pounds: but the Doctor would not pay
him, upon which he arrested him: thereupon he pleaded himself his Majesty's
Chaplain, showed a Certificate of his being sworn in that capacity, and so got
off without paying for his Cure. And as unworthily he served Doctor Welden, in
whose house he so long lay sick, to the great trouble and disorder of his
Family, prejudice and spoiling of his Goods.

By this means the Cause could not come to a Hearing, as by the Order of 28th
May 1673, was directed.

But during this the Doctors sickness, he was several times sent unto by his
Grace of Canterbury and the Lord Chancellor, to know if he would resign; he
declared that he would so soon as there were indifferent Persons nominated to
Arbitrate the Difference between him and his Parishioners concerning arrears of
Tithes.

Thereupon his Parishioners presented the Petition annexed, and had the Order
of Reference underwritten made thereupon.

To his Grace the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Right Honorable the
Lord high Chancellor of England. The Humble Petition of the Inhabitants of
Croydon.
Humbly Shows,
THAT your Petitioners most thankfully acknowledge your Lordships great Favor
in giving them hopes of the removal of Doctor Clewer their Vicar, and placing
amongst them Mr. Hescott who has been two Sundays with them and Preached, and
the whole Parish in general satisfied with him, and are ready to make good
their former Proposals under their hands for making a settled maintenance of
one hundred and sixty pounds per ann. to be secured and paid in such manner as
therein was proposed. Sunday the 22 day of June instant the Church Doors were
shut up, there being no Person to Preach or read Prayers, which was a great
discouragement to the Parish. That Doctor Clewer, who (as your Petitioners are
informed) had resigned his Vicarage (or promised on Friday last was seven night
so to have done) does now refuse to make such surrender, until by your
Lordships, two Gentlemen be nominated and appointed to arbitrate the matter in
difference between him and some of the Parishioners concerning his Tithes in
arrears, to which your Petitioners readily consent.

That by the Order of his Majesty and Council, upon the last Petition presented
by your Petitioners, it was referred to your Lordships to end this business if
you could, or otherwise the Cause upon the said Petition to have been heard at
that Board the 11th of June last past; That your Petitioners have none to
Preach to them, or Christen, Marry, or Bury; Mr. Hescott being gone into the
Country.

The Premises considered, they most humbly implore your Lordships Favor to
nominate and appoint under your Hands two Persons to arbitrate the difference
aforesaid, and desire them to meet and end the same, and that Doctor Clewer may
give his final determination whether he will surrender or not; and the Cause
thereupon to be set down to be heard in Council; and in the mean time that you
will be pleased to appoint some good man to Preach amongst them.

And as in Duty bound they shall Pray.

July 24 1673.
WE do nominate and appoint Sir Adam Brown Baronet, and Sir William Haward, to
be the Persons to Arbitrate the matter in difference about Tithes in Arrears
between Dr. Clewer, and the Inhabitants of Croydon, and do desire that they
will undertake the trouble of ending these differences between them.

Gilb. Cant. Shaftsbury C.

Whereupon Sir Adam Brown, and Sir William Haward appointed to meet at Croydon
the 5th of August 1673. where they met that day, and on the 6, 7, and 28th of
August and on the 2d and 9th of September, to hear and compose the matters in
difference between the said Vicar and his Parishioners.

And they heard, and determined about two hundred and fifty differences, and
made their Report in express words as follows.

To his Grace the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Right Honorable the
Lord High Chancellor of England.
May it please your Lordships,
IN pursuance of your Lordships Reference unto us made, upon the Petition of
the Inhabitants of the Town of Croydon, in the County of Surry, dated the 24th
of June last, we have been several days upon the Place (to wit) on the 5th,
6th, 7th, and 25th of August last, and the 2d and 9th of September instant, to
endeavor to compose the matter in difference betwixt Dr. William Clewer, and
those of his Parish with whom he had any controversy. On the 5th of August,
the Doctor after some delay came to us to the George-Inn, where many of the
Parishioners being present we examined as many of their Cases as we could
before ten of the Clock at Night, when the Doctor would stay no longer, though
a hundred of People were waiting, so we adjourned to eight a Clock the next
morning; when the Doctor refused to come to us, alleging indisposition of
Body. Whereupon resolving to proceed as far as we could, we went to his house,
and continued sitting from eight in the morning till half an hour past twelve
at night, without any intermission to eat, in which time we were sometimes
told by the Doctor that we needed not to trouble our selves any farther for
that he and those that were then in Arrears to him (and which we had not before
determined should agree. But upon the importunity of the Poor we stayed and
heard all Persons that the Doctor then complained against, and determined every
Case then before us, so that we thought to have made our Report. But afterward
accidentally riding through the Town, and hearing fresh Complaints upon the
desire of many of the Inhabitants, we appointed to meet again on the 25th of
August last, when accordingly we came to the Town, and sent for the Doctor, who
refused to come to us. Whereupon we again went down to his House, but were so
delayed by him, that we could not in the forenoon dispatch above eight or nine
Persons. He refusing to let those be called that were present, and ready to pay
money, and calling upon others that were not there, and who only owed him for
Christenings and Offerings. And having sat till one of the Clock, we went to
the George to dinner, desiring the Doctors company with us, offered him the
convenience of a Coach because of his Lameness, and left the same to bring him,
went our selves on foot, the which we rather did because his own House was
inconvenient, and we were much incommoded there, by the smalness of his Room,
and the heat occasioned by the crowd of People; but the Doctor would not come
to us. So that after sending for him several times, and he refusing to come, we
writ to him, and appointed him to meet us on the 2d of September instant.
Expressly desiring him to prepare us a List of the Persons names that owed him
any money, and how much each owed him, and and for what; that so we might lose
no more time in searching his Books and Papers, for all the men that came
before us, which much hindered our proceedings; which done we dismissed those that
attended, who lost that days work, and appointed them to attend on the said
second of September. But on the first of September the said Doctor prevailed
(upon pretense that he was ill by Preaching the Sunday before) to defer the
meeting till the 9th of September, when he promised to come to the George to
us, and that in the mean time the Parishioners should have notice thereof.
Nevertheless, we loath to disappoint them, come to Croydon the said 2d of
September, and found many of the Inhabitants waiting, having had no timely
notice, and therefore sent to the Doctor, desired him to come to us and
dispatch them (being informed he was well and went abroad that day:) but though
we sent often down, he refused to come, and so we were forced to dismiss them
with the loss of that day also, which much troubled us; appointing them to
appear again the 9th of September, when we again attended, and sent for the
Doctor, who at first refused to come; pretending he had not promised so to do,
whereby he spent great part of our time, insomuch that we could do nothing till
after dinner; when we sat, and the Inhabitants being present, We demanded the
List aforesaid, but could not prevail for the same, so that most part of our
time (as formerly) was spent in his turning over his Books. Nevertheless we sat
till ten at night, and dispach't all that were present, unless some few which
the Doctor would not stay to end, though he continued longer in the house then
we believe would have dispatched them; nor would he agree, though we desired
it, to appear the next morning to end the same, so that they lost their labor.
And we do humbly certify that having examined about two hundred and fifty
several Cases, we did find that the occasion of the differences between the
Doctor and them was the unreasonable demands of Tithes, and other undue
impositions he had endeavored to impose upon most of them, being the poorer
sort of the Inhabitants, who being illiterate, were by undue means drawn either
into exorbitant Agreements, penal Bills, or Judgments, by Arresting and keeping
them in durance, till they complied with him therein; whereby many Families
were put to very great expense, and thereby much impoverished some of them,
totally ruined others, forced them to run from their Houses, and leave their
Wives and Children to the Parish; by which means we conceive that he himself in
some measure has been the occasion of the non-payment of what was his just
dues, which otherwise might probably have been had with the Affections of the
People. And for ground of this our belief, we take leave further to inform your
good Lordships, That every person that appeared before us, and with whom the
Doctor had any contest, most willingly submitted to whatever we should
determine between them; whereupon we proceeded to examine his Demands, and upon
deliberate Consideration of what was alleged on each side, found them very
extravagant, and not fitting to be submitted unto; therefore moderated the
same, giving him in some cases but the twentieth, in others the twelfth, tenth,
sixth or fourth part of what was demanded, which in many cases was more than
they ought to have paid; Nevertheless they most readily submitted thereunto,
and all of them paid the same in hopes of the Doctor's being removed, so that
they may not further be troubled with him; the which he seemed to insinuate his
readiness unto, and was the great Motive that in many cases invited us to do
what we did, excepting some poor Almsmen, from whom he had gotten Judgments for
several sums of money; who being unable to pay the same, the Parish rather than
they should go to Goal, offered to pay a Part thereof: Whereupon finding little
or no ground for the said Judgments, we reduced the sums demanded to a third
part, and the Parish undertook to satisfy the same, with which the Doctor
rested satisfied; and also two or three small sums not exceeding five pounds in
the whole, for payment whereof we have given some short time. And we did
determine all the Cases that came before us, except one of Christopher Joyner
deceased, of whose Executors he demanded ten pounds per annum for ten years
arrears of Tithes, when as he had not above twenty pounds per annum in the
Parish; and Sir Purbeck Temple and Thomas Bowers Cases, the difference between
whom had been before submitted to References and Awards made therein;
Nevertheless they submitted to our determination. And Sir Purbeck Temple
tendered the money according to his Award, which would not be acepted; And
excepting also the Case of Edward Harvy the which had also been submitted unto
Reference, and one Award made therein (though he be not able to pay any part of
the money) which Cases we were forced to leave as we found, the Doctor refusing
to refer himself to us therein. And having thus proceeded (being weary with
these delays) we left the said Parishioners, who most humbly and unanimously
implore your good Lordships Favor to remove from amongst them the said Doctor,
and that a good man may be placed amongst them; In which Suit we also humbly
join to your Honors, as a thing which for the reasons aforesaid, we do judge
very convenient; All which nevertheless we humbly submit to your Lordships
Judgments, and remain,

My Lords, Your Lordships most humble Servants, Adam Brown. William Haward.

Croydon, September. 10. 1673.
This Report is not the tenth part so bad as the matter appeared against the
Doctor; the particular Cases decided are too long to insert; but if they were,
it would not be possible for any man to believe there could be so many horrid
Oppressions and Frauds put upon poor People by any Clergyman living.

Of this Report there were two Copies signed; the one of them the Referrees
presented to my Lords Grace of Canterbury, the other to the late Lord
Chancellor, who thereupon promised to do what in them lay to remove the said
Doctor: accordingly he was sent for, promised his Grace that he would resign;
and came to the Lord Chancellor and told him the same also, And that whenever
his Lordship should desire the same, he would do it; adding, that his Grace
commanded him to tell his Lordship that he would present to Croydon such a
Person as his Lordship would appoint. And upon this Consideration the Lord
Chancellor promised the said Clewer to provide for him some other Living,
bidding him rely upon his Honor for it, assuring him he should have the first
convenient Living that fell in his gift, or to that effect: Whereupon the said
Doctor promised to conform to his Lordships desires, but neglected to do the
same, shuffling and endeavoring to put tricks upon their Lordships. This
necessitated the Parishioners to petition his Majesty and Council once more,
therein setting forth what the Referrees had done, annexing their Report to the
said Petition, showing the Necessity of the Doctor's being removed, or the
Towns being ruined: Therefore humbly implored his Removal, or that they might
have his Majesty's Royal leave for to insert a Clause into the Act of
Parliament then drawing, to settle the 160 l. per Annum on the Vicar; to make
the said Doctor incapable of any preferment in Church or State.

This Petition being read, the Kings most Excellent Majesty Present, the
Parishioners were called in, and told by the Lord Chancellor that their
Petition had been read, and that his Majesty's Royal pleasure was, that in Case
the said Doctor did not surrender before the Bills designed to be brought into
Parliament for settling the maintenance aforesaid should be presented to the
Parliament, that then they should put in such a Clause into the said Bill,
wishing the Parish to hasten the said Bill. This the Lord Chancellor declared
to them in his Majesty's Presence. Besides this, the Order following was made.

At the Court at Whitehal October. 15. 1673. Present The Kings most excellent
Majesty in Council.
UPon reading the Petition of the Inhabitants of Croydon, complaining against
Dr. William Clewer their Vicar, and praying that he may be removed for several
Reasons at large set forth in the Petition; His Majesty in Council has this
day declared, That when the Inhabitants of the said Parish of Croydon shall
provide to settle a hundred and sixty pounds by the year, as a maintenance for
the Vicar of the said Parish, according to their Proposal in the said Petition,
in order to the passing of an Act to confirm the same for ever on the Vicarage
of the said Parish, then his Majesty will give effectual Order for removing of
the present Incombent Doctor Clewer.

Robert Southwel.

Upon this the Parishioners immediately went home, and Published in the Market
and at the Church his Majesty's Gracious Answer, desiring all the Inhabitants
to meet at the Vestry to sign a Declaration testifying their Consents to the
Passing of the Bill aforesaid; and accordingly most of them did meet, Signed
and Sealed such Certificate of their Consents, and their humble Petition to
both Houses of Parliament to Pass the said Bill, and impowering a Solicitor to
prosecute the Passing thereof.

This done, a Bill was drawn, and such a Clause as aforesaid was contained
therein; when drawn, the same was copied, and one Copy carried, and left with
his Grace of Canterbury, the other with the then Lord Chancellor: They having
perused the same, My Lord of Canterbury referred the Amendment thereof to Mr.
Phillips of the Inner Temple, his Graces Counsel; and the Lord Chancellor, to
Mr. Attorney Montague: both were attended, and they made their several
Amendments, with which the same was fairly copied, and put into Sir Adam
Brown's hand to present in October last: But the Prorogation of Parliament
prevented the same.

All this time the said Doctor had notice of it, knew of the Clause, Promised
to surrender so it might be left out; went to both his Grace of Canterbury, and
from him to the Lord Chancellor, frequently declaring the same: And my Lord
Chancellor offered him an other Living, which he kept void for him, (and so in
truth it was till the very day his Majesty was pleased to send for the Seal
from his Lordship) But the Doctor resolving to persist in his Villainies to
ruin the Parish of Croydon (as he frequently declares he will do before he
leaves it) refused to surrender, but continues to go on in his horrid
oppressions and vexations, commencing suits against his Parishioners without
color of Cause, to their unspeakable damage.

Under these sad Oppressions the poor Parish having lain these thirteen years
languishing, they now become humble Supplicants to the Parliament of England,
To Enable them by an Act to give such Maintenance to a succeeding Minister, as
may be an Encouragement to a Sober, Learned, Orthodox and Peaceable Man to come
and settle amongst them.

To do the Church that Right as to remove so wicked and scandalous a Person out
of it, and for the Honor and Vindication of the Religion of the Church of
England, to make him for ever incapable of serving in the Church again, than
which no greater advantage can be done to the Church of England at this time.

For the said Doctor is a frequenter of houses of debauchery, particularly, a
blind beggarly disorderly Alehouse in a by-place within the Parish of
Newington, notoriously infamous for entertainment of lewd Persons, where the
Officers (having notice given them) about midnight so and him (upon search) hid
in a Garret, and were carrying him to the Counter, or Prison in the Borough,
till he discovered himself to be a Clergyman, and befought their civility,
entreating that they would not disgrace him publicly, whereupon they released
him. But the House s^o^^ after was in danger to be pulled down for a
Baudy-house.

It is humbly submitted, Whether this man be fit to be continued in the Church,
or to be made a Public Example, to deter other Clergymen from such wicked
practices for the future?

FINIS.

