

LIFE OF Donna Rosina, A NOVEL, BEING, A Pleasant Account of the Artifices and
Impostures of a Beautiful Woman, who Jilted and Cheated the most Experienced
Sharpers, and made all Persons Unhappy, that Thought her Handsome.

Originally a Spanish Relation. In Three Parts. Done into English, by the
Ingenious Mr. E. W. a known Celebrated AUTHOR.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by B. Harris, at the Golden Boar's Head in Grace
Church-Street. Price One Shilling.

TO THE READER.
THere was formerly Published in the Spanish Tongue, a Tract called, the Life
of Gusman de Alfarache, the Humor of which took so well in this Nation, that
he and his Rogueries were several times commit^ed to the Press. The Design of
that Work was to represent One on whom either Nature, or a strange Ascendant of
Mercury, the Thieving Planet, had bestowed a Talent of Cheating and
Circumvention, that he not only Trickt all he dealt with, but became a
Precedent or Pattern to all those who out of Necessity or Inclination, have
been Obliged to live by their Shifts, or their Wits, as some call it.

The present Story has some Resemblance to that Ingenious Piece; forasmuch as
it brings in a Woman, engaged in as great Designs as her Predecessor Gusman,
but with this Advantage, That the Weakness of her Sex obliges her to make Use
of Men for the Prosecution of her Enterprises. They are both Originally Spanish
Relations, a Language we are obliged to for many Pieces of this Kind.

The Intrigues inserted, are not altogether Imaginary, but such as really
happened in some Eminent Cities of Spain; which yet if any Person have not
Faith enough to Believe, the only way to be Satisfied is, to Travel to those
Places where the Scenes are laid, and thereby fully Inform himself of the
Reality of these Transactions.

And so I Wish the Reader as much Pleasure in Perusing, as I had in Translating
the same.

E. W.

THE LIFE OF Donna Rosina, A Notorious CHEAT, etc.
Part the First.
THIS Miracle of Female Subtilty, whose Life and Actions are our present
Subject, was Young, Sprightly, and very Beautiful; Three Dangerous Advantages
when they are attended with those Qualifications, for which she was no less
Famous, namely, Craft, Impudence, and Hypocrisy, and an insatiable Longing
after other People's Goods; and all these strengthened by a natural Propensity,
as being the Issue of Parents, who, instead of giving a timely Check to these
Vicious Inclinations, rather encouraged her in them by their ill Example, as
being addicted to the same themselves from their Youth.

Signior Trapassa, Father to this worthy Person, whose Achievements we intend
to Relate, had been Condemned to the Galleys, for having Assumed to himself an
Order of Knighthood, before he had made the necessary Trials, upon which the
King bestows that Honor, by the Sovereign Council of Portugal. His design in
doing it, was, that he might the more conveniently follow his Profession of
Stealing about the Court, where he was Respected as a Knight; and the better
under that Cloak to play those Pranks of Villainy, wherein he was such a
Professor, that the most expert Thief might have learnt Lessons from him.

A certain Woman whom he used an unlawful Trade withal, was so Incensed against
him, upon the Account of some Jealousy, that he reserved not all his Kindness
for her, that she put in a Charge against him, the Issue whereof was, that he
was preferred to the Galleys, where he passed over the Term of his
Condemnation, and somewhat more. He was put into that Squadron of Slaves, which
is called the Squadron of Spain, and turned over from Toledo to St. Mary's
Port, with the rest who were in the same Predicament of Slavery. He made an
Attempt to recover his Liberty, but the Plot being discovered, he was put to
greater Hardship than he had otherwise been.

As soon as the Lady Estephania (so was the Jealous Woman that had showed him
that Trick, called) understood he was gone to Exercise that painful Employment,
though she was not of an over Compassionate Nature, yet she very seriously
Repented that she had been the Occasion of his Misery; and considered, that she
could not make better Satisfaction for that Injury, than by proffering herself
to him in Marriage, as soon as the time of his Penance was Expired.

And what inclined her the more to this kind of Reparation was, that she had
already a Daughter by him, which Child is the Heroine of our present History.
With this Resolution she left the Court, and went to Sevil, hoping in that
great and famous City, she might the sooner hear some News of him, whom she had
Reduced to such a wretched Condition, and whom she would once more have gladly
seen at Liberty.

Estephania had a House well Furnished, being a Genoese's Widow, who had left
her very well to pass: That, and the Care she took to go in rich Clothes,
gained her such Repute at Sevil, that she was looked upon as some Person of
Quality, but she soon lost that, when the Relation of her Life came to be
known; especially this Particular of it. That out of an excess of Jealousy she
had preferred a young Gallant to the Galleys, whom she had often entertained on
a Feather bed. This imprudent Action made her Abominable in the Opinion of the
most intimate of her own Sex, whose Indignation she allowed to be more just
against her, when she considered, that she had Prostituted her self to an
Impostor, and a Rascal fit only for the Galleys.

These Reasons and Reproaches, obliged her to remove from Madrid to Sevil,
carrying all she could conveniently with her, and Selling the rest, which
brought her in a considerable Sum of Money. Having thus ordered her Affairs,
she went toward Sevil by Coach, with two Maids to wait on her, intending to
continue there, till the time of Trapassa's Serving in the Galleys was expired,
for she kept an exact Account of it, which being near out, she understood that
the Spanish Galleys were arrived safe at St. Mary's Port. She immediately went
thither, not in so high a Dress as she wore at Sevil, but in a more modest
Habit, that she might not be afterward Reproached, That she was Wife of a
Galley-Slave, whom she had Courted out of Chains to her Embraces.

She was soon Informed that her Gallant was in the Captain's own Galley, very
Jocund, and advanced to the Office of a Foreman, a Pre-eminence among the
Slaves which Exempts them from Rowing, which he had acquired of the General by
the Pleasantness of his Conversation; and was by this time so well acquainted
with the Galleys, that he seemed not to Value whether ever he came out of them.
But the arrival of Estephania Remedied all. Her first Business was to Treat
about his Liberty with those Persons on whom the Matter depended; and feeding
them with Money, Trapassa had no Knowledge of her Design, as not having seen
her, nor stirred out of the Galley; so that he was much Surprised when he came
to understand that some Person did not only Solicit his Freedom, but was
likewise Liberal of their Money to procure it; for it never entered into his
Thoughts, that his old Love Estephania, should have changed the cruel Humor he
had left her in, into Mildness and Compassion for him. All things being agreed
on, for Trapassa's Discharge, his Chains were struck off, and he was told, he
might go whither he would. In the mean time could not tell who had been the
Author of that Happiness, which was no small one, in regard that when poor
Slaves have served out the time of their Condemnation; yet there are some
Pretenses found to hinder their being set at Liberty; so that though they have
been Sentenced only to Serve 4 Years, yet have been forced to remain in
Servitude Five or Six.

Signior Trapassa was extremely Astonished when he found himself in the Presence
of Estephania, who stood waiting on the Shore to receive him, and perceived,
that it was only by her means that he had recovered his Freedom. She received
him with open Arms; and he, to express his Gratitude, returned the like
obliging Caresses to her: So that the Kindness he had now received from her,
made him quit his Resentments for the Miseries she had occasioned him. He was
somewhat Disturbed that she did not appear in that Habit which he had left her
at Madrid, as being ignorant of her Design in Disguising herself; nor could she
at that time give him an Account of it, by reason the Captain and others who
delivered him, were present, and whom she was obliged to entertain at Dinner.
Having Treated 'em very handsomely, all withdrew, save only Trapassa, who
continued still with his Mistress. Finding themselves alone, they repeated
their Caresses, and outvied one another in Assurances of the Satisfaction they
received by that Interview. Trapassa returned her Thanks with all the grateful
Acknowledgments imaginable, for the Trouble and Charge she had been at, and the
Goodness she had shown in freeing him from the worst of Slavery. On the other
side, Estephania asked his Pardon for the Mischief she had procured him, and
all the Misfortunes her Malice had Occasioned to him; telling him withal, That
she could not imagine any other way to Repair the Injury she had done him, but
by joining Hands with him in Matrimony if he liked the Proposal, since she had
a Daughter already by him, and Wealth enough for both of them to live at their
Ease.

I leave you to Judge, Whether this Motion was not Pleasing to Trapassa, who
was ready to catch at the least Offer of Good Fortune, upon his coming out of
so severe a School of Penance. So that his Answer was in renewing his
Embraces, satisfying her with what Joy he accepted of the advantageous Bargain
she Proposed to him; in treating her to give him an Account of his Daughter,
whom he was passionately Desirous to see.

Estephania, overjoyed to find his Sentiments so Agreeable to her Expectation,
presented him with a noble Riding Suit, which she had purposely caused to be
made for him; and the next Morning betimes they took their Journey toward
Sevil, where Trapassa finding his Daughter then about Eight Years old, he acted
a part that he had never done before, that is, he was solemnly Married to the
Lady Estephania in the Face of the Church. They changed their Lodgings to
another Quarter of the City than that where they had formerly dwelt, being
resolved to live another kind of Life than they had done before. For Estephania
believing that the Hardship her dear Love had endured in the Galleys, had cured
him of some of his former Extravagancies, and that the Gray Hairs he had
brought from thence, would Reclaim him from his Debauches. She endeavored to
procure him some Credible Employment in Sevil, as well to keep him out of
Idleness, as that he might thereby bring in something toward Housekeeping. But
an inbred Disposition which was in Trapassa, could not easily be brought under
Discipline, and if he had behaved himself a while with some Reservedness, it
proceeded from Influence of the Admonitions and Rebukes which his Wife
continually gave him, and not out of any virtuous Inclination; so that through
his own Neglect, he could find out no other Business but frequenting
Gaming-Houses, Play Houses, and other vicious places, where those who are
Naturally inclined to Sloth, usually waste most part of their time. This course
of Life extremely troubled his Wife; who yet willing to avoid all Matrimonial
Discontents, winked at his Disorders, and endeavored to find some Comfort in
the Conversation of his Daughter, whose Beauty was already become the common
Discourse of the City.

Trapassa having no settled Business, Idleness being the Seminary of all Vices,
tempted him to follow his former Course of Gaming, the Gulf wherein so many
fair Estates have been swallowed up. He began at first to Play at small Games,
as if for Recreation only, but afterward venturing still higher, he in a short
time took the Opportunity to lay Hands on the Goods of his Wife. She was
sensible enough, that too many of her things were wanting, and doubted not but
her Husband had conveyed them away; but all she could do, was, to weep and
bemoan her Misfortune, which she charged upon no body but herself. Trapassa
perceiving her so much disturbed, promised Reformation, but the cursed Humor
of Gaming continuing upon him, his Luck was so bad, that he Pawned or Sold
every thing of Value in his House. Finding himself at length reduced to
pinching Necessities, he began to Contrive how he might again Retrieve himself.
He would have been content that his Wife, who was yet Handsome, should have
turned Common Prostitute, though she had but just Recovered her Reputation; but
he perceived she was grown so Honest, and so altered from what she had been
before, that he had not the Confidence to mention it to her: For she grew so
extreme Melancholy at the Disordered Demeanor of her Husband, that she seemed
in a manner careless of all things, and little regarded the Education of her
Daughter, who was by this time come into the Teens, and by reason of these
Distractions between her Parents, lived as she pleased, appearing every Day at
the Window, not with a little Affectation.

The Grief and Regret which poor Estephania conceived at her being reduced to
Penury, brought her into a Sickness whereof she Died about a Year after, with a
sincere Repentance for her past Follies, in Hopes to Die as Happy a Death, as
her Husband had occasioned her living an Unhappy Life. She was very meanly
Buried, Trapassa not having wherewithal to bestow much on her Funeral. He was
much concerned at her Death, and acknowledged but too late, his great Oversight
in returning to his ill Courses; whereas, if he had taken her Advice, he might
have lived Pleasantly all the rest of his Days. All the Comfort he had now
lest, and the Hope on which he depended for a Livelihood, was the Beauty of his
Daughter, which he believed so Charming, as might procure him a Son in Law, who
would Relieve his Necessities, never considering, that in this Age Riches are
commonly preferred before Virtue, and that Graces and Perfections have seldom
much Power in them, if Wealth be lacking.

The unfortunate Trapassa, though oppressed with Miseries, could not forbear
frequenting the Gaming Houses, not indeed to play himself, for he had not
wherewithal, but to get some small Present from the Gamesters when they had a
good Hand, as is usual in Spain to be bestowed upon those that look on, and is
commonly the only Revenue of those that have Ruined themselves by that
pernicious Diversion.

Trapassa being seldom at home, it gave his Daughter the greater freedom to
follow her own Sentiments. She would be perpetually looking out of the Window,
which induced a great number of Young Gallants to repair to the Street where
she dwelt. The Father was not Ignorant how matters went, and though he might
have prevented yet winkt at it, in hopes to see his Daughter advantageously
Married, to help him out, as being the most likely means to retrieve his
Misfortunes. He therefore left the little Rosina, so was his Daughter called,
to her own Liberty, hoping that by her Insinuations, she would in time have the
Disposal of the Hearts and Purses of those that Courted her. His Designs proved
more successful than he imagined; for among many that Languished for her, there
was one very Rich, who was Transported with the Love of her. She assumed the
Title of Donna, an Honor which belongs only to Persons of Noble Extraction,
because her Mother had used it before, and if she had not, her Daughter would
have taken it up, as being a Dignity that Costs little or nothing.

The Person who was so remarkably her Servant, was Agent for some Affairs in
Peru; a Gentleman whose Credit much exceeded his Estate, and was accounted very
Rich, belonging to the Ensuring Office in the Spanish West Indies, and about 50
Years of Age. Though he was satisfied that his M striss had no Fortune, and
that he must also maintain her Father, yet he was resolved to take her for
Better for Worse; from whence we may deduce this Observation, That when Love
has once taken Possession of an Aged Person, it is very Difficult to Dispossess
him. Laurentia de Savaria, this Amorous Elder was named, who was so enchanted
with the Beauty of Rosina, that the Treaty of Marriage was concluded in less
than Eight Days, and he had the Earnest of an Happiness, which he thought would
have lasted him as long as he Lived. He took his Father in Law into his Family:
though he knew him to be a great Gamester. The first Days of the Nuptials were
spent as they usually are at such Solemnities; he furnished his Wife with new
Gowns, Rings, and Jewels, suitable to his Condition; for being a Person pretty
well stricken in Years, he was no Lover of Excess, an Humor not very Pleasing
to Rosina, who minded nothing so much as rich Clothes, and Longed for
whatsoever she saw worn by Women of a Quality much above her; and this much
Cooled her Love to her Husband, who was of an Indian Disposition, somewhat
Covetous, and careful not to Waste his Estate; and being sensible that her
Father was an Old Gamester, who had run out all, he durst not Trust his Wife
with keeping the Cash, nor with the Expenses of his House, This Proceeding
quite Defeated the Hopes of Trapassa, who imagined, that upon this Marriage, he
should Command all that was in his Daughter's Power, being still possessed with
the restless Spirit of Gaming.

Rosina Observing her Husband was Employed about his Affairs, took Occasion to
go abroad every Morning, under pretense of going to Church, to Pray that she
might be a Mother; with this Excuse she blinded her Husband, the true Motives
of these Sallies being to appear in the Streets, and at Mass. A Citizen's Son
of Sevil, taking notice of her, fell instantly in Love with her, one of the
most Debauched Young Men of his time; who had reduced himself by his Lewdness,
into as bad a Condition almost, as Trapassa. His Name was Ruperio, a very
comely Beau, who proved so Fortunate in Courting Rosina, that she was wholly at
his Devotion, expecting to receive such Presents from him, as might put her in
a Garb agreeable to her Beauty, above what she could obtain from the Miser her
Husband.

The first Demand she made to him, was somewhat Modest, considering she was a
Merchant's Wife, namely, to bestow on her a Gown of the same Silk and Fashion
that ^ Neighbor of hers had, whom she named and a Gold Watch for her side,
promising him, in Requital of these Favors, not to Deny him any thing that was
in her Power. Rosina, by his insolent Boastings, imagined that he had Thousands
at Command, and he likewise promised to Comply with her Desires; but being
unable to perform the same, he contrived how to get that by his Wit, which his
Purse would not reach to. He happened to be well Acquainted with the Lady,
whose Gown he was to match, and going to her, entreated her to Lend it him;
pretending it was only for the Representation of a Comedy which was to be acted
in a Nunnery. He could not be Denied upon such an Account; so that at the end
of Three Days, which time he told Rosina, it would take up to make it, he sent
it to her House, when her Husband was abroad in the City about his business.
The Watch he told her was not yet finished, but should suddenly be brought her;
entreating her in the mean time, to accept of another of less Value, as a
Pledge for the Security of the other. She returned him Hearty Thanks, extremely
Pleased to find he was so Punctual, and to show herself Grateful, gave him all
the Satisfaction he could expect from her.

He took leave of Rosina, who intended to Persuade her Husband, that a Kinsman
of hers had sent her that Gown from Madrid, to prevent his being Jealous of
her. On the other Hand, Ruperio resolved, if possible, to get it again, and
return it where it was borrowed. Savaria having no knowledge of him, he
effected the matter by the following Trick.

Four or Five Days after the delivery of the Gown to Rosina, Ruperio puts
himself into the Habit of a Serving Man, and about Dinner comes to Savaria's
House, saying, he was Servant to the Lady to whom the Gown belonged. Savaria
ordered him to come in, who told him, he was sent by his Mistress, for the Gown
she had Lent Madam Rosina, only to see the Fashion of it. Savaria turning
toward his Wife, asked her what Gown the Fellow would have? She presently knew
her Gallant: Friend, said she, come hither to Morrow Morning, and you shall
have it. But my Mistress, replies Ruperio, has commanded me not to come back
without it; for this Afternnoon she is to go to a Christning, at which she is
to be Gossip, and she must needs have it. How shall I know* cries she, that you
belong to that Lady, and that you came from her? The crafty Spark, perceiving
what she designed, and that she had no mind to return it; The Gown, said he, is
of such a Color, trimmed in such a manner, and was sent you in a Green Cloth,
done about with a Silk Fringe. Savaria hearing him give such particular Marks;
Sweetheart, said he to his Wife, You have nothing to reply, for since he
demands it with so much earnestness, no question but his Mistress has occasion
for it; and if you are unwilling to rise out of your place, give me the Key of
your Trunk where it is, and I will fetch it. Rosina had not a Word more to say,
but being ready to burst with Indignation, she arose from the Table, took the
Gown out of the Trunk, and delivering it to Ruperio, Give my humble Service,
said she, to Madam Leonara, and tell her, I ask her Pardon that I did not send
it home sooner, which I could not do, because the Person for whom I borrowed
it, was not here since.

The disguised Gallant received the Gown, and left Rosina with her Eyes all on
Fire, and vexed to the Soul to find herself so impudently affronted. Savaria
asked her upon what account she had borrowed it, who answered, That it was at
the Request of an Acquaintance of hers, who was desirous to have such another,
as being extremely taken with the Color and Fashion of it. She persuaded her
Husband to any thing, who, poor Man, understood little of the World, ^esides
his Trading. In the mean time she was extremely incensed against Ruperio, for
^he Ungenteel Trick he had put upon her, ^n depriving her of a Garment she was
so ^leas'd with, and whereof she thought her self Indisputably possessed. She
thereupon resolved to be Revenged on him, whatever it cost her; but thinking to
Communicate her Design to her Maid who was her Confident in all her Intrigues,
Trapassa her Father over heard them, and came to the Knowledge of the whole
Story; and being Acquainted with the Gallant, who was one that haunted Gaming
Houses, he thought himself Obliged to Revenge the Affront done to his Daughter;
and meeting him one Day in the Street, tells him he desired to measure the
Length of his Sword, upon what account he should know when he came to the
Place. Ruperio followed him, and being gone so far from the City, that they
were out of the People's Sight, Trapassa acquainted him with the Occasion of
this Challenge. They presently drew, and made several Passes, but at length
Trapassa proved the more unfortunate, for he was run thorough the Heart, so
that he Died immediately, not having time to make the least act of Contrition;
a Judgment usually happening to those who lead such vicious Lives as he had
done. Ruperio took Sanctuary in a Church, and Trapassa's Body was brought to
his Son in Law, where it was received with a mixture of Joy and Sorrow; Joy
that the House was delivered from the most Humor some and Insupportable Person
in the World, and Grief for the future charge ^f his Interment.

In the mean time Rosina made it appear ^y her Lamentations and Tears, that his
death was as great an affliction to her, as ^t was pleasing to her Husband. She
would ^eceive no Consolation, pretending she had ^ost all her support in this
World; for all the Relations and Friends she had were now exchanged for a
Husband whom she could not affect. On the other side, Savaria thought himself
one of the happiest Men in the World, to have a Wife handsome and young as his
was; but she was really a little too handsome and too young for him; that
proportion of Age, which Parents ought chiefly to mind in marrying their
Children, not being observed in this. ^t cannot be expected, that an old man
should be acceptable to a young Girl; and when a Woman comes once to slight her
Husband, she is in the way to admit of a^y Body. But for Rosina, the ambition
she ^lways had of going highly in Clothes, and ^o be revenged of Ruperio, made
her break ^orth into all Excesses that exasperated Womankind can fall into; to
defile her mar^iage Bed, and absolutely abandon her self ^o Act all those
things from which she ho^ed to derive any satisfaction or advantage. nothing so
much disquieted her as the injury she had received from Ruperio, which she
thought so great, that she would have died for sorrow, but out of a desire to
be revenged of him. But in regard She must have assistance therein, She took
all opportunities to assure her self of a Gallant who would Vigorously execute
her Commands.

One of those Fridays, which are solemnized with a great concourse of People
from Easter to Whitsuntide, in Triana, part of the Suburbs of Sevil, through
which passes the Quadalquier, the most famous River in Andalusia. Rosina went
into a Boat covered with Branches to go and see that Festival, to which she was
carried by the express Order of her Husband, by a Neighbor of his whom he
thought one of the most discreet and Virtuous Women in the World; but he was
not the first Man who has been deceived in a Woman; for on the contrary. She
was one of the most Wanton, and withal the most Silly of the whole Sex. She
therefore took up a Boat for herself, Rosina* and two Women more of their
acq^^^ntance; but though she had given the Waterman his full Fare; yet she was
easily persuaded by him to take other Persons into the Boat, and among them a
Young Man who had his Spies at the waterside to give him notice of such an
opportunity. They were no sooner come aboard, but Rosina unvailed her Face,
which the Gallant, whom we will call Pelician, had no sooner seen but he was
surprised with her Beauty; and thought her so extreme handsome that he
persuaded some of his Friends who stood on the River side to come into the
Boat, and to effect it greased the Waterman's Fist. Being all got in, Feli^^^n
took his place next to Rosina, into whose favor it was his design to insinuate
himself. He was Son to a Person of Quality, who had raised himself to a vast
Fortune in the Indies, and had no Child but this; who disposing of his wealth
as he pleased; it was forseen that it would not be long ere he scattered abroad
what his Father had not in so short a time raked together. For he was a profuse
Gamester, a perpetual Courter of Ladies, and maintained a Crew of Hangers on,
who accompanied and encouraged him in his Debauches. Besides these admirable
Qualities, he was extremely extravagant in point of Clothes, a Vice common in
Young Men at Sevil, who have all things at their own disposal as he had.

Being seated near Rosina, and his Comerades next to her she-Friends, the Boat
went leasurely down the River, for which the Waterman had consideration.
Felician was resolved to lose no time, but declare his Love to Rosina, in such
obliging Terms that she gave entire Credit to what he said, and by her
attention satisfied him that she was not displeased with his Company. Felician
was a very ingenious Person, and of a complaisant humor upon such occasions as
^hese, expressing himself with such a Grace and smartness, that the Ladies were
exceedingly pleased, especially Rosina, who thought nothing comparable to his
Conversation* She told him her Name, the place where she Lived, what Profession
her Husband was of; and in a word made him a kind of Confession of her most
secret Affairs. Felician was as free to her, concluding his discourse with a
Thousand Protestations of service and obedience to her commands. The afternoon
passed away in Compliments and Courtship, to the great satisfaction of Rosina,
who had two designs to carry on at the same time; One to be revenged on Ruperio
by the assistance of Felician, and the other to wheedle out of him some Money
toward new Clothes and her other extravagant expenses, and she succeeded in
both her Projects.

From that day Felician began to frequent the street where Rosina dwelt,
especially when he had Intelligence that he^ Husband was abroad about his
Concern^ Rosina on the other side resolved not t^ comply easily; for remembering
how she had been put upon by Ruperio, She was Jea^ous of having the same Game
played over ^gain with her. Before she admitted him ^ntrance into the House, she
resolved to make Trial of his Liberality. Of this she was in a short time
pretty well informed; for Felician having been Prodigal all his Life, he upon
this occasion exceeded all he had done before, sending her Presents of Rich
Clothes, Jewels, and other Ornaments, besides the Expense he was at in Treats
and Collations when they met privately together as they often did; so that
Rosina was ^he most satisfied Woman in the World. It Is commonly said, that the
more easily a Man attains his enjoyments the sooner he ^s surfeited with them;
but it was otherwise with Felician, whose affection to Rosina ^ncreased daily,
and came to that height that it could not well be greater.

It happened about this time, that Ruperio gained in one Night Six hundred
Crowns ^t Play. He always went very fine; but this ^nexpected good Fortune made
him ex^eed his former Gaudiness. But with that ^ood he fancied he had likewise
ill Fortune, ^eing told that Felician was often seen in ^he Street where Rosina
lived; from whence ^e inferred, that he made some Addresses to ^er. This
Jealousy began to revive the Love he formerly had for her, and he was disturbed
that he should have any Rival Hereupon he resolved if possible to recove^ her
Favor, and requite the Injury he w^^ sensible he had done her. Upon this
account he passed several times through the same street, which caused no little
perplexity to Felician.

Rosina was enraged to see the Imposto^ had the Impudence to make any
pretension to her favor after the notorious Sham h^ had put upon her. She
considered ther^ was no other way to be rid of his importunities, but to engage
her beloved Gallan^ Felician in her quarrel, by persuading hi^ that Ruperio's
design was to break off the happy Correspondence, and Affection th^^ there was
between them; So that if he ha^ any value for her Love, he ought to fin^ out
some means to check the Insolence o^ his Rival, and free her from his Courtship
which was odious to her. Observe her what dangerous service Women put the^^
Gallants upon, setting them on like Gam^ Cocks till they have destroyed one
another

Rosina thought it not prudence to a^quaint Felician with what had passed
between her and Ruperio, but took a safe course, telling him that he was
continuall^ soliciting her with very advantageous pro^fers, which yet for his
sake she absolute^^ refused and slighted. Felician believed he^ the rather
because he met him every day, and sometimes in the night, walking the ^ounds
about his Mistress house. To in^ense him the more, she added, that were it ^ot
for that troublesome Person she would ^^e him oftener than she did. There needs
^o more to be said, Felician enflamed with ^pight, met Ruperio one Night in
that ^^reet, when he knew Rosina was in Bed, and her Husband looking over some
ac^ounts which Concerned his Agency. Fe^^cian perceiving Ruperio called him by
his ^ame, and having talked a while together ^o avoid being discovered by
making any ^uarrel in the streets, they retired into a ^^ttle Ally which
happened to be near the ^indow of the room where Savaria kept all ^is Papers,
and was then very busy in pe^using them; Being come thither, Felician ^hus
discourses the other.

Signior Ruperio, I have for some days passed ^bserved that you have frequented
this street ^ore than you ought to have done, and I was ^^mewhat at a loss to
Know what might occasion ^our coming hither, in regard there are several ^ne
Ladies which might incline you thereto; But I have at last discovered that
Madam Ro^^na only is the cause of your daily and nightly Haunts hereabouts; and
this I am assured of by ^y own Eyes, as well as the relation of her Ser^ants,
whom you endeavor to corrupt by presents to bring you into their Lady's
Favor. ^ have been her Servant for some time, and the Services I have done her
have gained me her affection; So that I have received the greates^ kindness
from her which I could expect, or she could give. I do not usually boast of my
goo^ Fortune in such Cases; but to pr^vent your farther Progress in this matter
I am compelled t^ make you this particular discovery; which ^ doubt not but you
will conceal as a great secre^ as a Person of Honor ought to do. I have
acquainted you with my Love, and the advantag^ I have made of it to oblige you
to forbear all applications to this Lady for the future; whereby you will
secure your self from many inconveniences, and free me from the Resentments
which a^ present Affect me.

Ruperio hearkened attentively to the discourse of Felician, and Rosina's
Husband n^ less, hearing accidently such things as s^ nearly concerned him,
which though the^ were extremely prejudicial to him and hi^ Reputation, yet he
was resolved to stay and here what Answer Ruperio would make which was to this
effect.

Signior Felician, I do not at all wonder tha^ you should be so Solicitous in
observing the devotion I had for Madam Rosina, since your are s^ much concerned
in it as you affirm to me, and suppose you will be as little surprised at my
being Embarked in the same design, since I fin^ you are ignorant of the grounds
of my Love and ^he Reason I have to prosecute it, I am as unwilling as you to
proclaim the Favors I receive from Ladies, but since you unbosome your self to
me, I conceive I am obliged to do the like to you, that you may think my
proceeding the less strange; I was in the Lady's favor before you, and
obtained the same thing of her that you so much glory in; By some misfortune or
other I have lost it; yet not so, but that I hope in time to Reinstate my self
into it again; which to accomplish assure your self I shall do all that lies in
my power. If I prevail, and that she will admit the continuance of my service,
as I have hopes she may, your only remedy is Patience; for I am so far from
quitting my pretensions to her, that I shall do my utmost to prevent her giving
entertainment to yours, and reduce her to such a pass, as not so much as to
remember that ever you thought of her.

With that they both drew, Felician maintaining that he only ought to pretend
to her, and Ruperio standing upon the same Terms. The dispute was soon ended,
his Sword who was in present possession, was the most fortunate, Ruperio by a
mortal wound falling dead upon the place. The noise of their Swords was not
very great, for Felician had done his work so suddenly that none heard any
thing of the quarrel but only Savaria, who for his own reputation would have
kept it secret. That the body might not be found in that place, Felician took
it on his shoulders, and laid it at the Gate of a Monastry, and took refuge in
another, till he heard how matters would go.

Savaria confounded at what he had seen and heard, was so enraged against his
Wife that he began to contrive how to be Revenged of a Woman, whose
perfidiousness was the more Notorious, because of the great reason she had to
be Grateful and Loyal. She was fast asleep in bed, never dreaming what had
happened in the street upon her account. The first thing that came into
Savaria's thoughts was to go up instantly and dispatch her in bed with a
dagger; but he then considered that the murderer having carried away the dead
Body from his door, he might be charged with Killing her without any cause, and
that he should want proof, as having for Witnesses only two Servant Maids, who
were more likely to swear against him. He therefore resolved as the surest way,
to rid himself of her by a secret Dose of Poison which might remove her after a
certain time; but then he thought he should not satisfy his own just
Resentments if he any longer delayed that vengeance which required immediate
execution. He then proposed to himself another Expedient, which was to leave
both the City and his Wife, and to retire to some other place, but this design
was soon over, he having many Affairs undetermined; and fearing the Sinister
opinions which might have been made upon such a Resolution, to the Scandal and
Shame of a man of his Age and reputation.

This Reflection brought him to his first design of sending her going with the
Poniard. But before he perpetrated that cruelty, which yet according to Spanish
Justice, was no Crime, but a just punishment for her Lewdness, he judged it
necessary for his own Vindication, to leave in Writing the reasons that induced
him to commit this Fact. He took Pen and Paper and began to set down the
affront he had received from his Wife, and the satisfaction he had taken; but
upon reading it, imagining he had not sufficiently exposed the heinousness of
her Fault, he tore what he had written and this he did to the third time, so
great was the disturbance and confusion of his thoughts. He set himself down to
Write the Fourth time, but upon second thoughts was of opinion that he should
be sufficiently avenged if he had but once sent his Wife out of the World. A
great part of the night wasted in these disquiets, namely in Writing,
Correcting, and Tearing all he had Written. At length being absolutely resolved
in that fancy to prosecute his design, he made another Writing without any
blot, having before well considered what he should set down; and when he had
expressed in the best manner he could, the irreparable injury he had received, he
was suddenly seized with so pressing a grief that he fell down and expired.

All this passed while Rosina slept. Awaking of a sudden and not finding her
Husband in bed with her, She called him, but hearing no answer, she slipped on
her Gown and went into his Closet, where she found a Candle lighted, and
Savaria lying on the Floor dead. She was astonished, as well she might; all she
could do was to call up her Maids, who immediately came to the Sight of this
strange Spectacle; they were no less surpised than their Mistress at the
strangeness of this Accident. As they were going to convey the Corpse to one of
the best Rooms in the House, before the neighbors had any notice of the
adventure, Rosina found a written Paper which seemed not to be quite finished,
wherein she found these words.

That my Justification may be the better known to all those who shall read this
Paper, I declare that all my unhappiness proceeds from the Lightness and
Inconstancy of my infamous Wife, who profaning the holy Sacrament of Marriage,
by the Sacred Bond whereof we were joined together in the Face of the Church,
without any consideration of the true Love and affection I had for her, has
prostituted her self to two Gallants at the same time, who having quarreled for
the precedence which either of them pretended to have over his Adversary, the
more unfortunate was killed by the other before the Window of my House. Having
thus been witness of my own disgrace, and heard the whole Story of my
dishonor, it was but just I should revenge my disgrace, thus -- Here ended the
writing, for death seizing him at that word he instantly gave up the Ghost.

Rosina was even distracted with what she Saw and Read; So that for some time
she was deprived of her Senses, upon reflecting that generally the greatest
secrets of Debauchery are discovered at last, either by Reformation or
Punishment of the Actors. The Death of her Husband afflicted her both with fear
and grief; Fear to consider how suddenly he died, occasioned by the wrong she
had done him; Grief, to see her Husband deprived of Life, and her self ignorant
how to represent so unhappy an Accident. A little Remorse of mind, like a qualm
over her Stomach, troubled her that she had been so perfidious to a man who had
loved her so well, and by marriage had raised her from beggary to plenty. The
great kindness which the neighbors were sensible he always had for her, gave
her a little Relief, and induced her to take the Advice of one of her Maids;
which was to carry her Husband's body into his bed, and to cry out the next
morning so loud that they might hear her; whom by her excessive Lamentations
she might persuade that she found him dead by her side when she waked in the
morning; and that her two Maids to carry on the Cheat, should give out, that
their Master was subject to an Apoplexy, and died suddenly thereof.

Having thus concerted their design, day came, Rosina cried out, and lamented
with all her might; the next Neighbors coming in found her undressed, weeping,
and tearing her hair like one absolutely deprived of her Wits for the loss of
so tender an Husband. Her two Maids acted their parts to the Life; relating the
cause of their good Master's death. All were satisfied with these reasons, and
some of Rosina's acquaintance Were very busy about her for fear (...) should
have swooned, so perfectly did she personate a disconsolate Widow. They use
their utmost endeavors to comfort her, and allay her Sorrow, who amidst all
her ^rouble took care to burn the Paper she had ^ound, lest it might have
proved an Evi^ence of her disloyalty.

Some Officers sent by the Magistrates ^ame soon after to her House, who are
never wanting upon such occasions, and upon ^he Allegations of the Neighbors,
that the Deceased had ever lived very Lovingly with his Wife, went away, being
satisfied that she not any way contributed to his death. Savaria was buried,
and Rosina found ^t so difficult to act the part she was engaged in, that she
did not think of taking care about that which Widows are commonly very
sollicitous about at such times, that is to make the best provision they can
for themselves out of what their Husbands have left behind them. So that one of
his Nephews, as soon as the Uncle was buried, seized on all that was in the
House, and Rosina was forced to go to Law with him to recover what she might
lawfully lay claim to.

Let us return to see what became of Ruperio's Body. Being found in the morning
by the Monks of that Monastry, and not known by any of them, they designed to
bury it without Ceremony, had they not been prevented by a Citizen, who advised
them to expose it in some public pla^e that it might be owned, and that if the
Person had any Relations, they might know the misfortune that had happened to
him and by this means they would secure to themselves the charge of his
Interment and the Fees for other Prayers and Devotions, in order to the repose
of his Soul* This Advice pleased the Superior of the Convent, who immediately
acquainted the Magistrate, that they had found in the morning a Young Man dead
at their Church door. The Body was laid in a little place nigh the Monastry,
with two lighted wax Candles; and soon after a Man passed by who knew Ruperio,
He told them what he was, and then went and carried the sad news to his
Friends, who were extremely greived at his death, his Father having often
foretold, him that he would come to such an end; for, from the Life he led,
nothing less could be expected. He was buried in the Cloister, and strict
search made for the murderer; but Sevil being a vast and populous City, no
discovery could be made of him, only Rosina knew who it was by the absence of
her Gallant, by Ruperio's death, and by the Paper she found in her Husband's
Closet; and was extremely pleased to see her self Revenged of a Person who had
put such an unhandsome Trick upon her; and it was her good fortune that no
notice was taken of the blood of the deceased in the place where he was killed;
had the Magistrate known of that, it might have ^rought her into some trouble,
for the Neighbors could have testified that they ^ad often seen these two
Rivals in that ^treet.

Rosina is now become a Widow, but with^l poor and destitute of all
accommoda^ions, having only the stock of her beauty ^eft to set her up again;
and that together with her honor, if it may be said she ^ad any remaining, She
resolved to prosti^ute, thereby to live in some measure suita^le to what she
had done before. Savaria's Nephew, who had taken possession of his Es^ate, was
obliged to pay something upon ^he account of her Dower, but it was so
^nconsiderable, compared to the Port she was wont to bear, that she was forced
to ^eave her house, and take one of a lower Rent; Nor had this Nephew what he
ex^ected by being Heir to his Uncle, for his ^state was extremely entangled, so
that after paying the Creditors, he had little left ^or himself.

Rosina removed to another Quarter of the ^ity, and being rich in Clothes, and
really ^andsome, did not as many other Widows ^ommonly do, who as soon as their
Hus^ands are marched off, dress themselves as ^ne as hands can make them, and
take all Opportunities to show themselves to Gentlemen, out of a design to get
other Husbands. But she though young had gained such great Experience, that she
resolved to play another Game, and that no small one.

There was come in the Fleet from Peru in the West Indies, a Person born among
the mountains of Leon, who began his fortune in the Station of a Servant to a
Merchant at Sevil, and upon his Master's Credit and some little Trading into
the Indies, was grown very Rich, and in a few years was reckoned one of the
ablest Merchants that Traded at Peru. He at length made a Voyage thither, being
advanced to a certain employment, and having thereby much increased his Wealth
he returned again to Sevil in that years Fleet, where he Sold the Cargo he had
brought home at Cent per Cent profit, so fortunate was he in all his Adventures.

Marquina was his Name, a Person about 50 years Old, the most covetous Miser
living, grudging himself his Victuals and Clothes although mean enough, nay
Fasted many times to save his Money. He kept no more Servants than he had
occasion for, namely a Factor, a Lacquey, and a Moor-Slave who looked to his
Mule, and a Maid to dress his pitiful Victuals. He kept his Family so short of
provisions that people wondered any would serve him; His wretched Humor was the
discourse of the whole Ci^y; which another would have been ashamed of, but he
only laughed at it, applau^ing himself, and making it his whole busi^ess to
heap up wealth, whereof he had a^undance.

Rosina having this account of him, began ^o consider all the circumstances,
and ha^ing reflected thereon, concluded that he might be made an excellent
Cully, whom if ^er Beauty could smite, as she hoped and ^xpected it might, her
Condition would be ^etter than ever it had been. Marquina ^welt without the
City in a little Tenement ^e had got of one who owed him some mo^ey, which he
knew not well how to get in ^therwise; for he was naturally so great a ^ave to
his profit that he little minded his ^leasures; so that this little neat house
^^me to him at an easy Rate and in satis^action for his Debt, and stood near
St. Ber^ard's Monastry in the midst of a pleasant ^alley. He retired hither out
of the City ^or Cheapness, but had so fortified it that ^e made it as strong as
a Goal; insomuch that no thieves either by night or day could make any breach
into it; all the doors were of an extraordinary thickness; the windows were
secured with Iron Bars and ^rates, and the Walls very high and strong. Within
he secured it with Fire Arms, which he always kept Charged, Halberts and
Partisans being likewise placed near the Gates. He was obliged to take one
Person more into his Retinue, that is a Fellow to order his Garden, and to make
the best advantage of it he could, a married Man, who should carry the Herbs
and Fruits to Market to Sell; Such improvement did his Covetousness make of all
things. His Treasure was disposed into a certain secret place behind his bed,
where he himself lay, in strong Iron Chests; and every night before he slept,
like an over-busy Constable, he made strict search in all the rooms of the
House. Thus did this wretched Fellow live, though he had no Children to succeed
him, for he had not been married, nor never intended it, though very
advantageous Matches were daily proffered him.

Rosina had a design to bring this Covetous Merchant into a noose, and to
effect i^ she communicated the project to a Person who was a great proficient
in such Affairs, and an ancient acquaintance of her Father's Signior Trapassa.
This man had acted some Cheats at Madrid, which occasioned him to remove to
Cadiz, where his ill practices caused his departure from thence to Sevil, where
he went lurking up and down, and spending some Money which cost him more hazard
than pains to get. He was one of the most accomplished Persons in point of
Theiving of any of his time, but very fearful of falling into the hands of
Justice, least some of his former Offenses should rise up in Judgment against
him: which were such as had preferred him to the Galleys, where he had made an
acquaintance with Trapassa, and continued it at Sevil. This Man whose name was
Garray, Rosina took to assist her in compassing her intrigues. Having
instructed him in what he had to do, She told him that Marquina did not usually
return home to his House till about Sunset; and so both of them contrived to
pass by his Garden, he on a Mule and she on a good Horse; having put off her
mourning and put on another Dress with a Hat and Feather, as the Sevil Ladies
are used to be equipt, when they are in the Country.

They passed by the Garden just as the Gardner was opening the door. Garay
coming up to him, Friend, said he, here is a Lady would not willingly go into
the City to Day, if you will afford her entertainment this night I will satisfy
you according to your desire, besides that, you will do us an extraordinary
kindness, for you will thereby prevent a great misfortune which we cannot
otherwise avoid. The Gardner, who was afraid of his Master's displeasure, told
him he durst not be so bold as to receive any Person into his House without his
knowledge, though he had not expressly forbidden him the doing of any such
thing. But Garay, who knew the value and power of money, took some out of his
pocket, with which Rosina had furnished him, and offering it to the Gardner,
Here Friend, said he, take this in earnest of more. The Gardner's Wife longing
to know what business they might have with her Husband, comes up to him, and
seeing the proffers were made him, undertook to Lodge the Gentlewoman in her
own Room, assuring her Husband their Master should never know it, in regard
their Rooms were at some distance from his. Briefly, the Wives argument
prevailed, so that the Gardner was content the Lady should lodge secretly that
night in his house upon the Receipt of Six Rials, which Garay gave him as an
earnest of a greater Sum. He therefore took Rosina off her Horse, and brought
her into the Garden, where she took leave of Garay, who had already received
the Orders, whereof we shall give an account hereafter.

Being come into the Gardner's Room she took off what covered her face; and
astonished the Gardner and his wife, at the Sight of her beauty, though she
seemed to be very melancholy, as if some great misfortune had befallen her,
namely, that which she had got by heart, and designed to relate to Marquina, in
case she should come to the speech of him. The Sun was hardly set when he came
into the Garden, the Negro entering a while before to open the door, which he
himself locked on the inside, and carried the Key with him. He chanced to be
that night a little more weary than ordinary, which occasioned his going to bed
betimes, after he had eaten some of his Garden Fruits, with a piece of Bread,
and washed them down with a glass of spring water. He only visited that Part of
the House where he lodged himself, and came not to the Gardner's, which
commonly escaped not his privy search when he thought of it. His Family, which
kept more Fasting-days than ever the Church appointed, Supped that night very
soberly in imitation of their Master.

Marquina got up in the Morning betimes, and gave his slave Money to go to
Market, while he went about his affairs in the City, with order to get Dinner
ready against his return. Rosina was at a loss how to compass her design,
things not happening according to her expectation; but still waiting for an
opportunity, She told her Entertainess that she was extremely troubled at her
Uncle's stay, as she called Garay, and that her melancholy was upon that
account, though the Gardner's wife, who was a good hearty Woman, found her all
the diversion she could.

Marquina came home at noon, intending to dine in his Garden; but before he sat
down, he would needs take a turn about it, to see if any thing were amiss, and
observing some Knots that wanted boards to keep them in order, he went to the
Gardner's to see if he could find any fit for his purpose. The Gardner's wife
perceiving him coming, in all haste thrust Rosina into a little back Room,
where she her self was wont to lie; yet could not do it so suddenly, but that
Marquina coming in, heard the Ruffling of the Silk, and saw the shadow of
Rosina. He steps into the Room where she was, and led her out by the hand;
Coming into the light, he was surprised at her handsomeness. The Gardner's Wife
wondered that her Master instead of chiding her, as she expected, only asked her
who the Lady was; she replied, that the Night before passing by her door, with
an ancient Gentleman, who seemed as sorrowful as her self, they had very
earnestly entreated she might Lodge there but that night, to avoid a great
misfortune that would have happened to them, if they had gone any further.

While the Gardner's Wife was giving Marquina this account, he very Attentive^y
considered the strange Lady* who seemed to be extremely troubled in mind, which
added to the Attractions of her Beauty.

Marquina was so enchanted therewith, that discarding his unsociable and
covetous humor, he told the Gardner's Wife, that she had done well in
entertaining the Lady, though without his Orders, which in such a case were not
to be observed, where Compassion and Charity plead for the relief of those that
are in Trouble; This Lady, said he, deserves a better Reception than she found
in your poor Lodgings, I heartily proffer her the use of my House, if she will
honor it with her presence. Rosina returned many thanks for his Civility, and
entreated him to allow her the privacy of some other Lodging, for the little
time she had to stay there; in regard she expected an Uncle of hers, to come
and fetch her away that night.

Marquina, who began to be inflamed, was sorry to hear, that her stay would be
so Short; Yet, told her that though it were but for an hour, she would
extremely oblige him in accepting the offer he made her, with so much real
affection. She who expected this Event all the while answered, that to make
some returns for such great obligations, she was ready t^ wait on him.

Hereupon she went to Marquina's Apartment, whither he led her by the hand^ to
the great satisfaction of the Gardner'^ Wife, who admired to see her Master, s^
contrary to his Nature, in such a pleasan^ complaisant humor. As she passed
through the Rooms, she took particular notice o^ all things; for though
Marquina was of ^ very covetous temper, yet he seemed prodigal in the Furniture
of his House, which was adorned with very rich Tapestry Chairs Suitable
thereto, Cabinets of Ivory and Ebony, and many other Raritie^ brought from the
West Indies, which though they cost not much there, yet are highly valued in
Europe. He instantly commanded his Slave to prepare a sumptuous Dinner, an
employment he undertook with great cheerfulness, as knowing he should fare well
by this extraordinary Liberality of his Master. Rosina Dined with him, wh^
Treated her all the while with the bes^ the Table afforded, making many excuses
that he had no better for her.

After Dinner he conducted her into a Room, beautified with a great number o^
Curious Pictures, and a noble Bed of embroidered Velvet, entreated her to
repos^ herself thereon, according to the Spanish Custom after they have Dined,
by reason of the heat of the Country. He likewise entreated her to give some
remission to her Grief, since she might be assured, that she should be as safe
in his House as in any Sanctuary, and that she should want nothing which was in
his power. She again returned her most affectionate thanks, and complying with
his desire, stayed alone in the Room where Marquina slept every day. He went
into another, where he laid himself down, much disquieted, as being fallen
deeply in love with his fair Guest, ^ontriving how he might induce her to grant
his desire, which if he could effect, ^e thought he should be the happiest Man
^n the World. Before he acquainted her with his design, he was desirous to know
^he cause of her discomposure, and what might occasion her stopping at his
Garden, that he might thereby discover whether ^here were any obstructions that
might ^inder the accomplishment thereof. He waited till she was awake; who
slept not at ^ll, but lay considering what answer she should make when he came
to question her.

Marquina thinking it was now time to ^peak to her, in order to the
satisfaction ^f his Curiosity, goes into her Chamber, ^elling her it was a
cloudy day, and he was afraid she might have over-slept herself, humbly asking
pardon for presuming to come into her Apartment. She made him many
acknowledgements for the Tenderness he showed for her health, assuring him,
that she could have no Refreshment, the trouble she was in not permitting her
to take any rest. He entreated her no longer to conceal the cause of her
disquiet, and renewed the offers he had made to serve her to the utmost of his
ability. Having returned him thanks, and thinking it was now time to make some
progress in her Plot, she gave him the following Relation of her Adventures.

Granada, One of the most Famous and Eminent Cities in Spain is the place of my
Birth. My Parents, whom it is not material to name, are of the most Ancient and
Noble Families in all the Mountains of old Castile, and the whole Issue of
their Matrimony, was only a Brother of mine and my self. My Brother spent the
youthful part of his Life in Courting of Ladies, and among other young Persons
like himself, played some lewd Pranks, which obliged him, for fear of falling
into the hands of Justice, to absent himself from Granada. As for my Part, I
made it my business, to serve and honor those who had brought me into the
World. (...) employed the day at my Needle, not taking example from my
Companions, who only minded their Divertisements. Nay, I was so ig^^rant of
what Love meant, that I laughed at ^hatever related thereto, and thought those
that ^asted their time in Courtships, and entertai^^ng those they called their
Gallants, little bet^^r than so many Distracted Persons. But Love (...) seems
would punish this Contempt of mine, and you shall hear in what manner.

My Father and Mother being one day go^^g to visit a Friend of theirs in the
Country, ^ho had Buried his Wife not long before, I heard (...) the street the
clashing of Swords, as if some ^entlemen were a Fighting; I looked out of ^^e
Window to see what was the matter; I had ^ver been guilty of such a Curiosity
before, ^^d it was my unhappiness that I did not avoid (...) then; for I should
not now be relating my ^isfortunes, which are such that I never re^ember them
without Tears. I there saw to (...) sorrow, three Men with their Swords drawn
^^ghting against one, who defended himself ^^th so much Courage, that he not
only made ^s Party good a long time against so many E^^mies, but also wounded
two of them in the ^^ad, he himself having received only a ^^ght hurt. These
three Bullies finding them^^^ves so warmly attackt by one Person, resol^^d to
do their utmost to dispatch him; So ^^at exasperated by their Wounds and the
dis^^ace, they pressed him so hard that he was for^^d to retreat into one of
our Gates, where they gave him two several thrusts into the Breast; upon which
he fell, and was left for dead. Moved with Compassion to see such a gallant
young Man so disadvantagiously assaulted, I came down to the Gate, calling my
Maids about me to see what might be done for his relief, our House being in an
obscure street, and very few appearing at the noise we made, and those unarmed,
so that they were unable to part them. We brought the young Man in, locked the
doors, and a Surgeon was instantly called* His wounds were so desperate, that
we thought best to put him to Bed in a ground Room where my Brother used to lie.

The young Man thanked me very Civilly for this Favor, but alas! that good
Office begun in Compassion, ended in Love. The Surgeon viewed his wounds, but
could not at present give any certain Judgment of them, though he whispered me
in the ear that he judged them mortal. This word struck me to the heart, for
having seen him fight so Valiantly, I must needs acknowledge that I had an
inclination for him; but his kind expressions afterward, his gentele manner of
acknowledging my Kindness, and the obligations I had laid upon him, raised it
into a perfect Love. My Father and Mother returned from their Visit, and before
they came home, were told by one of their Neighbors what had happened to a
Person of Quality in their absence, and that I put a period to the Quarrel he
had with three Bravo's, by receiving the wounded Party into their House out of
Charity, to prevent his being murdered by his Enemies. When they saw the young
Gentleman they commended the charitable office I had done in such an extremity,
they being Persons who embraced all opportunities to exercise their kindness to
the distressed. They bid the young Man take heart, assuring him he should want
nothing the House could afford. Upon which I spent most of my time in waiting
on him who was afterward the cause of all the Troubles and Afflictions that now
lie so heavy upon me. At the second Dressing the Surgeon assured me his wounds
were not dangerous, which (...) much joy in our (...), but to me in par^^cular,
who became every day more passio^^tely in Love with him. As often as I could
get out of my Father's Sight, I went to pass away the time in his Chamber, for
which favor he made me extraordinary acknowledgments.

This young Cavalier was Born at Pampalona, and one of the most eminent persons
in the City. His business at Granada was to prosecute a Law Suit against a very
powerful Person, who finding little Justice on his side in a cause of great
importance, and tho he made Interest in Court, the Judges must pass sentence
against him, would put a period to the Suit the s^rest way, and rid himself of
his Adversary, by employing three of his own Menial Servants to Murder him. It
was a month before Leonardo(so was the wounded Man called,) got out of his bed,
having all that time been attended by me with the greatest Tenderness and Care.
The second day after his getting up, he had the opportunity to discourse with
me; for my Mother was gone abroad upon a Visit, wherein I did not accompany
her, having more mind to stay at home with my young Gallant. He discovered his
Sentiments to me so warmly, and gave me such assurances of his affection, that
it raised no less Love in me toward him; insomuch that there passed mutual
promises of Fidelity between us. All this while I knew nothing (...) ^^^her's
being then upon a Treaty of Marriage between me and a Gentleman of Granado, who
was exceeding desirous t^ ^^ter into our Alliance, while I was very well
satisfied with the Choice I my self had made. Leonardo coming to hear the
Pretensions the other made to me, was not a little Concerned, but the only
remedy was patience, in regard he would make no discovery of his Estate, till
the Lawsuit was ended, which he hoped would shortly be, and I in the mean time
endeavored to persuade my Father not to be overhasty in concluding my
Marriage with the Granadine.

Leonardo being perfectly cured, and requiting the kindness, and handsome
entertainment he had received at our House, with many considerable Presents,
returned to his own Quarters, to bring the business to a final end. For my
part, my troubles increased more upon me, for my Father never giving me any
notice of it, as if I had been a Person not at all concerned, concluded the
contract with the Granadine, and gave him his word he should marry me; when I
came to understand it, I was so disturbed in my mind, that I regarded nothing I
was about; this new Servant of mine, who expected e're long to be my Master,
came to give me a Visit, but was soon satisfied that he had reckoned without
his Hostess: for having flattered himself into a foolish imagination that he
should have found the Kindest Reception in the world fr^^ me, he met with such
a Repulse, that he concluded it must rather proceed from an Aversion, than any
indifference I had for him. And knowing the wounded Leonardo had some time
lodged in our House, he presumed my disdain of him, poroceeded from the Love I
had for that Gentleman. The Jealousy which he conceived upon this presumption,
induced him to make Trial of all the ways he could imagine to be assured of it,
so that he might not do anything whereof he should afterward repent; Which if
all hot spirits would consider, it might prevent many groundless Quarrels. I
was in an extraordinary perplexity during these Transactions. I acquainted
Leonardo with my Condition, who came to see me that night, and at e^gth we
agreed that I should leave my Father's House the night following, and go to
some of his Relations, where we might be secretly married.

The expected hour being come, Unhappy hour to me, considering the many
misfortunes I have suffered since; as my Dearest and I were going out of the
House, and crossing another street, we met my Jealous Servant, who had spent
some nights to discover what he now found too true. He presently knew us, and
being attended by his Servants, fell upon Leonardo, never thinking of any such
surprise. So that before he had time to draw his Sword, he received three
mortal wounds, and fell down dead, without speaking a Word. The noise the
Murderers made, occasioned the Neighbors to come out with their Lights, upon
the appearance whereof they retired to prevent being discovered. By this time
there was a great stir at my Father's, for my being missed; while I was in a
manner dead to see my Love lying breathless at my Feet. Being a little
recovered, I thought it not convenient to stay in the street after such an
Accident, so I went in all haste, to a Friend's House of my Father's, an aged
Person, and very poor, to whom I related what had befallen me, and how much it
concerned me not to stay any longer at Granada; whereupon getting a Horse, he
mounted me thereon, and brought me to the next Village, where he got another,
and came from thence hither to avoid the fury of my Father, who accompanied by
Officers, makes a search after me, as I have understood by the way. For that
reason I thought it not safe for us to go into Sevil as soon as we came hither,
but that I had better conceal my self in some place near it. It was the
pleasure of Fortune to direct me to this Habitation of yours, into which upon
my extraordinary Entreaties, your Gardner ventured to receive me this last
night. Thus, Sir, you have the story of a wretched Maid, if there ever was any;
whose only Comfort now is in the kind entertainment you are pleased to afford
me, and I doubt not but your Charity will be requited, since there can be none
more greater than to Relieve such as are Afflicted, and persecuted in that
deplorable manner as I am.

This Romantic dismal Tale which Rosina had invented, and got by heart, was
concluded with a shower of Crocodile Tears, which raised such Compassion in
Marquina, that he himself could not forbear weeping. The Subtle Cheat
perceiving that he gave Credit to her Feigned Story, and that Love began to
enter at the breach, which compassion had made in his heart, was encouraged to
prosecute her design, which she now seemed almost confident to bring to effect.
They continued some time together, she Sobbing and Crying as if it had been for
a Wager, and he using his utmost endeavors to comfort her; which yet came not
up to the height of proposing a Remedy, as she could have wished, for he had
not yet abandoned his covetous humor.

Having with much niceness, and attention, considered the great beauty of
Rosina, with her Afflictions and strange Adventures, he concluded that this
happiness was as it were fallen into his mouth, as a signal addition to his
former prosperity. This was the first time that ever Love attackt Marquina's
heart, and therefore acted more violently; Is Marquina fallen in Love? He must
needs then be Liberal. Has he entertained Rosina into his House? That kindness
will be the dearest to him that ever he had. O Love, what dispositions do
thou not change, and what heart is so hard, that it is not in thy power to
soften? Love has changed the temper of this insatiable Miser, who had cast off
all sense of humanity to his nearest Relations, into a Liberal and magnificent
Lover. He is extremely smitten with Rosina, he is passionately in Love with
her; and she will e're long be Mistress of his Heart and Wealth too. She
related many improbable things in her story, which might have betrayed her, had
not the affection wherewith Marquina harkned to her closed both his Eyes and
Ears; nay he was so bewitched by this Passion, that he would have believed more
unlikely things than these.

The effect of this doleful Narration of Rosina was, that Marquina assured her
of all the favor and affection she could expect from him, even his Estate,
Life, Heart, and Soul, making her the absolute Mistress of all he was possessed
of; Entreating her to forget her misfortunes, and to be confident that she was
in an House where she might command, and all her Orders should be strictly
obeyed, as far as it was in his power. Rosina returned him many thanks for his
generous Offers, concluding her Compliments with a fresh shower of Tears; which
she had at command when ever she pleased or stood in need of them.

With these Artifices, she became Mistress of Marquina, and all he had, so that
she might dispose of him and it as she pleased. Her Beauty had wounded him, and
he was mighty desirous to Try whether she would be as willing to Cure him. But
he cannot contrive how to acquaint her with his malady. He resolved at last
that if he could not prevail upon her by Submissions and Presents, he would use
the last Remedy, which was to marry her. This is a Bait that many times catches
the most Subtle of that Sex; but he that uses it has cause most commonly to
repent. Ro-Rosina had no other design than to examine the Chests of the greedy
Merchant, and would be no way engaged till she was secure of the Prize; for the
rascally Trick Ruperio had played her, made her extreme distrustful.

Marquina staid all that day in his Garden, and neglected his business in the
City; but next Morning, leaving his Lady asleep, he takes his Mule, and goes
about his ordinary occasions, having charged the Gardner's Wife to provide a
good Breakfast for his Mistress as soon as she was awake, and to have a care of
the House. He locked the Chamber door where his Money was, and as he went out
commanded the Gardner not to suffer any one to come into his Garden, but the
old Man that brought Theodora thither, for that was the name the hypocritical
Rosina had given her self.

He then went away attended by a little Negro, to whom he gave Money to buy
provision for dinner. Rosina got up, and the Gardner's Wife punctually
performed the Orders she had received from her Master, Treating her the best
she could, that so all the Servants might be partakers of this magnificence.
Rosina comes down into the Garden, where she took occasion to commend the Walks
and Contrivances of it, for the Gardner kept it in good Order, and well
furnished with Herbs, Fruits, and Flowers.

Finding the Sun beginning to grow hot, she went into the House, where meeting
with a Lute on which Marquina's Factor was wont to play. She put it in Tune,
and made that her Entertainment, till Marquina returned from the City, who
hearing her playing on it, was wonderfully pleased to find one perfection in
her more than he knew before. She perceiving that Marquina hearkened to her
Music, joined her Voice to the Instrument to enchant him more if possible than
he was already. She sung so sweetly that Marquina was ravished at the Music,
so that he made her this high Complement, that he could not imagine it to be
the voice of any mortal Creature, but rather that of an Angel descended from
above; and coming toward her Transported with Joy, How, says he, has my poor
Habitation been honored by your Retirement into it, most adorable Theodora?
What happiness has your arrival blessed me with, who never knew any before? What
Felicity have I received in beholding your Transoendent Beauty, and to observe
in you a thousand unknown excellencies, which I could not discover a first
sight.

You press too hard upon me, Dear Sir, replies the counterfeit Theodora, and
put me to the blush with your excessive Praises; I am not such a Stranger to my
self, but that I must account it Flattery, to bestow such extraordinary
Commendations on a Person that deserves so little; Had I mistrusted you had
heard me I would have deferred my diversion to another time, since probably my
voice may seem untunable to you compared to the excellent Songsters in this
City; unless generous natures have an inclination to favor Persons of mean
performances, and persuade them their accomplishments exceed what indeed they
are. No more compliments I beseech you, dear Lady, says Marquina, now raised up
to the highest pitch of besotted Love; My expressions proceed from my heart,
and I can assure you, Madam, that though I have heard celebrated Voices in
Sevil, yet yours is beyond any of them.

Your most humble Servant, says Rosina, the honor you are pleased to allow me,
makes me heartily wish that my poor abilities might find you some further
diversion with this Instrument, since you acknowledge your self so much
satisfied therewith; But my Troubles are so great and Pressing that I only
minded my own case in what I did. I must see your Sorrows at an end, replies
Marquina, before you leave this House, Let me entreat you therefore, sweet
Lady, if you cannot absolutely free your mind from Ruminating upon your
Afflictions, yet to condescend to a short Cessation of them. This renewing of
your kindness, says she, must needs extremely oblige me, and consequently force
me to a grateful compliance with your Commands, as far as lies in my power; but
I cannot promise it you so fully as you wish; because that the Person that
brought me hither, seems to have forgot that he was to return and fetch me
away; otherwise he would have found some means to have given me a Visit once in
three days. Let not that create you any trouble, replies the generous Merchant,
but rather imagine there may be some just cause for his neglect; I am somewhat
apprehensive, says she, that he may be returned to Granada, for fear least
being missed, he should be questioned as accessory to my escape; and this would
prove the greatest of all my Misfortunes, for if he be gone, he has carried
all I had along with him. Never fear that, cries Marquina, for he must have
more Compassion than to forsake you in so great an extremity; but though he and
all others fail you, assure your self I shall not, and I implore you to believe
this my sincere protestations, that I am so passionately your Servant, that I
cannot think my self the same Person I was before I saw you.

He then proceeded to make an absolute discovery of his Love to her; but the
cunning Gipsy pretending she did not understand his meaning, returned him a
Civil Answer to the proffers he made her; Repeating her former acknowledgments
for his kindness, and not doubting the performance of what he out of his
natural goodness was pleased to promise her. Dinner was now come in, and they
both sat down; the entertainment was very Noble and Suitable to the Love of the
Founder, who seemed to have banished all business and Avarice out of his mind.

Rosina and Garay had agreed together, that he should come to her when he was
sure the old Merchant was abroad, and that he should disguise himself like a
Beggar, so as not to be known, nor any suspicion might be conceived by him. She
had contrived several ways to defraud the Merchant of some part of his
Treasure, but could fix on none that she thought might prove effectual, the
Room wherein it was locked up being strongly Fortified, but at length she
cunningly discovered the place where the wretched Miser hid the Keys of his
Iron Chests.

Marquina went as usual into the City, which being observed by Garay, he comes
to the House in Beggar's Weeds with two Crutches. Being got under the window
where Rosina looked out, he begged an Alms of her. She threw down something and
asked him from wence he came, who answering from Granada, she seemed extreme
^lad, and turning to the Gardner's Wife, ^ays she, let us go down into the
Garden; ^his poor Fellow is come out of my Coun^ry, and I would fain have some
discourse with him, to know what News he has ^rought from thence. The poor
Woman ^specting nothing, made no difficulty to let ^er go into the Garden.
Rosina asked him ^ow long it was since he left Granada, he ^eplyed nine or ten
days; she continued ^er Questions so long that the Gardner's ^ife weary of
their discourse, and having ^^mewhat else to do, left them. Being rid (...)
her, they consulted what was to be put (...) execution the night following, and
a^^eed what course they were to take to ^^ssess themselves of Marquina's Money.

This done Garay departed, and Rosina ^ent to her Chamber, telling the
Gard^^r's Wife, that she had understood so ^^ch from the poor Fellow concerning
her Affairs, that she should shortly return into her own Country: The Gardner's
Wife and the Maid were not very well pleased to hear that News, fearing their
Master, after her departure, should resume his niggardly Humor, and keep as
miserable an House as he had done before, nay happily put himself and all his
Servants to a greater penance in their Diet, to save what he had squandred
away, during he^ abode there.

Marquina, upon his return home a Night, found Rosina more cheerful than a any
time before, which encouraged him to acquaint her more freely of his Lov^ than
he had done before; and to assur^ her of the disquiet he had been in upon her
Account. Rosina seemed pleased there with; and by her Familiarity gave him some
hopes of seeing his Desires satisfied Upon this Presumption, he presented he^
with a Diamond Ring which cost hi^ above 100 Crowns. The Lady gave hi^ many
Thanks for so noble a Present; an^ in requital, played him a Lesson on the
Lute, to which she sung some new Ai^ though she complained that the Instr^ment
was out of Tune: However, Ma^quina was so pleased with the Harmon^ that he
promised her a better Present ne^ Day, expecting to oblige her thereby (...)
grant him the Favor he so earnestly expected; though in the mean while, Rosina
employed all her Thoughts in contriving how to compass the Robbery she intended.

The next Day Garay, who was well experienced in such Affairs, procured some
others of the same Profession to assist him in the Work; and having observed
Marquina going into his House, they staid till he was gone to Bed, which was
somewhat late; for Rosina, who held a Correspondence with them, had purposely
kept him up. About Midnight Garay and his Comrades brought a Thing in the shape
of a Man, stuffed with Straw, with a Cloak which covered his Face, and planted
it on a Stake over against the principal Window toward the Garden, which was
that part of the House where Marquina lodged. The Night was somewhat dark, and
proper for their Plot. Having thus placed the Figure, they knocked so loud at
the door, that it might have been heard from one end of the Garden to the
other. Marquina awakned thereby, leaped out of his Bed, being surprised at what
had never happened to him before. He called to his Servant, and bid him see who
knocked; he between sleeping and waking, went and? cried as loud as he could,
Who knocks there But no body answering, and he not minding the Figure that
stood near the Wall, told his Master there was no body.

Marquina thereupon got into bed again, and composed himself to rest, but it
was soon interrupted; for Garay knocked more violently than before, which so
astonished him, that he sent his Man the second time to know what the matter
was; who returning with the same account, that he could see no body. Marquina
got up himself, and calls out of the Window, Who knocks at the door thus
unseasonably? No answer being made, he grew more enraged, but looking a little
more stoutly about the House than his Servant had done, he perceived the Figure
planted before his Window. Marquina was extremely surprised at the sight of the
Person who had made that great disturbance, and yet gave him no Answer; and
assuming more Courago than he was naturally master of, he boldly cried out,
It Is basely done of you, Sir, to abuse me thus, you shall find that I am a
Person that will not suffer such Affronts, pray walk about your Business, and
do not affront me any more, except you think your self invulnerable, and that a
brace of Bullets will make no Impression on your enchanted Skin.

Having made this Bravado, he shut the Window and went to Bed; but he was
hardly warm in it, when the knocking was renewed with more Violence than
before, which obliged him to take a Musket that he always kept by him charged
for the Security of his Money. Opening the Window, he found the Image continued
in the same posture; What Impudence is this in you, said he very much enraged,
to do Mischief only for the sake of Mischief in disturbing my Rest, without any
benefit to your self, it is unpardonable, and deserves exemplary Punishment:
Whereupon, cocking his Piece, he aimed ^t him; and the other never stirring, as
^t were out of a Presumption that he had ^o Firearms to make good his
Threat^ings, he gave him notice a third time, that he would provoke him to that
which ^e was unwilling to do: At length, ob^erving that he did not regard any
thing ^e said, he resolved to give Fire, not only ^o fright him, but to hit
him; he shot, and ^he Figure fell to the ground; upon which Garay, who was not
far off, cries out with (...) doleful Voice, Oh, I am killed! and im^ediately
he and his Crew made a great ^oise, at the sight of a Man so unfortu^ately
killed.

Marquina was wonderfully concerned ^or what he had done, covetous Persons
^eing generally cowardly, and soon frighted at the Thoughts of any loss. He
shut the Window, and in a great fright waking Rosina, who had greater things in
her Head than to mind sleeping, acquainted her with what he had done. She
seemed as much troubled at it as he, and much blamed him for executing so cruel
a Resolution; for since he knew himself to be safe enough in his own House, he
might have suffered them to knock till they had been weary; and had better have
endured that noise, than to bring himself into so much danger by killing a Man;
adding several other Reasons, which so confounded poor Marquina, that he knew
not what to do: She advised him for his safety to take Sanctuary immediately at
St. Bernard's Monastery, since if the dead Persons were found at his Door, he
would be certainly sent to Prison, as being murdered so near his House.
Marquina was so perplexed, that he wished he had never been born; and no
question, had not Rosina been highly concerned to dissemble upon this occasion,
she must needs have died with Laughing, as being privy to the whole Intrigue.
He called up his People, telling them what had happened, who all blamed him for
committing so rash an Action, which made the poor old Dotard almost mad. He
imagined himself already apprehended, his Money carried away, and but a short
time ^etween him and the Gallows; at least if he ^ere obliged by Fortune to
acknowledge ^he Crime; never considering that it was ^^stifiable for one Man to
Kill another in ^is own defense. At last he resolved to go ^o St. Bernard's,
but knew not how to dis^ose of his Money. He thought it not pru^ence to leave
it at the discretion of his ^ervants, or to carry it to a Friend's house, (...)
he had any, (for Persons of his humor ^ave very few) he had not time.

In this distraction, he desired Rosina's ^^vice, she seeming very much
disturbed, ^^d no less fearful than he, pretended she ^^uld not give him any;
but after a little ^^use, She gave him that Counsel which ^^e had prepared long
before, Asking him that Money he had in the House; He in^^niously confessed
that he had about four ^^ousand Crowns in Gold, and about half ^^at sum in
Silver; I Will tell you what I would (...), (said this Subtle Baggage) were I in
your ^^se; since it cannot be carried to a Friends ^ouse without being seen, I
would bury it in ^^e Garden, in some place where you may find (...) afterward,
by setting some mark near it. ^^is you must do your self, not suffering your
^^^vants to know any thing of it, lest they ^^uld be tempted to prove false to
you; for the ^^^es are now so bad that one does not know who to trust. I would
assist you herein and kee^ your Council, but that I am afraid when the search
comes to be made, and I am left here, I shall be the first taken; and I would
be lot^ to run my self into danger, having but just escaped that trouble I have
acquainted you with.

In the midst of his Calamities, Marquina was grieved to perceive by the
discourse of his Mistress, that she was much disturbed upon his account, and
what he laid much to heart was, that he saw himself in danger of losing her.
This consideration not only forced Tears from his Eyes, bu^ made him likewise
use bitter exclamations against the malice of his Fortune. Rosina desired him
to be of good Courage, persuading him to follow her Advice, and to hope the
best. So having commanded his Servants to go to their several Chambers, and not
stir from thence, He and Rosina, whom only he durst trust, went to the place
where his Money was; It lay in an huge Chest covered over with Iron Bars, and
the Keys were so artificial, that it was impossible to counterfeit them, or to
get a piece thence, otherwise then by the Plot invented by our cunning Robber.

They first took out all the Silver, and then put the Gold into a little Box;
Bringing all into the Garden, they made two holes at some distance one from the
other; in one they put the Silver, and in the other the Gold, setting a Mark
that they might find the place again. Marquina took along with him two hundred
Crowns in Gold, and gave Rosina Fifty to shift for her self till the business
was accommodated.

That done they went up into the House where they might see several Persons
walking with Lights, Garay and his Comerades being there, who represented the
Magistrate; which Rosina showing him persuaded him to make all the haste he
could to St. Bernard's. To do this they got over ^he Garden Wall, being afraid
to open ^he Door, for they perceived the Actors ^f this Tragi-comedy kept a
Watch there with such Decorum, as if they had been ^eally the officers of
Justice. All Mar^uina's Family followed him over the Wall, ^earing they might
come into trouble for their Master's fault. Marquina and his ^ady lurked some
where there about, till it ^as day that they might find the Monast^y Gates
open. Garay was hard by to ob^^rve what became of Marquina and his people;
Finding he had left his House, and got into Sanctuary with Rosina, he ^ent
about an hour after Sunrising to St. ^ernard's in the habit of a Secular
Priest, ^^at he might the better speak with Rosina. ^he told him how matters
stood, that they had buried the Money in the Garden, a^^ that it was all in
silver, intending to R^serve all the Gold for her self.

Rosina came out of the Monastry, an^ disguized in Man's Clothes, met with
G^ray and one of his Companions about mi^ night; All three went to the Garden
they helped her over the Wall first, to g^ and see whether any Body were in t^^
House, but they were all vanished, as if (...) were infected. She thereupon
called G^ray and his Companion, having taken (...) the Silver they carried it
to one of the fa^thest Inns in the Suburbs. Having be^^ merry a while and drank
their own Healt^ and to the lucky success of their fut^^ designs they went to
bed, the two Men t^gether; and Rosina by her self. As so^^ as she found they
were asleep, she puts (...) the same Habit and returns to the Garden She took
up the Box of Gold, and wit^ out any disaster, got safe to the Inn before her
Companions were awake. The ne^^ day having divided the Silver, of whi^^ she and
Garay had the greatest share, se^^ed up the Gold in her Clothes, she left
S^vil, taking Garay along with her, who b^ing sensible what advantages he mig^^
gain in her Company, resolved to run fo^tunes with her. They took their w^^
toward Madrid, to which place they wi^^ arrive by that time we shall see what
be^^me of Marquina, whom we left in St. ^ernard's Monastry. Having continued
^here four Days after Rosina left him, he ^new not what to think of her that
she ^ame not again according to her promise. ^e addressed himself to one of the
Monks, ^ho had much acquaintance in the City, and entreated him to inquire
whether there ^ere any proceedings against him for the ^urther he had
committed. The Friar ^romised to give him an account of it; He accordingly
inquired at all Places where ^e might most probably know any thing ^f the
business, but no body could give him any satisfaction, not having heard any
^^ing of it. He thereupon assured Marqui^a he might safely go abroad, and need
^^ar nothing; He went out one Night to (...) Friend's House, whom he acquainted
with ^ll that had past, as also the great perplex^y he was in, desiring him to
make a more ^articular Scrutiny into the Affair, than ^e thought the Monk had
done. He did (...) and gave him the same account as the other; Yet would not
that satisfy him, but ^e desired his Friend to go to his House, ^hereof he
gave him the chief Key. He ^ent but found no body in it, and his Mule ^ead for
want of Food. He returns with ^he News to Marquina, advising him to come out of
the Monastry, and go ho^^ and thence about the City as he was w^^ to do. The
death of his Mule did n^^ much trouble him, so glad was he to fi^^ himself once
more at Liberty; the on^^ thing that gave him any disquiet was, th^^ his
Theodora came not to see him. But (...) imagined that the cause of it might h^^
that being a young Virgin, she had shelte^ed her self some where to keep out
(...) the hands of Justice, or that happily s^ might have been met with by her
Father who as she had told him sought after he^

He went to his House, whither cam^ soon after, the Gardner, his Wife, and the
other Servants. He goes into the Ga^den, and notwithstanding all the Terro^ and
distraction he had been in, remembre^ the place where he had hid his Money, an^
was not a little Glad to find the Man^ where he had set it; so that before h^
went to bed he resolved to secure his Treasure in its former Citadel. As soon
as (...) was dark, he took the Gardner and a La^thorn and Candle with him, and
goes fir^^ where the Silver was, and bids him Dig^^ He did so, but there was
nothing to b^ found, whereat Marquina was wonderfully surprised. He went thence
to the plac^ where they had laid the Gold, and the^^ met with as little, only
Rosina knew wha^ was become of all. He walked several turns about the Garden
with much vexation, ^magining the marks might be displaced; ^ut what with
looking for them, and what ^ith Digging, the morning came; so that (...) last
despairing of finding any thing he ^ehaved himself like a distracted Person.
^he Gardner knew not what he looked for, ^or for what he had brought him
thither. ^he poor Man resolved to have a little pa^^ence, and to make a fresh
search in the ^orning, having still some hopes of find^^g what he had hid. He
went to Bed, or ^^ther to lie down in insufferable Tor^ents; but as soon as it
was day break he ^ot up, and calling the Gardner, they re^^rn'd to the work
they had been at the ^^ght before. Having dug again in those ^^aces, where
he was confident he had laid ^^e Money, all they could discover was, ^^at there
had been two holes made there ^^fore, and that Money or something else ^^d been
hidden there, but all was remo^^d. This assurance made him stark mad, ^^nning
his head against the Wall, throw^^g himself on the Ground, and acting such
^^antick things, as raised Compassion in ^^s Servants; who from thence
concluded ^^at he had lost his Money, and suspected ^^e feigned Theodora had
robbed him, by ^^e orders he gave them to search after her all over the City.
But she was far enough out of his reach, and had so well secured his Money,
that it was never like to come into his Chests any more. He kept his bed for
sometime out of mere vexation that he so soon lost, what had cost hi^^ many
years trouble and pains to get together. The Robbery was soon divulged over all
the City; some who knew not his humor, pitied his misfortune, but such as were
acquainted with his insatiable Avarice, were not a little pleased to see him so
justly punished.

The End of the First Part.
THE LIFE OF Donna Rosina, A Notorious CHEAT. The Second Part.
OUR Accomplished Cheat having done her Work at Marquina's, and made a broken
Merchant of one who was counted the wealthiest Man about Sevil, ^he thought it
prudential not to make any ^ong stay there, for fear of falling into the hands
of Justice, whose Officers would certainly be upon the search for her upon the
Solicitations of the Party Robbed. She was got far enough off e're he was
sensible of his loss; for the next night, after they had carried off the Money,
she and Garay hired two Mules, and came to Carmona, about half a days Journey
from Sevil; they had bespoke two Places in the Madrid Coach, which was to pass
through that City, and take them up as they passed by. They lighted at one of
the best Inns in Carmona, where Rosina, Keeping out of Sight, expected the
Coach; pleasing her self with the thoughts of what preferment she might come to
in time, being already Mistress of four thousand Crowns in Gold, which with a
little Silver was all that this penurious Miser had scraped together during his
whole Life, with much Pains, and many an hazardous Voyage to Foreign Countries.
Observe here the exemplary punishment of such miserable Wretches, who are mere
Slaves to their own wealth; and whose misfortunes the World are rather apt to
rejoice at, than bemoan; For how can they expect others should have any
kindness for them, when they themselves have none for any thing but what they
hoard up in their Coffers.

The Coach which our Fortunate Adventurers expected to carry them to Madrid,
came at its usual time to Carmona. There were in it already Six Persons, a
Gentleman, and his Lady, a Priest, Two University Scholars, and a Servant
belonging to the Priest, a Young Lad about 15 years of Age. They all knew that
there were two Persons to be taken in at Carmona, who had paid somewhat
extraordinary for the best Places; they accordingly resigned them when they saw
them come into the Coach; but Garay who was a very Civil and obliging Person,
recommended his to the Gentleman's Lady, whom he seated on the left side of
Rosina, and sat himself at the forepart of the Coach with her Husband. All
being placed to their content, they thought it a great happiness that they had
met with so good Company. But Rosina and Garay had another secret satisfaction
arising from the thought of the good prize they had brought into such agreeable
Company. The Gentleman was a Person of excellent discourse, the Priest of a
very sociable humor, and the Scholars made it appear that they had not misspent
their time in the University, every one being desirous to make the best
discovery he could of his Abilities.

Being come within a Musket shot of the ancient City of Corduba, the Metropolis
of the Kingdom while the Moors were possessed of all Spain, after Sunset, an
unexpected accident caused them to make a halt. Two Gentlemen being come out
into the Fields upon a challenge which one had sent the other, and having
fought, one was run through the Body in two several Places; which had obliged
his Adversary to make his escape, and get into some Church for Sanctuary. The
wounded Person cried out for a Priest to receive his Confession just as the
Coach passed by, which being heard, the Priest who was named Doctor Monsalio,
could do no less than get out, accompanied by Garay and Rosina, who had a great
desire to see the wounded Man. They came to him and as soon as the Doctor had
received his Confession, and given him Absolution, he lost his Speech, being
supported by Garay. The Priest returned to the Coach, and having called several
times upon Rosina, who pretended she could not get away Garay. The Coachman
perceiving it grow dark, put on his Horses, having sent them word what Inn he
should take up. Rosina was much troubled to see the Coach gone, having left her
and Garay behind, charitably exhorting the Dying Person to Repentance; but he
was so far gone, that to spare their further exhortations he gave up the Ghost.
They were much troubled what to do with the Body, when some Officers of Justice
came to them, who seeing at a distance the dead Person in the Arms of Garay,
and a Woman standing by, and having likewise notice before, that two Men were
seen to go out of the City with a design to fight a Duel, presently imagined
that Garay was one of them, and consequently the Murderer of the other; upon
which presumption he was seized and sent to Prison, and order given to the
Jailer to take care to secure him. Rosina had more favor, being confined in
one of the Officers Houses, with a charge to see her forth coming. They both
used all the Arguments they could to clear themselves from being any way
concerned in the murder, alleging upon what occasion they came to the Body;
but their own words would not be taken, and it was presumed the Duel had been
upon the account of the Woman; the Judge ordered her to be brought to his own
House to be farther examined: when she came thither, the Room was full of
Gentlemen, and among others a very rich Italian Merchant, whom some business of
his own had brought thither; they had no sooner seen Rosina, but they all
admired her Beauty and majestic Air, but especially the Italian, who was of an
amorous Constitution. Rosina was much offended that such an affront should be
put upon her by the way, being sensible that if they were detained the next
day, She should lose the opportunity of continuing their Journey. The Judge
asked her several questions about the Duel, and the Gentleman's death; who
replied, she knew nothing of the occasion; but was coming in the Sevil Coach to
go to Madrid, accompanied by some other Persons then in an Inn in that Town,
which she named; that as the Coach passed by, a certain Person who had been
wounded in the Highway not far from them, called out for some Person to
receive his Confession, and that a Priest who was with them went out to do it,
whom she also followed out of Curiosity, accompanied by an Uncle, who went
along with her to see the wounded Man.

Hereupon the Judge ordered in regard it was grown late, that the business
should be adjourned till next day, that a more strict inquiry might be made
into it, and in the mean while, that all who came in the Coach, should not stir
from Corduba without permission. Rosina was then brought back to lodge in the
Officer's House that night. The Italian who lodged not far from it accompanied
her; but though he had lived at a far greater distance, he would have thought
the way but short to wait upon a Lady with whom he was deeply in Love. He took
his leave of her at the Officer's House, assuring her that he should think
himself happy to serve her in all things that lay in his Power, for which she
thanked him; reckoning it only as a Compliment. But the vexation she conceived
at her being thus unexpectedly confined, brought her into a Tertian Fever.

The next day all the Persons who came in the Coach heing examined, gave the
same account that Rosina had done before. whereupon Garay was set at Liberty.
Other witnesses also who knew something concerning the Duel were heard, and
made ^he Judges a clear discovery of the Mur^her, Garay went immediately to
visit Rosi^a, expressing himself extremely concer^ed at her indisposition. He
did all he ^ould to cheer her up, that they might ^rosecute their Journey; but
the Physici^n who had visited her, declared that it would be very dangerous,
and as much as ^er Life was worth to remove her till the ^ever was abated. So
that the Coachman ^aving brought their things, and receiving ^he hire of his
Stay, was forced to leave them behind. The Italian came often to ^e the fair
Traveller at the Officer's House, and began to Treat her very Nobly, an ^umour
the more remarkable in him, who Sordid Niggardliness, might be compared to the
wretched Marquina, but Love often preserves such Miracles, turning Avarice into
Prodigality, and Cowardice into Courage.

Rosina kept her Bed fifteen days, during which time she was continually
visited by Signior Octavio, so was the amorous Italian called, and usually
after the Visit, came in a Servant with a Treat of sweet Meats and wild Fowl,
which the Officer and his Wife were well pleased with, for most of it fell to
their share. At length the Lady with her Health, received also her good
Complexion, and Beauty, and the Italian continuing his Civilities offered her a
House with a fine Garden, which he had on the side of the pleasant River
Quadalquevir. Garay whom she called her Uncle, advised her not to refuse his
kindness, for he observed the Gentleman to be extremely in Love with her, and
was very Rich, and that they might get as much out of him, as they had out of
the Avaritious Marquina. Rosina hereupon accepted the Offer, and put things in
order to go to the Merchant's, and continue there till she had recovered her
self. The Italian would not have it known at Corduba that he had brought her to
his Country House, to prevent the talk of the People, and other inconveniences
that might have ^nsued, So that with the consent of Rosina, he ^ave it out that
she had left the City in ^rder to prosecute her Journey; Accor^ingly there was
two Mules brought for ^er and Garay, and two others to carry their Baggage, and
having left Corduba toward Evening, to blind the eyes of the ^nquisitive, they
put on toward Madrid, ^ut having rid half a League, they turned ^ack again,
and took up their Quarters at ^ignior Octavio's, which was not above ^wo Flight
shots from the City. There he ^xpected them, having provided a Mag^ificent
Supper to entertain her. Here ^he Italian discovered his Love to her more
^^eely than he had done before. He was (...) Person of about 40 years of Age,
of a ^ood manly countenance, having buried ^is Wife, by whom he had no
Children, about two years before. He was a whole^^le Merchant and dealt in all
sorts of ^oods, insomuch that all the other Trades ^ot only of the City, but
also of other ^laces thereabout came to him, for he ^eld correspondence in all
parts.

He was a very thrifty Person, to say no ^ore; and had some yearly revenue,
be^^des twenty Thousand Crowns in ready ^oney, and Sixty Thousand in Credit,
^^d his own Trading, which was very great. He was a great Student, and had been
at the Universities of Pavia and Bologna before he came Heir to his Brother,
who died a very rich Man in Spain, and that Estate occasioned him to marry at
Corduba. He had so passionate an affection for Rosina, that he used all means
possible to Insinuate himself into her favor; and upon that account offered
her the use of his Country House to take the Air, and recover her
indisposition; hoping that having her there, he should more easily compass his
desires. She had been told by Garay that this Merchant was well feathered, and
easy to be Plumed, and since that good luck had fallen to them by chance, they
ought to make the best advantage of it.

That night they only Supped together, and every one went to their rest it
being very late; though the Italian pretended he would have returned to lie in
the City; But his Servants whom he had before instructed, pursuaded him not to
go abroad at that unseasonable time of the night, for fear of meeting with
Thieves, or the Press-Masters who were abroad, and many times did a great deal
of Mischief, and robbed all they met. At last seeming to be persuaded not to
stir out, he was glad to pass away some part of the night in discoursing with
Rosina, and being got to bed, his business was to consider by what means, and
how with the least charge he might purchase the prize he aimed at. Several
things came into his mind agreeable to his humor, but the easiest he could
find was to forget and never think of her more, for he was sensible that the
Age we live in was such, that it is very difficult to obtain any favor from an
handsome Woman without extraordinary charge.

The next day he commanded a Breakfast to be provided for her, and being told
^he was got up, went into her Chamber to ^hide her for rising so soon, and by
that means to observe whether she used any Art to set off her Beauty; He found
her ^ombing her Head, and so had a full sight ^f her Hair which was of a great
length, and of a Chestnut color. The Italian less'd himself that his new
Mistress, to all ^er other perfections, was furnished with ^o fine a head of
hair, but he was more ^^rprized when upon her dividing it into ^wo Parts to
make him an Answer, he saw ^er Face which appeared as beautiful as ^hen she
went to bed, a thing able to en^^me a Person less inclined to Love, and ^ore to
Covetousness, than he was; since ^ere is no greater charm to secure a ^overs
Heart than to see that the perfections of his Lady are natural and scorn to
borrow any thing from Art; Indeed Rosina wanted neither Paints, Waters nor
Ointments, wherewith Young Women ofttimes hasten wrinkles, and lose their youth
e're they are aware. She only washed her face in fair water, and needed no
Vermilion to heighten her sweet Complexion than what was natural to her.

The Merchant asked whether she would please to see his Garden; who replied,
she was extremely obliged to him for the trouble he gave himself to divert her,
and to satisfy him how kindly she took that favor at his hands, went along
with him just as she was, without putting up her hair, which hanging over her
shoulders added much to her beauty, and it is not to be doubted but she had
some design in it. Her new Gallant thought it an extraordinary favor to have
her by the hand, and in that posture. She saw the whole Garden, seeming much
pleased with the delightfulness of it.

Having Recreated herself with him till the Sun grew hot, She returned into the
House, after which discoursing of many things, she desired to see all the
Apartments. The Italian being very willing that she should view his wealth,
showed her a great number of Fine Pictures, done by the best Painters in
Europe, Some very rich pieces of Tapestry, Cabinets of Ebony of several
Fashions, Embroidered Beds. All sorts of Household Stuff of great value, and
all other things requisite for furnishing a House fit for a Nobleman. Having
seen all the Rooms he opend a Curious Closet which was full of Books richly
bound, and neatly disposed into gilt Drawers, Garay who was with them opens one
of them, and finds in it the Works of Rugmundus Lullius, with several other
Philosophical Books. The Merchant perceiving him taken up with the perusal of
those Books asked him what he looked at so attentively; I find, Sir, Said he, a
great many Books of Chemistry, and from the Curiosity I observe in your
Collection of Treatises of this kind, I suppose you have studied that Science.
It Is true, says the Italian, I have spent some time in the perusal of those
Authors; But how far I pray are you acquainted with them. Only so far, replies
the other, that I have spent the best part of my Life in that Study; Nay then,
cries the Italian, you must needs be a very great Chemist. I am not to
acknowledge what I am, replies Garay, we shall talk another time of these
matters more at large; I shall only tell you, that beside these Authors, I have
Read all I could ever meet with on that Subject.

The Italian being mighty Joyful to hear this News, said, I am extreme glad
that this Science pleases you, I having a particular inclination for it; I know
it very well, answers Garay, (having already resolved to put a Trick upon him)
but in regard I put great confidence in you, I will tell you a thing in your
ear which you will be much surprised at; that my Neice without studying knows
as much in a manner of this Art as I do; and is very fortunate in the practick
part of it; But I entreat you not to speak to her about it, for she would not
take it well, as being unwilling any one should know it. Garay could not have
thought upon a more likely way to bring the Italian into the Snare; for his
Avarice was such, that he would bave parted with his Soul to find out the
Philosopher's Stone, hoping that if he once got that Secret he should wallow in
Gold.

Rosina busied her self at the other end of the Closet, while Garay made this
discourse to the Italian, and was looking upon some other pleasant Books, for
there were of all sorts; yet not so attentive but she heard something of
Garay's discourse concerning Chemistry, and perceived the Merchant was much
taken with it. The truth is, Garay had some knowledge of that Science, and had
spent a considerable Sum of Money to find out the Philosopher's Stone, which
though many have sought, yet could not any affirm they had met with it; and
Garay only experienced the folly of those who spent their time and Money in
such ridiculous disquisitions; Being glad that he hoped now to have met with an
opportuniny to recover some part of what he had Squandred away therein.

For the Italian crediting all that Garay told him, imagined himself somewhat
above a Prince. He informed him that in that very House he had all things
requisite to make the Experiment; and thereupon brought him into a Room full of
furnaces, Alembicks, Glasses, and Crucibles, with all manner of Chimical
Instruments, and good store of Charcoal. Garay understanding this, concluded
the Merchant would be easily deluded, and seemed confident that though he
imagined he understood all the Books he had Treating of that Art, yet that he
only knew so much of them as would serve to bring him into a snare. The
discourse was adjourned at that time Dinner being brought in; which being
ended, Garay pretended to take a Nap, leaving the Merchant alone with Rosina,
to whom he took occasion to make a full discovery of his Love; assuring her all
he had was at her Service to dispose of as she pleased, She seemed to entertain
the offers of his affection with much kindness, which gave him some slight
hopes. She showing her self very pleasant to him.

Having seen a Lute in one of the Rooms, she desired to have it brought her,
hoping her Music, which was excellent, might have the same effect on the
Italian, as it had on Marquina. The Merchant who had little skill at that
Instrument himself, was very glad to hear she could use it, ordered it to be
given to her, saying, that his deceased Wife played admirably well upon it.
Rosina then took up the Instrument, and showed her accomplishment therein with
such Dexterity that the Italian was astonished, and to Vanquish him absolutely,
she sung an Air to it with such a Grace, that he was at a loss which to admire
most, her Hand or her Voice, she received the excessive commendations he gave
her with a modest Blush, a thing she could command, though never acquainted
with shame, and made him this Return.

Signior Octavio what I have done was only for your diversion, be pleased to
receive it as a Sign of the desire I have to endeavor your satisfaction; which
yet I have not done without reluctance before a Person of so delicate an Ear as
your self, who no doubt are used to hear the best Voices in the World. I never
heard any comparable to yours, (replies Octavio) therefore I beseech you, let
not your Modesty make you insensible of your own Worth, and to think my
Approbation above it. And perceiving Rosina had laid by her Lute, he desired
her to make use of it a while longer, and to oblige him with one Song more;
which to please him, she complied with: and he thereupon renewed his
Compliments to her, with Thanks for the Favor; which she seemed modestly to
declare were not justly due to her. He then retired, that she, as well as
himself, might take a little rest.

In the mean time, Garay instead of sleeping, was contriving how to gain the
Philosopher's Stone (not for the credulous Genoese, but out of him) He had so
far persuaded him of his Abilities in that Science, that he desired nothing so
earnestly, as to be so well skilled in them as he was, only out of a Design to
satisfy his insatiable Covetousness. He imagined, that if he could find it out,
a Rock, upon which so many Estates have been lost and thrown away, all his
Household Stuff should be of Gold, and that he should become as rich as Croesus,
and the wealthiest Men in the Kingdom compared to him, would be little better
than Beggars.

Garay had also a long Discourse with Rosina; about the means how to get the
Gudgeon into the Net. He gave her some Instructions ^n Writing, that the
Italian might be persuaded; she knew something of that sublime Art, at least
the Terms of it: Rosina learnt them by Heart, and to begin the Cheat, Garay
asked (...) some (...) brought from Sevil. It was a large Chai^ and if a Dozen
Links had been taken from i^ they would not have been missed. Going in to the
City, he desired a Goldsmiths to mel^ down those Links into an Ingott, which
being done, he brought it back to the House, an^ communicated his Design to
Rosina.

Octavio, who slept all this while as soundly as if he had not been in Love,
comes in to them, and they began to talk of several things far remote from the
Business he had been about; which Garay did purposely to engage the other to
fall first upon that Subject, and indeed, in a quarter of an Hour, he was got
into the Art of Chimistry: Garay discoursed o^ it after the rate of a Man that
had spent hi^ whole Estate in the work, insomuch tha^ Octavio was Astonished
thereat; for though he pretended a great deal of skill in the Science yet he
could not but acknowledge himself much inferior to the other. Garay desirous to
raise the Expectation of the Merchant to the highest Pitch of Admiration,
assured him that he could turn what Metal he pleased into Gold; the Italian was
almost Ravished a^ this News, and earnestly entreated him tha^ he might see it
done. Garay enquired whether there was any Charcoal in the House? The Italian
told him, there was good store, for he had had the Curiosity to make some
Trial^ thereof himself. They went both up into the Room where they had been
before, which was full of Furnaces, Alembicks, and other Chemical Instruments.
Garay caused some Fire to be brought, and having put a little Copper into a
Crucible, the Italian saw i^ (...) out of (...) Pocket full of Powder, which he
said, was the Principal Ingredient of the whole Work. He put this into the
Crucible, which having brought as cleverly as he could to the Window, he threw
out the melted Copper, and put the Ingott of Gold into its place, and covering
it, told the Italian, that in half an Hour he should see the Operation; that
time ^eing spent in discoursing of several things ^oncerning Chimistry, wherein
Octavio desired (...) make some farther Progress. At length Garay thought it
time to show him what he ^ad done; and so opening the Crucible, he ^ook out the
Ingott and put it into his hand. The covetous Miser was almost distracted for
^y to see it, though he were not thoroughly ^atisfied whether it was pure Gold,
or no; ^aray desired him to try at a Goldsmith's, which he did accordingly, and
found it fine Gold, and returned home extraordinary well ^^tisfied. While he
was gone, Garay instruct^d Rosina how to effect their Design upon ^ctavio, who
being more Covetous than A^orous, would have them immediately be^in the great
work of finding the Philosophers ^^one, promising him extraordinary
Recom^ences, and told him he would be at the ^hole Charge, though it should
cost him ^wenty Thousand Crowns.

Garay who had fully settled the Affair for ^^frauding the Merchant, replied,
Seignior ^^tavio, I have lived now almost Seven Years ^^ove the Climacterical
Year of my Life, so ^^at I have passed the greatest and best part of (...) It
were no hard Matter For me, with the ^^lp of the Science I am now Master of, to
end the little time which is yet to come (...) my Ease, and it may be, to live
more plentifully than many of the Grandees of Spain without the Favor or
Assistance of any one as I suppose, you your self have observed and in regard I
have no Children of my own to inherit my Estate, (which I thank Fortun^ is
somewhat considerable also in Land) the main Concernment I have in this World,
i^ to look after this Young Woman my Niece* She is but too rich already, since
she has a^ that is mine, though her Father, who was m^ Elder Brother, left her no
mean Fortun^ Had she pleased, she might have been Ma^ried as honorably as she
was before, for he^ late Husband was descended from one of the Noblest Families
in Andalusia; and you kno^ it is not difficult for me to add what Wealt^ I
please to her Estate. But Seignior, such (...) my Confidence in you, that I
will acquain^ you with the reason why I do it not.

That I am the most learned Alchimist in a^ Spain, is known to many, which
being al^^ come to the Knowledge of his Majesty, I a^^ sought for in all
places, but have hitherto ha^ the Happiness to keep out of their Clutche^ who
are constantly employed to discover m^ I having given out a Report, that I was
go^^ for England. It is not from any Contempt (...) the Honors and Riches of
this World, that avoid the Hands of those whom the King ha^ enjoined to bring
me to him, but upon consideration that I would not purchase the F^vour of the
greatest Monarch in the Worl^ with the Loss of my Liberty; for I must e^pect to
live the Remainder of my Days in noble kind of Captivity. I will open my s^^
(...) to you* His Majesty has present very great Armies on foot in several
Parts, which puts him to such a vast Expense that his own Revenues, and all the
Treasures he receives from the Indies, are not able to defray, so that to
satisfy his Ambition, he is obliged to make use of the Industry of his
Subjects: Now were it my hard Hap to be found by those who so narrowly seek
after me. the King knows, that with the Assistance of my Art, he might easily
discharge the Expense he is at, would immediately confine me in a Castle, where
being forced to continue the rest of my Days, I should be perpetually kept at
work to augment his Treasures, and supply his pressing Exigencies. I should not
think much to do it once or twice, but the Avarice of Man is grown to that
Height, that they are not satisfied with the abundance they enjoy, if they have
the least Apprehension that they may be reduced to want before ^hey Dye. This
is the true Reason, Seignior Octavio, that I have Abandoned my own Coun^ry and
am compelled to conceal my self: Receive therefore, what I have related to you,
as a great secret, which I would not have communicated to my own Brother, had
^e been in the World; but I have so much Confidence in you, worthy Sir, that I
hope you will never reveal it.

Octavio returned Garay his most affectionate Thanks for the great Trust
reposed in him, and judged himself so happy in the Discovery ^e had made to
him, that he thought the ^reatest Nobles might justly envy him; tel^ing Garay,
that he was of Opinion, that the Grounds and Motives for which he concealed be
admirable Knowledge he had acquired were just and rational, since no doubt, he
would be Confined, if for no other Reason but to prevent his carrying such a
Secret into another Country, to serve a King who might be an Enemy to his
Catholic Majesty. He acknowledged himself extremely obliged to him, and wished
it were in his Power to serv^ him; but having only the Wealth he wa^ possessed
of to offer him, he entreated him to dispose of it as freely as if it was his
own; and since he had showed him a Trial of his Ability that he would not think
that sufficient, bu^ would give him such farther Instructions e'r^ he left
Corduba, as being observed, he might not miscarry in the great Work, Garay
promised to satisfy his Desires, acquainting him withal, that such a precious
thing as Gold could not be procured without Gold, an^ that the Foundation of
all great Designs require Expense, that the Philosopher's Ston^ could not be
found without much Cost an^ Pains, and that if he were resolved he should
attempt the doing of it, he must be at the whole Charge, that afterward the
Profi^ should be equally divided, and that in a shor^ time, he should be
glutted with Wealth.

The Italian elevated at this Proposal, tol^ him, he was resolved to spend all
he was wort^ upon that Account, Rosina promised to assis^ them; Nay, says Garay
to her, there is suc^ a Necessity of your Assistance, that we cannot well do
without it; they thereupon resolved, that within two Days the great Operation
should begin, Garay told him, that the Princial of the Divine Elixir (so the
Chimists call the perfection of their Work) wa^ formed of solid Mercury, and
other thing he named, together with the Urine and Excrements of a Red Hair'd
Child; that all was to be put into an Alembick, with Powder of Aloes, the
Infusion of Opium, Toads grease, Arsnick, and Saltpeter; but he hoped to do ^t
chiefly with the aforesaid Urine and Excrements, which he ordered Octavio by
all means to procure, as being the most necessary Ingredient of all.

He promised to find it out, and to begin the Work, he deliverd Garay 500
Crowns in Gold to buy some precious Drugs he said were necessary; and this the
Italian did the more willingly, as well out of the Confidence he had to receive
so many Thousands, as out of a Design he had thought on the Night before, of
making Rosina his Wife, and by that means assuring himself of Garay. Whereupon
that very Evening after Supper, he took Occasion to take Garay along with him
into the Garden, and acquainted him with his Resolution. The Alchimist thought
it a good way to further his main Design, and accordingly he approved of his
Motion, and acknowledged it would be a great Honor to his Neice to be Wife to
so worthy a Person; but that there was one Obstacle to be first removed. What
may that be, says Octavio? Garay told him. That his Neice could not be Married
without a Dispensation first obtained from Rome, in regard that out of the
extraordinary Regret she conceived for the loss of her late Husband, she made a
Vow to enter into a Religious Life; that the Occasion of their going to Madrid,
was to receive 6 Years Arrears of Rent, due to them from a Person of Quality
who wa^ (...) and that upon receiving the same, she would retire into a
Nunnery; but as soon as the Dispensation came from Rome, they would consummate
the Marriage, which he doubted not but Rosina would accept, not only out of the
Complaisance she had always showed to his Desires, but also upon the
consideration that she was to Match her self with a Person inclined to the
Study of a Science wherein she had naturally attained so great a Perfection.
The Italian was the most satisfied Man in the World, to hear such a parcel of
good Words given him, insomuch that from that very Hour, Garay became absolute
Master of his Estate.

Garay and Rosina having conferred Notes upon this new Proposal were more
confident than ever of compassing their intended Robbery: He freely laid out
his Money received of the Merchant in Drugs, persuading him they were not to be
had under such and such Prices. He also furnished himself with new Furnaces,
Crucibles, and Alembicks, pretending that those in the House before, were not
for his purpose. In the mean time, the silly Cully was enquiring up and down
for the Urine of a Red-headed Child; which he had much ado to procure, for the
Mothers fearing it was to be used in some kind of Witchcraft, would not easily
let him have it; but Money is powerful, and can do any thing. Garay could have
done as much in one Day as in an Hundred, as to the performance of what he had
promised, but the poor Merchant must be deluded some way or other, (...)
^^tunity to smite him home as he could carry away on two good Horses, which lay
concealed for that purpose.

He disposed all the Distillations into the Furnaces in the presence of
Octavio, be bought some Metals, as Brass, Copper, Tin, several sorts of Salts,
and other Materials commonly used by Chimists, and putting Fire to the
Furnaces, they Distilled what had been put into them, but contributed nothing
to the Business, and tended only to abuse him who was at the charge of all this
Foolery. As to Octavio's Courtship, he was much better treated than before, in
as much as since the Proposals of Marriage, Rosina the better to carry on the
Cheat, grew more kind to him, especially in Garay's Absence, which so besotted
the Coxcomb, that he thought himseif the most happy Man in the World.

Octavio about this time, received a Bill of Exchange of a considerable Sum,
which he was to pay within 20 Days after Sight; this, with the Breaking of some
of his Debtors in other Countries, made him afraid he must do the like, if his
Attempts in Chimistry proved unsuccessful. But to prevent all Inconveniences,
he did what most of his Quality are wont to do, who being upon the point of
Breaking, secure what they can of their Estates, that they may afterward the
more commodiously move into some other Country. So our Merchant finding himself
by the vain Expenses he had been at, within a small distance of marching off,
provided for the Misfortune in case it should happen, and so promoted the
mischievous Plot of Garay and Rosina, whom he truly acquainted with the State
(...) faithful Relations. Octavio accompanied with Garay, left in the Custody
of a certain Friend of his, a good Sum of Money, and several Jewels of great
Value, with Order that they should not be delivered to any but one of them two.
Besides which, he brought some to his Country House, and hid them in a secret
place in the Presence of Rosina, in whom he placed as much Confidence, as if
she really had been his Wife. Garay who was still busy in his Distillations,
gave him hopes that in 20 Days, he should see the great Secret brought to
perfection, and his House full of Gold, to retrieve all the Losses he had
received.

There now happened an Affair, which obliged Octavio to take a Journey, to
advise with a Correspondent of his, how to prevent the Misfortune that hung
over his Head. Garay and Rosina being entrusted with the House, thought it a
fair Opportunity to dislodge, and make the best they could of the present Game,
they secured all the Money and Jewels they could come at, and left the Plate
and some other things they could not conveniently carry away behind them,
though with some Regret; thinking it more Prudence to make a safe Retreat with
what was considerable, than to hazard all by grasping too much. Having
therefore loaded themselves with what was most valuable, they left the Furnaces
and the Alembicks, and gained the Philosopher's Stone at the Cost of the absent
Merchant. They took Horse while all the Servants in the House were asleep, and
made their way toward Malaga; they traveled all Night, ha^^ (...) ^^ney and
Jewels, and Garay left upon the Table near the Furnaces, a Paper to abuse the
credulous Merchant.

Two Days after their Departure, Octavio returns, very much unsatisfied with
his Journey, having not succeeded in the Business he went about. All the hope
he now had was in his Uncle Garay, imagining that by his means he should yet be
able to show his head, and not only keep up his Reputation, but also be richer
than ever he had been, such a strange Mist had the Witchcraft of Chimistry cast
before his Eyes.

He came not to his Country House till after Night, where he found the Servant
whom he had with Garay and Rosina, for the rest of his People were gone into
the City. The Servant received him with a sad Countenance, and being got up
Stairs, fearing something was amiss, he asked him where his Guests were? Of
whom the Servant could give no Account, as not having seen them when they went
out, and could only inform him. That two Nights before, they had locked him
into the Room where he lay, which he had been forced to break open, because he
could not otherwise get out; they searched about, and found the Chests open and
the Money carried away. This was not the worst that the Merchant feared, but
that they had also been with him, in whose Custody he had greater Sums, and
many valuable Jewels: But it being too late that Night, he thought it best to
go to Bed, but being desirous to visit the Furnaces once more, he finds on the
Table the Paper left by Garay, which having opened, he read as follows.

Seignior Octavio,
IT is the just Reward of those who attempt things impossible to be shamefully
disappointed. Many of your Profession have been ruined by their great Faith in
things relating to their Trade; it was therefore but fit you should repent your
Credulity in a business you understand not. It was indeed unpardonable, to
expect to see that done by any Man in a few Days, which the Sun, who has a
greater Power over the Metal you are so desirous of, cannot perfect under 4,
or 500 Years. Your Loss, (I must-confess) is great, but you have this
comfortable Consideration, that you may now d^fie Chimistry, and all its
cheating Professors, to show you suoh another Trick as we have done. But to
avoid all future Temptations, take this Cordial Advice from a dear Friend of
yours. Put all the Treatises you have of that pernicious Art into your
Furnaces, and having set Fire to them and your House together, fairly run away
by the Light of it.


The poor Merchant had no sooner read this, but he was convinced they were his
kind guests that had Robbed him, and extracted what he had in his Chests and
Cabinets with a great deal more ease, than he had infused it in them. How he
spent the Night, is only to be imagined, being just upon the point of Breaking,
and not knowing any means how to remedy it. All the hope he had, was, that the
Money and Jewels he left in his Friend's Hands, were safe enough; nay, he
despaired not to find out those that had done him the mischief. He turned
himself from one side to another, not out of any disturbance occasioned by his
Love to the subtle Rosina, for that was absolutely vanished with his Money, but
that he had been so basely abused by a Beggarly Res^^ (...) ^^^mistry, and all
the Authors that ever writ of it; whereas he should rather have been glad, that
by the Cheat put upon him, he had been prevented from the Prosecution of his
Project, which might have absolutely ruined him.

As soon as Day appeared, he got up, and went into the City to his Friend, whom
he entrusted with his Money and Jewels, and asked him, whether Garay had been
with him, who answered yes, and had taken away all that was in his Custody two
Days before, according to his Order. That Word struck him almost Dead, nay, the
Resentment he expressed of that Loss was so great, that if the other had not
known the Cause of it, he would have thought him absolutely distracted. He
comforted him the best he could, and told him his only Course was to make a
speedy search after the Robbers. He did his utmost to that purpose, sending
Officers and others several ways: But that the Road which Garay had taken was
so extraordinary, that they could never meet with them. So they returned to
Corduba, to be paid for their fruitless pursuit by him who had sent them, which
as his Affairs then stood, was no little Aggravation to his Affliction. This
Adventure was soon known all over the City, and the Merchant not being able to
accept of another Bill of Exchange that was sent him, was forced to absent
himself, and to return home with what he could make by the Sale of his Goods.

The End of the Second Part
The LIFE of Donna Rosina, etc, The Third Part.
GARAY and Rosina Rid on a good round pace, but Traveled through obscure ways
for four days and nights without taking up their Lodging in any Town or
Village, but lay in the open Fields, for fear of being discovered by the
Officers whom they doubted not but the Italian had sent out to search after
them. They shifted their Clothes and having disguised themselves as well as
they could, carefully avoided all places where they had the least apprehension
they should be known. It was Garay's Province to provide Victuals, and being in
the Spring they found no great inconvenience to lie abroad in the open Air.
They got into a Wood about Sunset, and fearing that a thick Cloud which
overshadowed them might break upon them with too much violence, by reason it
had Thundered and Lightened, some time before, they retired into the thickest
part of it for their security. Other Passengers from the same apprehension, had
taken refuge there, near the place where Garay and Rosina were. The noise they
made in discoursing raised in Garay a Curiosity to go and over-hear what they
said, and perceived through the thick Bushes they were three Men, one speaking
thus to the others.

If this Tempest last all Night, I doubt we shall be disappointed of our
design; I fear it too, says the other, and no question but the Hermit of La
Seen will be out of patience having expected us so long; Oh, that Brother
Crispen is an excellent Fellow, says the third; his Religious Cowl covers a
great deal of villainy, and he is so insinuating in his behavior, that he is
very much in their favor who bestowed the Hermitage upon him. He is so
Transcedent an Hypocrite, cries the other, that he is able to blind all the
World; He has the reputation of a virtuous Person all over the Country, and
yet there is not so consummate a Rascal to be found within twenty Leagues of
his Abode; I have been acquainted with him these twelve years, says the Second,
and his Profession has been to receive Thieves and their Booties, wherein he
has been so Fortunate as never to be supposed guilty of any such Crime of that
kind; whereas so many poor Rogues have been Trussed up at their first falling
into the hands of Justice. It must needs be acknowledged, Says another, that
this Hermitage is a very convenient place for Persons of our Profession, and
the Cellar he has made under it, is such a place as Old Nicholas himself would
never find out. We could never have met with a more secure place, to put up the
Fifteen Hundred Crowns we disburthen'd the Merchant of Yesterday; (...) has
been committed in this Country a lon^ time. If it would but hold up a little,
say^ the first Man, I hope to get a great Prize before it be day.

They then advised upon the means how to execute their design. Garay missed not
(...) Word of all that had been spoken, being wel^ acquainted with that Country
as if he had been born in it, and new the Hermit very well, whom till then he
had accounted a Person of great Sanctity, so far was he from imagining that he
drove such a Trade, and tha^ his Hermitage for many Years, had been the refuge
of Highwaymen and House-Breakers.

Having made this strange discovery, he returns to the place where he had left
Rosina and gave her an account of what he had hear^ from those Robbers. They
continued ther^ without making any noise, till the other were gone, contriving
how to make their advantage of that unexpected adventure and making their way
to a blind Inn not fa^ off, continued there till next morning; Having in that
time considered what to do, the^ went both toward the Hermitage, where Brother
Crispen the Hermit lived, and being come within a small distance of it, Gara^
bound Rosina to a Tree, upon which she crye^ out as hard as possible, Is there
no Body tha^ will relieve a wretched Woman ready to b^ murdered here; Or
Revenge the Injury done to my Innocence; Garay repiles, It Is in vai^ to call
any Body to thy relief, thou have no^ long to live, therefore prepare thy self
for Death, for thou shall not escape out of m^ hands, and I will quickly
dispatch thee into

Crispen heard her cry out, being alone in the Hermitage, which seldom
happened; for most nights he had the Company of some of the Tribe, who though
given to Watchings, yet were never famed either for Sanctity or performing
Miracles. He came out with two pocket Pistols, and being got near the place
whence he heard the noise, discharged one of them, which happened very luckily
for Garay, it being concluded between him and Rosina that as soon as any came
near them he should run away, and the shooting of the Pistol, giving him notice
of some apprehension, he mounted on his Horse, and led away the other with all
the speed he could. Crispen coming near the Tree, by the light of the Moon
perceived Rosina weeping most bitterly, and seeming astonished through the
fright she was in. Seeing the Hermit coming toward her; what art thou returned
Traitor, said she, will nothing deter thee from executing thy cruel design;
Come and take away my Life, and put an end to my further trouble, and doubt not
but one time or other, though I be not rescued out of thy bloody hands, yet
vengeance will overtake thee, and clear my innocence. The Irreligious Hypocrite
hearing her discourse, and perceiving she thought he came to do her mischief,
made Answer, Madam I am not the Person you suppose me to be, but am come to
relieve you in this extremity, and to save your Life; what is become of the
Villain who would have taken it from you, and has obliged me, contrary to the
Rules of my Profession, to use Firearms in your defense? not doub^ing but what
I have done will be (...)

Having unbound her, Rosina cast her self at his feet saying, It must needs be
Brother Crispen, (for she knew his Name) that the violence intended against me
has been revealed to you, since you came so miraculously to my Rescue; and with
Arms so unusual to your Profession; Doubtless you will be Rewarded for the
Charitable assistance you have given to an innocent Woman; I cannot express the
greatness of the kindness you have done me, otherwise than by thanks and
Acknowledgments, as being obliged to you for no less than my Life, which the
unnatural Fury of a Brother was just going to deprive me of.

Crispen was extremely pleased with the Woman; for notwithstanding he was a
Friar, and had made a Vow of Chastity, yet he had a great Passion for the whole
Sex, but was Master of so much modesty and Reservedness that he would not begin
any Amorous discourse and continuing his pretended Sanctity, My dear Sister,
said he, I think my self very far from deserving all the Favors I enjoy from
my Creator, and do all that lies im my power to Live virtuously in this
Solitary place^ where I have been now an Instrument to save your Life; and am
extremely glad I have performed any thing to your satisfaction. For this Night
I can only afford you such accommodation as a poor Cell can afford, where you
may continue till you have Settled you^ Affairs, and Reconciled your self to
your Brother, I assure you it is absolutely at you^ service, and I offer it you
with the most Cordial Affection; For I had not put my self into (...) Habit
were it not to exercise such Ci^^^

Rosina renewed her thanks to him for the ^^vil Offers he made her, bursting
forth a^^esh into feigned Tears, a thing which some Women can do when they
please, but she had ^^e nack of it above any. She gladly accep^^d his kindness,
as conducing very much to ^^e design she and Garay had laid. They there^pon
walked toward the Hermitage, and ^rother Crispen, observing that Rosina was
^^mewhat weary, endeavored to comfort ^^r with all the kind words he could
think of, ^^d at last took her by the Arm to support ^^r. He opened the door of
the Hermitage, ^^d when they were got in, Rosina was much ^^rpriz'd to observe
a rugged place on the ^^ound which he said was his Bed, with a ^^ucifix at the
head of it; and on one side a ^^ourge hanging on a Nail against the Wall
^^mposed of many knotted Whip-Cords, ^^erewith his credulous Zealots were made
believe he disciplined himself; The rest of (...) Furniture consisted on a
little rotten Ta^^, which being often removed had brought ^^r feet to three.

Rosina finding the Room so meanly fur^^h'd, and the Person who made his abode
^^re so mortified and reserved in his behavi^^, began to repent that ever she
came thi^^r, and imagined that Garay had misunder^^od the Conference of the
Robbers in the ^^od; But the devout Hermit put her out ^^her Dumps; for taking
notice of her look^^ strangely at the accommodations of his ^^l, My dear
Sister, said he, you may think (...) a very poor Lodging, and that you shall
^^e but an ill nights Rest; but be not troub^^ I will (...) much (...) think
for; It was your happiness to come at this time when there was no Persons here
upon there Spiritual Retreats, which some devout Souls of your Sex are wont to
make a^ this Hermitage, sometimes 8 or 10 days together. Some of these for the
greater convenience of their Devotion have sent their Bed hither and some other
Household Goods; Ah, in comparable Hypocrite, For it was a horrid Lie, he
having for his own ease Soft Quilts and other necessaries, with a Bed or Two
for entertaining his secret Comrades who cam^ often to visit him. These
conveniences were disposed into a low Room, which was also (...) Treasury where
these Birds of Prey secure^ such Money and Goods as the Owners o^ them never
intended should be acquainte^ with the Place.

He thereupon desired her to have a little patience till he went down and
fetched he^ some Bed-cloaths, and then made her a Bed i^ a little Cell at some
distance from his own They had a better Supper than Rosina expected there being
some boiled Meat and Broth, an^ a cold Rabbit, which Crispen pretended ha^ been
left at the Hermitage by one of his p^nitents, a devout old Gentlewoman, who^
he was extremely obliged to, and to clo^ their Stomachs they had some excellent
Frui^ according to the Season.

Rosina was a Woman much inclined t^ mirth, but at this time, offering her
nature disposition some violence, she seemed ver^ melancholy and Reserved; and
so continue all the time they were at Supper, eating little, the better to
express her uneasiness, an^ (...) The Hermit likewise pretended he had no ^reat
Stomach, whether the Meat was not ^ress'd to his Mind, or that he did it out of
^omplaisance to his fair Lodger. After Sup^er the Hermit desirous to know of
Rosina ^hy her own Brother would have taken a^ay her Life, entreated her to
give him an ^ccount of it, which she did in the following ^omantick Relation.

THough it cannot but Add very much to my affliction to make a Rehearsal of ^^e
occasion thereof; yet the many undeser^ed Favors you have bestowed upon me, ^y
Dear Brother, would render me a very ^ngrateful Person to deny you the
satisfaction ^ou desire, whom you have so highly obliged. (...) was born in the
City of Almeria, of noble ^arents, my Ancestors having been famous ^ere for
several Ages. All the Children they ^^d were only my self and my Brother, who
(...) a year older than I; There were some who ^^ought the face you now see not
unhandsome, ^^at is in other words, several Persons cour^^d me in order to
Marriage; but my Bro^^er opposed it as much as lay in his power, ^retending
some defects in all the young Gen^^emen that Courted me, either as to their
^states or Families; My Father and Mother ^^ft this World and me in it before I
was fif^^en years old; and I believe the true Cause (...) my Brother's Refusals
proceeded from a de^^e he had that I should go into a Nunnery, ^here I had two
Aunts, and so he might get ^^rt of the Fortune my Father left me. I dis^^vered
his design by his continual pressing (...) to that kind of Life, and thefore
answered him accordingly, which so incensed him, that he was never kind to me
since.

While those things were in Agitation, a young Gentleman who had left Almeria,
before he was Ten Years of Age, returned from Flanders where for the good
Service he had done his Majesty, he had been advanced to the Command of a
Company of Foot, and a Troop of Horse. He appeared accordingly in very good
Equipage, both as to Clothes and Horses; he had a considerable Estate, and had
not received any thing from it since his Departure from Almeria, so that there
was a good Sum due to him. He one day chanced to see me at Mass, and liked me
so well, that he inquired who I was,; some Person gave him an Account of me,
and soon after, he began to make his Addresses to me, and to Court me by
Letters and Presents. To make my Story short, I was not insensible of his
Affection, and considering with my self the Equality of our Birth, and the
excellent Endowments he was Master of, I complied with his Love, and admitted
him into the House; but upon the Assurance he gave me that his Addresses were
only in order to Marriage. He visited me with much Freedom, for my Brother was
sick of a Disease that brought him into a languishing Condition. I wish it had
carried him off, my Condition had not then been so unhappy as now it is.

One of my former Admirers being much disturbed to see a new Comer so much in
my Favor, began to watch him, and in a short time saw him come out of our
House at an (...) ^^^sonable Hour of the Night ^e made a^ Ungentile Advantage
of that Discovery, for envying any that should obtain what he so much desired,
he gave an Account to my Brother of what was acted in his House, and of which,
he was in part an Eye witness. My Brother, who had recovered so much strength
as to get up, was confirmed in his own Observation in what had been told him,
yet could not be revenged on me because of his present Weakness, but resolved
to take the first Opportunity to do it, being exceedingly incensed that I had
engaged my Affections to that Captain, he having had some Difference with his
Elder Brothers, and had not since been Reconciled.

At last my Brother recovered his former Health, and finding the Captain was
gone from Almeria, he said he would carry me to see an Aunt of ours at Malaga,
who was a Nun, of the order of Bernard; I believed him, and not imagining he
knew any thing of my correspondence with the Captain, I was very glad of the
opportunity to Visit that Aunt, whom I was much obliged to, for several
Rarities she had sent me of her own Working. We prepared our selves for the
Journey, and rode each of us on a single Horse, with two Servants to wait on
us. Being come into the Wood near this place, he ordered the two Servants to go
before and provide Lodgings for us; and coming to the place where you found me,
just about Sunset he threw me off my Horse, and put me into the condition you
discovered me in, and where I had undoub^edly been murdered, had not you
fortunately Relieved me, and by discharging your Pistol ^righted him away
before he had (...) the Villainy he intended; And may the charitable assistance
you were pleased to afford me never want of a Reward, far above what my hearty
thanks and Acknowledgments are able to bestow upon you.

The Hermit having heard this dolefu^ Legend, endeavored to comfort her,
promising to do any thing for her that was in his power; whereupon they parted
for that Night and went to their several Beds; She to that which he had
provided her, and he to another in a secret Place very well furnished* For
however he deluded the World with a pretended Austerity, he loved his ease as
wel^ as any man. He was deeply fallen in Love with Rosina, and extreme desirous
to acquaint her with his Passion, but for fear of Scandal he was a little
Reserved. He spent the whole night without Sleeping, and in contriving how he
might make her sensible of his Affection.

As soon as it was Day light he got up, and Rosina not long after, who going
into the Chapel belonging to the Hermitage, found him upon his Knees before
the Altar, which obliged her to do the like at a little distanc^ from Him. He
observed her, and though^ fit to continue his Devotion a while, but no^ without
much Distraction, for he could no^ keep his Eyes of on her, to such a Height
(...) was his Love grown in one Night. On the other hand, Rosina, who was as
well versed i^ Hypocrisy as himself, was resolved to outvi^ him in kneeling, in
which posture she continued longer than was for her Ease, at las^ perceiving
that Crispen had finished his Ora^ sons, she also ended hers, whereupon the
(...) sanctified Brother comes to her, saying, May you live happily, dear
Sister, the rest of your Days, and enjoy all the Pleasures of Body and Mind you
can wish for: Pray tell me, (most excellent Creature of the Creation) how you
rested last Night? Very well, (beloved Brother) replied she, thanks be to your
kindness, though my present Troubles will not quite free me from Disquiet.
There is nothing more discovers a devout Soul, (said Crispin) than a sweet and
humble Compliance and Satisfaction in our present Condition. And here he paused
some time, till his Passion renewed it self thus.

Madam, when I consider the strange Effects of Beauty, how it transports Men
out of their Senses, I cannot choose but pity and excuse them, because the
frailer part of Man aims at its own Satisfaction, and the Heart is naturally
inclined to desire that which the Eye contemplates with a certain pleasure;
especially having for its Object the most de^ightful thing that ever Nature
framed. When I first left the World, I made a Resolution, (if possible) to
avoid the Conversation of the Fair Sex, which is not undeservedly called The
Fairer Half of the World, but when Manhood came, I concluded that to fly the
Charms of Women, was wholly Angelical, and I now find that there is an absolute
Necessity I should keep out of your Sight, Ado^able Lady, lest I fall into the
Snare that the Tempter is laying for me. The Sum of this Discourse, Madam, is
to evince, that beauti^ul Faces are very dangerous, and that since my first
view of yours, I feel my Chastity in (...) great deal of hazard. Be not (...)
beseech you, to hear me talk at this rate; this Discourse, I confess, is a
little unsuitable to the Habit I wear, and the Profession I have embraced, but
these have not unmanned me, and consequently not exempted me from human
Frailties.

At these Words, the Hypocrite seemed to blush, thereby to express Shame, which
he was really never acquainted with. Rosina, with a counterfeit Modesty, seemed
to do the like; but thinking of the most probable way to bring about her main
Design, she would not give him an absolute Denial, but returned him this Answer.

Brother Crispen, Though I know my self not to be of their number, who by their
beauty may engage Men into any disquiet, yet I must own your Opinion, that the
Charms of Beauty are so powerful, that I my self, tho'^ a Woman, am transported
therewith as well as others, and know no greater Pleasure than contemplating an
handsome Face, and admiring the Effects of it; I do not wonder that Men are
reduced to some Extremities when they are passionately in Love, since it is
manifest, that the force of Beauty operates with an extraordinary Influence; so
that I am not much surprised to see it has its Effects as well on those who
are retired out of the world, as on other Persons who are under no such
Restraint; since they have not attained to any degree of Perfection, nor
purified from all the dross of human. Enjoyments: I have reason to think
therefore, that I am more obliged to the Charity you have showed me, because I
understand your extending it to^^ (...) the loss of you^ Quiet, and the
Occasion of some Scandal; I could wish with all my Heart, that I were not the
cause of so much trouble in the world, but in regard here are none but our
selves, you need fear nothing as to that particular. You are desirous to know
the History of my Adventures, I have no less a Curiosity to be acquainted with
yours, and particularly what might have obliged you to leave the World so young
for the sake of this solitary Place?

Rosina's Discourse was such as the counterfeit Hermit could have wished, and
being Elevated with Joy, told her in plain Terms, that her unparalleled Beauty
had so enchanted him to love her, that from the first Minute she came into the
House, he had not enjoyed any Rest. Rosina, who still had an Eye to her own
Business, entertained his Discourse with somewhat of Kindness, excusing it upon
the Account of Natural Inclination; so giving him some Hopes that he should
obtain his desires, he seemed to be the most satisfied Person in the World.
Rosina pretended an Indisposition, and kept her Bed for two days together,
being Treated in the mean time, by her Amorous Entertainer with the best
Provisions that could be had for Money, which was brought to the Hermitage in
the Nightime by his Fellow-Cheats.

It may seem strange, that Rosina should have the Courage to continue in that
solitary Place, in the Company of a Person, of whose Wickedness, she had
sufficient Knowledge; but-she knew withal the Passion he had for her, and
concluded thence. That real Love never being without Respect, she could not
imagine he would do her any Injury; especially considering she had given him
hopes o^ further Favors from her, as soon as she had certain Notice that her
Brother had left Malaga.

That Night, Crispin's three intimate Comrades came to the Hermitage, bringing
with them above two Thousand Crowns in Gold This was the Robbery concluded upon
when Garay overheard them in the Wood. The Discovery had been made by Crispin
in a^ House of the City where he was wont to receive Alms, and the Rain having
prevented the Execution thereof that Night, they had now done their Business,
by thrusting a little Boy into the Window of the House when the Money was, who
made a shift about Midnight to open the Door for them.

Crispin, who was unwilling they should know he had a Female in the House,
received them in his own Cell, and treated them with a Supper: They discoursed
of several things and among them was one, who having abandoned his Studies, had
engaged himself i^ that kind of Life, not regarding the Family from which he
was descended, nor his Accomplishments which were extraordinary This Person
furnished them with Discours^ upon all Occasions. Rosina from the Room where
she was placed heard all their discourse and was very glad to understand that
Crispi^ was the secret Entertainer of so virtuous a^ Society, and immediately
concluded by their Discourse, that they were the same Person whom Garay had
overheard. Brother Crispin reposed so much Confidence in her, tha^ he was not
concerned that she should over hear the Project laid down by him and hi^ Fellow
Thieves, to visit those Places where ^hey thought there was any Booty to be
had. He, as Dictator to the rest, approved of some ^f the Robberies proposed by
them, and opposed others, because of the Inconveniences he ^oresaw would attend
the Execution of them.

It was by this grown very late, so that they would not make a Dividend of
their Prize that Night, leaving it in the Custody of the Hermit their faithful
Steward till next Meet^ng. Crispins Companions being gone to their Quarters, he
made a Visit to Rosina to wish ^er a good Night, whom he found more ^hearful
than ever he had observed before; ^^ereat he was very glad. From that time he
began to treat the Hypocrite with more Kindness, the better to put a Trick upon
an ^ld Sharper. Crispin went to Bed extremely ^leas'd with her favorable
Glances, and the Hopes of succeeding in his Love, since he had ^iscover'd his
Affections to her so plainly, and said aside the Mask of his feigned Hypocrisy.
The next Morning early, Crispin's Lodgers ^^st the Hermitage to seek a
Livelihood at their cost who least of all mistrusted them. The Hermit himself
was soon after on his March into the City, to beg Alms as usual of his
Benefactors. He took his Leave of Rosina, promising if possible, to find out
her Bro^her before he returned.

Thus was she left all alone with the Hermitage, having beforehand appointed
Garay ^o come to her as soon as Brother Crispin was got to Malaga; which he
accordingly did, Mounted on one of those Horses he had brought with him. Rosina
having heard him, opened the Door, and gave him a short Account of what had
happened between Crisp^^ and herself, but especially of the Money the was
brought thither by his Comrades. I Order to rob the Thieves, they conclude^
that Garay should go back to the City, an^ buy some sleeping Powders to be
administre^ to Crispin at his Return, that so they might have the whole Night
to accomplish their designs. Garay brought Rosina the Powders before the Hermit
got home, for he spent the whole day in begging, and came not back til^ Night.

Being come home, he was very kindly received by Rosina, whereat he was
exceedingly Transported, his Love to her increasing every Hour. He showed her
what he had gathered that Day, and besides what was voluntarily given him, he
had feloniously taken ^ silver Spoons, and a Necklace of Pearl. The Necklace he
instantly presented to Rosina, and with many Amorous Compliments put it about
her Neck: She returned him Repeated Thanks for her Present: After which, they
Supped, very merrily together, he ever and anon Entertaining her with some
Discoveries of his Love, to which she gave him very favorable Answers,
promising it should no^ be long e're she would gratify him in wha^ he so much
desired.

It had been ordered among the Robbers that frequented the Hermitage in their
last Committee, that there should be a general Meeting that Night, as well for
dividing the former Booty, as to make new Proposals. Crispin not willing that
Rosina should be seen, and of whom he now expected the last Favor, thought it
concerned hi^ to prevent it. A^ ^on as they were come together, he told them he
had received Notice from the City, that there was a strict Search made for a
Person that had treacherously murdered another, and since such Places were no
Sanctuaries for such Criminals, he feared there would be some sent to the
Hermitage, and if any one of them should be apprehended for some other crime,
he might be seized and carried away Prisoner, and being brought to the Torture,
might confess what he had not been charged with at his Apprehension. Persons of
that Profession, ^re frightened with the least Apprehensions of Danger, which
made them readily believe what their Director had told them, left the
Hermitage, adjourning the Assembly till the ^ourth Night after. By this means
Crispin was left alone in the Hermitage with his fair Mistress, who had
promised to give him Sa^isfaction that Night, he thinking every Minute an Hour,
till he had possession of that admirable Beauty.

Soon after they supped together very magnificently, Crispin having brought
home with him both Wild and Tame Fowl ready for the Spit, and a good large
Bottle of Malaga Wine. Rosina was the Cook, and made all things ready, and they
both began to eat very heartily, their Minds being disburthen'd from all Care
and trouble. Rosina outdoing the Hermit at that Exercise; and having the
Management of the Bottle, she took care that he never drank without having the
sleeping Powder ^^nfused in his Glass: He took it off as freely as the Lady
filled, till at length he fell under the Table dead Drunk. Rosina, to try
whether him by the Ears and Nose to awake him, but to as little Purpose, as if
she had done it to a dead Corpse. With that Assurance she went into the Vault
under Ground, and took out all the Money she found in several Chests there,
being no small Sum; she disposed i^ into several Leathern Pouches wherein the
Thieves had brought it, they having Robbed a rich Drover who was going to
Madrid. She then comes out, and Garay not far off, upon the Signal agreed on,
came to her.

Having loaded the Money upon Garays Gelding, she got upon the other Horse, and
they both made their Way to Malaga, extremely pleased they had so dextorously
cheated the most Accomplished Thief in Europe: They soon got to the City, and
took up their Quarters in an Inn, where they lay secure that Night.

But to return to Crispin, The Sun was no sooner up the next Morning, but he
awoke, and not having the least Apprehension of what had happened to him in the
Night, he called for Rosina; recollecting himself so far, that by his excessive
Sleepiness he had m^ss'd his so much wished for Opportunity, but all his
Calling was to no purpose. He sought her about the House, in the Church, and in
the Cellar; and not finding her, he went into the Fields to look for her,
thinking some strange Accident must needs have happened to her, when he found
all the Doors locked, which she had taken Care to do.

He made a second Search for her, and at last finding his Chests opened, and
the Bags (...) that the poor innocent Woman, frightened by ^he Thieves, made her
Escape, and lay luiring about the Neighboring Fields, since he supposed she
would not venture to go far in a dark Night: He searched after her till he grew
weary, but she was gone far enough ou^ of his Reach. At last, hearing no
Account of her, he began to apprehend that she might be guilty of the Robbery,
which struck him to the Heart and he was ready to Hang himself to think that so
experienced a Rogue, and one that had been Chairman to a Committee of
Villains, should have such a base Sham put upon him by a Woman, and from thence
he inferred, that all she had done was only to bring him into the Noose.
However he went the next day (as usual) to Malaga, to try if he could find her
in the City: Garay met him, but he having never before seen him, he was never
the Wiser,

Rosina and Garay were upon their Departure for Castile; but she would not go
till she had served the Pharasaical Hermit such a scurvy Trick as she might
never fear any Requital from him. She knew the time of the Meeting of the Cabal
at the Hermitage, and that they might be all found together to receive the
Chastisement due to their Crime, she wrote a Letter to one of the Magistrates,
acquainting him with the Place and Time when he should seize these Malefactors.

This done, Garay and Rosina took their Way for Toledo, and while they are
traveling thither, we shall give an Account of what was done upon that Letter.
As soon as it was Night, the Magistrate attended by (...) it, and took it: He
found in the first Place, Crispin, little thinking to receive such a Visit, yet
it was seasonable, considering it saved his Life; for his Fellow Thieves began
to quarrel about the Money lost, and charged Crispin with Treachery, and
probably he had received severe Usage from them, they being three to one.
Having secured him, they searched the whole House, and at last going into the
Vault found his Companions, as also Ladders of Cords, Pick-Locks, Iron Crows,
and other Instruments, useful for Gentlemen of their Faculty: They likewise
found in the Chests several pieces of Plate, and other things of Value, all
undeniable Demonstrations of the devout Exercise of that impious Company: They
were all taken and brought away Prisoners, Crispin himself being so confounded,
that he knew not what Answer to make to any Question that was asked him,
whereupon the Officers, in particular reproached him for his Hypocrisy.

With these Reproaches and Threats of the Gallows they carried him away to the
City, where they were condemned to Dye; the other three upon the Rack confessed
several Crimes, charging Crispin to have been the Man, who gave them
Intelligence how to execute the Robberies which they committed, and many times
opened the Doors of Houses himself to assist them therein. As for his own part,
he expressed so much Resolution and Constancy in the midst of his Torments upon
the Rack, that he obstinately denied all that was laid to his Charge; yet all
this could not prevent the passing Sentence upon him, though his Execution was a
while del^^ed by reason of his falling into a violent Fever in the Prison; but
his Companions were all Trussed up out of the Way. Not long after, Crispin
being upon the Recovery, and like to follow the same Way, made his Escape out
of Prison at Noon Day in Women's Clothes, to the great Surprise of the People,
who longed to see him Executed, and the great Trouble of the Jailer, who was
thought to have connived thereat, by being corrupted with Money; but he cleared
himself by producing the Person who had furnished him with the Clothes
wherewith he disguised himself; who for that Crime was condemned to the Galleys.

Rosina and Garay were by this Arrived at the Imperial City of Toledo, where
they had resolved to settle themselves, and to gain the greater Reputation, she
pretended that Garay was her Father, and took a fine House in the most eminent
Street of the City; her Train consisting of a Slave she had bought at Malaga, a
Waiting Woman, a Lackey, and a Gentleman Usher, when she lived at Toledo. She
put on the Habit of a Widow, and went by the Name of Donna Emeritana,
pretending to be Descended from an illustrious Family of that Name in the
Kingdom of Portugal. Garay was decently clothed for a Man of his Age, and
called himself Don Jeronimo. She bought rich Houshod Goods, suitable to a Widow
of Quality, and was accordingly visited by the principal Ladies of the
Neighborhood, who were extremely pleased with the Charms both of her Beauty
and Conversation. Going every Day to Mass in the of the young Beau's of the
City, and she being newly come to Toledo, several young Sparks were taken with
her Beauty, and made their Addresses to her.

While she was informing herself who was the Richest and likely to have the
most Money, that she might not forget her old Trade for want of Practice, we
shall leave her, and take a turn to Malaga, to see what became of Crispin after
his Escape out of Prison.

Finding himself once more at Liberty, he left Malaga, and got into a Wood not
far from the City, where he continued all Night, and then went into the
Hermitage, where he had lived many Years with the Repute of a Saint. As soon as
he was convicted of the Crimes laid to his Charge, another Hermit who was
counted a pious Man, succeeded in his place, who went about to several
Churches, begging Alms to build a little Hospital for Strangers in that place.
He was not quite settled in the Hermitage, the Place not being yet furnished,
Crispin got thither in the night, and found a place where he had laid up
something against a rainy Day; breaking up the Ground, he came to a little
Earthen Pot, wherein was a Bag, and in it all the Money he had reserved of all
the Robberies he had been Engaged in.

With that Sum, which might amount to 5 or 600 Pound Sterling all in Gold, he
went to the City of Jaen, where he had a Friend of the same Occupation. This
Comrade of his heard how he had got out of Prison, whereat he was very glad,
being before apprehensive that he might have confessed upon the Rack, both
engaged together. He received him with great Affection, in hopes of his
direction and assistance in some new Enterprises; Crispin was but meanly
accoutred, as having been uncased of the Hermit's Habit, which he showed
himself unworthy of; but the Bag he brought so well lined, was a sovereign
remedy against Nakedness. He gave his Companion money to buy a light colored
Suit of Clothes and a Perriwig, cutting off his long Beard, which with a Sword
by his side, altered him so much, that he seemed quite another Man. In that
Equipage he continued some time at Jaen, till there happened an Opportunity to
commit a considerable Robbery at Andujar, and the Booty, was nicely divided
between him and his Companion. But fearing diligent Search would be made after
them for this Prank, Crispin thought it his best Course to be gone from thence
in time, the Adventure at Malaga being still fresh in his Mind.

They took into their Company a third Person, whom they met with by chance; a
young Man born in the City of Valentia, they then came to Toledo. Their young
Accomplice was called Javino, a poor Rope-maker's Son of Valencia, who for some
Roguish Exploits he had done there, whereby he had gained a considerable Sum of
Money, was obliged to absent himself from thence for several Years. He was a
handsome, fair-hair'd, sprightly young Man, and besides the Accomplishments of
his Person, had an admirable Wit, being not inferior to Crispin and his other
Com^^^

This young Debauchee went al^^ (...) fine, at the Charge of thos^ (...) not
mind or were (...), verb, Fast Bind, Fast Find. He had an Art to transform his
Clothes that he got by slight of Hand, into the newest Mode, so disguising
them by changing their Laces and Trimming, that the true Owners could not have
known them. One Holiday he put on a very rich Suit, and went along with Crispin
to the great Church, and into the same Chapel where Rosina was at her
Devotions under the name of Donna Emeritana, and though she was in a Widow's
Habit, Crispin knew her at first Sight with a secret Satisfaction. He showed
Rosina to his Companion Don Javino, and having desired him to follow her, so as
that she might not perceive it, he did it so cunningly, that he kept his Eye on
her, though seeming to look another Way, till he saw her go into her House. He
was very glad to hear from the Neighbors, that she lived there in great
Reputation under the Name of Donna Emeritana, lately come from Badajos with her
Father to live at Toledo.

Crispin, to be revenged on her, swore that he would not leave Toledo till he
had called her to an Account for the Money she had carried away from the
Hermitage, together with the Interest, and all the Charges of his Imprisonment.
To compass his Design, he instructed Javino what he should do and whom he
should represent, without making any real Discovery of himself to her. Not long
after, an Opportunity offered it self to prosecute the Design they had agreed
upon. One Evening about, an Hour before Night, there happened to be a Quarrel
in the Street where Rosina lived, the Officers of Justice were presently (...)
to be dressed, securing some others that happened to be then in the Street,
though not at all engaged in the Quarrel, which occasioned others to run, it
being no great pleasure to come into. Trouble and Restraint for other Men's
Crimes.

Crispin's Plot took its Rise from this Quarrel, and Javino instructed by that
subtle Hypocrite, had taken the Cross of Knight. of the Order of Montesa, an Honor
bestowed by the King, only on the natural Inhabitants of the Kingdom of
Valencia; and to that purpose, he had made him a very handsome black Suit. In
this Garb, being come to Rosina's House, and having given his Cloak to Crispin,
he went in with his Sword drawn, acting the part of a Man much Astonished, and
finding the door open, he goes up, and came into the Room where Rosina and her
Maids were: they were a little startled to see a Man rush into the Room after
that manner, and seeming much disordered; Rosina rose From her Seat, and the
Gentleman falling on his Knees, he thus Addressed her,

If Compassion be not a stranger to so fair a Creature, be pleased Madam, to
permit me to take Sanctuary in your House against the Officers of Justice, by
whom I am pursued; That I have killed a Man, I must acknowledge, but it was in
my Defense in this Street, where he set upon me with Advantage; the Officers
were in close pursuit of me, and I had been infallibly taken, had I not
courageously defended my self against two; who with the Commissary, had almost
seized me by the Collar: I escaped from (...) since it is Prudence in a Man to
give way to the Magistrate whom he is obliged to respect. But still persisting
in their Pursuit, I found your House open for my safety, and have taken the
Boldness to shut the Door after me, and to come up into your Chamber; I
therefore most humbly beseech you, Madam, if it may be done without any
Inconvenience to you, to dispose me into some secret place in your House, till
the People are dispersed and that I may safely go hence, But if my Presumption
puts you into any Distraction, or creates you any Trouble, be pleased to give
me the least Signal, and I will instantly go out into the Street, though I were
sure to lose my Life, rather than cause any Uneasiness to such an Accomplished
Lady.

Rosina looking earnestly upon him, and she who never loved any thing
comparable to Money, immediately found a strong Inclination in herself to that
young Man, who seemed as Eloquent as Handsome; and thereupon returned him this
Answer,

You have done me but Justice, Sir, when you thought me sensible of Honor and
Compassion; Persons in my Condition are never destitute thereof, especially
to'ards such as your self; I presume by what I observe, that you are a Person
of Quality, and therefore sympathizing with your troubles, I cordially offer
you the use of my House, to continue in it as long as you shall think fit, for
avoiding the Pursuit of those that seek after you, it not being just that you
should fall into their Hands, since by my (...) Danger; Fear not any thing
here, for though the Officers should come into the House, I will secure you in
such a secret Place, that they shall never discover you.

The Young Beau gave her a thousand thanks for so signal a Favor, which
obliged her to make him this farther discourse; You are very sensible Sir by
the Habit I am in, with what Reservedness I ought to live in my house, and yet
I freely confirm to you the security you promise yourself in it, till you have
accommodated your Affairs, But I have a Father now from home, who will expect
an account of my demeanor; and if at his return, which possibly may be this
day, he will entertain you in a Room in his Lodgings, as I am confident he will
think it an honor, I shall be content. The young Gallant renewed his
acknowledgments for those repeated assurances, and expressed himself so
genteely, that she was still the more pleased with him.

In the mean, time his Fellow Robbers knocked very confidently at the door,
calling upon them to open it to the Officers of Justice, whom they personated.
The Servants were at first a little started, but Rosina soon recovering out of
the small disorder which appeared in her countenance, took Javina by the hand,
and led him into an upper Room which had a double Partition, and before it a
piece of Hangings, and putting him in there left him, being confident that it
could be impossible to find him out. This done she went to open the door, and
Crispin impudently enters, without the least fear of being known in his present
disguise. He was attended with Lanthorns and Fire Arms, rudely rusht into the
Room where Rosina was. Crispin gave her a kind salute, and Counterfeiting his
Voice, as he had done his Person, I know Madam, said he, that we may seem
guilty of some Incivility thus to rush into a Widows House but my Commission
obliges me thereto, and therefore I hope you will excuse me; the Lieutenant
Criminal has commanded me to search all the Houses hereabouts to find out the
Malefactor we look for. Our search hitherto has been to no purpose, and we
have but this one House to examine, Give us leave therefore to look into all
the Rooms; that we may satisfy our Superiors, and approve our selves honest
Men. You may assure your selves, Said she to them, upon my word, that I saw no
body come into my House; but that you may have no suspicion that I am a Person
who would conceal Murderers, search and Welcome for him that you were ordered
to seize. The Servant with a Wax Candle lighted them into several Rooms, which
they were not very exact in searching, that the Lady might think it to be their
Civility.

Crispin then took a formal leave of Rosina, Recommending the prosecution of
the Plot to Javino his Confederate. The counterfeit Knight came afterward out
of his Apartment, pretending that he was exceeding glad to have escap^d the
Officers hands, and in grateful Acknowledgments expressed himself to the fair
Widow for the favor he had received from her. She who the more she viewed him,
was the more Enamored of him, gave him all manner of Assurances that he should
be waited (...) ^f he would have the patience to stay till her Father came home
she was confident he would not suffer him to seek any other Lodging.

The Gallant who perceived the Lady began to grow warm, was the more earnest to
beg that leave which he knew would not be easily granted, and pretended it
would be his safest Course to take Sanctuary in some Monastry, from whence he
might send Notice to his Friends where he was; and that he designing to go the
next day for Sevil, it would be dangerous to lie that night at his Quarters.
Rosina being much concerned to find him so resolved, She the more earnestly
pressed him to stay; Representing the great hazard he ran, and desiring him by
all means to stay an hour or two longer. Javino who wished for nothing more was
persuaded to comply therewith. She then desired his permission to go and take
Order about some things her Father had left her to do. This was only a Pretense
to withdraw and confer Notes with a Slave of ^hers, in whom she reposed much
confidence, what course they were to take in this Affair. She called her into a
private Room, and made a free Confession of her Passion for that Knight, and
demanded the best Advice she could take herself, were she in the same condition.

The Slave who was as Subtle as her Mistress, immediately apprehended that the
Counsel she would best like must be such as complied with her Passion; I must
confess, Madam, said she, it would argue an excessive Easiness of nature in
you, considering the short time you have known this Cavalier to discover that
he has already gotten possession of your heart and (...) on the other side to
persuade Garay when he comes, to suffer him to continue here this Night; My
Advice is, that since the House is large enough and that there are empty Rooms,
into one whereof he may pass through your Chamber, that you lodge him there,
without acquainting any of your Family therewith. It shall be my care to bring
him thither, and supply him with all necessaries without Garays knowledge. You
understand that Garay is to be gone within two days to Madrid, and then you may
freely Reveal your self to this young Gentleman whom I will easily persuade,
that the Officers still continuing their search about this street, it is
absolutely necessary that he stay here, unless he will hazard both his Liberty
and Life.

The Slaves Counsel was extreme agreeable to Rosina's humor, who ordered her
to go immediately and lay clean sheets on the Bed, and put the Cavalier in
possession of the Room. This was instantly put in execution, and not long after
the amorous Widow went to visit her Gallant; You have reason to wonder Sir,
said she, that without my Father's permission I have ventured to receive you
into the House, and in the night too; but to secure a Person of your
Qualifications, there may be a little breach made of the Rules of Civility; I
have therefore thought it convenient that as I have been the means of your
escape out of the Eye of the Law, so you should also avoid my Father's Sight,
that so you may remain here in the most profound security. Be pleased to think
your self obliged to me for this little service, which I rende^ to you very
freely, (...)

Javino perceiving the Fish had swallowed the Bait, multiplies his
Acknowledgments abundantly for this new Favor. This occasioned variety of
Discourse between them, the Issue whereof was, that by his flattering
Insinuations he still gained Ground upon her Affections, and by his natural
Eloquence in celebrating her Perfections, made an absolute Conquest over her
Soul. However she resolved to have a farther Trial of his sincerity, and
whether what he so earnestly averred was true, that the Charms of her Beauty
were the only Motives that transformed a Person, who fl^d for Fear of his Life
into her House for Shelter, to a confident Lover.

The Slave coming in, and giving her Mistress an Account that she had obeyed
her commands, she took Javino by the hand and led him into another Room
provided for him: He found it light enough, as having in the midst of it a
Crystal Branch filled with Wax Candles, and a magnificent Collation ready for
him. He was a little surpised to find she left him alone, but she excused it,
by telling him that she would be with him again as soon as she had seen her
Father in Bed. At her going out of the Room, she beheld him with Eyes so full
of Love and Tenderness, that this new Demonstration heightened the Gallant into
an absolute Confidence of the Success of his Enterprise.

Garay was not so far stricken in Years, but that he had the Vanity to pretend
to the sole Possession of Rosina. He acted the part of a Gallant, and had he
not been already married he would have treated of a March with many other Women
do, that are cast off and slighted by their Husbands, bestowed the time of his
Absence on those who would accept of her kindness. Some Years had passed since
he heard from her, therefore imagining she might be dead, he had resolved to
make a Journey to Madrid, to make a secret Enquiry after her, that in case she
had left the World, he might prosecute his Intentions to marry Rosina, who was
extremely obliged to him; and upon this Account, he was resolved to depart
within 2 Days.

Leaving him in these thoughts, let us return to Rosina, who set Garay to
supper as soon as he came in, and pretending some indisposition, excused her
self that she could not bear him Company. It being his occasion to go to bed as
soon as he had supped, Rosina staid till she had notice he was fast asleep, and
then went to her Gallant, causing her own supper, which was somewhat
extraordinary, to be carried along with her. As soon as it was ended, Rosina,
whose love increased every moment toward her new Guest, entreated him to give
an Account of his Life, and sincerely to acquaint her with his Name, his
Country, and the occasion of his coming to Toledo. Javino, whose only design
was to Banter her, entertained her with the following Romance, to which she
gave earnest Audience.

My Country, Madam, is Valentia: one of the most eminent Kingdoms of the
Spanish Monarchy. You know it well enough by name, and possibly are not to
learn that it has a great Advantage over several others both in regard of
Nobility and wealth, (...) mate, and the delightful fruitfulness of its Soil. I
am of the noble Family of Pertusa, well known in that Country; and the King for
the many good Services performed by my Ancestors, has honored me with the
Order of Knight. of Mentesa, and the Commanderie of Sylla, which is the best of all
belonging to that Order. Besides what that brings me in, I have an Estate that
brings me in Three Thousand Crowns a Year. I am the only Son of the Family, and
made my Addresses to a noble Lady of that City I was born in, named Donna
Sentillana, one of the most illustrious Families of Valentia, a Person of most
admirable Perfections: I have served her with all the Affections imaginable,
whereto she gave me no Return; as being engaged to another Cavalier, named Don
Vincent Parada: Whereupon seeing my Rival preferred before me, I was
exasperated beyond Measure. Don Vincent was a Person of such an Humor, that
nothing would satisfy him but to Rid out of the way whatever might obstruct his
Amorous Pretensions, and meeting me one Night in the Street where my Mistress
lived, attended by three Servants, he set upon me, though I had but one with
me. I defended my self as well as I could, but at length having received so
many Wounds, it was judged they were Mortal. There could never be made any
certain Discovery of the Person that hurt me, yet it being reported that Don
Vincent was my Rival, the Magistrate imprisoned him; but having cleared himself
either by Favor or Money, he was set at Liberty. Being recovered of my Wounds
(...) and reflecting on the Advantage wherewith Don Vincent had engaged me, I
thought it but a just Requital to fall upon him upon the like unequal Terms; I
therefore surprised him in the same manner as he had done me, and the Issue
was, that he had got off much more wounded than I had been.

There happened to be some in the street who knew me, and made Oath that I was
the man who had done the Mischief to my Rival; Upon this accident I retired
from thence, for he was so dangerously wounded that his Recovery was despaired
of; I saw his Friends were resolved to revenge his Death, and was afraid to
fall into the hands of Justice. This obliged me to leave Valentia and come to
this City, where I have been about a month, I have since understood by a
Gentleman of that Country that Don Vincent is out of all danger, and in perfect
health, and that the Treaty of Marriage between him and Donna Sentillana is
concluded, whereof I have a greater Resentment than of having this day met with
2 Men who being hired by my Rival came hither on purpose to Murder me. They
fell upon me in this street; One I think I have mortally wounded, and by that
means made a shift to escape out of their hands, with the assistance of those
who came in to part us. I found your House open, and being come into it for
refuge, I find my self so secure that I have nothing now to fear but the effect
of your fair eyes; and by avoiding one Prison, I am fallen into another; But
excellent Lady, I think my Imprisonment so pleasant that if you discharge me
not, I shall desire to continue therein as long as I live.

Thus did the counterfeit Javino conclude his Relation, leaving Rosina
extremely satisfied to observe in that Cavalier not only those Accomplishments
which might deserve her Love, but also such intimation of Affection to her, as
raised in her prevailing Hopes that she might one Day be his Wife; Upon which,
having ruminated with her self, she returned this Answer.

Seignior Don Javino Pertusa! I am very much concerned that you should come
into my Acquaintance upon so sad an Occasion to your self, but I am more easy
that your return home may be deferred; for I could wish you would constantly
reside in this City, and for my part, I do assure you that I would use all
means in my Power to stay you here, yea, though it should be prejudicial to my
Liberty. The Advantages you would gain thereby, may not perhaps amount to much,
yet you cannot but think your self obliged to me for the good Will I bear you,
considering the little time I have had the Honor to know you. Such as it is, I
shall think my self but too happy, and that I have attained my utmost Wishes,
if you will be pleased to make any Acknowledgment of it. Possibly I am not
handsome enough, but I dare assure you of my good Nature; and with all that, I
have otherwise wherewithal to satify a Person of your Worth and Quality.

Madam, (replies Don Javino) though I judge my self far unworthy the Favors
you have heaped on me, and more of the good Opinion you are pleased to expres^^
(...) me; yet since I have resigned my Heart and Soul to you. I do not much
fear any Displeasure you can take against me, as to that particular; your
sovereign Beauty has so transported me out of my self, that my Will and
Affections are absolutely at your Disposal. It was a happy day to me, when I
was set upon by those Valentian Cutthroats, since the Mischief they intended
me, procured those many Obligations you have laid upon me; and I wish I may
prolong my Life for your Service, since if you approve of the Affection I have
for you, as you are pleased to assure me, I shall get into an Haven where I may
defy all Dangers, in spite of all the Storms of my ill Fortune. The Thoughts
of this gives me satisfaction, and makes me wholly forget my own Country, since
I can never be more happy, than in the place where so much Goodness and Beauty
resides.

These Discourses, and others more Amorous, passed between him and Rosina,
whereby the subtle Youth perceived that she was ensnared by his cunning
Insinuations, and instead of being Courted, made it her Business to ingratiate
herself more and more with him The time passed insensibly in these pleasing
Conferences, insomuch that it was Two in the Morning e're Rosina retired to her
Chamber, though troubled she was forced to do i^ so soon; and the Impostor
Javino presently went to Bed, extremely pleased that his Comrade's Plot had
taken so well.

In the mean time, Crispin was exceedingly perplexed, that he received no News
of wha^ (...) and the next, which wa^ by reason of Garay's being in the House;
but as soon as be was gone for Madrid, the Amorous Rosina allowed herself more
Liberty, her Love to her new Guest not suffering her to conceal her Fondness
for him. At length, Javino sent a Letter by a Slave to Crispin, acquainting him
how he was favored by Rosina; Crispin answered him by the same Hand, send^ing
him a Purse with an Hundred Pieces of Gold, to draw Rosina into Play, and to
make Presents to her Servants, that he might be sure of them when Occasion
served.

The Day on which Garay depart'd for Madrid, Rosina was employed in
entertaining 2 Ladies of the Neighborhood, a Work she was not at all pleased
with at that time, wishing their Absence, and herself in her Gallant's Company.
As soon as they were gone, she went up to visit him; whom she found Tuning a
Lute that her Slave had brought him, (for he was an excellent Musician, and had
a Fast of Poetry, accomplishments not extraordinary in the Natives of
Valencia) Rosina hearing him at a Distance, came softly into his Room, when he
sung a Song of his own Composing, upon the Occasion of his Love, with an
unimitable Grace. This added Fuel to the flame of her Affection, which were
before grown too violent to be detained within the Bounds of Modesty; but that
which ravished her most was the Verses he had sung, they being made about her,
and the lucky Accident that had happened to him.

Whereupon, the Lovesick Widow coming up to him, What, (said she) Seignior,
You are Master of those excellencies which I little imagined? I am extream^y
pleased therewith; yet do not much Wonder at i^ as knowing Valentia to be
famous for excellen^ Voices. Mine is but ordinary said he, an^ it is rather the
Pleasantness of the Word than my Voice, that induced me to sing. (...) find
(said she) the Words are very new and that they were not made above 2 Day ago:
It is most true, (replied he) which not much to be admired, since the Subjec^
they are upon has such an Influence ove^ me, as would made me undertake
Imposs^bilities, as Transcending whatever I ye^ thought worthy of Admiration.
No Fla^tery, I beseech you (cries she) for though know what you say is not
true, and that w^ must allow a Distance between Men's word and their Thoughts,
who pretend to love when it is only Compliment, yet I cannon ^^t take it kindly
from you; Madam, yo^ may be deceived in both (said he) therefore ^oo pleased to
believe me, when I affirm tha^ I think my felf extreme happy for that unhappy
Adventure, which procured me the Glory of your Friendship. All I beg of yo^ is,
that you would be pleased to pardon m^ Freedom, since my Heart cannot be fuller
o^ Respect for you than it is.

In short, these and other insinuating Di^logues, raised the Widow to such a
high Pit^ of Kindness, that the crafty Companion b^gan to relent, and resolved
to desist from the Enterprise which had occasioned his comit^ thither, and to
love his fair Landlady in ea^nest; and thinking he had fully satisfied h^ with
the Legend he had told her of his Li^^ he beca^^ so familiar with her, as to
des^^^ and Fortune. She resolved to make her Condition equal with his, and
accordingly acquainted him in a short Narrative, That she was descended from
the illustrious Counts of Menezez in Portugal, though she was born in Badajos.
The cunning Spark immediately apprehended what Game she would be at, and that
her Design was to oblige him to Marry her. This was directly contrary to the
Sentiments of Crispin, who would by no means have him think of any such thing,
but continually reflect on the Dangers those Persons are apt to run into, who
following the Profession he was engaged in, are concerned to be expeditious in
the Execution of their Enterprises; lest being prevented by some unexpected
Accident, they come to make their last Wills at the Gibbet, before they are
willing to remove into the other World.

The young Gallant grew still more warm in his Love toward Rosina, especially
upon the Consideration, that according to her own Relation she was nobly
Descended. He used thereupon all ways imaginable to be^^^ (...) her Affections
to'ards him. She on the (...) Hand, had the same thoughts, so that concurring
in their Desires, like Lovers mutually passionate, Rosina carried herself so
freely and familiarly toward him, that he might easily perceive she had
abandoned all Modesty, insomuch that upon a little Entreaty, she permitted him
to do what he pleased. But in the midst of her Embraces, she did not forget her
old Acquaintance Garay; she reflected on the Familiarities that had passed
between 'em, and how much she was obliged to him, and that he was ^ss^emed all
over the City as her Father. She imagined to herself the Resentment he must
needs have at his Return, when he found she had so treacherously forsaken him.
She was thinking to give him a Sum o^ Money privately and so dismiss him: Bu^
pondring more seriously upon it, she though^ it her best Course to leave Toledo
before he came back, and to persuade her new Gallan^ to carry her into his
Country Seat at Valencia She resolved in Two or Three Days to declare her Mind
to him, for Garay was not expected home till 15 Days after.

Mean while Rosina and her Gallant passed away the time very jocundly, and
being really in Love with her, was fully resolved to put a Trick upon Crispin,
and to proceed no farther in his first Design. It was in the Winter time, when
the Nights are longest, that these Lovers shortened the long Evenings with an^
Intermixture of Caresses, Songs, and Amorous Discourses, nay, many times they
sung together their several parts to a Musical Instrument he played on.

In these warm Fits (her Heart being open) (...) told him she had some
intentions to leave the House she was in, before her Father's Return from
Madrid, and to carry along with her all the best Houshold-Goods, and go with
him to Valencia, since he was so powerful in those parts, and descended from so
illustrious a Family; and that her Father would not be dissatisfied with her
Marriage when he should come to hear of it. Upon this, the disguised Cavalier
was forced to discover how it had been contrived between Crispin and him to Rob
her, and being desirous that she should conti^^^ (...) ^hus disclosed the whole
Affair to her.

MY dear Heart, (said he) having Experienced the Kindness and Affection
wherewith you have been pleased to honor me, I were the most ungrateful Person
in the World, if I should conceal any thing that so nearly concerns you; No, I
will make an absolute and full Discovery of my self to you, and acquaint you
with such things, as have not hitherto so much as entered into your Imagination;
for which, I have very little Reason to expect your Pardon, were it not, that
the sincere Affection I have for you, may in some Measure alleviate my Crime; I
do not say you have any Obligations to me for loving you, since it is almost
impossible, but that those who have once had a Sight of your excellent
Perfections, must be Charmed with them, and become your Captive, as I happily
am; My Liberty, and all the Powers and Faculties of my Soul, being absolutely
at your Ladiship's Disposal.

This Preamble, Madam is only to induce you to forgive the Offense I have
committed against you: I now ingeniously acknowledge that I am not the Person I
described my self, in the Account you required me to give of my Family. It Is
true, I was born in Valentia, but meanly Descended, yet of Parents of good
Repute. My Father got his Livelihood by the Labor of his Hands, and the Sweat
of his ^row, being by Profession a Rope-maker. I found I had some ambitious
Thoughts above my Profession, and therefore unwilling to follow my Father's
laborious Profession. I went into Castile, having before been at Andalucia,
where I made those Advantages of my Travels, and the Conversation I met with,
that I never wanted either Friends or Money. I came to this City in the Company
of a Man named Crispin, who had been a Prisoner some time at Malaga, but for
what Crime, he would by no means acknowledge to me. This Person has obliged
me, having born my Charges all the way: Nay, more than that, he has lent me
Money, out of the Confidence of the Reality of my Intentions, to serve him in
the secret Trade we managed together. He declared his Mind to me one Day, and
advised me, by some Pretense or other, to get into your House, for he knew you
had good Store of Money, and was very desirous to ease you of some part of it.
From his Discourse. I found he had been Prisoner at Malaga for some Robbery.
Now to compass our Design, we pretended a Quarrel, which should occasion me to
take Refuge in your House; and in the mean time you have entertained me with
such extraordinary Kindness, and have so highly obliged me, that I find your
Favors will frustrate Crispin's fellonious Project. And now having Acquainted
you with the unhandsome Trick we designed to out upon you. Assure your self.
Madam that I will retaliate it upon himself, and deprive him of what Money he
has, to Chastise him for his Folly; for I abhor to be Ungrateful to a Person
whom I love and honor, and from (...) I have received so many Obligations.
you, dispose of me now as you think sit, for I am resolved to perish, rather
than consent you should-receive any Injury, though I have Disclaimed the Quality
I had unjustly assumed.

Rosina was extremely exasperated against Crispin, not so much for his Design
to be Revenged on her for the Prank she had played him at Malaga, but upon an
Apprehension that he might have acquainted Javino what kind of Person she was,
and what Trade she followed; whereupon, considering that he had so ingeniously
discovered himself to her, and acknowledged the Meaness of his Birth, she
thought her self obliged to the like, and to give him a sincere Account of her
Descent, Course of Life, Friends, and in a word, of all her Adventures till her
Arrival at Toledo; Love and Wine made her discover all, and Javino was glad she
was of no higher Extraction than himself; their Equality not only occasioning a
greater Kindness, but created some thoughts of a Match between them. They
resolved to leave Toledo and take up their Residence at Madrid: But Rosina
acquainting him, that she was resolved to be Revenged on Crispin, who had
contrived such a mischievous Design against her. Javino undertook it, telling
her that under pretense of their Acquaintance and Friendship, he could easily
bring him into the Noose, and not only leave him money-less, but likewise
procure him a second Lodging, for fear he should attempt to be quit with them
again.

With this Resolution, leaving Rosina's house he went to Crispin, whom he sound
at his (...) not expecting that he should have seen him so soon. He was
ovrerjoyed to hear how his Companion had insinuated himself into Rosina's
Favor; whereupon Javino telling him that he wanted another Sum of Money, as
well for his own Expense, as to gain the Servants; he Apostate Hermit answered
him, he should not want it. By this means, Javino thought to oblige him to put
a greater Confidence in him, heightened the intended Cheat with a multitude of
Oaths of inviolable Friendship. Thus was an old experienced Villain brought
into a Fool's Paradise; and that Javino might live suitable to the Relation he
had made of himself, he gave him an hundred pieces of Gold, to be disposed of
as he pleased, hoping to have them returned with Ten-fold Interest. He took
them out of a Bag where there was 5 or 6 Hundred more, some part of his former
Purchases. Javino observed the Place where he put his Treasure, and resolved
never to rest till he had altered the Property of the Purse. While Crispin went
to give his Landlady Orders for a Brace of Partridges and a Rabbit for their
Suppers, he went to the Portmanteau where the Money was secured, and opening
the Padlock. (a thing he could do as cleverly as any of his Profession) took
out the Bag, and disposed it into a Place where he might take it with him
without Observation. They supped very merrily; after which, he took his Leave,
of Crispin, clevating him with the Hopes of bringing his Design to pass very
speedily.

He went instantly to Rosina, who we may Imagine received him with open. Amen.
He (...) of what (...) ^^tween him and Crispin, and how with his own Money, he
himself had promoted the design to plunder him. Being alone, he showed her the
Yellow Pieces, for she had great Affection for Money of that Color. He then
represented to her, how much it concerned them to leave Toledo before Crispin
should discover the Lost of his Money. Rosina told him, she knew an Expedient
for that, which was to put the same Sham upon him there, that she had done at
Malaga. Having thereupon sent a Letter to the Provost, whose Business it was to
prosecute such People, they made Provision for their Departure to Madrid, and
meeting with two Wagons that were going thither, they put their Goods into
them, taking only the She-Slave to wait on them. They went to the Court in that
City, where, as in a Sea so many Rivers meet, Rosina having resolved not to
appear publicly there, until she had heard some News of Garay.

Leaving them there, let us see what was the Effect of the Letter sent to the
Provost. As soon as he had read it, he went according to the Directions
therein, attended with some of his Officers to Crispin's Lodgings, who
impatiently expecting that Javino should let him into Rosina's House, and put
him in possession of all her Money, was seized in his Chamber, and sent to
Prison. Not long before, one of the Judges of Malaga had been at Toledo to
enquire after him, and not finding him, had lest with the Provost a Description
of his Person and Physiognomy, by which, though his present Habit much
disguised him, yet he was violently suspected to be the same Man. They seized
(...) what they found in the House amo^^ which, Crispin supposed they had met
with the Gold, for he knew nothing of its Departure. Being put upon the Rack,
he confessed all the Villainies he had committed, for which, he was sentenced to
he Hanged, and was Executed accordingly; having been observed to use such
Generosity as not to impeach any of those who had engaged with him in his
Designs, though he knew his present dismal Fate had been procured his Friend
Javino, yet he forgave him and all the World besides.

In the mean time, Rosina and Javino were Married as soon as they came to
Madrid, but kept out of the Sight of Garay, who went soon after to Ascala,
where he had been told his Wife was, but not meeting with her there, he fell in
with some of his own Employ, and being surpised in a Robbery, they were all
Condemned to the Lash, and six Years Recreation in the Galleys. Garay was
brought to the Chain at Toledo, which gave some little ease to his Mind, for
thinking that Rosina had been there still, he writ a Letter to her desiring her
that since she had acquired all she was worth by his Cooperation and
Assistance, she would have some Compassion on him, and exempt him from that
hard Penance, by buying a Slave in his Room. The Messenger inquires for Rosina
where he had directed him, and the Neighbors acquainted him that she had left
Toledo; so that poor Garay burdened with an heavy Chain, Old Age and Hardship,
came to have that Relation to His Catholic Majesty, as his Slave, which he and
many others, though they justly deserved it, little expected to be preferred to.

(...) Dan Javino lived like a Prince at Madrid, where he soon met with some of
his old Companions; a sort of people who like Foxes, never live better than
when they are cursed. They committed some Robberies with Care and Industry, that
the Authors thereof could never be discovered, by which they were so flushed
and encouraged, that they daily performed new Enterprises.

A Company of Stage Players were then newly set up, at the proper Charge and
Liberality of a Grandee of Spain, who was very rich, and Furnished them with
all they wanted. This fresh Company had the whole Court to themselves, and
their Benefactor gave them by way of Advance, Four Thousand Crowns, to provide
them with Clothes, and other things suitable to the Plays they intended to
represent; This Sum was brought into the House of one of the Actors, an
ingenious Person, for whom the rest had such a Respect that he managed all
things, and gave them a faithful an Account thereof. He put this Money into a
great Chest, whereof he always carried the Key about him. Javino's Comerades
having soon an Account of it, and thought, it to be a noble Attempt to gain it,
they proposed several ways to that end; but at length it was referred to
Javino, whose Advice they had found very fortunate upon other Occasions. He
desired time till the next Day, and that Night communicating the Business to
his Wife Rosina, with the different Proposals of his Companions, she gave him
infallible Directions, how the Business should be effected.

Javino had a Smatch of Poetry upon which th^^ fo^^ded a^^air Plo^ which was
approved of by the rest of the Conspirators. The next Day, he clothed himself
like a Scholar newly come from the University, in a Cassock, and a long black
Cloak, very bare and sported in many places; they fitted his Nose with a large
pair of Spectacles, which were fastened to his Ears with a Lure-string, (a
Fashion much used in Spain) he had a huge broad-brim'd Hat, with all things
requisite, to Act the Part of a Ridiculous Poet, as the way they conceived most
probable to compass their Project.

He went thus to the Comedians, who were met at their Theater, upon the
Rehearsal of a Play which was to be Acted within a few Days; He addressed
himself to the Director of the Company, saying, Sir, I am your humble Servant,
and a Poet, if it may not be any Offense to you. The Comedian was a very
apprehensive Person, (as we said) and had often met with such Extravagants as
Javino seemed to be, and replied, Sir, assure your self it shall not trouble me
at all. The Design of my Studies, (said the other) was to become Eminent in
Divinity, that so I might be capable of a good Benefice; in Order to which, I
have already taken the Degree of Bachelor of Arts. I am a Biscayan, and Allied
to the most honorable Familes of that Province, and am known by the Name of
Dominico Joancho. I addicted my self to Poetry, for indeed I was born a Poet,
and finding that all people admired my Works, and many were importunate with me
to publish them, I would needs make a Trial of my Fancy in writing of Plays,
which I compas'd ^^an extraordinary Style t^ a^^ I can furnish you with at
least a Dozen, sit for the Stage. I am come to Court, where there are excellent
Wits, and I have had the Honor to be esteemed here according to my Worth; and
I may without Vanity affirm, that the greatest Critics have acknowledged my
Perfections to be extraordinary. And I think it my greatest Happiness, Sir, to
flourish in the same Age with such a Noble and Illustrious Company, who may be
called the Flower of all those that ever were in Spain, in whose Service I am
willing to employ my Talent, if you are willing to accept thereof; and as for
the Price, I know you have so much Honor, that I am sure we shall not disagree.

The Comedian was of a very pleasant Humor, and glad of any Occasion to Divert
himself; so that measuring his Inside by his Outside Appearance and Discourse,
he told him that he did them a Transcendent Honor, and that he gave him Thanks
in the Name of the whole Company. Then turning to his Companions, 'Gentlemen,
(said he) be pleased to take Notice of the Renowred Dominico Joancho, a
Nobleman of Biscay, and an Excellent Poet, whose Productions for the Theater,
are beyond all that has been hitherto written. and who offers to exhaust his
excellent Vein of Poetry for our Service, having already finished several Plays
which he has a Desire to show us. The other Comedians by the Discourse of
their Fellow-Player, and the ill Equipage and course Looks of the Person,
easily discovered that He and his Wits had taken Leave of each other; which
obliged them to pretend that then (...) obliged to him, saluting him one after
another very civilly, to which he made an handsome Return.

Then sitting all down about him, they desired him to read the Titles of some
of his Comedies, which he said were ready for the Stage. The Counterseit
Author, who Acted his part very pleasantly, took a Paper out of his Pocket, and
read thus: A Catalogue of Plays, written this Present Year by Diminico Joancho,
a Biscayan Poet. I. The Extravagant Infanta. II. The French Pox. III. Almonds
for such as have no Teeth. IV. The Scorching Summer. V. Between two Stools the
Arse comes to the Ground. etc. The Comedians could hardly forbear Laughing at
the extravagant Titles of the Comedies, and pretended that they should be glad
to enjoy his Conversation longer. The principal Comedian desired his Company at
his House to Supper, where they would be all ready to Entertertain him, and to
have an Account of what Play he designed to Act first. He then departed,
promising to fail them.

Javino having made this Progress in his business, went and gave his
Fellow-Thieves an Account thereof, appointed them to wait about the House where
the Money was, he undertaking to amuse the Comedians so long till they had done
their Work, which, would not be long, since they had all their Picklocks and
Implements ready for Men of their Calling. The Players on the other side,
prepared all things to show the Poet such a Trick as they thought his
Extravagance deserved, prescribing some Squibs and Crackers, (if possible)
(...) left, though it proved to their Loss in the Sequel.

At the Hour appointed, the Sham-Poet came to the House to which he was
invited. He who expected him, had provided what was Requisite to make Sport
enough that Night for the whole Company; and seeing them all met, said, the
Room was too narrow for 'em, and that they had better remove to the Theater,
where they should not be Disturbed. The feigned Poet was glad at this Offer,
because thereby the Coast would be clear about the chief Comedian's House, and
his Comerades might more easily disp^tch their Affair. It happened to his Wish;
for the Mistress of the House, who heard her Husband and others of the Company
Talk of the Extravagant Poet, and how they intended to serve him, would needs
see the Sport; and lest it might be late e're they returned home, she took all
the Servants along with her and left the House empty. They brought the Poet to
the Theater with a great deal of Ceremony, and placed him at the end of a Table
on which there were ^ Candles. Having taken one of his Comedies out of his
Pocket, and the Company silently expecting, after 2 or 3 Grave Hem's, he began
to Read the Verses, but after such a Ridiculous and Foolish Manner, that when
he had gone over about a Hundred of them, the Players perceiving that the Piece
contained many Sheets close-written, and Tired with the Impertinence of what
they had already heard, and that they had spent the Night so simply,
interrupted the Reciter with a kind of Buzzing Noise. That was the Cue which
(...) Angry, and clapped his Hands with such Violence on the Table, that he
shook the Candle-sticks, and cried out, aloud, Tacete! Tacete! Hold your Peace!
Be Quiet! But the Players and others not understanding Latin, the Hurry
increased, the Table was overturned, and the Candles put out, and all retiring
from him, they set Fire to the Train laid for the poor Poet. He found himself
beset with a number of Squibs, Crackers, and long Bags full of Sand, like
Snakes, all in open Hostility against him. He was in a very desperate
condition, for there was nothing but Confusion on the Theater, besides the
Flames of Rosin, which came up beneath the Stage, and were ready to Choke him,
enough to Cure him of all thoughts of Poetry for the future. He seemed to take
it very unkindly, that he had been brought thither to receive such an Affront;
for besides the danger his Tinder Cloak and Cassock were in of a general
Conflagration, he lost his Comedy, pretending that a greater Damage could not
have befallen him.

The Epilogue of the Comedy was somewhat Tragical to the Players, since
Javino's Confederates, while the Company was thus Entertained at the Theater,
had found a way into the Comedian's House, and examined all the Chests and
Trunks that stood in their way, in one whereof they found the Money they looked
for, which they carried to Javino's House where it was equally divided.

The next Day, the Comedian going to take out some Clothes, was much surpised
to find the Chest open. He asked his Wife who had ^^en in the House, she could
give him no ac^ (...) People ^bro^d to search and acquainted the Magistrate
with what had happened; the nearest Streets to his House were Searched, but to
no purpose. He fell Sick out of pure Discontent, and kept his Bed, and then
began to doubt, that it was a Trick put upon him by the pretended Poet, for
whom he had made strict Search, though in vain.

In the mean time the Officers of Justice were upon their Duty, to find whether
searching for the Poet they could find the Thief. At length they happened to
seize one of Javino's Companions upon Suspicion, who being put to the Torture,
confessed the whole Contrivance; and by his Directions, Javino, Rosina, and all
the rest of the Confederates, were taken and sent to Prison, and they
unanimously declaring, that Javino and his Wife were the only Contrivers of the
Robbery, who Lived likewise at a high Rate, without any Visible Estate, and
having none to speak for their Reputation, the two former were Sentenced to be
Hanged, and their Comerades Condemned to the Galleys.

Thus Theives, though for their Villainies Renowned,
Often with shame and Infamy are Crowned.
And those that do their Countries Laws offend,
Their just Fate is an Haltar in (...)
THE END.
A CATALOGUE of BOOKS Sold by DANIEL PRATT, at the Bible and Crown in the
Strand, London.
A Ristotle's Master Piece. The Art of Gardening. Ann of Bullen. An Accademy of
Complements. Banquet for Ladies and Gentlemen. Bunyons Heart Ease. The Seven
Champions. Cynthia. The French Convert. The Seven Wise Masters. The Seven Wise
Mistresses. The Secretary's Guide. The Destruction of Troy. The Great Assize.
Francis Spira. Thomas Savage. Russells Sermons. Christ's Famous Titles
Keebles's Weeks Preparation. The Nine Worthies. A Token for ^outh. The
Pleasures of Matrimony. Reynard the Fox. Aesop's Fables. Parismus. The Duty of
a Woman. Guy of Warwick. The Wonderful Prodiges. Wars in England. Mars and
Venus. Nine Novels. The Wooden World. Winter Evenings. Rochester's Poems. The
Ladies Delight. Duty of Sacrament. Triumph of Wit. Come and Welcome. Queen
Cookery. The Cry of the Son of God. Aristotle's Legacy. Aristotle's Problems,
Tokens for Youth. The Mariners Jewel. The Cambridge Jests. A Cabinet of Wit.
The History of Montelion. The Gentleman's Jock^y. Lambert of Cattle. The
Complete Servant Maid. Hocus Pocus. Fortunatus. The Posie of Prayer. Culpeper's
Midwife. The French Rogue. The Scholars Recreation. Flavel of the Sacrament.
Grace Abounding. The Pilgrims Progress. Three Novels. The Universal Jester. The
Royal Jester. The Coffee-House Jests. Female Policy. The Oxford Jests. (...)
The Shepherds Calendar. War with the Devil. The merry Companion. Syldals
Spelling Book. Cockers Spelling Book. Youngs Spelling Book. Artimedorus of
Dreams. Laugh and be Fat. Argalus and Parthenia. Valentine and Orson. The Duty
of Prayer. Cockers Arithmetic. Arts Treasury. Ayres's Arithmetic. Arraingment
of Women. The Art of Legerdemain. Bunyons Holy War. Solomon's Temple. Sighs from
Hell. The Book of Knowledge. The Crucified Savior. Drumbs of Comfort. Dyers
Works. Divine Breathings. The English-Rogue. The Female Grievances. The Holy
Jesus. The Wars of the Jews. The History of fair Rosamond. The History of the
Tales of the Faries. Starts Sermons. The History of Oliver Cromwell. ^acobs
Ladder. The Mothers Blessing. The Travels of Godliness. ^^e Travels of
Ungodliness. (...) Piety. (...) Time. (...) Visions. (...) ^olds of Adultery.
^^e Supplication of Saints. The Secretary's Guide. The Tokens for Mariners.
The Weeks Preparation. The Young Man's Calling. The Art af Money Catchng. The
great Assize. The Quakers Accademy. The Young Man's Companion. The L^dies
Closet.
Where also are to be Sold, Bibles, Common Prayers, Testaments, Grammars,
Accidences Psalters, and all other School-Books, at reasonable Rates.


