To all the ROYALISTS that Suffered for His MAJESTY, and to the rest of the
Good People of England.
The Humble APOLOGY of the English CATHOLICS.
My Lords, and Gentlemen,
THe Arms which Christians can use against Lawful Powers, in their Severitie,
are only Prayers and Tears: Now since nothing can equal the infinity of those
we have shed, but the Cause, viz. ^spen^ see our dearest friends forsake us; we
hope is will not offend you if (after we have a little (...) our eyes) we sigh
out our complaints to you.

We had spoke much sooner, had we not been silent through consternation to see
you inflamed (whom with reverence we honor) and also to show our submissive
patience, which used no slights or tricks to divert the debates of Parliament:
For no body can imagine, where so many of the great Nobility and Gentry are
concerned, but something might have been done; when as in all ages we see
things of public advantage by the managers dexterity nipt in the bud, even in
the very Houses themselves. Far be it from Catholics to perplex Parliaments,
who have been the Founders of there Privileges, and all Ancient Laws: Nay,
Magna Charta it self had its rise from us: Which we do the less boast of, since
it was not at first obtained in so submiss and humble a manner.

We sung our Nunc Demittis, when we saw our Master in his Throne, and you in
your deserved Authority and Rule; nor could any thing have ever grieved us
more, but to have our Loyalty called into question by you, even at the
instigation of our greatest adversaries. If we must suffer, let it be by you
alone; for that is a double death to men of Honor, to have their Enemies not
only accusers, but for their insulting Judges also. These are they that by
beginning with us, Murdered their Prince, and wounded you; and shall the same
method continue, by your approbation? We are sure you mean well, though their
design be wicked: But let it never be ^^^^rded in Story, that you forgot your
often Vows to us, in joining with them that have been the cause of so great
calamity to the Nation.

Of all Calumnies against Catholics we have admired at none so much, as that
their Principles, are said to be inconsinent with Government, and they
themselves thought ever prone to Rebellion.

My Lords and Gentlemen, Had this been a new Sect not known before, something
perchance might have been doubted; but to lay this at their doors, that have
governd the Civilized World, is the Miracle of Miracles to us.

Did Richard the first, or Edward Longshands suspect his Catholics that served
in Palestine, and made our Countries Fame big in the Chronicle of oll ages? or
did they mistrust (in their dangerous absence) their Subjects at home because
they were of this profession? Could Edward the 3 d. imagine those to be
Traytorous in their Doctrine, that had that care and duty for their prince, as
to make them (by Statute) guilty of death in the highest degree, that had the
least thought of ill against the King? Be pleased that Henry the 5 th. be
remembered also, who did those wonders of which the whole world do still
resound, and certainly all History will agree in this, that 'twas Ol^-Castle he
feared, and not those that believed the Bishop of R^me to be Head of the
Church. We will no longer trouble you with putting you in mind of any more of
our mighty Kings, who have been feared abroad, and as safe at home as any since
the Reformation of Religion, We shall only add this, that if Popery be the
enslaving of Princes, France still believes it self as absolute as D^nma^k or
Sweden, nor will ever the House of (...) abjure the Pope to secure themselves
of the fidelity of their Subject. We shall always acknowledge to the whole
world, that there have been as many brave English in this last Centurie, as in
any other place whatsoever: Yet since the exclusion of the Catholic Faith,
there has been that committed by those, who would be feign called Protestants,
that the wickedest Papist at no time dreamt of. 'Twas never heard of before
that an absolute Queen was condemned by Subjects, and those styled her Peers;
or that a King was publicly tried and executed by his own people and servants.

My Lords and Gentlemen, We know who were the Authors of this last abomination,
and how generously you strove against the raging torrent; nor have we any other
ends to remember you of it, but to show that all Religions may have a corrupted
spawn; and that God has been pleased to permit such a Rebellion, which our
Progenitors never saw, to convince you perchance (whom for ever may he prosper)
that Popery is not the only sourse of Treason.

Little did we think (when your prayers and ours were offered up to beg a
Blessing on the Kings Affairs) ever to see that day, in which Carlos, G^fford,
Whitgrave, and the Pendress should be punished by your desires for that
Religion, which obliged them to save their forlorn Prince; and a stigmatized
man (for his offenses against King and Church) a chief promoter of it. Nay
less, did we imagine, that by your Votes Hu^leston might be hanged, who again
secured our Sovereign, and others free in their fat possessions that sat as
Judges, and Sealed the Execution of that great Prince of Happy Memory. We
confess we are unfortunate, and you just Judges, whom with our lives we will
ever maintain to be so; nor are we ignorant the necessity of affairs made both
the King and you do things, which formerly you could not so much as fancy. Yet
give us leave to say we are still Loyal, nay to desire you to believe so, and
to remember how synonimous (under the late Rebellion) was the word Papist and
Cavaleer; for there was never no Papist that was not deemed a Cavaleer, nor no
Cavaleer that was not called a Papist, or at least judged to be Popishly
affected.

We know though we differ something in Religion (the truth of which let the
last day judge) yet none can agree with your Inclinations, or are fitter for
your converse then We; for as we have as much birth amongst us as England can
boast of, so our breeding leanes your way both in Court and Camp: And
therefore, had not our late sufferings united us in that firm tie, yet our like
humors must needs have joined our hearts. If we err, pity our condition, and
remember what your great Ancestors were; and make some difference between us
(that have twice converted England from Paganism) and those other Sects that
can challenge nothing but intrusion for their imposed Authority.

But it is generally said, That Papists cannot live without persecuting all
other Religions within their reach.

We confess, where the name of Protestant is unknown, the Catholic Magistrates
(believing it erroneous) do use all ca^e to keep it out: Yet in those Countries
where liberty is given, they have far more Privileges then we under any
reformed Government whatsoever. To be short, we will only instance France for
all, where they have public Churches, where they can make what Proselytes they
please; and where it is not against Law to be in any charge or employment. Now
Holland (which permits every thing) gives us, it is true, our Lives and Estates,
but takes away all trust in Rule, and leaves us also in danger of the Scout,
whenever he pleases to molest our Meetings.

Because we have named France, the Massacre will perchance be urged against us.
But the world must know that was a Cabinet Plot, condemned as wicked by
Catholic Writers there, and of other Countries also. Besides, it cannot be
thought they were murdered for being Protestants, since 'twas their powerful
Rebellion (let their faith have been what it would) that drew them into tha^
ill mac^inated destruction. May it not be as well said in the next Catholic
Kings reign, that the Duke of Guise and Cardinal (Heads of the League) were
killed for their Religion also? Now no body is ignorant but 'twas their
factious Authority, which made that jealous Prince design their Deaths, though
by unwarrantable means. If it were for Doctrine that Hugonots suffered in
France, this haughty Monarch would soon destroy them now, having neither Force
nor Town to resist his Might and Puissance. They yet live free enough, being
even Members of Parliament, and may convert the Kings Brother too, if he thinks
fit to be so. Thus you see how well Protestants may live in a Popish Country,
under a Popish King: Nor was Cha^lemaine more Catholic then this; for though
he contends sometimes with the Pope, it is not of Faith, but about Gallicane
Privileges, which perchance he may very lawfully do. Judge then worthy Patriots
who are the best used, and consider our hardship here in England, where it is
not only a Fine for hearing Mass, but death to the Master for having a Priest
in his House; and so far we are from Preserment, that by Law we cannot come
within 10. miles of London. All which we know your great mercy will never
permit you to exact.

It has been often urged that our Misdemeanors in Queen Elizabeth's, and King
James his time was the cause of our punishment.

We earnestly wish that the Party had had more patience under that Princess.
But pray consider (though we excuse not their faults) whither it was not a
question harder then that of York and Lancaster (the cause of a War of such
length, and death of so many Princes) who had most right, Queen Elizabeth, or
Mary Stewart* For since the whole Kingdom had Crowned, and sworn Allegiance to
Queen Mary, they had owned her legitimate, Daughter to Henry the Eighth; and
therefore 'twas thought necessarily to follow by many, that if Mary was the
true Child, Elizabeth was the Natural, which must needs then give way to the
thrice noble Queen of Scots: 'Twas for the Royal House of Scotland that they
suffered in those days, and it is for the same Illustrious Family we are ready
to hazard all on any occasion. Nor can the consequence of the former proceedure
be but ill, if a Hen. 8. ^h. (whom Sir VV. Rawleigh and my Lord Cherbury, two
f^mous Protestants, have so homely characterized) should after twenty years
co-habitation, turn away his Wife, and this out of scruple of Conscience (as he
said) when as History declares, that he never spared woman in his lust, nor man
in his fury.

Now for the Fifth of November, with hands lifted up to Heaven, we abominate
and detest, and from the bottom of our hearts, say, that may they fall into
irrecoverable perdition, who propagate that faith by the blood of Kings, which
is to be planted in truth and meekness only. But let it not displease you (Men,
Brethren and Fathers,) if we a^k whether Ulysses be no better known? or, who
has forgot the Plots of Cromwell, framed in his Closet, not only to destroy
many faithful Cavileers, but also to put a luster upon his Intelligence, as if
nothing could be done without his knowledge. Even so did the then great
Minister who d^ew some few Des^e^ad^^s into this conjuration, and then
discovered it by a miracle. This will easily appear, viz. how little the
Catholic party understood the design, seeing there were not a score of guilty
found, though all imaginable industry was used by the Commons, Lords, and Privy
Counsil too. But suppose (my Lords and Gentlemen, which never can be granted)
that all the Papists of that age were consenting; Will you be so severe then to
still punish the Children for the Fathers faults? nay, such Children that so
unanimously joined with you in that glorious quarrel, wherein you and we
underwent such sufferings, that needs we must have all sunk, had not our mutual
love assisted.

What have we done, that we should now deserve your Anger? Has the Indiscretion
of some few Incenst you? It Is true, that is the thing Objected.

Do not you know an Enemy may easily mistake a Mass-Bell for that which calls
to Dinner; or a Sequestrator glad to be affronted being Constable? when 'twas
the hatred to his person and not present office, which perchance egged a rash
man to folly. We dare with submission say, let a public invitation be put up
against any party whatsoever; nay, against the Reverend Bishops themselves, and
some malicious informer or other will allege that, which may be far better to
conceal. Yet all Mankind by a Manifesto on the House door are encouraged to
accuse us. Nor are they upon Oath though your Enemies and ours take all for
granted and true.

It cannot be imagined, where there is so many men of heat and youth (overjoyed
with the happy Restoration at their Prince, and remembering the Insolences of
the former Grandees,) that they should all, at all times prudently carry
themselves; for this would be to be more then men: And truly we esteem it as a
particular blessing, that God has not suffered many, through vanity or frailty
to fall into greater faults, then are yet as we understand laid to our charge.

Can we choose but be dismayed (when all things fail) that extravagant Crimes
are fathered on us. It is we that must be the Authors some say of Fireing the
City, even we that have lost so vastly by it. Yet truly in this our ingenuity
is great, since we think it no Plot, though our Enemy, an H^^g^not Protestant,
acknowledged the fact, and was justly executed for his vain Con^ession. Again,
if a Merchant of the Church of England buy Knives for the business of his
Trade, this also presently is a Papist contrivance to destroy the well affected.

We must a little complain, finding it by experience, that by reason you
discountenance us, the People rage; and again, because they rage, we are the
more forsaken by you. Assured we are, that our Conversation is affable, and our
Houses so many hospitable receipts to our Neighbors. Our acquaintance therefore
we fear at no time, but it is the stranger we dread: (that taking all on
Hearsay,) zealously wounds, and then examines the business when it is too late,
or is perchance confirmed by another, that knows no more of us then he himself.
It Is to you we must make our applications, beseeching you (as subjects tender
of our King) to intercede for us in the execution, and weigh the Dilemma, which
doubtless he is in, either to deny so good a Parliament their request, or else
run counter to his Royal inclinations, when he punishes the weak and harmless.
Why may not we Noble Countrymen, hope for favor from you, as well as French
Protestants find from theirs? A greater duty then ours none could express we
are sure. Or why should the United Provinces, and other Magistrates (that are
harsh both in mind and manners) refrain from violence against our Religion,
and your tender brea^ts seem not to harbor the least compassion or pity?
These barbarous people sequester none for their faith, but for transgression
against the State; Nor is the whole party involved in the crime of a few, but
every man suffers for his own and proper fault. Do you then the like, and he
that offends let him die without mercy; And think always (we beseech you) of
Cromwells' injustice, who for the actions of some against his pretended Laws,
drew thousands into decimation, (even ignorant of the thing) after they had
vastly paid for their security and quiet.

We have no other study but the Glory of our Sovereign, and just liberty of the
Subjects; nor was it a mean argument of our duty, when every Catholic Lord
gave his voice for the Restoration of Bishops; by which we could pretend no
other advantage but that 26. Votes (subsisting wholly by the Crown) were added
to the defense of Kingship, and consequently a check to all Anarchy and
confusion.

It Is morally impossible that we who approve of Monarchy in the Church, but
must ever be fond of it in the State also. Yet this is a misfortune, we now
plainly feel, that the longer the late transgressors live, the more forgotten
are their crimes, whilst distance in time calls the faults of our Fathers to
remembrance, and bu^ies our own Allegiance in eternal Oblivion and
forgetfulness.

My Lords and Gentlemen, Consider we beseech you, the sad condition of the
Irish Soldiers now in England, the worst of which Nation could be but
intentionally so wicked, as the acted villainy of many English whom your admired
Clemency pardoned. Remember how they left the Spanish service when they heard
their King was in France; and how they forsook the employment of that unnatural
prince after he had committed the never to be forgiven act of banishing his
distressed Kinsman out of his Dominions. These poor men left all again to bring
their Monarch to his home; and shall they then be fo^go^e^ by you? Or shall my
Lord Dougl^as and his brave Scots be left to their shifts, who scorned to
receave wages of those that have declared War against England.

How commonly is it said, that the Oath of renouncing their Religion is
intended for these; which will needs bring this loss to the King and you, that
either you will force all of our Faith to lay down their Arms, (though by
experience of great Integrity and worth) or else, if some few you retain, they
are such whom Necessity has made to swear against conscience; and who therefore
will certainly betray you, when a greater advantage shall be offered. By this
test then, you can have none but whom with caution you ought to shun, and thus
must you drive away those that truly would serve you; for had they the least
thought of being false, they would gladly take the advantage of gain and pay,
to deceave you.

We know your wisdom and generolity, and therefore cannot imagine such a thing.
Nor do we doubt when you show favor to these, but you will use mercy to us,
who are both fellow Subjects, and your own flesh and blood also. If you forsake
us, we must say the world decays, and its final trensmutation must need quickly
follow.

Little do you think the Insolences we shall suffer by Committee Men, etc.
whom chance and lot has put into petty power. Nor will it choose but g^ieve you
to see them abused (whom formerly you loved) even by the common Enemies of us
both. When they punish, how will they triumph and say, Take this (poor
Romanists) for your love to Kingship; and again this, For your long doting on
the Royal Party; all which you shall receive from us, commissioned by your
dearest Friends, and under this cloak we will gladly vent our private spleen
and malice.

We know, my Lords and Gentlemen, that from your hearts you do deplore our
condition, ^et permit us to tell you, your bravery must extend thus far, as
not to sit still, with pity only, but each is to labor for the distressed, as
far as in reallity his Ability will reach: some must beseech our Gracious
Sovereign for us, others again must Undeceave the Good, though Deluded
Multitude. Therefore all are to remember who are the Prime Raisers of the
Storm, and how through our Sides they would Wound both the KING and You; for
though their Hatred to us our selves is great, yet the enmity out of all
measure increases, because we have been yours (and so shall continue) even in
the Fiery day of Trial.

Protect us we entreat you then upon all your former Promises; or if that be
not sufficient, for the sakes of those that Lost their Estates with you; Many
of which are now fallen asleep: But if this be still too Weak, we must conjure
you by the ^ight of this Bloody Catalogue, which contains the Names of your
murdered Friends and Relations, who in the Heat of Battle, perchance saved
many of your Lives, even with the joyful Loss of their own.

THe Earl of Carnarvan slain at Newbury first battle.

Lord Viscount Dumbar at Scarborough, and two of his Sons much wounded.

Knights.
Sir John Smith Ba^naret-who Rescued the Kings Standard from the Rebels at
Edghil) slain at Alresford in Hampshire. Sir John Cansfield wounded at Newb. of
which he dyed a lingering death. Sir Hen* Gage (Governor of Oxford) ^^ain at
Cullumbridge, 11 Jan. 1644. Sir J. Digby wounded at Taunton, and died at
Bridgewater. Sir P. Brown wounded at Nasby, dyed at Northampton. Sir Nich.
Fortescue, Knight of Malta, slain in Lancashire. Sir Troylus Turbervil Captain
Leiut. of the Kings Lifeguard, slain upon his Majesty's marching from Newark
to Oxford. Sir J. Preston wounded at Furnace, of which he died a lingering
death. Sir Arthur Aston (Governor of Reading) slain at Tredaugh in cold blood.
Sir Thomas Tildes^^^ slain at Wiggan. Sir Hen. Slingsby beheade^ on Tower-hi^l
Colonels.
Col. Th. Howard (Son of the Lord William Howard) slain at Pei^^bridge. Col.
Tho. Howard (Son of Sir Francis) at Atherton Moor, The gaining which Battle was
principaly ascribed to his Valor. Col. Tho. Morgan of Weston in Warwicksh.
slain at Newb. first battle; he raised a Regiment of Horse for the King at his
own charg, and his Estate was given to Mr. Pyms Son. Col. Cuthbert Conniers at
Malpass. Col. Thom. Dalton of Thurnham mortally wounded at Newb. 2d. battle and
dyed at Marlborough. Col. Francis Hungate slain at Chester. Col. Poor
(Governor at Berkley Castle) near Lidney. Col. Will. Ewre (Son to the late
Lord Ew^e) at Ma^ston Moor. Col. Ra. Pudsey at -- Col. Cuthbert Clifton slain
near Manchster. Col. Cassey Bental at S^ow in the wolds. Col. Trollop slain at
VViggan. Col. William Bains at Malpass. Col. William Walton at T^ed^^gh.
Col. Richard Manning at Altesford.
Leiut. Colonels.
(...). Col. Thomas Makham of Allorton slain near Gainsborough. L. Col.
Lancelot Holtby at Branceford. L. Col. Haggerston at Preston. L. Col. Pavver at
Line. L. Col. Jordan Me^^^m at Pontefract. L. Col. John Godfrey at Tewksbury.
L. Colonel George Preston at Bradford. L. Col. Will. Houghton at Newbury. L.
Col. Philip Howard slain at Chester. L. Col. Middleton at Hopto^-heath. L. Col.
Michael Constable there also. L. Col. Sayr at Nasby. L. Col. Scot at A^^esford.
L. Col. Thomas Salvin at -- Lieut. Col. Richard Brown at -- Lieut. Col.
Goodridge wounded at -- and dyed at Oxford. L. Col. Congrave slain at Dean in
Gloucester.
Sergeant Majors.
Major Cu^a^d slain at the taking of Ba^ing in cold blood. Maj* Rich. Harborn
wounded at Malpass died at Kendal. Maj. Tho. Vavasor slain at Ma^ston Moor.
Maj. Panton wounded at Cover, died at Highme^dow. Maj. Hudleston slain at York.
Maj. Thomas Ew^e at Newbury 1. Maj. Lawrence Clifton at Shelford house. Maj.
Thomas Heskith at Malpass. Major William L^^k at Newbury 1. Maj. Rively wounded
at Nisby, died prisoner at London. Maj. Richard S^erburn at -- Maj. Holmby at
Henly Maj. Rich. Norwood slain before Taunton. Maj. Gilbert Markham at Nasby.
Captains.
Captain Marmaduke Constable, Standard Bearer to the L. Genesis Lindsey, slain at
Edghill. Capt. Will. Laborn, and Capt. Mat. Anderton, at Sheriff^ hutton in
Yorkshire. Cap. Joseph Constable at Newberry. Capt. Wiburn slain at Basing in
Cold Blood. Captain Burgh slain at Cover. Capt. Thurston Andertan wounded at
Newbury, died at Oxford. Cap. Haggarston (eldest son of Sir Thomas in
Lancashire. Capt. Anthony ^igby at Baving House. Cap. Richard Bradford at --
Cap. Ke^elm Digby (Eldest Son of Sir Kenelm Digby) raised a Troop of Horse at
his own charge, and was slain at Saint ^eotes. Cap. Ratclif Houghtod at Preston
Cap. Rob. M^lineux of the Wood in Lancashire at Newbury 1. Cap. Charl. Thimelby
at worcester. Cap. Robert Townsend at Edg-hill. Capt. Matthew Rat^^if near
Henly. Capt* Richard Wolsole at Newbury: Cap Anthony Awd, Cap Thomas Cole at
Newark. Captain Patison at Wiggan. Ca. Maximil Nelson at Ma^ston moor. Cap.
Fran. Godfrey slain at Sherburn. Cap. Tho. Meynel at Pontefract. Cap* John
Clifton at Shelford house. Cap. Abrah. Lance, Capt. Robert Lance at Rowton in
Chesh. Cap. Anth. Hameron near Manchester. Capt. Will. Symcots, Cap Leiut. to
the Lord Piercy, slain at Newberry 1. Capt. Thomas Singleton at Newberry 1.
Capt. Francis Errington of Denton in Northumberland at Rotheran. Capt. George
Singleton at -- Cap. Mich. Fitzakerly at Liverpool. Cap. Daniel Thorold at
Nasby. Cap. Franc. Clifton at Newberry 1, Cap. John Lance at Is^ip. Cap* George
Cassey at Hereford. Captain Langdale at Greekhowel in Wales. Cap. Carver in
Monmouthshire. Cap* John Lingen at Ledbury. Capt. Samways at Newberry 2. Capt.
John Plumton slain at York. Cap. Pet. Forcer at -- Cap. Thomas Whittingham at
Newberry. Cap. Winkley at Leverpool. Cap. Thomas Anderton at -- Cap. Rich.
Walmsley at O^mschurch. Capt* John Swinglehurst, and Capt. John Butler at
Mars^on Moor. Cap. George Holden at Uske. Cap. Richard Latham at Litchfield.
Cap. Tho. Charnock at -- Cap. Robert Dent at Newcastle. Cap. Thomas Hesketh,
Cap. and John K^ipe at Bindle. Cap. Tho. Eccleston at -- Cap. John Hothersal,
Cap. Nic. Anderton at G^eenoo castle. Cap. Anthony Girlington at Lancaster.
Capt. Francis Rows in Dean Forest. Cap. Randolph Wallinger at Cover. Cap.
Chrisloph. Wray slain at Bradford. Cap. VVil. Rookwood at Alresford. Cap. Rob.
Bookwood at Oxford. Cap. Hoskins slain at Lidney in cold blood. Cap. Phil.
Darey at -- Cap. Will. Jones at Ragland. Cap. Henry Wells wounded at Newberry 2.
dyed in prison at London. Cap. Richardson slain before (...) Cap. ^spen^ slain
in ^spen^. Inferior Officers. (...) slain at Newberry. Lieu. Rich. Osba^ston
at Leeds. Lieut. George Hothersa^ at Leverpool. Lieut. William Girlington at --
Lieut. John Kulch^th at Wo^^al. Lieut. William Singleton at Marston. Lieut.
Peter Boardman at Bredford. Lieut. Short slain near Gloucester. Lieut. Rich.
Bradford at Bi^chington. Lieut. James Bradford at -- Lieu. Tho. Kinsman at
Lincoln. Lieut. John Birch at Birmicham. Lieut. (...) Cornet William Culchereth
at Newberry. Cor. Deinto^ at Cadiff. Cor. Robert Lance in Cheshire. Cor. Edward
Walker at Burton. Cor. Miles Lochard at Gooderidge.
Gent. Volunteers.
Mr. Edw. Talbot (brother to the now (...) of Shrewsbury) slain at Marston
Moor. Mr. Cha. Townly, and Mr. Charles Sherburn there also. Mr. Nicholas
Timelby at Bristow. Mr. Pool of Worral at -- Mr. John Tipper at Newnam. Mr.
Christopher Blount at Edgbalston. Mr. Francis Darcy at^ Mr. Theodore Mowse at
Langport. Mr. Gerad Salvin at -- Mr. Wiburn Mr. Rob. Bowls Mr. Will. Stoner, at
Baz^ing.
Mr. Price of Washingly in Northampton sh. slain at Lincoln in cold blo^d, Mr.
Cuthbert Ratcliff slain at Newcastle, Mr. Thomas Latham at Newark. Mr. Andrew
Giffard at Hampton. Mr. Lewis Blount at Manchester. Mr. Carry and Mr. Gennyngs
at Shelford house. Mr. James Anderton in Wales. Mr. Thomas Roper at Gootheridg.
Mr. Stephen Pudsey in Holderness. Mr. Francis Pavier at Marston. Mr. James
Banton at Cover. Tho. Pendrel at Stow. Mr* Boniface Kemp and Mr. Ildesons
Hesket slain near York in cold blood. Mr. Mich. Wharton at Scarborough. Mr.
Errington at Chester. Tho. Westby Doctor of Physic at Preston. Mr. Peter Davis
at Denbigh. Mr. Edward Davis at Chester. Mr. Bret at -- Mr. Roger Wood at
Chester. Mr. Henry Lawson at Melton. Mr. Tho Craithorn the elder, at Uphaven.
Mr. Hen. Johnson at -- Three sons of Mr. Kitby of ^aue^^^. John Witham and ^
(...) Preston.
John 15. 13. G^eater love than this no man has, then that one lay down blt
life for his friends. Major General Will. Webb so wounded at Newbury by Case
Shot, that he lives a dying life.
The Names of such Catholics whose Estates (both Real and Personal) were sold,
in persuance of an Act made by the Rump, July 16. 1651. for their pretended
Delinquency; that is, for adhering to their King.
JOhn Lord Marquess of Winchester, who so Valiantly defended Bazing-house.
Henry Lord Marquess of Worcester, who has been at least 300000. l. looser by
the War. Francis Lord Cottington. Lord John Somerset. Marmaduke L Langdale,
and his Son. Sir John Winter, who so stoutly defended Lidney House. Sir Thomas
Tildesly himself slain, and his Estate sold. Sir Hen slingsby beheaded, at
Tower Hill, and his Estate sold. Sir Peircy Herbert, now Lord Powys. Sir
Francis Howard Sir Hen. Bedingfield. Sir Arth. Aston, Governor of Reading. Sir
Tho. Haggerston-Rog. Bodenham, Esquire Charles Townly, Esquire Rowland Air, Esquire Peter
Pudsey, Esquire John Giffard, Esquire
Other Catholics, whose Estates were sold by an Additional Rump-Act made
August. 4. 1662.
HEnry Lord Viscount Dunbar and his Son. Sir Will. Vavasor. Sir Edw. Ratcliff.
Thomas Clifton, Esquire Peter Gifford of Chillington, Esquire Walter Fowler of St.
Thomas Esquire Thomas Brook of Madely, Esquire Francis Biddulph of Biddulph, Esquire
William Middleton of Stocton, Esquire, Lance Errington, Esquire Nich. Errington, Esquire
Hen Errington, Esquire John Jones of Dingestow, Esquire John Weston, Esquire Phil. Hungate,
Esquire To. Dolman Gent. Rich. Masley Gent. Genesis Smith. Genesis Ralph Pudsey Gent.
More Catholics, whose Estates were sold by another Rump-Act made November 18.
1652.
HEnry Lord Arnudel of Wardor, who reised a Regiment of Horse for the King, and
whose Castle of Wardor was so gallantly defended against Sir Edward Hungerford.
Henry Lord Marley and Monteagle. William Lord Ewre. William Lord Powis, who
keptlong his castle of Powis against the Enemy, and afterward taken in it; and
thereupon was kept a great while Prisoner at Stafford, and died in durance at
London. Lord Charles Somerset. Sir Wall. Blountlong a prisoner in the Tow. Sir
Edw. Widdrington who raised a Regiment of Horse. Sir Richard Tichburn Sir
Charles Blount (slain also by one of his own Captains.) Sir Jo Clavering died a
Prisoner at London. Sir John Cansfield. Sir John Timelby of Ernam. Sir Phillip
Constable. Sir Edward Plumpton. Sir Nicholas Thornton, who raised a Troop of
Horse at his own Charge. Hugh Anderton of Exton, Esquire. Thomas Langtree of
Langtree, Esquire. Will. Hoghton, Esquire William Hesketh, Esquire William Latham, Esquire
Tho. Singleton, Esquire John VVestby, Esquire Sir Edward Charlton* William Sheldon of
Beoly, Esquire. William Gage of Bently, Esquire. Tho. Clavering, Esquire John
Plumpton Esquire Marm. Holby, Esquire Hen. Englefield, Esquire Robert VVigmore Esquire To
Cramblington Esquire Will Sherburn, Esquire John Constable, Esquire Richard Latham, Esquire
William Bawd, Esquire James Anderton of Birchley, Esquire Tho. Singleton Esquire John
Talbot, Esquire Nich* Fitzakerly, Esquire John Peircy, Esquire. Thomas Acton of Burton,
Esquire. Tho. Gill^orand, Esquire Tho. Grimshaw, Esquire Ralph Rishton and William
^loyer, Gentlemen. Richard Chorley of Chorley. James Anderton of Clayton,
Esquire. William Anderton of Anderton, Esquire. With many others. Mr Edm^nd
Church of Essex was one of the first whose personal Estate was plun ^red, and
his real sequestered, which so continued (without any allowance to his Wise and
Children) from 1642. till 1649* when he dyed a Prisoner. Mr. John Barlow of
Pembrookshire, his whole Estate (being at least 1500l. per annum) was given to
Col Horton, and Cap Nicholas, without allowance of of any fifths, or other
sustenance for his wise and many children.
November 16. 1666.

