Castigatio Temporum: OR, A short View and Reprehension Of the ERRORS and
ENORMITIES Of the TIMES, BOTH In Church and State; And what is the most
probable Means to cure the Distempers in either.

Printed at London, in the Year 1660.

To the READER.
REader, It is more then time, (for Principlis obstes, sero Medicina paratur.)

That thou and I should at last look to our Duties; whenas Mankind, especially
in these Northern Regions, are become so faithless, and make such haste into
forbidden wickedness, that not only in Faith and Religion, nothing is esteemed
which is not New, but in Morality also, those Noblest Virtues of Justice and
Obedience, are persecuted as Vices; and their Contraries have the Reward which
is due to Virtue set upon them.

A short View and Castigation of the Public Vices of the Times.
DOubtless it is a miserable Slavery, where the Law is wandering or uncertain:
Misera servitus ubi Jus est vagum aut incognitum. If then it be a miserable
slavery where the Law is wandering and uncertain, it must be there a more
miserable slavery where the Supreme Power (from whence all Law is derived) is
wandering and uncertain: for there what can men trust to? What security can any
man have in his Life or Estate, when it is not known where he shall expect it?
What Meum or Tuum can there be, where no man can tell from whence to derive it?
And if it be true (as it is) That Justice comprehends in it self all Virtues,
(Justitia in sese Virtutes continet omnes) what man can there be just, virtuous
or honest, where he knows not to what to conform his Actions?

In the beginning of our Distractions, whenas Liberty and Privilege were
opposed to Prerogative, they who asserted Liberty and Privilege though then
understood and called by one name, viz. Parliament, yet were compounded of two
different Bodies, that is, two Houses, one of Lords, another of Commons: those
called themselves the Kings hereditary Council; these, the Representative Body
of the Kingdom. And these two, strengthened by their Liberty and Privilege, and
aided by their Brethren the Scots, drive poor Prerogative out of all, to the
utter extirpation of it.

But because all power is incompatible, and this power in two, and therefore
not possible long to consist; the Representative Body 6 Febr. 1648.
turns the Hereditary Council out of doors, and seizes and rifles all Records
and Papers in a moment, which they had been above eight years a doing. And then
they say the Supreme Power of the Nation is reduced to the prime and original
Fountain, viz. the People, and by the People to them. So that a small part of
the House of Commons (for above one half were dead, or turned out of doors for
adhering to the King; and the Army turned out at one time eleven of them that
were left, and above one 6 August 1647.
half were imprisoned by the lesser part, and the Army) which entire and whole,
was not so much as a Court of Judicature, but to some things amongst
themselves, nor had power to take any man's examination) ascribe to themselves
the Supreme power of the Nation, and play such reaks, as they became
intolerable, even to their own creatures, who do by them, as they had done by
the poor Prerogative creatures, the Lords 20 April 1653.
.

And then comes, I Oliver, Captain General of all the Porces of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, by the advice of my Officers of
the Army, etc. And he himself Taxes, and makes Laws. But this Scoene is soon
altered: for the General, as he is called, summons 4 July 1653.
diverse men from several parts to White Hall, and, if you believe Politicus,
leaning upon a bay window, devolves to them the Sureme power of the Nation.
These are called Parliament too, give the General White Hall; but no damage to
any of them: not any of them parted with any thing by this Gift. They make a
Law, too, for Marriage by a Justice of Peace; and to hang men by a Law a
Posteriori, that is, a Law made after the Fact is committed, as you see in
their Law for hanging the Saylors: It is not hard to find this Act of
Parliament; for these did not (I think) make many more besides these three.
They say, this pitiful thing could not agree in it self, nor bear the burden
of the Nation upon their shoulders: and therefore 12 December. 1653.
they return the General all his power again; and so the General is as he was,
and they may go home again, and look to their Cattle.

And then December 16. 1653. the General is sworn Lord Protector, and swears to
an Instrument of God knows whose making, by which the Supreme power of this
Nation, is in one person, and the freeborn people of the Nation. Sept. 3.
1654. the Protector summons another Parliament (as he calls it) but with no
better success then the former. All this while Taxes are imposed, distrained
for, and levied without consent of Parliament: Why what is become of the Rights
and Privileges of the English Nation? Sure there is no such thing as Magna
Charta, or the Statute De Tallagio non concedendo. But after that, the
Protector got another company of men, 1657.
who called themselves Parliament; these made or renewed him Protector, and
gave him power to name his Successor; and if you would have believed (ita
vertere seria ludo) at next sitting we should have had the Other House, and
every secluded Member (that should swear as he ought) should have power to sit
in this House: And yet was the condition of this poor Nation as perplexed as
ever before. The Parliament has given power to the Protector to nominate his
Successor, and the Instrument has given it to the Council; and who shall judge
between these two? What is the power of the Instrument? What the power of the
Protector? What the power of Parliament? What is a Parliament? Which of these
is Supreme? To whom shall any man make his obedience? And to what purpose
should the rest of the Members be allowed to sit, and another House made, when
these only who are now admitted, with the Protector, can make Laws without
them? Whether is the Protector obliged to observe the Instrument, or the
Humble Petition and Advice, having sworn to both? Nor would the Protector
suffer this Parliament to sit after this expectation, so long as to pass one
Act conjunctly with the Other House.

Since, Sept. 3. 1658. Death made another alteration, by taking away the
Protector, Oliver, by the Grace of God, etc. and they say that he designed his
Son Richard his Successor, who did swear, they say, to protect and govern this
freeborn people according to the Laws; but what the Laws are, no man can tell,
where the Legislator is not certainly known. It is a question whether this
Protector shall be Richard the First, or Second; or whether he be by the Grace
of God, or not; claiming all his Right from the Petition and Advice, and his
Fathers Nomination.

But all the World runs a madding still, and is constant in nothing but
Inconstancy; and this poor Nation in all these changes finds nothing tending
to her cure. The Protector calls a company of men together, Jan. 27. 1658.
( viz. this House, and the Other House) and although he claims all his Right
from the Petition and Advice, as the chief Cornerstone; yet was this House
that made the Petition and Advice, in election and constitution, nothing like
this House, who then assumed to themselves the Supreme Authority of this
Nation: These men in this House, not only disallow those men who framed the
Petition and Advice, as no Free Parliament; but having themselves but an
entrusted power (against all Rules of Law and Reason) participate and
communicate this their power to Irish and Scottish Members; whereas Delegata
potestas non potest participari.

And because they will not be less kind-hearted to the The Other House, then their
Scottish and Irish Members, they, for convenience, will transact with the
Members now sitting in the Other House, as another House of Parliament. But
whether the Other House shall be Superior, Equal, or Inferior to this, may be
a great Question: If Superior to this, then cannot this be the Supreme
Authority of this Nation; nay, then cannot they be made and created by this
House; for no created Thing can be superior to its Maker and Creator: If Equal,
then cannot it be the Other House, but a part or relative to this; which must
needs be a breach of the Trust of this House; nor shall ever the freeborn
people of this Nation need to elect Members to this House, if this House can
make Members of their own Scottish and Irish, and another House of like
Authority with themselves: If the Other House be Inferior to this, then are
the Lords, and alwayes-received Upper-House of Parliament, inferior, and
subject to the Lower House, and House of Commons, the cheapest thing in the
reckoning.

It is a strange thing to consider, what a frenzy and madness this Nation is
fallen into, since 1641. when under a gracious and known Sovereign, and
received and known Laws, the greatest blessings (in the ordinary nature of
things) God can give a Nation; not only esteeming Liberty in the multiplicity
of Laws, and uncertain Governors, As if it were intolerable to obey one known
Sovereign, and known Laws, and yet an casie thing to be inslaved to the
arbitrary wills and lusts of many men, who by no Right tyrannize over us.
but by their wilful rejecting their known Prince and Laws, they labor under
all those Miseries and Calamities which are incident to Confusion; and yet
think there is no way to peace, but the contrary extreme. If any man before
these times should have named but the bringing in of Excise, (the most
tolerable of Taxes we now groan under) I am confident he would have been pulled
in pieces by the Multitude. And after all these public Impositions, and
Taxes, since 1641. (which I am confident are twenty times more then all the
Taxes in five hundred years under our Kings) and the sale of the Crown and
Church Lands, (the one, the greatest Ornament of our Nation; the other, of our
Church) there is now a greater public Debt upon this Nation, then all the
Texes imposed by, or given to the Kings of England these hundred years, will
satisfy; though not above two years ago, a constant Salary was constituted,
sufficient to defray the charge of the Army and Navy.

They were wont to cry out of, and to fear Arbitrary power, whenas they felt it
not, or suffered under it: what but Arbitrary power, has destroyed all the
known Laws and Liberties of this Church and Nation? What but an Arbitrary power
has brought us into such a condition, that we know not what is Just and Legal,
and what is not? And if it be a miserable slavery where the Law is wandering and
uncertain; what a miserable slavery are we fallen into? whereas Incertainty is
the only Certainty of our Condition, and Perjury the least of our Crimes. At
first men protested to be true to the King, and the Protestant Religion, as it
was established: after, they covenanted to be true and faithful to the King, in
order to the Solemn League and Covenant: then engaged to be true to a
Government without King or House of Lords: but that not being consistent with
the late Protectors greatness, was repealed by a Parliament (so called, of his
own making:) then the Protector and his creatures swear to an Instrument of
their own making: but this continued no longer then the Parliament (so called)
which made the Petition and Advice, and they made a new oath to be taken by the
Protector, his Council, and all who shall sit in Parliament, or bear Office in
the Commonwealth. I do wonder which of the Members in any of these last
Parliaments, after they came into the House, ever regarded what he had sworn at
the Door: as if the being a Member had been sufficient privilege against
perjury: and let any sober Christian lay his hand upon his heart, and consider
whether here has not been swearing and forswearing sufficient to swear all
Religion of an Oath, as well as Truth and Integrity, quite out of doors for
ever: and what Conversation, Truth, Integrity or Ingenuity can be expected from
those men in ordinary things, who in things of highest concernment, have so
often violated and falsified their Faith, Troth and Oaths.

But miserable sure is it with those men whose ills cannot be safe without
attempting greater. To all our antecedent Distractions and Confusions, is yet
added another, of the Officers of the Army; and where it will end, God only
knows. These men, they say, pretending great dangers and fears to the Saints,
get leave of the Protector to assemble and advise for safety and redress;
where, after fasting and long Prayer, they promulge a Petition to the
Protector, testifying their great care of him, the Parliament, and conservation
of his glorious Fathers renowned Memory: but it is a peculiar mark of
godliness, especially after a Fast, with these Saints, that men never
understand their meaning, by any thing they say: (the Protectors Father of
renowned Memory, next after old Satan, the common Father of them all, was most
excellent at it) for the word was scarce cold in their mouths, whenas they not
only dissolve the Parliament, but use the Protector just with that Veneration
and Observance that his glorious Father of renowned Memory, did the King at
Hampton Court, and Carisbrook-Castle. Where are all the Hails now, of your
Highnesses most obedient Soldiers and Subjects, to live and die with your
Highness, in the preservation of the Rights Civil and Religious of this Nation?
Who gave, or by what Birthright do these Officers do these things. Why may not
the Underofficers do by them, as they have done by the Parliament and
Protector? and so the common Soldiers and Agitators, by the Underofficers;
and so ad infinitum: and in what a condition are we the while?

But although the Officers and the rest of the lower sort of Soldiers do not
well agree among themselves, but as it may relate to their interest, in
continuance of their present greatness, and enjoying the good and fat of the
Land; yet for the present they so far agree (it being the likeliest means to
continue their greatness) to revive the Long Parliament, (or, as it is called,
the Rump of it) that all they who have continued since 1648. (some great good
was done then, I warrant you) until the 20th of April, 1653. may reassume
their Trust; and so they declare May 6. 1659.
: which Declaration was delivered to the old Speaker, by the Lord Lambert, the
Lord Cooper, the Lord Berry, etc. I would fain know whether it were not these
very Officers that cut off the Rump of this long black Parliament, and in utter
renunciation of it, did not take new Commissions from the late Protector. It is
a very great Question among the Critics, whether this Rump be the Armies
Parliament, or whether the Army be the Parliaments Army.

Thus have we taken a short view of the Alterations and Distractions which have
(by Gods Judgment and Justice) happened to us, since we would wilfully cast
off our known Governors and Laws. Now let any man, not madly and foolishly
blinded with vain Zeal, consider in all these Revolutions and Changes of our
uncertain and many Arbitrary Masters, (who by no color of Right tyrannize over
us) whether all Faith and Religion has not utterly fled from us? Whether all
Laws, by which any Man should direct his Actions, have not been shut up in the
Arbitrary Breasts of our Lordly Governors? Nay, whether the observance of the
known Laws (the only Rule of Justice, Virtue, and Honesty) have not been
persecuted by our lordly Governors, as Treason, and notorious Vices? Did all
the Fields of this Nation ever run such streams of humane Blood, as under them?
Did ever all the Kings of this Nation, in five hundred years, exact the
twentieth part of Taxes, which these new Masters have done in five? Were not
the Nobility and Gentry of this Nation butchered, imprisoned, sequestered, by no
color of Law; and their only Crime, the observance of the Law? And to all
these Calamities, are not the sacred Patrimony both of Church and Crown
invaded, and made a prey to Soldiers, Sequestrators and Excise-men? Are we not
only dissenting and jarring among our selves; but at open Enmity, and in the
state of War with all the World, and all Trade and Traffic interrupted? Are
not these Lord Officers (titles their saintships can easily digest in
themselves, and an effect only of the Protectors Tyranny, which they
disclaimed, and at first was abominated by them) two parts of this
Rump-Parliament, who must be not only our Lords and Taskers; but also the
Takers and Receivers of all the Taxes they please to impose upon us?

Things standing upon such a horrid and rotten Basis, it was impossible they
should long continue: But the Generous Booth; disdaining such a company of
Pigwidgeon Usurpers should arrogate to themselves the Title of Parliament; in
August last, 1659. accompanied by a gallant Troop of Gentry, opposes them, and
declares for a Free Parliament: which so startled them at Westminster, that
they most imprudently Armed and sent Lambert against him; (whose Victory all
prudent Men foresaw would be more terrible to his Masters, then if he were
vanquished.) All this while, although the Nation were generally engaged with
Sir George, they not only left him to sustain the united force of his Enemies,
but contribute (though passively) to his opposition; so that left alone
(although he did as much more then could be hoped from him, as the rest of the
Nation had been negligent in what he expected) he and his Party sunk under the
pressure of his Adversaries; yet with so strange a Catastrophe, that in a short
time, without Blood, the Victor became the Vanquished, and the Conquered in the
state of a Conqueror.

For the Lord Lambert (as he is called) returning triumphantly to London, after
his Victory, and disdaining that these men who were restored by the mere force
of the Army, should make these Lordly Officers hold their places and greatness
at the will of their creatures, resolves to have them distinct and independent
from them: in order whereunto, they, on the 9 of October, 1659. present them a
Petition (as they called it) which was so far from being granted, that the Rump
reassume the Commissions formerly granted them, and constitute seven
Commissioners to govern the Army, during the Rumps pleasure: which so startled
these Lord-Officers, that on the 13 they reduced them to the same state they
were before May last, and resolve to share all the greatness not only of this
Nation, but also of Scotland and Ireland, among themselves and creatures.

These strange and unheard of tumults and alterations, no man knowing whither
they would tend, rouse the Northern Lion, (who for many years had securely
governed a Scottish Generation in peace, which none of their Kings before him
could ever do) and he declares against these tumults and disorders of the
English Army. Against him the Officers send their victorious General Lord
Lambert; but General Monk being a prudent Manager of his Designs, and having
no body to depend upon, opposes him upon a defensive posture, resolving to put
nothing upon Fortune, which he had securely in his own hands; whereas Lambert
expecting Orders and Directions from a distracted company of Schismatics,
whose Foundation depended only upon the wretched common Soldiers, is deserted,
first at Portsmouth, then at London, and lastly by them all.

The Soldiers having thus deserted their Officers, the Rump return, December. 26.
to the exercise of their Trust, as they call it; yet so, that they resolve to
keep out a much greater number then themselves, who by equal right might
exercise with them; and (not considering that their Foundation was only the
affections of a company of needy and wretched Soldiers, who expected to derive
their pay from them, for want of which, they deserted their Officers) proceed
as high and arrogantly, as if they had had the greatest injustice done to them,
and been placed in as just Authority as ever men had. It is a most remarkable
thing, that these very Officers, who not content to have been Lords of the
Other House, and to have shared almost all the Military and Civil greatness of
the Nation among themselves, should turn out the Protector and his Parliament,
and place a thing in stead thereof, who in less then the Revolution of a Year
should take so great vengeance upon them all.

In the Interim, victorious General Monk, victorious without fighting, and a
Conqueror without blood, courageously advances out of Scotland toward London;
all the way meeting from almost all Countries, Remonstrances full of
dissatisfaction to the present Government; and desirous of a full and free
Parliament, or that the Secluded Members might be admitted to sit again. After
he arrived at London, the first service these worthy Patriots put him upon, was
to make War upon the City Gates and Portcullices; a thing as ill relishing the
greatness of his spirit and undertakings, as hateful and ridiculous to men in
general: the baseness of which Action, together with the Reasons alleged by
the Secluded Members, it may be was the cause of their readmission and Session.

Upon the 16 of this Month of March, this many Tailed and many Headed thing
(although they by a most unparalled fact among them had cut off their Head)
called Parliament, which had in so many shapes acted Tragedies the greatest
part of 20 years, was dissolved: having against all Law and Justice, not only
been the ruin almost of infinite Families of all sorts of men; and not only
caused the Fields of the three Nations to run with more streams of humane
blood, then ever was before mentioned by any story of the Nations in many
years: but also erected new and unheard of Courts, after the War was done to,
ensnare and take away men's lives: having not only taxed the Subject forty
times more then all the Kings of this Nation have done in 500 years before; but
also embezel'd and sold all the Public Revenues both of Church and Crown; and
yet left a greater Debt upon the Nation, then all the Parliaments (except the
Sacrilegious gift of Church Lands) have given to the Kings of this Nation these
400 years: having made the honor of the English Nation vile and contemptible
to all Nations abroad: having not only lost all faith at home, but kept none
abroad; whereby the Public Trade and Traffic of this Nation is interrupted
and lost; and yet have left above 50000 armed men, besides the ordinary
Militia, to be maintained by the Nations: yet as an Epicedium, to manifest
their Saintships to the world, and how ill the Cavaliers have deserved, because
guilty of none of these things, they not only exclude them, but their
posterity, from being elegible in what they call this next Parliament.

Since it is impossible that any differences can be composed, What are the most
probable means to cure the distractions in the State.
where men will not submit to some certain and known rule, to which the men
differing ought indifferently to submit themselves; and since all Factions have
played reaks at the Helm, and Imperiously, without all Title or President, not
only arrogantly dominered over one another, but also the rest of their
Fellow Subjects; and since the forsaking our known Governors, (to whom by all
Laws of God and man, we did ow our obedience) and those known Laws, which
should be the Rule of the Subjects actions, and put a period to their
differences, has been the cause of all our civil distractions; and since there
is no other probable means under heaven to cure our distractions and compose
our differences, but by returning to our known Governors and Laws: then at
last, let men lay a side all further animosities, and take hold of those means,
which may save the Ship of this Commonwealth before it utterly sinks, to the
Public ruin of the Inhabitants. But how the wounds of this distracted Nation
may be so healed, and the breaches so cemented, that though all be sufferers,
yet the Nation redeemed, will doubtless require the wisdom of a Full and Free
Parliament, duly constituted; by whose judgment all the differences and civil
distractions of the Nation ought to be determined and decided.

Qui molitur insidias in Patriam, id facit quod infaelix
Nauta, perforans navem, in qua ipse vehitur.
Let us see whether, as the case now stands with us, the condition of this
Nation be any better in Religion then Government. Credere Deum esse, non est
articulus fidei: To believe there is a God, is an Article of no man's Faith: nor
is that act Religion to worship and serve God with, which every individual man
frames and purposes to himself as useful and expedient for him to do, (yet
indeed it is very requisite, that every man should every day, with his private
worship and service, implore Gods preventing and assisting grace, all the day
after: because no man or men can tell another man what he wants, and to what
sin by nature he is evilly prone to, so well as himself) for then all men who
worship one God, were of one Religion and of one Faith. Let us therefore see
what is Faith, and what Religion? Who an Atheist, and what Atheism?

Faith is an act of Belief in God, as he has revealed himself to mankind
extraordinarily, What is Faith.
and so as by nature no man could possibly without Gods grace, attain to the
knowledge or belief of it. It was therefore an act of faith in the Children of
Israel, to believe in God as he had revealed himself to Abraham, Isaac, and
Israel; to the evidence of which, no man inspired with all the knowledge and
learning of Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, and all other Philosophers
could possibly by those helps only attain; and to believe in God as known to
them and their Fathers by the name of Jehovah, was an Article of Jewish Faith:
and to believe in God the Father as he has revealed himself to mankind in his
Son Jesus Christ, God and Man, is the sum of Christian faith; and by doing in
this faith, ought every Christian man to seek out his Salvation with fear and
trembling.

By Religion, What Religion.
all men generally, Christians, Jews, Mahometans and Infidels (who though
misplacing the Deity in the Creatures, as the Sun or Moon, an Oak, Apollo,
etc.) understand, the restraining or binding men to the Public worship and
service of God, in such an unity, form, and communion. And so zealous were the
Druides, (...), Nicias Orat. Thuc. l. 7.
in their Rites and Forms, that none but their Priests and Scholars might learn
them; nor would they commit them to Letters, both because they would not have
them divulged (lest they should grow contemptible by being exposed to the view
of the rude and ignorant multitude) and because their Scholars might the better
retain and keep them in their memory. Seldom annal. Anglobr. l. c. 4 Caesar li.
6. de bell. Gall. Camb Br. p. 13.14.
If then Religion be the binding men to worship God in such a form, etc. let us
see what makes and alters forms. Forma rerum sicut numeri (according to
Aristotle) consistunt in indivisibili: Tho forms of things, as numbers, do
consist indivisibly, or integrally; for as in numbers, if you add to, alter or
diminish ought from any number, it ceases to be the number it was before; so in
forms, if you add, diminish or alter ought, it ceases to be the form it was
before: therefore St. Paul exhorts, 1 Timothy 2. That first of all (because there
can be no Religion without it) prayers, and supplications, intercessions and
giving of thanks, be made for all men, for Kings, etc. And let all things be
done decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14.40. Now decency and order must
pre-suppose rules, precepts and forms, to which they are referred; and where
there are no rules, precepts, and forms observed, there necessarily things must
be done indecently and out of order; and the reason of all is, That men may
with one mouth and one mind glorify God, Romans 6.15. And therefore in the
Church of England (and I believe in all Christian Churches,) set forms are not
only ordered, when Congregations are gathered together, that many may with one
mind and one mouth glorify God, both for all sorts of men, in their several
vocations and stations; Flaminem assiduum Jovi sacerdotalem erea vit. Livy.
lib. 1.
That as amongst the Jews, the fire upon the Altar might never go out, so among
Christians no day might the Priest omit to offer up the public service of God,
for all sorts of men. To believe then in God the Father, in God the Son, in God
the Holy Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, and'c. are
Articles of Christian faith; and the worshipping of God the Father, God the Son,
and God the Holy Ghost in the Catholic Church, and communion of Saints, is an
act of Christian Religion.

Now let us see who is an Atheist, and what is Atheism? there is no man in his
wits, that is compos mentis, who can think there is no God: David, Psalm. 14.1.
says, The foolish body has said his heart, There is no God: and it is not folly
merely, which makes men Atheists; Nor is there any man so mad, as to believe
there is a God, and he not to be served and worshipped: Who is an Atheist.
who then is an Atheist? why he who is of no Religion, that believes there is
no God to be publicly and formally worshipped. And if that be Religion that
restrains and binds men to the worship and service of God, in such an unity,
form, and communion; then that is Atheism that destroys this unity, What is
Atheism.
form, and communion, and gives liberty or licentiousness to all men to run a
whoring after their own inventions.

Now would I fain know what religion or public form of worship and service of
God is used among us in Churches, Whether there be any Religion publicly
professed in England.
where it is to be found? In what two Churches is God served with one mind and
one mouth? what Minister uses the same thing twice? Is not every man's soul by
an implicit faith, haled before the great Tribunal of heaven in whatsoever the
Minister shall say, be it sense or nonsense? wherein is the decency and order
which the Apostle commands? what rules or precepts of God or his Church are
here observed? and yet if this be not the public worship and service of God,
then have the poor auditory nothing but preaching the Gospel for their money,
(unless the reading of two Chapters and Psalms, which is given in to the
reckoning.) And now good God, that ever such impudence and blasphemy should
enter into the hearts of men, as to call the preaching of the Chymaera's and
fancies of the wild-headed and brainsick men, the preaching of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ! Sure that which converted the world to Christianity, was true:
but what man can force a belief to all the contradictions and absurdities
preached by our new lights? yet every one of these has as much to say for his
Gospel one as another, viz. the taking of each of their bare words for it. God
commands Moses to put off his shoos, (an expression of worship with the
Hebrews) because the ground whereon he stood was holy: but here all are with
their Hats on their heads; for which no reason can be given, but that all of
them might be alike profane. God in the second Commandment forbids the bowing
down to, or worshipping any creature made with hands (and because all negative
precepts pre-suppose affirmative, therefore this bowing down to or worshipping
must be done to somewhat else) for the Lord thy God is a jealous God; and what
is God jealous of there? but that this Divine adoration, which is only due to
him, should be given to any creature; and this abstract adoration, and not
concrete, or joined with any Petition: therefore when the Devil, Mat. 5.4, 9.
had showed our Savior all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, he
did not stipulate with our Savior, to ask any thing of him, but told him if he
would fall down and worship him, he would give him them all: and that this
worship is due to God, our Savior says, ver. 10. It is written, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. And all men by nature,
wheresoever they conceive a Deity, did and do attribute this worship to it.
They bowed themselves and worshipped, Exodus 4.31. and Numb. 25.2, 3. And the
people, (viz. the Israelites) did eat, and bowed down to their gods; and Israel
joined themselves to Baal-Peor. And how did Israel join themselves to
Baal-Peor, but in joining with the Moabites in the worshipping, viz. the bowing
down, etc. to their misplaced Deity? therefore the Moabites did bow down to
them. And Judge. 2.12. The Children of Israel followed other Gods, of the Gods
of the people that were round about them, and bowed themselves unto them, etc.
And v. 17. They would not hearken unto their Judges, but went a whoring after
other Gods, and bowed down to them. Sure no man can imagine that the Children
of Israel did more by these Gods then the people round about them. And Dan. 3.
Whosoeever falls not down and worshippeth the golden image which the King
has set up. And no question this bowing down is employed in the worshipping
Osiris and Isis by the Egyptians, and of Jupiter and Saturn, etc. by the
ancient Heathens.

And I dare challenge any man to show, where any men do, or ever did conceive a
Deity, (until our Reformers of Faith and Christian Religion left it out) and
did not bow down and worship it with this abstract adoration. And in reason
shall any man give his superior (although it may be he never had, nor does
expect any thing from him) a Civil Worship? and shall not I, who am infinitely
less then a Worm, and no Man, compared with God, (for between us there is no
proportion) give this divine adoration to God, so good and gracious to me, that
he has not only made me, and that not a vile and contemptible Creature, but
after his own Image, and endued me with a reasonable soul? And yet with what
spite and scorn was and is this adoration decryed by the Zealots of these time,
as bowing and cringing to the Altar? etc. God no doubt permitting their spite
and malice to take place among their followers, lest this divine adoration
should be offered up to the imaginations of such wretched men. Yet shall these
very men quarrel and fight with the Dutch and other Nations, if they do not by
striking sail to their Admiral, etc. (though they ask nothing of him)
acknowledge their power in the narrow Seas; which is more then they will do by
Almighty God, in bowing down and worshipping him. But they say, they worship
God in spirit and truth: so may the Dutch, etc. acknowledge their power, for
ought they know. These men do moreover inveigh against the Papists, because
(they say) they commit Idolatry in worshipping Images; they themselves not
considering, that if this adoration be not due to God, (which in their practice
they deny) it cannot be Idolatry to give it to any Creature. With what face
shall these men appear before God, who have for so many years together taken
the sacred Patrimony and means of Gods Church, ordained and given for such an
end, viz. daily to offer up the prayers of the Church for all sorts of men in
their several vocations, to visit the sick, to baptize infants, to administer
the Eucharist, to bury the dead, to instruct the ignorant, to reduce such as
walk out of the way, etc. and in stead of these, become only Time-servers,
studying how to please them who pay them their wages? And if God so severely
punished Nadab and Abihu, Exodus 10. the sons of Aaron, for once offering up
strange fire; what shall these men expect, who for so many years together have
offered up nothing else but strange fire? Which of all these men bows his knee
at the Name of Jesus, though expressly commanded? would any man take any of them
for Christians? Compare the spirit of our Professors, who have reduced all
Music in the public service to the singing of Tom. Sternholds and Hopkins
Psalm, with the Spirit of God, 150 Psalm. De Jove quid sentis? I wonder what
the men of this age think of God; what is become of that ghostly power, which
our Savior instituted in Apostles, Priests, etc? Sure it is not to be found
with the late Tryers at White Hall.

And now, Oh that I could more then pour forth all Jeremiahs Lamentations in
Commiseration of thee, O my Mother Church and Native Country! much more
deserving it, then the Jews did in the Babylonish Captivity; for there the
Prophet foresaw their deliverance, and the promised Messiah; whereas we cannot
hope but that Christianity it self is in the wain with us, whenas not only
Bishops and Priests are hated, persecuted and despised for no cause, but
because they are Christ's Ministers; and Mountebanks, Puppets and Tryers set up
in stead, and in detestation of them; whenas not only days are kept for the
effusion of Christian blood, most unchristianly shed; and all those solemn days
and times for the celebration of the mysteries of our Saviors Nativity, Death,
Passion, Ascension, and the coming of the Holy Ghost upon Men, are by public
Authority decryed as superstitious and idolatrous; when as no man is qualified
for Saintship, that cannot show some badge of Sacrilege, but also the defacing
of those goodly Monuments built and founded by our pious Ancestors for the
celebration of the public worship and service of God, and the greatest
Ornaments of the English Nation, are numbered amongst their glorious actions.
The Prophet David complained bitterly that in his time the carved Work of Gods
House was broken down with Axes and Hammers; whereas here not only the carved
Work of Gods House is broken down with Axes and Hammers, but Gods House it self
is made a Jakes, and stable for Horses. Our Savior whipped the Money Changers
and sellers of Doves out of the Temple, because Gods House was called a House
of Prayer: we have not only perverted the end of Gods House; from being a
House of Prayer, and made it a House of preaching the vile passions and
affections of seditious men; but made it a Public Exchange, not only for
Money Changers, but also for all sorts of Paltry Ribband, and indeed of all
sorts of Ribauldry; since not half of this Profaness was ever heard of in the
African Churches; where (were it not for some poor Christian Slaves) there are
no footsteps of Christianity left: and yet after all this abomination of
desolation, and mystery of Iniquity, are men so generally careless of redress,
that they apprehend that the only virtue, which is only incident to fools and
madmen, viz. to cure supposed Vices by running into contrary Extremes, until in
the end they arrive at right-down Infidelity and Atheism. Sure if there were no
Faith or Religion in us as Christians, nor any sense of the honor of the
English Nation; yet in Reason and Prudence, we (in all this confusion and
distraction both of Church and State, which must necessarily bring destruction
upon us, if not timely prevented) should consider of our condition before these
calamities, (not only enjoying peace, when all the world were at War; and such
plenty and abundance of all Gods temporal blessings, that gold and silver were
almost as common as stones in the street; but were the most envied and renowned
Church of all the Reformed) and return thither, and there continue, until we be
in some sort assured, that by forsaking our station, we shall better our
condition, and not run into all Irreligion and Profaness.

A Postscript to the Reader
SInce all these Nations have so long labored in such frenzies and
distractions both in Church and State, and since so much does depend upon the
prudence and temper of this next Representative, in order to the cure of them
in either, (the Nation, by Gods extraordinary grace and mercy being
well-disposed thereunto) it is therefore desired, that all animosities,
affections, and private interest be laid aside in Elections: and because it may
be truly feared, that not only they who have made, themselves private Fortunes
out of the public ruins, are not proper Instruments for the dementing of our
distractions, being prejudiced by their particular interest; so neither are
those men (how worthy and well-deserving soever otherwise) who have been much
Sufferers, very proper for Representatives this next Session, lest provoked by
passion or otherwise, they might rather endeavor to repair their private, then
public state: nor are men of vile fortunes, who may hope by fishing in
troubled Waters to better their condition, to be considered in this Election;
yet are not men's fortunes so absolutely to be considered, as their parts and
integrity: nor are the wounds of this Nation in probability to be searched
into, and proper Medicines to be applied to them by men of youth and ignorance,
whose rashness may produce like effects, to the prejudice of others.

FINIS.

