A Moral Treatise UPON VALOR, Divided into TWO BOOKS. Translated from the
FRENCH.

LICENSED,

Aug. 15. 1694. Edw. Cook.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, Anno Dom. MDCXCIV.

To His Most Sacred Majesty, WILLIAM III. King of England, Scotland, France,
and Ireland, etc.
Most Dread Sovereign,
THose Great Acquests of Glory which ordinarily did attend the Fortune of
Alexander, are now, upon a more great and solid Account, become Your Majesty's
just Trihute.

The Insatiable desire of that Illustrious Macedonian, to establish his Great
Name in the Memory of the World, was the Chief Cause, by which he made his way
through the Credulity of that Age, to the Seat of Jupiter Hamon.

To be Esteemed less than a Deity, fell short of the Ambition of that Aspiring
Monarch: But Your Majesty's Great Soul, of a more Pious Stamp, keeps Touch with
the Will of Heaven, and instead of false and flashy Adoration, Your Majesty's
utmost Aim is that Distinguishing Glory of being placed (like good King David)
in the Throne of Justice.

Yet, Royal Sir, I hope you will allow the many and indispensable Favors which
we daily receive from Your Majesty's Wise Conduct, not only do oblige us to Pay
our utmost Acknowledgments, but also to follow You, as another Joshua of the
People.

The many and uncommon benefits which generally accrue from a Magnanimous
Prince, to the Welfare of his Subjects, confirm the Affections of the Dutiful,
and prevail more than all the Arguments which Reason or Religion can produce to
the Conservation of Loyalty.

To gratify the Ambition of some, Fortune, for a Time, has afforded fresh
Laurels, when the chief design of such Aspirers, is only to Embroil the World,
and Conquer more upon the Account of their own Vainglory, than tbe Public
Justice.

But Your Majesty's just Cause, moves in a higher Sphere, and engages Your
Royal Person in a War, as well to the Preservation of our Religion, as our
Liberties, as if the Two Great Tables of the Law were Engraved on Your
Majesty's Sword.

Go forward then, most Sacred Sir, in Your Royal Undertakings, and make Your
Name as Eternal, as Illustrious, that by each Auspicious Act, the World may
see, that while Good Princes Live, the Great Creator of Heaven is their
Protector uopn Earth; and when Dead, the World the Preserver of their Memories.

I am therefore bold, Most Sacred Majesty, to lay the Ensuing Tract at Your
Royal Feet, and Dedicate this Translation of True Valor, to Your Gracious
Acceptance, in which may plainly be perceived, in Two particular Chapters of
the same, though Writ several Years since, The true Prophetic Characters of the
late King James, and Your Present Majesty; The Subject Matter of which agreeing
so exactly with the whole Series of Your Majesty's Life, and which Your Majesty
is so well Experienced in, gives me hopes of Your Majesty's Royal Patronage,
and encourages this Presumption, of Subscribing my Self,

Your Majesty's most Dutiful, and most Faithful Subject, Samuel Compton.

A Moral Treatise UPON VALOR.
LIB. I.
CHAP. I.
Valor is necessary to a Prince, for his Reputation.
THE First Reason that obliges Princes to be valiant, is their Reputation.
There is no Virtue that makes so great a Figure in the World, nor leaves so
great an Impression on Men's Spirits, as this of Valor: And the Esteem that
People have for it appears chiefly in Military Discipline: We do not make so
narrow an Inspection into the Conduct of Men of other Professions; we do not
regard so much whether an Artist is continually in his Shop, whether a Merchant
is every Day upon the Exchange, whether a Lawyer constantly attends the Bar, or
a Physician waits daily on his Patients: But a Soldier, for the least Failure
in his Duty, must undergo Severities. Upon his first Listing himself, he is an
Apprentice to War and Danger; and his whole Life is but a continued Succession
of Labors and Fatigues. Other Professions one may sometimes neglect, and not
be punished for it; we may renounce them, and exchange them for others, or may
wholly leave them off, and no Penalty can be inflicted on us: But the least
Omission in War passes for an Offense punishable; and Desertion, for a Capital
Crime. An Army is a distinct People from others, and a Realm by it self:
Besides the general Laws, they have Laws peculiar to themselves; according to
which they inflict the speediest, exactest and severest Justice in the World.
This rigorous Exercise that is kept up amongst Soldiers, arises from a
Consideration we have for them, and from a Maxim which comes very near to that
of Plato, when in his Commonwealth he puts this remarkable Difference between
Freemen and Slaves, in that he condemns Freemen to Death for Crimes, for
which Slaves shall receive a more favorable Chastisement. Some hold, that an
Army ranged in Battle is the finest and most noble Spectacle that can be
presented to our Eyes: The Pleasure we take in seeing them, arises from the
high Idaea we have of Valor. For, indeed, should we see Troops glistering in
their Arms, drawn up in the most regular manner, and abundantly furnished with
all those Materials which are requisite for Siege or Battle, and we should at
the same time be persuaded that they were Cowards under the Appearance of
Soldiers, we should disdain to look upon this vain and useless Mobile; or if we
did cast our Eyes upon them, it would be rather to ridicule than admire them.

CHAP. II.
The same Reflections continued.
BUT to carry this Reflection farther, we may consider, that we bestow greater
Pains and Cost to incite Men to Valor, than to any of the other Virtues. Kings
keep those in daily Pay, whom they employ in their Wars: They do not give Money
to Men for their Prudence, nor for their Liberality; but they maintain them for
being valiant. There are I know not how many Arts subordinate to the Art
Military; and a Thousand Sorts of Artificers are employed, to equip a Soldier
Cap-a pe: One makes him a Sword; another, his Breast Plate; a Third, his
Headpiece; others there be, that are forging and furbishing his Firearms,
(which Antiquity was ignorant of:) Some are employed in making Instruments
which may excite his Joy, or raise his Fury; as Drums, Trumpets, and
Wind-Musick; whose ravishing Sounds make the most agreeable Harmony. The Manage
was invented for the War: And if the Riding-Master train up an Horse of Value,
he is designed for the Day of Battle. The Pomp and Flourish of Habits is not
comely in any, but Soldiers by Profession: Feathers, Scarves, Gold or
Silver-Embroyderies, look great, when worn with a Sword; and a Soldier has
always been allowed these sorts of Ornaments, as Presages of his Triumph. The
Branches of the noblest of all Trees are wreathed into Coronets for him; as,
the Laurel, (which Thunder seems to reverence;) and the Palm Tree, which never
bows down to the Earth, but advances up ambitiously toward the Sky. We cannot
number the different Prizes that the Ancients established, as the Recompense of
valiant Actions: There were not only some for Captains and Generals; as, the
Sur-names of Countries which they conquered, Trophies, Triumphal Arches, and
Triumphs themselves; but there were others for the Common-Soldiers: They
bestowed one sort of Crown upon him that first scaled the Walls; they gave
another to him who, in the Heat of the Battle, had saved a Roman Citizen: And
though the Materials thereof were but common and ordinary, yet they valued them
above precious Treasures. A Monarch also takes himself to be honored, when he
is called a Captain; neither does he despise the Title of a Soldier. To speak
properly, Sovereigns have but two Sorts of Professions; to rule their Subjects,
and to manage their Wars. The First they teach their own Children; in the
Second they instruct their Children, and their Subjects. They take care
themselves to form their Troops; they are not ashamed to have the meanest of
their Subjects for their Scholars; and the same Mouth that pronounces Laws to
the whole Nation, will give out Orders and Instructions to the raggedest of his
Soldiers.

CHAP. III.
It is more pleasant to read the Lives of Valiant, than of other Princes.
WE pronounce the Name of Alexander and Caesar more frequently than those of
other Princes. We seem to feel a kind of Interest in their past Fortunes, we
fancy our selves concerned in their Conquests, and to have some Share in their
Triumphs; we are charmed with a far greater Pleasure in reading of their Lives,
than that of Novelty; we are more delighted to read their Stories over and over
again, than that of any other Prince, though but once. Notwithstanding a
Thousand Republicans, and Men of Commonwealth-Principles, have endeavored to
palliate the Death of Caesar, with specious Pretenses; yet, at this very Day,
we cannot but look upon that Act as an Assassination, and regard the Criminals
for no less than Parricides: We conspire against them who plotted against him;
we abhor those of the Senate that were so cruel; and it is our Opinion, that
the unfortunate End of those Conspirators was an Effect of the just Vengeance
of Heaven upon them. What Regret have we not also for Alexander, to think he
should be removed out of the World at so young an Age? We lament his Death,
whether it were violent or natural: We conceive that so great a Courage
deserved a longer Life. After he had conquered Asia, we could have wished he
had turned his Arms against Europe, (as he designed to do:) We imagine we
should have been well pleased to have seen him attack the Romans, who at that
Time were making their Advances in Italy, and were laying the Foundation of the
most puissant Republic in the World. And that which is here most remarkable,
is, we do not cease to admire their Valor, when, at the same Time, we know
they have been unfortunate in their Enterprises. Pyrrhus, in many of his
Expeditions, met with more Disgraces, than Success: He was despoiled by
Lysimachus of the Part which he had in Macedonia: He was forced to abandon
Sicily and Italy, after he had spent six Years Time there: He raised the Siege
of Lacedaemon, and was slain before that at Argos. Yet, notwithstanding all
these Misfortunes, we follow the Conduct of his Exploits with Admiration: We
wish his Success had been equal to his Courage; and are sorry that all his
Conquests should drop through his Fingers, just as he had caught them with his
Hands; and after having vanquished his Enemies, through a Thousand Dangers and
Hazards, that he was not so happy as to reap the Fruit of his Victories.

CHAP. IV.
The Romans erected Statues to the Honor of Hannibal; and they made all their
Statues in a Military Habit.
WE can allege nothing that can redound more to the Glory of Valor, than what
is reported by Pliny; that in Rome it self three Statues were erected to the
Honor of Hannibal. So that this implacable Enemy of that Republic had the
Monuments of his Glory set up within the Precincts of that City, wherein he had
brandished his Terrors; and the Ruin whereof he had solemnly sworn. To this
Remark of Pliny, let us add another of Cicero's, who observed that all the
Roman Statues were made in a Military Habit. This Custom speaks much to the
Praise of Valor; for that they took it up out of Choice, and not out of
Necessity. And although amongst the Romans, the same Persons were Magistrates
in Time of Peace, as well as Captains in Times of War; yet they did not think
it proper to make Choice of any other Habit for their Statues, or to represent
them with the Ensigns of Magistracy. In Truth, we cannot say the same of the
Grecian Statues; we cannot observe any Preference on the Account of Arms in
that Point. The Grecian Heroes had no Habits upon their Statues; either
because it was an ancient Custom, which they had in Reverence; or else, that
they had a Mind to leave a Liberty to their Engravers to exercise their own
Ingenuity, who thereby might better show the utmost Excellency of their Art, in
exactly delineating the Proportion and Shapes of Humane Bodies. Graeca res est
nihil velare, ac contra Romana thoracas addere.

SIR, I presume Your Highness will easily pardon me for citing to you a
Sentence out of a Latin Author, since you Your Self already so well understand
that Language. One Day I had the Happiness to see some of Your Composures; and
it was not without Admiration that I considered them: They were so neatly
exact, that the severest Critics might desire nothing more: And we may with
Truth affirm, that the Progress You have made in Learning, is far above Your
Years.

CHAP. V.
The Esteem Men have had for Valor appears by the Names which the Greeks and
Latins have given to it; and also, by that we have given it in our own Language.
YOU have then observed, (SIR) that the Latins, by the Word Virtue,
particularly understand Valor; as if they conceived Valor was the only
Virtue, or, at least, the Virtue by way of Excellency. Besides, some have
thought, probably enough, that this Word is derived from a Name which signifies
Man, Virtus a Viro. The like Etymology is plainly evident in the Greek Tongue;
which not only gives the general Name of Virtue to Valor, in calling it (...);
but they also called it (...); to let us understand, that in this a Man may
behold his true Character; and that he is unworthy to bear the Name of a Man,
who is defective in Courage. But neither the Greeks nor Latins have dignified
this Virtue with so honorable a Name, as that by which we render it in our
Language. Is it not a remarkable Thing, that we have appropriated to it the
very Name by which we use to express the Price or Worth of Things? As much as
to let us understand, that Men are valuable, more or less, according to the
Proportion of their Courage; and that Valor is the only Fountain of Merit.

CHAP. VI.
We love the Image of Valor in other Creatures which are hardy.
THE Lion cannot properly be said to have true Valor, seeing that Valor is a
Virtue, and Virtue belongs only to Reasonable Creatures. Yet Valor is so
amiable, that we love its very Image and Appearance in the Brute: And we speak
of the Lion with a kind of awful Esteem: We attribute to him Actions of
Generosity; we say, he will not insult over a vanquished Enemy, that he will
pardon them whom he has brought under the Power of his Clutches: We say, when
he sees himself in danger to be overpowered by a Multitude, he will not flee
away in Disorder, but make seasonable Halts and Turns; he retreats in State,
and, as it were, facing his Enemies. When a Man has distinguished himself by
his Bravery, we bestow some Title upon him in our usual Language; but when
Eloquence or Poesy thinks to honor an Hero, it compares him to a Lion.
France, which has bred up many Persons who deserve that Appellation, does not
bring forth Lions: But when we know they are brought over from those scorching
Climates where they are bred, into our Country, we are curious to go and view
them; we consider them with Attention, and a kind of Respect; we take pleasure
to see them extend their Claws, with which they can tear Elephants in pieces;
we love to hear his Roaring, which has been the Terror of a whole Country. The
same may be said of the Eagle: We conceive lofty Thoughts of him; we consider
him as a Sovereign, who exercises his Dominion in the vast Empire of the Aerie
Regions, and makes his uninterrupted Progress through immense Spaces. That
which gives us so noble an Idaea of him, is, That he excels all the Feathered
Creation in Courage, and his Approaches to them are terrible. The Word Prince,
in the Original, signifies no more than Chief: And this Title carries a
smoother, and more acceptable Sound to a newly-conquered People, than all the
other harsh Names, which are as so many Marks of Arbitrary Sovereignty. For
this Reason Augustus (as Tacitus has well observed) chose to govern the Empire
under no other Title than that of Prince. Dion, to the same Sense, reports of
another Emperor, who used to say, I am the Master of my Slaves, the General of
my Soldiers, and the Prince of all the rest of the Romans. The most graceful
Superiority is that which is founded in the highest Perfection: And we
attribute this Name to those who excel all others in their laudable
Professions. We therefore call Virgil the Prince of Poets, and Cicero the
Prince of Orators. Of all those Royal Duties that God has annexed to the
Dignity of a Prince, this Title carries in it an Eternal Advertisement to those
who are honored with it, to surpass their Subjects in Merit, as well as Power,
if ever they will be the Chiefs, and possess in all Things the highest Rank.
They are then obliged to acquire more Glory than other Men; but they cannot
have more Glory, if they have not more Virtue; and the most renowned of all
Virtues is Valor.

CHAP. VII.
Valor is the Ornament of all Ages; and of the Female Sex, when it is found
there.
WIthout Valor, Youth is despicable; and with it, Old Age is honorable. What
could be a more glorious Spectacle, than to behold Antigonus in the Grecian
History, and the Constable of Montmorency in that of our own; who at the Age of
Eighty Years, sought for Death in the midst of Battles; and there they both
found it? Homer has made us conceive a greater Esteem for Nestor, in bringing
him to the Siege of Troy, than for the Father of Achilles, or Ulysses, whom he
left snoring at home, in their private Houses. Certain I am, we regard the
Macedonian Soldiers, called Argyraspides, with Admiration: They were the Flower
of the Militia of that Kingdom; they had served not only in all the Wars of
Alexander, but likewise in those of his Father Philip: The greatest part of
them were Seventy Years of Age, and the youngest Sixty. It was not because they
were Niggards of their Lives, that they lasted so long: They were all covered
with Wounds; neither could they receive any new ones, but upon their old Scars.

Valor is also an Ornament to the other Sex, when it is found there. Amongst
all Queens, we most admire Semiramis, and Zenobia. And it is impossible to
think of a Name more taking, than that of an Amazon.

CHAP. VIII.
Cowardice is the greatest Reproach to a Man.
COwardice is the most stabbing Reproach that can be put upon a Man. From the
Time that he is upbraided with it, he takes up a Resolution, either to perish
himself, or to avenge the Affront by the Death of his Accuser. It seems a less
Evil to him, to kill, or be killed, than to suffer this Ignominy; and
frequently, through a blind Fury, he is transported to the height of Revenge.
Nay, he had rather appear a perfect Criminal, and more really guilty of other
Vices, than so much as to seem reproachable for this. When Nature perceives
that she has been unkind, in not befriending a Man with that Courage which is
proper for him, she gives him continual Advices to hide his Defect; she will
shift him away from all Occasions, where his Weakness may be brought upon the
Stage: She presents to his Thoughts Duty and Honor, that so she may lead him
to do that upon Consideration, which he was unable to do upon his first
Thoughts: And If she finds all this unprofitable, then she sometimes inspires
him with Despair, which may seem to pass for Stoutness and Valor. In short, we
may affirm, there is no such rigorous and shameful Slavery, as Servile Fear:
When a Man would always be in a State of Security, he never is, nor does he
deserve to be so. The Fear of Dangers, either honorable or necessary, is the
Lot of mean Souls; and they whose Lives are least to be valued, are most afraid
of losing them.

CHAP. IX.
Whether a Man be Courageous, or Fearful, naturally.
I Am now come to a Thought upon this Subject, which I know not if I can well
express. Nature having impressed the Law of Self-preservation upon all
Creatures, inspires them sometimes with very contrary Sentiments: For we cannot
doubt but it is from the same Principle of Self-Preservation, which renders the
Lion so undaunted, and the Heart so fearful. But if I may have Leave to abstract
Humane Reason, and to consider Man in the Resemblance he may have with other
Creatures, I believe, Nature has not placed him in the Rank of those who are
fearful, but of the Courageous. This appears, not only from the rash and hardy
Actions which Men sometimes commit, against the Light of Reason; but also from
the Salvage Nations, and their manner of Living, who are perpetually waging
War, one against another; and seldom cease, till their eager and bold Assaults
ferment into Fury and Ferocity. But Cowards, which ought to make use of their
Understandings, to elevate the Courage they received at their Birth, make no
other Use of their timorous Reasonings, but to disgrace and stifle it; and by
this unworthy Vice, sink themselves into a lower Degree than ever Nature
intended them for: Whereas, on the other Side, they might not only have
maintained their native Courage, but have advanced themselves to an higher
Rank, by the Succors of Wit, and the Aids of Virtue.

CHAP. X.
Shame has always attended the Actions of Cowards, amongst People which had
any Sense of Honor.
BUT let us not frame Suppositions injurious to Humane Nature: Let us speak of
Men as they are; (that is to say) as Reasonable Creaturs; and consider the
Shame and Contempt wherewith the Actions of Cowards are deservedly branded
amongst People which have had any Sense of Honor. If any Disgrace happened to
the Romans by the Rashness or Imprudence of a Captain, they easily granted him
Pardon for this Fault. After the Loss of a Battle which threatened their total
Ruin, as soon as they understood that the Consul, who was the Cause of this
Misfortune, was coming back for Rome, they went out to meet him with all the
Testimonies of Respect, rather than with any Thoughts of Indignation: They gave
him Thanks, that after such an Event, he had not despaired of the Safety of the
Commonwealth. But they did not carry it so toward another, Mancinus.
who made a dishonorable Treaty in Spain: They declared him a Slave to the
Numantines, by a public Edict; and they effectually sent him back with an
Herald, to deliver him into their Hands. It is true, the City of Numantia would
not receive him. So that it was made a Question in the Ancient Roman Law,
whether this Man should become Free by his Return into his Country; and whether
he should be restored to the Freedom of a Citizen, and the Dignity of a
Senator. One Time, after an entire Defeat, when they had scarce Men enough left
to furnish their Forts, and but a small Ransom was demanded of them for a great
Number of Prisoners; yet they would not redeem them: They cashiered and
banished all those who were saved in the Battle, into Sicily: and as Marcellus
was passing through that Island, to besiege Syracuse, those wretched Soldiers
cast themselves at his Feet, conjuring him with Tears to List them again into
the Roman Service: They made Protestations to him, that they would make it
appear, that that Bloody Defeat was not to be attributed to their Default, but
to their Misfortune. Marcellus, who was touched with a Sense of their Distress,
though he was to engage in a Siege where he should have need of Men, wrote to
the Senate in their Behalf; who returned him this Answer, That the Commonwealth
had no need of the Service of Cowards. In their ancient Discipline, they had a
Military Punishment which was very surprising: When a Soldier had been guilty
of Cowardice, they used to Let him Blood, as if he had been dangerously sick,
and as if the Distemper had invaded his Spirits; to let us understand by this
sort of Chastisement, that it was impossible a Man should continue in his right
Senses, and at the same time be a Coward.

As for the Lacedaemonians, they followed the Opinion of those, who (by a
Definition peculiar enough) held, that Valor was the Fear of Shame: And upon
this Apprehension, there was at Sparta a Temple consecrated to Fear. Amongst
them, Fleeing in Time of War, Loss of Arms, and (in a Word) all Cowardly
Actions, or but the Appearances of them, were Indelible Stains, and Eternal
Infamies. There were some of them who died for Grief, whereinto they had
precipitated themselves; neither would they admit of any Consolation. There
were found some Mothers, who killed their own Sons when they returned from a
Battle, as believing they did not there behave themselves valiantly. They
invited Tyrteus the Athenian into their City, because his Verses excited Men to
Valor. On the contrary, Archilocus being gone thither, they banished him as
soon as they knew there was a Sentence in his Verses which seemed to favor
Cowardice; the Sense whereof was this: I will cast away my Buckler, to save my
Life: I may purchase another Buckler; but if I lose my Life, I can never have
another.

CHAP. XI.
The Esteem that Men have is not altogether Gratis, no more than their Love:
And in this Respect we may find Reason why Valor is so much prized.
ACcording to this disadvantageous Idaea, which we have with Reason conceived
of a Vice contrary to Valor, if a Prince appears defective in this, no Person
dare, or will, applaud him: For, as we love, to be beloved again; so we esteem
others, to make our selves esteemed. And it is an undeniable Proof of a good
Judgment, to know where to place our Choice rightly. This Reflection which I
have just now made, That the Esteem of Men is never Gratis, no more than their
Love, has occasioned me another manner of Reasoning, which did not at first
offer it self to my Mind, and has made me to discover one of the prime Sources
from whence arises the Reputation we have of Valor. Both Public and Private
Men regard those who are endued with this Virtue, as Props and Bucklers,
whereof they may sometimes stand in need. So that by our Suffrages which we
bestow on them, in Emulation one of another, we would oblige them to defend us
on all Occasions; and engage their Inclinations to protect us, as well as their
Power. It Is true, we esteem a valiant Man, though he be in the farthest Part of
the Indies; and our Estimation of him survives after he is dead. But when an
Inclination is born with us, it does not wait always to put it self into
Action, till all necessary Circumstances are offered; and although Nature has
appointed it to a certain End, yet it follows its Course nevertheless, though
it miss of its End. Besides, Example re-unites all Times, and all Places. By
the Help of Example, Valor has a Sympathetick Force; its Operations influence
those who are remote; and the Powder of an Hero's Ashes works at a distance: We
regard the Memoirs of their Lives, as a perpetual Spur and Incitement to
Virtue; we hope it will produce other Heroes in our Days, to whom we may flee,
as a Sanctuary in our Distresses. And we should never have been transported
with so much Zeal in the Praises of Constantine and Theodosius, if we did not
believe the Emulation of their Valor would be effectual to produce other
Constantine's, and other Theodosius's, who may be our Defenders.

CHAP. XII.
The Desire of Superiority in the Matters of Valor has been the Original
Cause of Wars.
IT has been imagined, that the first Cause of War was, a Desire that Nations
have had to transplant themselves into more fruitful Countries, and more
commodious Habitations, than their own; when, in Truth, Nature has more Care of
her Productions, than to leave them destitute of Things necessary in the Places
where they were brought forth: No Breezes refresh so sweetly, as one's native
Air; no Mansion is so pleasant, as that which is situated in a Man's own
Country. Those who are born under the Freezings of the North, or the Scorchings
of the Line, would not exchange their Dwellings for the most temperate Climate
in the World. The Original Cause of War seems then to proceed from the Ambition
Men generally have for Superiority in Matters of Valor. This Desire is, from
Time to Time, kept awake in the Minds of People; and has carried them on to
fight one against another, without any other Consideration. Hence it oftentimes
comes to pass, that the Conqueror does not care to keep his Conquests entire;
but is contented with a Tribute, an Homage, or a bare Acknowledgment that the
Vanquished make, that they have been surmounted purely by the Force of his
Arms. We do not believe that the Goths, Huns and Vandals, those Hurricanes of
Nations, which made an Inundation into the Roman Empire, were animated by this
Motive: It may be, they did not believe it themselves. But this is not the
first Time that a Passion has been eagerly pursued, without being understood by
him that followed it. It happens oftentimes, that these Springs play and move
in the Bottom of our Hearts, and our Hearts not perceive them: And it is very
probable, that Nature being, as it were, jealous of her self, endeavors to
show it in some of her Operations, wherein she has better succeeded, than in
others; and so pushed on those fierce Nations, to make them appear more
courageous, than those that were subdued by them. Moreover, when we speak of
the Alaric's, and the Attila's, there is a Thought darts in upon us, which
entirely takes us up: We are well pleased that History has not forgotten them,
as not deserving to be confounded with the Lumber of the Crowd: Whatever
Opinion we may have of them otherwise, yet we never think of them with such
mean and slighty Thoughts as we commonly have for Things base and vile. Those
very Persons which have an Horror for them, yet can detest them, without
despising them. They are compared to Torrents, and Lightnings: They look upon
them as Serpents, who raise themselves up toward the Sky; and not as mere
crawling Vermin. In short, If we observe in them something Barbarous, yet we
also find something, I know not what, of Great. These Men have celebrated
themselves by their Boldness; they have forced Fame to immortalize them; they
have ravished an Esteem from those very Nations they have ransacked; and by
invading of Empires, they have usurped to an Admiration. It was for this Reason
that the Romans, who treated all other Nations as Barbarians, (except the
Graecians;) and the Ancient Graecians, who looked upon all the World besides as
barbarians, (not excepting the Romans;) put a great Difference, both the one,
and the other, between those which they called Barbarians: They spoke with
Contempt of the Syrians and Egyptians, because they looked upon them as
Cowards; but they spoke of the Gauls with Esteem, because they accounted them
valiant. This fierce and undaunted Nation (whose Country France then was)
serves me for an Example, to justify the Notion which I have been pursuing.
One of the Ancients has made this Remark; That the Destruction of Rome had
been infallible, if the Gauls would have attacked her during the Time she made
War against the Carthaginians, or against the Italians: But in regard Rome had
the Weight of other Wars upon her Shoulders, and other Enemies to grapple with,
the Gauls stood by as Neuters, and Spectators of the Event, without taking
either Side. But afterward, when they saw her free, and dis-engaged, either
through Conquest, or Treaty, then they poured themselves into Italy, and made
that terrible Irruption, called, Tumultus Gallicus; which alarmed the whole
World to take up Arms, and to defend themselves against such formidable
Enemies. Was not this a visible Affectation of Valor? They would overcome; yet
not so, but that their Victory should be wholly attributed to their Courage.
And they had assuredly been victorious, had they but equalized the Romans in
Discipline, as they surpassed them in Valor.

CHAP. XIII.
History recounts the Actions of Valor more exactly than other Things.
HIstory takes more Care to circumstantiate the Actions of Valor, than those
of other Virtues. When she falls upon a Siege, or a set Battle, she makes a
Stand, and would have us do so too, and look every Way about us. She frequently
spends more Time in describing one Day's Battle, than in the Journals of a Ten
Years Peace. When she meets with any memorable Event, she makes a punctual
Description of the Place where it happened; represents to us the regular
Motions of the Troops, reports the Harangues of the Generals, marks out the
exact Time when the Signal was given; she observes the several Companies, and
their Movements, both in the Onset, and in the Defense; she numbers the Slain,
and gives us an Account of the Prisoners. In short, she waits, Step by Step, on
the Conquerors, and the Conquered; and, as if there were nothing else in the
World but those Armies which were engaged, she forgets all the rest of Mankind,
only to describe this Battle. Now, she does not take this Pains out of
Ostentation, but rather out of Necessity. And we shall find she has Reason for
this Exactness, if we call to mind, that Set Battles have caused the
Revolutions of Empires, and have put Changes upon the Face of the World. In
effect, At such a Time the Soldiers carry in their Hands the Destiny of
Nations: And it often comes to pass, that on the Success of one good or ill Day
has depended the Prosperity or Misery of many succeeding Ages. And as History
is more exact in these Descriptions, so we are apt most especially to apply our
selves to them: We consider with Attention the immortal Impressions which they
leave upon our Minds. Painting takes us up more entirely in Picture and
Landskips of this nature, than in others: It cannot represent to us a more
agreeable Object, than an Hero in a Battle. And we take extreme Pleasure,
either to behold Achilles giving Chase to the Trojans, or a Scipio fighting
under the Walls of Carthage: But we think it does not concern us, neither do we
with any Pleasure stay to consider, whether Achilles (as Story says) was as
beautiful as he was valiant; or whether Heaven had blessed Scipio with a
Majestic Body, worthy so great a Soul. We love to see Charles the Eighth in
his Heroic Posture, though his Stature and his Presence were little taking or
advantageous. We should love to see Agesilaus presented to the Life, (if
possible) and in his natural Shapes; but that he had expressly forbidden while
he lived, that any should draw his Portraicture, or erect his Statue.

CHAP. XIV.
Although Justice be the Principal of Virtues, yet Men honor Valor more than
Justice: And the Reason of this their Conduct.
IT is the Opinion of the most sage Philosopher, in his Ethics, that there are
more Praises attributed to just and valiant Men, than to Persons eminent for
other Virtues. He might have added, (as, in effect, he has observed in his
Problems) that the Valiant are more highly applauded, than the Just. In
pursuing this, I shall not follow the Example of those Orators, who, in their
Declamations, usually amplify the Theme they have espoused; and never fail to
extol their present Subject, above all others. We must not be partial, as not
for the Men, so neither for the Virtues. It must be confessed, Justice is the
Principal of all: And the Answer of a certain Prince, both valiant and just,
was solid and fine: When one demanded of him, whether Valor or Justice was the
more reputable; he made this Reply, If all the World would follow Justice,
Valor would be useless. Yet nevertheless, we do here in the bestowing our
Acclamations, as Princes sometimes do in the Dispensation of their Kindness:
The Measure of their Favors is not regulated according to the Proportion of
the Merit of the Person only; they have other Regards; as, Services rendered, or
to be rendered; the Recommendation of great and necessary Ministers of State;
the Effect that their Largesses may have as to the Public; and a Thousand such
like Considerations. Farther; Although Men generally esteem Justice more than
Valor, yet they honor Valor more than Justice; they have always added a
greater Splendour to the Reputation of this Virtue, than to that of others; and
they have taken an extreme Care in all Ages, as to Men that live and die in the
Wars, to render their Lives illustrious, and their Deaths honorable. And it is
not without good Reason that they do so; for the Profession of War is the most
penible in its Performances, and the most hazardous in its Designs. Perils are
not amiable and lovely in themselves; they must be recommended and imbellished
with Glory. And we may well say, Justice it self has advised Men to maintain
this Conduct; since it is but just, that if Valor hazard all for the Defense
and Preservation of the People, that the People, on their side, should refuse
nothing that may contribute to the Renown of Valor. Now, all these Reasons are
more eminently apparent, in reference to Princes: We ordain Triumphs for them,
not only for having established good Laws, but for having made great Conquests.
And not only the Esteem, but the thankful Acknowledgments that People conceive
for them, is greater when they return from a Campaign full of Fatigues and
Dangers, than when they see them mount the Throne of Justice: Because War is no
less hazardous than it is painful; and in the Exercises of Valor, the King
exposes his own Life; whereas in the Administration of Justice, he bestows
nothing but his Time and Labor.

CHAP. XV.
Valor is necessary to a Prince, for his own Conservation.
THough there were nothing but the Consideration of Honor to incite Princes to
Valor, one would think this were an effectual Motive to Royal Souls. But this
is not the only Thing: Interest and Self-preservation obliges them to be
valiant. Though Policy and Morality are nearly founded upon the same
Principles, and are guided almost by the same Rules, yet it is less rare to
find a just and generous Morality amongst private Persons, than a just and
generous Policy among States. Those who are managed by just and generous
Politics, are so much the more commendable; but yet, the Maxim I have
propounded does not cease to be true. For, if we consider the World now as it
is, and as it always has been, we shall find, that Monarchies and Republics
are in a continual Defiance; they are always in a State of War. It is not so
much great Rivers, or a vast Range of Mountains, that bounds their Dominions,
as a mutual and reciprocal Fear they have one of another. From hence it is that
they are pre-cautioned to fortify themselves, to have Garrisons Manned, and
Armies in Pay, and to retain the Idaea of War in the midst of a profound Peace.
Valor is necessary, where there is a continual Suspicion of Injustice, and
Jealousy of injuries, to put one in a Capacity to repress Violence, and to
oppose Force with Force. When a valiant Prince is set upon, he often defends
himself with Success, always, with Honor. Besides; It is certain, they think
more than once, before they undertake any Thing against him: So that he is
seldom reduced to the Necessity of defending himself. And, in Truth, he has
more of those that are secretly jealous of him, than of declared Enemies. It
frequently happens, that a single Man has brought Safety to a Nation, and
Victory to an Army. This great Confidence proceeds from the Reputation of the
General; whether it be in Politic Government, or Military Discipline. There is
an ancient Saying, which is very common; That an Army of Hearts, conducted by a
Lion, shall be more formidable, than an Army of Lions, led on by an Heart. After
Pyrrhus came into Italy, and had beaten the Romans, commanded by the Consul
Albinus, it was ordained at Rome, that no Man should say that the Romans had
been vanquished by the Epirotes; but that Albinus had been worsted by Pyrrhus.
We must needs highly praise the Conduct of Eumenes; who being to fight a Battle
against Craterus and Neoptolemus, the former whereof had a great Reputation,
and the other none; when he understood that Craterus was ready to fall on him,
he made his Troops believe that it was Neoptolemus; so that they engaged
briskly in the Battle, and never knew they had to do with Craterus, till they
had routed his Army, and slain their General. When Alexander was gone over into
Asia, there was great Reason of Fear for Macedonia, almost all their Forces
having followed the Fortune of that Prince: Yet neither the Thracians,
Illyrians, nor Graecians durst attack them; or if they did, it was with vain
Attempts; as the Lacedaemonians did with their King Agis: And it was often
said, that the Advantages which the Macedonians gained over them was rather the
Effect of Alexander's Renown, than Antipater's Conduct and Valor. When Henry
the Fourth had conquered his own Kingdom, Spain thought her self happy to make
a Peace with him: He enjoys his own Repose, and caused France to enjoy hers: He
establishes himself without Trouble in that Kingdom, which in the preceding
Age had been the Scene of so many outrageous Broils and Rebellions. No Person
was so hardy as to set upon him, but rather sought his Alliance. And we know,
that at the fatal Time of his Death, when he had made vast Preparations for
War, how he alarmed all other States, and put Europe to a Stand. On the other
Side, when a Prince is defective in Courage, he is despised by all the World;
and sometimes he is even abandoned by his own Subjects. The strange Misfortune
which happened to Severus the Emperor, proceeded from the mean Opinion the
Soldiers had of his Valor. Mark Anthony, at the Beginning of the Wars, was
more beloved by the Soldiers, than any General of his Time: Of which he had
good Experience. After he had lost a Battle, which forced him to quit Italy, he
re-established his Fortune amongst the Gauls; and by his Presence, drew over to
him the Roman Legions, who, instead of fighting him, (as they had Orders)
submitted themselves to his Conduct. This very General saw all these Troops
desert him, and go over to Augustus, after he had made a shameful and
effeminate Retreat from the Battle of Actium. We will relate one Thing, which,
though it seems not very important, as being but the Action of a private
Person; yet it serves to confirm the Truth of this Notion that I am upon.
Augustus, for the accomplishing of what he had begun, quits Rome a Year after
this fatal Battle; and being gone into Egypt, he besieges the Enemy in
Alexandria: a Roman Soldier under Anthony, so highly signalized himself in a
Sally, that Mark Anthony caused him to sup with him at his own Table, and
Cleopatra presented him with an Headpiece and Breast Plate of Gold: Yet
notwithstanding, though this Soldier was so magnificently recompensed, the
Night following he deserts Anthony, and goes over to Augustus's Camp. I allege
not this Example, in any wise to excuse such base Ingratitude; but to let you
see the Danger a Man exposes himself to of being abandoned, when he has given
Cause but to question his Want of Resolution. But if Valor be necessary to a
Prince to keep what he has gotten, it is yet much more necessary to put him in
possession of what belongs to him. He must not think, or expect, in an ordinary
Way, that the State will render up their Forts, at least, unless they are
forced to it, or are in fear of being so; they will not part with them, as long
as they have a Prospect of Power to keep them. It is to no purpose to send
Ambassadors to allege Reasons; they will counter-plead them with Reasons, or
contrary Pretenses: And when the Demand he makes is very pressing, he will at
last receive an Answer like to that of the Lacedaemonian Captain; the King of
Persia wrote to him, Send me your Arms: He returns him this blunt Answer, viz.
Come, and fetch them.

CHAP. XVI.
The same Reflections pursued.
IF it be a Truth to say, (generally speaking) that Things are preserved by the
same Means by which they have been acquired, we cannot doubt then, but that
Courage is highly instrumental for the Preserving, seeing it is necessary to
the Raising, it self; and that the greatest Fortunes in all Ages have been
wrought out by Valor. Amongst the Roman Emperors, some from the lowest Rank,
have arrived to the Purple: Many others were private Men, before they were
Princes. The Empire was a long time exposed, either as the Reward of Courage,
or as a Prey to Ambition; which, without Courage, is altogether vain and
impotent. In Truth, the first Six Caesar's succeeded each other by the Rights of
Blood or Adoption. Vespasian, and some others, had their Children for their
Successors: But how came Vespasian himself to the Throne? How came Galba,
Trajan and Severus to the Sovereignty? Severus, above all others, is the
greatest Instance of the Effects which are produced by Courage: He had to
contest with puissant Rivals; and of the Four Pretenders to the Empire, he was
looked upon to be the weakest; yet by his Valor he surmounted his Competitors;
he flew to and fro, from one End of the Empire to another, with an Impetuosity
always victorious: Whether he were in the Eastern Parts, or in our Countries
Westward, he achieved such great Things, that it was the Opinion of a
judicious Historian, Herodian.
that his Actions were not inferior to those of Caesar.

But, to come nearer to our own Times: Have we not seen an obscure Person, a
Man sprung from nothing, or (as we sometimes phrase it) a Son of the Earth, who
routed the Turks, and brought away their Sultan Prisoner: He rendered himself
Master of all Persia, and of all the Indies; and so far advanced his Victories,
that some pretend Tamerlain no less a Conqueror than Alexander. On the one
side, if he did not possess himself of Greece, and the Provinces bordering the
Hellespont, yet, on the other side, he passed the River Ganges, and extends his
Conquest as far as the Sunrising. His Memory is at this Day had in great
Veneration amongst the Nations which he subdued; and, notwithstanding the
Meanness of his Birth, many of the Asiatick Princes count it an Honor to be
descended from him.

CHAP. XVII.
The Commonwealth of the Lacedaemonians maintained it self a long Time by the
Laws of Lycurgus, which chiefly related to War.
THE Lacedaemonian Commonwealth subsisted a long Time, (that is to say) more
than Five Hundred Years, in great Splendor: She became more formidable than
either Athens, or Thebes; and was considered as the Terror or Support of
Greece, according as her Neighbors were her Enemies, or Allies. During so long
a Time, she never wanted Enemies in Greece, or Asia; and the Wars she sustained
were extremely dangerous. Besides, she had but a small Extent of Ground, and
her Capital City was without Walls; but she maintained her self by her Valor.
The Laws of Lycurgus, which chiefly related to the Affairs of War, had rendered
her invincible; so that she was never observed to fall from this her Puissance,
till Riches, which were the Spoils of their Conquests, corrupted them through
Avarice, and softened them through Pleasures. the Republic of Carthage ended
sooner than that of Rome, for it was destroyed by it; but then, she began to be
a Commonwealth sooner; so that her Continuance was no less: And in her we shall
find an Example, like to that we have been relating. The Laws, indeed, of the
Carthaginians were near akin to those of the Lacedaemonians: And there were
three Sorts of People, as Aristotle remarks in his Politics, that were guided
almost by the same Form of Government; the Carthaginians, the Lacedaemonians,
and the Candiots. These last were also very valiant, and by that Means they
long flourished.

CHAP. XVIII.
The long Duration of Monarchy comes from Valor.
BUT the Duration of these States comes not near Monarchy. Next to the Succors
of Divine Providence, which is the principal cause of its Conservation, we may
not referr it to Humane Prudence, since it must be granted, that this Virtue is
not always found in any one particular Nation: It must be attributed to Valor.
Perhaps, in the longest Succession of Kings, there is but few of them that
History reproacheth for Want of Courage; and yet the Historians profess an
Impartiality, both to the Good, and Bad. If we trace the Lines of remotest
Monarchies as far as we do ours, or those most near, we shall not find one
Kingdom, where Courage has been wanting. And though some Kings have not been
always Victorious, but they have been always Valiant; and if Fortune had been
but as constant to them as Nature, they would have left nothing for their
Successors to do now, but might have made themselves Masters of the Universe.
The Misfortunes of King John obliged Charles, his Son, not to hazard a second
Disgrace; but that Prince, who, in this, then showed his Prudence, had before
given Proof of his Courage. Lewis the Eleventh, who, toward the Latter End of
his Days, had abandoned his Soul to the melancholy Terrors and Apprehensions
of Death, never gave Testimony of such terrifying Fears in all his Wars: And
one might have seen him give Personal Proofs of his Valor at the Battle of
Montlheri. Henry the Third had won three Victories before he was King; which
gives us to observe, that it was his Slothfulness, and not his Cowardice, which
was the Cause of his unhappy Reign. He feared not the Danger of War, but he
dreaded the Labor of it. He had been well satisfied to have fought every Year
a Battle, provided, that after the Fight was over, he might have been permitted
to spend the rest of the Year in Idleness. These are they whom Calumny may take
occasion to asperse; and yet they are free from this Fault of Cowardice. The
rest claim our Elogies, rather than need our Apologies. Prosperity sometimes
failed them in the Event, and Prudence was sometimes wanting in the Enterprise;
but their Courage never failed, neither in the Enterprise, nor in the Event.
There were no Adventures happened to them, wherein their Valor was not showed
forth. Kings are not made Prisoners of War so long as they remain in their
Palaces: But if any of them, in commanding their Armies, do fall into the Hands
of their Enemies, who manage the War by their Lieutenants, it is plain, that,
at the same Time they are vanquished, they have appeared more courageous than
their Conquerours. Such have been the Princes from whom some are descended, who
have no reason to blush for their Ancestors, nor themselves, in Reading their
History: They are found in their proper Place, when seated on their Throne: And
that they were altogether worthy of proceeding; their Successors, who have
since had better Fortune: Whose Destinies may raise in us a Compassion for
them, but will never cause us to be ashamed of them.

CHAP. XIX.
The Empire of the Ancient Persians was soon expired; as also that of the
Graecians. And the Reasons thereof.
AND as some Kings have been always Valiant, so have their Subjects never
basely degenerated from the Principle of Courage. So that we need not wonder,
that Monarchy has preserved it self, during the Course of so many Ages; and
that she promises her self a Duration equal to that of the Universe. On the
contrary, the Empire of the Ancient Persians did not long subsist, because
Cyrus had those for his Successors, which were not worthy of him: They had more
of Vanity, than Valor: They moved, indeed, with innumerable Armies, they
poured forth Soldiers by the Millions; and, with a ridiculous Arrogance,
vaunted, that they would shovel Mountains into the Sea, and lay Fetters upon
the Ocean; and yet, after all these dreadful Cracks, they were beaten, sunk and
chased by the little Republics of Greece. However, we may say that Darius, in
whom this Empire expired, was not defective in Courage; but he had not so much
as his Enemy; seeing that, though he was far stronger than he, yet,
nevertheless, he was surmounted by him. When his famous Conqueror was dead,
without Children, the Principal of his Captains became Kings: One had Macedonia
for his Part; another, Syria; a Third, Egypt: But all these blazing
Sovereignties, not falling into Hands strong enough to sustain them, were soon
extinguished. Perseus, the last King of the Macedonians, was but the Seventh in
Succession from Antigonus. The Seleucides, which had Syria, continued no long
Time. And the Ptolemey's, whose Kingdom was the last which was reduced to a
Province, held not Egypt above two Ages. Their Misfortunes came from a Defect
of Valor. Perseus, of whom we have been speaking, instead of showing the
Courage of a King after his Defeat, carried himself with so much Baseness, that
the General of the Roman Army was ashamed of him when he came from the Battle;
apprehending that it would not be any Glory for him to conquer such a Man. And
when he saw him prostrate himself unworthily at his Feet, Ah! says he, Do not
dishonor my Victory. And yet, this Carriage was less to be blamed (if
possible) than that of Antiochus, of the Race of the Seleucides; to whom the
Romans sent Popilius, to command him to depart out of a Country, whereinto he
had entered with his main Army. So soon as he saw the Ambassador a-far off,
going over his Camp, he humbly salutes him: The Ambassador, with a Fierceness
not to be endured, comes up to him, without returning him any Salute, and
delivers him a Letter from the Senate. Antiochus, after he had read it, told
him, He would deliberate upon whas was to be done. Popilius presently making a
Circle about this Prince, with a Wand that he then had in his Hand, said to
him; Deliberate if you will; but before you go out of this Circle, I expect
your Answer. Here You may behold a perfect Coward: A King, who, in the midst of
his Army, had received such unworthy Carriage from an Envoy; instead of being
inspired with a just Indignation, consulted only his own Fears; and answered,
He would do what the Romans should desire of him. As for Ptolemy, can any one
be guilty of a more sordid and treacherous Action than his, when he sacrificed
the greatest Unfortunate to his infamous Politics? And the better to make his
Court to Caesar, makes him a Present of the Head of Pompey. All these Princes,
so little worthy of their Sovereignty, did but possess part of the Conquests of
Alexander. What became of Persia, after the Death of this great Monarch? There
were but two Divisions made of those great Conquests; one by Perdiccas, and the
other by Antipater. It was in the second Division, that Babylon fell to
Seleucus: He afterward gained the Army of Nicanor, Governor of Media; and
being also assured of Persia, it was the best Division, seeing that his Empire
extended it self from the Egean Sea, even to the Indies. But at last, all these
Successors of Alexander, and their Descendants, not knowing how to agree
amongst themselves, nor how to conquer one another, it happened that, during
their Dissensions, a valiant Parthian, named Arsaces, mounts the Throne, and
became the Founder of one of the most puissant and illustrious Families that
History presents to our Remembrance. This Noble Family was not eclipsed (as
others were) with the Rays of the Roman Splendour: She gave Kings to the Eastern
Nations; and investing her self, during so many Ages, with Sovereign Power, was
never the Subject, but always the Rival of that ambitious Republic. These were
the Princes called the Arsacides, from the Name of their illustrious Founder;
who created so much Trouble to the Romans; and abated their Pride, by the
mortal Disgraces he put upon them; as, the Death of Crassus, the Flight of Mark
Anthony, and the Slaughters or Defeats of many of their great Armies. I believe
there was never any but Ventidius, that triumphed over the Parthians: But the
Parthians have often triumphed over the Romans; though the Triumph was a
Ceremony altogether Roman, and was not used amongst the Greeks: And it was
their Fault they did not triumph in State, since they gained so many signal
Advantages over those haughty Enemies. And certainly, we may say, the Valor of
the Parthians gave Checkmate to the Ambition of the Romans. They hindered them
from rendering themselves Masters of the Universe, (as they thought to have
done:) And I doubt not, but their invincible Resistance was the Cause of that
standing Counsel which Augustus left amongst the Secrets of Government. He
recommends it to his Successors, never to extend their Dominion beyond
Euphrates; and to look upon that River, as the fatal Boundary of the Empire.

CHAP. XX.
A great Number of Examples in Morality amount to a Proof; and produces almost
the same Effect, as Experience does in Physic.
IN alleging all these Examples, I conceive, I have done what I ought; because
in Things of this Nature, the Number of Examples amounts to a Proof; and almost
holds the same Place in Morality, as Experiments do in Physic. If one should
demand of me, Does it never happen, that a Cowardly Nation gets a Conquest over
one more valiant? I would answer, It may happen so by Accident; as, if an Army
should perish by a Tempest at Sea, or by an Inundation upon Land. But these
Events are very rare: And besides, they are foreign to the Actions of Valor.

It was a Saying of one of the Ancients, That Virtue and Fortune, although they
are very different, yet sometimes produce the very same Effects. If by Fortune,
he means Providence, the Saying has nothing surprising in it: And we need not
wonder, that God, who can do all Things, should act Things like to those that
Men do, when he has a Will to do so. But if one will speak of Fortune,
considered only in respect to us, as being no other Thing than Humane Weakness
meeting with an happy Success, which it neither foresaw, nor merited, we must
restrain this Proposition, and content our selves to say, That Fortune does
that sometimes, and but very rarely, which Virtue does always, or, at least,
generally. It is storied, That a Painter throwing his Pencil in a Rage against
his Cloth, hit upon that Stroke which he had been long studying to represent.
This happened but once: But it happens an infinite Number of Times, that we
paint that which we have a Fancy to, if we will work gradually, and with
Patience. So that this one Instance is no Argument against so many others.
Which shows, we have no Reason to say, that to the Drawing of Pictures, it is
no more than to throw the Pencil against the Frame; but we ought to guide it by
the Rules of Art. Though it sometimes happens, that valiant Nations have been
vanquished by Cowards, (though the contrary is generally true) yet the Maxim
does not fail to be certain, That Princes are obliged to be valiant, for their
Preservation; and that they ought to regard this Virtue, as the Force of their
Empire, and the Support of their Dignity.

CHAP. XXI.
Other Arguments drawn from the Character of those who have Courage, and of
those who have none.
BUT, besides; it is not impossible to support a Truth so certain as this, upon
a Reasoning independent on Experience. Though a Man be ignorant of all the
Histories of the World, provided he does but know the Character of Persons
which have Courage, and the Character of those that have none, he will
conclude, that Things ought thus to come to pass as they have done; and he will
divine (as one may say) the Effects which Valor has produced in several
Nations. Indeed, he might thus argue; Either valiant People have been overcome
by those which have surpassed them in Prudence, or by those which were inferior
to them in Prudence, as well as in Courage. It is plain, that they have not
been vanquished by the last; and it is very probable, that neither have they
been conquered by the others; because the Character of Prudence without Courage
is not to quarrel against Valor, but to seek her own Repose and Security by
Submission; and to prefer an humble and quiet Obedience, before a restless
Liberty. Accordingly, he will find this Maxim justified by History; and see a
remarkable Example in the Graecians, after they had degenerated from the
Courage of their Ancestors; and that the Posterity of those who had conquered
Persia, made little or no Opposition against the Romans: They had always the
same Inclination to the Arts, wherein they are still excellent; but they have
none of that Valor left, which had been their Buckler, and their Rampart: And,
instead of studying how to break or shake off the Yoke, they thought of nothing
but to accustom themselves tamely to it: They employed their Wits in nothing so
much, as to flatter their Masters, whose Contempt they had drawn upon
themselves: They submitted more than was desired of them; and from the
compleatest Liberty, which they once enjoyed, slipped into the most abject
Slavery. They relate to us an Adventure upon this Subject, which is fine
enough: Mark Anthony sometimes took pleasure, in his Marches, to appear under
the Name, and in the Equipage of that Fabulous God, whom the Pagans made to
preside over Wine and Good Cheer; and who besides, (say they) was a great
Conqueror, and that he pierced even as far as the Indies. From whence it came,
that Alexander also affected to imitate him. This Triumvir, who had divided the
Empire with Augustus, (for they had excluded Lepidus) having passed into Greece
with an Army, and appearing in this Dress that we told you, the Athenians sent
their Deputies to him, signifying, that they would acknowledge him to be the
God, whose Name he had taken upon him, and whose Triumph he represented; and
that they came to offer him Minerva, the Patroness of their City, in Marriage.
Mark Anthony answered them, That he accepted her for his Bride: But, at the
same Time, he added, That since they would marry their Goddess to him, he
doubted not but that they would be well pleased to pay him down Three Millions
for her Dowry. Certainly, they were astonished at the Success of their
Flattery: But how great soever their Surprise was, the Money must be found; and
the Athenians were forced to exhaust their Exchequer, to pay down Minerva's
Marriage-Portion. There are a Thousand Examples of this Nature; which were the
Effects of that sordid Baseness which the Graecians fell into, by losing the
Courage of their Ancestors; and which, informing us of the Character of Men
when they have Wit without Courage, confirm the Argument we have been pursuing,
to demonstrate the infallible Success of Valor. I did not think it needful to
remark in this Discourse, that we are to suppose some Proportion between the
Forces: In Moral Discourses, these sort of Suppositions must always be granted;
and though they are not expressly contained, yet they are to be supplied by an
equitable Construction. In effect, We know very well that the Lacedaemonians
were cut in pieces by the Persians, at the Streights of Thermopylae: But what
could Three Hundred Soldiers do against an Army of more than Ten Hundred
Thousand? They did all that Men could do; they sold their Lives at a dear Rate,
slew a vast Number of Persians, and put their Main Body into Disorder; insomuch
that the King of Sparta pushed on to the very Tent of Xerxes: But they foresaw
well enough, that they should be over-powred by a Multitude: And they might
have said then, what some have made them say since, Diutius possunt perire,
quam nos vincere. We suppose then, that there should be amongst the Forces,
either if not an entire Equality, yet, at least, some Proportion. If we rest
upon this Foundation, the Reflections that we have made, will be acknowledged
to be true; and we shall find, that it is humanely impossible that courageous
People should be surmounted by others; and that Valor should not render her
self Mistress of the World.

CHAP. XXII.
A Prince may be considered in reference to Five Sorts of Persons: And to
maintain himself in all these different Respects, he has need of Valor.
BUT we must dwell a little longer upon these Considerations; which ought to be
the more agreeable to a valiant Prince, seeing that we are naturally pleased to
apply Inclination to Duty; and to do that by the free and ingenuous Motions of
our Souls, out of Choice, which we are obliged to do out of Necessity. A King
may then be considered in reference to Five Sorts of Persons; of Soldiers, of
Subjects, of Allies, of Enemies, and of those which are purely Strangers,
without any of those other Respects. When he renders himself illustrious by
true Valor, he inspires into his Soldiers Courage, into his Subjects
Affection, into his Allies Confidence, into his Enemies Fear, and into all
others Esteem and Respect. The Roman Dictator never fought, but with the
Infantry; to let them understand, that Danger was equal to him, with his
Troops; and renouncing all Possibility of a Retreat, he did not divide his
Thoughts between Conquering and Fleeing, but between Victory or Death. A
Grecian Captain, leading his Soldiers through a very difficult Pass, Zenophon.
where they were to climb a steep Hill, which he had already gained, marching
at the Head of them, he exhorts them not to be dis-heartned at the
Difficulties, but to do their best Endeavors to follow him. He that was the
foremost of them, answered him: You speak freely, Sir; and to your own Sense:
You are on horseback, I am on foot; and besides, I carry a very heavy Buckler.
The Captain hearing this, a lights immediately from his Horse, gives the
Soldier his Hand, and carries his Buckler for him. This soon wrought a
wonderful Emulation amongst the rest; who, when they were got to the Top of the
Hill, reproached the Soldier for his Insolence, and conjured their Officer to
give him back his Buckler, and to mount his Horse. This Captain was not a
Prince: I leave You to consider how passionately the Soldiers had been
affected, if a Sovereign had done such an Action. When a Soldier sees that his
Prince exposes his Royal Person, this Sight cannot but strangely animate him,
and force from him such Reflections as these: Behold a Prince who has a Crown
to lose, and yet hazards his Life: Why should I then, who am but a Soldier of
Fortune, and who have no Estate but my Sword; why, I say, should I study to
save my inconsiderable self, after so great an Example? As for his other
Subjects, who are not engaged in Military Service, they have also sensible
Considerations, which extremely touch them: They consider they are at Ease and
Security in their own Houses, during the Time that their Prince, to maintain
them in their Tranquillity, undergoes a Thousand Fatigues, and is confronted by
a Thousand Dangers: They think with themselves, that he is not obliged, but
that he may stay at home in his Palace, and enjoy his Royal Repose; but yet he
will command his Armies himself, and will not be diverted from this Design,
neither for the Hazards he must run, nor for the Pains he must endure. It is
impossible but that such Considerations, which are inspired even by common
Sense, should be presented to their Minds, and enter into the Bottom of their
Souls, and fill them full with Love, Zeal and Gratitude for the Person of their
Sovereign. Who does not presently see the Effects which the Valor of a Prince
will produce in the Spirits of his Allies, by their confiding in him? And in
those of his Enemies, by their Fears? The Principle we have settled upon the
Difference between Policy and Morality obliges us to believe, that Alliances
between States are rather founded upon Interests, than any private Friendship:
They never seek for Alliances, but with those who are capable to serve, or to
hurt them. The Ancient Persians knew well how to make use of this Distinction:
When an Ambassador was sent to them, from the Lacedaemonians, they entertained
him with another manner of Reception, than the Envoys which came from the other
Republics of Greece. What shall we say of those wonderful Effects which the
Reputation of valiant Princes has produced, and whereof History has furnished
us with such a Multitude of Examples? It has happened a Thousand Times, that
their very Names only have caused Forts to be speedily surrendered, which were
able to have maintained a long Siege, and have put to flight those Armies which
had Forces sufficient to have overcome the Pursuers.

As to those who are neither Soldiers nor Subjects, neither Allies nor Enemies
to a valiant Prince, they entertain the Noise of his Renown, and the News of
his Exploits, with Admiration; they have no Thoughts to engage in any War
against him, but rather to seek the Aids of his Protection: They are afraid of
becoming his Enemies, and covet nothing more, than to be his Allies. Nay, they
even wish sometimes to be his Soldiers, or his Subjects, that they might
participate of his Glory. They offer up a Thousand Vows to Heaven, for such a
Prince of their own; and when they cannot obtain one like him, they are so far
transported, as to wish that he were their Master.

CHAP. XXIII.
If a Prince, when he is engaged in a War, be bound to do it in Person.
IT is little to the purpose to say, that the King may wage War by his
Lieutenants: For, besides that no Person can ever be so well assured of the
Fidelity that others have for him, as he is assured of the Fidelity that he has
for himself; the Prince is the Soul of the Army; his Presence is that Plastic
Power, which inspires Life, Activity and Vigor into them; so that nothing in
the World is able to compensate so great a Benefit. Farther, I know not whether
Sovereigns can be dispensed with from this important Function; and if they are
not obliged to command their Armies in Person, when they have not other weighty
Reasons to the contrary. This Question has never been stirred, but upon the
Score of Policy: It concerns us here to treat of it in the Moral Consideration;
either for that if there lies an Obligation of Conscience upon them, the
Difficulty is soon at an End, and there remains no more Place for Politic
Deliberations; or be it, that this Reflection is absolutely necessary for the
Prosecution of our Subject. Indeed, If we can imagine that a Prince is never
obliged to make War in Person, we may draw this Consequence then, That he is
never obliged to be valiant. Our Religion gives us Light in this, which the
Pagans had not; it clearly discovers those Truths to us, which were unknown to
them, or which they knew but by some glimmering Interviews, and of which they
never spoke, but with Hesitancy. Two Principles must be granted: First, That it
is God who has established Kings. The other is, That he has established them
to govern and defend the People. We must also grant a Third Principle, which
is, That in all Professions in the World, from the lowest to the highest, when
a Thing to be done is the End of the Profession, those who are called to those
Professions are obliged to do it themselves; otherwise, Men will shuffle off
their Duties one to another, and no one would mind his proper Business, or (to
use a more Christian Expression) follow his Vocation. Now, If it be certain
that God has not raised up Kings, but to govern and defend their People; and
if it is as certain, that they are obliged to govern and defend them by
themselves; then we must grant, that in all important Occasions wherein they
are to acquit themselves of this their Duty, they are obliged to do it in
Person. Let us add, to put an End to this Argument, That there cannot be
offered more important Occasions, than those of War. These Maxims are of so
great Truth, that if a Sovereign, by his Presence only, could put a Stop to a
Contagious Pestilence, which is sometimes compared to War; and by the
Communications of its poisonous Effluviums, has frequently made sweeping
Desolations in the World; he ought to expose himself thereunto, and thereby to
relieve the public Calamity of his Subjects; and he is obliged to it, even by
the Office of his Sovereignty. But Kings are not bred up Doctors; they cannot
administer Medicines against the Plague: There is need of Physicians to cure
their Bodies, and Spiritual Pastors to take care of the Salvation of their
Souls. Whereupon, we may say in some manner, That as in a Time of this
Epidemical Distemper, although the Bishops substitute Churchmen to hold their
Places, and to do their Functions; yet they are not left at liberty, but at
such a Time they ought to visit in Person: And Non-residency is unpardonable.
So Princes, though they may have able Captains in their Realms, yet they are
not therefore dispensed with from making their Wars in Person. But, to give a
greater Light to this Reflection, let us distinguish between three Sorts of
Things, in respect of the Actions of Kings: Those which he cannot do, but by
himself: Those Things which he cannot do, but by another: And those Things
which he may do, either by himself, or others. There is no Question of those
Things which he cannot do, but by himself, that he is plainly obliged: Neither
can there be any Dispute about such Things which he cannot do, but by another;
it is as plain, that therein he is dispensed with. So that the Difficulty rests
only on those Things which he may do, either by himself, or by another. If he
will not do them himself, I demand, Wherein consists the Merit of his Obedience
which he ought to render to God, and of answering the End of his Vocation? It
is not in those Things which he cannot do, but by himself; for he is
constrained to do them, and Necessity leaves him no Room for Choice. On the
other Side, I demand, what are the Things a King cannot do, but by himself? If
we search into the Particulars, it will be hard to find any: And we shall see,
that it is almost impossible to imagine any Thing in the Conduct of a State,
which the King (generally speaking) may not devolve upon others. If it were
then permitted him to make use of this Liberty in its utmost Extent, the
Consequence will be, that he need never to take notice of the Complaints of his
Subjects, or redress their Grievances; he need never administer Justice, or
pass any Acts of Grace himself; and, in a Word, he may then reign always, and
in all Things, by another. What would Kings say, if after they have nominated
one of their Subjects General of the Army, and this Man should only be General
Sit-still at home, and choose another to command the Troops in his stead? Now, a
Monarch is nominated and appointed a General by the Sovereign of the World, the
Lord of Hosts: He, in like manner, commits the same Offense against God, when
he will not himself command in Person in his Military Undertakings, but assigns
to other Hands all the Care and Conduct of the War. This Opinion may, perhaps,
be thought singular, but it appears to me to be rationally grounded, and I am
fully persuaded of the Truth of it. It is true, there may be some Exceptions;
as, If the Intestine Affairs of the State require the Presence of the Prince at
home; and that it were impossible for him to be absent, without hazarding the
Safety of his Kingdom. But the greatest of these Exceptions, is, that of
Offensive Wars; there the Prince is not obliged to command in Person, because
he does not then act in the Defense of his People: But since the Preservation
of his Subjects ought to be the Aim of his Actions, the same Reason which
obliges him to make War, obliges him to do it in Person. But setting aside
that Exception, and some few others, whereof a dis-interested Prudence ought to
be Judge, I believe, that the actual Command of the Army is not only the Glory,
but the Duty of Kings; and that they are thereunto obliged, by an indispensible
Consequence upon the Sovereign Dignity.

CHAP. XXIV.
Valor is necessary for a Prince, to render his Condition agreeable.
Valor is yet farther necessary for a Prince, to render his Condition
pleasant. We shall easily understand this Maxim, as a Consequence of those we
have already established, if we consider, it is very difficult for a Prince to
live happily, if he be not in a Condition to live honorably, and to authorize
his own Security. The Principles of Honor, which are impressed on the Souls of
Men, and above all, on those of Kings, are an inexhaustible Source of Joy to
those who comply with them, and a continual Torment to those who are not
conformable to them. A Sovereign is jealous of his Authority, and has Reason
so to be, since it is God who has bestowed it on him. But when he is not able
to support his Dignity himself, this Jealousy serves but to torment him the
more: He bemoans his Destiny, either in public, or private: He finds, Fortune
has betrayed him, in lifting him up; and he loves not that Theater, where he
is obliged to represent a Personage greater than himself: His Crown is too
heavy for him, and his Throne is all stuck with Thorns. Hence it is, that the
Hearts of Kings are crowded with Distrusts, Terrors, Irresolutions, and
Angers, which sometimes burst out into Cruelties; and their Griefs turn into
Fury. As they fear all Men, so they would that all Men should fear them; and
seeing they cannot render themselves venerable by their Virtue, they think to
appear terrible by their Vices. History oftentimes has much a-do to unravel
these sorts of Motives; those which are led by them, do not boast of them; they
palliate their Injustice and Violences, under other Pretenses; yet however,
their Artifices are not able to prevent their Discovery. We know by what
Motives the Nero's and the Domitians were acted, when they did rid themselves
of the greatest Personages of their Time. We know, I say, that under Cowardly
Princes, Impunity is not always the Effect of Innocence; and that oftentimes
great and extraordinary Merit passes with them for a Capital Crime. They are
sure to follow a Conduct like that of the Republics of Ephesus and Athens, who
practiced the Ostracism; and by a long Exile, disgraced the Glory of their most
famous Citizens, even at the same Time that their Fidelity and Love for their
Country had rendered them illustrious. What Pleasure or Repose can a Prince
enjoy, whose Soul is ruffled with such irregular Disorders; hating the loyalest
of his Subjects, and fearing the least formidable of his Enemies? It is then,
his Imagination grows big, and multiplies Dangers. The least ill News puts him
into a Consternation, and is as mortal Alarms to him. A small Force levied in a
Foreign Nation, appears to him as numerous an Invasion as the Armies of Xerxes
or Daxius. The impertinent Folly of some private Malcontents, which murmur
against the Government, seems to him no less than a total Revolt, contrived
long beforehand; and portends a general Insurrection throughout the whole
Kingdom. Every Thing makes him suspicious: He is top-full of Fears, within and
without: A Sense of his ill Conduct at home, and of his ill-managed
Transactions abroad, supply him with a continual Series of Uneasiness. He is
become a Scene of Misery: And we cannot say, whether he is disquieted more with
a Disgust of Things present, or with the Apprehension of what is to come.

CHAP. XXV.
Important Reflections upon the Idaea which the Ancients have conceived of
Valor, not only in respect to the Dangers of War, but of all other Things
which may create Fear or Grief.
WE shall better understand how this Virtue is necessary to the Repose of
Princes, if we take the Notion of it in the whole Extent, as the Ancients did:
They considered it, in general, as the Force of the Soul, and gave it really
the Name of Force: By which they understood, that this fortifies a Man with
Assurance, not only in respect of the Dangers of War, but of all other Things
which may be the Objects of Fear. When one of them tells us, that the Cymbrians
were hardy in their Combats, and fearful in their Sickness; and that the
Greeks, on the contrary, looked upon Death with Horror in a Field of Battle,
but waited for it with Resolution in their Beds; this Philosopher speaking
after this manner, lets us know, that the Courage of both these Nations was
imperfect. We cannot make a better Judgment of the Sentiments they had of
Valor, than by the Definitions they have given of it. What is Valor? It is
(says an Ancient) a voluntary and considerate Resolution to expose ones self
to Dangers, and to undergo Hardship. Fortitudo est considerata periculorum
susceptio, and laborum perpessio. Valor (says another) is the Pursuit we make
after a solid Advantage, through Dangers and Labors which we must surmount in
the Acquest of it. Fortitudo est contemptio laboris and periculi, cum ratione
utilitatis, and compensatione commodorum. One Sect of Philosophers also defined
this Virtue after this manner: Fortitudo est ratio negligendae mortis,
perpetiendique doloris. Valor is that which enables us to suffer Pain, and
despise Death. In fine, all others have spoke to the same Sense: And I can
assure You, without fear of abusing You in this Point, that there is not one of
them which has limited Valor to the Dangers of War only. We have two
Reflections here to make: The First is, That the Word which generally enters
into their Definitions, and which they join with that of Danger, does equally
signify Labor and Pain, because they follow the Ideom of the Greek Language;
which, although it be very copious, uses one and the same Word to express
Dolor and Labor. (...).
The Second Consideration, which we must not forget, is, to take notice that
the Idaea's which they formed of Valor, are deduced from the Doctrine of
Aristotle; who, in truth, had received them from the Principles of the Academy;
who having distinguished diverse Faculties in the Soul of Man, he there placed
(or gave Leave to his excellent Commentators to do it) the four Virtues:
Prudence in the Understanding, Justice in the Will, Valor in that which they
call Irascible, and Temperance in the other. Now, it is certain, that Irascible
does not only respect Military Dangers, but it has for its Object all the
Rancounters of this Life, either terrible, painful, or difficult. According to
these Principles, the Ancients attribute the very same Epithets of Commendation
to the two Scipio's, to Fabius Maximus, and Aemylius, for having supported
great Afflictions, as well as for winning of Battles. And they give us to
understand, that if Marius did exercise his Courage in the midst of Arms, he
also exercised the same Courage, when he endured a violent Operation of
Surgery, without complaining; and in the midst of exquisite Pains, remained
firm and unmovable. I see we have much a-do to bend our Language to this
Sense: We do not say, a Man suffers Affliction valiantly; but we say, he
suffers it with Constancy. It matters not for Words, provided we agree upon
Things. In this Notion of Valor, comprizing an Undauntedness in Battles, and a
steady Resolution in all the other Accidents of Life, Princes may be informed
of a Character which is very becoming of, and expedient for them. If they do
not keep up this Force and Assurance of Mind, they will be injurious to
themselves on many Occasions: They will not be able to maintain the Glory of
their Exploits in their other Actions; but, in many Things, will discover, that
they are tainted with the low Opinions and Errors of vulgar Souls: It will
appear, that they were raised, not by their Virtue, but their Fortune: In
short, There will many Occasions happen, where their Weakness will betray their
Dignity. It is Admiration, and not Pity, that the Grandeur of Kings calls for.
Nothing is more undecent, than to shed Tears upon a Throne; nothing is so
contemptible, as a puling Sovereign. Monarchs ought not to appear intimidated,
Crest-fallen, or surprised: They should settle their Minds in such a fixed
State, as not to stand in need of Consolation; or if they do need it, they
ought to seek for it (as one once said) in the Bosom of the Commonwealth. When
a Prince is of this Disposition, he renders his Life truly easy; and finds not
only Repose, but Joy, in the midst of Labors: It sweetens the Bitterness of
Adventures, though never so vexatious; it turns all the Thorns of the Crown
into fragrant Flowers. I thought it my Duty, not to forget these Reflections in
this Discourse, although it was designed particularly to consider Valor in
reference to the Profession of War; wherein, if I conformed my self to our
Modern Way, yet I am not very far wandered from the Maxims of the Ancient
Moralists. In short, Those who have handled Valor in the largest Extent, yet
will be sure to inform us, that Military Courage is the principal Part of it;
and that it shines brightest, above all, in the Occasions of War, where the
most apparent Dangers reign rampant, and which are big with Things most capable
to inspire Fear. So that Valor, above all, relates to War, as War does to
Fighting, which is the End of the Functions of that Discipline. The Roman
Soldiers were never idle, they underwent more Pains than the most laborious
Mechanics; and by this Means they arrived at those great Performances, the
Memory and Footsteps whereof astonish us at this Day: But they labored as
Soldiers, not as Mechanics; and never quitted the Military Character. Hence it
was, that Corbulon was so severe, that he punished a Soldier with Death,
because he was carrying Earth without having his Sword on. Hence it was, that
the Obligation of Fighting never ceased, until the Military Oath was altogether
broken; whereas before they might have been discharged from other Obligations.
To understand this well, we must remember, that the Romans had two sorts of
Conge's or Dismission from the Wars: One which they called Missio; and that
permitted the Soldiers totally to quit the Wars, and to return to their own
Homes: The other they called Exauctoratio; which dispensed with the Soldiers
from their Military Employments, but still they were obliged not to be far
distant from the Army: Those who had this sort of License lived out of the
Precincts of the Camp; they lived after what manner they pleased, so long as
they had nothing actually to do against the Enemy; but when Occasion presented
it self, they joined with the other Roman Soldiers who lodged in the Camp, and
all engaged together in the Battle.

CHAP. XXVI.
The Pleasures of Princes are Military Pleasures.
IT IS from this Relation that Valor has to War, and War to Battle, that the
noblest Games have, in all Times, been the Representations of that Profession,
and of this Virtue. There was never any Thing so celebrated in the World, as
the Olympian Games; there used to be a general Concourse of all Greece; and he
who won the Prize, not only made his Entrance, as it were, in Triumph into the
Town where he was born, but he had this farther Honor done him, that the Year
of his Victory bore his Name; for the Annals were directed after this manner,
The Year wherein such an one was Victor in the Olympic Games, it happened that
-- We cannot doubt but that the Representations of Valor and War were very
lively in the Solemnities of these Games. 'Twas for this Reason that, after
they were ended, there appeared a War-horse in the midst of the Course. One of
the Ancients has observed, that for the same Reason the Exercise of Wrestling
always went before that of Running; because Wrestling represents the hot
Engagement of the Fight, as the Race represents the Pursuit. The Romans, that
their Spectacula might the better resemble War, would have them all to be
dangerous and bloody; not only in the private Combats of the Gladiators, but
also in those they called the Naumachies, which were the Representations of
Sea Fights. The most famous of all was that which was given them by the Emperor
Claudius: They filled an immense Space with Water, which represented the Sea,
and caused an Hundred Ships to be floating thereon, which were Manned with
Twenty Thousand Malefactors, or (as one may say) Slaves of Torment. This
Multitude, thus condemned to kill one another, might have been capable of
acting strange Things, had they once turned their Despair against the
Spectators: But to prevent such an Attempt, this artificial Lake was hemmed in
with another Army; and over those Troops, ranged in Battalia, sat the Emperor
and his Courtiers, in the highest Places of the Amphitheatre. Then the Signal
was given, and these Hundred Ships, being divided into two Fleets, came to
grapple, and entered into a stiff and bloody Engagement. We must confess, these
Sights were very inhumane; the Lives of Men are too precious to be sported
away, and to be sacrificed to a Diversion. Princes have wisely renounced these
sorts of Pleasures; and those which they have retained are purely military.
Hunting is a kind of War: The Carousels, Tilts and Tournaments are the Images
of Combats: The Shows in the Theater have something of this, and commonly act
some Hero, who has been famous for Valor. Besides, in the most profound
Peace, the Prince appears in the Equipage of War; he is surrounded with his
Troops of Guards; those with whom he frequently converseth, are the Officers
which command them; they exercise their Soldiers before his Face; they every
Day demand the Word of him; they daily render him an Account of their
Functions, and entertain him with nothing so much, as what relates to their own
Profession. When he makes a Journey, it is rather the March of an Army, than a
Progress: The Order they then observe is not much different from the Military
Discipline. The Entries which he makes into the Towns, are like to the
Intradoes of a Conqueror; they salute him by the Mouths of their Canons, and
whole Vollies complement his Welcome; they erect Triumphal Arches for him, and
strew his Way with Palms and Laurels. Thus the Fortune of a Prince continually
advertiseth him, that he ought to be valiant; insomuch, that if he fail in this
Virtue, he can take no Pleasure in any Thing about him; and so, not taking any
Pleasure, he must needs be miserable.

CHAP. XXVII.
Every Virtue has a Pleasure which is proper to it: But this of Valor is the
most sensible of all.
BUT if he delight in the Images and Representations of Valor, without loving
Valor it self, he will be always deprived of the Joy that attends this Virtue.
Every Virtue is accompanied with a Pleasure which is peculiar and proper to it:
and if she meets sometimes with Thorns, yet she never fails to crown her self
with Flowers; and her Actions are all agreeable of themselves, or, to use the
Expressions of some of the Ancients on this Argument, voluptuous. All the
Philosophers have owned this for a Truth; not excepting those, whose Maxims
were the most cried down. One cannot do a greater Injury to Virtue, than in
establishing Pleasure to be the End of Man: Yet notwithstanding, those Persons
who speak after this manner, will give us leave to search for Pleasure in the
Exercises of Valor. According to this Principle, generally acknowledged, true
Liberality in dispensing her Gifts, never sustains Loss; she pays her self by
her own Hands, in procuring the Pleasure which she relisheth; and though she
may meet with ungrateful Wretches, (which are but too common in the World) yet
she sees they do themselves the Wrong, and is sorry for them, without
complaining of them. One may say the same of all the other Virtues: Valor is
that which has the most sensible Pleasure; and which triumphs not only with
the greatest Majesty, but with the most affable Gentleness. Nature, or rather
Providence, will have it so, to sweeten the Labors of a Virtue the most
painful; and to keep us from being discouraged at the Sight of the Fatigues
which accompany it, and the Dangers which surround it. But Christian Morality
furnishes us with a famous Instance on this Subject: She includes Martyrdom
under the Notion of Valor; and considers them who have suffered, as Champions,
or as Heroes, victorious over Pain and Death. The First Fruits of the Joys of
Heaven never appear so visible, as in the Martyrs; who went to the Dens, Stakes
and Gibbets with a smiling Countenance, and who felt Transports of Joy in the
midst of their Torments. Although they frequently received extraordinary
Assistances from Almighty God, yet let us not doubt, but that the inward
Satisfaction of Soul which attends virtuous Actions, did contribute much to
this their Behavior. But now, to speak here only of Military Valor, I believe
I ought not to forget what one once said of Valor, That it was the only Virtue
which had a kind of Fury with it. And it is remarkable, that those Things to
which the Philosophers have attributed Fury, are accompanied with greater
Pleasure than all others. Poesy is of this Number: We must grant, that this is
that Part of Learning, which is sweet and charming. We may say, in a manner,
that Valor is amongst the Virtues, as Poesy is amongst the Sciences: She has
her Inspirations, and her Enthusiasms too: She elevates and soars above Nature
it self. And, indeed, does there not seem something more than humane in the
famous Camillus, who was called the Second Founder of Rome; who, when his Thigh
was pierced with an Arrow, he wrested it out of the Wound himself; and after
this, as if he had been cured on the sudden, or that he never minded it, he
falls upon the Enemy, and continues the Battle? Brasidas the Lacedaemonian did
something more; he not only drew out the Dart which had entered his Body, but
revenged his Wound by the Death of his Enemy that gave it. It is reported, that
two Armies being engaged, there happened an Earthquake where the Field of
Battle was, and the Soldiers perceived it not; as if they all had been under an
Alienation of Mind, and were (as we may say) possessed with the Demon of War;
it was not possible for them to regard any other Thing than the Action they
were engaged in, and the Means of carrying the Victory.

There are yet other Reasons of this extraordinary Pleasure, which Valor
bestows upon those who follow her Impulses, and practice the Exercises thereof.
First, The Grandeur of the Effects which she produces; as, the Taking of Towns
and Provinces, the Subversion or Elevation of Empires; and, in a Word, the
Catastrophe's which happen upon the Theater of War, where we not only see Men
who represent Kings, but where Kings themselves are Actors. Besides, Virtues
are agreeable and pleasant, in that they make us victorious, either over
others, or over our selves: Over our selves, in surmounting our Passions; over
others, in abhorring the bad Examples, or in advancing us above the Good. All
the Victories of the other Virtues are obscure, in Comparison to those of
Valor; which shows that she must be Mistress of all other Passions less
generous, since that, maugre their Counsel, she exposes her self to the most
terrible of all Things. She not only keeps at a Distance from the Examples of
Cowards, but her very Presence puts them to flight; and forcing the Resistance
of others, she reaps those Advantages, whereof our Eyes are Witnesses. In
short, she opens a large Field to all the other Virtues, and furnishes us with
a copious Argument to exercise Justice, Liberality, Clemency and Moderation on:
Insomuch that the Pleasures which accompany them being joined together, the
Result is a Joy, the greatness whereof is scarcely to be conceived, and never
to be expressed.

The End of the First Book.
CHAP. I.
Valor ought to be accompanied with Justice.
PLutarch says, there is a great Difference between valiant Men. If he makes
this Difference to consist in the Degree, that they are more or less valiant,
there is nothing of Difficulty in it: Or if he understands it of the Manner of
making War, we should easily apprehend his Sense. But he does not mean so
neither. He places this Difference in the Valor it self; and he alleges the
Example of Alcibiades and Epaminondas, as of two Men valiant to the highest
Pitch: But they were not so after the same manner. In the mean Time, Morality
teaches us, that Valor is one and the same; and consequently, it must be
said, that between two valiant Men, considered purely as valiant, there is
rather a Resemblance, than any Opposition. To give a true Sense then to the
Maxim of Plutarch, it is necessary that we ground it upon the Circumstances
which ought to accompany Valor. The Example of these two Men which he
propounds, leads us naturally to this Explication. Epaminondas was a Person of
a sincere Probity; and his Valor was animated by this Motive. On the other
side, Alcibiades sacrificed all to his Ambition; and, the better to accomplish
his Ends, never examined whether the Means were just, or unjust. This appears,
not only by the Conduct of his whole Life, but by an Expression that fell from
him once, at Pericles's House, whither he went to give him a Visit: When they
told him he was not to be spoke with, for that he was busy in making up his
Accounts for the Athenians; says he, Would not he do better to study a Way how
not to give up his Accounts? Now, though this Athenian had a most daring
Courage, and had signalized himself in the Wars by Actions of the utmost
Bravery, yet his Reputation was not so clear as that of the famous Theban, who
was so illustrious for his Virtues, that those that knew best how to judge of
his Merit, did unanimously agree to place him in the first Rank of Heroes, not
only of his City, but of his Nation; and to regard him as the greatest Man that
ever Greece brought forth.

CHAP. II.
The Ancient Romans made a Difference between two of their most formidable
Enemies, in considering one as a just Prince, and the other as a Man without
Faith.
THE Reflection we have made is confirmed by the Difference which the Ancient
Romans put between two the most formidable Enemies they ever had; Pyrrhus, and
Hannibal. They considered the First, as a Prince who had Faith and Equity; and
whom they never mentioned, but with Esteem. They considered the Second, as a
Captain cruel and perfidious; and they never spoke of him, but with Despite
and Execration. We may observe the same Difference amongst the Conquests which
the Romans made. The most intelligent of them, if they did advise the
Destruction of Carthage, yet would not approve of that of Corinth. And although
the advantageous Situation of these two Places was equally capable to eclipse
the Glory of their City, and to draw the Seat of the Empire either into Greece
or Africa, yet they esteemed the Surname of Achaicus was not so glorious to
Mummius, as the Surname of Africanus was to Scipio: And that if it were just to
demolish Carthage, and to punish her for the Mischiefs she had done in Italy;
yet it was not just to inflict the same Penalty upon Corinth, from whom they
never received any considerable Injury.

CHAP. III.
Just Wars must be justly managed. What sort of Wars are just: And what is
requisite to make a War justly.
Valor is blameworthy when it fights against Justice. Duella justa just
gerunto: Just Wars must be justly managed. All is comprised in these two Words.
Wars are just when they are made for the Reparation of Injuries received, or
for the Preservation of our lawful Rights; to which we may add, or for the
Defense of our Allies. They are made justly, when Faith is kept in the
Management, and Peace is propounded for the End. Pacem habere debet voluntas,
bellum necessitas, says St. Augustine. It would, indeed, be a strange Thing,
if one should imagine that we were permitted to make War for War's sake, to
exercise Violences and Cruelties, and to revel in Blood and Slaughter. Peace is
a Thing which is absolutely good: War is not so, but upon certain Conditions.
War (I say) ought to be considered as a Remedy which we ought not to make use
of, but in Cases of the last Extremity, and which tends to the Preservation or
(as we may say) the Health of the Body Politic. It may be compared to the
violent Operations of Surgery, which makes Application of Knives and Fire to
the Body of Man; but they are not designed to torment him, but to cure him.
Farther, Faith ought to be kept. We know not how to excuse the Perfidiousness
of Hannibal, at the Battle of Thrasymene: After having won a Victory over the
Romans, whose General was slain upon the Place, he perceived a Body of the
Infantry, of Six Thousand Men, who had gained an advantageous Fort, and that it
was difficult to force them: He sent to them to surrender; and, indeed, they
did surrender upon Terms; but, instead of performing what he had promised, they
had no sooner laid down their Arms, but he put them all to the Edge of the
Sword. The Stratagem which he made use of in the Battle of Cannae was not
altogether so unjust; yet I have heard him condemned for it by some Persons,
who, without doubt, will be thought too nice and scrupulous by Men of the
Sword: He sent Five Hundred Numidian Horse, who presented themselves to the
Consul Marcus Terentius Varro, as being willing to desert, and come over to
him. The Consul put them in the Rear of the Roman Army; but afterward, when
they came to engage, and the Battle grew hot, the Numidians made it appear,
that their Desertion was but feigned; for, turning their Arms against the
Romans, they promoted the greatest Slaughter, in one of the bloodiest Battles
that ever was fought. When Princes do not wage just Wars, or manage them
justly, it is to no purpose for them to have Advantages and Success in Military
Undertakings; they are miserable still; for Vice is the greatest of all
Misfortunes: And an unjust Victory has with Reason been called an illustrious
Crime. Occisarum gentium gloriosum scelus, Sen.

CHAP. IV.
Valor without Justice is not a Virtue, no more than Prudence.
Valor is then rather worthy of Blame than Praise, when she is not accompanied
with Justice: She then loses her Merit, and her Loveliness; she degenerates
from the Nobleness of her Original, and sowres into a Vice; or, at least,
cease to be a Virtue. So it is of Prudence, when she becomes unjust: When she
does not keep up to her proper End, instead of carrying out the Spirit of a Man
to the Performance of dexterous and commendable Actions, she conducts, or
rather bewilders him by the Shifts and Windings of Cunning, Imposture, and
Infidelity; for we cannot give it more honorable Names. We do not call those
virtuous or prudent, who are possessed of these sorts of Endowments. All their
florid Parts beget get not any Esteem, Amity, or Confidence; but, on the
contrary, they engender Fear, Contempt, and Aversion: And we are so far from
choosing such to be our Guides, that we stand upon our Guard against their
Advices, and consider them as dangerous Shelves and Snares. Valor is no less
strangely changed, when she is allied to Injustice; she forfeits all her
Reputation by such contagious Company, and instead of attracting Men's Vows and
Acclamations, she extorts their Reproaches and Imprecations. We may apply to
Valor the Saying of a Prince, concerning Constancy; who understanding that
some Persons guilty of the foulest Enormities endured the Rack with incredible
Resolution, These Men, says he, must needs be impudent Sinners, who employ so
good a Thing as Constancy, to shore up their evil Actions. We do not therefore
call them valiant, who devote their Courage to Injustice; and instead of
opposing Violence, commit it; and being obliged to serve as Asylums and
Protectors of the Innocent, become their Enemies and Persecutors. If the
Out-braving of Perils, and Defiance of Death, must needs merit the Name of
Valiant, then we may allow it to those unhappy Wretches, who not only despise
Death, but seek for it; and being seized with the Excess of Desparation, or a
Transport of Frenzy, lay violent Hands on themselves, and become their own
Executioners. It appears by this, that the Actions of Heroes require something
more, than to expose a Man's self to Danger, and the Contempt of Death it self:
Though that seems to be the Height of Courage, yet it is not true Valor; at
least, it is no part of the Motive wherewith it ought to be animated; that is,
the preferring the Sense of true Honor before our own Lives. According to
these Principles, though the Saying of Agesilaus was excellent, when to one who
demanded of him how he came to perform such great Exploits, he answered, It was
by despising Death: Yet, not to abuse this noble Thought, it is necessary that
we add another Saying of Cato the Elder; who tells us, In the Perils of War, he
makes a great Difference between those that love Virtue, and those who are
weary of their Lives. Indeed, it must be the Love of Virtue that animates
Valor, and the principal Wheel that puts it into its due Motions. Zeal for
Justice ought not only to be the Pretense, but the Cause of War: And a Prince
is obliged to have the same Motive in prosecuting his Enemies by his Arms, as
in arraigning Offenders by his Laws; for his Enemies are looked upon as
convicted Criminals, the Declaration of War is their Sentence of Condemnation;
and because this Sentence cannot be so easily executed as the others, he sends
his Armies to be his Sheriffs and Executioners. And the same Effect which the
Punishment of a private Criminal has on a Nation, the Punishment of a Nation
has on the Universe; or, as we may say, in the great Republic of the World.

CHAP. V.
Examples against the strange Error of those, who believe the exact Practice
of Justice to be an Obstacle to Valor.
AND yet, notwithstanding all this, some Men there are in the World, who
imagine, that the exact practicing of Justice is an Obstacle to Valor. If, in
the fixed Humor whereinto this fundamental Error has cast their Minds, they
are not capable to be disabused by Reasons, they ought to be cured by Examples.
Marcus Aurelius is the most famous amongst the Emperors, for Virtue purely
Humane. St. Lewis is the most renowned amongst all Kings, for Christian Piety.
They were both very valiant. St. Lewis was the first that descended from
Shipboard, into Egypt, in the sight of the Enemy; he fought with incredible
Obstinacy in that Fight, where he lost his Liberty: And, during his
Imprisonment, he discovered such a noble Assurance of Mind, that the Prince of
the Barbarians being near Death, the Admiration that they had for the Virtue of
their generous Captive, put them upon Deliberation whether they should not
choose him for their Sovereign. As for Marcus Aurelius, he ended his Days in an
Expedition in Almaigne: He underwent all the Duties of a Soldier, and a
Captain; and had made great Advances, if he had not been surprised by Death.
The Example of this Prince, and that of his Son, do well demonstrate, that
Justice is serviceable to Valor, instead of being prejudicial to it; and that
that Courage which is not founded in the Love of Virtue, is obnoxious to great
Disorders. Commodus, the Son of Aurelius, had been carefully educated by his
Father, with all the Exactness imaginable: This Education was in him joined
with an auspicious Birth; he had a vast Genius; he was strong, dexterous, and
of a good Mind; and nothing was wanting to make him a great Prince, but his
Will to be so. His Father had no sooner rendered up his Life, but he thinks of
nothing more than returning to Rome, though one might have well represented to
him, that Rome was every where where the Emperor was. He abandons an assured
Victory, and patching up a dishonorable Peace with the Alemaignes, sets
forward for Italy, without being at the Pains to consider whether it would not
beget ill Impressions of his Conduct, in the Beginning of his Reign. We come
now from seeing an old Emperor, who had rather die under his Military Labors,
in the Bed of Honor, than quit the Design he had formed; and we see after him,
a young Prince, full of Vigor, who, to wind himself out of the Fatigues of
War, eschews an Enterprise, to which the Memory of his Father, and his own
Honor, should have engaged him: Instead of embracing a lawful Occasion for the
Acquests of Glory, he rather chose to expose himself to the View of the Romans,
in the Equipage of a Gladiator; and by throwing of Darts, to kill Panthers or
Lions in an Amphitheatre.

CHAP. VI.
Why it is, that, at this Day, all the World has not the Opinion they ought to
have, upon the Obligation of joining Justice to Valor.
IF all Men, at this Day, have not the Opinion they ought to have of their
being obliged to join Valor with this other Virtue, (which is the Rule of all
Morality) perhaps it comes from hence, that in this Monarchy, as in many
others, they have made a Separation of the Gown from the Sword, as if they were
distinct Functions; and do not think it proper, that the same Men might be
Magistrates and Captains too. It is true, the Sovereign Administration of Laws
and Arms resides in the Person of the Prince; but it is in no other properly,
but in him, that this Union is to be found: And yet, in some sort, he has
declared himself for the Military Employment, since he every Day bears the
Badges of it; and even in the actual Administration of Justice, he wears a
Sword by his Side. But the Ancients did not determine of Things after this
Rule. Amongst them, the Charge of Consul, that of Praetor, and many others,
were no less for the Wars, than for Peace: Insomuch that there were some that,
in a Moment, passed from the Tribunal, to the Camp; and, after having heard
Causes pleaded, and been Pleaders themselves, were sent to command, and to
fight, in the Army. Fabritius was a Man of an undaunted Spirit: Both the Cato's
were exceeding valiant: And the same Justice which restrained them from
suffering their Judgments to be corrupted, excited them not to suffer
themselves to be vanquished in Battles. We find the like Examples in the
Grecian History. Phocion and Aristides had no less of Courage, than Integrity.
They gave to Aristides the Surname of Just; they might as well have given him
the Surname of Valiant. It Is true, he never commanded the Army in Chief; but he
distinguished himself in all the Wars where he served, either as a Soldier, or
as an Officer; and he behaved himself admirably well in the Battles of
Marathron, Salamine, and Platea. Now, in the Republics of Greece, no manner of
Profession could exempt a Man from his Service in the Wars; or, at least, was
incompatible with Arms. We could name Philosophers, who have joined Justice
with Valor. Socrates saved Alcibiades in a Battle; and darting himself through
the thickest of his Enemies, rescued him out of their Hands. Zenophon, after
the Death of Clearchus, was one of the Captains in that famous Retreat, which,
amongst the Critics in the Art of War, passes for one of the finest
Masterpieces that ever was performed.

CHAP. VII.
What is the Extent of Military Obedience.
AS it is an important Thing, (SIR) for those who are destined to command
Armies, to know to what Point they may extend this Command; and because You
purpose Your self to learn under the Orders of the King, Your Father, who
teaches the Art of Conquering, and of being victorious; we must not forget to
remark in this Discourse, what is the Extent of Military Obedience. It has
sometimes been a Question, Whether Justice obliges a Soldier to deliver up
himself to a certain and inevitable Death, when his Commander puts him upon it.
Some answer to this, First, That it is very difficult to find any Case so
deplorable, but that there may be some possibility of escaping: For, after the
Example of Alexander, when he threw himself into the City of the Oxydracians:
And after that, of Horatius Cocles; who singly stopped an Army of Enemies, till
the Bridge was broken down, and then, all wounded as he was, leaped with his
Arms into Tyber, and saved himself by swimming. There hardly seems a Danger so
visible, and so pressing, where a Man may not see some Glimmerings of Hope. But
although we should take this Supposition in the Extent of its Rigor, yet we
ought not to doubt, but that a Soldier, who has received his Commands, must
follow the Orders given him, though it were certain, that in the executing it,
or in the endeavoring to do it, it would cost him his Life. The same Principle
which wills us to hazard Life for the Preservation of Honor, commands us to
sacrifice it for the same Reason; since if Honor were not more valuable than
Life, we should not only not sacrifice it for the Preservation of Honor, but
should not think it needful to hazard it. Besides, a private Man is in respect
of the Public, as a Member is in respect of the Body: And it happens
sometimes, that for the Preservation of the Body, we not only apply painful
Remedies to the Part affected, but we wholly cut it off. This Reasoning is
confirmed by Examples: As, by that of Leonidas; who, with his Three Hundred
Lacedaemonians, (as we have mentioned in this Discourse) being at the Streights
of Thermopylae, to oppose the greatest Army that ever was; when he knew that
this dreadful Army was ready to fall upon him, says he to his Soldiers, Come,
my Friends, let us dine now; we shall sup in the other World. The Roman History
relates an Action very like this, and of an equal Number of Men, in the War
against the Carthaginians. But if some will insist upon that which I just now
hinted, that it may be these valiant Men, in these Rencounters, did not look
upon their Deaths as altogether infallible; yet there were others, who did
actually devote themselves to Death; as, Decius amongst the Romans, and Codrus
and Menecheus amongst the Greeks. And in our Modern Histories, we find
Commanders of Ships, who being pursued, and sore pressed, without being either
able to defend or save themselves, have put Fire to the Powder, and blown
themselves up, that so neither they nor their Ship might fall, as a Prey, into
the Hands of their Enemies.

CHAP. VIII.
Whether one may be dispensed with from following an Order in War, when he
sees, in not following it, he shall bring greater Advantage to his Side.
IT has also been a Question, If, after a Military Order is given out, he who
received it, may disobey it, when he sees, in not following it, he shall do a
greater piece of Service for his Party, and that he shall be certain to
accomplish a Victory? A like Question to this has been propounded, in
reference to Friendship: They demand, If a Man being charged by his Friend to
do a Thing, whether he be obliged precisely to keep close to that which was
prescribed him; or whether he may take another Course; when he assuredly knows,
that by this Means he shall farther serve his Friend, who has put his Concerns
into his Hands? Many have thought, that he may do it: But, in the mean Time,
they give us these two Cautions: First, To see if the Course which we steer,
and which we prefer before the other, does prevail so much over that which we
have Orders to follow, that this Advantage be so considerable, as to make a
Compensation for the Liberty we give our selves to forsake the Will and
Commands of a Friend, in his proper Interests. They advise us also to take care
with whom we have to do: For if we should have to do with a stiff and
selfconceited Person, wholly abounding in his own Sense, he will neither take
our good Intentions, nor our good Success, for Reason; but, on such Occasions,
interprets all sorts of Addresses, as Shifts to cover unfaithfulness: Then we
must serve him according to his Humor, and not run the Risk of losing his
Friendship. Some have extended this Question to the Commands which we receive
from our Superiors; in which we must affirm, that the securest Way is, not to
set up ones self as an Umpire of their Will; and that there happen very few
Occasions, where he may be allowed to pass the Limits of a blind Obedience.
Aulus Gellius, who sometimes makes Remarks particular enough upon Things of
Antiquity, relates, how that Crassus going into Asia with his Army, and being
desirous to besiege a Place, stood in want of a long and strong Beam, to make
one of those Engines which the Ancients called Baleares, Battering-Rams, and
with which they used to batter Towns: He passing by Athens, took notice of a
Beam which was in the Gate, and which he believed would exactly fit his
purpose; he wrote to the Architect of the Athenians, to send it to him. The
Architect, who was an able Artist, knowing for what Design he intended it, sent
him another, which he judged most proper for his purpose. Crassus calls him
before him, and demanded of him, Why he did not exactly follow his Orders?
Whatever Reason the Man alleged to justify himself, he caused him to be
punished in the sight of his Army. Behold one who was rigorous to Extremity. We
may say, this Roman used him as he would have dealt with a Soldier who had
disobeyed his Orders; and that he pursued the Severity of Military Discipline.
Indeed, in War we must obey punctually: And when Orders are given out, nothing
can dispense with the Obligation we have to submit to them. This Maxim is
sounded first upon this, That we ought never to do a positive Evil, for any
Good that may happen thereby: And Disobedience in Matters of Discipline is an
essential Crime. On the other side, We must keep up this Rigor to the height,
otherwise, the Consequence would be dangerous, if by one single Exception, we
should open a Door to Disobedience; and if we should give place to imagine,
that there are Reasons, after a General has given his Orders, which will leave
one at liberty to follow, or not to follow them. The Notions which the Stoic
Philosophers had of Valor, accords very well with this Principle. Through all
the Extent of Morality, they referr the Design of Things to Prudence, the
Distribution to Justice, and the Execution to Valor. Seeing then, the proper
Office of Valor is to execute, she must be content with her own Function; and
may always suppose, that there have been Consults enough preparatory for her;
and besides, that she is not answerable for the Miscarriages of Deliberations.
Other Authors, to show the Connection of Virtues, have established this for a
Maxim, That an Action can never be virtuous, if it be not done with Discretion,
Equity, Moderation, and Resolution: And according to this Prospect, they have
assigned to every Virtue a general Quality; as, Discretion to Prudence, Equity
to Justice, Moderation to Temperance, and Resolution to Valor. We have no need
to examine this Principle, in all its Circumstances: It is enough for this
Reflection, that since Resolution is the Character of Valor, a Soldier must
give Testimony of it, in keeping himself indispensably tied to Discipline, and
in never starting aside from the Duties of Military Obedience.

CHAP. IX.
It is an Error to believe, that the Profession of a Soldier is condemned by
the Christian Religion. If Anger be permitted in Battle, in what manner one
ought to behave himself against a Friend on the contrary Party, when one meets
him in the Fight.
I Thought it needful here to touch that Scruple so weakly grounded, which
makes some Men believe, that the Military Profession stands condemned by
Religion: In this they are condemned themselves, not only by the History of so
many Wars which are related in the Scriptures, but also by that remarkable
Place in the Gospel, where the Soldiers consulted the Forerunner of Jesus
Christ: He does not exhort them to quit their Employment, but to be contented
with their Pay, and not to mutiny. Here then is no Subject of Doubt, as there
may be in that famous Dispute, which has divided the Ancient Philosophers; and
it consists in this; Whether Anger be forbidden in Battles, as a Passion
altogether evil: Or whether it may be allowed as an Instrument of Valor. This
last Opinion has prevailed; the Lyceum is more followed in this Point, than
the Porticus; and we believe, as there are commendable Desires, wise Fears, and
innocent Joys and Sorrows, so there are lawful Angers; and in just Wars we may
make use of this Passion, to inflame, or (as Aristotle speaks) to whet our
Courage. What shall we say to this other Question which has been propounded by
the Ancients; that is, In what manner we are to behave our selves against a
Friend who is of the contrary Party, and with whom we meet in Battle? Must we
avoid him, or fight him? We shall not undertake to decide a Difficulty, which
so many great Men have left undecided. Let us forbear searching to the Bottom
of this Question, for fear of finding Reasons contrary to a Sentiment which
seems so humane: And let us preserve Respect for Friendship, which is a Virtue
it self, or the most honorable of all Things in the World, next to Virtue.

CHAP. X.
Necessary Reflections upon Rashness.
WHen Valor is regulated by Justice, she is far enough from Rashness. For, if
a Prince be prodigal of his Life, he is unjust to his People; and he ought
sometimes to regard Temerity under this Notion: For, if it be considered as a
piece of Injustice, it appears more condemnable, than if it be considered but
as a piece of Imprudence. That a Prince therefore may not become guilty of rash
Actions, he ought to have something else in his Eye besides Perils; because one
must not seek out Dangers for Danger's sake. And if one do expose himself to
the Hardships of War, it is not simply to expose himself, and no more; but for
the avoiding of some eminent Damage, or the obtaining some great Advantage. The
Action of a Prince then ought to have this End, viz. A Reference to the Success
of his Arms, which is possible, important, and conformable to his Rank. He
fails in the first Condition, which is Possibility, if he does as Alexander
did, when he threw himself from the Top of the Walls, into an Enemy's City:
For, Could he pretend to take it alone! He fails to observe the second
Condition, which is Importance, if he does as the same Prince did, when, during
the Siege of Tire, he drew out a small Detachment of his Army, for I know not
what Expedition against the Arabians; which was neither necessary for him, nor
worthy of him. It is our next Business to consider, that an Action may be
possible and important, and yet not be proper to the Quality of him that would
execute it. Nothing is more possible, than to gain Forts by springing of Mines;
and sometimes nothing is more important, than to use those Means; but we must
not thence conclude, that the King ought to go himself to lodge the Miner. I
see it would be impossible to enumerate the particular Things which are fit to
be acted by a Prince, in the Wars; and which are not so: But it seems to me,
that we may establish this as a general Maxim, That a Prince ought not to
expose himself to Danger, but in such Actions where his Command is requisite.
If he knows a Fort well, it is, to ordain in what manner it shall be besieged:
If he visit the Trenches, it is there also to dispose his Orders: And if he
appear in Battle, it is not there chiefly to imbrue his Sword in the Blood of
some Soldiers; for the killing of three or four Men is not sufficient to turn a
Battle; but it is here he ought to have his Eyes move through the whole, to
shoot his Orders and Directions every where, and to be as the Soul to his whole
Army. We distinguish between two sorts of Temerity; one a particular, the other
a general Rashness: One consists in the hazarding our selves, upon Occasion,
against the Rules of Military Prudence; the other is, when we engage in a War
far above our Force, or without being well prepared; as they say Caesar did in
his Wars against Alexandria. Some distinguish also betwixt the Temerity of the
Enterprise, and the Temerity of the Execution; which are not altogether the
same as those we have mentioned, although they come very near to them. Common
Sense gives us sufficiently to understand these Differences.

It will be more important for us to consider the Causes of this Temerity; and
they are, the false Admiration of rash Enterprises or Executions, when they
have succeeded; and a mistaken Contempt of Conducts conformable to the Maxims
of War, when they seem not to have enough of Bravery and Resolution. We may see
this manifestly verified in a Conduct quite contrary, which Marcellus and
Fabius once followed; one called the Sword, and the other the Buckler of the
Romans. I should wander too far, if I should examine the Lives of these two
Men, to make particular Remarks of this Diversity and Opposition. It is
sufficient to say, that Fabius was truly the Buckler of Rome, and that he saved
her from Ruin. On the other side, Marcellus is blamed for having precipitated
himself into Dangers; and to have (as we may say) stole away his Life from the
Defense of his Country, in a Time when she stood most in need of it. It was
said by a famous Orator, That many Great Men, who have been wholly disposed to
sacrifice their Lives and Fortunes to the public Interest, yet were not
content to sacrifice to it the least Part of their Glory. He alleges upon
this Subject, the Example of Cleombrotus the Lacedaemonian, who lost the Battle
at Leuctre: And of another, called Callicratides; who, during the Wars of
Peloponnesus, engaged himself unluckily in a Sea Fight against the Athenians;
and when they endeavored to dissuade him from it, he answered, The
Commonwealth of Sparta might send another Fleet to the Sea; but as for him, he
could not make a Retreat, but to his Dishonor. But he deceived himself
extremely in speaking after this rate; for if a Retreat were necessary, then it
could not be shameful; and if the Engagement were rash, it could not be
glorious. These Restrictions put You in Pain, (SIR;) and You look upon them as
Fetters to Your Courage: You bear them so much the more impatiently, in that
You know Alexander remains Conqueror at this Day; and having an Emulation for
his Glory, You aim to be as valiant as he. Your Pretensions (SIR) are just; and
You give us Reason to hope, that You will equal the Fortune, and surpass the
Virtue of this famous Conqueror. But I most humbly beseech You to take notice,
that one may be as valiant as Alexander, without being fond of following the
Examples of his Temerity; provided one do not forbear imitating him herein by
any Impulse of Fear, but out of a Principle of Reason. There are, in the whole,
three or four Actions in the Life of that Prince, which are inexcusable
Temerities, and the Success cannot justify them; since wise Men judge of
Things as they are in themselves, and not by the Events. These sorts of Excess
would be more condemned in our Days, after the Invention of Artillery, which
has given so many Advantages to Fortune. If he that formerly saw a Warlike
Engine, cried out, that Valor would be lost, had seen these other Machines,
which not only represent the Noise, but the Effects of Lightning, and carry
Death to a prodigious Distance, how would he have improved the Subject of his
Exclamation! He that is undaunted, is as valiant as Alexander: But though, in
this Greatness of Courage, he is not afraid of Death; yet, nevertheless, he is
not obliged to expose himself thereunto, to no purpose. We cannot imagine any
Thing more important than this Reflection, because the Valor of a rash Prince
cannot produce the Effects which it ought to do: His Enemies conceive as much
of Hope, as Fear at it; and they desire no more of him, than to confront
Dangers, without Necessity; and they wait every Moment for that fatal Stroke,
which shall put a Period to the Course of his Success, and that of his Life. If
a Prince will be a Conqueror, he must first learn to overcome himself: And he
must hold this for a certain Rule, That he that cannot command his own Courage,
can never render himself Master of his Enemy's. The true Valor of a Prince
does not consist in avoiding Dangers, no more than in seeking of them; but to
attend, and not to desert the Functions of his Command, for any Dangers that
shall encompass him. If, in a Sea Fight, a Pilot should quit the Rudder, and
run upon the Deck, he would be accounted foolhardy: And, on the other side;
if, fearing to be slain in the Place where he ought to steer the Ship, he
should go and hide himself in the Hole, he would be branded for an Errant
Coward. Some have compared an Army to the Body of a Man. Iphicrates said, the
Infantry were the Hands, the Cavalry the Feet, and the General the Head. Now,
if the Head will either give or put by Blows, instead of leaving this Office to
the Hands, it would receive as many Wounds as it makes Pushes, and would soon
be put out of a Condition of fighting. But if, on the other Extreme, finding it
self afraid of Danger, it would hood-wink her Eyes, or turn away her Sight, it
will so happen, that the Hands not being guided thereby, the whole Body will be
left without Defense, and exposed to the Discretion of the Enemy. I allow, that
these Comparisons are imperfect, (and we cannot frame Similitudes which will
have an entire Exactness;) but we may draw some Light from them, and thereupon
form a Definition of Valor, near approaching to that which the Ancients have
left us. In Truth, this Virtue would not be ill defined, if we say, that Valor
is the Science of those Dangers, to which a Man ought to expose himself; and of
those, to which he ought not to expose himself. They who will be willing to
conceive of it in this Sense, would pursue the Notion of Socrates, who called
all the Virtues Sciences; and particularly, gave this Name to Valor* It is
related of him, how that being one Day at a Feast, where they brought in one of
those sort of Women we see nowadays, who leaped over naked Swords, with the
Points upwards and crossed; he made a Reflection, how well this Woman had
overcome the natural Timidity of her Sex, in that she undertook a Thing wherein
her Death had been infallible if she had stopped by the Way, and had not
thoroughly performed so hazardous a Leap. Then, being come near to one of his
Scholars, Valor (says he to him) is a Thing which falls under Doctrine, and
may be learned. If the Maxim of this Philosopher has any Foundation, and it is
true that Valor may be learned, who shall be the Master of this noble Science?
Certainly, the Prince. His Examples therein are the Models, and his Orders are
the Precepts. But in the Orders that he shall give out to others, or to
himself, he ought not to make Justice to consist in Equality, but (as one
formerly said) Equality in Justice. And if it be demanded whether the Danger
ought to be equal in an Army; we may answer in the Affirmative. But we must
understand it of an Equality of Justice, or Proportion; (that is to say) That
the King must expose himself as a King, and the Soldier as a Soldier.

CHAP. XI.
The Dependence of Valor, in regard of God.
THE principal Part of Justice is that wherewith God has ordained us to serve
him; and it consists in that entire Submission we ought to render him. Insomuch
that we must not fail to consider in this Discourse, what are those
Dependencies which the Valor of Men receives from the Power of God. It depends
upon him in respect of that which we call Fortune, and in respect of the Body,
and also of the Soul. First, The Things called Fortuitous are entirely in the
Hands of God. There is no Courage whatsoever, that is able to foresee or
prevent these sorts of Adventures. As, when Cambyses was going to make War in
Lybia, Fifty Thousand of his Army were buried under a Mountain of Quicksands:
Or, as in the late Times, the King of Sweden was going to the Isle of Fu^ne^,
the Ice broke under one of his Regiments, whereby they were all drowned in the
Sea. Scipio, when very young, was in that Battle which Paulus Aemylius gained
over the last King of Macedonia. After the Fight was over, and the Victory
carried for the Romans, they knew not what was become of him; and the Roman
Army was returned into their Camp, without seeing young Scipio appear. Aemylius
was extremely troubled thereat; and in the midst of the Success of this great
Day, he felt no Joy, but what was imbittered with Grief, by the Apprehension he
had of having lost a Son of so great Hopes. They sent out into all Coasts, to
learn Tidings of him, and called out aloud for him; but all to no purpose: They
concluded then, that he lay mingled amongst the slain Bodies; and they were
there searching for him, when, at last, they saw him return with Two more, and
his Sword reeking in Blood: That is to say, he was so transported by the
inconsiderate Fervency of Youth, as, having quitted the Body of the Army, he
pursued the Macedonians so far, that he had perished a Thousand Times, if he
had had to do with Men who durst have rallied: Nothing had been more easy,
than to have encompassed and slain him. If this had happened, there had been no
Scipio the Great, the Destroyer of Carthage and Numantia: And his Valor (as
one may say) having been nipped in the Bud, he had not performed those
illustrious Actions which have rendered him immortal in Story. On the other
side, If Providence had given a longer Life to the Duke of Longueville, he
might have been another Scipio; or, to compare him with the Chief of his
Illustrious Race, which ended in him, he might have been another Dunois. It Is
true, the Death of this young Prince does not so much respect the first
Dependence, of which I have been speaking, as the second, which ought also to
be considered. The Valor of a Man depends on Almighty God, in regard of his
Body. This is plainly visible in Wounds; seeing that Courage is unprofitable,
when the Strength fails. What profitted it Pyrrhus to have a grand Courage,
when having taken a Town by Force of Arms, he received a Blow with a Stone,
thrown down from the Top of an House, which stunned him; and causing him to
fall from his Horse, left him without Strength or Sense, in the Hands of those
that took away his Life? What did this heroic Resolution of Mind profit
Philopoemon, who was the sole Support of his Country; when, being the last in
the Retreat, as he was first in the Onset, his Horse threw him down under him;
whereupon, he was soon surrounded by his Enemies? We may remark this
Difference, not only in Wounds, but in other Things; which, though they are
less sensible, yet are more astonishing. It happens sometimes, that a valiant
Person, who has out-faced great Dangers with an undaunted Countenance, has yet
been afraid when there has been no Cause of Fear: It must be no other than a
kind of Dazzling, or an Imagination, which troubles and confounds him. It is in
the Actions of War, as in those of Eloquence: The most complete Orators
sometimes have been, as it were, Planet-struck, and have lost their Speech,
without knowing any Reason for it. Men of the greatest Courage have been, as
one may say, dumb-founded, as well as the greatest Genius's. History is full of
such Events. And that which is observable here, is, that the Pagans themselves
have acknowledged this sort of Dependence; insomuch that the Sentiments they
have had thereof have obliged them to consider these pannick Fears as Envoys
from Heaven. We shall find a Proof of this in that Expression which Virgil
makes Turnus pronounce: Dii me terrent.

It Is true, these Idolaters most frequently knew not to what God they should
ascribe these unexpected Horrors: And we may with Reason say, that as Children
who know not their Father, address themselves sometimes to the first Man they
meet, calling him their Father: In like manner, the Pagans, through their
Ignorance of the true Deity, when any Terror invaded their Spirits, or struck
their Senses, they imagined presently that this was their God; and seeing the
great Effects which Terror produced in their Armies, they took Terror it self
for a God. There was at Lacedaemonia (as we have already observed) the Temple
of Fear: And there was another at Rome, which was not only dedicated to Fear,
but to its Effects; Pavori, and Pallori. All the Auguries, Expiations and
Sacrifices which they made during the Wars, and before their Battles, came from
the same Original; insomuch that, at the last, their Religion became wholly
Military. They considered their Camp as a Temple: They did not only bring their
Gods thither with their Eagles, but they placed the Eagles themselves in the
Number of their Gods; they adored them, and they swore by their Name. When the
Emperors had embraced the Christian Faith, they abolished this sort of
Idolatry, as well as others. But to retain the Soldiers in their Duty by a
visible Object of Religion, which might often put them in mind of the need they
had of God's Assistance, and of the Dependence they had on his Power, they
represented the Cross upon the Standard, which they called Labarum. Sozomen,
the Ecclesiastical Historian, relates, That the Christian Soldiers considered
this Ensign as a Thing sacred, wherein was the Sign of their Redemption; and
that they rendered to it a peculiar Respect. As all these Fears I have been
observing may arise from the Disposition of the Body, or of the Corporeal
Faculties, I have ranked them under the second Dependence. But there is another
Dependence behind: The Valor of Men is subject to the Divine Power in regard
of the Soul. Indeed, a Prince who says to God, Give me my Arms, preserve me my
Life and Health, and I know well enough how to do the rest: That is to say, I
know well enough how to improve my Courage my self: This Prince speaks like a
Pagan. Our Souls depend entirely on him that made them. And if a valiant Man
does not believe that it is God which bestows his Valor on him, and that he
can take it from him whenever he pleases; if the most hardy Man in the World
imagines that it does not belong to God to render him the most fearful
Creature, he knows not God, neither does he know himself. Our Souls, as we have
said already, are the Operations of his Hands; they have continual Need of the
Supplies of his Succors, to preserve the Qualities they have received. This
Principle must be agreed, That as there are none but Spirits that can penetrate
Bodies, so there is none but God can penetrate Souls. Insomuch that God is in
our Souls, he acts immediately there, and it belongs to him to do that which he
pleases. They deceive themselves extremely who imagine, that in making these
Reflections on the Dependence of Men's Valor, it should be capable to abate
their Courage, rather than to add more Assurance to it. For, as it is in Civil
Societies, the Power of our Friends creates in us rather Confidence than Fear;
so the Divine Omnipotence is so far from abating the Courage of those Persons
that acknowledge and adore it, that it elevates and confirms it. And certainly
I believe, that all the Exhortations that ever have been made, or ever shall be
made, to excite Men to Valor, have not so much Force as one Sentence of the
Old Testament, alleged by St. Paul; If God be for us, who can be against us?
And that other in the Gospel; Fear not them that can kill the Body, but cannot
destroy the Soul.

CHAP. XII.
What is the End of Valiant Actions.
AMongst the Circumstances which attend Actions, the most essential of all is
the End. What is the End of the Actions of Valor? The Pagans have propounded
Glory for its End. Christian Morality advances higher; and to conceive aright
of the Grandeur and Solidity of the Sentiments she inspires upon this Subject,
it is needful for us to consider, it is in Valor as it is in other Virtues,
and that Military Actions ought to be ranked amongst the good Works to which
the Reward of Heaven is promised. There is in them this in particular, that
they are not only more painful and difficult than the others, but they
oftentimes put a Period to the Life of him that performs them; and so he
embraces Death in the actual Exercise of Virtue. If a Man closes up his Life,
stretching out his Hands to assist the Poor, and in the very Act of Alms-deeds
and Charity; or if he render up his Soul at the Foot of the Altar, whilst he is
applying himself to the Invocation and Adoration of God; such a Death will,
with Reason, be accounted as a Favor, and will give us advantageous Thoughts
of the Salvation of this Man. We ought to have the same Opinion of a Death
which happens in Military Expeditions. And to make the Reflection more
agreeable to this Notion, it is not necessary that it must be a War waged
against Infidels; it is sufficient that, in respect of the Prince, the War be
just; and in respect of the Subjects, that they are commanded by their Prince:
Then we may say, that Death is a Sacrifice; and he that suffers it, is a
Victim. It will be objected, without doubt, that this Sacrifice may not be
pleasing to God, because it may suffer that Death, and yet otherwise be in an
ill State. I agree it: But this is not a Case peculiar to Valor only, seeing
that it may be also, that he who dies in the actual Exercise of Almsgiving, or
of Prayer, yet may not die in a good Disposition of Conscience. There is only
one Difference to be observed, That Almsgiving and Prayer do not, in
themselves, expose a Man's Life to Hazard; but Military Actions are accompanied
with Dangers, and it is their very Business to encounter them. Insomuch that we
may soberly conclude thereupon, that a Soldier is particularly obliged to take
care of his Conscience; and in that he is exposed to Death hourly, he ought
always to be well prepared to die daily. It is not necessary to make a farther
Research what is the End of valiant Actions, it is the same as of other
virtuous Actions. Valor propounds no less an Aim, than the noblest of all
Conquests; that of Heaven. She propounds an Immortality that is not feigned,
nor metaphorical, as is that of Fame; but a Life truly eternal, and truly
happy. As to that other Immortality, such as it is; I mean, the Glory which
springs from Valor; we must see of what Dispositions Christian Princes ought
to be in this Respect. I remember I have read a Notion in the Writings of an
Ancient Father, which, at the first, surprised me; but it was very solid, and
very necessary upon this Occasion. He preached to his People after this manner:
Have a Care of my Reputation: It is your Interest, rather than mine, so to do:
I have no need of it for my self; but I have need of it for you. So a Prince
stands in no need of Honor for himself: He shall not be judged of God by his
Reputation, but by his Virtue: He has only need of it for his People, to
maintain his Subjects in their Duty, to hinder his Enemies from undertaking any
Thing against them; and, in a Word, for a Thousand Things important to the
Public. We cannot doubt then, but that the Reputation of Kings is capable of
producing great Effects, be it either in Peace or War: But all this has no
farther Regard to a Prince, but during his Life. Ought he then to neglect a
Reputation which shall endure after Death? No, he ought not to neglect it; but
on the contrary, to desire it; not for himself, but for others: Which is the
Motive we have formerly touched at, and appears here to be manifestly true.
Indeed, St. Lewis would not be ever the less happy in Heaven, though all the
World were ignorant of the Actions he did on the Earth; and we never had known
he was valiant, or that he had made War in Africa, or had suffered Death as a
Martyr. It is not then a Felicity to St. Lewis, that History speaks of him; but
it is an Happiness for those who are now living. It is an Happiness in
particular to You, (SIR) who are animated by this Example; and find in a Stem
of your August Family, the most perfect Model that the Church has propounded
for Princes. As we may see by this, that the Glory of great Kings produces
great Effects, which are not confined within the Limits of their Days; so we
cannot deny but that they may propound to themselves to do such Actions which
will never be forgotten; and the Memoires of their Virtue will procure a
continued and perpetual Benefit to the World. We shall be yet more convinced of
the Truth of this Maxim, if we consider that there is a Proportion altogether
equal, between the Times and Places. And, as when a Christian Prince desires to
be known out of his own Kingdom, it is to render himself profitable to
Strangers, as well as to his Subjects: In like manner, when he desires to be
famed after his Death, it is to this End, that after having served his own
Generation, he will be yet farther serviceable to Posterity.

CHAP. XIII.
Valor ought to be accompanied with Generosity.
WHen one is animated from so noble a Principle, and has propounded to himself
so excellent an End, he sometimes prohibits himself the Use of those Things
which, in themselves, are allowable. It is not enough to satisfy our selves,
that we are far from being guided by unjust Maxims; but we ought farther to
hearken to the Impulses of Generosity. Many confound the Name of Generous, with
that of Valiant; but in this they deceive themselves: All undaunted Men are not
generous. Generosity is a Grandeur, or a Beauty of the Soul, which sometimes is
not found in those who are remarkable for Courage. There are many who not being
capable of the least Cowardice amidst the Dangers of War, yet have been guilty
of great Weaknesses in the other Accidents of Life. We have borrowed this Term
of the Latins, but we take it in another Sense than the Ancient Romans did; and
have given it such a copious Signification, that we must consider Generosity in
the full Extent, as a general Virtue, which is a chief Ingredient, and mingles
it self amongst all the others, and adds a Flavor to their Sentiments. Indeed,
as I remarked before, we call those generous, who have a comely* beautiful
Soul. Now, as one single Feature well formed does not render the Face
beautiful, so one single Virtue does not make up a lovely Soul. Generosity is
allied to all the Virtues, but she loves to be espoused to Valor, which opens
to her a vast Career, wherein to exercise her self; it gives her the stateliest
Theater she could ever have had, whereon to show forth the Nobleness and Purity
of her Intentions. It is by Valor that an Hero renders himself victorious; it
is by Generosity that he does not sully the Glory of his Victory. It is by this
that he remits the rigorous Justice of his Rights, and gives a Relaxation of
hard (and yet just) Severities; that he scorns Revenge, though he has the full
Power to act it. He is sorry in his Chair of Triumph, for the Blood which he
was constrained to shed in the Field of Battle, stretches out his Hands to
relieve the Vanquished, and shows them that he is an Enemy to no People; and
that he never designed any more than to correct their Insolence, Tyranny, and
Injustice. Farther, (SIR;) Generosity is properly the Virtue of a Prince. You
ought to esteem it as one of the principal Ornaments of your Life: And You
cannot take too much Pains to cultivate those Seeds which You have received at
Your Royal Birth, and to practice those Maxims which You have continually
learned in Your excellent Education. That which shows, this Virtue appertains
peculiarly to those who are placed in the highest Station, is, that she
includes within her self a kind of Superiority: And we may always affirm in
some sort, that he that does a generous Act, in that he raises himself up
above him that receives it. And certainly, should a Subject, in making
Protestations of his Loyalty, tell the King that he would serve him generously;
though perhaps he may have no ill Intention, yet he offends against Decency.
Nay, to go farther; If a ^^lan should so express himself toward God, he would
speak not only barbarously, but impiously. No one may say, he acts generously
toward God: And, that which is more surprising, we ought not to say neither,
that God is generous toward Men: We ought to say, indeed, that he is good, and
compassionate. Now, seeing that Generosity is a Virtue more sublime than mere
Goodness, it may be demanded, Why, in speaking of God, we choose rather to say
he is good, than that he is generous? They do wisely, that express themselves
so: And this Way of Speaking seems to be founded on Reason. As Words are the
Images of the Thoughts, we cannot well give a Name to God, seeing we cannot
comprehend him. All Names, generally, are unworthy of his Greatness and
Immensity, not excepting even that which was had in so great a Veneration
amongst the Jews. We say of God, that he is good; because, as this is a Name we
ordinarily ascribe to Men, so we believe, by our attributing it to God, that,
at the same Time, he will not fail to elevate our Thoughts beyond our
Expressions. But we forbear to give him the Name of Generous, which is one of
the sublimest in Morality, for fear one should imagine that it would fill up
the Idaea he ought to have of the King of Kings, and that it might be truly
worthy of his infinite Perfections. I am insensibly fallen into this
Digression, and will improve it no farther, but tie my self at present to
consider Generosity as a Virtue which ought to accompany Valor.

CHAP. XIV.
The greatest Men in Ancient History have not only been valiant, but generous.
THE Heroes which Antiquity took care to render illustrious, were generous, as
well as valiant. And it must be confessed, that the Actions wherein their
generous Thoughts and Motions are most conspicuous, are the Passages of their
Lives wherein we are most sensibly touched, and which engage us the more to
esteem their Memories. Caesar lamented the Death of Pompey: And after he was
passed over into Africa, conducting his Troops toward the City where Cato was,
as soon as he understood that he had killed himself, I envy your Death, (cried
he) O Cato, since you have envied me the Glory of saving your Life. Augustus
also bewailed the Death of Mark Anthony: He shuts himself up with some of his
familiar Friends, to condole the Death of his Rival, and to render Praises to
his Merit: He reads to them certain Letters which he had received from him, and
makes Remarks on the Neatness and Beauties of his Style: He shows them, that he
was not only a Man of great Courage, but of a great Soul. Some will say, all
these Regrets were but dissembled. May be they were so; but one may judge by
this, how commendable and amiable Generosity is, since, in these Instances,
Caesar and Augustus believed, that they ought to have had either such real
Impressions, or, at least, the Appearances of them: And as they had the Taste
and Ambition of true Glory, so they conceived it imported much to their Honor,
to be sensible of the Misfortune of their Enemies; or if they were not so, yet
to seem to be so. In speaking after this manner, I know I do not accommodate my
self to the Opinion of those who make little favorable Constructions of the
Tears of the two first Caesar's: In which it seems to me, they have but ill
practiced the Virtue whereof we are speaking, and that they have not used them
generously. For, what Reason can they allege, that these two great Men, who,
after the Establishment of their Sovereignty, had made their Clemency appear so
conspicuous, should not then enter upon Considerations which might draw Tears
from them? Valor and Generosity are not incompatible; and when one has
vanquished an Enemy, I cannot tell what should hinder him from deploring his
Misfortune, after the Victory. We must confess, Envy is a malignant
Interpreter; it will divine Things it never saw, and will make Comments on the
finest Actions of the Heroes, in the worst Sense. But what can it say of
Scipio, who, after the Battle at Zama, the Loss of which reduced the
Carthaginians to the Roman Servitude, studied rather to preserve Hannibal, than
to destroy him? He obliged the Vanquished to burn their Vessels, wherein
consisted the Force of their Empire: But he did not oblige them to deliver up
this redoubtable Enemy, who had ravaged Italy, and had brought Rome to the very
Brink of Ruin; and who, besides, in the Use of Means which he employed to gain
his Point, and to succeed in his Enterprises, sometimes transgressed the
Boundaries of Justice, and was not always contented with the Rights of War.
Scipio saved him nevertheless; and afterward, going to make War in Asia, he
saw him at Ephesus. Although Hannibal was fled to that very Prince, against
whom this War was declared, yet the generous Roman treated him with a great
deal of Honor. History observes, that this fierce African took the Way of him,
but Scipio little valued Formalities; and during the Conversation they had
together, he demands of him, who were, in his Judgment, the greatest Captains
in the World. Hannibal answered, The greatest Captain in the World was
Alexander, the Second to him was Pyrrhus, and the Third my self. His Conqueror
was not offended with this disobliging Answer, but said to him, smiling, What
would you have said, if you had conquered me? Then, replied the other, I should
have counted my self the First. This Generosity of Scipio appears so much the
more commendable, when we shall have compared it with the Inhumanity of
Flaminius; who having found Hannibal in the King of Bithynia's Court, never
ceased to persecute him so cruelly, that he caused him to kill himself. A
Procedure so barbarous was condemned by the solid Part of Mankind, and a great
Number of them Romans too. By this, Flaminius blasted the Reputation he had
acquired in his Macedonian Conquests. We conceive, I say, he ought to have
spared the Life of a Man, who, after having escaped so many Dangers, was now
arrived to an extreme Old Age. Hannibal was of such an Age, that had he wished
Ill to the Romans, he was not capable to effect it; though, indeed, he ought
not to have done it, nor to have wished it. This Action of Titus Flaminius puts
me in mind of that of Lucius Flaminius, his Brother; which was extremely
condemned: He was Commander of a Province; and one Day being at a Feast with a
Person he loved, who being taken with an inhumane Curiosity, told him, she had
never seen a Man's Head cut off. It is easy, says he, to satisfy your Desire
in that. And there being in the Prison some Criminals under Condemnation of
Death, he sent for one into the Hall where the Feast was, and cut off his Head
in their Presence. When he returned to Rome, one might have offered something
by way of Excuse for a Conduct so brutal; that he whom he had caused to be
executed was a guilty Person, and one actually condemned; and that he had only
changed the Place of his Execution: One might have alleged the Glory of his
Family, the good ^ervices of his Brother, and of himself too. But he was noted
for Infamy; and Cato the Elder, by his Authority, as Censor, which he then
exercised, expelled him out of the Senatorian Dignity. By this Example we may
observe, that this brutish Action displeased even a People, who were accustomed
to see the Combats of the Gladiators. So true it is, that valiant Men, when
they are cruel, excite more of Horror, than Admiration; and that all who are
Strangers to Generosity, offend not only Souls that are generous, but even
those that are not so.

CHAP. XV.
Valor without Generosity, is imperfect; and Generosity without Valor, is
imperfect also.
UPon the whole, it concerns us, that we join both these Virtues together; I
mean, Generosity and Valor: They are imperfect when they are separated the one
from the other. Generosity without Valor, does not seem to be sincere; and
Valor without Generosity, does not seem to be reasonable: One appears as an
Artifice, employed for the covering a Defect; and the other, as an Instinct
whereby Nature blindly hurries him. A Prince ought therefore to unite both
these in his own Person. Those who would represent Heroes in their greatest
Perfections, form and imagine them according to this Idaea: They animate them
with a Desire of rendering all Mankind happy: They make them to protect the
Innocent, though their Persons are unknown to them; sometimes to run through
the Universe, to relieve the Oppressed: They inspire into them an ardent
Passion for true Glory, and a noble Contempt, not only of all Things which are
little and base, but of those which are common and ordinary. This Union of
Generosity and Valor makes Magnanimity, which must be considered as the
Perfection of Humane Virtues. The Title of Magnanimous is one of the most
glorious Surnames that a Monarch can have ascribed to him. I wonder that we
have never given it to any King: Those, amongst the Princes, which deserved it,
have not taken it upon them. You may (SIR) take it one Day, after You have
merited it; and as You have already an Ambition to render Your Self worthy of
it, it rests wholly in You, to have the Advantage of enjoying it.

CHAP. XVI.
Diverse sorts of Generosities, which serve to imhaunce Valor.
AMongst the diverse sorts of Generosities, (the Number of which are infinite)
those which show an entire Unconcernedness, and a noble Contempt of Riches,
serve extremely to raise the Reputation of Valor; because that Confidence
which makes a Man valiant, and persuades him that he need never fear the
Dangers of War, has very much of Conformity with that Confidence which makes a
Man liberal, and persuades him that he need never be afraid of Misfortunes; the
Thoughts of which are a continual Terror to the Covetous. Alexander, before he
passed over into Asia, gave away all that he had: And when one demanded of him,
what he had reserved for himself: I have, says he, reserved Hope. But if we
find too much of Excess in this Conduct, (as, without doubt, there was) we
shall find, however, a great Solidity in his Answer to Parmenio, at the Battle
of Arbella. This old Captain sent to advertise him, that the Persians had
fallen upon the Baggage of the Army; and that he could not save it, without
immediate Succors. Alexander bid them tell him, That he must let that alone,
and think of nothing but to overcome; for if the Macedonians carried the
Victory, they should not only recover their own Baggage, but that of the
Enemy's also. This Answer gives me Occasion to relate the Saying of Antisthenes
the Philosopher, and Scholar to Socrates: We ought, says he, to wish all sorts
of Goods to our Enemies, except Valor; for if they are defective in Valor,
they will not be able to preserve the Goods that they have, and we shall not
fail to render our selves Masters thereof. One spoke ingeniously, who called
Covetousness an Aenigma: For, in Truth, nothing is so odd, and unconceivable,
as to join Poverty and Riches together; and to scrape up a Mass of Goods, on
purpose not to make use of them. This Aenigma yet becomes more inexplicable,
when Avarice meets with Valor in one and the same Person. If one should put
the Question, and ask, Who is he that despises Life, and with Greediness heaps
up Things which he believes are necessary for Life; and yet, nevertheless,
makes no Use of those very Things he has so eagerly hoarded up? Certainly,
this would look like a Fable, and a Chimera; and one could not imagine that it
were ever possible to make a fit Application thereof. But such Examples are
rare amongst Kings. Yet I will not deny, but that there may be found some
Princes of the Character of that Roman, who was made Consul at a Time when they
dreaded a difficult and dangerous War. He was much cried down upon the Score of
Interest. And when it was demanded of another Roman, there at that Time, why he
would be advised to give his Vote for such a Man to be Consul? It is, says he,
because I had rather be plundered, than sold. But, as I have said, these
Examples are very rare. Valiant Men do make no other Estimate of Riches, but to
use them; and they do not use them for any other End, but thereby to be enabled
to do Things worthy of Glory. This appears, even from the Common Soldier, to
the Prince: The great Desire of a Soldier truly courageous, is, to have
serviceable Arms; that of a Captain, to have a Company well disciplined; and
that of a Prince, to have strong and well-marshall'd Armies: It Is for this that
he reserves his Treasures. And we cannot but lament, or, to say better, we can
scarcely bewail the Misfortune of those who perish by the blind Impulses of
Avarice. Perseus.
A certain King of Macedonia, who was conquered by the Romans, had Troops able
to defend him; but because these Troops cost him so much Money to maintain
them, he disbanded them the Evening before the Battle which he had against such
formidable Enemies. History farther observes, that after his Defeat,
Covetousness was his predominant Passion; and when he fled away with all that
he had that was of any great value, he was betrayed by a Captain of a Vessel,
who embarked the Treasures of this Prince in his own Ship, and left him upon
the Sea-shoar, abandoned to all the World. Although we see him arrived to the
most deplorable of Humane Disgraces, yet we have less Pity for his Misfortune,
than Indignation at his Conduct.

CHAP. XVII.
Amongst all the Generosities in the World, there is none that brings so much
Honor to valiant Men, as the Pardoning of Injuries.
THere is no Point of Generosity that redounds so much to the Honor of valiant
Men, as the Pardoning of Injuries. I shall only add this Word; They ought to
consider, that in Pardoning they run no Risk, seeing they need not fear that
this shall be imputed to them as Feebleness, or Want of Courage. Pompey has
been commended for burning the Papers of Sertorius, where were Letters would
have made many a Roman's Heart ache; who desired not to see an End so soon to a
War wherein he was engaged. We commend Caesar yet more, for throwing the
Letters which were written to Pompey during the Civil Wars, into the Fire,
without so much as reading them, for fear they might have inspired into him
other Thoughts, contrary to those of his Clemency. The Subject whereof we treat
will not permit us to forget those Generosities which are useful for the
Success of Valor, and which are as the Instruments of Victories and Conquests.
Aristides reconciled himself to Themistocles the Night before the Battle of
Salamina. In that of Platea, when there arose a Dispute about the Rank which
was due to the Athenians, and which they had held in all the other Wars of
Greece, Aristides spoke to the Graecians in almost these Terms: We are not come
here with a Design to dispute with our Allies, but to fight against our
Enemies: We know, Places are not capable, in themselves, to create Fear, or
inspire Valor. Behold us all disposed to receive the Posts wherein you will be
pleased to put us; and we make Protestations, that we will endeavor well to
defend them. I consider also the Conduct of Phocion as a great Piece of
Generosity, when he refused to engage in Battle, to which he was rashly desired
by those whom he commanded. He persisted in his Judgment, notwithstanding the
Murmurs of his Troops. And when they were almost ready to accuse him for Want
of Courage, Brave Fellow Soldiers, says he, It is not you that can make me
valiant, and it is not I that can make you Cowards. We must acknowledge by this
Example, that amongst those Persons who propound Glory for their End, there may
happen Occasions, where their Generosity shall raise them above the Sense of
Honor: They love rather to be blamed without committing of Faults, than commit
Faults without being blamed; and then finding their Consolation in the
Testimony they render to themselves, they thence draw so much Satisfaction,
that they are not over-sollicitous for the Reproaches they never deserved.

CHAP. XVIII.
After what manner Soldiers ought to speak of their Exploits.
WE must not make an End of the Reflections that we have pursued upon
Generosity, without observing, in few Words, after what manner valiant Men
ought to speak of their Exploits. And the first Condition which ought to be
observed, is, Truth. In Times past, by the Rules of the Roman Discipline, Lying
in these sorts of Matters was a Crime, which they significantly called, The
Crime of False Combats. And Polybius makes this Remark, That if a Soldier had
vaunted himself before an Officer, of a Piece of Service he had not done, he
was sure to be punished as soon as he was thereof convicted. To be full of ones
own Praises, though there may be some Truth at the Bottom, is not always
allowable. Homer's Heroes are represented as very valiant, but they sometimes
talk like Braggadochio's; and because they boast of themselves at every Turn,
in this they are not formed according to the Idaea of true Generosity, no more
than in their continual Transports of Passion: Which made one of the Ancients
say, Nihil soedius Heroibus Homericis: Nothing is more fulsom than Homer' s
Heroes. The most celebrated Men of Greece and Italy have often failed in this
important Part of Morality: And we must confess, that the generous Alexander
was not always generous in this Point. The certain and sure Rule which one
ought to follow, is, to consider this Self-applauding, either as hurtful, or
unprofitable; or as necessary. When it is hurtful, we should forbear in point
of Prudence: When it is unprofitable, we should forbear in point of Modesty:
But when it is necessary, we must then strain a Point, and applaud our own
Actions, as well out of that Justice which we owe to our selves, as others. And
therefore, when Historians describe Princes to us, who, to animate their Troops
before the Battle, make Harangues, and tell them, that they have a Leader who
fears no Dangers, and puts them in mind of other Occasions wherein he has
signalized his Courage, they do not consider this sort of Discourse as
savouring of Pride, but as generous. A certain Prince at Sea, finding himself
within Sight of the Enemy's Fleet, which was ready to attack him, heard one of
the Soldiers say, The Enemy's Ships are much more in Number than ours; he turns
himself suddenly to the Soldier, and asked him, For how many do thou count
me? This was not Arrogance, it was a becoming Confidence. And although, by
these Words, the Prince comprehended his own Praises, yet the Expression was
not less fine, than that which is related of Pelopidas: He leads his Troops
through a Place where he did not believe he should be forced to an Engagement:
In the mean time, he perceived the Enemies on a sudden, and that he could not
avoid fighting. Says one of his Officers to him, We are fallen into the Hands
of our Enemies. No, says he; the Enemies are fallen into ours.

CHAP. XIX.
The Valor of a Prince ought to be accompanied with the Love of Learning.
BEfore I come to observe another Qualification, which is advantageous when
accompanied with Valor, I believe I am obliged to tell You, that it is not so
essential, nor so important, as those two of which I have been discoursing,
Generosity and Justice. We cannot treat Morality with too much Freedom and
Sincerity. Virtue surmounts all other Things in such a manner, that when a
virtuous Man is possessed of them, his Merit flows principally from that which
is virtuous in him; and when he is virtuous, though he be not possessed of
them, yet we must needs always observe in him a good Foundation for true Glory.
We commonly fancy Old Rome to be the Seat of the Sciences; and, as a Polite
Commonwealth, we cannot form this Notion of her in her Infancy; for, during
more than Four Hundred Years, this People remained in a profound Ignorance, and
an extreme Aversion for Learning. Those Men, though they were rough and
unpolished, yet they were brave: And, as one has said of them, They knew not
how to do any Thing, but to till the Ground, and kill their Enemies. However,
we admire the Heroes she produced in those first Ages; and we have Reason to
admire them. We shall not find a less Interval of Time between the Foundation
of Athens, and the Honor she had to be the Mother of the Arts. Since she
became so famous for Eloquence, she produced a great Captain; who, though he
had not an ordinary Politeness for an Athenian, yet he gained Battles at Land
and Sea for them: And of whom one said, Cimon was as valiant as Miltiades, as
prudent as Themistocles, and more just than either Themistocles, or Miltiades.
Although he had not so much Agreeableness of Spirit, as he had Grandeur of
Soul, yet he acquired immortal Renown. They placed him in the Rank of the
Illustrious, and have wrote his Life. And if we may observe therein some little
Defect, yet a slight Indecency is not capable to sully the Glory of his
Reputation. On the other side, Though Princes are endued with Politeness; yet,
if those other more solid Qualities, which we have touched upon in this
Discourse, are not conspicuous in them, we must ingenuously confess the Truth,
they cannot acquire a true Esteem in the World: And if they desire to be
numbered amongst the Heroes of it, their Ambition meets with so many Obstacles,
that it is impossible to surmount them. But behold the Judgment one ought to
make upon the Sciences, that so we may not ascribe too much to them, nor
derogate too much from them. They are to be esteemed for Three Things: First,
They are able to inspire virtuous Notions. Besides, When they accompany Virtue,
they appear more refined, and are rendered more amiable. And Lastly, They are
useful to preserve the Memoirs of Grand Atchievments; whether it be by the Pen
of him that performed them, or by that of other learned Men, who dedicate their
nocturnal Studies and Labors to his Honor.

CHAP. XX.
Without the Assistance of Learning, a Prince knows not how to immortalize his
Actions.
IT would be difficult to find Princes, who, after having formed a Design of
distinguishing themselves from the rest of Mankind by their Valor, have not,
at the same Time, apprehended, that they stand in need of the Assistance of the
Learned, to eternize the Memory of their Exploits. One Day Alexander finding
himself oppressed under the Weights and Fatigues of War, cried out, If you did
but know, O Athenians, what I suffer, to merit your Praises! Amongst the
Treasures of the Spoils of Darius, they found a Cabinet of inestimable Value.
And at an Entertainment in the Presence of Alexander, his Courtiers asking what
it was he would put into so precious a Cabinet: I designed, says he, to put
Homer' s Works into it. And he used it actually for that purpose. Amongst those
they call the Twelve Caesar's, the greatest in Esteem are the Two first. We may
add to them Vespasiam. I shall say nothing upon the Two first, for them we
should speak but too much: But Vespasian had no less a Love for the Arts, than
either of them. It was he, whose Protection and Encouragement brought forth a
Swarm of fine Wits; which, without doubt, must give place to those who were in
the Time of Augustus; and yet, nevertheless, they merit very great Esteem.
Pompey lowred the Consulary Fasces before Possidonius his House, when he went
to give him a Visit. Trajan made Dion Chrysostom sit on one Side of him, in his
Chair of Triumph. Scipio ordained, that the Status of Ennius should be placed
upon his Monument: And another was erected in the public Place, to the Honor
of Claudian, by the Order of Arcadius and Honorius. Charlemaign and Francis the
First were, in their Times, the Fathers of Learning. Philip Augustus was also
found of it. There is at this Day extant a kind of History in Verse, called the
Philippeids. He honored the Author with his Royal Favors; and though it was
not worthy so great a Prince, that was his Misfortune, and not his Crime.
Charles the Fifth followed these excellent Examples. He esteemed the Learned,
and the Sciences: And if he did not make therein so great a Progress as was
expected, under the Conduct of that sage Governor whom Lewis the Twelfth had
provided for him; and improved not so much as was hoped he would have done,
under the Care and Pains of a Tutor who afterward arrived to the Supreme
Pontificate; yet he signified his Sorrow for it. History observes, that an
Harangue in Latin having been made before him at the City of Genoua, when he
understood not the meaning of it; It happens now (says he) what I have long
Time foretold; that I should repent one Day, that I had not applied my self to
Study. Nay, even Hannibal himself had a particular Affection for Learned Men.
And the very Turks themselves, who pass for Barbarians (and so they are in many
Things, yet) would seen in this to give some Ground to their Reputation. Those
who are famous, above others, in their History, are, Mahomet the Second, and
Solomon: The one extended the Bounds of the Empire, and the other established
it: They both of them took care to cultivate their Genius. The Education which
these Infidels bestow on their Princes is not very far from this Maxim: They
teach them the Persian Language, to enable them to read their History and
Poesy. In Truth, they are but irregular Works, in comparison of those which
the Greeks and Latins have left us: Their Chronology is fabulous, and their
Eloquence adulterate. But if they delight in this mean sort of Learning,
because they understand it; it is very probable, that if they were acquainted
with more perfect Sciences, they would better esteem them.

CHAP. XXI.
How the Qualities of Wit or Parts serve to inhaunce the Esteem of a valiant
Man.
IT is a common Opinion, says Tacitus, that Soldiers, take them generally, are
seldom polite: And therefore the refined Qualities of the Soul serve extremely
to increase the Esteem of a valiant Man, because they make a glorious Exception
from this General Rule. And besides, they make it apparent, that his Courage is
not a blind Transport of Anger, nor an inconsiderate Heat of Youth, nor the
Effect of any other Principles less commendable; but a true Virtue, conducted
by the Light of Reason, and animated by the Emulation of good Examples.
Farther; All Things which have any Relation to the Arts, contribute so highly
to the Glory of a valiant Prince, that we many times admire that in him, which
we scarce take notice of, or perhaps blame, in another Person. Though
Agriculture be never so innocent a sort of Life, yet if we should see a Prince
delight in it, who had never acquired a Reputation in War, when Opportunities
have courted him thereunto, we should scarce forgive him this Fondness; nor
should we endure to see him dress up Palms and Laurels, who knows not how to
merit Crowns. But the Lacedaemonian, who saw Cyrus the Younger in his Gardens,
conceived a quite contrary Opinion: The Adventure is remarkable; and as it had
respect to a great Prince, and an illustrious Private Man, it seems to me not
unworthy to be related to You. Lysander, whom Courage and Victories had rendered
very famous, was sent Ambassador from the Lacedaemonians, to Cyrus, surnamed
The Younger, to distinguish him from Cyrus who founded the Monarchy, and who,
according to the common Opinion, was slain in his Wars against the Scythians;
he was then in the City of Sardis, the Metropolis of that Realm, which the
Persians had made one of the Provinces of their Empire, and which they had
conquered from the rich and unfortunate Croesus. There was a Conformity of
Merit between the Prince and the Ambassador, the Result whereof was, a
Complacency in the Society one of another. Cyrus treated him in all Things
worthy his Grandeur: And one Day taking him into his Gardens, which were kept
by his Order, with Royal Expenses, Lysander could not forbear to admire the
Stateliness of the Trees, the Length of the Alleys, the Compartment of the
Parterres, the Abundance of Flowers, and of Fruits; and, above all, the fine
Order wherein every Thing was disposed. When Cyrus perceived him in this
Surprise, You do not believe (says he to him) that all this was my Invention.
I drew the Platform my self; and, amongst these Trees, you may see some that
were planted with my own Hands. The Ambassador was then more astonished, and
cast his Eyes upon the Magnificence of that Prince's Habit, which was nothing
like that of a Gardener; and thinking, at the same Time, upon the Glory of his
Actions, You are happy, cries he, O great Prince, forasmuch as in you Virtue is
joined with Fortune. This was the Opinion he had of the Merit of Cyrus, which
caused him to make that Reflection. For, if he had had to do with a Man whom he
had not esteemed for his Courage, he had despised this Adventure, instead of
admiring it. He would not have been surprised, that an effeminate Prince should
seek out such Amusements, to divert his idle Hours: And it would have been the
Subject of his Indignation, to have seen him take more Care to plant his Trees,
and dress his Gardens, than to govern his People, and command his Armies.

CHAP. XXII.
Continuance of the same Reflections.
I Know not how it happens; that Wit which one would think should help to
conceal the Defect of Courage* serves rather to discover it. Whether it be,
because a Man of Wit has more Eyes upon him than others, and one or other will
spy out his weak Side: Or whether it be, that Envy endeavors to find some
Defect in him, which seems to make an Atonement for the Displeasure it has
conceived for the Advantages he possesses: Or whether it be the Artifices he
makes use of to avoid Dangers; discover the Fear wherewith he is agitated. As
one may observe amongst the Animals; those that are fearful, appear to be so
much the more, as they have Cunning joined with Timorousness. Wit is then a
Light which discovers equally the Good, and the Bad: And Cowardice, instead of
finding an Asylum, wherein it may hide it self, meets with a Flash, which
betrays it, and renders it more exposed. It must also be owned, on the other
side, that the Valor of a Prince makes a greater Figure, when he is Master of
an happy Genius, and has taken Pains to cultivate it. Then we are ravished to
see that, under what Circumstances soever he appears, he comes off with
Advantage; knows how to act well, and to speak well, that he can inspire Fear
into his Enemies, and Love into his Subjects. Then a Thousand happy Expressions
fall from him, which all the World collects with Care; and they being spread
amongst the People, redouble the Esteem they have for their Sovereign, and
confirm them in the Love of Loyalty: They are transferred to After-Ages, and
are as eternal as the famous Sayings of the Lacedaemonians, which have been as
faithfully preserved as consecrated Relics; but had never been derived down to
us, had they not been spoken by one of the most valiant Nations in the World. A
King who joins the Qualities of Address to that of Courage, and Eloquence to
Undauntedness, makes present Repartees and Replies to premeditated Discourses:
He indicts Letters, which bear the Character of his Dignity; and may be his own
Historian, if he will himself: He relisheth and understands what is sweetest in
his Triumphs, the Encomium of his Virtue: And, amongst all the Praises they
bestow upon him, he distinguishes those which Posterity may be ignorant of,
from those which ought to be immortal. All the Arts and Sciences conspire
together for his Glory; and are equally allured to this Devoir by the Renown of
his Actions, and the Equity of his Judgments. A Roman, that had been Consul,
writing to a learned Man whom he had recommended to Caesar, and upon whom
Caesar had bestowed his Friendship, Rejoice, says he, in that you are
introduced into a Place, where they understand you are worth something. Under
the Reign of an illustrious Prince, the Homers, the Demosthenes's, the
Thucydides's, all speak the same Language. This Consideration is that which
continually charms their Nocturnal Studies: And what Pains soever they are at,
this is that which sweetens and renders them agreeable. They feel a sensible
Joy, that their Hero, who knows how to make Conquests, and reap Victories,
knows also in what manner they ought to be celebrated. They are ambitious of
his Approbation, as the most noble of all their Recompenses; and submitting
their Works to him, to whom they have consecrated them, they esteem themselves
happy, that he who is the Object of those Praises, is, at the same Time, the
Judge and Dispenser of them.

CHAP. XXIII.
The Learning of a Prince ought not to be affected.
FInally, The Learning of a Prince, to make it worthy of Valor, ought not to
be affected, as was that of Adrian, who took a Pride in attempting those Things
wherein he never succeeded; or as that of Tiberius, who made use of an obscure
Language, although he was able to express himself as clearly as any; and by his
odd Opinions of the Merit of Authors, preferred those who were little known,
and less esteemed. He tired the Grammarians of his Time with ridiculous
Questions; sometimes addicted himself to an insatiable Curiosity in Learning,
which Seneca justly styles an Intemperance. Kings ought to shun this, as a
Rock; and to consider, God has not sent them into the World to shut themselves
up in a dull Solitude, and to pore all their Lifetime upon dead Men's Labors;
but to appear upon the Throne, to enlighten the World by their Presence, and to
live continually in Action. There is no Part of Science, but what is capable to
take up a Man's Lifetime, if he will search into the vain Quirks and
Subtilties of it, and not be content with necessary Deductions. These sorts of
Excess will be injurious to a Prince, although they arise from a Desire to
apprehend the Bottom of those Arts which have a more immediate Relation to
Royalty or Valor. It seems, the Knowledge of the Laws cannot be too well
understood by him, seeing that we exercise Justice in his Name. And likewise,
that he cannot be too well skilled in Fortifications: He has Forts himself,
and so have his Enemies; and therefore he ought to know how to defend the one,
and attack the other. Yet if he will altogether dive to the Bottom of these
Arts, and refine upon them, so well as the profoundest Lawyer, or the most able
Engineer, he must do nothing else during his whole Reign. The Extent of his
Employs oblige him to divide himself: The Character of Sovereignty is, to have
a general Inspection over all. A King knows enough of the Arts and Sciences,
provided he can but know when he is well or ill served, not only in respect of
Zeal, but of Capacity: Then he is a Lawyer, and an Engineer, by those that are
so; and he makes their Science his own. We cannot carry this Reflection too
far; for, through the Want of this due Consideration and Guidance, many Princes
come short of that Glory which waited for them; and never filled up the
Grandeur of their Dignity so much as they were capable of. It has oft-times
been said, it is with a Realm, as with a Ship; and with a Sovereign, as with a
Pilot. A Thousand Workmen contribute to the making of a Ship, or to its
Tackle: One furnishes her with Anchors; another, with Masts or Sail-yards;
others, with Cables or Sails. If a Pilot propound to himself, fully to
understand every of these particular Matters, and to make them himself, with
his own Hands, either Canvass or Cordage, he will run a great Hazard, never to
acquit himself well in his own Profession: For, one of these two Things must
follow; that either he will learn this Art out of his Ship, and by consequence,
abandon the Conduct thereof; or he will apply himself to it during the Course
of his Navigation, and then we cannot think our selves safe with him, but shall
have Reason to fear, that his continual Distractions will soon occasion a
Shipwreck. There are some Arts which a Prince ought to condemn, and others
which he ought to despise; some which he must leave to others, and forbear
himself; and there are others which he may understand without practicing them.
In short, There are some which he may practice too; nevertheless, without
entering into Concurrence or Partnership with those who make a Profession
thereof.

The Conclusion of the Work.
WHen a Prince knows how to make so judicious a Difference; when (I say) his
Knowledge in that Part of Learning which is necessary, and his Love generally
to all the Sciences, is joined to Generosity and Justice; and that these
Qualifications united together, accompany Valor in the Person of a Prince; out
of this Composition results an Hero, which becomes the Delicacy of the whole
Earth. It is by this Means, that such may pretend, not only to equal, but to
surpass the greatest Men of Antiquity. And it seems to me, that what they call,
Field of Glory, ought to be considered as a Race-Course, where the Prize is not
yet adjudged; because we cannot know whether those who have already exercised
there, shall not be surpassed by some of those who are now exercising in this
Field, or that shall hereafter enter thereinto. The Cyrus's, the Alexanders,
the Caesar's, the Constantines, and the Theodofius's, have appeared in this
Course with great Splendor: But how great soever their Reputation has been,
yet it has not fore-closed our Hopes: That when our Modern Warriors do aspire
to outdo them, considering the vast Gifts they have received from Heaven,
their Ambition will not be found Temerarious.

I have said nothing but what the Heroic have made appear by their first
Motions and Active Inclinations: And if any thing render this piece agreeable,
it will not be that Novelty, which is, however, one of the greatest Charms in
the Products of Wit; but I am assured, the Brave will have the same Pleasure
that one has, when he hears that Praised which he loves. And besides, as the
Rulers of Virtue are the true Commendations of those that Practice them, I do
not doubt, for that Reason, but that this Discourse will one Day become their
Encomium.

FINIS.

