THE NEW ATLAS: OR, Travels and Voyages IN Europe, Asia, Africa and America,
Through the most Renowned Parts of the WORLD, VIZ.

From England to the Dardanelles, thence to Constantinople, Egypt, Palestine,
or the Holy Land, Syria, Mesopotamia, Chaldea, Persia, East India, China,
Tartary, Muscovy, and by Poland; the German Empire, Flanders and Holland, to
Spain and the West Indies; with a brief Account of Aethiopia, and the
Pilgrimages to Mecha and Medina in Arabia, containing what is Rare and Worthy
of Remarks in those vast Countries; relating to Building, Antiquities,
Religion, Manners, Customs, Princes, Courts, or Affairs Military and Civil, or
whatever else of any kind is worthy of Note.

Performed by an English Gentleman, in Nine Years Travel and Voyages, more
exact than Ever.

LONDON, Printed for J. Cleave in Chanchery-Lane near Serjeant's Inn, and A.
Roper at the Black Boy in Fleet Street, School.

TO THE Ingenious Reader, THE PREFACE.
THE desire of Travel, and Voyaging to distant Lands, is so Natural to an
Active Genious, that but few who have not had the opportunity of putting it in
Action, have been no less desirable of such an improving undertaking. By what
is visible in one's Native Country, there is no exalted Mind but must
consequently tend to a higher elevation in Knowledge, to furnish it with a
Completion of those wonderful things the scanty Globe Communicates to the Sight
and Senses, so to enable one to give a true Judgment in difference of
Countries, and what is Rare and Remarkable in them. To this end, Princes have
laid aside their Regal Ornaments, and the exuberant Pleasures of Thrones for a
time, taking on them the Fateigue of long Journeys, through many dangers and
difficulties, that so they might inform themselves of the certainty of things,
and Affairs worthy to be entertained in the repositories of Royal Breasts, and
to be the concern of Majesty. I need not enumerate Ancient Examples for this,
one very Modern may suffice, to evidence Truth of what I Attest. It is well
known how the Great and Powerful Czar of Muscovy, in the midst of War shrouding
Majesty in a mean disguise; left his Spacious Country and Armies Contesting
with the mighty Nations of Turks and Tartars, making a tedious Journey to
inform himself in those Matters; of which, at Home, he conceived he had but an
imperfect Relation; also to pollish his pregnant Genious in the refined Courts
of other Princes, and in all probability met with a satisfaction that made him
conclude his Time and Travel well bestowed and undertaken.

I need not much enforce an Argument to persuade the Ingenious that Travel,
renders a Man very much accomplished, and often raises his Fortune above the
common level. It has been seen in Ancient and Modern Ages, whilst such as have
supinely loytered away their Moments of Life, under the umbrage of their own
Mansion, have made no figure in the World, whilst they remained in it; and when
they dropped from the stage of Mortality were soon wrapped in Oblivion. But to
come somewhat nearer to my purpose;

In this History of my Travels through many vast Countries, I have been very
exact to set down nothing but what with much Care and Circumspection occurrred
to me; where any thing is mentioned, as by Hearsay, which is but scanty. I had
it in Conversing with those knowing, and, as I nearly conclude, of much
Integrity, every thing bearing a probability and consonance to Truth. The whole
Work is free from Impossibilities, or any thing that may carry the face of
Romantic Stories or Fables, you may easily perceive in Reading, where I was an
occular and aureal Witness, and where I had only informations from others,
which contribute but a very little part of what I have Written. I have as much
as possible affected Brevity, and must presume to say, that none who have gone
before me, have in Large Volumes comprised so much material matter. I Writ it
indeed at first for the refreshing my own memory, but my Friends, who on all
occasions had been Dear to me, were impatient that it should rest in Silence,
and swayed me even against my inclinations, to let it go abroad; (for not
without some Reluctance) I submitted to their importunities, and the many
reasons they urged to Frame or Mould me to a temper of complying. And now it is
abroad, I am altogether persuaded, it cannot but be grateful to my ingenious
Countrymen, nay, even to Neighboring Nations; for something constrains me to
imagine, it will not altogether be confined within the narrow compass of a
single Island, when it contains in it self so great a share of the World, and
all that is worthy of Note in the Countries it mentions, and those the most
Famed in the Universe. I have digested it into a Method suitable for the
understanding of all intelligent Capacities, and formed it in Chapters, that
any thing desired may be the sooner found out, or turned to; yet the Contents
mention not the Particulars at full, but only some as an Introduction to the
rest; for the matter being Concise and Compact, should I bring every thing
under the heads mentioned therein, they would swell too much, and perhaps be
tedious to the Reader, seeing such a method is a kind of doubling what is the
subsequent, and an Anticipateing the the Readers Expectation.

To Conclude, I present you with Truth and Variety, and so resting on the
ingenious Reader's good Nature, and Impartiality for a candid Construction of
this Work, I take leave to subscribe my self,

Your Most Humble, and Devoted Friend to serve you, T. C.

THE NEW ATLAS; OR, Travels and Voyages In Europe, Asia, Africa, and America.
CHAP. I. Motives that induced the Author to undertake these Travels; his first
setting out for Constantinople, and Voyage as far as the Dardanelles; the
description of diverse places he touched at in the way, and what else happened
in that passage.
INSPIRED by the Fame of distant Lands, by seeing what is rare and Worthy of
Note nearer Home, I debated with my self whether the latter ought not to
suffice my curiosity, and labored very much to enforce it for many Reasons;
but neither that, nor the Charge, Danger, and Hardships I was like to meet with
in Voyaging tempestuous Seas, nor Traveling strange Countries, had any such
prevalent Effect upon me as to surmount the eager Inclination and restless
Desire I had to be an Eyewitness of those things I had often heard, though
imperfectly, in Relation to what they have since appeared. This great Resolve
laboring in my Mind, my Friends could not choose but take notice of some great
alteration in me, and their pressing desires to know the cause of unusual
Emotions that were too evident, constrained me to open my self freely, which at
first did not a little startle them; but perceiving I was fully bent on the
undertaking, and that all their persuasions to the contrary were fruitless,
they assisted me with a supply in a great measure to carry on my undertaking;
and so having prepared every thing I then thought necessary, we parted with
good Wishes, Prayers and Tears.

I sent my Cargo on Board a Merchant's Ship lying over against Eriffe, in the
River of Thames, on the 30th of April 1684, and traveling over-land, went on
Board myself when she was fallen to the Downs. It will be needless to tell you
what Agreement I made with the Master who was my Friend, and used me extreme
well during my Voyage, or how I spent my time ever we quitted the Lands end;
let it suffice we were driven back by stress of Weather, and forced to put in
at several places with other Ships in our Company, before we had a fair Wind to
carry us out to Sea; but at length Providence so ordered it, that the Wind came
about as well as we could wish, and we lost no time to embrace so favorable an
opportunity; but getting out of Harbor, where we had lain for Ten days Wind
bound, in a few hours sailing England disappeared, but Night coming on, the Sun
setting with a dusky Cloud a thwart it, and darting its Beams Pale to either
Pole, the Mariners observed by that and some other Signs they have, that a
Storm threatened us; nor were they deceived in their Conjecture, for the Wind
arose by degrees, and about Midnight it was a full Storm, but with some
difficulty we weathered it, for about the rising of the Sun the Wind slackned
and we kept on our way; yet this tossing a little indisposed me, so that all
that day I kept my Cabin, but for the most part after this the Seas and Winds
contended as it were to give us a favorable passage to Constantinople, whither
this Ship was bound upon some particular occasions as well as that of Trade,
which I do not conceive pertinent to this Relation of my own Travels, nor shall
I describe, as some superfluously do, all the Coasts we made in our Sailing:
Let it suffice then that we touched not till we came to Messina in Sicily,
though in our passage I saw the Fires of the Mountain Stromboli, which in the
night time looked dreadful, though at a great distance, and was informed that
the People who live near it conceive a foolish opinion, that it is an entrance
into Hell, because when the Fire makes its Irruptions they hear howlings as of
the Damned, which is no more than the Winds breaking through the hollow Rockey
Caverns in the Mountain, wasted by the long continuance of the burning, which
makes a confused noise, that at a distance resembles howling.

Passing the Fare of Messina, we came before the Town, and dropped Anchor without
the Port, where those that would had leave to go ashore; I failed not to do
it, and whilst the Sailers were employed in taking in some necessaries, I took
a slight view of the place. It lies on that side the Island that looks to
Rhegio in Italy, from which it is 60 miles distant, where the Ancient Town of
Zande stood: Nature has furnished it with a pleasant and safe Harbor, which
for its compactness may be thought to have been made by Art. The Buildings that
adorn the Port are Regular and Uniform, so that they give a pleasant prospect
at the end of the Mole that shuts in the Port: There is a Tower well fortified
to secure the entry, and about the middle of it is another Tower, on the top of
it a a great Light to guide Ships in the Night; The Streets of the Town are
fair and large; The Cathedral is very stately, and over the Door in large
Characters is Written, Gran-Mercy a Messine. When the French became Masters of
the Island, it was the first place that Surrendered, and Sicily caused and
beheld the fatal Tragedy of the Intruders, for a design was secretly laid and
carried on, so that on a set day, when the Bell rung to Evening Song, which was
the Sign, the Inhabitants of the Island Massacred all the French Nation without
sparing Women or Children, which is still called the Fatal Sicilian Vesper.
Before the Church is a square Piazza, with a Theater in the middle, where the
Victory over the Turkish Naval Forces is represented in Brass, and in the same
Metal stands the Statue of Don John of Austria, the Spanish Admiral, in that
Expedition. The Country is very Fruitful, abounds in Sulphur Mines, and much
subject to Earthquakes. The next Town of note is Syracuse, where the famous
Archimedes made his Experiments, and fired the Roman Navy that besieged it with
Burning-Glasses. There is a Castle built on the Rocks called Scyla, and the
Water beating on these Rocks resembles the barking of Dogs. As for Charibais it
is opposite to the Port of Messina, and not dangerous, but when two contrary
Eddies meet and make a kind of a whirlpool, so that sometimes Ships turn round
and are sucked in, which gave occasion to Fable them two Sea Monsters set there
to destroy Passengers, though there are Pilots always ready at the general
Charge to guide Ships in and out. The Viceroy has his Residence here six
Months, and as many at Palermo. Mount Gibello, anciently called Aetna, much
infects this fruitful Island with its firey Irruptions. The Sicilians are very
hauty, Proud, and exceeding Jealous of the Spaniards under whose Government
they are.

From hence setting Sail, we directed our Course to Maltha, and having Coasted
Sicily, there sprung up an East North East Wind, before which we drove a very
swift Sailing, and soon made the Isle of Maltha, in the Port of which we came
to an Anchor. It lies in the African Sea, between Sicily and Tripoly, in the
Latitude of 38 degrees, and in Longitude 34, extending from East to West 29
Miles, and is about 12 over; all the Earth is exceeding White; its Ancient Name
was Melita. In the Year 1530 the Emperor Charles gave it, and the Isle of Gozo,
to the Knights who were driven out of Rhodes, and they have ever since
possessed it in spite of all the efforts the Turks have made. It seems to be a
Rock with very little Earth on it, yet it bears Fruit and Corn, but they are
mostly supplied from Sicily, it lying but 20 Leagues distant. Here St. Paul on
his landing in his passage to Rome shook off the Viper; they show his Grott,
and the Earth is dug there, and carried away for many Physical uses. The
Natives wear Green Spectacles to prevent their Eyes from Dazzling, by reason of
the whiteness of the Earth. The Knights of the Order are under a great Master.
They have many advantageous Ports well defended, and are formidable at Sea with
their Galleys to the Moors of Barbary and Turks; for if they take them they
make 'em Slaves. The Towns of Maltha are well situate and defended; they have
good Magazines, and always keep a good Provision of Arms and Naval Stores. They
are very charitable to Travelers, especially the Sick, providing for them in
their Hospitals while they stay, and pay the charges of their Voyage when they
depart.

The Wind being again fair, we left Maltha, passing the Cape of Metapan and
Isle of Cerigo, the Ancient Porphyrus and Citherea, where formerly stood a
Magnificent Temple to Venus, the ruins of which, as I was told, are still to be
seen near the Sea; and meeting with a storm, we were constrained to cast Anchor
before the Island of Zia, which in Ancient times was called Call Ceos or Cea;
it is about 50 Miles in Circuit, shaped like a Horse-shoe; the Soil produces
Wine, Corn, good Pasture, and many other useful things; the Harbor is stored
with Fish, the Inhabitants are very civil to Strangers; the Women wear their
Coats but to their Knees, and their Smocks about a Foot below that, with a Veil
reaching their Breasts, which they turn aside as they think fit; when they will
or will not Compliment any but lying in War's way, between the Turks and
Venetians, they are much oppressed and impoverished, otherways the plenty of
the Island would enrich them.

Sailing from hence we made the Isle of Andra: This is the Ancient Andros of
the Greeks, but now Inhabited by People of several Nations, as Albanians,
Armenians, Turks, Jews, etc. and these differ in Customs as well as Languages,
very rude and unhospitable; the Chief Towns are Arni and Amolacos. The Greeks
have several Churches in this Island, but the People are very Superstitious and
odd in their Devotions, strowing Flowers, and rolling in them; but the Latins
who have likewise Churches there, are more Civilized, and proceed Regular: The
Island is very Fruitful, and here they make abundance of white wicker Baskets
used all over the Archipelago.

Weighing Anchor, we got out to Sea, and stood to the Starboard, passing
between this Island and Negropont, and having a South-west Wind, Sciro, and
soon after Ispi Cera, and some other places appeared. In the Evening when we
were pretty clear of Islands, the Wind turned East South East, and we soon made
the Land where Troy stood, little of whose Ruins remain; for we had passed
Tenedos in the Night, so passing the Mouths we entered the Channel of the
Helespont, the place where the Turks passed from Asia into Europe to extend
their Empire.

CHAP. II. Of the Helespont, Dardanelles, Places about them, what is observable
in Constantinople and its adjacents; Containing all that is Curious and
Remarkable in these Parts.
THE Gate, or Entrance, as it were, to Constantinople being by the Helespont
and Dardanelles, I think it here convenient to say something of this famed
Straight before I come a Land; It lies in 37 Degrees, 42 Minutes, North
Latitude, and of Longitude about 55, not extending above 10 or 12 Leagues in
length, and at the entrance it is a large League and an half broad; it divides
the Country of Thrace from Troas a Province of Asia, that lies to the East: To
the North lies the Propontis, and to the South the Aegean Sea, and the
Archipelago; and in Sailing here one has a prospect of diverse fine Towns,
Villages, etc. and a curious Country on either Hand.

The Turks knowing the important advantage of this Straight, have Fortified the
Passage with two strong Castles, one in Europe, and the other in Asia; the
Castle built in Asia, called the New Castle, is seated on a tongue of Land
pointing out into the Sea on a square Platform, comprizing 4 large panes of
Walls, flanked at the four Corners with Towers; those next the Sea, square with
a sort of Redoubt only on one side; those toward the Land are round, and defend
the Walls, but neither in thickness nor largeness comparable to the other; the
Works washed by the Sea have Port-holes level with the surface of the Water,
and I could number as I Sailed by, about 40 Cannon mounted, to prevent any
Ships from forcing their way into the Harbor; and to the South of this Castle
stands a very fair Mosque.

The Castle on the European side, which the Turks call Roumeli-inglu-issar, is
seated near to Cape Greco, and in form is irregular; within the compass of the
Walls are Houses for the Aga, and other Officers, with a fair Mosque. There is
a Platform on which many great Guns are planted, lying equal with the surface
of the Water. Near the Castle lies a small Village noted for its Five stately
Pilasters, that serve to underprop the Aquaducts bringing Water to the
Fortress. But notwithstand-these Castles, whose Guns reach from Shore to Shore,
the Venetians, and other Maritime Nations, have insulted the Harbor, for the
Castles lie not directly opposite, least in firing they should batter each
other. The Castles are appointed to examine Ships that pass and re-pass, and
the Governors have Orders to sink such Ships as will not comply: Beyond these
Castles that are of Modern building are two old Castles, one on each shore;
that on the Asian side the Turks call Natoli-jski-jsiar; it is of square
Building, flanked at the corners with Towers, and in the midst of it is a large
square Tower, on which some Culverin is placed; and behind this Castle is a
large Village of about 3000 Inhabitants, Christians, Turks, and Jews; These by
us are called the Castles of the Dardanelles. That on the European side is of a
Regular Fortification, and indeed we may esteem this narrow Passage well
guarded by these Castles, and Constantinople so advantageously Situated, that
no great City in the World can boast of more Advantages; as will by and by
appear.

Being examined at the Castles, and leave obtained to pass, we arrived at
Gallipoly, about 35 Miles from them. This Town was anciently built by one
Callias, Prince of the Athenians, and after his Name called Callipolis, but now
corruptly Gallipoly; it is thinly inhabited by Greeks, who mostly sell a Liquor
called Raki, a kind of Brandy, and some Oil. The Doors of their Houses are not
above two Foot high, and so made to prevent the proud Turks Insults, who are
hereby prevented riding in on Horseback. In this Town there is a square Castle,
with a Tower joined to it by the Pummel of a Wall; to the Seaward there is an
Arsenal, where the old Galleys are laid up which the Turks affirm to have been
taken from the Venetians when they took the Island of Cyprus; but in Truth they
are a part of their own shattered Fleet that escaped from the Battle of
Lepanto, and were by main strength carried over the Isthmus of Corinth, and put
into the Archipelago, they not being able to bring them about by Sea, because
the Christians had possessed all the Passes.

After having been ashore, and pretty well refreshed in this place, we weighed
Anchor, and with a West South West Wind passed the Isle of Marmora: At this
place the Sea is wide, and this is properly the Propontis, though now called
mostly Mare de Marmora; and here though we had a fair Wind, the Current setting
strong against us, we could not make much way; however, Sailing on we in a
little time came in sight of Constantinople, which is about 125 Miles from
Gallipoly, and entering into the Straight of it we had a very fine Prospect of
that Famous City; it is seated in Thrace, on Europe side, over against the
Situation of Ancient Chalcedon on the Asian Shore.

Constantinople, by most that have seen it, is held to be the best Situated of
any City in the World for all manner of convenience, viz. On a point of main
Land, jutting out toward the Thracian Bosphorus, so little divided from Asia,
that it requires but half an hours Sailing to pass thither; on the Right Hand
is has the Propontis, or White-Sea; on the Left the Euxine or Black-Sea and
Paulus Maeotis, which receiving a great number of Rivers, and having on it many
bordering People, this City is plentifully furnished with all necessaries; for
let the Wind blow as it will, the Channels of the White and Black Sea serve it,
because, when it is contrary to the one it stands fair fro the other.

Between these Seas is the entry of the Port, which Nature without the help of
Art has made exceeding useful, for it is always so replennished with Water,
that Ships of good burden may lay their heads on the Keys, and one may step
ashore without any difficulty.

It is held to be first Founded by Pausanias, King of Sparto, who named it
Byzantium; and upon his consulting the Oracle where to build a City, he gave no
other Answer but this, viz. Over Against the blind Men, intimating the
Calcidonians, who had neglected the fair opportunity of a sight so accommodated
by Nature, and built Chalcedon in Asia opposite to it. It was destroyed by
Severus, to punish the Citizens for their Revolt, but restored more Magnificent
by Constantine the Great, who named it Constantinople, equalling it with Rome
in her Ancient Glory, and removing the Seat of the Empire thither, as if it
were designed by the Nature of its Situation, to bear Rule, and be the
Mistress of Cities. There goes a Fame, that when Constantine was about to
measure out ground to build an Imperial City in Asia, a stooping Eagle catched
up the Line, and carrying it over the Straight, dropped it in the place where the
City now stands, which was looked on as a fortunate Presage, and proved a
sufficient encouragement for erecting it. It was once taken by the Latins from
the Greeks, Anno 1203, and re-taken by them Anno 1254; and lastly by Mahomet
the Second Emperor of the Turks, Anno 1453, who since made it the Seat of the
Empire, and called it Istambol, corruptly from the Greek Word (...). The heat
of the Air in Summer is cool, and much allayed by the Breezes that come from
the Seas. It has been much subject to Earthquakes, and is very often so to the
Plague.

Constantinople is in Figure Triangular, two sides of it are washed by the Sea,
the one by the Propontis, or White Sea, and the other by the Port; the other
side is toward the Land; the biggest of the three is that beaten by the Surges
of the Propontis, reaching from the Seraglio to the seven Towers, and that
toward the Port is the middlemost: The Seraglio being built on the point of
the point of the Triangle, gives a curious Prospect, for it runs out between
the Propontis and the Port: Its Gardens on the Shore are very Charming, there
being nothing that is scarce and rare but is found in them; and this is held to
be the particular spot where the Ancient Byzantium stood. On the other Angle
pointing to the Canal of the White Sea, are the seven Towers; they were built
by the Christians, and are covered with Lead; the chief use they are now put
to, is to keep the vast Treasure of the Empire, sent as Tribute from many
Nations, though part of them are often made a Prison for Persons of Quality,
and great Officers. At the third Angle which is at the bottom of the Port to
the Land side, appear the Ruins of Constantine's Palace, by which it seems to
have been very Magnificent.

This great City is encompassed by strong Walls, and to the Land side they are
double; in some places the Walls are of rough Stone and Brick, in others of
Smooth Freestoone; they are guarded by a good Ditch, Wharfed and Faced on both
sides; the Walls are guarded by a great number of little Towers at an equal
distance, and Guns planted commodiously, though I confess, I take it not to be
very strong, compared with the Modern Fortified Towns and Cities: Some allow it
to be 16 Miles in circuit, but I cannot well agree with them, for I, with
another Person, walked and rowed it at a pretty moderate pace in three Hours,
so that I guess it to be about 12 Miles in Circuit. It has 22 Gates, 6 toward
the Land, 5 toward the Propontis, and 11 along the Port; those to the Water
answered by Creeks, Landing places and Stairs. When I had made this observation
I thought it convenient to enter the City, which I did on the fifth of June
about nine in the Morning, I found the Streets mostly narrow, the Houses
generally built of Timber, and that is the reason when Fires happen, which they
often do, vast numbers of Houses are consumed before the raging Element can be
overcome, and the Janisaries and others, appointed to extinguish it, many times
on a disgust, or for the sake of Plunder, encourage the progress of the
Conflagration by hindering those that would assist them.

Going to the Besestn which is a distinct Canton of the City, enclosed with
Gates and Walls, I found it to be very fine, for here the Merchants keep Shop,
and the place is very Regular, the Houses are covered above with Planks joined
upon Rafters, though there are holes left to let in the Light; and here the
richest Wares are vended, or at least Samples to be seen of such as they have
in their Warehouses; They are all ranked by themselves, so that business is
quickly dispatched. At ten every Evening the Gates are shut, and after that
hour none can pass without giving a small matter of Money to the Porter, and
this is the place most frequented; greatest part of the Streets though the City
are very Populous, being easy to pass without Crowds at any time.

From this place I went to visit the Hypyodrome, which spacious place was built
by the Emperor Constantine, for Tilts, Tournaments, and other exercise on
Horseback, and the Turks at present call it the place of Horses; It is 400
paces long, and about 200 broad; and at the end opposite to the Seraglio, there
are two Obilisks, the first is 70 Foot high, and can be discerned to consist of
no more than one Stone; it is adorned with several Herogliphical Figures in
Relief, placed on a square Marble Pedestal; on one of the Faces of the Pedestal
is an old Latin Inscription so defaced by time, that no more can be gathered
from it, than that it was built by the Emperor Theodosius; the Second has a
like in Greek Characters; the Third is adorned with the Emperor's Effigies
seated on a Throne, with his Officers of State about him; and on the Fourth is
represented a Battle. The other Obelisk is of Free Stone, sharp pointed like a
Piramid, and being much worn by time, has no Inscription on it to be discerned.

Near these stands a Brazen Pillar of considerable height, commonly called the
Serpentine Column, because it appears like three Serpents wreathed or twisted
together, their Tails fastened to the ground, and at the top it has 3 gapeing
Mouths; and it is the common opinion, that this Pillar was set up in
remembrance of 3 Serpents, who in Ancient times wasted the confines of the
City, till the Emperor Leo Haurus by Magic Art drew them into a great Ditch in
the middle of the Hypyodrome, who were killed by filling up the Ditch with
Stones and Earth. In this City there are two other Columns, one called the
Historical, and the other the Burnt Column, the latter being defaced by Fire,
but neither of them being much remarkable, I pass them over, yet adjoining to
them there is a Court where the Archers Exercise, and the Turks are very exact
in shooting, for I see them stick their Arrows one after another in the
circumference of half a Crown, at 100 Paces.

The next thing of Note my curiosity led me to visit was, Sancta Sophia, the
principal Mosque in the City; it has several Doors that lead into a Portico
that gives entrance into the Mosque, which is 120 Paces in Length, and 80 in
breadth, having square Walls, but the Vault or Roof is round, so Artificially
contrived, that the Frame is supported without Columns, though there are many
rows of Columns, which only appear to support the weight of two Galleries, yet
are placed so that they prove very Ornamental, being 30 on each side, about 16
Foot high, of hard pollished Stone; however, the length of Time has made many
Clefts and Chinks in them. The Vault of the Mosque retains much of its Ancient
Beauty, as being adorned with curious Mosaic Work, consisting of small guilt
Stones so neatly joined, that they after so many Ages remain almost perfect;
and at the four Corners where the Vault begins, in Mosaic Work, are the
Figires of the four Beasts mentioned in the Apocalypse, yet Turks who pretend to
abhor Images have somewhat defaced them, as they have the Figure of our
Savior, which is over the Principal Door: He is represented sitting on a
Throne, giving Benedict-to one that prostrates before him; the Figure of the
Virgin Mary appears on the Right Hand; and in a Bass Relief the Holy Ghost is
represented in the Figure of a Dove, which they have not at all defaced.

There is to be seen the Tomb of the Renowned Emperor Constantine in this
stately Structure, in former times a Christian Church; it is a Gray Stone, 8
Foot long, and 4 over, and the Turks hold it in remembrance of that worthy
Emperor of great Esteem. This Mosque or Temple is paved with curious Marble
covered with Mats, to abate the coldness of the Stone when they prostrate
themselves, for the Turks are so devoutly superstitious, that they put of their
Barbouches, or Shoes, when they enter their Mosques. There are also to be seen
the ruins of other fine Paintings and Images, partly defaced by the Turks, and
partly by Time.

Christians are not admitted here without Connivance or Bribery, and those only
by the Franks; for if a Jew or Greek be found in the Mosque, he must either
die, or turn Turk. It was built by Justinian the Emperor on recovery of his
health, having vowed in his Sickness, if God spared him, to found one of the
beautifulest Churches in the World, to the honor of the Sovereign Wisdom, for
Sophia in the Greek signifies Wisdom, and this is the only Ancient Structure of
this kind in Constantinople; for though there are many stately Mosques in the
City, they are of late building, Erected by the Sultans and Sultanesses, whose
Names they bear; as that of Solomon the Magnificent, which is very Stately; of
Achmet Mohomet Selim; with those of Chadazet and Valide, new and very
Beautiful, by the Idea of which last you may guess at the rest; it was Founded
by the Sultaness Valide, Mother to Mahomet the Fourth, seated in the middle of
a large square Court, resembling a vast Cloister, by reason of the Arched Roof
that environs it like a Portico, and under are diverse Fountains with Cocks,
where those that are polluted wash themselves ever they enter the Mosque; it
has but one Gate, and that is surrounded by a Portico of extraordinary height,
paved with white and black Marble, supported by 64 Pillars of Red Marble; the
Platform is adorned with Painting and Figures after the Turkish manner. This
Portico is covered with many little Domes, and a very large one in the middle
higher than the rest, the whole Structure being very curious Work covered with
Lead; there are four Turrets at the four Corners of the Buidling, called
Minarets, slender, but very high, with Balconies round them, standing like
Maypoles, with Cressents on the Globes, and winding-Stairs, just enough for the
Muesans to creep up with their loud Bawlings to call the People to Prayers, for
they have no Bells, where clapping their hands on their Ears, they go round the
Turret in the Balconies, and when they cry their Voices are heard very far.
They call in their own Language, which in English is to this Effect; God is a
great God, give Testimony that there is but one God, come yield your selves up
to his Mercy, and Pray him to forgive you your Sins. God is a great God, etc.
This Mosque is Vaulted and Adorned with a great number of Lamps and Globes of
Glass, and in the Globes are many curious Devices, as Galleys, the model of
Mosques, Trees, Flowers, Cities, and the like. There is a Table at the upper
end, where usually the High Altar stands in the Romish Churches, and to this
they turn their Faces when they say their Prayers, over which is placed the
Name of God, Written in Gold Arabic Characters, and over against that are
fixed two Brazen Candlesticks holding Wax Tapers of a vast bigness. The Sultans
or Emperors lie Buried in their Mosques, their Tombs being covered with Rich
Carpets, which have been laid on Mahomet's Tomb at Mecha; for they conclude
that sanctifies them, and keeps them from evil Spirits; their rich Turbans are
placed at the Head, and if they have been Warlike, their Cimiters, and other
Military Achievements, are fix-on or near them: Diverse Alcorans are chained to
the Tombs, and there is always one or other that has a Pension left them by the
deceased Emperor to Read the Alcoran to the People that come to visit the Tomb,
and to Pray for his Soul. Sultan Amurat has two of his Wives placed at his
Head, and eleven of his Children round him; and at the head of the Tomb or
Coffin is a convenient place where his Prayer-Books are laid up, appearing
through a Latten Grate, adorned with Gold and precious Stones. The Keepers of
the Turbe, or little Chaple, in the Mosque where these Bodies lie, are obliged
at certain hours of the day to Pray for the Souls of the deceased.

The Arsenal is at the end of the Port belonging to the City, being a very
compact Building; it contains a considerable extent of Ground; the Galleys are
laid up there under 120 Arches; the Christians are not permitted to come into
it, but the Turks say, there are Arms for 60000 Men, besides Furniture for
Shipping, and in the Baths many thousand Slaves are shut up who lead miserable
Lives. The Captain Bassa, and all the Officers depending on the Admiralty, have
their Apartments, and lodge in the Arsenal, that they may be ever ready to
receive Orders about the Naval concerns.

In this City are many Hans and Kervanserais, which serve most for Warehouses,
being strongly built, barred and guarded to prevent Imbezlement.

The Hans consist of four sides of building, enclosing a square Court with a
Fountain, the Roof consists of little Domes covered with Lead; and here Foreign
Merchants, who bring their Goods to lay up, find entertainment; they only
contain two Stories, divided into Rooms, that have no intercourse one with
another, the lower Story consists of Warehouses for Goods, and the upper
divided into little Chambers, where Strangers that are Travelers Lodge, but
they must furnish themselves with all necessaries, or otherways they must want
both Furniture and Provisions.

The Karvanserais are built after the same fashion, only the Stone work reaches
but to the first Story, and the rest is Wood and Brick, whereas the Hans have
entire Stone Walls of a good thickness for their better securities against
Pilferers. They have each of them but one Gate, and in the latter indigent
Persons are permitted to Lodge, from half a Crown to a Crown a Month.

The next thing of Note in the City is the Seraglio, which Christians and Jews
are prohibited to enter, except Ambassadors, and some few Attendance when they
have their Audience, and then some crowd in with them that are not concerned,
or rather bribe their way, but it is very dangerous for them to pass any
further than the Second Court, and further I could not gain access, though I
proffered liberally, and the Turks rarely refuse Money where they can oblige one
for it, and therefore I shall give a description as far as I could observe, and
something over according to the best information I could get.

The Seraglio is the Prince's Palace, but of very irregular building; it is
built on a point of Land that juts out into the Sea, as I have before
mentioned, and surrounded with Walls of a greyish Stone, adorned at top with a
Parapet and Battlement, suitable to the City Walls; it is near 4 miles in
compass, but the greatest part is Gardens; the Building clusters together, like
the ancient building of low Castles or Fortifications, so that on the out side
they have nothing of Magnificence, except a few guilt Spires and Globes; the
chief Entry is near Sancta Sophia, and the Gate is like that of the entrance
into many Ancient Cities, without either beautiful Architecture, or Ornament;
yet the Capigy keep their Court of Guards under it, and carefully watch the
entrance.

Passing this Gate it leads into a large Court, where on the right Hand is the
Apartment for such as fall sick in the Seraglio, with matted Sopha's along the
Walls, so that they are no better lodged then in Hospitals; on the left Hand is
a Magazine for furnishing 1000 Men, that the Grand Signior's Domestics may,
upon any sudden Insurrection in the City, defend the Palace, and the Person of
their Emperor; though notwithstanding this precaution, several of them have
been deposed by the Rabble and Soldery, and come by violent Deaths, as their
Histories make mention at large.

There being little else remarkable in this Court, I passed into the Second,
fronted with two large Porticoes; on one side are the Grand Signior's Kitchens,
where they Dress for Him, his Women, and such as live at his Charge in the
Seraglio; and on the other side are his Stables, where 100 Horses may
conveniently stand, and many Apartments where the Officers Lodge; and this great
Court is entered on Horseback by none but the Grand Signior, all others alight
at the Gate: It is not so big as the first, but consists of a Square, extending
200 Paces every way; there is round it a Gallery in the Form of a Cloister,
supported by a great many Marble Pillars, and covered with Lead; and at the
back of that there are Domes, ranging from one end of the Court to the other,
covered with Lead, as the former, and on the right Hand, where the Kitchins
are, the Stables I mentioned being toward the Sea. The Janisaries draw up in
this Court to the right Hand, and the Horse to the Left; in the middle there is
a delicate Fountain, shaded with Cypress, and Scycamore Trees; and heretofore
near this Fountain, the Grand Signiors caused the Heads of the Bassa's, and
other great Men of the Court that displeased them, to be cut off, as a Terror
to others; for the Government is Despotical, and the Lives of the Subjects are
at the disposal of the Prince. On the left Hand, at the end of the Court, is a
Hall, where the Divan or Council of State sits, and on the Right, a Door which
gives entry into that, and is more properly called the Seraglio, and none but
those who have particular Orders can pass it.

Very near this Seraglio, within the same enclosure is another building Founded
by Constantine the Great, and intended a Palace, but now it is called the Old
Seraglio, having many additional Buildings, yet not fair on the out side,
though these and the other have costly Gildings and Paintings within; the Turks
in general having little regard what out side show their Houses make, so they
appear Sumptuous and Magnificent within. It is surrounded with Walls of an
unusual height, without any Windows on the out side, the better to prevent the
Women from being seen; and here the Reigning Sultan shuts up the Wives of his
Predecessors, whom he Sequesters from the World, except he likes any of them
himself, or pleases to bestow them on the great Men of his Empire, for their
signal Services; otherwise this is a kind of a Nunnery for Life.

There is yet a Third Apartment, properly called a Seraglio, joining close to
that of the Grand Signior, so that he can pass to it by Galleries privately,
when he has a mind to divert himself there. What more I could gather by sight
at a distance is, that this place which is so much talked of, as the Palace of
the greatest Emperor in the World, especially as to largeness of Territories,
gives but an inconsiderable Prospect; and one at a distance can form nothing
regular in it, it looking like a confused Mass of Building, in Apartments and
Domes.

The Grand Signior has here his Officers, who have a great many under them;
most part of them are Eunuchs, Blacks of Aethiopia; and others, that are most
comely of their kind; they formerly were only Gelt, but it is said, that Sultan
Solomon, one day seeing a Gelding back a Mare, and perform, as he supposed, the
office of a Stallion, came Home and caused them all to be smoothed by the
Belly, to prevent their dabling with his Women, of which Wound a great number
died, and now they make Water through a Silver Pipe, which they put into the
orrifice of the Root of their Yard, to prevent polluting themselves, by
scattering their Urine on their Vestments; for then, till they have Absolution,
they think they are unclean, as I shall show hereafter; and now they cut off
the Genitals of Children they buy, or have as Tribute, upon the Borders of
Aethiopia, and other Negro Countries; and though many die under this usage, for
it is not done till they are 8 or 10 years old, that they may see whether they
are Docil or Ingenious; yet they have enough to serve in all the Seraglio's in
Europe and Asia; for there are others belonging to the Grand Signior, beside
those at Constantinople; and many to the Bassa's, and Governors of Provinces in
diverse Countries; and these are so Jealous, or rather Envious, which makes them
to watch over the Women so narrowly, that they are rarely too cunning for them;
they are lodged in a separate Apartment, together; and the single Testimony of
one of them, against the greatest Subject in the Empire, costs the party his
Life; nay, a bare Solicitation, or too near a View, without any Act, is
sufficient for a Strangling; as for Example, Sultan Amurat used a Prospective
Glass, to discover the Actions of those that were in the City, and by that
means, espying a Man at a Window, with the like Prospective, taking a view of
one of his Sultana's, walking in the Garden of the Seraglio; he thereupon sent
a Capigi, with 4 Mutes, who entered the House, and immediately Strangled the
over curious unfortunate.

These Eunuchs have, in a manner, the sole Government of the Seraglio, but
particularly of the Women; and when the Sultana's take the Air in the Garden,
the Bostangis, or Gardeners, stand round the Walls, holding Staves with long
and broad pieces of Cloth fastened to them, which makes them as though they were
Blind, and is much higher than the Garden Wall, to which their Backs are
turned, it being Death to look, if any of the Eunuchs percieve it, and complain
of it; and this Jealousy proceeds so far, that no Boat is suffered to come
within 400 Paces of the Garden-Wall, though it is very high, if the Sultana's
be walking there; and if any persume it, there are Sentinels advantageously
placed, to Fire at them; so that those who have business by Water, are
constrained to fetch a great compass about. But, notwithstanding this
Jealousy, which, in a great or less Degree reigns all over the Empire, the
Turks esteem Women as very inconsiderable Creatures, without Souls, denying
that they go to Heaven; That they were only made to serve for the use of Man,
and be obedient to him, and their main end was designed for Generation;
otherwise, unless to satisfy their Lusts, they esteem them scarce Rational,
and little better then Beasts: In a word, these of Quality are but splendid
Slaves, and the meaner sort miserable ones.

The Eunuchs have the Charge of bringing up the Grand Signior's Pages, called
I^hn^glians, who are the beautifulest Youths that can be got, and for the most
part of Christian Extraction, but taken so young from their Parents, that they
easily Educate them in the Mohammedan Superstition with great care, till they
are about 28 years of Age, and are taught such Arts, and used to such Exercise
as their Inclination chiefly leads them to. If they are of good natural parts,
and prompt in understanding, they usually rise to the greatest preferments in
the Ottoman Empire; if not, they are turned out, and entered into pay and
employments of other natures, living but meanly; but whilst they live in the
Seraglio, the greatest Preferment they can, rise to, is to be of the number of
the Forty, who are nearest the Grand Signior's Person, and these the Eunuchs
look narrowly after least they slip among the Women, or defile one another by
unnatural Lust, for these are not dis membred; among the 40 mentioned, there
are four in high Esteem, viz. the Selihtar or Sword Bearer; the Tschoader, who
carries the Cock; the Ibrictar, who carries Water ready to pour on the Grand
Signior's Hands when he requires it; and the Kuptar, who carries the Pot of
Sorbet to give him when he calls for it. There are Seminaries of these
Ichnogleans, as at Peza, etc. where they are Educated, and growing up, sent to
Constantinople, to be entertained in the Grand Seraglio.

The next that make a considerable Figure in the Seraglio, are the Bostangis or
Gardeners, over whom is a Bassa, called the Bostangi Bassa; he has his Lodging
in the Seraglio, and the Privilege of wearing his Beard, not any beside him
and the Grand Signior doing it, the rest being Shaved in token of Servitude; He
is very great with the Prince, and always steers his Barge when he goes to take
the Air on the Sea, so that having his Ear, and liberty to Discourse with him,
all the Grandees stand in fear of him, and much consider his Power, laboring
to keep him their Friend; and when any considerable Person is put to Death in
Constantinople, he is sent to fetch his Head.

There are in this City many little Seraglioes belonging to the great Men of
the Court, but on the outside, they look much like old decaying Buildings, and
some hold, that they built them without external Beauty and Ornament, because
the Grand Signior should not be Jealous of their Pride, as aspiring to too much
greatness, but within it is otherways, for they have lovely Apartments, adorned
with Gold and Azure; the Floors are covered with Rich Carpets, so that those
who enter pull of their Shoes, to prevent any injury they may do them; the
Walls of most of them are faced with polished Tiles, like China Ware; in their
Halls, and Chambers, they have risings about a Foot, which they call Divans,
covered with richer Carpets than the Floor, and Imbrodered Cushions placed in
order on them. Here they Rest, receive Visits, and spend the best part of the
Day, and the Women's Apartments in all these, are separated from those of the
Lodgings; none but the Master of the House, and some Eunuchs, are suffered to
enter where they are; the Women stir little abroad, having Baths in their
Houses, with suitable Attendance, and other convenient Necessaries.

Thus having described all that is worthy of Note in Constantinople, I shall
speak something of the Neighboring places, which may properly be termed the
Suburbs of this great City; and in the first place Galata is a very pleasant
place, separated from the City only by the Port, which may be crossed in
Caiques, or Wherries, who are always attending; however, taking a compass you
may go by Land, and have a very fine Prospect of the Country. This Town is
pretty Large, and formerly belonged to the Genoese, and then was more
considerable, for it held out some time against the whole Power of the
Ottoman's, after Mahomet the Second had taken Constantinople; the Houses are
Fair, and well Built, mostly Inhabited by Greeks, though it is the usual
Residence of Franks, and they have five Monasteries there, which much Beautify
the place; and near the Sea side, there is the finest Fish-Market that may be
seen in any Country, for the Fishmonger's-shops are stocked with such numbers
of various kinds of Fish, on Market days, that Strangers admire how they should
procure them; the Greeks keep many Taverns here, so that there are frequent
disorders, by reason of drunken People, though great care is taken to prevent
it.

Pera, and Tophana are two other pleasant little Towns; the Former is appointed
for the Residence of most Ambassadors; those of the Emperor of Germany, King of
Poland, and Republic of Ragousa, having usually their Residence in
Constantinople; the French Ambassador's House is here, very stately, having a
curious Prospect of the Seraglio. The latter is the place where they cast their
great Guns, and that in the Turkish Language seems to give it its Name; the
Houses in both are very finely Built, rising and falling pleasantly, so that at
a distance, they seem to represent a kind of an Amphitheatre.

To these I might add Cassumpasha, which lies first if one goes by Land, and
appears like a great Village; her Galleys and Ships are Built and laid up with
great convenience, for it is accommodated with 120 Arched Docks, or Houses; in
the way to this the Ocmeidan, or Field of Arrows, a very spacious place, where
the Turks exercise shooting with the Bow; and many resort thither to pray for
success on their Arms, and any thing they stand in need of.

One may go in a Caique from Constantinople to Schudaret, which the Turks call
Iscodar, it being but a good Mile. In the way there is a Tower built on a Rock
in the Sea pretty strong, the Guns command the Port, and the Mouths of the
White and Black-Sea; the latter is so called, not because the Water is Black,
as some imagine, but by reason of the many casualties that happen upon the
rising of sudden Storms, that cast Vessels away, to the loss of many Lives; and
beside, it not being very broad, there are several Currants caused by the
Danube, Boristenhes, Tunais, and other smaller Rivers, that discharge their
Waters into it, and occasion many Eddies that drive Ships on the Rocks, where
they are lodged or split; but to return,

In the Tower I mentioned, is a fine Well of fresh Water, and some call it
Leander's Tower, but for what reason I know not. Schudaret is a pleasant
Village on the Asian Shore; The Grand Signior has a stately Seraglio in it,
beautified with lovely Gardens; and a little lower, on the same side, stands
Chalcedon, anciently very Famous, and Celebrated by the four General Councils
held there; yet time has laid the Structures of Antiquity in Ruins, so that at
present it is but an inconsiderable Village, which stands like the Ruins of
Troy, as a Memorial there was once so famed a place. In another walk of four
Hours from Constantinople, is the Prince's Isle, a very pleasant place to take
the Air in, for though it is not great, it contains two little Towns, inhabited
by Greeks. The Coast of the Black Sea is also a curious place to take the Air
upon. This is the Thracian Bosphorus, which coming from the Black Sea to
Constantinople, mingles its Waters with the White Sea, and is but a Mile over
at the broadest place, no more than 12 Miles in length, and all about this
Channel are a great many lovely Houses and Gardens, so that passing it, one
would conclude it the loveliest Prospect in the World; the Fruits are here
Plentiful, and very Excellent; on the Asian side there is a pretty Castle,
where Sultan Ibrahim was hid 20 Years, when Sultan Amurat put his other
Brothers to Death; and along the Shore are other Villages, in which one may be
furnished with what is needful.

In this Channel they take great quantities of good Fish of diverse Sorts, and
amongst them the Sword Fish, so called, because it has a long broad Bone on the
Snout of it, like a Sword, or rather jaged like a Saw on the edges; there are
store of Dolphins, usually playing about the Boats, as also many other curious
varieties; so that I may conclude, Constantinople, and the Towns adjacent, to
be exceeding pleasantly Situated, which having thus sufficiently described, I
now pass to other useful Observations, during my stay in the Chief City of the
Ottoman Empire.

CHAP. II. The Original of the Turks, and Extent of the Ottoman Empire; The
Officers, Civil, and Ecclesiastical; their Forces, and Order; with many things
relating to their Religion, Customs, and diverse other matters.
THE Turks are held to be Originally a People of Scythia, though some will have
them the Offspring of the Ten Jewish Tribes, carried into Captivity by
Salmenaser; and the Jews to curry Favor, would have them believe however, that
the first considerable Figure they made, was upon their coming out of
Turcomania, under Tangrolipix, a petty Captain, to assist the Persians, and at
length possessed themselves of that Kingdom, their Captain being made King in
the Field, upon the Death of the Persian Sultan, who falling from his Horse,
died there; and immediately settled the large Empire in Asia, but it was ruined
by the Tartars, yet they renewed it again under Akoman Gazi, or the Warlike,
about 346 Years after, building it on the Ruins of the Persian, Babylonian,
Grecian, and Roman Monarchies, which till late years, they have continued to
spread wider, so that it now consists of part of Persia, almost all Greece, the
Kingdom of Egypt, the greatest part or Arabia, the Islands of Cyprus, Rhodes,
Mitylene, Negropont, Chio or Scio, Candia, and many other Islands. The Empire
of Treprezom, the Kingdom of Colchis, now called Mingrelia, Tunis, Algires,
Dalmatia, Illizia, Tribalenia, Bulgaria, Valachia, Moldavia, part of Hungary,
etc. so that they hold all the Sea Coast, from the Confines of Epidaurus the
utmost bounds of Europe Westward, to the Mouth of the River Tanais, now called
Don, with all that lies between the City of Belgrade and Constantinople; and
Southward, all the Sea Coast from Velex to Belis, the boundard of the Kingdom
of Fez, unto the Arabian Gulf, or Red Sea, and so proportionably every way; the
greatness of which, may be the better Conjectured, by the vastness of part of
it, for the Mear of Maetis, which is all at the Grand Signior's Command, is
1000 Miles in Compass, and the Euxine or Black-Sea in Circuit 2700 Miles; the
Mediterranean Coast, which is subject to him, is in Compass about 8000 Miles;
so that he may pass in his own Dominions, from Tauris to Belgrade, 3180 Miles,
or thereabouts, and almost the like distance from Derbent to Adena, and from
Balsoza in the Persian Gulf, to Tremisena in Barbary, may be reckoned little
less than 4000 Miles; however, of late days the weakness of this vast Empire
has very much appeared, which shows it is declining to a Period; their Naval
strengths having been inconsiderable, ever since their total defeat in the Gulf
of Lepanto, by the Spaniards, Venetians, etc. Their Landforces promise little
better of late, as having been worsted in several Battles by the Germans,
Poles, Venetians, etc. so that this once Terror of the World, seems to be
despised rather than feared; the vastness of the Ottoman Territories, causing
such infinite expense of Treasure, that the many Millions yearly accruing by
Customs, Impositions, and many other ways, are not a sufficient Supply to raise
and bring any considerable Armies into the Field. Yet the Grand Signior will
not abate any thing of his Grandeur, but boasts himself the mighty Emperor of
the World, to do, and not to do whatever he pleases; alleging, that the
strength of the Heavens and the Earth are given to him, and his Flatterers make
him believe it; his Apartment in the Seraglio is hung with Cloth of Gold,
gilded Skins and Tapestries, interwoven with Silk and Gold, wherein are lively
represented the Wars of the Ottoman Emperors; the Chamber he lodges in is
adorned with rich Painting, Gilding, and precious Stones, that cast a very
glorious light in the Night: Six Pages do him Service in his Chamber by Night,
watching his Person, two and two, by turns, with lighted Torches, the one
siting at the Head, and the other at the Feet of his Bed: When he attires
himself, they put into his Pocket 1000 Aspers, and 20 Ducats of Gold, and all
that remains not given away that day, they have, when he puts of his Clothes,
for their Fees, for he rarely puts on one Aparrel twice; and when he goes a
Hunting, or to divert himself, his Purse-Bearer carries great store of Treasure
to distribute; and vast quantities of all sorts of Provisions follow him,
though many times they are not made use of.

The Chief Officers of the Empire are, 1. The Grand Vizier, who acts
immediately under the Grand Signior, and by him he speaks to such as have
important business; for no Ambassador is admitted to the Grand Signior's
presence, but on his first Arrival, when he delivers his Letters of Credit, and
Present, for particularly without the latter, none can have Audience; all other
Audiences are had of the Vizier, who is likewise called the Capi-Aga; he has
power of Life and Death, is General of the Army when the Grand Signior is not
in the Field, and all take their Directions from him. 2. The Casnader Bassa is
next in Rank, as to Secular Affairs; his Office is to take an Account of the
Treasury. 3. The Chilergy Bassa, or Cup Bearer. 4. The Seragli Agasi, Steward,
or Master of the Household. 5. The Chiller Agasi, or Serinder Bassa, overseer of
the Seraglio of Women, who is always an Eunuch. 6. The Bostangi Bassa, or Chief
Gardener, of who is already spoken. 7. The Caimacan of Constantinople.

The Grand Signior has always near him, six Mutes Men, very lusty in Body, that
are born Deaf, and consequently are Dumb. These are very Bloody and Cruel,
being the Ministets of his Vengeance, to Strangle whom he pleases; and when any
one is Strangled in the Seraglio, the Bodies are thrown out of a particular
Window appointed for that purpose into the Sea, and as many Guns are fired, to
give Notice, in terror to others, as there are Strangled Bodies thrown out.
There are in all 40 of these Mutes, some of which he keeps as his Buffoons, to
play with for his pastime.

He has 8 Lance-bearers, called Mutafurach, who attend him with Lances, when
he goes abroad, and these are subject to no Command but his own. The Eunuchs of
the Seraglio, I have mentioned elsewhere; the Turks call them Hundurni, and
under their Care, there are constantly 500 Virgins, most of Europe, the
choicest Beauties that can be procured; they are taken from their Parents under
8 Years, and are brought up to Work in the Seraglio, as in a Nunnery; and when
the Grand Signior is desirous to enjoy any of them, the day before he gives
notice to the Chief of the Eunuchs, who Commands the rest to set them in order
in their best Attire; then the Grand Signior, attended by him, walks between
them, as they stand in Rows on either hand, exposing all their Beauties and
winning Allurements to tempt him, and where he likes, he drops his
Handkerchief, of which he has choice hanging at his Girdle, which the Eunuch
takes up, delivers to the Virgin, and immediately putting her into a Coach,
carries her to Rich Lodgings, where she is gorgously attired, and so he does by
all that are this way chosen, and there they remain till they are sent for in
order, by the Grand Signior to his Bed, for he never Marries, but when one is
brought to his Bed side; he gives her a Golden Head tire, and 10000 Aspers,
causing her to live a part, and daily increasing her Maintenance, and then she
is called a Sultana or Sultaness, and the eldest Son, if he out-lives his
Father succeeds to the Throne, and puts all his other Brothers (if they fall
into his Hands) to Death, causing them to be Strangled with a Bow string; for
it is held unlawful to shed the Sacred Ottoman Blood, as they call it, on the
Ground, though the Sultanas, and great Men of the Court hide some of them, till
the Fury is over, and preserve their Lives, as it has three or four times
happened; and this cruel Policy they use, to prevent the dismembring the Empire
by Civil broils, and the better to secure the Throne to themselves.

There are about 300 Persons called Sollacchi, who continually march near the
Grand Signior's Person, and are as it were his Guard; and these are under the
Command of the Aga of the Janisaries. They are attired in Linen Garments,
hanging down beneath their Knees, and over them they ware quilted Wastcoats,
with half Sleeves of Taffaty, Damask, or Satin; and on their Heads a Cap and
Feather, carrying Bows and Arrows. There are another kind of Footmen, called
Peichi, exceeding swift in running, and these are employed in the nature of
Lackeys, or Foot-Posts, and are attired in Cloth of Gold, with a Girdle of the
same; the Caps are in fashion of our Butter pots, with a Silver Pike standing
out before in the nature of a Horn.

There are 4000 Porters that give attendance in the Court, the Chief of them is
the Capigi Bassa.

The Judges they call Cadis, who are divided into all parts of the Empire, in
Cities, or great Towns, to decide Controversies; yet their Suits, especially
between the Turks, are very few, and they make a quick dispatch of business,
there being rarely Advocates allowed, to Procrastinate business; nor do they
admit of Evidence in Writing, always taking it by word of Mouth, so that Bills
Bonds, and other Contracts, are not significant in Turkey; yet there is much
Bribery used, and he that can give the Judge most, usually carries the Cause.
They punish Crimes with great severity, and so speedily, that rarely Thefts are
committed by any private Turk, and the People in all Cities are careful to
prevent Murders, for if the Murderer escape, a great sum of Money is required
of the Person before whose Door the Murdered Body is found, which is exacted
with Rigor.

The Divan consists of the Grand Vizier, and several other Visiers of the
Bench, and there the important business of State is Controverted, and Causes
heard; of all which the Grand Vizier gives the Grand Signior an account; nor
dares he dissemble, or hide any thing, as knowing the Grand Signior has a
Window into it, before which hangs a thin Curtain, through which he can see and
hear, but not be seen, and therefore the Visiers know not but he may be always
there in the Divan time, which keeps such an awe over them, that they do better
Justice than in other places, to prevent their Heads flying off, as it
sometimes has happened, upon the least defect or partiality. Next to the
Bassas, the Beglerbegs, or Lords of Lords, are in highest Authority in Temporal
matters; they have Command over Provinces and Armies, and under them are diverse
Zanzacks, as their Deputies; but their Government is during the Prince's
pleasure; and the Chief of these is the Beglerbeg of Rormania in Greece, under
whose Command are 21 Zanzacks. These usually exercise and bring to the Field
the Spahi and Tiraarcots, the Turks best Horsemen: These latter are certain
Horsemen, usually on the Frontiers, that for Lands allotted them out of the
Grands Signior's Conquests, are bound to give their attendance, and serve in
the Wars upon Summons. The Spahi are most Europeans, trained up Young to manage
a Horse, and exercise Cavalry, having Pay. There are also Spachoglanians,
Silictarians, and Olofagians, who have Lands or Pensions assigned them to serve
in the Wars; for none, as in other Countries, can purchase Lands for
Inheritance, the whole Empire being in Fee-simple the Grand Signior's, and all
things revokable at his pleasure.

The Horsemen march under a white Banner, mostly Armed with strong Coats, Bows,
Arrows, Firearms, Cimitars, Battle-Axes, etc. There are another sort of
Horsemen, called Caripices, but not above 800: These are usually the Grand
Signior's Guard, surrounding him in the middle of the Batallion of the
Janisaries, and are Fellows so desperate, that they will venture on any
Enterprise; being for the most part Sons of great Commanders, trained up from
their Youth in this way.

The Janisaries are the Turk's best Footmen; and these at first are taken when
Children from their Parents, mostly Christians, but brought up in the Mohammedan
Superstition; inured to all manner of hardship, and have Officers over them, to
teach them the use of Arms; and these enclose the Grand Signior when he marches
with the Army: They ware white Caps; their Arms are Harquibuses, and sharp
cutting Cimitars, who since their first Institution, as a Nursery of Soldery,
have been the chief support of the Ottoman Empire; they are commanded by an
Aga, or Chief Commander, to whom nothing is so fatal as their Love and Respect,
for that creats in the Grand Signior a Jealousy of his aspiring, and on this
Account many of the Aga's have lost their Lives, but mostly they are put to
Death privately, to prevent their being rescued; and if he be a Court
Favorite, the Janisaries are distrustful of him, and sometimes on failure of
their Pay, and other Occasions, Mutiny, and Murder him; so that on either hand
he stands very ticklish in his high promotion.

The Janisaries in Constantinople, etc. have great Halls, or Apartments, where
they Sleep together, their Beds being placed on either side; and all those of a
Battallion usually Dine together, the younger being appointed to serve the
elder, and if any one absent himself from his Lodging, unless upon leave, or
some particular occasion, he is sure to be severely Cudgeled, yet obliged, by
way of submission to his punishment, to Kiss the Hand that inflicts it.

In time of Peace their employs are different; some are appointed to wait on
Ambassadors, others on Merchants, and Consuls, or such as Travel through the
Turkish Territories. They have power to Arrest Malefactors, and see good Orders
kept, being in great Esteem with all Men: so that if they go into the Market to
buy any thing, they will have it at their own price, the Vender not
gainsaying; but this may be concluded to proceed rather from the effects of
Fear than Love; and they carry such a Vogue, that no Grand Signior thinks his
Throne settled, till they approve of him; so that to purchase their good
Opinion, the new Sultan pays off their Arrears, distributes Money amongst them,
and increases their Stipends.

Though these are the Chief Strength of Foot, yet there others, but not so
serviceable, viz. The Acoujces, which serve as a forlorn hope; these recieve no
Pay, but have liberty to plunder in War time, allowing the Sultan a fifth part
of the spoil. The Asapi, which are Rabble, raised as there is need for them,
and serve as Pioneers, being of so small account, that they are set in the
Front of the Battle to receive the first shock, and tire the Enemy with
slaughtering them; and when a Town is Besieged, they are set first to scale the
Walls, to amuse the Besieged, and their slain Bodies serve as a Rampart to
mount on, or fill up the Ditch; and so little are these miserable Creatures
esteemed, that a Spahi having taken five of them in a Civil War, offered them
to a Butcher for a Sheep's Head, which he refusing, the Spahi swore if he would
not make the exchange, he would cut of their Heads, and boil them, and was
preparing to do it; but the Butcher, though a Man of Blood, seeing him in
earnest, gave him the Sheep's Head to save the poor Wretches Lives, and
afterward set them at liberty.

The Grand Signior has always 6000 Gunners in Pay, most of them Rhenegado
Christians, turned Mahometans, many of them are French Men; and these are
called Topegi; Twelve thousand others are in Pay, to look after his Ammunition;
his Carriages are very numerous, and his Train of Artillery large. There are
3000 attending the Grand Signior's pleasure, called Chiaus, or Chiaux, who act
in the nature of Sergeants at Arms, and are in good Esteem, being often
employed in Embasses; but their chief employ is to carry Letters, or
Commendations from the Grand Signior, or Grand Vizier, and are empowered to
apprehend Mallefactors, yet go not to the Wars, unless the Grand Signior is
there. These are Commanded by a Bassa of their own order, who is of such
Credit, that when he is sent for any Man's Head, though he has no Warrant in
Writing, his Authority is not disputed.

When the Turkish Armies March, it is with as great silence as may be; they are
under a regular Discipline, and live very sparing in Diet; for the most part,
on Rice, dried Fruits, Bread baked in the Ashes, and powdered Flesh dried in
the Sun, rarely complaning as the Christians do of want, but patiently endure
and wait till they can be supplied; no Women are found in their Armies, and the
Servants attending on great Men are Listed, and do the Office of Soldiers in
their March; they observe the beck of the Hand, or show of the Countenance, as
a Command, and understand to obey it; nor dare they in their March, enter into
any Corn Field, nor plunder in any friendly Country, as other Soldiers do,
under pain of Death, so that the People, as with us, are not concerned when
great Armies march, as knowing they shall lose nothing if they look to it, that
it be not privately stolen; and Theft is severely punished amongst them.

To support this, and other Charges in the Empire, the Grand Signior's Incoms
are accounted 20 Millions a Year, most of it arising from Presents, Customs,
and Confiscation; though in his Dominions, whole Kingdoms lie in a manner wast,
by reason of the vast number of Men consumed in War, or rather, industry is
discouraged; for should they get Wealth by their Labor, it is theirs but
during the Prince's pleasure, and none are certain how soon he may strip them
of all.

As for the Religion of the Turks, it is no Ancienter than Mahomet, an
Impostor, Born in Arabia, who set it abroach about the Reign of Heraclitus, the
Emperor, for taking his Tenants from the Arian and Nestorian Heresies, denying
the Divinity of our Savior, he drew a Multitude after him, and becoming
Powerful, forced many to follow his Opinion; and since it has been carried on
by the Sword to spread so wide. The Jewish, and Christian Religion being then
most prevalent, after dilating with himself, he leaned to the first, and mixed
his own wild Notions with what he took out of the Mosaic Law, and from the
Custom of the Jews, as a distinction between Clean and Unclean Meats,
Circumcision; but the latter not performed at the end of 8 Days, as the Jews
Custom is, but at the end of 8 Years, when the Child is able to make a
Confession of his Belief, and speak in the Arabic Tongue, viz. There is but
one God, and Mahomet is his Prophet, one God, and equal Prophets. At the
Circumcision, there is Feasting three Days, for all the Friends and Kinsfolks.
The Female Children only speak the Words; yet the Moorish Mahometans, in some
parts, use a kind of a Circumcision to their Females, cutting off a bit of the
Nimphae. If any Christian turn Turk, he is led about the Streets, as in
Triumph, and receives Presents and Gifts as he passes, to encourage him to
persevere in his new undertaking; but the Men, be they of what Age they will,
that so renounce their Faith, must be Circumcised, yet the Turks afterward set
Light by those that Renounce, and will rarely Trust or Prefer them, saying,
They are not worthy to be trusted that Renounce their Faith, be it what it will.

Their Laws is contained in the Alcoran, wherein among other things, one God,
the Maker of the World, and of all Things, is owned. Can the Turks Honor
Christ as a great Prophet, but deny him to be the Son of God? They are
forbidden by their Law to Worship Images, or to have any set up in their
Mosques; but their Alcoran indulges them in Sensuallity, and promises them much
of Worldly Felicity, or such like pleasures as we have here, in another World,
but obtained and carried on with greater Ease and Happiness, for their Paradise
consists in the enjoyment of handsome Women, and such like Trifles, though here
they look on them to have no Souls, and scarcely Rational Creatures.

They hold their Sabbath on our Friday, and their Lent lasts 30 days, during
which time they neither Eat nor drink in the Day, but take their repast after
Sunset; but not till they have Notice by the Voice of Men from the Minarets or
Steeples; they also abstain from Women; Wine is forbidden in their Law, yet
many times they Carouse it so lustily in private, that they get Drunk; this
Lent they call Ramadan.

Their Bairam, or Easter, is continued with great show three Days, but it
begins not precisely at a time, because it must commence at the New of the
Moon, yet not till she appears; and trusty Persons are sent to watch on the
Mountains, and high places, to see her, and he that first discovers her has a
Reward, and then it begins with Proclamation; they have other public times, as
the little Bairam, etc.

If during the reading of the Law they look Back, scratch their Heads, or do
any thing that is unseemly, they think they have lost the benefit they were to
have received at that time; and I must confess they seem to be very precise in
their Devotions, though generally very Ignorant in Learning; yet of late, some
of the better sort put their Children to learn the Arabic Tongue, because the
Alcoran is Written in it.

By their Law they have leave to Marry as many Wives as they can maintain, and
when any of them proves with Child, the Husband must not Carnally know her till
she is delivered. There is another kind of Marriage Contract during Pleasure,
called Kebin, mostly practiced by Strangers, who, for a certain Sum, signifying
their intention to the Cadi, who notes down the Contract, may have a Wife for
as long as he pleases; but when he turns her away, he must give her what he
bargained for, and keep the Children, if she has any by her. The Turks often
Divorce their Wives with showing little or no Cause, but the Wives have not
that Privilege. They must prove before the Judge, that their Husbands are not
able to keep them, or that they have attempted to use them against the course
of Nature, and the like. If a Turk debauch a Christian Woman, both of them,
upon Conviction, must suffer Death, unless he can persuade her to change her
Faith, and so it is with a Christian and a Turkish Woman, he must turn Turk, or
be burnt, unless by largely Bribing the Cadi, he can get it off, which
sometimes happens, if she be of mean Rank.

Notwithstanding this liberty to Marry, and take so many Wives, the Turks are
great Sodomites, and the Bassa's, etc. are guilty of keeping handsome Youths,
whom they purchase as Slaves, to satisfy their Brutal Lusts this way, yet they
keep it as private as may be.

The Chief Interpreter of their Law is the Mufti, or Archpriest. The Grand
Signior nominates and chooses him from among the Learned Men in their Law. He is
greatly Reverenced by the Turks, and termed the Head of their Church, and the
decider of all Controversies arising in matters of Religion. All the Bassa's
are subject to his Directions, as a Rule to them in their Government. He
abaseth himself not to set down in the Divan, only he passes very stately
through it, when he is sent for by the Grand Signior, who rises at his approach
to do him Honor, then places him by him on his Seat, and discourses familiarly
with him about matters of Religion, State, or Previous Questions; and this
Honor is allowed to no other.

Next to the Mufti, in this sort of Dignity, are the Cadile-Squires, Talismen,
or two Doctors of the Law, whose business it is to examine the Cadi's, or
Judges, dispersed in the Provinces of the Empire; and these for the most part
are attendant on the Grand Signior. One has Jurisdiction over the European
Cadi's, and the other over the rest, and are Sovereign Judges within their own
Jurisdiction, in all causes about matters of Religion, and are, as it were,
Patriarchs. These are of great Authority, having places in the Divan, and in
the Council of Bassa's, where they are consulted in the weighty Affairs of the
Empire.

There are a degree of Churchmen not belonging to their Law, called Mulli, and
these are instead of Bishops, but directed in their proceedings by the Mufti.

Another sort there are, called Nuderisi, who act in the Nature of Suffragans,
and have under them several young Doctors of the Law, called Naipi, who are
constituted, in the absence of the Cadi's, to hear and Redress grievances.

Next to the foregoing, are the Hagi, who write Books, and inferior to them are
the Cassii, who Read to them as they Write. These are their several degrees of
Churchmen and Lawyers, for the Turks are governed by a kind of an
Ecclesiastical Law, according to their Alcoran. They have many Colleges, which
they call Medressa's, Situate in Constantinople, and diverse other Cities.

CHAP. IV. The Belief of the Turks, and many other things practiced among them;
as their Charity, Mourning at Funerals, Games, Just Observances, etc.
THE Turks believe that after any Person is Dead and laid in the Grave, the
Angels come to examine them, and that they have Angels to guard them in their
Life time, every one being appointed to a particular Member; and when they take
up any piece of Paper in the Street, least the Name of God should be writ on
it, they will not take it along with them, for fear of putting it to profane
Uses, but stick it on the next Wall, so that the Cranies are often found stuck
full of them; yet they will Swear by the Name of God, but it is to what is
Truth, for otherways they are looked on as Ignominious, and Infidels. As to
their Belief, they hold that diverse Beasts go to Paradise, as the Camel of
Selch: (one of their Prophets) the Ram of Abraham, offered up in Sacrifice; the
Cow of Moses, whose Ashes was mingled with the Water of Purification, which
seems to be the Golden Calf in Horeb; Solomon's Ant; the Parrot of the Queen of
Sheba. They also believe Jonas's Whale that cast him on dry Land, and Mahomet's
Ass shall be there likewise; four Sleepers, and a little Dog, who led them to a
Cave in time of Persecution, where they slept 300 Years, which seemed to them
but as one Night, for one of them going to buy Victuals when they awaked with
Antiquated Money, the time was discovered by the Date of the Coin. They hold in
Paradise, according to Mahomet's promise, that they shall enjoy Virgins, fresh
Colored, with large Black Eyes, and Beautiful Boys attending them; who at
first shall be but Fifteen, and never exceed Thirty Years of Age, always in a
Bloom or Spring of Beauty; and that God shall appear to them every Friday,
which is their Sabbath; that there they shall have Rivers, pleasant Fields,
Gardens, and the like. They say those in Hell shall Drink scalding Water, and
Eat of the Fruit of a Tree called Zacon, which grows out of the bottom of Hell,
and rises to a great height, the Branches of it being like the Heads of
Devils; and if those that are in Hell have a little Faith, after they are
purged by Fire, to consume their Sins, they shall be washed in a Water called
Selzaboul, and then admitted into Paradise; but those that have not Faith when
they are consumed to Ashes, shall be Created a new, and so prepared Eternally
to endure the Torments; they hold a kind of Purgatory, but they say there are
many back Doors, by which they may give the Devil the slip, if they are
watchful and cunning. They Pray for the Dead, and invocate a sort of Saints of
their own making.

The Turks have many Fountains, and in washing they think they are free from
Defilements, even after having lain with their Wives, Noctural Pollutions,
their Urin dropping on their Garments, or touch-a Dog, and indeed in any other
matters that they conceive they are Polluted; and they are so Nice in it, that
upon Traveling, they will go a great way to seek Water, and if they find none,
to do it with Sand; and indeed they keep their Bodies in all parts extreme
cleanly, even to Superstition, in many Rights and Ceremonies they use, as the
Abdest and Goust.

The sober Turks are very Charitable to Men and Beasts, doing all they can to
relieve them in their Necessities, so that they supply the Poor for the most
part, without putting any to the Shame of appearing in the Streets to Beg; some
of them when they die, leave Pensions to maintain Beasts, to keep them during
their Natural Lives; and in Constantinople, I saw a Bitch who had got into a
Corner to cast her Whelps; the Turks no sooner saw it, but they made a Wall
with Bricks and Stones about her, and several run and fetched Victuals, and
other Necessaries, which in a wonderful manner showed their compassion toward
the poor Creature, nor did one or other leave attending her, till the Puppies
were taken from her, and she capable of shifting for her self.

Images, as I have already hinted, are prohibited amongst the Turks, but they
are very desirous of curious Paintings, though they are not Artists at it.
There is a prohibition of Usury by their Alcoran, though it is connivingly done
by the Turks, and the Jews practice it frequently. Swines Flesh is counted
unclean among them, and some Turks would rather die than Eat it; nor dare the
Shoomakers use Hog's Bristles in sowing their Shoes, if it should be known,
they would be punished. When a Turk dies, there is great Mourning; the greater
the Quality, the more the Women fall a howling excessively, and those that
cannot frame themselves to it, hire those that are accustomed to it, and as
often as any Visitants come, the Lamentation is renewed, and when the Corpse is
in the Grave, they go often thither to Weep, the Widow expressing what good
things her deceased Husband has done for her; they often spread Carpets with
Victuals, that those that pass by may Eat it, and Pray for the Soul of the
deceased. They set at the Head of the Grave a Stone, which they say, the Angel
that is to examine him sits on; and they bid the Dead Person answer him
stoutly, and not be afraid. They burn Incense about the Graves, as they say, to
scare away the Evil Spirits, and Pray to God to be merciful to the Party; and
according to his Quality, he has a Turban placed at the Head of the Grave, or
Tomb, by which he is distinguished, as to his Rank.

As for the Turks in general, they are well proportioned, strong in Body; and
the Women are mostly Handsome, their Complexion Fair, because they seldom stir
abroad, unless the Vulgar Sort. The Habit of Men and Women is very neat and
commendable, keeping still in one Fashion. They are People of a Jolley temper,
and much rely on Fatallity, every one concluding there is a set time for all
Accidents, and none believe they shall die before the appointed Hour, which in
War makes them run upon desperate attempts, for they are verily persuaded, they
may as well die in their Beds as in the Field at the same time; and if it is so
decreed, their Fate is irresistible. They are in Passive Obedience to their
Prince, and submit to his Decrees, without reasoning the Justice or Injustice
of them; they play at diverse Games, but never for Money, to avoid Quarrelling;
and Deuelling is a thing not known amongst them. However they are very Proud,
and esteem all others inferior to them, thinking themselves the Valiantest and
Wisest Men on Earth; a conceited Vanity too much indulged amongst Christians;
they are exceeding Superstitious, and their Ignorance is the Mother of their
Devotion, for their Priests labor to keep them so, that they may not discern
Truth from Fables.

As to Weight and Measure they are very Just, for one may send a Child to the
Market, and they dare not in the least defraud it; for there are Persons who
overlook those places, and if they discover a defraud, the Person who does it
is Bastinado'd, and perhaps, unless he Compounds, severely fined; and although,
as in all Nations, there are some Irregularities committed, yet here a great
Caution is used to prevent it, though sometimes Broils happen in the Streets,
when the Turks get Drunk, and Blood is shed.

After all this, they account Christians no better than Dogs, and as often,
almost, as they see them in the Streets, put more or less Affront upon them,
except such as are protected by Janisaries, or other Authority; they swear by
their Beards, the Head of their Ancestors, and that of the Grand Signior, which
they seldom break; for though none within the Seraglio but the Grand Signior,
and the Bostangi Bassa, are allowed to ware their Beards, those without are not
limited.

CHAP. V. Their Pilgrimages to Mecha and Medina; the Birth, and Burial-places
of Mahomet their Prophet; what they Observe; and a description of the House,
Tomb, and what else is Curious and Admirable in this Undertaking.
THE Turks are very Devout and Punctual in their Pilgrimages to Mecha in
Arabia, to visit Mahomet's Tomb, and every Year there goes a great Caravan from
Constantinople, as well as from diverse other places, which I shall mention at
the conclusion of this Chapter, and they so time it, that they may be there at
the time of their Carnaval. The Grand Signior sends Rich presents, as Velvet
embroidered with Gold, and Arabian Characters in Gold and Silver, Pearl and
Rich Stones, for Canopies, Carpets, Coverings for the Doors, etc. but these
usually are sent from Cair in Egypt, because it is much nearer to Mecha than
Constantinople; and when the Holy Cammel, as they term it, who carries these
Rich Ornaments passes by, there is great crouding to touch the Burden, and
those that do it, kiss their Fingers, and think themselves Blessed.

This Caravan amounts most times, to between 10 and 20000, and sometimes a far
greater number. I shall not trouble the Reader with a Journal of the way,
because I Traveled it not; however, it must be very tedious, because it is
Long, and over Deserts, and rugged Mountains, which makes them take great store
of Provisions with them, and Vessels to recruit them with Fresh Water, which in
the Hot Countries they pass, is rarely to be found; they mostly Encamp in the
Fields and Deserts, being always constrained to set Watches, least Robbers
should break in on the out skirts of their Camp, to kill and plunder, before
the Alarm can be taken; nay, the wild Beasts near Forests assault them, and
kill Men and Cattle, especially such as straggle too far from the main Body;
but for the hardships they endure, some Privileges are allowed them, for
whatever Crimes they commit lower than Treason, if they escape, and make this
Pilgrimage, upon their return they are absolved, and accounted as Honest as if
they had never Offended. They have a Guard of Janisaries, with many others who
go Armed, and their number gathers by the way, like a Snow-ball rolled from a
steep Mountain; they appear all the way very devout, the number consisting of
Men, Women, and Children; some indeed, take the advantage of Trade and
Commerce, carrying store of rich Wares with them; all the way, those in
Pilgrimage Sing Verses of their Alcoran, and bestow Charity according as they
are able.

When they come within two days Journey of Mecha, they strip themselves, only
leaving their Privities covered with a Napkin, for it is a Capital Offense,
either in Man or Woman, to let them be seen, and another Napkin about their
Necks, alleging this kind of Fransey, to be out of respect to the place where
their Prophet had so often Traveled; on their Feet they wear Scandals, saying,
The Ground is Holy, and we will not defile it with our naked Feet: And in this
State they continue 8 Days, during which term, it is not lawful to be Shaved,
to Buy or Sell, kill any thing, or be angry with their Servants, nor speak any
thing that is unseemly; and if any one Trespasses, he is to atone by Alms;
those that are Sick are dispensed from Striping, but they must in lieu of it
give Alms.

When they come to Mecha, they stay there three Days, during which time they
visit the several places of Devotion. This Mecha is an Ancient Town Situate
among the Mountains, built all of Stone and Mortar; and here they hold Mahomet
was Born, prohibiting all but Musselmen to enter it on pain of Death. In the
middle of it is the Kiaabe, or Square House; it is surrounded with a Wall to
hinder approach; they go round it several times in Devotion, saying certain
Prayers, an Imum, or Priest, goes before them, and what Antic Trick or
Gestures soever he shows, they imitate him; first they walk softly and Mutter
their Prayers, then, at certain Intervals, they Run and Skip, shruging and
turning their Shoulders many ways; then they fall into a soft pace again, and
so continue it by turns, till they have ended their Prayers. This House is
covered with a Dome, and it has a Well of good Water, considering what other
places afford about the City, they being mostly Brackish or Bitter; near to the
Door, upon the entrance of this House or Temple, is a black Stone, as big as a
Pumpion: This the Turks say, came down from Heaven, and was then White, but
Man's Sins polluted it, and made it turn Black; and he that can first kiss it,
when they have given one another the Selam, after the Prayer of Kouschlouk, on
Friday, which falls within three Days that they sojourn there, is held a Saint,
and every one strives to kiss his Feet; but this same proves Fatal to the
Party, who is smoothered in the Crowd. This House is never entered but four
times a Year, and one of them is at the Ramadan, to wash it with Rose Water,
unless any one will give 100 Chequins of Gold for admittance. It is covered all
round on the outside with Stuffs sent by the Grand Signior, in whose Dominions
it is, and other Mohammedan Princes; and every Year the rich Covering is
renewed; the old being cut out into Relics, and sold by the Sultan Scherif,
who Commands, to Pilgrims, at a good Rate, unless the Little Bairam, or Easter
Sacrifice falls on a Friday, and then the Grand Signior has it, to send in
pieces to the New Mosques, which being hung up there, serves instead of their
Consecration.

When the Pilgrims have finished their three days at Mecha, they go to Minnet,
where they are to arrive the Vigil of the Little Bairam, and on the day of
Bairam, they Sacrifice Sheep, every one according to Ability, distributing part
to the Poor; then they shave themselves, and put on their Clothes to visit
Mount Arafat, and there they stay 3 days more; the first Day after they have
said Prayers, they go to the Foot of the Hill, throw 7 Stones against the
Mount, and stay there, the next Day they throw 14, and the Third 21: They say
they throw these Stones to break the Devil's Head, who in that place tempted
Abrahain, when he was going to Sacrifice his Son Ishmael, for they will not
allow it to be Isaac. Here they say, Adam and Eve sought one another for the
space of 220 Years, after they were driven out of Paradise, the one going up
the Mountain on one side, whilst the other went up on the other side, and so
made it a Fruitless search, but at the end of this time met just on the top of
it. Here the Sultan Scherif says some Prayers, and gives them his Benediction,
and so this Work is concluded. He has abundance of ways, under the Umbrage of
Devotion, to squeeze Money out of them, and is vastly Rich.

After this the Pilgrims go to Medina, to visit Mahomet's Tomb, which according
to Authentic Relations, does not hang in the Air by Virtue of Loadstones: It
stands as other Tombs, and is indeed encompassed with Iron Grates, upon a
suspicion they once had, that 2 Christians, Habited like Devises, intended to
steal it away, and for that purpose had dug under it, to get the Body. Medina
is 3 Days Journey from the Red Sea, its Port is called Jambo. This and Mecha
are but indifferent Towns, though of such great Resort. About the middle of
Medina is a Mosque, and in a Corner of it stands Mahomet's Tomb, covered as the
Monuments of the Turkish Emperors at Constantinople. The Sepulcher is in a
little round Building, or Tower, covered with a Dome, which the Turks call
Turbe. The Building is quite open to the middle; up to the Dome, and all round
there is a little Gallery, of which the outside Wall has several Windows with
Silver Grates to them, and the inside Wall of the little Tower adorned with a
great number of precious Stones, being the place that answers to the Head of
the Tomb; and this certainly is exceeding Rich, by the Gifts of many Princes,
and others, as Diamonds, Gold, Rubies, Saphires, and other sorts of Jewels,
that might, for their Value, purchase a petty Kingdom; and lower down, there is
a half Moon of Gold of a vast Value, by reason of the precious Stones which
enchase it.

The Turbe, wherein the Tomb is, is hung round with Hangings of Red and White
Silk, like Damask, unless where the Jewels are, and there they are turned
aside, that their Luster may appear, and round the Hangings are Words in
Characters of Gold, expressing the Names of GOD, and Mahomet, etc. The Door, by
which one enters into the Gallery, is Silver, and so is that which goes out of
the Gallery into the Turbe. The Pilgrims visit some other places hereabouts,
but of no great Note, yet one thing more is confirmed on all Hands, to be very
remarkable in those dry Countries, viz. The next Night after the Pilgrims are
gone, so much Rain falls, that it seems like a Deluge, for a time, and much
Fertelizes the Plains, washing away all the Blood and Filth of the Sacrifices,
and this falls always the Third Night after the Sacrifice at their Little
Beiram, or Easter, though this tide generally changes the Day, as with us our
Easter does; and this they look upon as a Miracle, to confirm their Oblations
are accepted; and indeed the wisest of Men may be puzzeled, to know, whether so
exact a falling of Rain, in a Country, parched and dry, for the most part,
proceeds from a Natural, or Supernatural Cause.

Many times 100000 People meet at Mecha together, encamping on the Plains; as
for their going to Medina, some refuse it, because they are not bound by their
Law, to visit Mahomet's Tomb, but at Pleasure, and then they must say a Prayer
for his Soul. The other Caravans come from Egypt, Syria, Persia, India, and
Barbery; so that the Concourse, according to the Relation I had, is exceeding
great.

CHAP. VI. Travels and Voyages to Alexandria in Egypt; with many things
remarkable in the way, etc.
THUS having taken a view of Constantinople, with the places about it; the
Religion, Manners, Customs, etc. of the Turks, I could not, however, rest
satisfied, my curiosity now abroad, leading me on to visit remoter Countries;
wherefore, I set forward for Bursa, the Ancient Prusea, formerly the Capital
City of the Turkish Empire, taken from the Caramanian King, by Orcham, or
Vreham, Son of Othoman, in his Father's Life time. It was likewise the Ancient
Seat of the Kings of Bythinia. In order to this, I went on Board at Tophana,
and was transported to Montagua, but making no stay in such an inconsiderable
place, I took Horse, and rid to Bursa, 13 Miles from it; this City is not above
10 Miles distant from Mount Olimpus: It is pleasantly Situated, and well
Watered by Aquaducts; it consists of many fair Buildings, and they reckon about
200 fine Mosques. There, in little Chapels covered with Domes, lie Buried the
first Turkish Sultans, and French Sultana, in great State. The City is about
half a French League in length but not Walled in all parts; and upon a little
Hill in the middle of it, is a little Castle, found to be built by a Maiden
Princess, who was cured of a Leprosy by the Hot Waters; for as a wonder in
Nature, there runs a Rivulet of Hot Water, almost scalding those that step into
it at first; and there one sees the Tomb of Roland, or Orland, a very Valiant
Man, who defended the City against all Assaults his Sword, Mace, and other
warlike Habiliaments hang by it; but this Tomb stands on a Hill, in a little
Chapel, where usually a Turkish Hermit Lives.

From this place I set forward to Smyrna, and arrived there by several Stages,
finding nothing in the way memorable. Smyrna is about 8 days Journey of a
Caravan from Bursa; It is a noted Town of Jonia; they say it was first Founded
by Tantulus, and since called Smyrna, by an Amazon of that Name, who Conquered
it; it has been subject to Earthquakes, and felt the dire effects of them, by
being reduced to a heap of Rubbish; and after that built by Mark Anthony,
nearer to the Sea than at first it stood; the People boast that Homer was Born
there; the Turks at present call it Ismyr. This City, Anciently one of the
Seven Churches of Asia, to whom St. John was commanded to Write, is very well
Peopled, and Defended by a Castle, but it is not strong; there is a huge
Cistern cut out of a Rock, and the Amphitheatre, where St. Policarp suffered
Martyrdom. There is another Castle nearer the Sea, and on the Gate, the Arms of
the Church of Rome, supposed to be erected by the Genoese, who once were
Masters of the City, and all the Coast. This Castle shuts the Port, which is
but little, so that the Stranger Trading Ships ride at Anchor abroad, in the
Road, which is good and spacious. There is another Castle at the Mouth of the
Road, commanding the Ships that enter, and go out, for the Custom here is very
considerable to the Grand Signior, most European Traders having Consuls there.
The Country about it is Spacious, Pleasant, and Fruitful; Oil, and a pleasant
sort of Wine, called Smyrna Wine, in abundance. The Air is Temperate, for in
the Heat of Summer the Northern Breezes blow, and cool all the Region about it.

After I had tarried here 8 Days, I found a Vessel bound for Alexandria in
Egypt: I had read much of that anciently Famed Country, which enticed me to
lay hold on the opportunity of being an Eyewitness, of what had been almost
every where spoke of it, so embarked with my Baggage, and in two Days came to
an Anchor in the Port, or Road of Chio, a very fine Island, mostly inhabited by
Greeks: There grows abundance of Mastick Trees, which yield the Owners-great
advantage; they grow crooked, like a Vine, and being cut, the Gum, called
Mastick, at a certain Season, flows from them, and is the best that is to be
found. The Christians, both Greeks and Latins, have their free Liberty to
exercise their Religion, so that there are a great many Religious Houses, and
they enjoy greater Privileges, than any within the Turkish Dominions, for here
they have Bells in some Monasteries, and elsewhere they are not allowed,
particularly at Niamoni. The Villages stand here very thick, and the
Inhabitants are numerous; but the Ship coming to Anchor here, only by reason of
bad Weather, I had time to take but a slight View ever I Sailed again; and
passing many other Islands, as Samas, Nicaria, etc. in the former of these, in
the Night, I saw a light near the Sea, rising and falling, as big as a large
Candle, which the Patron of the Vessel, who was a Greek, told me, always
appeared in the Ruins of a Christian Church, but as any Man approached it, it
vanished, or removed further from them, which made me conclude, it was an Ignis
fatuis, rising from the Unctuous Vapors, and kindled by Agitation. These
Islands are now Poor, and of no great Note, though Anciently very Famous. I
shall pass over other that appeared on Star, and Larboard, and sometimes a Head
of us; we Sailed near some in great danger, by reason of the bad Weather, and
Rocks that jutted out in the shallowness of the Sea near them, the Winds
shifting, and the Waves running high; but after all, at Sun rising, a gentle
Gale blowing from the South, we spread our Sails, and cleared our Vessel of a
dangerous Straight, between some Rocks and Islands, that we were fallen in
with; and about Evening, shifting to the North West, we stood away South and by
East, so that next Morning we made the Island of Rhodes, and about Noon came to
an Anchor in a good Harbor, to recruit our selves with Provisions, for the
Storms we met with spoiled most we brought with us, the Waves frequently
rolling over the wast of our small Vessel, during that Violence, so that a
great deal of Water entered her, and all Hands were at the Pump Night and Day.

This noted Island has Lycia to the North, a Sea 20 Miles over, separating
them. To the East, Cyprus; to the West, Candie; and to the South, Egypt; it
lies in a temperate Climate, and is in Circuit about 100 Miles; few Clouds are
ever seen over it; it is very Fruitful, and the Turks strugled long before they
could be entire Masters of it, which happened in the Reign of Solomon the
Magnificent; for the City that gave the Name to this Island, was then taken, at
the Expense of 150000 Turks, from the great Master, and Renowned Knights,
Hospitallers, who Immortallized their Fame, in defending it to the last
extremity. This City has two commodious Harbors, did not the great one lie so
open to the East, and North-East Winds, that sometimes drive Ships from their
Anchors, The Turks have built a strong new Tower in the place of the old one,
to command the Entrance, and Sentinels are placed in Turrets, to give Notice of
the approach of Ships. It has a Bastion and Curtain, that reaches to the Town,
so that it makes one side of the Port, and there is an Old Castle over against
it: Over this Port formerly stood a Huge Collossus of Brass, one of the Wonders
of the World, for it stood stradling 50 Fathom, one Foot from another, and 70
Cubits high, so that Ships under Sail passed under it; it represented the Sun,
and was cast by Chares the Lydian: In one Hand it held a Light-House, to direct
Ships in, in dark Nights; but it was thrown down by an Earthquake, and being
broken by the Sarasens, when they Conquered Rhodes; they sold it to a Jew, who
loaded 900 Camels with the Metal for Alexandria, and now the Tower and Castle I
mentioned, are built where the Feet of it stood. There are many Ancient
Monuments remaining in this City; as the Statue of St. Paul, and diverse others
of Note. The Escutcheons of Christian Princes, and the Knights of the Order of
St. John of Jerusalem. The Building is Regular, and the Streets pretty Fair.
But now the Wind serving, I was constrained to end my Observation here, and
return on Board; we set Sail with a North-west Wind, and soon left Lindo
a-stern, being a little Rock at the point of the Island of Rhodes, 20 Leagues
from the City, and on it there is a small Town, with a very good Fort. The next
that appeared was Scarpanto, 17 Leagues distant from Lindo, leaving it to the
Starboard, we entered the Gulf of Sata^ia, where, for a considerable time
Sailing, we had a Rolling Sea, the Current there setting with Eddies, and it is
many times dangerous passing, for Ships are often cast away there; and here we
were encompassed with many flashes of Lightning, that glancing on the Waters,
made the Sea seem as on Fire, looking very terrible; and I plainly perceived
the Master of the Ship was at a loss to stand in with the Coast, so that it
growing somewhat Calm, we made little way that Night.

The Morning proving Fair, the Man sent up to discover, could, however, see no
Land, but the whiteishness of the Water made the Sailors conclude, we must be
near the Land of Egypt, which is the only Mark at a great distance, that can
be observed, the Land lying so low, that it is not made till a Ship is in a
manner upon it.

This whiteness is occasioned by the River Nile, that carries it a great way
into the Sea, and at this distance from the Coast, we had many Flurreys,
accompanied with great Showers of Rain, but they were in a little time over,
and the Wind coming about North-west, we tacked, and sent up again to discover,
but no Land appearing, we kept sailing South and South-west; but fearing to
lose the Windward of Alexandria, we stood East and by South, but finding that a
mistake, we tacked about that we might get nearer to the Land, from which we
knew we could not be far distant, and held on the same Course, till we found
our selves obliged to Tack, and bear away South-west; here we saw the Moon rise
Ecclipsed, half an hour after Sunset, which was not visible in England,
Holland, France, etc. because there, according to the Almanacks, the Ecclips,
was to happen at 3 in the Afternoon, Feb. 11. and the next Day we percieved the
Sea very white about us, and the Man that looked out cried Land; some thought
it to be Damiette, and others Bouquer; but in the mean time, that we might not
Sail to Leeward, we continued our Course South-west, and in a few Hours we
Tacked and stood North-east; and about a quarter of an hour after the Wind
turning North-west, we bore away South and South-west, and in conclusion we
made the Bouquer, and a little after the Farillon, or Light-House of
Alexandria, and at 3 of the Clock in the Afternoon the same day, we entered the
Haven by the South. One thing I found remarkable in approaching Land, from
Damiette to Rossetto, between the two Branches of the Nile, that from 40 Fathom
Water, it lessens every Mile till you come to Land. Egypt is bounded on the
East with the Red Sea, on the South with Asia, on the West with Cyrene, and on
the North with the Mediterranean Sea.

CHAP. VII. The Author's Arrival at Alexandria, and what is observable there;
and his passing from thence to Caire.
BEING now at Land, and recovered from my Sea fatigue, by suitable
Refreshments, my curiosity lead me to take a view of this once so Renowned
City, Founded by Alexander the Great, when, after his Persian Expedition, he
brought Egypt under his Subjection, though it is not comparable to what it has
been in its flourishing time, as may appear by the Ruins about it, and within
its Circumference, and the Venerable remains of Antiquity.

This Town is called by the Turks, who possess all Egypt, Skenderia. There are
in it several Fondicks, or large Houses, where the English, French, Dutch, and
other Europeans, have their appointed Residence, paying no House Rent, but on
the contrary, the Consuls receive Money of the Grand Signior Annually to keep
them in suitable Repair, they being every Evening shut up, and the Keys carried
to the Aga of the Castle, who sends them back every Morning; they are likewise
shut up, as is the Watergate, every Friday, during Noon Prayer; and this
arises from an old Prophecy, that the Franks, for so they call all Christian
Europeans, shall become Masters of that place, during Noon Prayer, on a Friday.

Scarce any thing of the Ancient Town remains unruinated but the Walls, and
some Buildings toward the French Fondick, which are almost ruined; it being
easy to distinguish the Ancient from the Later Buildings, for the latter are
low, and ill-contrived.

This once Famous Town has three Ports, one called the Old Harbor; it is
pretty large, but the entrance difficult, so that but few Vessels put in there;
the other two are separated by a little Island, and higher up, the Island was
anciently called Pharos, and is joined to the main Land by a Stone Bridge, and
in the middle of it is a square Tower, where the Powder is kept, and at the
end, another Castle, called Farillon, standing where the Ancient Watchtower of
Pharos stood, which was accounted one of the Seven Wonders of the World. The
first of these Ports is a Harbor for the Galleys, and is on one side defended
by the Farillon, and on the other by a slighter Castle; but these Ports are
encumbered with Stones and Rocks, requiring a skilful Pilot to guide in Vessels
of any considerable Burden. The Custom-house here is Farmed by a Turk, and has
a Jew for his Deputy, and indeed the Receipt of Custom mostly passes through
the Jew's Hands, who can pleasure, or displeasure many that Trade there: There
is also an Old Custom house, but of little Note.

In Alexandria there is a Mount made of Ancient Ruins, on which stands a square
Tower, and a Sentinel, who puts out a Flag so soon as he descrys a Sail, and
every Vessel coming into the Port pays him something. All Officers here depend
on the Bassa of Egypt, who places and displaces them at his pleasure.

The Walls of this Town have Falls, Brays, and are flanked with great square
Towers, about 200 Paces distant one from another, and a little Tower between
every two of them; in each of the great Tower there is a large square Hall, the
Vault of it supported by Pillars of Thebaick Stone, and a great many Chambers
above, and over these a large Platform, of 30 Foot Square, and each of these
anciently were able to maintain 200 Men; the Walls are very thick, and every
where Port-holes in them; these Castles have Cisterns, replenished with Water,
but most part of those that encompassed the ancient Alexandria, as it was in
its Former Extent and Luster, are ruined by the length of Time, and neglect of
Repair: but if the Turkish Officers catch an European Christian in these
Towers, they presently charge him as a Spy, come to view the strength of the
Town, and then nothing but Money will release him from Punishment.

Near this Town is the famous Pillar of Pompey, so much celebrated by
Historians; it stands about 200 Paces distant, upon a little rising, placed on
a square Pedestal, about 7 or 8 Foot high, that resting on a square Basis,
about 20 Foot broad, and 2 Foot high, made up of several large Stones; the Body
of the Pillar is an entire piece of Garnet, about 6 Fathom in Compass, having
on the Top a very curious Capital; and it must create Admiration, by what
strong Engines so vast a Stone could be brought thither, which makes some
believe it was cast, and made of a certain Cement on the place, which Art was
usual with the Ancients, though now, for any thing that appears, it is lost.

In this place appears the remains of Caesar's Palace, but all that can be
called entire of it, are some Porphery Pillars, and a Frontispiece, which looks
very curious. There is a Kihalis, or Canal, cut from the Nile, which brings
Water to this place, and is the only good Water they have; this fills their
Cisterns that are Magnificently made, and placed under in Vaults, the whole
Town being hollow underneath, and supported by fair Marble Pillars, and some
say, there are fair Streets under Ground, wherein there are Shops to be seen
still; but the Turks, for some Reasons, will not discover them, nor suffer any
to go down in the Vaults that lead to them. All along, the Gardens bor^er on
the Kahalis, planted with Lemon, Orange, and other curious Trees, as Cassa, and
Corab Trees, and the like.

Here stands St. Catharine's Church, kept by the Greeks, where they show a
hollow Pillar, on which they say her Head was cut off, and would make
Travelers believe, that the Blood and Fat it is smeered with, remained ever
since her Decolation. There is a pretty neat Church built to St. Mark, where he
received his Martyrdom, and the Picture of St. Michael, said to be drawn by
St. Luke; there are to be seen in some ruinous places, Pillars of Porphyrian
Marble, and Obelisks of Garnet, with Hierogliphicks upon them, yet but one of
them standing on a Pedestal.

Many other things are here to be seen, but not to be tedious, I shall omit the
describing of all the Statues and Figures mostly encumbered with Ruins, which
are very numerous, and rather demonstrate the former Magnificence of the place,
than what it now is; and having settled my Affairs here, I hired a Janisary for
my greater security to pass on with me to Caire, the Principal place of Egypt;
but before I went thither, I visited Rossetto, about 60 miles from Alexandria,
there being but one place to bait at by the way, called Maudie, or the Passage,
because you Ferry over a Lock there, full of Fish, though there is a Castle
nearer called Bouquier, to defend the Road, the rest, or the greatest part,
being Desert Sands; on the other side of the Water is a Kervanserai, or Inn,
where you may be welcome to Eat and Drink such as you bring with you for
nothing; most part of this Journey you Travel along the Seaside: You may see
where the Nile discharges it self into the Sea, which is a very dangerous
Passage, there being Saiques and Barks usually cast away in venturing,
especially when the Sea is rough, for then it occasions an Eddy in the Water of
the River, which turning the Vessels round casts them on Shore. Rossetto is the
ancient Canopus, lying in a Branch of the Nile, falling into the Sea five Miles
below the Town; and this is accounted the neatest Town in Egypt for its
Piazza's and Hans, being a Town of good Trade, encompassed by five Gardens, the
Houses high and well built, Provisions plenty, and at a very cheap Rate. From
hence taking Water on the Nile, I passed with many others to Boulac, a Port of
Caire. This is a long narrow Town, built on the side of the Nile, and has about
it many pleasant Gardens and Country Houses; and here by Custom, you must,
being a Frank, pay at your first coming to Caire a Piastre, which is received
by Jews, Authorized for that purpose. At this place we hired Asses to go to
Caire, which the Moors kept ready sadled, on purpose to wait for Travelers,
and accommodate them, and you have the Ass, and the Master's Attendance for a
small Charge; the latter running after and driving the Ass on, and crying, look
to it, which the Ass hearing, is very cautious of stumbling.

CHAP. VIII. A View of Caire, and what is Remarkable in it, etc.
CAIRE is the Capital City of Egypt, and with it runs the fortune of the whole
Country; when it was wrested from the Mamaluke^ by Sultan Selim, Emperor of the
Turks, Anno 1571, who caused Thomambey, the Mamaluke Sultan, to be hanged on a
Hook, under one of the Gates, and exterminating the whole Race of those Men;
settled the Turkkish Government under a Bassa, as his Viceroy. This City is
Situate at the Foot of a Hill, on which a Castle is built to Command it, which
renders it unhealthful, insomuch, that the Pestilence often rages there, and
sweeps away a multitude of People, for the Wind intercepts the free passage of
the Wind and Air, and occasions a stifling Heat; and the good Water they have
is brought on Camels Backs from Boulac in Bourachios, which is half a League
from the City, and this Water is sold very dear.

This City is exceeding large, and full of People, being in the form of a
Crescent, yet is narrow, and may be compassed in two Hours and a quarters
Walking: It is surrounded with many stateley Palaces of the Beys, and other
great Men of the Country; the Houses are little, but full of People, so that
when the Plague sweeps away 200000, it is hardly perceived, especially in a
little time after. The Walls have handsome Battlements and Towers, at less than
100 Paces interval, able to hold many Soldiers; they appear to have been very
Stately, but at present mostly ruinous. The Castle likewise is much decayed,
the Turks being Supine, make little account of repairing them; near the Walls
are large Church Yards, full of Sepulchers, adorned with fair Stone, that gives
a pleasant Prospect, and all agree, that in this City there are 23000
Precincts, and as many Mosques, there being one in a Precinct at least. A
Precinct is a set part, and in some of them there are several Streets; and each
Precinct is watched by two Men Chained together, to prevent them from
separating, and they demand certain dues of the Inhabitaints and Strangers; the
Sons-Bassa keeps the Keys of the Padlocks that lock up their Chains. The
Streets here are short and narrow, except the Street of Bazar and the Khalis,
which is dry but 3 Months in the Year, and few People frequent it; the rest are
little, turning and winding, which makes me believe the Houses were first built
without any design of compacting them into a City, every one placing his House
on the ground he liked best to build on, without considering whether they
stopped the Street or not. Some Mosques are very Magnificent, with curious
Frontispieces and Gates, with very high Minarets; but the greatest part are
little and inconsiderable; The fairest is called Degemiel Azem. The Houses are
high, with flat Tarass-Roofs, where they take the fresh Air when the Sun is
down, and lie on Carpets there in the heat of Summer.

On the outside the Houses make little show, but within, they are Richly
adorned with Gold and Azure, especially those of Quality, and their Halls have
an open round hole in the Roofs, to let in the cool Breathings of the Air, and
commonly there is a Cupulo, or Lanthorn, over the hole, to keep out blustering
Winds.

CHAP. IX. Of the Piramids of Egypt, and other Buildings and memorable
Antiquities; of the Catacombs, where the Munices are. The River Nile, and the
Creatures found therein, etc,
HAving taken a view of Caire, I was desirous to see those Wonders of the World
so much every where discoursed of, viz. The Piramids of Aegppt. These are
seated on a Sandy Plain; two of them are shut, but the third, which is biggest
is open, and seated very near the other, two or three Leagues from New Caire.
This is a vast Artificial Monument, built mostly of Stones of a Prodigious
bigness, though they differ in that, for in Reason, we cannot suppose, that so
many Stones of an equal bigness should be found for the supplying so
stupendous a Work; yet the smallest are a Foot thick, and 2 Foot in length;
some 3 Foot thick, 6 long, and 4 broad: The highth of the greatest of these is
520 Foot, and each Face in breadth 682 Foot.

The Ascent consists of between 200 and 210 Steps; the Top, to those that are
below, appears like the point of a Spire, though on the top there is a Platform
of 24 Foot square, and is paved only with 12 Stones, some of which are broken,
or rather worn out by time; and from thence you have a Prospect of Old Caire,
Boulack, the Ruins of the Ancient famed Memphis, the Mountains and Deserts of
Egypt; but it requires a strong Head to look down to the bottom, where Men and
Cattle seem no bigger than Crows, and a good Arm cannot throw a Stone beyond
the Foundation, for it will light upon some part of the Work; there were
formerly Steps on every side, but Time, the Consumer of all things, has wasted
and crumbled several of the Stones, so that in some parts there are dreadful
Precipices, therefore Strangers take with them a Guide, who is used to Ascend,
and it is their safest way: They as it were clamber up the Steps, being of that
height, that they are forced to use their Hands and Knees, some 3 Foot, and
others less; there is a Room by the way to rest and refresh one, in which are
diverse Images, Sculptures, and other Contrivances, according to the manner of
the Ancients, and near the bottom you enter into a descending Alley 30 Paces
long, and 3 Foot high, so that one must stoop very low; at the end of this
there is a place to creep through like a little Wicket, which is even with the
Ground; and this brings you into another little Alley like the former, only in
this you must ascend, and this Alley ends in two others; that on the right Hand
has no inclination, and leads to a vaulted Chamber 18 Foot long, and 12 broad;
at the entrance into this Alley is a very deep Well, or Pit, though destitute
of Water, in which are diverse Caves, entering at the bottom, by the sides, and
into this one must be let with Ropes, having a lighted Torch or Tapour, for it
is exceeding Dark, which you must take care to secure, by reason of the great
number of Bats that are bred, and flutter about that dark abode; wherefore the
more Prudent carry Tinder-boxes along with them, to re-kindle the extinguished
Light: Opposite to the last Alley, there is another that begins so high in the
Wall, that we were constrained to climb up to it, but to make amends, we found
it much higher and broader than the rest; and having walked 70 Paces, still
ascending, a spacious Room disclosed it self, which was 33 Foot long, and 16
broad, paved with 9 entire Stones, the length of them equal to the breadth of
the Room; the Walls are of a curious Porphery, and at one end there is an empty
Tomb of a very hard Stone, between 7 and 8 Foot long, and between 3 and 4 Foot
broad, but broken about the Edges by such as visited the place, to carry with
them as a Token. This Tomb is held to be made for the same Pharaoh that was
overwhelmed in the Red Sea, pursuing the Israelites.

The Piramid standing nearest to this is little, in comparison of it, being
only 150 Foot, and each of the Sides or Faces 200 Foot broad: The common
opinion is, that it was built by a beautiful Woman, called Rhodope, who was
Aesop's fellow Slave in Egypt, with whom the King became Enamored, and she
got so much Money by her Love Intrigues, as defrayed the Charges of building
it. The third is little inferior to the first, for it is 510 Foot in height,
and the breadth of each Face is 630 Foot, being a manner a Quadrilatrial
Figure, as are the rest.

There is to be observed the Ruins of an Ancient Temple, before each of them,
and a huge Idol of Stone standing very near those ruinated Structures, about 26
Foot high, and in all, proportionable, where they say, Oracles were delivered
of old; but the Cheat now appears plain, for in the Head of it there is a deep
hole, wherein a Man may easily hide himself; and here, no doubt, the Priest was
placed who gave the Oracle to delude the People, his Noise coming through holes
made in the Nostrils of the Idol; and so we may conclude of the rest, who with
Ambiguous Answers, abused those that came to enquire future Events, or to be
resolved in doubtful Matters. This Colessus is cut in a Rock, representing a
Woman.

From hence we Traveled to a large Village, called Sacara, the Burying-place
of the Ancient Egyptians, in which there are Catacombs, or Sepulcheral Vaults.
These are distinct Subteraneous Chambers built of square Stone; and in these
are the Bodies that are called the Mummies of Egypt, where a Moor is the
Master of them, to open them for such as will give him Money, the entrance
otherways being covered with Sand; the opening is above, through which one must
go, and so down by a Ladder, or with a Rope; they were heretofore full of
Bodies of the Ancient Egyptians, so skilfully Embalmed, that they were,
perhaps, preserved 3 or 4000 Years, with their Epitaphs in Letters of Gold on
Cloth; their Coffins were enriched with Hierogliphicks, and the Figures of the
Deceased in Relievo, and many Images, much Gold, and Jewels, were found with
the Bodies; but the covetousness of the Moors and Turks, and the curiosity of
the Franks, who purchase them of the former at a dear Rate, have almost
exhausted them, though it is believed there are some that were never opened, and
that the Moors conceal them out of Avarice, to take out what is precious, and
raise the price of such Rarities to a higher Rate: Being let down in one of
these Vaults, I saw many parts of Bodies, but little entire, they being much
broken and mangled by such as had, out of Curiosity, carried away pieces of
them.

This place is full of Piramids, but most of them very small, unless one that
never was finished, which, if completed, had been near in bigness, to the
largest I have mentioned, proportionable to the Basis; there are in it,
Ascending and Descending Alleys, at the end of which are 3 Rooms; but it not
being finished as the rest, as to what it might have been is but Conjecture;
some hold that this mighty Work ceased when Alexander the Great seized on
Egypt, and the Greeks wrested the Kingdom from the Race of the Ancient
Egyptian Kings.

On the other side of the Nile, opposite to this place, are to be seen the
Ruins of the Ancient Memphis, where the Egyptian Kings held their Court; but
Time, and the spoiling Hand of War, has made it as Troy, a heap of Ruins: It
seems to have been exceeding large, and extended along the River, till you come
over against Old Caire, so that although I spent many Hours in viewing these
Ruins, I could find nothing of Note, but pieces of Pillars, and Images, the low
Foundations of what seem to have been Ancient Temples, and little else
Remarkable.

Returning toward Caire, I came to Maltherea, 3 Miles distant from the City,
where are a great many curious shading Orange Trees, and a delicious Spring of
Water, which is said to have been the abiding place of the Blessed Virgin, when
she fled with our Savior into Egypt: There are likewise Myrtle, and
Lemon-Trees, that render the place very pleasant. This Spring and Joseph's Well
in Caire, are all the Springs of Water I could see or hear of in Egypt. That
Well is of a prodigious Depth, cut in a solid Rock 106 Foot deep, yet so broad
and winding are the Steps, that two Oxen may go down to the bottom, where, in a
Hole, is a very curious Spring, and that Water is held precious; near it are
some remains of Pharaoh's Palace, and a Room called Joseph's Hall, adorned
with Gold and Azure, and many Pillars, also his Steward's House, remarkable for
12 Columns of Thebaick Marble. Near to this there is a dreadful Prison, in
which, it is held, that Patriarch was cast, upon the false Accusation of his
Mistress; this consists of several Dungeons cut of the Rock, and if Tradition
be true, his case in that place could not but be lamentable, for it appears
very Dismal and Loathsome.

The common received opinion that it Rains not in Egypt is groundless; the
Showers fall seldomer, and less violently than in other places, so that a great
part of the Country is dry and barren Sand; the chief Fertility is occasioned
by the melting of the Snow from the Mountains, and the overflowing the River
Nile, of which famous River, I come now to speak more particularly.

This River has its source near the Mountains of the Moon, or Jews Mountains in
Aethiopia, where it is very small, but gathers many Rivers in long running,
which makes it swell much; it runs through the length of Egypt, having its
course from South to North, discharging it self into the Mediterranean Sea, by
two Mouths, making a Triangular Isle, by the Greeks called Delta, because it
resembles the Greek D; these Mouths are Navigable for large Vessels; for though
it has others, they are less, and can properly be called no other than
Rivulets; It is broader than the Seine, and for the most part glides smoothly,
unless where its Cataracts make it rage and foam, by its falling from a great
height; when it overflows it appears like a little Sea, the Water is naturally
thick and muddy, but they have a way to Clarify it, by running it through
Vessels filled with white Earth, and then it is very wholesome. Most of the
Cities, Towns, and Villages, are Situate on its Banks, or very near it, for
the convenience of Water, which is precious in that Country, for there are so
many Villages, that you have scarce passed one, but you come at another. This
River abounds not much with Fish, and there is but one good sort found at
Caire, called a Variole, but there are a vast number of Crocodiles in it, who,
no doubt, devour the Fish; this is an Amphibeous Creature, living at pleasure
in the Water, or on Land; the Head of it is flat above and below, and the Eyes
or it indifferently big, and very darkish; they have a long sharp Snout, with
long sharp Teeth, but no Tongue to be perceived; the Body large, and all of a
bigness; the Back covered with high Scales, like the Heads of large Nails, of a
greenish color, so hard, that they are Proof against a Halbert; their Tails
are very long, covered over with Scales, but the Belly is white, and pretty
tender; it has four short Legs, with five Claws on the foremost Feet, and but
four on the hinder. It grows as long as it Lives, and some are about 20 Foot
from Head to Tail; these great ones many times snap young Children at Land, and
sometimes put up their Noses, and pull People out of their Boats in the River;
so that many go with Spikes to prevent their putting up their Noses; and it is
dangerous to swim, where their haunts are: But that they Weep when they have
taken their Prey, is, for what I could find, a Fable.

To take these Creatures, they make a great many Pits by the River side, and
cover them with rotten Sticks, so that passing over, the Sticks give way, and
they fall in; then Men let down a Rope with a running Nooze, to muzzle their
Snouts, and so they draw them up, and kill them for their Skins, which they
sell to Strangers at good Rates: None but the Moors will Eat of their Flesh.

There is also in the River a Hyppopotamuses, or Seahorse, and is of a tawney
Color, the hinder part like a Bouffler, though its Legs are short, yet very
thick; it has the muzzle of an Ox, and some are about the bigness of a Camel:
its Head resembles that of a Horse, and is very great, but the Eyes are small;
the Ears little; the Neck thick; the Tail like an Elephant's; in the lower Jaw
it has four Teeth half a Foot long, two of them are crooked, and as big as the
Horn of an Ox in circumference.

This famous River mainly fertilises Egypt, and without it, it would be
desolate; nay, if it should fail but one Year to overflow, there would be a
Famine in the Land, which some hold it did for seven Years, when the mighty
Famine happened in Joseph's time, restrained by an Almighty Power; but seeing
that Famine extended to others Land., this may be but Conjectural; when it Ebbs
it leaves a fat nitreous Slime, that greatly enriches the Land, and makes it
produce plentifully. They have few Fruit Trees, and no Wine; for the small
quantity of Grapes found, are thick rhined, producing little Juice. The chief
Trees are, the Fig Trees of Pharo, the true Sycamore, Cassa, Papyrus,
Colocasse, Orange, Lemon and Myrtle Trees, but these three last are mostly
brought thither; they have great store of Onions, and other Roots; also plenty
of Corn, and diverse sorts of fine Fowls, as Yellow Birds, wild Turtles,
Pigeons, and Larks; and indeed Egypt may be rightly termed an Earthly
Paradise, did not the Oppression of their Governors much abate the Peoples
pleasure, but that is very great, as in other parts of the Ottoman Empire.

At the cutting of the Khalis, or Sluyce of the Nile, there is a great Festival
held, and triumphant Shows by Land and Water, with much rejoicing for many
Days, and whereas the Ancient Egyptians used to Sacrifice a Boy and a Girl
taken by lot, to their fancied God of the River; but the Turks abolished that
ill Custom, and instead thereof, place on each side, in the Night, the
resemblance of a Man and a Woman in Fire, by fixing Lamps very dexterously to
represent their Figures.

Egypt, as other Countries under the Turkish Government, consists of a mixed
People, of diverse Nations, as Turks, Jews, Arabs, Franks, Armenians, Greeks,
Moors, and the Ancient Inhabitants, who have liberty to exercise their Religion
as they please, but have Mulcts set upon them, for the Turks care not what they
do in that nature, so they can screw Money out of them, they being, next to the
Jews, the most covetous of all People. The Chief Government under the Grand
Signior is in the Hands of a Bassa, who has his Sub Bassa's: The great Men of
the Country are called Beys, who often bring his Head into danger, if he
displeases them, by their sending complaints to the Ottoman Port: And thus
having given you an account of the most considerable rarities of Egypt, as to
what I saw there, etc. I shall further entertain you with my Travels to
Palestine, or the Holy Land.

CHAP. X. Travels in Palestine, or the Holy Land, and all the remarkable Things
and Places to be seen in it, more exact than ever yet described; Of Mount
Libanus, and places Adjacent.
BEING desirous to visit the Holy Land, so much Famed throughout the World, for
the many Wonders God wrought there, and the many Memorable and Venerable
Antiquities yet to be seen. I provided my self of such Necessaries, as my
Reason dictated, and as I was told I should stand in need of. Upon Notice that
a Caravan was ready to part, I went and entered my self one of the Company; so
every one having Notice, and being in a readiness, we set forward, but the Wind
blowing hard, we had like to have been overwhelmed with Clouds of Sand raised
by it, which flying about our Ears, spoiled some of our Provision; however, the
Storm being over in 3 or 4 Hours, we kept on our way, with Timbrels Sounding,
to cheer the Cammels, that they might pursue their Journey with more Alacrity.
The first place that offered it self to us, was Ithanque, a little Town, where
the Caravan of Jerusalem makes its first Stage; the next was Balbeys, and from
thence we proceeded, the next Day to Salabia, where are the pleasant Woods of
Tamarisk, and there we lay in Tents, setting Guards, for fear of a surprise
from Robbers, lurking in those Woods: Our Caravan consisting of above 100
Camels, besides Mules, and Horses, with a considerable strength of Men, but no
attempt was made; and the next Evening we reached Elbir Devedar, and encamped
near some dirty Wells of Water, that our Beasts might be the better refreshed;
and then marched to Catice, where we had a Guard of Turks Armed, to conduct us
to Rich, for now we were come within danger of the Arabs, and there I saw a
long Pit, of fine white Salt, which the People affirmed was made only of Rain
Water. We parted from thence, and went to Birlab, and having rested there, we
journied to Bir Acat, a place in the Desert destitute of Water, yet full of
Quicksands; however, we were forced to lie there; but the next Day traveling
on, we found a Well, called Sibile-El-Bar-Acat, made by an Aga, who passed that
way in his Journey to Constantinople; it is covered with a Dome, supported by
Pillars. This Water very much refreshed us, and our Cattle; but going from
hence we entered again into the Quicksands, which reach as far as Rich, and
well it was we got to that place, for about a quarter of an Hour after a Storm
arose, which lasted about 30 Hours. This Village is not far from the Sea, and
has a Castle built of little Rock Stones, as is likewise all the Houses of the
Village; and here I observed they had so much Marble, that their Wells were
made of that Stone, and their Burying-places are full of them. Having refreshed
our selves, we departed for Cauniows, with a Guard of 8 Turks, and from thence
we Traveled through Quicksands, though it Rained, Thundered, and blew hard,
to Zaka, a place where no Houses are, for that Name was only given it from
three Wells of Brackish Water we found there, but passing on, we came to Wells
of pleasant Water, and now we begun to have a prospect of a fine Country, where
some Corn-Land appeared, which much encouraged us; there we found many pleasant
Trees, and good Meadows, so that now we concluded we were on the Borders of the
Land of Promise, and indeed we soon reached the City of Gaza, which stands
about two Miles from the Sea, and was anciently very Stately and Famous for
Trade; many of the Ancient Pillars are yet remaining, there being almost every
where Marble Pillars to be seen; it was one of the five Lordships of the
Philistines, the Gates of which Sampson carried away on his Shoulders, and left
them on a little Hill a Mile distant. Near the City there is a Castle, with 4
corner Towers, and the Gates are of Iron: Hard by this are found lumps of
ruined Walls, that cannot be broke with a Hammer, being the Ruins of a Castle,
built by the Ancient Romans; near the Castle, behind the Burying-place, where
we encamped, stood the House that Sampson pulled down, when he by that means
destroyed so many Phililistines, and many other things of Note, which I had not
time to observe, by reason the Caravan was in haste to depart.

From Gaza we passed to a Village, called Megdel, and so to Ithansedoud; all
the way there are pleasant Plains, full of Trees and Corn, and in the Season
these Plains are Embroidered with Tulips and Emonies, that grow without
planting; so passing a Village called Yebna, at the end of it we crossed over a
Bridge, and from thence proceeded over lovely Plains to Rama, and encamped in a
Plain over against it; however, I went with a few others, to visit some
Merchants that resided there: This Town depends on the Bassa of Gaza. Here is
the House of Nicodemus, now inhabited by French Merchants; there is also a
pretty Church: The Church of the Forty Martyrs is in this Town. The Doors of
the Houses are not above 3 Foot high, and they make them so, on purpose to
prevent the Insolent Arabs, that Border on them, from entering their Houses on
Horseback: there is likewise a Church Dedicated to the Honor of St. George.

Decamping from hence at 6 a Clock in the Morning, we saw, about 9, on our
right Hand, the Village of Good Thief, called in Arabic, Bethlakij. After that
we paid the Caffaire, or Custom, and so had a Guard allowed us to Jerusalem;
but being l^d about to avoid another Caffaire, we were entangled among the
Mountains, and obliged to encamp there, in a place close by a ruinous old
Building, which had been a Convent of Franciscan Friars. Some Arches of the
Ruins are yet standing above, and many others under Ground, where the Arabs
keep a few Cows; a Spring of pleasant Water issuing out of a Rock near it.

The next day, we passed on toward Jerusalem, once exceeding Famous, but now
contracted into a small compass; we left Degib, a small Village, so called in
Arabic, and was once the Town of Samuel the Prophet; it stands upon an
Eminence, there is a Mosque covered with a Dome, they say Samuel is Buried
there, and the Jews visit it out of Devotion; and soon after we discovered the
City of Jerusalem, which the Turks call Coudscherif, and came before it, but
being Franks, as they call the Latin Christians, we could not be admitted till
the Religious sent for us; and when we had waited about an Hour, at that which
is called the Gate of Damascus, we were introduced by the Trucheman of the
Convent, who came with an Officer belonging to the Basha of the Province, who
visited the Bagage, and then we were conducted to the Convent of St. Savior,
who Entertained us Charitably, and showed us to an Apartment were we might rest
our selves, and a Monk came and washed our Feet, and the Religious were very
Industrious to show us the places of Note, and to begin our visits of the Holy
Places. First we passed near to the Judgment Hall, from whence our Savior went
out bearing his Cross; it is so called, because, those that were Condemned to
die, went out of the City by it: At present within the City, advanced a few
steps, proceeding on our way, we pass under an Arch, where is a Stone on which
they say, Pilate set our Savior, when he said, Ecce Homo, Behold the Man. This
is a large Arch reaching from one side of the Street to the other, and has two
Windows looking into the Street, only separated by a little Marble Pillar, and
under this Window is an Inscription, viz. Tode Toll Crucifice eum; Take and
Crucify him. A little further is the Palace of Herod, from whence our Savior
was sent back to Pilate, and although these two were at variance before, yet
the Prince of Peace passing between them, they soon, even that very day, were
at Agreement: And indeed, there are many of the Ancient Structures remaining,
though this famous City has undergone so many Revolutions, yet it is
Conjectured, that many new Works have been added to the Old Ruins, and they
much repaired in many places. The Sheep Gate still remains entire, and over the
place where our Savior was Scourged, there is a pretty Chaple Erected; the
Front and some other parts of Solomon's Temple are yet remaining, and there are
several Arches that make a lovely Porch before the Door of the Temple; nor is
the Tower of David quite defeated, there remaining many Ruins to show the
Strength and Magnificence of it. There are abundance of Chaples in this City,
some belonging to the Latin Christians, others to the Greeks, and some to
Armenians Abasines, etc. and these were raised on several Religious occasions,
where the passages in Holy Scripture are recited to have happened; but they pay
the Turks a large tribute for possessing them, yet they get much Money by the
visits that are made in Pilgrimages, the Turks often choping and changing with
those that will give most Money, and they who are the richest, commonly possess
those that are most in Veneration, and consequently most frequented; but above
all the rest that are very numerous, the Church of the Holy Sepulcher is in the
highest Veneration, therefore I shall briefly describe it.

All Franks that enter it at first, are taxed 24 Piasters a piece, and the
Religious pay only 12; but when you have once paid that Tax, and Entered it,
you may go in as often as you will when it is open, giving a Mudine to the
Turk, who keeps the Door.

Before you enter into the Church, you pass a kind of a large Court that is
before it, laid with Freestone; and on this, the Jews do not, or, as some say,
dare not tread: Then the Steeple appears, which is on the left side corner of
the Front of the Church; it is square on all sides, has three stories of
Windows, two in front, supported and separated by two Marble Pillars, and
heretofore is said to have 18 Bells in it. The Door of this Church is very
Magnificent, and over it are many Figures in Brass Relics, being the
Representations of several Sacred Histories; the Door is sealed with the Seal
of the Basha, and when any enter, it is immediately shut again. In this Church,
there is the Chaple of Apparition, so called; because it is held, our Lord
appeared in that place to the Blessed Virgin, immediately after his
Resurrection; and from thence we went down to the Chaple of St. Helena,
Inventrix of the Cross, and having viewed some others, we passed through the
said Chaple, where it was told the Women, that Christ was risen in this Chaple.
There is a little Altar, and three Windows to give light before the Door, a
Lamp, and seven Lamps within it, and there lies a Stone said to be rolled from
the mouth of our Savior's Sepulcher, on which the Angel set, when his
Brightness appeared so transparent.

On the right hand as you enter, is the place where the Body of our Lord was
laid in, cut out of the Rock, in which there is a Table of the same Rock raised
about two Foot from the Ground, or somewhat more. This takes up one half of the
Breadth, and the whole length of the Chaple; it has been faced with white
Marble to prevent its being broken, for the Christians who came to visit it,
strove eagerly to have little Bits of it, to place in Rings and other Gold
Ornaments as a precious Relick. And now it serves for an Alter, where the Latin
Priests celebrate Mass, none being permitted to do the like; and in the Roof of
it are three Holes to evaporate the Smoke of the Lamps, there being 44 of them
in it of Silver and Gold, sent by the Kings of France, Spain, and other
Princes. The inside of this place is faced with White Marble, and environed on
the outside with 10 curious Pillars of the same Stone, and the Lamps are round
about it. It is covered with a Platform in the middle, whereof just over the
Holes that Evaporate the Smoke, there is a Dome about 6 Foot in Height, covered
with Lead, which stands upon 12 little Porphery colored Pillars, two and two
on the Platform, which makes six Arches, and under every one of them hangs 3
Lamps; though when it runs, the Water falls through the Aizie in the Dome of
the Church, on the little Dome, from whence it is conveyed by a Pipe into a
hole.

Before the Door of the Sepulcher, at an equal distance from it, and the Door
of the Quire, is a prodigeous Lump of Silver; they say, that two Men can hardly
Fathom it, it was sent by Philip III. of Spain, whose Arms are on it in several
places with this Motto: Philipus III. Rex Hispaniorum me donavit.

The Quire and the Body of the Church is of curious Work; it is said to be
placed in the middle of the World, because in Psalm 74. its said, God wrought
Salvation in the midst of the Earth, but not to be too tedious in this matter,
I must cut short and proceed to other places. We went soon after to visit the
Mount of Olives, the place where our Lord wept over Jerusalem, and foretold its
Destruction; and from thence indeed there is a curious prospect of the City. On
the top of this Mount is the place of the Ascension, where is a Chaple with 8
Fronts, and a little Dome covered with Lead, supported by 8 Pillars of White
Marble; in this Chaple is the print of a Foot on a piece of Rock, which they
say, our Savior left when he Ascended; and that there was an other of them
which the Turks have cut away and kept to show to such as will give Money to
see it in the Temple of Solomon. Then we visited the Gzot, in which it is held
the Apostles made the Creed, and the Sepulchers of Absalon and Jehosaphat; the
Valley wherein they stand is no other now, than a great Ditch, that conveys the
Water from Jerusalem, but the chief Jews hire their Burying Places here of the
Turks, superstitiously fancying, that Judgment will first begin here at the
general Resurrection, and therefore they who are Buried in it, shall be first
dispatched. About Absalon's Tomb is a great heap of Stones, for every one that
passes by, is obliged to throw a Stone at it, in detestation of his Rebellion
against his Father.

Near this, there is the Tomb of Zacharias, and the Brook Kedron; this Brook
has over it a Stone Bridge, but many times it is dry, as it happened at this
time, so that we passed over without wetting our Feet, though not near the
Bridge.

As for the Garden of Olives, it is a very small place, and few Trees remaining
in it; it is enclosed with a very inconsiderable Wall, and into it is taken the
Garden of Bethsemany, where our Savior was in his Agony, and near it is the
Sepulcher of of the Blessed Virgin Mary, which is a Church almost under ground,
of it, nothing but the Front can be seen, and hereabouts are several other
Sepulchers to be seen, as those of Joachin and Anna, and the place where St.
Stephen was Stoned; so entering by St. Stephen's Gate, we came to the
Sheep-pool, which is near to Solomon's Temple; and here are yet to be seen the
Sepulchers of Godfrey of Bulloin, the first Christian King of Jerusalem; that
of his Brother Balwin, and others that succeeded him, though time has much
defaced some of them. From hence I went to Mount Calvery, where is a Hole half
a foot Diameter, and 2 foot Deep, in which the Christians there say, the Cross
stood when our Savior was Crucified; they showed a Rock, with a cleft in it,
that they say rent at his giving up the Ghost.

My curiosity now led me to visit the Burying Places of the Kings of Jerusalem,
which is of great Antiquity; and to this you go out of the City by the Gates of
Damascus, and when I came there, I entered into a great Court, cut out and made
even in a Rock, and the Rock serves to it as a Wall; and on the left hand there
is a Gallery cut out of the same Rock, with several Pillars beautified with
Stone, Embelished with curious Figures, and Engravenings on Stone; and there is
a little open place at one end of this Gallery, through which I crept on my
Hands and Knees, and then found a large square Room cut out of the Rock; and
further there are other Rooms, and curious square Tombs cut out of the Rock
also, so that it seemed a Palace rather than a Burying place, though here many
of the Ancient Kings of Jerusalem lie Interred; and returning from this
Magnificent Palace of the Dead, I went to visit the Cave, where, it is held,
the Prophet Jeremiah composed his Lamentations. It is a large lightsome Grot,
the Roof of it supported by a Pillar that stands in the midst of it, being very
near the Burying Place of the Kings.

Having been curious in making these Observations, I had a desire to see the
famous River Jordan, so renowned in Holy Writ; and so taking Provision for the
way, and Company also to guard us against the insults of the Arabs, who watch
all opportunities to rob Strangers and Turks; We set forward with a great many
more that had the same desire, and joining with us in our way, lay almost all
along among the Mountains, the Road being very Stony from Jerusalem to the
Plains of Jerico; before the latter, our Caravan, as we may Term it, Encamped,
having passed Bithany, and the Fountain of the Apostles. Here we refreshed our
selves, and though Jerico was once a famous City, it now consists of a few
Brick Houses, inhabited by Arabs, who live a miserable poor life; near to this
is the House of Zacheus, and here we found the so much talked of Roses of
Jerico; these Blow not unless they are put into Water, and then they Blow in
all Seasons, contrary to the Opinions of those who say they blow not but on
Christmas Day, and others on all the Festivals of our Lady.

Traveling by many places of little Note, at length we came to Jordan, and
Encamped near it: On the Banks there are many Almond, and other pleasant Trees;
it is not broader than the Thames, but very deep in most places, it has its
beginning from 2 small Springs, called Jor, and Dan, toward Mount Libanus, and
from them, put together, it takes its Name. The Water of this River, they say,
will not corrupt by length of time, though it appears not very clear: It runs
from East to South, and passing through the Sea of Tiberius, loses its Waters
in the Asphalian Lake, or Dead Sea, which sprung up in the Plains, when the
Cities of Sodom and Gomorah were sunk in Flames; in the Sylvian places, on the
Bank of this River, the warbling of Birds is very Harmonious, especially of
Nightingals, who are there in great numbers. At this River many paid their
Devotions, in remembrance of the Wonders that had been done there; as the
Children of Israel's passing it dry shod: Elisha's, dividing it with his
Mantle; and our Savior's being Baptized.

As for the Dead Sea, it is a great standing Lake of Salt and Bitter Water; all
the Plains that border on it are Bitter, and they say there are Trees growing
on the brink of it, that bear Apples with a Scarlet and Golden Rhine, fair to
the Eye to delude Travelers, but as a Curse on the Place, they are within,
Ashes and Smoke. Some hold, that a living thing will not sink in this Water,
but the fumes arising from it were so extreme it being hot Weather, that I
thought it convenient not to approach too near it. I was informed that this
Sea, or rather Lake, was 100 Miles in length, and 25 over, but that no Fish can
live in it. In our return, I saw the Mount where our Savior Fasted Forty Days,
and was Tempted; on the top of it there is a Grot, wherein is an Altar: This
Grot is said to be the place of his Residence, during that time, and there the
Monks say Mass on public occasions; and coming down again, I saw the Prophet
Elisha's Well, where he made the Bitter Water Sweet, by casting Salt into it;
and now the Water is of an excellent pleasant Taste; This Well is about a
quarter of an Hours Travel from the Foot of the Mountain.

Going now to Bethlehem, they showed us by the way the House of St. Simeon, and
the place where Elias was Born; also the House of Jacob, Rachel's Sepulcher,
and David's Cestern.

Bethlehem was anciently a Town of the Tribe of J^dah, and has been, as appears
by the Ruins, a very fair place, but now greatly reduced: There is in it a
Convent of Monks; and the place where St. Jerome resided, and taught the People,
is a pretty compact Church, dedicated to the Honor of St. Catherine: There is
also the Sepulcher of the Innocents, where many of them that Herod caused to be
Slain were Buried: The Oratory of St. Jerome, and his Tomb: The place where our
Savior was laid in the Mainger, is to be seen. There is an Altar where the
three Kings adored him, and made their precious Offerings; and all these places
are adorned with pleasant Structures and Ornaments, Lamps burning in most of
them, and Sculptures resembling the Histories; in one of which, the Virgin Mary
is represented, kneeling before our Savior, who has 2 Crowns of Silver on his
Head, which things are the only Ornament of the place; near it is the Sealed
Well, and the 3 Fish Ponds of Solomon; the Well is a pleasant little hole, but
deep, with 3 Springs bubling up; at the end, Aquaducts convey the Water to
Jerusalem; the Fish Ponds seem to be cut out of a Rock, being smooth Stone at
bottom, with Springs, one at the end of another, lowering by degrees, so that
they communicate their Water; and Traveling on, there is the Garden of
Solomon, shut in between 2 Hills, which serve for a Wall on either side; also
the Cave where David cut off the lap of Readiness Garment; and passing the Town of
Sanacarib, we came in with the Mountains of Judea: the Town is called so,
because Sanacarib's Army Encamping there, was cut off by the Angel: The
Fountain is likewise in the way, where the Ethiopian Eunuch was Baptized by
St. Philip, and is a pleasant Spring of Sweet Water; and by bad way passing the
Village of Battir, we came to the Desert of St. John Baptist, and upon an
Ascent are seen the Ruins of an Old Monastery; under this is a Grot, where they
say he lay, and in it, the form of a Bed cut in the Rock. There are many things
to be seen, in the Mountains of Judea, more than here mentioned; but being
tedious ways, Rockey and Stoney, I declined to Travel further in them, they
being composed of many Risings and Fallings, some very Craggy, others Smooth,
with pleasant shading Trees on them, as Olives, Palms, etc.

Having rested a little after this Journey, and escaped some Ambushcades of the
Arabs, I, as well as many more of my Companions, being desirous to see other
memorable places before we left the Holy Land, our curiosity lead us to pass
through the Gate of Bethlehem, which we did, pretty early in the Morning, and
the first thing of Note that saluted our Eyes, was the Foot of Mount Sion, on
the Right Hand, and the two Fish Ponds of Bersheba, in one of which, David
beheld her bathing from his Palace in Mount Sion, when he fell enamored with
her, and committed that grievous Sin, which made not only him but all Israel
Mourn. Then we passed to the Field which is called Acaldema, or the Field of
Blood, and here the Armenian Strangers find a Burying-place: so going forward,
we saw the Grot where 8 of the Apostles hid themselves, when our Lord was made
a Prisoner; it is now a pleasant cool place for shelter, and in it are to be
seen the Pictures of the Apostles. Near this there is a Burying-place for the
Greeks, and Strangers, and a Pit, where it is said, the Jews hid the Fire of the
Altar, by the Command of the Prophet Jeremiah, when they were carried away
Captive by Nabuchadnezzar into Babylon; close by it there is a Mosque, with a
Reservatory of pleasant Water to refresh Travelers.

But going on, we came to the Pool of Shilo, where the Blind Man washed, and
had his sight restored him, and passing on, saw where the Prophet Isaiah was
sawn asunder with a wooden Saw, by the command of Manasses. Then we journied by
the Fountain of the Blessed Virgin, to the Mount of Scandal, near which Judas
hanged himself, after he had betrayed his Lord; it is so called, because the
Concubins perverted his wise Heart, and made him commit Folly, in offering
Sacrifice to Moloch, and the Idol of Chamos; and so we came to Bethany: There
we saw the Ruins of the House of Simeon the Lepar, where Mary Magdalen anointed
our Savior with the precious Oynement; also the Ruins of the Castle of Lazarus
on a little Ascent, and at the Foot of it is the Sepulcher out of which he was
raised; it is a little Grot, and in a Table of Stone, where the Priests on
Solemn Days say Mass, they show there the Stone that our Savior sat on, when
he bewailed him, and called him forth; and places where the House of Martha
stood; as also the Fig Tree that withered when Christ Cursed it; and that where
the Ass stood, which he sent for and Rod in Triumph to Jerusalem: Then we went
to the Grot where St. Peter Wept bitterly after he had denied his Master; and
from hence we turned to Mount Sion, where our Lord celebrated the Holy Supper
with his Apostles, and instituted the Blessed Sacrament. Here is the Room he
entered when the Doors were shut, and the Holy Ghost descended on the Day of
Penticost.

Not far from hence we beheld the Sepulchers of David, and Solomon. This
Mountain was formerly within the compass of the Walls of Jerusalem; but Selim
the Turkish Sultan rebuilding them, it was excluded, and the City much
straightened. We saw many other things hereabouts, as the Iron Gate, the House
of Zebedec, and that of the High Priest, Annas; the place where St. James was
beheaded; the Houses of St. Thomas, and Mark; the Prison of St. Peter, whence
he was delivered by the Angel, etc.

And now returning a little again to Jerusalem, I shall give somewhat more of
its Description than hitherto I have done.

This Famous City is seated on a Barren Mountanous Ground for the most part, it
produces no Food, but at a distance the Land is exceeding Fertile. The Streets
are narrow and crooked, the Building but indifferent, all the Ancient
Magnificence being in a manner laid in Rubbish; it has 6 Gates, viz. That of
Ephraim, the Gates of Bethlehem, Jaffa, Damascus, Zion, and the Dungate, and
one that is walled up, called the Golden-Gate, because our Savior entered in
Triumph at it; the Sheep-Gate is not reckoned, as being much ruined. The Turks
keep them all shut at Noon-Prayer, because they have a Prophecy, that at that
time, the Christians shall surprise Jerusalem, and particularly on a Friday, on
which Day they are very apprehensive it will happen; not far from the
Golden-Gate there is a Pillar bearing out of the Wall like a Cannon, and on
this the Turks have a foolish Opinion, that Mahomet shall sit at the Day, to
see whether Christ Judges the Christians Uprightly, and if he does, Mahomet
will give him his Sister in Marriage, with a great Portion; and then changing
himself into a great Sheep, he shall fly up in the Air a vast height, with the
Mahometans entangled in his Wool, and there shake himself terribly, and such as
can hold fast shall go with him into Paradise, but such as fall off shall drop
into Hell. The Walls of this City are fair and strong.

Again, leaving Jerusalem, I went with a considerable Company to visit Emans,
and Jaffa; the first of these is but 2 Leagues and an half from Jerusalem; by
the way stands the Well where our Lo^^ appeared to the two Disciples, after his
Resurrection; a little further is the Castle where our Lord was known to them
in breaking Bread, which is now very ruinous, and the Village is of little
account, there being very few Houses, and those inconsiderable, which made us
keep on by the way of Ramah to Jaffa, which is 4 Leagues beyond it: This Jaffa
was Anciently called Joppa. It is built on the Top of a Rock, and is altogether
Ruinous, there remaining no more than some Towers, and the Port at the Foot of
the Rock; and to a crag of this Rock it is Fabled, Andromeda was tied, when
Perseus the Son of Jupiter, and Danae delivered her from the Sea Monster. Here
the Prophet Inah embarked when he fled from the Face of God. Here St. Peter
raised Tabitha, Acts 9. and saw the Sheet let down from Heaven, Acts 10. There
are Grots by the Seaside for Pilgrims to rest in; there is also a little
Castle, with two Towers, one round the other, square, and a great Tower
separated from it on one side, but no Houses by the Sea. The Port has but
little Water in it, and none but small Barks can come up with the Fortresses.
Mount Carmell being but a little distance from hence, by Water, I agreed with
others, to take small Vessels to visit it, but we met with a Storm by the way,
that much endangered us; but at length we arrived safely there, and lodged in
the Village of Cayplias, which, by the Ruins appears to have been formerly a
considerable Town, it is at the Foot of the Mountain, and the next Morning we
ascended the Mountain, where we found a Convent of barefooted Friars, called
Carmelites; these observe a very strict Rule, neither eating Flesh nor drinking
Wine, totally Sequestring themselves from the World, nor will they suffer
others to do it in their Convent. This is the place where the Prophet Elias
lived; and there is in this Mount, as they say, a Garden of Stone Mellons,
which happened on this wise; the Prophet asking the Man to give him some of
that he was gathering, he to put him off, told him they were Stones, when
immediately they proved so indeed, by turning into Stone; they showed us one of
these, but would not show us the place where they grew, least we should covet
to carry them away; however, they feasted us with Fruits, boiled Roots, and
gave us Water to Drink; for though the Hill is Rockey, ye by their industry,
they have raised many Fruit Trees, and have variety of good Flowers. Then we
saw the Well Elias made to spring out of the Ground, and another little Well by
it; we saw a little distant from these, the Grot, or Cave of Elias and Elisha;
it is cut very smooth in the Rock, above and below, near 20 Paces in length,
and 15 in breadth, and very high: The Turks have built a little Mosque by it.
This Mountain, and the Country about, it is commanded by an Emir, or Prince,
who pays the Grand Signior a Tribute of Twelve Horses.

I forgot to tell you of Mount Libanus, so famed for its tall Cedars, but such
wast has been made of them, that I could number great and small but 23. There
is a Church and Monastery in it; there is a Patriarch belonging to it, that
lives at a Village beneath, called Cannobin. Thus much for the Holy Land, whose
Fame has overspread the World.

CHAP. IX. Travels through Syria, and diverse other Countries toward the
Kingdom of Persia, with many remarkable Things occuring in so long and
hazardous a Journey by Land, and Water.
HAving heard many Famous Things reported of Persia, too many here to
enumerate; and being recruited with Bills of Exchange, and other Advantages for
Traveling, it being a curiosity I was inclined too from my tender Years, I
found an opportunity to go in good Company for Damascus. This City is still in
good Reputation, and has six Gates, viz. the East Gate, the Sphaies, or
Seraglio Gate, the Shoo Gate, the Gate of Paradise, the Gate of Peace, and St.
Thomas's Gate: This City is an Hour and a quarters walk round it; but the
Suburbs are as big again as the Town. It has in it many stately Buildings, some
New, others of great Antiquity, having been Anciently the Capital City of
Syria; but being on a Journey, I had not much leisure to view it, or few other
Towns or Cities on the way, therefore I shall but lightly touch on them in my
Passage.

From hence we parted for Aleppo, which is one of the most considerable Cities
of the Ottoman Empire in Asia, by reason of the great Trade Merchants drive
there; it is as large as Damascus, and has a fruitful Country lying about it.
The Walls are strong and well fortified; it has ten Gates, and many curious
Buildings in it. This and the former are governed by Bassa's, who have large
dependencies. There is a Court of Wells, with a Canal full of good Fish, but
the Turks, on some superstitious account or other, forbid any to take them,
alleging, for excuse, that those who Eat them will fall Sick and Die. There
are in this City People of all curious Trades, and were not the oppression of
the Turks, as it is indeed all over the Ottoman Empire, very great, Riches
would flow here in abundance.

From this place our Road lay to Mosul by the way of Bir, and Orfa the Ancient
Edessa, but before we came to Bir we passed Euphrates in great Boats. This is a
little Town in Mesopotamia, on the side of the River, and passing by small
Towns, and the Ruins of some great ones, we came to Orfa; The Walls are about
two Hours Walk in Circumference, and pretty entire, but the Town within, though
it has been Fair and Stately, lies now mostly in Ruins. We refreshed our selves
here, and passed on by Codgtasar, in the Country of Meredin and Nisibia; we saw
in our way many Villages, some Towns, and other things of Note, as Job's Tomb,
Fields of Mellons, Cucumbers, etc. Our way was sometimes over Mountains, then
into Valleys, and now and then in Plains, seeing but few, except some few
wandering People, who move from place to place, feeding Cattle, and carrying
their Tents with them; and after a weary Journey, we came to M^sul, and entered
it by Bagdad Capisi, that looks toward the South, where we paid a Paistre to
the Janisary that kept the Gate.

This City, Anciently called Aasour, stands on the side of the Tigris, which
runs to the East of it. It is encompassed with strong Stone Walls, plaistered
over; and these have little pointed Battlements on the top, 2 Fingers thick,
and 4 or 5 broad. There is a Castle in the Water of an Oval Form, and pretty
strong, which keeps the Pass of the River. Many of the Houses are fairly built
with Freestone, and the City is about an Hours walk in compass: It has five
Gates, beside that I mentioned. On the other side of the River is the place
where once stood the Famous City of Nineveh, and some of the Ruins are to be
seen, and not far distant, a Tomb, wherein Jonah is said to be Buried. In
Summer it is extreme Hot, insomuch, that the People keep in Vaults in the heat
of the Day, and some in Stone Troughs of cold Water.

Having recruited our Provisions here, it being July, to prevent the danger of
the Semiel, or infectious Wind, which arises about this time, kills many that
Travel by Land. I, and some of the Company, passed by Water on a Keleck, or a
kind of a Float, fastened on a great many Leather Baggs, filled full of Wind;
but they would not suffer us to carry any Wine on Board, foolishly fancying,
that it would fink their Boat; and in this we did wisely, for we afterward
heard of many that passed by Land, who were not accustomed to that Wind, died,
being stifled or Poisoned with the infectious Air. In our Passage we saw many
Towns and Villages; and Men, Women, and Cattle were swiming their Passage over
the River. In the Night we heard the Lions Roar on either Hand, which made us
keep from the Shore, least they should leap into our Kelechs, though the
Natives would persuade us, they were afraid of a Man, and that the Arabs
usually pursued and killed them with a Staff; but we thought fit not to lay too
much stress upon this, for I had heard in Mosul, that many who had stragled
from the Caravans, had been snaped by them, for they rove in great numbers, and
Firearms are the best defense against them; besides, we were forced to stand
on our Guard, for fear of the Thieveish Arabs, who often get aboard by swiming,
and surprise these Kelechs, nor did they fail to Alarm us, but when we espied
them, they Dived, and got to Shore, and by that means escaped our Shot we made
at them: But to be Brief, at last we came to Bagdad. This is a long Town, lying
on the River: The first thing that appears is the Castle, to the side of the
River, on the left Hand, and seems to be very well Fortified. It is built of
curious white Stone, though the generality of the Houses in the Town are low
and inconsiderable; it is very strong on the Land-side, and in circuit Large,
requiring at least two Hours to compass it, at a moderate pace on Foot; there
are lovely Bagnios, and fair Bazars in it. It was Founded by the Persians, but
taken from them by the Turks, and has a Bassa for their Governor. It stands
advantageous enough on the Tygris, but is thinly Peopled, by reason of the
Licentiousness of the Soldiers, who are scarcely under any Command.

It is extreme Hot in this place in the Summer time, as in all others of the
same Latitude. There are but few Fruit Trees hereabouts, but every where store
of Licorice. They generally use Oil of Naphta in their Lamps, it being
plentiful in their Borders. They often send their Expresses from place to place
by Carrier Pigeons, fastening the Note about their Necks, which they exactly
perform, unless they are killed by the way, which rarely happens.

I found here a Caravan, mostly consisting of Persians, bound for Hamaden in
Persia; this opportunity I and others embraced, though we found the Retinue did
not exceed sixty, slenderly Armed, and mostly without Tents, appearing resolute
and hardy; and passing Caranluocapi, leaving on the left the Persian Tower
Adgdadom Coulasu, we came near Lockman Hakin, and encamped there all Day, where
the Chakales entertained us with Music: From thence we Marched, and Lodged in
a Village, called Aacube, under the pleasant Shade of diverse spreading
Palm Trees, and so proceeded Eastward to Harounia, where are many pleasant
Gardens, and passing by Adiga and Immanisker, and many other Villages, we were
informed the Arabs lay in wait for us in the narrow Passes, which caused us to
get 15 Janisaries well Armed; but we needed them not, meeting with no
opposition, for we safely arrived at Mendeli, the utmost bounds of the Turks,
on the Frontiers of Persia: It is a little Town and Castle among Palm Trees,
made with Mud and Clay, and here we rested some time.

CHAP. VII. Travels into Persia, and a particular Account of the Places, and
what occured in the way to Ispahan, the Metropolis of the Kingdom.
THE famous Kingdom of Persia, so much Renowned in History, is the Ancientest
Monarchy now known in the World, having, for the most part, had an interrupted
Succession of Kings, who have Governed that vast Region Valliantly, in wise
Conduct, and much Glory.

It is bounded on the East with the great River Indus, on the South with the
main Ocean, on the North with the Caspian-Sea, and on the West with the Tygris
and Persian-Gulf, and is divided into 11 Provinces, viz. Persis, now called
Far, Susiana, Caramania, Gedrosso, Drangiania, Irica, Arachossa, Parapomisus,
Seccha, Hircania, and Ormus; all very large, and most of them Fertile.

On the confines of this Kingdom, we found Men Armed with Bows and Quivers, who
stopped us, because we were advanced before the Caravan, but being certified
that we belonged to it, they let us pass. These are the King's Officers, set on
the Roads to examine Strangers, thereby to prevent Spys and Robbers entering
into the Country, and are upon most Roads, having a pretty good Sallary out of
the Treasury for their diligence; and they get much Money of Passengers.

Having passed these Men, we Traveled sometimes over Plains, then Hills, and
then into Plains again, and through many narrow Passages, seeing on either Hand
a very fruitful Country, and the Persian's Houses, many of them being made of
Cane, and built straglingly here and there; we often changed the Point,
sometimes North, or East, or South-East, as the way led us, till we came by a
Village of Cures, called Nian; the Hills about it were covered with Turpentine,
and wild Chesnut-Trees; the Waters bordered with Agnus Castus, and
Rose-Laurels. Here the Weather altered, for it was very Cold in comparison of
the Hot Countries we had passed before. From hence we passed to a Village,
called Chegiafer, it is composed of straggling Houses, of rough Stone, Earth,
Cane, and Reeds, covered with green Branches; the former are their
Summer-Houses, and the latter their Winter-Houses. Their Mosques in this place
are built of rough Stone and Earth, and on the way there are many Kervanserais
commodious to Inn at, very fine for the most part, being beautified with a kind
of black Stone, some pollished and some rough; but passing on through a vast
track of Country, we came to Hamadan, to which place the Caravan was bound.

Hamadan is a large Town, but in many places of it void spaces, there being
many Gardens and Ploughed Fields within the Walls; the Houses are Stately, yet
built of Brick baked in the Sun: It has one fair Street, where they sell Stuffs
and Clothes ready made; it has many Shops in it, and lies near the Bezestein
which is little, but well compacted; and indeed it is a Town of a pretty Trade,
many Caravans coming thither out of Turkey, and other parts, to buy and sell
Merchandise, though the Air and Water are unwholesome, and no Wine to be found,
so that I was very ill there, which made me hasten to be gone to a more
agreeable Air. It is Commanded by a Cham, under the King of Persia, who is the
same there, as a Bassa in Turkey. The Armenians have a Church here, but keep it
in no good Order: To this and other Chams the King every Year sends a Rich
Vest, who go out of the Gate to receive it, and return with it on, without any
other Ceremony, then being attended by the chief Men of the place on Horseback,
and this is usually Cloth of Gold.

From hence we took Mules with our Lading, for five Abasis a piece, and one of
these will carry 600 weight, if need requires it; and so taking leave of those
of the Caravan that staid to negotiate their Affairs, we set forward for
Ispahan, the Regal City of Persia, and Metropolis of the Kingdom, in a very
strong Troop; for though such care has been taken, that Robberies are less
frequented in Persia than in Turkey, yet it is prudence, however, to be armed
against Danger, and passing early in the Morning through the King's Gate, so
called, because it looks toward the Royal City: We Traveled over Hills and
Downs, the way often altering, from good to bad, till we came to the Town of
Nischar, where we refreshed our selves in a ruinous Kervanserai, on the Ground,
where Carpets were spread, and drank Water out of a leathern Jugg, called there
a Matera: From thence we Marched along the River side, and came to lodge at
another Village called Boulousch Kisar, and the next Day encamped under Trees
near Haran, another Village, where we were warned by our Muliters, to keep a
good Guard in the Night time, for they told us, Spys had been amongst us that
Day, to visit our Arms, and see how we were provided; but whether they liked
them not, or stood in fear, I know not; but certain it is, we had there no
disturbance.

Early in the Morning we marched again, and passed by several pleasant Villages
and Gardens, and foarding the little River Dizava, we came to a Town of that
Name, lying amongst Gardens, in a spacious Plain, and here we had a plentiful
shower of Rain, which was the first, except a little mizling in our way, since
my departure from Aleppo; and so by a long Journey, taking in our way Sari,
Debile, Mouchasaba, Machat, Scheber-Gird, Angovan, Agatch, or Farsang, Nichova,
Fagasun, Ithua, Ghulpaigan, Arbane, Deba, little Villages, and Towns of no
great Note, and passing by diverse Kervanserais, we came to Ispahan, having seen
by the way several Antelopes, a great Beast, between a Deer and a Goat, very
smift in running and climbing the Mountains.

CHAP. XIII. A Description of Ispahan, in what is curious and worthy of Remark
in it.
ISpahan, as I told you, is the Principality, and stands in the Province of
Iraca, part of the Ancient Parthia: Here the Air is Dry, Pleasant, and more
wholesome than in many other parts, which is one main Reason the King usually
keeps his Court here. This City was Anciently called, Hecatompolis, being
Recorded to have had 100 Gates. It is beautified with Walls of a great height,
built of a red kind of a Marble; and though the Houses are very Stately, they
are built with Brick baked in the Sun, daubed over with a fine Clay, mingled
with Straw, and white cast over with a very fine Plaster, which is made of a
Stone got out of the Neighboring Mountains and burned to that whiteness, this
Plaster is the third part of the Charge of building a House; they burn their
Tiles indeed in a Kiln, but they are not so lasting as ours. There is in this
City many very stately Mosques, curiously adorned; also sundry Palaces,
Seraglios, and Buildings of great Antiquity, but many of the most Ancient are
Ruinous. The Persians take great delight in their Houses, keeping them very
neat, and adorning them with curious Paintings, Carpets, and Tapestry; for in
these, and their Gardens, seem to consist their greatest Pride. The Walls of
this City will take 5 or 6 Hours, at a pretty round pace, on Foot, to compass
them; because, within them there are spacious Gardens, adorned with pleasant
Flowers, and delicious Fruit Trees, served by Aquaducts that run there in
Channels, watering and Fructifying the several quarters; and in those Gardens
are artificial Mounts, bedded with Flowers and pleasant Summer-houses on the
top of them, shaded with Trees, besides many stately Palaces; and the quarter
where these are, is called the New Town. The Suburbs of this City are very
large, and the Nobles have Palaces in it, especially in Golfa, lying beyond
the River Sendera, which is mostly inhabited by Armenians, transplanted by
Sheba Abba, a Persian Sultan, when he utterly razed their Town of that Name in
Armenia. About this great City are cantoned People of diverse other Nations; and
there is hardly any Country in Europe, Asia, or Africa, but there are Natives
of them to be found here.

In this City there are many Squares, which render it lovely; the greatest of
which, is that of Meidan; it has regular Piazza's, and is about 700 common
Paces in length, and near 300 in breadth; it is built round, and the Houses are
all in the form of Porticoes; over them is a second range of Arches, more
backward, and these serve for Galleries and Passages, the Houses being all of
an equal height, give a curious Prospect: There is a pleasant Canal near it,
bordered with Palm Trees, and fed by a Spring, at the end of which is a Bell,
said to be taken out of a Nunnery in Ormus, with this Inscription, Ave Maria
Gratia plena. Hail Mary full of Grace. Hither the Musicians resort, there being
a Gallery, and sound several Instruments to divert the People, especially in
the Night time, and amongst others, a Trumpet of Copper, which is 8 Foot long,
making a strong hoars sound, and may be heard in a still Night all over the
City, being almost in proportion, like a speaking Trumpet, Passing on to the
Right, or West side, is the Gate of Aly, their great Prophet; on the Threshold
of it, which is a round Stone, the Persians, out of a Veneration for the place,
will not tread on; and if Malefactors can escape into the Court beyond it, or
in the King's Stables, or Kitchen, they are in a Sanctuary, none daring to
remove them from thence. This Gate is plain, and guarded by Sofies-men of great
account there, and many Persians out of Devotion, kneel and kiss the Threeshold
ever they pass over it.

The Street of Techebarbag, or the four Gardens, is very large, near 100 Paces
broad, and about 2 Itallion Miles in length: There is a by way into it from the
King's Palace, through narrow Passages as it were a Curtain; its watered with
a Canal, and adorned with shadowing Plan-Trees, being divided by the River
Senderu, over which is a curious Bridge of Stone, with a Gallery, covered and
raised above the Level for Foot Passengers; its about 300 Paces long, and 20
broad, founded on many Arches, some Brick, edged with Freestone, and others
all of Stone. Over the Gallery there is a Platform, giving a fine Prospect of
the River, and other places, the Gallery serves likewise for a Horse-way in the
Winter, for then the overflowing of the River fills up the middle of the
Bridge, and renders it a kind of a Canal. The Gates of the King's Palace, and
the Front of it, gives a good Prospect, as do the Mosques, being adorned with
Domes, and other Beautifyings; but the Christians are forbidden to enter, under
the Penalty of gross affronts, if not a good Cudgeling, though some of them out
of curiosity do it in Persian Habits, mingling themselves with the rest, and so
pass undistinguished, amongst which I took my Lot, and saw their curious
Cielings, Paintings, Mosaick-Work, fine Marble, and many other curious things.
As for their Buryingplaces they are without the City, and so they are in all
the Cities of Persia.

They have a curious way to secure the hot Air in sultry Weather, viz. They
have on the tops of their Houses a Wall about 2 Fathom high, and as much in
breadth, to which, at the intervals of other Walls of about a Foot broad, and
as high as the first, are joined in right Angels, and these are covered with a
Roof, so that let the Wind blow which way it will, the Air being pressed
between 3 Walls, is driven through a hole in the Roof of the House, and
diffuses coolbreathings, cool breathings, but in Winter this hole is stopped.

This City is full of Artists, and each Company pays the King a certain Sum,
which they raise again upon all the Crafts, and they are very dextrous in their
several Handicrafts, in which, principally, consists the riches of the Kingdom.

In the King's Court the Turkish Language is mostly spoke, but much differing
from what is spoke at Constantinople; this distinguishes the Courtiers from the
rest of the People, and gives them certain Authorities and Preeminencies they
affect, for they covet Honor above all things, and are profuse in their Diet,
Habit, Houses, and Equipages, which renders many Noble Families Poor. Their
Equipage in Traveling is extraordinary. They smoke much Tobacco, and usually
do it through a Vessel of Water. Their Games are chiefly Chess, and Draughts,
which they use in their Visits. There are amongst them a great many
Mathematicians, and Astrologers, and the King maintains many hundreds of them
liberally, though most of them appear to be very ignorant: However, these are
their chief Studies. They have also Dreamers among them, who pretend to see and
foretell things that way.

If a Man has killed another, the Widow, or next Relation, demands the
satisfaction of his Blood, and if it be not made up for Money, the Murderer,
if taken, is delivered to the Prosecutor, who puts him to Death with great
Torments, especially if he falls into the Hands of a Woman, for they are more
cruel here than the Men; and though they often compound, yet the Relations that
are not consenting to it, will privately revenge the Blood of their Friend,
concluding, their Honor suffers if the Murderer escapes unpunished.

If any one has been Robbed, he must make a present to the Deroga, who is the
same in Office, with the Sons, or Sub-Bassa, in the Turkish Government. He
sends his Men abroad to take up suspected Persons, and puts them to the Rack to
make them confess, and if the Goods be recovered, he takes a tenth, and
sometimes a sixth part; but he seems to be kinder to the Franks, taking only a
present of them, though may times by concealing the discovery, he cheats them
of all.

As for the Habits of the Persians, they are more gaudy than substantial or
lasting, generally waring flowered Silks, or Callicoes, quilted Coats, and the
like, having a flowing loose Garment over a close Coat, or Wastcoat, with a
Girdle; their Drawers down to their Heels, their Stockings are of Cloth, wide
and big; their Shoos are like Women's Slippers, with high Heels, peaked at the
Toes with a bit of Iron, but so short, that most part of the Heel hangs over,
though they stick close, and are covered with Shagreen. They ware Turbans very
large, and of diverse colors, except the Moulla's, who are Privileged to wear
them white, though the Persians ware Caps with little Turbans about them, and
the better sort have them embroidered with Gold and Silver. They take a Pride
to have every piece of their Apparel of a different color, and affect
neatness. As for Rings, the Men, nay, the King himself wears Silver ones, but
the Women those of Gold, though they cannot give any reason for this
distinction. They paint their Hands, etc. with a Dye, called Hanna, and will
not suffer their Beards to grow long, as the Turks do, for they clip them to a
quarter of an Inch, and take care to have large Mustachoes.

The Women go veiled all to their Eyes, and the Bridegoom never sees his Bride
barefaced till the Wedding Night. They wear Gold Rings in their Noses, their
Nostrils being boared for that purpose, which is a mark of Servitude, though
they take it for a Pride. When they ride, they are placed on a Cammel, in
Caschave, where they are as easy as in a Chair. They sit at their Banquets,
and otherways, as the Men do, cross-legged, on Carpets spread on the Ground, or
on Cushions, and lie on Quilts in their Smocks and Drawers, but have curious
fine painted Coverlids over them.

They eat but sparingly, and wonder the Franks can eat Meat twice a Day, they
doing it but once, and then they mostly Boil or Bake their Meats, not much
approving of Roastmeat; nor indeed they do not eat much Flesh, living mostly on
Rice-broth, Herbs, and Fruits. They burn Oil of Napta in their Lampts, and in
Winter have Stoves in their Houses, which keeps them very warm. They Drink
Wine, though they are prohibited it, and many times do it over plentifully;
which makes them, as other Drunkards, quarrelsom. They have a great many
Ice-Houses curiously Vaulted, and deep under ground to keep their Ice in, to
cool their Liquors in the hot Seasons. Many of the Persians take Opium, which
intoxicates them in a kind of Drunkenness, and they carry it about with them,
for having once habituated themselves to it, they dare not leave it of, for if
they do, they have most commonly dangerous Sicknesses, and Death is frequently
the attendant.

As for the Persian way of Mourning, it is expressed by a Girdle, hanging down
with 2 ends before, and crossing them; but on the Death of a near Relation, the
Men rend their Caba, or Vests, in sign of Grief, and for the space of 7 Days
give Alms; but the Women make doleful howlings or lamentings for six, and
sometimes twelve Months, and keep themselves close, unless when they go to
visit the Graves, rehearsing to such as visit them, the Praises of the Dead,
who, with their forced Lamentations, for it is mostly no other, disturb their
Neighbors rest, and disorder themselves.

CHAP. XIV. The King of Persia an Absolute Monarch; of the Great Officers of
his Court, and other Matters.
THE King of Persia has an Absolute or Despotical Power over his Subjects, and
anciently, the Kings were in a manner adored by their People: He meddles in
matters of Religion, as well as in Secular Affairs, and they begin not their
Festivals till they have obtained his leave to keep them; and sometimes, though
the Moon has appeared, he sets them back, notwithstanding it is their great
Feast of Ramadan. His Subjects give him great Reverence and Respect, and
scarcely look upon him but with Trembling, paying an implicit Obedience to his
Orders. If they swear by his Head, the Oath is more binding to them, than when
they swear by the Deity; and without consulting the Law, he is the Arbitrary
Judge of their Lives and Fortunes, appointing such Rewards and Punishments as
he shall think fit, without control: And if the greatest Officer of the Court
falls under the King's displeasure, all his Friends forsake him, none daring to
own him, or subsist him with necessaries, so that he puts to Death whom he
pleases, and the nearest Relations of the party are constrained to seem pleased
with his Injustice; nay, sometimes the Sons are commanded to cut off their
Fathers Noses, or to kill them, which order they readily obey. These Kings are
so jealous of being deposed, by reason of their great Tyranny, that they cause
the Males of all their Female Kindred, to be shut up in a Stone Trough, as soon
as Born, and there starved to Death. So soon as a King comes to the Crown, he
puts out the Eyes of all his Male Relations, except Sons. He sometimes changes
Wives with his Nobles, giving them his instead of theirs, and it is not
murmured at, especially in public; and if he likes not his Bargain, will
exchange again at pleasure.

He has a Seraglio of very beautiful Women, who are kept mighty strict, for he
is exceeding jealous of them, and it is Death with extreme tortures, for any
Man, except Eunuchs, to be seen there; nay, they are prohibited to look on
them, though they are Veiled; and when he takes any of them into the Country
with him, no Men dare be in the way; and in the Town where he lodges in his
Progress, all the Men are obliged to leave their Houses, till the Harum, or
Lady is departed; the Eunuchs to give them Notice, by crying the Courouk, and
if any stay after, they are severely punished: Sometimes there is a Courouk for
Provision, and then none dares sell any therein mentioned, but for the King's
use, and this frequently lasts not above a Week or two. Many times the King
lays aside the stifness of Majesty, and is familiar with his Subjects, and
Strangers, Drinking and Eating with them in private, but it is dangerous
speaking amiss, least he falls into a Passion to the Party's destruction, and
therefore the least said proves always the best; for many have been put to
Death for their prating and adviseing him, which the Franks getting Drunk will
often attempt to do, when they see him so familiar with them.

The King gives Audience to Ambassadors, but transacts no business with them,
for that is left to the Ministers of State, and is well pleased if they drink
lustily with him, and he has a Remembrancer to tell him the next Day, all that
he says or does when he is Drunk, for then, many times, he gives away
Prodigally, as his Rings from his Fingers, and large possessions, but if he
finds it an oversight, or too great a value for the Person, he recalls it
again, and requites the Person with some little Present. He has an
Eatmad-Doulet to transact for him, as his chief Minister, who usually attends
his Person. He has always great store of Gold in Plate, and a vast Treasure in
Jewels; for the Nobles present him in their Order, every Spring, with one rich
thing or other, and he possesses the Treasures and Estates of those he puts to
Death, unless he pleases to give it to their Relations; besides, the Silks are
a Royal Manufactury, and he has great Incomes from them.

The Forces of the Kingdom consists in three Bands, or Bodies of Men, viz. the
Corschi, the Goulams, and the Teufencgi, the first of these are descended of
Turks, and Inhabit the Country, living in Tents, for the most part, and are
able to make a great Body; there are about 25000 of them constantly in the
King's Pay, having from ten to fifteen Tomans a Year; their General must be of
their Body, and is called Corschi-Bassa, who executes the King's Commands in
putting any great Man to Death, for they will not suffer the Native Persians to
do it. Their chief Riches consist in Cattle, which they drive from place to
place, and feed in the vast Plains and Mountains.

The second Rank of Soldiers are Slaves of many Nations, but chiefly Georgians,
and about 14000 of them are in the King's Pay, and have from 5 to 8 Tomans a
Year; their General is called Kouller Agasi.

Those of the third Rank are such as are raised in the Villages, mostly
Armenian Renegadoes, and are about 8000, having equal Pay with the last
mentioned; these are of little regard though they March on Horseback, for in
the Battle they alight and Fight on Foot; the other two Bodies Fight on
Horseback, with Bows, Arrows and Harquibuses.

Besides these, there is a new Militia of Guards that bear Muskets, but these
rarely go into the Field, unless the King be there in Person. As for the
Court-Officers,

The Eatmad Doulet is as the Vizier Basha in Turkey, next to him is the Sedre,
who manages matters of Religion, and has diverse under him; these makes all
Contracts, Testaments, and other public Deeds, Judges of Divorces, etc. As for
the Sedre, he is the High Priest of their Law; there are particularly under him
a Scheick of the Law, and a Cidi, or Judge, and these are Established in the
Principal Towns of Persia, and are nominated by the King, and only depend upon
him.

The Pichnamaz is an Officer in every Mosque, and in the King's Household he
directs the Prayers, and makes the People say as he does, and use the same
Jestures, always standing before them, that they may not see him; there are as
many of these in Persia as there are Mosques, and they bear a considerable
Authority. The Mulas are of the same Tribe, living on the Ecclesiastical
Revenues, and their Business is to Teach the Sciences and Law, being properly
the Persian Doctors, wearing relute Turbans. The Nuzar is the Wardrobe Keeper,
and Master of the Jewels, and is a kind of a Treasurer. The Melitar is the
chief Gentleman of the King's Bedchamber, and carrys a Pouch by his side full
of Hancarchiefs, which he presents to him as often as he requires them.

The Deroga is Judge of Criminal Matters, of the second degree, as Robbery,
Quarrels, and the like; and under him are the Aatas, or Constables: There are a
great number of other Officers of lesser Note, whose Names and Offices, for
Brevities sake, I am constrained to pass over.

They Hunt the Antelopes with Panthers, brought up to that purpose; this Beast
creeps on its Belly till it comes near the Game, then runs with main force and
leaps at it; but if the Panther misses at two or three leaps, he pursues no
further, but returns creeping back as ashamed of his being Baffled. They Hawk
much in this Country, and the Faulcons brought from Muscovy are of great Value;
they bring them up to fly at the Antelope, by feeding them on the Nose of a
dead Antelope; then flying at the living ones, they fasten on his Nose, and
pierce him with their Beaks and Tallents, fluttering so with their Wings, that
blinding his sight, he stops, and the Dogs coming up easily, takes him. The
King keeps for his Pleasure a great many Lions, Elephants, Leopards and Tygars.

To Encourage Christians to turn Mahometans, they have a Law that gives them
the Estates of their Christian Kindred when they dye, though they be in the
first Degree of Kindred, and the Deceased leaves Children; but the Judges for
Money have found out a way to invade it, by causing them to make it over to
some Mohammedan Friend by Testament, who possess it in trust for the Widow and
Children.

They have an odd way to make Women confess their Crimes, viz. they tie their
hands behind them, and then put large live Rats into their Drawers next their
Flesh, which running up and down, and pinching them, extort Confessions from
them; for of all Creatures in the World, the Rat is most terrible and frightful
to them. As for the Men to bring them to a Confession of their Guilt, their
flesh is pulled off with Pinchers from their Legs, Arms and Thighs.

When the Sun is Eclipsed, they run to their Mosques, and say a Prayer made for
that purpose, imploring God to avert heavy Judgments from them, and not to
leave them in Darkness; at the Eclips of the Moon, they beat their Kettle and
Brass Pans, making a Hedious din, persuading themselves they help her so in her
Labor to expel the Darkness, which upon the going off of the Eclipse, her
motion makes her seem to strugle with.

When a House is on Fire, they let it burn out, saving however what Goods they
can, saying, Providence will stop it of it self when it sees sit; yet they
freely permit others, who are not of their Religion, to endeavor the
Extinction of the Flames.

They hold Christians so impure, that if they have touched any Food in the
Market, and they know it, they will not buy it; and if one comes into a Bagnio,
the Master of it is obliged to wash it again before the Persians will enter;
yet they own Christ shall come at the last Day, and be Mahomet's Lieutenant,
and then all shall embrace the Mohammedan Profession, for then Mahomet will take
a Wife, and have a numerous Issue. They hold Marriage in so great Veneration,
that they blame him because he never was Married. They keep their Feasts a Day
before the Turks, for the Turks begin not their Bairam, or Easter, till they
see the Moon, and the Persians do it according to the Moon's course, being more
knowing in the Celestial Sciences. The Persian Kings are the more Reverenced,
because they are held to be of the Race of Aly, Mahomet's Successor. The
Persians are divided into two Sects, one called Schiai, the other Sunni; the
first think it enough to follow the Commands of the Law; but the other do that,
and likewise observe Councils.

At their Little Bairam they Sacrifice a Camel in Ispahan, the King first
strikes it with a Javellin, and then the People from the four Quarters of the
City Assemble in a tumultuous manner, and hew the poor Beast to pieces, with
Swords, Axes, Glaves, and the like, every one striving to get a part of him, so
that it often comes to a quarrel, and many are killed; the pieces they get they
broil and Eat, accounting it Sacred Meat. In other Cities they kill an Ox in
like manner, and in their Houses many Sheep, which they distribute to the Poor.

In their Creed they have an odd imagination concerning Man's dying: They hold
that every one must come and die in the place where the Angel took the Earth on
which he has been formed, imagining that one of the Celestial Spirits has the
care committed to him, of forming the Human Creature, by mingling a little Dust
with the Seed of the Parents.

They allow liberty of Conscience to all Strangers, and there are at Ispahan, a
great many Jews, Banians, Guebres, and Armenians, who pursue their several
Tenants. They have a great many Horses, Mules, and Camels, at all Seasons, and
though these things are here set down, many of the Particulars may serve in
General for all Persia; and therefore, having been detained in this City too
long, I fear, from the intended Travels, I now take my leave of it, to proceed
on my Journey.

CHAP. XV. Travels from Ispahan to Ormus and Bassaru, in the Persian Gulf; with
an Observation of many Places and Things by the way, of Persia in General, etc.
HAving stayed about 4 Months at Ispahan, I resolved to visit Schiras, and took
the opportunity of a Caravan then setting out; we parted early in the Morning
and journied South-east, meeting in our way with large Plains very barren; some
of these produced pieces of Salt Earth, made by the Salive part of the Ground,
and the working of the Rain on it, and this being refined makes good Salt;
leaving these Plains, we encountered with Hills, very difficult to pass,
because, though not high, they were Rockey, and very Slippery, so that many of
the Mules cast their Burdens, which proved very troublesome to us, and took up
much time to reload them; but having passed these Hills, we came to Mayar, a
ruined Village, which is the beginning, or entrance into the Country of Fars,
the real Ancient Persia, and there we lodged in a Kervanserai, and going from
thence, had, for a good way, a pleasant Country on either side of us, fruitful
in Trees and Corn Ground; but meeting with a Chan, and his Harams, or Women, we
were forced to fetch a compass to give free Passage, for these great Governors
in their Provinces, are as Absolute as a King, and will have their Commands as
strictly obeyed.

It will be in a manner endless, to tell you all the Villages, Hills, Plains,
Valleys, and Rivers by their Names, that we passed in this long and tedious
Journey, therefore, for brevity sake, in a tired condition, I hasten as fast as
I can to Schirars.

This City is the Metropolis of the Ancient Persia; some will have it to be the
Ancient Cyropolis; the Gates we entered at were very Fair and Stately, leading
to a broad Street, bordered with Gardens, and at the end of it is a large Stone
Basin full of Water to refresh Travelers; further there is a Bridge with 5
Arches, under which runs a small River, and a little beyond a covered Bazar;
and though this Street is very fair and long, it is accounted only the Suburb
to the City. It lies in a pleasant fertile Plain at the East of it, where is a
little Hill covered with Orange and Lemon Trees, intermixed with Cypresses: It
lies from North to South, and is about two Hours walk in Circumference. It has
many fair Mosques, and a College in it: There are Sallaries allowed to diverse
Learned Men in the latter, to teach Theology, Philosophy, and Physic, and
sometimes there are 4 or 500 Students in the it: The Gates are laid over with
blue Earth varnished, shining like Saphires.

The Gardens are exceeding pleasant, adorned with Fruits, Flowers, Canals,
Fountains, and Summer-Houses, on little raised Mounts, but many of the Houses
are ruinous, for the Persians are very Supine in repairing decayed Fabrics.

This is a City of great Trade, in comparison of many others, by reason the
Indian Merchants bring the rich Commodities of that Country hither. There is a
Well of a vast depth and circumference, into which they throw Women convicted
of Adultery, and there suffer them miserably to Perish; it is cut all out of a
hard Rock. A little distant there is a stately Mosque, and in it the Tomb of
Scheik Sadi, an excellent Persian Poet, whom they Honor as a Saint: There is a
Well not far from this, and a Stream running under it, full of Fish, which none
may take on pain of Death, unless the Dervish who looks after it, connive at
them, which he will do for a little present, and keep off all Spies, by
pretending there are Women in the Wells, and then the Men run away as from some
fearful Monster. One goes down to it by a pair of Stairs.

There is much Glass made in this City; they make a Glass Bottle, called a
Caraba, that will hold near 30 Quarts, covering them with Cane, or Straw; and
here is to be found the best Wine in the Kingdom; they have abundance of
Capers, plenty of Rose Water, and preserve Grapes for the whole Year. A Vizar
Governs here as the King's Farmer, and pays yearly 1000 Tomans, amounting to
15000 Crowns.

We stayed here but 2 Days, and then set out for Lar, in our way to Bender, and
passing over Plains, Hills, and Rivers, meeting by the way whole Families of
Arabs driving their Cattle, we arrived there. This Town is small, and seated on
a Rock; it is Commanded by a Chan, who has a stately House, with a Divan; it
has a fine Marketplace, a Bazars, and a Castle; the last is very strong, and
built all of Stone. There are a great many Jews inhabit, and drive a
considerable Trade here; all the Country about Lar is full of Tamarisks that
are very large here, and in most parts of Persia; the Sparrows being in great
numbers, destroy and wast the Fruits of the Earth exceedingly.

Taking a good refreshment in this Town, we took our way through a Country much
like the former we had passed, since our leaving Ispahan, and by tiresome
Journeys came to Bender-Abassi, where we no sooner entered but were carried to
the Custom-House and had our Goods searched; in our way I should have told you,
grew poisonous Plants, of which a strange story goes, viz. That if any Man
comes near them in June ot July, when South Winds from the Sea blows upon them,
they send forth such a poisonous Vapor, which drawn in with the breath, causes
the Body all over, to be in a burning heat, and immediately the Party dies, so
that in those Months the way is little frequented. The Persians affirm this for
Truth, and call the plants Kherzehreb; but this infection is rather concluded
by the Judicious to be in that Wind they call the Burying-Wind.

This Town is very little, governed by a Chan, and is of a prodigious Traffic,
as being commodiously Situated for Trade; the Schah Bender is the chief
Custom-House Officer, part of which Customs belong by right to the English, by
a Contract, when they assisted the Persian King in taking Ormus, but they have
been much defrauded, and reap litlit benefit. It has only one public Gate, a
Bazar, and a Fort to the Seaside, which is a square Platform of about 4 Fathom
each Face, and 2 in height, there not being above 5 or 6 Port-holes for great
Guns; the English and Dutch have their Houses by the Seaside, and the proper
Flags of the Nations fixed on Poles on the Tarrasses, to direct Ships thither.

About 2 Leagues from the main Land is the Glory of Islands, so termed, viz.
the famed Ormus, at the Mouth of the Persian Gulf; it is Southward from the
main Land, the Gulf reaching from thence to Bassera, which is in the bottom of
it. Ormus lies in 27 degrees North Latitude, 180 Leagues from Bassora; it has a
Fort that was built by the Portuguese, but taken from them by the great Schah
Abbas, King of Persia, assisted by the English: The Island is no more than 3
Leagues in circumference, and mostly Rockey, but it has gotten its Fame from
the Riches that flowed thither, from India and Persia, as being a considerable
Mart, especially when the Portuguese held it. As for the Water and Provisions,
they are mostly brought from the main Land, and because there is a deficiency
of Springs, they keep rain Water in Cisterns, and little more now is Inhabited
beside the Fort, round which the Persians have cut a Trench, and let the Sea
into it by a Canal, for it stands on the point of the Island, and is the last
Province of Persia this way. There are great store of Oysters about it, about
the bigness of ours, but much harder to open. A League to the South-west is the
Island of Lareca, it is bigger then Ormus, but very Barren, the Ground
consisting of a burning Sand; it reaches in length from North-west to
South-east: There is little in it except a Fort, which was begun by the Dutch,
but the Persians fearing they would prove ill Neighbors if they fortified it,
took it out of their Hands, and finished it.

As for Persia in General, it is environed with Mountains and Barren Deserts,
which are main Bulworks against the attempts of powerful Enemies. Their is a
scarcity of Money, which is one main reason they cannot set a great Army on
Foot in so vast a Country: and this, I think, proceeds from the smallness of
Trade, for the Persians are not very industrious, all of them standing much on
points of Honor. There are few or no Fruit Trees to be found but in Gardens;
and in most places the Water is bad, and Wood exceeding scarce in almost all
the Provinces. Their chief Manufacture is Silk, and some Stuffs. There is
abundance of Liquorice growing almost every where, but little of it set. The
Country abounds in Brooks, which render the ways very bad to Travel in Winter,
and some Rivers, most of which are in Mazandara, whose chief is Eschref, and
most of these Rivers fall into the Caspian Sea.

Here is the greatest store of Wood in the whole Country of Persia, but there
are a vast number of Serpents and Scorpions, who dying in multitudes, during
the hot Season, corrupt and infect the Air, rendering it unwholesome; so that
in fine, Persia is said to be a large Kervanserai, that serves for a Passage
for the Money and Goods that go out of Asia, Turkey, and Europe to the Indies,
and to the Stuffs and Spices returning, of which they have a small Profit.

Designing, now I was thus near to v^sit the Indies, I found some of my Company
willing to embrace the opportunity of leaving Ormus, and embarking for Bassora,
at the bottom of the Gulf, and accordingly, with all our Baggage, we safely
Arrived and Landed there.

CHAP. XVI. A Brief Account of Aethiopia, as I received from Mounsieur du Pau,
who resided many Years in that Court.
BEING now at Bassora, preparing for a Voyage to the Indies, it will not be
amiss to entertain you with a brief Relation of Aethiopia, or the Country of
Abyssins, which I had of a French Gentleman I found here, who had Traveled in
that vast Country, and lived some time in the Court; and this I the rather set
down, because I know not whether I shall ever Travel into that famed Country,
yet I shall be as Brief as may be.

He told me it was bounded on the East by the Red Sea, and Zanguebar, on the
South by Avousa, Ziela, Narca, etc. on the West with Nubia, and the Country of
Negros; on the North with part of Nubia, and Bugia, and is about 7 Months
Travel in Circuit. The King has four Kings Tributary to him, viz. The King of
Senner, who pays him Tribute in Horses, and lives in an excessive hot Country;
the King of Naria, who pays him Tribute in dust Gold; the Kings of Bugia, and
Dangala, who sends their Tribute in Stuffs and Slaves. In this Country are
Mines, out of which Gold is gotten, and sent to the Coasts of Saffala and
Guinea, and these Mines are shallower than in other Countries. They have
likewise a great deal of Civet, which is scraped from the Testacles, or rather
from an opening slit between or near the Cods of a Civet Cat; this Beast is
almost as big as a midling Greyhound, with a sharp Nose and Head like a Fox;
they have Feet, Tail, and Whiskers like a Cat.

When the People of the Country fall out, they go before their Scheiks, who do
the good Office to make them Friends again. They anoint their Heads with a
strong Oil, extracted from the Root of an Herb, to keep them from swarming with
Lice, which they are very subject to. The Provinces of Aethiopia are, Gouyan
(where the King has a Viceroy) Beghandir, Amara, Dambia, all very Mountainous;
Damoud, Tygre, and Barnegas; also other Provinces depending on it, Governed by
Princes who are his Vassals. The Air is in some places temperate, but in Senner
very hot. In this Kingdom are 24 Tambours, or Viceroys. The Capital City is
Gonthar in the Province of Dambia. The King has 100 Wives, and yet so little
Jealous, contrary to the Persians, and Turks, that he keeps no Eunuchs to look
after them, it being counted a Sin in that Country to geld a Man; He is of
easy access, so that the poorest have freedom to make their complaints to him,
or speak to him what they are minded: He keeps the numerous Children he has by
his many Wives, on a Mountain, called Ouohhni, 2 days journey from Gonthar. On
the top of the Mountain there is a pleasant Cave, where they keep them a
Nights, and in the Day time when they are big enough, their Guardians let them
play about the Mountains. When the King dies, they choose one of the wittiest
and likeliest of them, and Crown him, not regarding Birthright; then are the
Brothers removed a distant place to be kept Prisoners, and his Children as he
gets them, sent to the forementioned Mountain.

The Burying-place of the Kings is called Ayesus, and is a Grot cut out square
in a Rock, there the Aged are laid on one side, and the Younger on the other
side: and near it stood a very pretty Church built by the Jesuits, but they
diving into Politics, and State Matters, gave such suspicion to the King, that
they intended to undermine his Throne, as made him banish them, and demolish
their Church and Houses, putting some to Death that lingered behind, as also
diverse Capuchins, setting a bag of dust-Gold on their Heads, which made the
Abyssins hunt out, and cut off diverse of them, which they sent to the King, and
received their promised Reward; so that the poor Fathers were forced to pack up
and be gone; however, in the place where the Church stood, there is a place
erected which contains a curious Library, stored with Books of diverse kinds of
Learning, in various Languages. This Country produces very good Wheat and
Barley, and is pretty Fruitful in most places where the Deserts are not, for
there are very great ones in it, of 3 or 4 Days Journey, which are Wavey, like
the Sea, when the Wind blows strong from the South, or South-west, insomuch,
that Men and Cattle are buried under Mountains of loose Sand, if they be in the
way, where the Deserts lie most exposed to those Hurricanes.

The King in his Progress, always lodges in Tents, the Houses of their chief
Nobles being very mean, in respect of those in Europe; and the Walls of those
of the meaner sort are of Mud and Slime. There are almost Men of all Trades in
this Country; they have no Camels here, but store of Mules, Horses, Asses, and
Oxen. The People have an ill custom in eating raw Flesh, except the King, who
has it dressed, and drinks Wine of the Grape; the rest drink a Liquor made of
Millet, or Sarasin-Wheat, and they have a Spirit made of it as strong as
Brandy. They have Cloths, Stuffs, and Velvets, Imported by the way of the Red
Sea, and are Habited like the Franks or Europeans.

The King has a Guard of Harquibusiers. As for their Money, it is pieces of
Cloth cut out, going by weight, and little pieces of Salt they cut out on the
side of the Red Sea. The places where they make it is called Arho. There is
amongst them the Nation of the Gauls, who have no Firearms, but use in War
Spears and Targets, and often make War with the Aethiopians; their Riches
consisting in Cattle, and as this Gentleman informed me, there are a great
number of different Languages spoken in this Country; and discoursing him about
the River Nile, which has its rise there, he told me, he had seen the source of
it, and that the Spring rises in, and issues out of a Well in a large Plain,
shadowed with many Trees, and that well or Spring is called Ovembromma.

It rises in the Province, or Little Country of Ago, and is a very pleasant
Water there; from the Spring it runs Northward, through a long tract of Land,
and having passed several Cataracts, or falls, which are very high places, with
a terrible roaring, it passes on smoothly till it enters Egypt, and is, as I
have elsewhere said, the main support of that Country, for should the
Ethiopian King turn the Current, Egypt would be little better than a Desert,
which the Grand Signior, as many have guessed, fearing, is the cause he molests
not the Aethiopians with War; and the reason of its overflowing in Egypt, may
be supposed to proceed from the great Rains that fall in Aethiopia about that
time; for when it is Summer in one place, it is Winter in another. There are
but a Mountains any thing near the Spring of Nile, and those are called the
Jews Mountains, because they once inhabited them, but growing powerful, were
driven out for fear they should Rebel, and compelled to live in the Plains.
These Mountains are exceeding high, for in that hot Country they have always
Snow on their Tops or Spires.

There is a Generation of Portuguese among the Aethiopians, for anciently the
Moorish King of Zeila forcing a King of Aethiopia to fly into the Mountains, he
implored aid of the Portuguese, to restore him to his Throne, who, with their
Firearms slew the Moorish King, and so terrified his Army, that they left the
Country; and for this, their Traders on the Coast, were put into Offices, and
had rich Possessions bestowed on them, when settling and Marrying with the
Native Women, their progeny increased.

The King, and all his People, are a kind of Christians of the Cophlish
Religion, and believe but one Nature in Jesus Christ; at the end of 8 Days they
Circumcise their Males, and Baptize them 14 Days after, their Patriarch depends
on him of Alexandria. They say Mass as the Cophites do, but their Books are in
their own Language. When their Patriarch dies, they send to Alexandria, and
that Patriarch sends them a fit Person.

CHAP. XVII. The Author's Voyage from Boassra, in the Persian Gulf, to
East India, and Things remarkable in the dangerous Passage, particularly
Water-Spouts rising from the Sea, and remarks on them.
STaying at Bassora for a fair Passage to East India, in a little time it
happened, as I could wish; I found an Armenian Ship there of 28 Guns, and most
of the Mariners were Banians of India, the rest Armenians, except the Master
and two more, who were European Christians; the Master an Itallian, and the two
Mariners Greeks: This Ship was English built, and very stench, but how it came
into their Hands they declined to tell me, though I afterward understood, they
had bought it for 16000 Roupies when it was in a bad condition, and repairing
it they put up Armenian Colors, and had 3 Passports to indemfie them from the
Europeans that have Factories in India. Our Cargo consisted of such things as
could not be vended at Bassora, as Indico, Cloth, Dates, Chests of Glass,
Venetian Looking-Glasses, and a good quantity of Money to buy Indian
Commodities. I hired a Cabin, and laid in Provision and Water, fearing in so
hot a Voyage, the latter might grow scarce; and it was not without precaution,
for so it happened. Setting Sail, and getting clear of the Islands, we steered
South-west, and had Water, at 5, and 8 Fathom, 2 Men being continually heaving
the Lead, least we should fall on Shallows, or Rocks that are under Water near
the Shore.

It will be endless to tell you the often shifting of the Wind, the Calms we
had, and the Tackings we made; therefore, let me say with some difficulty we
got to the Island of Carek, the first place the Ship designed to Traffic at.
This Island reaches in length, from South-east to North-west, is very narrow
about 3 or 4 leagues in circumference, and 50 Leagues from Bossara; it is
partly Hills, and partly Plains, yielding Grapes, Barley, Wheat, Dates, and
good store of fresh Water, which is a precious commodity in those Countries:
There are Wells dug on the top of Rocks 10 or 12 Fathom deep, and have Steps to
go down, and from the bottom of these Wells the Water passes, and runs under
ground into the Plains. Near to the Wells there is a neat Mosque on the Hill,
and on the Island is 150 indifferent Houses, and near it a Pearl Fishery. The
King of Persia is Lord of it, and great numbers of Boats come to Fish for them
in May, June, July, and August. Here we unladed part of our Goods, but sold
little, by reason a Dutchman had been there before and forestalled us, giving
out this Ship would not touch there, by which means over and above, he took in
a great many Passengers, and Lading for India.

Being thus disappointed, we soon weighed Anchor, and steered away South South
east with a very gentle Wind, but were soon becalmed for many Hours; then
sprung up an Easterly Wind, and we stood away to the South, and soon had the
Isle of Rischer on our Larboard, which is very near the main Land, and makes a
little Port, called Bender-Rischer, which is guarded by a Fort, and standing
away, we came up with the Island of Coucher, and left it on our Larboard; this
Island is large, and indifferent Fruitful; and so Sailing on, passed Cape
Verdestan at 3 or 4 Leagues distance; and as we Sailed, we had often a faint
view of the main Land of Persia, especially where it lay high and Mountainous;
but before we came to the Island of Lar we lost our Longboat, which was a
great disappointment to us.

Lar is a little Desert Island, bearing nothing but a few Trees at the West
North-west end of it; we passed by this, and the next that presented was
Andravia, a little low Island near the main Land; and passing by we had Kies,
another Island to the South-West; it is indifferently Inhabited, the Houses
lying up and down in it, but Coasting Paloro, and leaving Mount Sennas on the
Main Land to the Larboard, we made Congo, a little Town in the Kingdom of
Persia, 27 Degrees, 15 Minutes North Latitude; it stands on the Seaside, near
the Foot of a black Rock that shelter the Town from the North Winds, and behind
there is a white Rock, or Hill, and many such along the Coast. The Town lies
from West North-west, to East South-east, and is defended by a little Castle,
where 3 pieces of Cannon are mounted, and has a safe Road for Shipping to Ride
in, though they are very much tossed in high Winds, about it are 5 Gardens
replenished with Fruit Trees, as Figs, Lemons, Quinces, Oranges, Pears, etc.
Large Pomgranates, Mellons, and Palm Trees; there are also the Indian Mangoes;
they have Schiras-Wine, and Brandy, made of Dates; there are near it Hills,
producing Sulphur, which is dug and transported to the Indies. The Custom is
easy, half of it belonging to the King af Portugal by Agreement, beside five
Horses the King of Persia presents him every Year; and to this end there is a
Portuguese Agent residing in the Town, who has the Colors of that Nation on
the Tarras of his House.

Leaving this place after the sale of some Goods, and taking in others, we set
Sail for Sindy, being the first Town of India, where the River Indus discharges
it self into the Sea; but here we narrowly escaped falling into the hands of
the Zinganes, a sort of Indian Pirates, who lie with their Boats behind the
Rocks, to surprise Vessels as they come near them, and if they board a Ship, in
the first fury, till they have mastered and secured the Prize, they put all to
the Sword, and the rest they Lame, by cutting the Sinew above the Heel, and
make them Slaves to keep their Cattle; they so use them to prevent their
running away: Their Arms are only Swords, and Arrows, therefore our
watchfulness, and the fire of our great Guns made them retire again among the
Rocks, so soon as they prepared to attack us. But having little to do here, we
set Sail for Surat, having now on Board us, by taking in many Passengers 116
Souls, and passing many small Islands, and some Promontories came to Queschimo,
a large low Island, so that Sailing by it, one may see the Mountains of the
main Land over it; it lies from East to West 20 Leagues in length, but
indifferent in breadth. There is a Fort where Ships Anchor at 6 Fathom Water,
and this formerly belonged to the Portuguese. On the South East of it lies
Nabdgion, or Pilombo, a little low Desert Island; and East of it Tonbo,
affording little beside Antelopes and Coneys; but Ships have here the Advantage
of many Wells to Water at, yet the entrance is dangerous, because of the Banks
that lie under Water about it; the Portuguese were once Masters of most of
these Islands, and exacted Tribute from Ships that Traded there, but their
Strength and Riches decaying at Home, weakened it abroad, so that now they have
lost most of their footing on the Coast of Persia, and the Indies.

Sailing from hence, in a little time, we had the Isle of Angom to the North
east, and on the South-east a Port of Arabia Foelix, called Julfer, to which
many Indian Barks come to buy Dates and Pearl, the latter being fished all
along the Coast from Mascat to Babrem, and bring European Money to purchase
them. The next that stood with us were the Isles of Salame; these are four
Rocks over against Cape Mosandon, one of them bigger than the rest rising a
little into a point, there is a dangerous Chanel passing between them, all Rock
at the bottom, so that many adventuring to pass it have been cast away.

Having passed these, we met with great storms of Hail, accompanied with
prodigious Thunders and Lightning, insomuch, that the Sea seemed to be all on
Fire. This made us furl our Sails, and though the Air on Head of us was as dark
as Night, there appeared a Rainbow on our Starboard.

Upon the breaking of this Storm prodigious Spouts began to rise out of the Sea
to our Larboard, and at length, increased almost on all sides of us, some being
very near, which put us into a considerable fright, least falling on our Ship
they should sink it, they being extraordinary large, insomuch, that all
affirmed they had not seen the like in their Lives, so that all Hands were
employed to secure the Ship as well as might be, from the threatening danger;
for we as good as gave our selves to be lost; however, trusting in the Creator
of all things, and taking to my self more Courage than ordinary, I took a view
of these watery Prodigies: The first that appeared was about a Musket Shot from
us, as we were steering North-east, and before it rose, the Water in that place
boiled up prodigiously, more than a Foot above the surface of the Sea, foaming
and looking whitish, and over it something representing a black Smoke (which
the Banians foolishly said was the Devil sucking up Water to drown them.) This
made a hurrying noise like a Torrent running in a Valley, mixed with a hissing
like that of Serpents, or Gees. A little after appeared a dark puff of steem,
this seemed to be a Pipe as big as ones Finger, the noise continuing, this
tapered as it were up to the Clouds, and the light put it out of our sight, so
that we knew that Spout was spent; but then there was another to the Southward
of us, which began in the same manner as the former, soon after another to the
Westward, and another to the side of the second, the most remote of the three;
and all these appeared like so many bundles of Straw, a Foot and an half, or
two Foot above the surface of the Water, smoking to appearance exceedingly,
making the same noise as the first. A little while after I perceived so many
Pipes reaching down from the Clouds upon these Risings, and every one of them
had a large end joining to the Cloud, widening like the end of a Trumpet, and
the lower end resembled the Teat, or Dug of a Beast, stretched perpendicularly
down by the force of some weight. These Pipes appeared to be of a paleish
White, which I conjecture was the Water in them, for no doubt they were formed
before they drew it up, and being emptied disappeared; for though the Pipes
descended small, swelled with the Water they grew larger, to the thickness of a
Man's Arm, or more.

These Spouts are dangerous things, for falling on a Ship they entangle the
Sails, and lift her up, then leting her fall again sink her if she be small,
but if the Ship be too heavy to be lifted, they split the Sails, and emptying a
vast quantity of Water into her with a violent force, sink her, and thus I
believe Ships have been lost, Sailing in those, and other Seas where Spouts
are, and so going down in a Minute or two, have never been heard of. Some that
were on Board brought a large black handled Knife, to cut the Spouts at a
distance, which Superstitious Fancy is thus put in practice: One of the Ships
company kneels down by the Mainmast, and holding in one Hand a Knife with a
black handle, he Reads the Gospel of St. John, and when he comes to these
Words, viz. The Word was made Flesh, and dwells in us, he turns to the Spout
and cuts the Air a thwart, and then they hold the Spout, though at a great
distance, is cut, and lets down all its Water with a great noise. But the
Master looking on this silly fruitless Fancy as a piece of Conjuration, would
not let it be put in practice. In the Mediterranean they shoot Cross bar shot
at them, which hitting is more probable of the two to cut; however, these spent
themselves without doing us any harm; and at length, through infinite Mercy, we
weathered the Storm which raged furiously all the time, and kept on our Course
having the main Land of Arabia on our Starboard, and on our Larboard that part
of Persia called Marsan, which bore South-east of us, and we made particularly
one Hill of Land shaped like a Sugar Loaf; and here, in November, December, and
January, the East Winds commonly Reign, and therefore to go from Persia to
India in a short time, the best Season is March, April, and the beginning of
May, for then the Mouson, or Trading Wind blows. However, we held on with the
help of the Current, which from the end of July to January sets toward Ormus
from India, and from January till July from Ormus toward India.

In our Passage another Storm arising, we saw 3 new Spouts, but they were at
too great a distance from us to apprehend much dangar. In our way, off
Bembaceca, we overtook 3 Ships bound to Surat, as we were, but proving slow
Sailers, the Master would not stay for them, but resolved to make the best of
his way, so contrary to the mind of the Mate, we left them to Sail at their
leisure.

CHAP. XVIII. The Arrixal at Surat; a description of that Town; the manner of
the People; Travels into the Indian Provinces, with Observations of what is
Rare and Remarkable in the vast Dominion of the Great Mogul.
AFter many dangers in Coasting Persia, and a great part of Arabia, we knew by
the Snakes we saw at Sea, a kind of spungy Froth floating in great abundance on
the Water, which pricks, and makes the Hands of those that touch it burn, that
we were not far from the main Land of India; we kept Sailing by many small
Islands, of which those Seas are plenty, till we made Daman, a Town belonging
to the Portugueses, who have strengthened it with a considerable Fort: It lies
in 20 Degrees North Latitude. From this Town to Cape Comorin is a range of very
high Hills along the Coast, yet this Town has no other Harbor but a little
Chanel which remains almost dry when the Tide is out. Here refreshing our
selves, we took the advantage of an Easterly Gale, and weighing Anchor bore
away Northward, having no more than five Fathom and an half Water in an Hours
Sailing; but then coming into deeper Water we Sailed more boldly, and came up
with the Bar of Surat, in 6 Fathom and an half Water: Here the
Custom-house-Officers came aboard us, and narrowly searched and viewed every
thing they had an opportunity to see; after that Boats came to fetch off the
Passengers and their Goods, and we were had to the Custom-house, and again
searched in a very odd manner. The entrance for Vessels of Burden is very
difficult, and we were a ground twice before the Tide could carry us in; we
passed then by the Castle of Surat on our Right Hand, and dropped our Anchor
before the Custom-House.

Thus being happily at Land, after a two Months troublesome Voyage, I and
others rested and refreshed our selves. The Bar, so called, by reason of Sands,
and is 6 French Leagues or more from Surat, yet their Ships of great Burthrn
must unload before they can come up the River.

Being impatient to see Surat, of which I had heard so much discourse at home.
I went in a Boat on the River with diverse other Passengers, but by reason of
the Stream being against us, we were a considerable time ever we reached the
Town; and the Custom-house being open, upon the Signal given we came on Shore,
without which we might not do it: then passing a large Court, we entered into a
Hall, where the Customer waited to have us searched.

The manner of their searching, as I said, is odd, and very strict, they making
their search from Head to Foot, feeling your Nakedness in every part, looking
also into your Mouth, as if they would tell you your Age by your Teeth; and the
Waiter demands of every Passenger, as his Fee, an Abassy, which is worth about
18 d. and the Bark has half a Roupe, which is about 14 d. a Head for every
Passenger. If they find one smugling in the least, he is fined severely, if not
Caved. All the Baggage is brought into the Custom-house to be searched, and
when that is done, every one is called in his turn, to pay, and take them away
for Money; they take two and an half per Cent. for Merchants Goods, of
Christians four, and of the Banians five per Cent.

India is a very large Country, of which I shall say something, before I enter
upon particulars. It is bounded on the West with the River Indus, on the East
with China, on the North with Tartary, on the South with the Ocean, and is
properly divided into two divisions, viz. India intra Gangem, and India extra
Gangem; the first contains nine Kingdoms, viz. Narsinga, Malavar, Ballasia,
Cambaia, Mandao, Bengala, Aristan, Comora, and Dellia. The second, seven, viz.
Macine, Aracan, Couchin-Chian, Baram, Siam, Pegue, Malavar. The whole Country
seems to take its denomination from the vast River Indus, which runs 1000 Miles
ever it falls into the Sea; and the Empire of the Great Mogul is the Principle,
many of the others being petty Kings, some of them paying him Tribute, and his
Territories are usually called the Mogulistan. The present Great Mogul is held
to descend directly from the line of Tamarlan the Tartar, whose Successors
settled in the Indies, and took to themselves the Name of Moguls, to distinguish
them from those to whom that Prince left Zagalay, Persia, Coraffau, with other
Countries to be Governed after him; and they concluding this Name would
contribute to the Glory of the Family, because the People would be the more
easily persuaded they are of the Race of the great Ginguiscan, the first
Emperor of the Ancient Moguls. It has been successively maintained for many
Generations, and is a mighty Empire established in India.

As for Mogul, is was anciently the Name of a mighty People Inhabiting a
Country at the extremity of East-Tartary, inclining toward the North, which
others have called Mongul and Mongal, some Mogulistan, where Ginguiscan was
Born, and that Emperor reduced it wholly under his Obedience, before he
proceeded to the Conquest of the rest of Asia; and both himself and Subjects
were called Moguls. The Great Mogul is said to carry 300000 Horse into the
Field with him when he makes War, beside a considerable Army of Foot; yet the
most knowing Indians say, though he pays so many, there is not above half of
them in Arms at once. The great Men that Command, usually, for their own
advantage, it being the most they have to live on, double the Muster-Roll. He
has in his Dominions, 20 Provinces or Governments, and those that have made
them more, have mistaken, by making two of one.

The true bounds of his Empire to the West, are, Macram, or Sinde, and
Candabar: On the East it reaches to the River Ganges; on the South it is
limited by the Gulf of Bengala, the great Sea, and Decan; on the North by a
part of Tartary. It extends from East to West, above 400 Leagues, and from
North to South 500; and this vast space, some Mountains and Deserts excepted,
is very much replenished with Cities, Towns, Castles, Boroughs, and pleasant
Villages; and the Country about them very fruitful in Corn, Rice, Fruits, etc.

In the Province of Guzerat, in this Empire, is the Town of Surat, of which I
have spoke something already. It lies in 22 Degrees 7 Minutes North Latitude,
watered by the River Tapty. The Walls were formerly of Earth, but they are
framing now of Brick, 2 Fathom and an half thick, and of the same height,
being cautioned so to do for its better defense, upon its being plundered by
Raja Savegi, who made himself Master of great Riches, though he took not the
Castle, nor was able to force the Factories of the Europeans, who had Fortified
them with Cannon, and making a stout defense, saved their Goods from the spoil.
This Raja had his Government in the Mountains, and did great mischiefs in
India; though Aurenzeb, the Mogul, or Emperor, did all he could to prevent it.

In building the new Wall, a great many Houses are left out of the Town,
especially those built of Cane. When the Mousson, or Monson, a Wind that serves
for Trade of Shiping, blows, the Town is full of People, so that it is difficult
to get any Lodging: and this is in January, February, March, part of April, and
sometimes all that Month.

It is Inhabited by Indians, Persians, Arabians, Armenians, Turks, European
Christians, and some few other Nations; though the proper Inhabitants are
divided into 3 Orders; the first of these include the Indian Moors, and others
of the Mohammedan Religion; the second are Gentiles, or Heathens, who adore
Idols, the third are the Parsis, who are likewise called Guares, or
Artechpirest, adorers of Fire, professing the Religion of the ancient Persians;
and these retired into India, when Caylif Oman reduced Persia under the Power
of the Mahometans. The Banians are here the richest Merchants, some of them
being held to be worth 8 Millions of Crowns. The Dutch particularly, among
other Europeans, have driven a great Trade here, as did the English, and these
had Houses assigned them for their Factories, called Lodges, very neatly built.

The Castle is built on the side of the River Tapty, and is a Fort of moderate
bigness, and of good strength; it stands at the South end of the Town, and
defends the Entry against those that would attack it. It is square, and flanked
at each corner with large Towers: The Ditches on 3 sides are filled with the
Sea Water, and the 4th which is on the West, is washed by the River. In this
Castle the Mogul's Revenues gathered in the Province are kept, and never sent
to Court without Order.

On the West side there is a stately Gate to enter at, which is in the Bazar or
Meiden, and this Castle has a particular Governor, and the Town has another.
The Houses of the Rich are but meanly built, of Timber, Brick, Lime, and Tiles,
and most of these being fetched a great way renders building very dear, by
reason there is no Stone in this Province: They make their Laths of Bambous
Cane, and they choose, by reason of the excessive heat of the Sun, which drys
and craks so fast, to build when it Rains, rather than in dry weather. As for
the Houses of the ordinary sort they are made of Cane, and covered with Palm
branches. The Streets are large and even, but not Paved. They spare the Oxen
here to Till the Land, and carry Burdens, feeding on Cow-Beef, especially for
the most part; they have good Mutton, and abundance of Poultry, and eat with
their Meats the Oil of Cnicus Sylvestris, or wild Saffron, the best in the
Indies; also that of Sesamum, which is common, but not so good. They have white
and red Grapes there, but they make an eager and unpleasant Wine, because the
heat is so excessive they have not deliberation enough to ripen; nor is the
strong Waters drunk there much better; it is made of Jagre, a a kind of course
black Sugar dissolved in Water, with the bruised Bark of the Baboul-Tree, and
so Distilled.

They make strong Water likewise of Tarry, and draw a Brandy from Rice, Sugar
and Dates, which, however, is but very sorry stuff, and kills many of the
Europeans, who coming a long Voyage, too suddenly fasten on those Liquors and
drink intemperately. They infuse these ingredients likewise in Water, and by
setting them in the Sun make Vinegar.

At Surat are sold all sorts of Stuffs and Cotton Cloth that are made in the
Indies, likewise a great many European Commodities, and those of China, as
Purceline, Cabinets, and Coffers, adorned with Turquois, Agats, Cornelian,
Ivory, and all sorts of Embellishments; here are Diamonds, Rubies, Pearls, and
most sort of precious Stones that are found in the Eastern Country; also Amber,
Musk, Myrrh, Frankincense, Manna, Sal Ammoniac, Lac, Indico, Quicksilver; the
Root Raenus for Dying Red, and all sorts of Spices and Fruits that are to be
found in the Indies, and other Countries of Levant; and here Merchants buy up
Drugs to transport into all parts of the World; so that this Town, though not
large, may be said to be the Emporium of the Indies.

Having pretty well viewed this place, and taken such things as I was informed
were necessary for such hot Countries as remained for me to Travel in, and
considering Amedabad was the Chief City of Guzerat, I directed my Journey to
take a view of it. This Province, a few Ages since was an entire Kingdom,
Governed by Mudafer, a young Prince, who by the advice of his Guardian, called
in Mogul Echbar, to make his party good against the great Men who were
troublesome to him; but the Mogul getting strong footing, imprisoned him and his
Guardian, where they died miserably, and seized the Kingdom, annexing it as a
Province to his Empire, and it is the pleasantest of Indostan, though not the
largest, for it is well watered with the Rivers Nardabad and Tapty, with some
other Rivers of lesser Note, so that the Fields look green all the Year, by
reason of the Corn and Rice that cover them, and the various kinds of Trees
that continually bear Blossoms and Fruit.

Setting out from Surat, with some others in company, I Traveled Northward,
and 2 Hours after crossed the Tapty in a Ferry, as I did the River Kim, near
the Town of Beriao, and came to Ouclisser, and passing the River Nardabad,
arrived at Baroche, distant from Surat, and the Sea, about 10 French Leagues,
or 20 Indian Cosses, which is a measure amongst them of about half a League.
This Town lies about 22 Degrees North Latitude; it has a large square Fortress
standing on a Hill, and the Town lies upon the side, near the Foot of it,
looking toward the River Nardabad, encompassed with a Stone Wall 2 Fathom
high, flanked with Towers between 30 and 35 paces distant one from another, and
is the strongest in the Province. The Bazar, or Marketplace is a large Street
at the Foot of the Hill, where are made the Cotton Stuffs, called Baftas. Here
are Mosques and Temples of the Heathens, with Pagods or Idols in them, to whose
senseless Shrines they pay devout Adoration. Here are plenty of Agats, and also
a bundance of Peacocks.

Leaving this place, I continued my Journey Northward, and came to the little
Town of Sourban, 7 Leagues from Baroche, and crossing the Brook Dader, and
several little Villages, I entered Debea, where a barbarous sort of People
Inhabit, who, a few Years since fed on Man's Flesh, selling it publicly at
their Shambles, so that Strangers always go armed here for fear of being robbed
and mischiefed by them, which made us make but a short stay; but passing the
Lake, or River Man, we came to Pesnad, about 7 Leagues from Debea, and saw in
our way 2 great Tanqueze, and a number of Monkies, who came and crossed us in
the Road, fearless of our shouts, but rather mockingly answered us again,
crying Pou, Pou; the Tanquiez are standing Ponds, or reservatories for Rain
Water, paved at the bottom, and kept very choicely. Leaving this place I
Traveled with my Company to Sousentra, and so to Mader, which place is very
Woody, and there the Monkies were in greater numbers than before, in the
Fields, Roads, and on the Trees; and Traveling 5 Le^gues from this place, I
came to Gilbag, where I met a great many Collies, a People of the cast off
Gentiles, who wander up and down, and have no fixed Habitation; their chief
business being to pick the Cotton Wool. In Gilbag there is a handsome Garden
that belongs to the Mogul, and in it are kept a number of Peacocks: it is
finely Watered, and well Planted with Fruit Trees, and from hence it is two
Leagues to Amedabad, to which I went the next Morning.

This, as I said, is the chief City of the Province, and is about 86 Cosses or
h^lf French Leagues from Surat, and the Sea. It is Governed by an Omra, or
Indian Lord, under the Mogul: It lies 23 Degrees and some Minutes North
Latitude, on a lovely Plain, and is watered by the River Sabremetty, which when
the Rains fall, much overflows the Plains. There are large Gardens, enclosed
with fine Brick Walls; these Gardens have reservatories for Water, and each of
them a fine Pavillon at the entrance, and at the end of most of them there are
convenient Lodgings. The Houses in the Suburbs are scattering, and many ancient
Tombs are to be seen about the City, into which you enter by a straight large
Street; the Walls are pretty strong, composed of Stone and Brick, flanked with
great round Towers and Battlements. It is about a League and an half in length,
and has 12 Gates, which are strictly watched, for fear of a surprise from the
Raja, of Bandour, whose Territories are near, but almost in inaccessible
Mountains, which gives him an opportunity to make inroads thereabouts, and
safely to retire with much Booty, not regarding the Mogul. In this City are
many curious Arches, and large Squares. There is a Kervanserai in the Meidan,
furnished with curious Balcony-Lodgings, supported with Pillars; and the King
has a Palace in this City of curious Work, where the Musicians resort to Play
on their Instruments Morning, Noon, Evening, and Midnight, for which they have
a Sallary allowed them; in the Apartments there are several Ornaments of
Folages covered Gold; there is the Juma, Mesgid, or Fridays, whither on that
Day the People all Flock; it is very beautiful, and is the fairest of all
others, though there are many more; on the outside of each Gate is a fine
Steeple, with a Balcony, where the Muesins, or Bedles, with their thundering
Voices call the People to the Mosque, for in this Country they have no Bells;
and when they repair hither they appear very devout, for I saw above 400
Faquirs who held their Arms cross behind their Heads without stirring all the
Prayer-time. I visited another Mosque which had been a Pagod Temple, before
Aureng-Zebe caused a Cow to be killed in it, which caused the Gentiles to
forsake it. It has abundance of Figures of naked Women in it, sitting after the
Oriental fashion, as also, of Men, Beasts, and Monsterous Creatures; but they
are somewhat disfigured by their Noses being cut off, which Aureng-Zebe caused
to be done out of a pretended Zeal. which raised him to the Throne over the
Heads of his Father and two elder Brothers.

In this City is the place where the famed Magician was Buried, whom many of
the Indians hold for a great Saint, and visit his Tomb with great Devotion: It
is a square pile of Building, having on each side several little Domessetting
off a great one the middle. The entry into it is by 7 Ports that take up the
whole Front; the Pavings is Marble, the Doors are of the same, inlaid with
Crystal and Mother-Pearle: The Tomb is like a bed, covered with Cloth of Gold,
and over it 7 Canopies of different colored Silk, one higher than another: The
Pavement is usually strowed with white Flowers, which the devout Mahometans
bring when they come to say their Prayers at the Tomb.

Near to the Burying-place of the Ancient Kings of Guzerat, which is a very
fine Building, and curious Arched Vaults under it, where the Ashes of the Dead
are in Urns, is the Sepulcher of a Cow, under a Dome, standing on 6 Pillars,
but either they knew not, or declined to tell me the reason why she was buried
there, but at another place I heard, one of their Kings was driven out by the
People, who flying to the Mountains, was there supported by the Cow's Milk till
he was recalled, whereupon dying soon after, he left a Pention to keep this Cow
so long as she should live, with Commands, that she should be Buried in this
manner when she Died; and the People on certain Days go to the Sepulchers of
their Kings to bewail their loss.

The next thing I visited, was a famed Well, 8 Story descending, every Story
supported with Arches and Pillars; it is 4 Fathom broad, and about 24 long;
very lightsome, having in it curious Springs. They say it was built by a King's
Nurse, and cost 20 Millions of Roupies, but I believe a great deal less
finished it.

Though some may think it strange, and scruple crediting it, yet certain it is,
here the Gentile Indians have an Hospial for sick Beasts, and another for
Birds, which they feed and look after till they are well, and then they sell
them to their own Sect, but not Mahometans, whom they count Cruel, because they
mis-use and kill Creatures, and often they buy them out of their Hands at dear
rates, purely out of a charitable compassion to save the poor Creatures Life,
for they hold it a Sin to kill any thing. Near this City are large Forests, in
which they take Panthers, and the Governor has those that teach them to be tame
and tractable, and then he sends them to the King as presents to divert him in
Hunting. I saw likewise a Beast there that had the Head of a Coney, the Ears,
Eyes and Teeth of a Hare, the Muzzle round and Flesh colored, the Tail of a
Squirrel, in the fore Feet it had four Fingers, and a Claw in the place of the
Fist; the hinder Feet had 5 Toes, each of which were long as well as the Claws;
the soles of its Feet flat, and like an Apes, of a Flesh color; its Hair on
the sides, long, course, and of a dark red, but greyish on the Belly, like the
Wool of a Hair; and from Head to Rump, about a Foot and an half long; few could
tell what to make of it; they told me it was brought from Moca, yet, probably,
it was no other than a Squirril. The Commodities mostly traded for here are,
Velvets, Skins, Taffatas, Tapestries, with Gold, Silk, and Woollen Grounds,
Cotton, Cloth, Indico dried and preserved, Ginger, Sugar, Cinnamon Tamarines,
Mirabalans, Cumin, Lac, Saltpetre, Opium, Honey, and some Schites, or painted
Cloth.

Cambay being in this Province, by the Sea, I resolved to visit it, but on my
way found little worth mentioning. Let it suffice then that I arrived there.
This Town lies at the bottom of a Gulf of the same Name, which is very
dangerous for large Vessels to come in, by reason of the Flats, and banks of
Sand, and for those of less force by reason the Malabar Pirates lie sheltering
under the Rocks to surprise them. This Town is much larger than Surat, though not
near so Populous, for the causes I mentioned. The Walls are Brick, about 4
Fathom high, with Towers at certain distances. The Streets are large, and have
all Gates at the ends of them which are kept close shut at Night. The Houses
are very high, built of Bricks baked in the Sun, and the Shops are stored with
Aromatic Perfumes, Spices, Silks, Stuffs Ivory, Bracelets, Agat, Cups,
Caphlets, and Rings: The Agats are got out of a Quarry, near a Village called
Nimodra, about 4 Leagues from from Cambaya. Most part of the Inhabitants are
Banians and Raspouts.

The Castle where the Governor resides is large, but not beautiful. In this
Town there are so many Monkies, that sometimes the Houses are covered over with
them, as it were a Dovecot, and these mischievous Creatures never fail to hurt
one or other in the Streets, if they can find any thing to throw at them. There
are many Gardens about this Town, and a stately Marble Tomb is to be seen very
ancient, and the Building about it suitable, adorned with Porphery Pillars,
etc. There are the Ruins of other old Tombs to be seen near it, held to be
those of Ancient Kings. The Suburbs are near as big as the Town, and great
store of Indico is made there. As one Travels from this place there is great
danger of Robbers who lie concealed, and by a slight throw a noose about a
Man's Neck, pull him down, and strangle him in a trice, and so rifle him, and
therefore it is proper to go in a good company, though there is a custom to
carry a Techeron Man and Woman with them, who declare to the Robbers, that the
Party is under their Protection, and if they injure them, the Man protests to
cut his own Throat, and the Woman shows them a Raisor, with which show vows to
cut off her Breast, and this they say, has often detered the Thieves from
offering violence to Travelers, because the Heathens who are mostly the
Robbers, look on it as a horrid and unpardonable Crime to be guilty of the
Death of a Techeron, because, ever after, the Party who is the cause of it is
hated by his Cast, and turned out of the Tribe, and continually upbraided with
the Death of a Gentil, though I could not understand this takes now adays, for
few of them will kill themselves, though they protest it, but have a cunning
fetch to excuse it, alleging, after they have whispered with the Robbers, they
have compounded, and so get Money out of Christians, which no doubt they snack
between them.

This Province has several other considerable Towns, as Goga, on the other side
the Gulf, between 20 and 30 Leagues from Cambaye, Patan lying more Southward,
toward the great Sea, where many Silks and Stuffs are made: It is defended by
a Fort, and has a Fine Mosque in it, which was formerly an Idol Temple.

Diu, belonging to the Portugueses, fortified with 3 Castles, at the Siege of
which, an Army sent by the last Sultan but one of Egypt, named Campson Gaurus,
perished, and Sultan Solomon the great Emperor of the Turks, sending another
Army under Solomon Bassa, which was joined by a vast power of Indians; the
valliant Portuguese Governor named Siveira, so well defended it, that after a
long Battery, they were forced to raise the Siege, and leave their Tents,
Artillery, and Ammunition, with 1000 wounded Men in their Camp, though the
Turks in their Passage, had seized Aden by Treachery, and strangled the King of
that place. At Diu is made the Stone Cobra, so famous for antedoting the biting
or stinging of Serpents; it is composed of the Ashes of a burnt Root, mingled
with a kind of an Earth they get under the Rocks, and making these into a
Paste, they form the Stone of it; then they prick the Wound, and letting a
little Blood out, they apply the Stone, leaving it till it falls off of it
self; it has the same effect on Wounds made by Poisoned Weapons, and after that
put into Woman's, or Cows Milk, it leaves the Poison it has sucked in, and if it
be not so used, it will burst.

There are two other Towns of Note in this Province, viz. Nariad, and
Mamadebad, where they make store of Stuffs; the latter furnishing this, and
adjacent Provinces, with Cotton Thread. The income of this Province to the
Mogul's Treasury is accounted Twenty millions and five hundred thousand French
Livres yearly.

Traveling on, I entered the Province of Agra, which I reckoned the largest in
the Mogul's Territories; Agra, which gives it the Name is the Capital Town in
it. It is distant from Surat 210 Leagues, and is seated on the River Gemna, in
28 Degrees and an half, North Latitude. The River has its source in the
Mountains to the North of Dehly, and increasing by the way, it is here
considerable, and passing through large Countries, empties it self into the
great River Ganges, at the Town of Halbas.

Mogul Ecbar made Agra a City, it being before but a Borough, and establishing
the Seat of his Empire there, called it Ecbar Abad, or the Habitation of Ecbar,
joining several Villages by other Buildings to enlarge it: He fortified it very
well with a Castle and Walls of great height and strength, and had his Palace
in the Castle, containing 3 Courts with Porches, adorned with Gilding and
Painting; nay, some pieces plated with Massy Gold. There are many stately
Sepulchers, Baths, Pillars, and other things of great Antiquity. And here
Aureng Zebe Imprisoned Cha-Gehan, his Father, when he mounted to the Throne,
and in that confinement he died, who has a little Sepulcher erected to his
Memory. There are in Agra a great many Christian Families; some reckon 5000,
but the computation is not agreed on. The Dutch hold a Factory in this Town,
and for the greater encouragement of Travelers, the Foursdar, an Officer in
the nature of a Sheriff, is obliged to make restitution to those that are
Robbed, and this is punctually observed in all, or most of the Provinces.

Here are Elephants, Antelopes, Leopards, and other Beasts that they use in
their Games for fighting. I saw here Green Pigeons, and the Indians have a
cunning way to catch them in the Water, for they go into the Rivers Naked, and
keep their Bodies under Water, their Heads only remaining above, which is
covered with a Cap of Feathers in the Form of a Waterfowl, so without scaring
them, draw them under Water by the Legs.

In the Mountains, about 5 days Journey from hence, they Hunt, and take store
of Merovers, or wild Cows, of which Hunting they make great advantage. Their
Pictures in Agra are pretty well done, but mostly in bandy Postures, exceeding
Active, being purposely drawn to stir up lacivious desires, and therefore I
shall pass them over. The Agrians are the best Workmen I ever met withal in
working Gold on Agat, Crystal, and other brittle things, which few of our
Lapidaries, or Goldsmiths can do, or if they can, fall short in equalling them.

Passing from Agra, I came to Fetipour, once the Seat of the Empire, but now
not much considerable, except for its lovely Meidan and Mosque; the entry of
Ecbar's Palace, and some stately Pillars scattered up and down; it was
slighted, as they say, because all the Springs about it were brackish, and
unwholesome. I was informed, in this Province there are upwards of 3400 Towns
and Villages, of which, next to what I have named, these are the Chief, viz.
Bernzabad, Chitopour, Bargant, Mirda, Hindon, Ladono, Chalaour, Byana, Canova,
and Scanderbade, most of these produce Manufactures of Stuffs, Silks, Tapestry,
etc. and the Revenues of this Province mount very near to that of Guzerat.

Next we entered the Province of Dehly by difficult ways, because the Rains had
made the Rivers swell in many places. It bounds on Agra to the North; and
Dehly, the Principal Town of the Province is about 45 Lergues from Agra, and
Mogul Cah Gehan, and Aureng Zeb, made it the Royal Seat of the Empire; the way
is all along planted with curious Trees in a Line, and each half League is
marked with a kind of a Turret, and there are conveniences by the way for
Travelers to shelter and rest in: There is by the way likewise, an ancient
Heathen Temple, visited by the Gentiles, who provide necessaries for a great
many Apes that are kept there, and they pay a kind of a blind Devotion to them,
as the Creatures of the Pagods. Dehly seems to be composed of certain Villages,
and there is the Ruins of a Town, which the Indians say, was the Regal Seat of
King Porus, famed in History for the Wars he maintained against Alexander the
Great. There is to be seen a Piramid or Obelisk of Stone, with an Inscription
in very ancient Characters, which they say, Alexander erected in Memory of his
Victory over Porus, but the Character not being Greek renders it doubtful.

This City lies in an open Champion Country, washed by the River Gemna, it has
a Fortress half a League in circumference, with a strong Wall, and a round
Tower, every 10 Battlements being secured by a Ditch wharfed with Stone, and a
Garden round it. In this Fortress the Mogul holds his Palace, and keeps the
Ensigns of his Royalty; and from hence he beholds the fighting of Elephants,
and other pastimes at Land, as also on the River; and toward the Town is a
large place where the Rajas in the Mogul's Pay Encamp, as his Guard. The Market
is kept in a fine Square, where abundance of Juglers, and Fellows pretending to
Conjuration, show Tricks. All the Mogul's Attendance in the P^llace show him a
profound Reverence, standing demure before him, with their Hands a cross upon
their Breasts, none daring speak unless Commanded, and at Noon every Day he
gives Audience to such as have recourse to him for Justice, administering it
Impartially, without respect of Persons.

There is a stately Hall, wherein he gives Audience to his Ministers about
affairs of State, and those of his Household; and in this Palace is a Throne of
Massy Gold, set with Flowers of Diamonds, Emerald, Rubies, and other precious
Stones, and a Peacock made out in all its Colors, with Gold, Silver, and
precious Stones, insomuch, that it resembles the Life, and is of vast value:
They say these were begun by Tamarlan, and finished by two succeeding Moguls:
Some hold these to be worth 20 Millions of Gold.

There is a stately Mosque, with its Dome of white Marble, and the Karvanserai
of Begum Saheb, Daughter to Cah Gahen, and Sister to Aureng Zeb. There are two
extraordinary fair Streets in the City, very wide and straight, of a
considerable length, having Arches all along on both sides serving for Shops,
and on the backside many convenient Warehouses, also Tarrassed Walks over the
Arches, where they take the Air, and have a fine Prospect; and these Streets
end in a very fine Square and Castle: There is nothing else considerable, for
the ordinary Houses are built mostly of Earth and Canes, the other Streets are
narrow and incommodious, by reason of the vast Crowds of People that flock to
Court, but when the Court is absent, there is Room enough without jostling; for
the great Men, when there with the Mogul, have large Trains, and his Officers
are very numerous; he has also a Guard to his Person of 35000 Horse, and about
12000 Foot, and most of the Soldiers have their Wives and Children to attend
them; so that by what appears, the Residentary Inhabitants do not appear to be
two thirds of the number by a considerable deal, if we reckon the Merchants and
Artificers that follow the Court wherever it removes, into the account of the
former.

They have Elks and Rhinoceroses here that are as large as Oxen; they have many
Bufflers, and they breed up Dogs brought from Bengala, who are held to have
been originally brought from England, for their pastime in hunting Lions, and
other furious Wild Beasts. They have Elephants both small and great; those are
the biggest and strongest that are brought from Cellan, and some of these will
c^rry 40 Men of 80 pound weight each they are very ductil, he that guides them
can direct them to do what he pleases with his Voice, and a small Wand: the
Elephant's Trunk serves him instead of (...) Hand to feed himself, and take up
Water, etc. they show many Tricks as their Guide directs them and will do no
hurt unless provoked, (...) in their Lust, and then the Guide who rides on
their N^^ks is in great danger, for they run furiousl^ and turn all topsiturvy
till they are stopped by Firew^rks, which they throw before them. They decoy
the he wild Elephants in the Woods and Mountains with a tame Female Elephant,
entangling him in toiles whilst he is in Copulation, and then keep him without
Meat till he is almost Famished, and so overmastering him, they lead him away,
by coaksing of him, and feeding him with Balls made of Paste, for they soon
fall in Love with those that seem to be kind to them; sometimes they catch them
in Pits, covered over with rotten Hurdles and Earth; they are not seven Years
with Calf, as some ignorantly hold; but when the Females are young and lusty,
they bring forth at the end of 12 or 14 Months. Some say they worship the Moon,
because they have been found kneeling, and throwing up Herbs and Flowers at its
Change; and usually about that time they wash themselves in Rivers, if they
have an opportunity.

The Indians, as well as the Moors, often kill them in the Mountains for their
Teeth, they having two exceeding large ones: Some are found Dead with their
Trunks off a good way, and this misfortune happens to them when they go to
Water at Ganges, or Indus, which Rivers are pestered with huge Crocodiles, who
bite off the ends of their Trunks, when they dip them in the Water, and so the
poor Beast is starved for want of wherewithal to feed it self. Some hold these
Creatures live an hundred Years.

At Dehly they have very curious Pictures representing the History of their
King's Wars, and such like Figures, and their Colors exceeding ours, render
them very Lovely and Ornamental. The richer sort here have abundance of Jewels,
especially the Rajas, who preserve them as an Inheritance from Generation to
Generation. They have a kind of Tin here brought from China, that in Luster
nearly resembles Silver. To the North-east of the Province of Dehly is that of
Azmer; the Country of Sinde bounds it on the West, Agra to the East, Multan and
Pengeah to the North, and Guzerat to the South: It was formerly divided into 3
Provinces, viz. Bando, Gesselmere, and Sorat, but now bears the Name of the
Capital City; it lies between 25 and 26 Degrees North Latitude, at the Foot of
a very high and almost inaccessible Mountain, at the top of which is a strong
Castle, and it is above a League in turnings and windings to come to it.

The Town of Azmer is walled with Stone, and has a good Ditch about it; without
it there appears the Ruins of many stately Buildings that show great Antiquity;
in the Town is to be seen Cogea-Mondy, a Mohammedan Saint; it is a curious
Building, having three Courts paved with Marble, the first is extremely large,
and has on the side several Sepulchers of pretended Saints, with a reservatory
of Water, and a neat Well about it; the second is not so large, but much more
beautiful, and many Lamps burning in it; the third is more beautiful than the
rest, and therein is Cogea's Tomb in a Chapel; the Doors of it are adorned with
various Colors made into Flowers, and other curious Devices with Mother-Pearl:
There are other Courts and Lodgings for the Imans or Priests who read the
Alcoran, and many go a Pilgrimage from far Countries to this Tomb. The common
Building of the Town, as all over India, is but indifferent, yet there are many
particular pleasant places in it.

There is a great Feast held every New Years day, and a Fair kept by the Ladies
of the Seraglio, and others of the best Quality, who expose their Jewels, Cloth
of Gold, and other rich Things to Sale, and indeed themselves, for the wittiest
and handsomest usually get Husbands, if they be not Married before. They have a
sumptuous Feast at the Mogul's Charge; and he is presented by them, the great
Men, and their Ladies, with a vast deal of Treasure, and in the several
Provinces whilst this Feast holds, he has seldom less than 14 or 15 Millions
given him. There are curious Shows of Elephants, Fireworks, and other pleasant
things to divert them; and when he is present with his Begums or Princesses, he
lays aside the stifness of Majesty, and is very familiar with his Nobles,
returning them Presents, but of no great Value in some parts of this Province,
and very ordinary in others. The Indian Girls are Married at 8 or 9 years old,
and have usually Children at 10: Those of the more rustic sort go naked,
except a Rag to hide their Privities.

They have a Beast here no bigger than a Hare, which has on its Belly a
swelling, or Bladder, that fills with corrupt Blood, which being taken off
becomes pure Musk, but the Beast lives not long after it. They use Oxen for
most sort of Labors, as to ride on, carry Burdens, draw in Coaches, Carts,
Chariots; the white ones are esteemed the best, and bear an extraordinary price.

They make store of Saltpeter in this Province, which is done in this manner.
They dig a fat black Earth, and put it into Pits, mingling it there with Water,
and beating it with great Wooden Beaters, so let it stand till the Water has
imbibed the saltness, then they draw it off in Pots, Resine and Boil it till it
Rocks, and being dried in the Sun, they sell it to the Europeans, who carry it
home as Ballast, and vend it at good Rates. This Province is held to pay the
Mogul between 30 and 33 Millions a Year, by way of Tax and Customs.

Departing from hence mostly through a Country indifferent Fertile, and watered
with some small Branches of Rivers, I entered the Province of Sinde, or Sindy,
which by some is called Tatta, bounded with Azmar to the East, and the
Mountains that border partly belonging to one Province; on the North with
Multan; on the South with a Desert and the Indian Sea; and on the West by
Macram and Segestan: It reaches from South to North in length, on both sides
the River Indus, and the Orientals call that vast River Sinde, or Sindy. On the
Banks of it was fought a Famous Battle, between Ginguiscan first Emperor of the
Tartars and the Ancient Moguls, and Sultan Gelaleddin, which allotted the Empire
to the former, in his gaining a Victory wherein 200000 Men were Slain, so that
he utterly vanquished the Caezmian Princes, who had for a long time been
Masters of Persia, all Zagatay, and the greatest part of the Country of
Turquestan. This River runs 1000 Miles, and receives many other Rivers into it;
its Banks are thick of Towns, but there is no great store of Fish in it, by
reason of the Allegator, or Crocodiles that destroy them.

The chief Town in this Province is Talta, though there are several others of
Note and Trade, as Died, or Diub-sind, it lies between 24 and 25 Degrees North
Latitude. At Talta, particularly, there is a great Trade, where the Indian
Merchants come from all parts to buy up the Goods made there, the Inhabitants
being very ingenious in all kind of Arts. The great River mentioned, makes many
Islands toward this place which are very Fruitful, but little Inhabited, yet
renders the Town very commodious, were it not for the great heat that reigns
there in the Summer Season.

At Lourebender, 3 days Journey from this Town upon the Sea, there is a fine
Road for Shipping, being reckoned by many the most commodious in the Indies,
which causes a great Trade, where the Palanquins of Talta are vended, being the
neatest in Indostan. The best and neatest Chariots and Coaches made in India
are found here, though the Indians Travel in Palanquins, which are a kind of
Couches with 4 Feet, having on each side Ballisters, 4 or 5 Inches high, and at
the Head and Feet a back-stay like a Childe's Cradle: This Machin hangs by a
long Pole, called Pambou, by the means of 2 Frames nailed to the Feet of the
Couch, these Frames have great Rings, through which Ropes pass, and also the
Pole or Pambous, and so the Planquin is carried on Men's Shoulders, who ply for
that end for a small matter. These Machins are very richly adorned, every one
doing it after his own humor, as he is able; some with Tisue, others with
Cloth of Gold, or rich Embroidery; for as the Indians are generally Neat, so
they are mostly Proud, taking a delight to show their finery to Strangers.

The other Provinces of the Mogul's Empire are, Multan, Candahar, Caboul or
Caboulistan, Cachmir or Kichmir, Lahors, Ayoud or Haoud, Varad or Varal, Becar,
Halabas, Oulesser or Bengala, Malva, Candich, Balagate, Doltabud, Telenga, and
Baglana; but these, and some others in India, not under the Jurisdiction of the
Great Mogul, for want of an opportunity, and an indisposition I had, by reason
of the intemperateness of the Air, upon often changing Climates, not giving me
leave to take a strict survey of them, I hope the Reader will pardon some
Omissions, and be pleased to guess at them by what I have said of many in
particular, since as to Trade, People, Building, Manners, Customs, etc. they
little vary, only I shall say something of the Famous River Ganges, and then
conclude my Travels in this Torrid Country, with General, but very Material
Observations.

The Ganges, as well as Indus, is a vast River, full of pleasant Islands,
covered with lovely Indian Trees, which delight the Passengers for 5 or 6 days
Sailing. The Heathens, or Gentiles, Indians, esteem the Water: They have
Temples, and Pagods near it, and here have a freedom of Worship; the chief
Pagods are that of Jaganat, which is at one Mouth of the Ganges, and that of
the Town of Bonarous upon the River; these are superstitiously decked with Gold
and Jewels; Millions of People repair thither, and Festivals are kept for many
days together, when they carry their Idols in Triumph.

The Great Mogul drinks commonly of the Water of the Ganges, though many
affirm, that if it be not boiled it causes a Flux. This River having received a
vast number of Brooks and Rivers from the North-east and West, discharges it
self by several Mouths into the vast Gulf of Bengala, at the height of about
23 Degrees, and this Gulf begins in 8 Degrees North Latitude, and is reckoned
800 Leagues over: On the sides of it, to the East, is many Towns, belonging to
diverse petty Princes, who are Sovereigns, with whose Subjects, as well as the
Moguls, the Europeans Trade for rich Commodities. On the banks of the Ganges
are Herds of Deer, grazing, but the Crocodiles destroy many of them by pulling
them into the River when they come to Drink, and then devour them: I saw a
Negro Boy pulled under by one of them as he was Swiming, but saw him no more.
The Ships that Moar in the River where these most haunt, keep Guard by Night to
prevent their clambering on the Decks, and surprising the Men a sleep.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Marriages, Apparrels, Superstitious Customs, the keeping the
Mogul 's Birthday, and other Things observed by the Indians, as the Funerals
of their Dead, etc.
HAving described many Things worthy of Note in India, I now proceed to others
which I purposely omitted, that for Brevity sake I might have the convenience
of collecting and placing them together.

The Marriages of the Mohammedan Indians, especially those of Note, are
celebrated with Pompous shows, and much Magnificency; they are Married by a
Moula, or Mohammedan Priest, and then the Bride in rich Ornaments, is carried to
the Bridegroom's Apartments on an Elephant. The Females Marry very young, as at
8, 9, and 10 years of Age, and some sooner, but those that Marry early leave of
Child bearing at 30, and are very much wrinkled. The Wedding Ceremonies of the
Gentil Indians is this; the Bramen, or Priest, after having said some Prayers
over the Couple, puts a Cloth between them, and orders the Man with his naked
Foot to touch the naked Foot of the Woman, and so the Ceremony is completed.
The Women are very Fruitful in this Country, and easily Delivered.

As for Aparrel, they wear Cotton, Stuffs, or Silks, as loose of they can; the
Man has Linen wraped round his Head, like a little close Turban, and the Woman
a kind of a Carchief, though their Habits, according to the Casts, are various,
yet of as many Colors as they can have them.

They often do Penance by Abstinence, and some are put in a hole for that
purpose. where, they say, they remain 6 or 7 Days without Eating or Drinking;
but this is mostly in the Temples of their Pagods, of which they have numbers,
many with vast Labor being cut out of natural Rock, some like Men, and others
very Monstrous: And in some Provinces great Hills and Rocks, with prodigious
cost and pains are cut into such Forms or Shapes, which shows their
Superstition.

At Bengala, and other places, they Sacrifice to the Sea, throwing in Coco
Nuts, which little Boys swim for, and make much sport and p^stime in struggling
for them, and this they call the opening of the Sea, because, for some Months,
Trade is stopped, by reason the Mounson, or Trading-Wind, serves not, and this
they do with a great deal of Devotion and Solemnity.

The Casts, or Tribes of the Gentil Indians, are reconed to be 84, and though
they profess to be all of the same Religion, yet they differ migntily in their
Ceremonies. Every one of the Tribes fo^^ow a particular Trade, and their
offspring must not quit it under the Penalty of being counted Infamous, and
turned out of his Cast. They are generally very Charitable, especially to
Strangers in their Sickness or Distress, and will streighten themselves very
much to relieve them. The Bramens, who are their Doctors, make the first and
head Tribe.

The Mogul's Birthday is kept with great Feasting and Rejoicing, and then he
is publicly weighed in Golden Scales, and precious Stones tied up in bags are
the Weights: The Weight of him is Registered, and if that Year he weighs more
than the former there is great Rejoicing; and for Trifles he gives amongst his
Nobles and Favorites, he receives a vast Treasure in Presents; if he weighs
less, they conclude him to be Languishing, which abates much of their
Merriment, and that Day particularly, the Indian Women adorn their Ears and
Noses with Rings and Jewels, if they are forced to borrow them, though at other
times the better sort wear them; those they wear in their Ears are flat, either
of Gold, Silver, or Copper.

Among the Indians they have a Liquor called Tarry, which is the Juice of a
Palm, or Coco Tree, or rather the Sap, which they love so much, that in many
places the Women make it in their bargain before they are Married, that they
shall be allowed to Drink it, and to go abroad sometimes to see their
Neighbors: It is gotten by wounding the Trees, and tastes something like
Whitewine. The Coco Nuts are about the bigness of an ordinary Mellon, and are
very much esteemed for the Liquor they produce. The Dutch at Batavia have a
Market kept under these kind of Trees, and the pleasantness of the Shade brings
them in a great income for Standings, beside the advantage of the Fruit. As for
the Swords, Daggers, and other Arms of the Indians, except Bows and Arrows,
they are heavy and clouterly made, after the ancient Fashion of the English.
There are in India many Hermophradites, partaking the Genitals of both Sexes;
these, though they go in Women's Aparrel, wear a Turban on their Heads to
distinguish them, under a great Penalty.

As for the belief of the Indian Gentiles, it is, that every Man may be saved
in his Religion or Sect, provided he exactly follow the way that God has
directed him, affirming, when they bow to Idols, they worship them not, but
have God in their Mind; they say those that take ill courses will be Damned,
and doubt not, but their Religion is the first of all Religions, and that it
was established in the days of Adam, and preserved by Noah, believing that
there is a Heaven and a Hell, for Rewards and Punishments, but none shall enter
before the Universal Judgment: That they show Honor and Respect to a Cow,
because she affords them more subsistence than other Creatures. The Pythagorian
Doctrine or Opinion of Transmigration of Souls is held by many of the Casts,
which makes them refrain killing Beasts or Birds, least the Souls of some of
their Tribe, departed, should be in them, and they often rescue them by
purchase from the Mahometans, who are about to kill them.

They call their God Ram, and say he was produced out of the Light, and in that
consideration, they render him Divine Honors in their P^gods, and elsewhere.
In saluting their Friends they repeat his Name twice; their Adoration consists
in joining their Hands, as if they Prayed and letting them fall very low, then
gently raising them to their Mouth, and last of all, over their Heads. They say
Chitta was Ram's Wife, and when they see the Picture of the Virgin Mary, they
affirm it is Chitta's Representation, saluting and bowing very low to it,
bringing Offerings of Fruit, Oil, and Wax-Candles, for none of their Sacrifices
are Bloody, but consist of bringing to their Pagods, things of Ornament, and
such as may be Eaten, and taking the Bramen's Directions they anoint the Body
of the Image with Oil and say their Prayers before the Idol they intend to
Invocate, they present their Oblation, and return out of the Temple, and when
the Bramen has taken what he thinks fit, the rest is distributed to those of
any Religion that will come for it. Besides the Bramens, the Gymnosophists of
Porphyrus are the Priests, and Doctors of the Heathen Indians. But the
Mahometans have a Mufti, and here I omit their Opinions, as being spoken of
elsewhere.

They have many strange Ceremonies in the Funerals of their Dead; they first
wash them in Water near the Temple of some Pagod, and then in some places
siting uncovered in a Chair, is carried with beat of Drum to a Funeral Pile,
attended by the Wife, and the Relations, in the richest Attire, and after the
usual Absolution, it is laid on the Pile, and the Wife who had followed in
Triumph, has a kind of a Throne seated there, in which she places her self,
adorned with Gold, Jewels, and Silver of her own, and lent her by her Friends,
seeming willing to die, singing and rejoicing, that pa^^ing with him through
the Flames, she shall have the Honor and Happiness to accompany him in the
other World; and when the Bramen sets Fire to the Pile, the Relations throw in
Spices, Oils, and Odours, till both the Bodies are consumed. This, by the wise,
is looked on as a piece of Priestcraft, to get the Riches that are found in the
Ashes, as Gold, Silver, and such Jewels as resist the Fire, for the Ashes being
accounted Sacred, none but the Bramen has the meddling with them; and the Woman
is counted Infamous among her Cast that refuses to undergo this Cruelty.

Some are buried with their Husbands, up to the Neck, then strangled and quite
covered; and some of the Maids, for the love they bear their Mistress, will in
like manner accompany her in Death; but this is rarely used now, for the Mogul,
and other Mohammedan Princes of India, have strictly forbid it, as Inhuman, and
Barbarous, which secures many Women from the Infamy they would otherwise
undergo in their Cast; yet though the Governors pretend all that in them lies
to restrain it, some are still burnt, for by earnest Solicitations, and large
Presents, if the Wife Petition for it, which some of them do, leave is
obtained; but it is thought they are incited to it by the crafty persuasions of
the knavish Bramen, who promises them inestimable Joys and Pleasures in another
Life.

Having somewhat satisfied my Curiosity, and, as I think, given a satisfactory
account of the places I visited, the Customs of the People, etc. the Fame of
China invited me to take a very tedious Journey to visit that Kingdom, and
hearing that a Caravan of Merchants every Year passed from Lahors thither, I
found a convenient opportunity by Land and Water, to arrive at that City a
little before the Caravan was about to depart, which consisted of about 500
Men, and 7000 Camels, Horses, etc.

CHAP. XVII. Travels through diverse Countries into China, and a satisfactory
Account of all that is remarkable in that Kingdom.
IN our Passage to China, for brevity sake, I shall not be particular in every
thing I saw, as not being remarkable in such wild and desert Countries. Let it
suffice then, that setting out we passed over vast Plains, Rivers, Mountains,
and Rockey ways, in danger of wild Beasts and Robbers, there being but few, and
those inconsiderable Towns, till we came to Athec, where recruiting with
Provisions, and refreshing ourselves, we Traveled on in much the like ways to
Passaur, and so by several small Towns till we came to a City called
Capherstam; the Country it stands in is very Fertile, producing good Wine, and
one thing I observed, that they go to their Temples in Mourning Weeds; and 25
days Journey from this, we came to Gtrideli, in 20 days more to Cabul, and so
to Ciracar, and Paroua, the last Town in the Mogul's Territories, after which
we were often forced to pay Tribute to petty Princes that governed the Cities
and dependancies in our way. Then to Aingharan we journied over exceeding high
Mountains, and leaving that place, came to Calcia, then to Gialalabath; here
recruiting, we passed to Talhan, and Cheman in the Kingdom of Samarhan, and by
a troublesome way from thence, came to Badasciam, and Chiarchiumar, where we
rested for some time, and then kept on our Journey to Serpanel, and so entered
the Country of Sarcil, full of Villages, and in 6 days passed over Ciecialith,
a vast Mountain covered with Snow, in which Passage some of the company
perished with Cold, and in a tedious Travel attained Tanghetar, in the Kingdom
of Cascar, and passing Jaconich, came to Hiarchan the Royal City, where, for a
good Sum, the Master of the Caravan obtained the King's Passport to further our
Journey more quietly: Then we kept our Journey through Jocil, Hancialix,
Aleghet, Hagabateth, Egriar, Marcetelec, Thalec, Horma, Thoantac, Mingrieda,
Capetalcol, Zelan, Sarc, Guebedal, Cambasci, Monsersec, Ciacolo, and Ascu; we
passed these by a very tedious way, over Stones, Sands, and the Deserts of
Carcatha, and so to Oitocarach, Gazo, Casciani, Dellai, Seregabedal, Vngan, and
Cucia, then to Pucian, and Turphan, a Fortified City; thence to Aramuth, and so
to Camul, the last City of the Kingdom of Ciales, and from Camul to the North
Wall of China, through which we had admission at a place called Ciaicum, after
a 6 Months Journey, and so passed to the City of Socive, and thus being entered
China, I shall proceed to speak of it, as far as I could learn, during my stay
there.

As for the vast Kingdom of China, it has gone under many Denominations, as the
Princes has been pleased to new Name and call it, as they severally ascended to
the Throne: Under the Reign of the first King it was called Tae mim que, that
is, The Kingdom of great Brightness, and by several other Names. But when the
Tartar, whose Race are now in the power, Conquered it, they called it Tai
Ciroque, A Kingdom of great Purity; and since it was called Chin, to which the
Portugueses, the first Europeans Trading there, adding an A, it has since
amongst us been called China, and so it is generally accepted.

It is seated in the extremities of Asia toward the East, and lies under 20
Degrees from North to South from the Fortress of Cai Pim, placed on the
Frontiers of the Province of Pekim, in the Latitude of 41, to the Meridional
point of the Island of Hai nan, in 8 Degrees of the Elevation, and to the South
of the Province of Quamtum, so that according to the Chinese account, it is
from North to South 5750 Li or Furlongs, which make 575 French Leagues, at 25
to a Degree; and from Po point, a Seaport Town in the Province of Che-Kiam, to
the extremity of the Province of Suchven, in a straight Line from East to West
it is 426 French Leagues, though Geographers taking it another way, make it
much longer, viz. from the last place to the North-west of the Province of
Leaotum, called Caiyven to the last City of the Province of Yunnan, called
Cin-tien-Kiu-min-Fat, and so the length is accounted 750 French Leagues, and
the breadth taken from Tam Chan, the most easterly place of the Country of
Leaotum, joining to the Kingdom of Corea, to Tum-tim to the Westward of the
Province of Xensi, it is 500 French Leagues.

This vast Kingdom, or Empire, contains 15 Provinces, larger than some
considerable Kingdoms, mostly Rich and Fertile, which are ranked according to
their Antiquity and Precedence, in this Order, by the Chinese.

Pekim, Nankim, now called Kiam-nan, Xensi, Xantum, Ho-nan, Xansi, Chekiam,
Kianosi, Huquam, Su Chuens, Fokien, Quamtum, Quamsi, Yunnan, Quei Cheum, and
Xantum; many of these have Towns commodiously on the Sea, and others on great
Rivers and Lakes, the whole Country being plentifully watered, by which means
it is exceeding Fertile, and saves them abundance of Land Carriage.

The Chinese brag much of the Original of their Kingdom, and some of their
Books place it many thousand Years before the Creation of the World; but most
agree, it has preserved its form of Government during the Reign of 22 Families,
and from them have descended 236 Kings, during the space 4034 Years, for so
long they allow it to have been a Kingdom; yet there is amongst them another
more probable account, viz. This account reduces the beginning of it to about
400 Years after the General Deluge, and if any pretend to dispute it by
Writing, or word of Mouth, it is enough to endanger their Lives, for they look
upon it as a disparagement to their Kingdom, as being the proudest, and most
conceited People of all Nations, thinking themselves the best in the World, and
that all others are insignificant to them, making in their Maps China very
spacious, and other Countries like little Rocks in the Sea, and they hold a
firm opinion, that Europe is no more than 2 small Islands; they also hold, all
their Neighbors for Barbarians, and paint them in Monstrous and Ridiculous
Forms, and to make them seem Cowards, though they have often experienced them
to the contrary, they report and paint them as little Pigmies, who tie
themselves in bundles when they go abroad, least the Eagles and Kites should
carry them away; and when any one argues learnedly to them, they start, as in a
surprise, demanding whether they have their Books in their Country, and when
the Strangers Answer no, they reply, why then how came you by that Learning?
They hold their Religion the purest and ancientest of all the Religions in the
World; However, it is to be believed, that their Chronicle is the ancientest
that is to be found, and is so well connected, the Reign of one King hanging so
well to the other, that it cannot reasonably be suspected to have been Written
upon trust, by Conjecture, or Imagination.

They divide the Heavens into 28 Constellations, and China into so many parts,
allowing each part one, and leave none for any other Nation; and in brief, they
give their own most lofty and magnificent Titles, but to Foreign Countries,
most barbarous, scornful, and degrading Names, to exalt their Kingdom by the
disparaging others, which Pride I am apt to believe proceeds from their
Ignorance, though some of the Nobles are more moderate and discreet, but then
it is such as have Traveled abroad, though but a few of them are permitted,
and even these dare not speak much in the praise of other Countries, least they
should be looked on as undervaluers of their own, and consequently as Enemies.
Some of their Kings have had the vanity to style themselves Child of the Sun,
and Emperor of the World. They are, however, a very industrious People, as
appears by their vast and stately Edifices, Manufactures, and other curious
Matters, for there are no idle People in the Kingdom, the Lame, Blind, and Deaf
employ themselves in one business or other, as they are capacitated, and get a
living by it, insomuch that they have a Proverb, which says, There is nothing
in China cast away; and let it be never so vile, it may turn to Profit one way
or other in the City of Pekim, which is the chief of the Kingdom. Many
thousands of Families live only by making and selling Card-Matches, and Wicks
for Candles, and as many by what they pick up about the Streets. They have in
every City a Bell, and a Drum-Tower, on which Watchmen strike, to give the
Hours, and the quarters in the Nightime, and both the Drum and Bell are
exceeding large, being heard many Miles, answering one another in a Musical
Harmony. They burn an Incense made of Sweet Woods and Perfumes in their
Chambers, and before their Pagods, making Candles of the same and other
mixtures, which in burning cast a fragrant smell; and some they make so large
to place in their Temples before their Idols that they will continue burning 20
or 30 Days and Nights, and burning to certain windings and marks, they, by
that, distinguish Hours and Days, in burning such and such exact proportions;
and those that burn them in their Chambers, when they would rise at a certain
Hour, tie a little Brass weight by a String to a mark that specifies the Hour,
and the string burning, the weight falls into a brass Basin set under it, and
strikes like a Larum-Watch.

They have many other curious devices, as Chariots that will run swiftly
without Horses, only a Man that sits in it turning a Winch, which by certain
Springs turns the Wheels round with great Rapidity. But passing over things of
this Nature for the present, I will proceed to describe, in some measure, the
City of Pekim, the Metropolis of China, where the King has his chief Court.

This famous City is seated in a Plain, forming a vast Square, each of its
sides being 12 Chinese Furlongs in length; it has 9 Gates, 3 upon the South
side, and 2 upon each of the other sides: it is now Inhabited by the Tartars,
and their Troops are divided into the 8 quarters, or, as they call them,
Banners. But considering, under the preceding Kings, the numerous Inhabitants
had not a sufficient place to contain them, though the Nine Suburbs answering
to the Gates were as big as Cities. There was a new City built like the old
one, square in Form, having its North side joining to the side of the old one;
this has 7 Gates, and every one a Suburb answering to it, so that taking that
in, with the Suburbs, it is of a vast circumference, yet many who have writ of
it, have made it much larger than it is; the one and the other are divided into
5 Jurisdictions, or Tribunals, of which I shall speak hereafter. The principal
Streets run to the 4 direct Points, or Winds; they are long, straight, and
broad, so well proportioned, as if they had been marked out with a Line. The
little Streets run all from East to West, being very fair, and divide the
spaces between the great Streets into equal and proportionable Islands, having
each a particular Name, and there is a Catalogue to be sold of them, with Notes
and Directions, that Strangers, and those whose business it is to go on
Errands, may the easier find them, for they are very numerous.

The fairest of these Streets is called Cham began Kiai, or the Street of
Perpetual Repose; it is about 30 Fathom broad, and of a vast length: The Houses
are low built, which, they say, is done in respect to the King's Palace, that
it should appear more magnificent, though besides the King's, there are
Palaces belonging to the Nobility very stately, yet they are built backward,
so that nothing but a great Gate appears to the Street. The old and new City
are crowded with swarms of People, as the Shops are with store of rich
Commodities, so that one would suppose there was a continual Fair held in it.

The King's Palace is seated in the midst of the City, and Fronts toward the
South, as almost all others do in this Country; it is encompassed with a double
enclosure of Walls, in form of a long square; the outward enclosure is
extraordinary high and thick, plaistered on both sides with a curious red
Plaster, and covered with a small Roof of varnished Brick of a Gold Color;
the length of it from South to North is 8 Chinese Furlongs; it has a Gate in
the middle of each side, composed of 3 Portals, the middlemost never being
opened but when the King passes, and these have a Guard upon them, but not very
considerable; there are also many Elephants kept in a spacious place for
service, and to divert the King, where are Stables completely furnished for
them, and no Persons that have any considerable deformity are suffered to enter
the Palace; the inner Wall that immediately incloses the Palace is very
thick, and high built, embellished with well contrived Battlements, and extends
from North to South 6 Furlongs, and a Furlong and an half in breadth, and the
Palace is about four Miles three quarters in circumference; it has 4 Gates
with large vaulted Arches, those to the South and North being like to them of
the first Enclosure, and upon the Angles of the Walls are 8 Towers of an
extraordinary bigness, and good Architecture, Varnished with beautiful red, and
adorned with Flowers of Gold, covered with Tiles of a Gold Varnish, and there
are Guards kept in them all, except Madarin's of the Tribunals within the
Palace; and the Officers of the King's Household are forbidden to come within
this Wall, unless they show a little Table of Wood, plated with Ivory, wherein
their Names, and the places they serve in are set down, with the Seal of the
Mandarin to whom they belong. It has a curious More round it full of Fish, and
every Gate a Drawbridge, unless the South, which lies over an Arch. In the
vast space between the two Walls are many stately Palaces that might suit the
entertainment of great Kings, they being richly adorned with pollished Stone,
and curious Gilding.

On the East side close by the Wall runs a River, over which are several
Bridges of Marble, with Draw-Bridges in the middle of them: On the West where
the space is large, there is a lake full of Fish, 5 Furlongs and a quarter in
length, made in the Form of a Bass-Viol; where it is narrowest there is a very
beautiful Bridge which answers the Gates of the Wall, at the end of which stand
Triumphant Arches of 3 Arches a piece, very Majestic, and of excellent
Workmanship. The Lake is environed with little Palaces, or Houses of Pleasure,
partly on the Water, and partly on the Land; and on the Lake are many beautiful
Barges for the King's use; the remainder of the East and West spaces not taken
up by the Lake, are beautified with Palaces, and the Officers Houses, all very
Stately and Magnificent, as also of those of Artificers that belong to the
King's Palace.

The inward Palace is low built, according to the fashion of the Chinese,
containing many Palaces, or Courts, one within the other, so that it seems a
little City of Palaces, guarded by a great number of Turrets, or Towers; and
particularly in the King's Apartment is to be seen nothing but gilded Cielings,
Pillars inlaid with Ivory and costly Stone; his Throne is exceeding Rich and
Magnificent, valued at many Millions, by reason of rich Stones and Gold that
adorn it: There are also some Temples erected within this enclosure, and so
many other things, that it would require a Volume to describe them particularly.

Besides the Temples in the Palace, the King has 7 others, in which he
Sacrifices once a Year, viz. 5 in the New, and 2 in the Old City, very large,
and exceedingly beautified with Gold, and costly Paintings. In the first of
these called Tien-Tam, or the Temple of Heaven, he Sacrifices to Heaven at the
time the Sun comes to the Winter Solstice, Offering Hogs, Oxen, Goats, and
Sheep, which is done with great Solemnity and Humility, the King laying aside
his Golden Robe, yellow Vesture, and precious Jewels, and putting on a plain
Habit of Black, or Sky-colored Damask. The second Temple is called Ti-Tam, or
the Temple of the Earth, and here the King before he is Crowned, Sacrifices to
the God of the Earth, and then putting himself into the Habit of a Ploughman,
he Ploughs a little piece of Ground with a varnished Plough, drawn by 2 Oxen
with gilded Horns, and in the mean time the Queen and her Ladies dress him a
homely Dinner, which they Eat together. To the North of these stands another
Temple, called Pe Tien-Tam, or the North Temple of Heaven, he Sacrifices at the
time of the Summer Solstice, and at Vernal Equinox he Sacrifices in a Temple to
the East, called Ge-Tam, or the Temple of the Sun, and at the Autumnal Equinox,
at the Western Temple, called Yue Tam, or the Temple of the Moon; and to
prepare for the Sacrifices, there is a Fast held in Pekim for 3 days, during
which time, no Flesh nor Fish is to be eaten, under great Penalties; and this
they say they do in a thankfulness for the Benefits they receive from the
Earth, by the Seasons of the Year, and the influence of Heaven.

In the sixth Temple called Ti vam miao, or the Temple of the past Kings, is a
rich Throne, and the Statues of all the Kings of China, from the first King,
named To hi to Xum Chi, Father to the present Prince; here the King performs an
Annual Ceremony to his Predecessors. The seventh Temple is called Chim-Hoam
Miao, or the Temple of the Spirit that guards the Walls; but here the King
never Sacrifices, but appoints Mandarins, and other Nobles, to do it at his
Charge, so that the Ceremony is performed with much Royalty; and in every City
there is such a Temple Dedicated to the same end.

Having proceeded thus far, I shall entertain you with an account of his Pomp,
and Magnificent Attendance, when he goes out of his palace; and this he rarely
does but upon two occasions, viz. either to Hunt, and take the Air, or to
Sacrifice, unless necessity forces him to the Wars; upon these occasions he
takes a Guard, and all the Nobles that are near have notice, and attend him in
their best Equipage; they most consist of between 12 and 13000, adorned with
Embroideries of Gold, Silver, and precious Stones, their Horses traped with the
same, and all their Servants that attend, at a distance, in very rich Attire.

First, there appear 24 Men with large Drums, in two Files, then the like
number of Trumpets in the same manner, next as many with long Staves, varnished
with red, and adorned with gilt Folinges; then 200 Halberdiers, the Heads of
their Halberds being like a Crescent; these were followed by 100 Men carrying
Maces of gilt Wood, with Staves as long as a Lance; then 2 Royal Poles, called
Cassi, varnished with Red, and gilded with Flowers at both ends; after these
400 large Lanthorns richly adorned, with many curious pieces of Workmanship;
these were followed by 400 Flambeauxs curiously Carved, and made of an
odoriferous Wood that burns long, and casts a curious shining light; then 200
Lances fringed and adorned with the Spoils of Wild Beasts; these are followed
by 24 Banners, on which, in Gold, and Rich Imbroidery are represented the Signs
of the Zodiac, which the Chinese divide into 24, contrary to us; after these
come 56 Banners, with 56 Constellations painted on them, under which they
comprehend the whole number of Stars; then 2 large Flabels, supported with
Poles, and gilded with Suns, Birds, Beasts, and other Things; these are
succeeded by 24 Umbrellos richly adorned; then 8 sorts of rich Utensils for the
Kings ordinary use, as a Table-Cloth, a Basin and Eure of Gold, etc. after
these 10 led Horses all white, Traped with Imbroidery of Gold and precious
Stones, followed by 100 Lanciers, and on both sides them the Pages of the King
that particular belong to his Chamber, and in the middle, between them, the
King himself, with an Air very Majestic and Stern, mounted on a stately Steed,
covered with a rich Umbrello, costly, beyond the belief of such as have not
seen it, shading both the King and his Horse; he is followed by petty Kings,
the Princes of the Blood, and a great number of the Principal Nobility in their
richest Attire, and ranked according to their Degrees; then 500 young Gentlemen
belonging to the King, followed by 1000 Footmen clad in red Robes, Embroidered
with Stars and Flowers of Gold and Silver; then succeeds an open Chair, or
Litter, carried by 36 Men, attended by another close Litter as big as a handsome
Room, carried by 120 Men; then 2 vast Chariots, each drawn by 2 Elephants;
after these another large Chariot drawn by 8 Horses, and another which is less,
by 4; these have very rich Caparisons lined with Silk, and the Governors in
costly Liveries, each of them attended by an Officer and 50 Soldiers; next to
these follow 2000 Mandarins of the Learned Tribunal; and to close all, 2000
Military Mandarins, with the King's Train: The People every where receive him
with profound Veneration and Respect, many Kneeling, and others lifting up
their Hands, with Prayers for his Prosperity.

Besides the numerous Vessels in Seaports, on Lakes, and Rivers, many of which
have places in them like Rooms and Chambers, wherein the People belonging to
them live and breed. The number of those that are appointed to carry Provisions
to the Court are near 1000; those that are to attend the Mandarins are very
numerous, and the rest, without great difficulty are not to be numbered, for
all the Lakes, Rivers, and Ports are so full of Vessels, that they seem so many
floating Towns, or Cities, and no less than 4 Millions of People are employed
in their Navigation. Their Rivers are many, and exceeding large, so that on the
River Kiam, which is called the Son of the Sea, one may Sail for 3 Months. The
Vessels that are only to bring the King's Habits, Silks, Stuffs, etc are 365,
for every day he has a Change of rich Garments. What shall I say? The People
adore him as a God, and think all the valuable things on Earth too little for
him, and therefore it would be endless to describe all the Magnificence that
attends his State, and every thing he is served withal. Let it suffice then,
that no Prince on Earth that ever I saw, or heard of, equals him in Grandeur,
for his Subjects look on him as the Son of Heaven, and that it is not only
their Duty, but a main incumbent of Religion to Honor him in all they can.
They bring their Timber, mostly by the Rivers, not in Vessels, but in Floats,
some of 3 Leagues length, fastened together with Rushes and Osiers, and on the
Floats are little Wooden Houses for those that guide them to lodge in by turns,
and dress their Provisions: And indeed they bring plenty of all things by their
Rivers and Lakes, which stores their Cities and Towns very plentifully, which
are very numerous, for according to their own Printed Account, of those walled
in are 4402, which are divided into two Orders, Civil and Military; the first
of these comprehend 2045, of which 175 are Cities of the first Rank, which the
Chinese call Tin; 274 of the second Rank, which they call Cheu; 288 which they
call Hien; 205 Royal Hosteries, or places of Entertainment of the first, and
103 of the second Rank; and these are Governed by Mandarins, who, in their
Governments are a kind of Viceroys.

The Nobility of this Kingdom, as generally taken, is no more than an
illustrious Grandeur that has continued for several Ages, but these are subject
to many casualties, for when the Reigning Family expires, they are generally
put to Death, because they are very powerful in the Country, and give a jealous
suspicion, so that new upstarts are put in their Room, which renders those more
safe who acquire this Honor, by the Gown or Military Employments, because that
Honor is recalled at pleasure, and the Grand Child seldom enjoys that, or
their Estate. There is but one of the Ancient Familes now remaining that I
could here of, viz. that of the Famous Confucius, who was Born under the third
Imperial Family, called Cheu, 551 Years before the Birth of Christ; and this
Family has great Privileges above others, as to be exempted from Taxes and
Tribute in the Provinces they Inhabit. They give a Title of Honor of a lower
Degree to their learned Men: and Philosophers are in great Veneration amongst
them, and to some of them they have given the Epethite of Saint, and give the
same Veneration to their Memory as to their Pagods, though they take it as an
affront to be taxed with it, for they call them Kings without Command, by which
employ they were worthy of Crowns for their Learning, Virtue; and Wisdom, but
desteny prevented them. Confucius, a Learned Man among the Chinese, who,
though long since Dead, is admired and adored amongst them: He modeled their
Law, or Rule, to be observed, into nine Maxims, which he called Chum^yum, or
the Golden Mediocrity, wherein he lays down, that a good Prince ought to have 9
Qualities, or Virtues. 1. To Govern himself well that he may show a good
Example to those he Rules over. 2. To Honor and Cherish Learning, and learned
Men, and to encourage Virtue, frequently to consult and converse with the
Learned, on the Affairs of the Kingdom. 3. To Love and highly respect his
Kindred, the Princes of the Blood, and to grant them the Favors and Rewards
they merit. 4. To be Courteous and Respectful to the Nobility in general, and
give them their due deserts. To incorporate himself in a Friendly and Amicable
manner with all his Subjects, to equalize his Heart with theirs, and to regard
and esteem them as his own proper substance and Person. 6. To Love his People
with a true Affection, unmixed with Distimulation; to rejoice at their
Prosperity, and be afflicted at their Misfortunes. 7. To invite to his Court,
and encourage Artists, for the quick dispatch of public and private business.
8. To Treat carefully, and with all civility, Ambassadors sent from Foreign
Princes, that they may see in Words and Deeds, the effects of a Princely and
Generous Mind. 9. To Cherish and Embrace all, that he may engage them to him,
to be the Bulwarks and Fortresses of his Kingdom. And these Rules well
practiced may serve other Kings, to render them great and happy.

The King has a Privy, or Supreme Council of the Learned Mandarins in his
Palace, who are called his Council of State, which is the most Honorable
Dignity in the Kingdom; these consult and transact all the weighty Affairs, and
these have several Magnificent Halls in the Palace, wherein they meet, to
consult according to their Degrees; and when he advances any one to this
Dignity, he adds to his Name, the Name of one of these Halls. Besides these,
there are 11 other Tribunals of Mandarins, 6 for Ecclesiastical and Civil, and
5 for Military Affairs: The first of these are called Lo-pu, and the last V-fu,
and these are of ancient Institution, the Chinese dating it 2000 Years before
the Birth of Christ; and to these Tribunals People repair for the determining
their Affairs, and for Redress; besides, they dispose of Offices and Trusts,
and confirm Honor and Dignities. Their Power is great, for they have a
jurisdiction almost over all that belongs to the Court, and it is absolute over
all the Provinces, so that they are much feared, and dreaded, because they can
place and displace at pleasure, and examine into all Frauds and Abuses to the
Crown, and into Ecclesiastical matters. They are fearful of doing any
injustice, by reason there is a Mandarin, in the nature of a Controller, or
Overseer to every Tribunal, who examins publicly or privately all that is
done, and if he finds any injustice or disorder, he is bound to make the King
acquainted with it; he is called Coli, so that seldom any Corruptness or
Partiality is found amongst them, and if it be, the Offender is severely
punished. There are some other dependent Tribunals in Pekim, and to every one
of the Provinces there belongs a Supreme Tribunal, which has the oversight of
inferior Courts, so that business is managed and dispatched with little
difficulty.

They have made prodigeous Works in this Country to secure the Rivers within
their bounds, yet notwithstanding, sometimes increased by the violent Rains,
they break out to the destruction of vast numbers of People, Cattle, and
Houses, as it happened in the Year 1668, after violent Rains, which almost
destroyed the new City of Pekim, and they had much ado to secure the Flood from
overturning the Walls of the old City, and in this Deluge which was accompanied
by an Earthquake, for it had a long time before been a very dry Season, near a
Million of People perished; and though many got upon Trees, Hills, and Out
Houses, they were there starved for the most part, for want of Boats to fetch
them off, and the rapid Flood tumbling Rocks along with it, broke down two
Arches of the Famous Bridge, which is about a Furlong over: This Bridge is the
most beautiful in China, but not the largest; the River overflowing is called
Hoen Ho, or the Muddy River, because the rapidness of its Stream, carries with
it a great quantity of Earth, tore from the Banks and Windings, which renders
it muddy all the Year, but it is little Navigable, by reason of the many
Cataracts, or Falls in it; yet for bringing vast Stores to Pekim from the
Southern Provinces, a Canal is opened 3500 Chinese Furlongs, through several
Provinces, accommodated with 72 Sluices, every one having large Folding-Gates,
and these are only open in the day time, some of them being very difficult to
pass with Barks of great Burden, because the Falls are great; but they are
drawn up against the Stream by the strength of 4 or 500 Men, and let down in
the like manner, with many Ropes fastened to them, to prevent setting on the
Piles, or plunging, and they are guided by long Poles, with Iron Heads at the
end. The Chanel begins at Tum Cheu, about 2 Leagues and an half from Pekim,
where there is a River, with the Current of which, Vessels drive till near the
Sea, and then it falls into another, through which Vessels Sail, till they come
to the Chanel; and Sailing about 25 Leagues, a Temple presents it self, called
Fuen Hui Miao; or, The Temple of the Spirit that divides the Water; hither they
Row against the Stream, but when they come at the Temple they Row with the
Stream, for on the East Side, about half a days Journey is a large Lake between
high Mountains; this Water swells a great River that bent its course toward
the Sea on the East, but they stopped up the outlet, and with prodigious
labor cutting through the Mountain, opened a Canal by which they brought the
Water to the Temple; in that part they hollowed 2 other Canals, one toward the
South, and another toward the North, with so true a proportion and regular
Line, that the Waters coming to the middle before the Temple, take leave of
each other, one running to the North, and the other to the South in one and the
same Canal, which is very admirable, and discharges it self into a large rapid
River, called the Yellow River, the Water being so colored by the yellow Earth
on the Banks, and Gold colored Sand and Slime at the bottom; upon this River
they Sail 2 Days, and then entering another Pass to another Canal running
toward the City of Hoaingan, and running by and through many Cities, comes to
Yamcheu. The vast Wall of China that excludes the Tartars, is no less to be
looked on as a work of Wonder; it runs from East to West, and in length 405
Portuguese Leagues, making 33 Degrees 10 Minutes, reaching from the City of Cai
yean, Seated in the extremity of the Country, called Leao Tum, to that of
Canso, or Can cheu, Seated on the borders of the Province of Xensi in a
straight Line, for should the turnings and windings in the Mountains be
reckoned it would make much more; it is guarded by 1327 Towers and Fortresses;
the Wall is 2 Fathom thick, and 4 in height, built mostly of Stone, though in
some places Brick appears, where it is supposed to be mended or altered, so
that were it vigilently guarded, and no Treachery, which too often happens by
the Captains of the Watches, being bribed with part of the Plunder, the Tartars
would be too feeble to surmount it, for upon this Wall and Frontier only, there
are 90254 Men kept in Arms and Pay, and those that keep the Watch-Towers give
the Signal of the Enemies approach by a Flag in the day time, and in the Night
by Fire.

These are but part of the King's Forces, for the Auxiliaries that lie ready to
march to their assistance, are in a manner innumerable, for the Horse only
amount to 989167, and the Foot are many more, their Pay yearly amounting to
5034714 Livres, though they in some sort maintain themselves by their Industry,
and no doubt as great, if not a greater number guard on the other Borders, so
that there are several Millions in Pay, for in the Kingdom there are 2357
Fortified Places, beside a great many that are Garrisoned upon almost
inaccessible Mountains and Rocks, that being strong by nature, have no Walls.

In the 15 Provinces there are 332 Famous Bridges, 2096 Mountains famous for
their being cut into the shapes of Monsterous Idols, for their Fountains,
Minerals, or Fruits, their Waters, such as are Lakes full of Fish, hot
Fountains wonderfully Medicinal, large Navigable Rivers and Streams, are 1472.

There are 1099 pieces of Antiquity to be seen, as Statues, Paintings, and
curious Vessels; 1159 Towers and Triumphal Arches erected at Sundry times, to
the Memories of those that were renowned in War, Learning, or Virtuous Actions;
272 Public Libraries, stored with variety of Books, many of them covered with
Gold and Silver Plate, adorned with precious Stones.

There are yet remaining entire 709 Temples, which the Chinese have Erected at
several times to the Memory of their Ancestors, of curious Architecture, large
and beautiful, and the Names of those to whose Memory they were Erected affixed
on Pillars and in these the several Families of the deceased Assemble at a
prefixed Day, and prostrate themselves on the Ground, in token of Love and
Veneration; then they burn Incense, and afterward make a splendid Feast at
several Tables, richly set forth.

They account 480 Temples of Idols exceeding Rich and Magnificent, beside many
of lesser Note, attending on these are 300000 Bouzes, a kind of a Religious
Order amongst them, some Married, and others not permitted, besides a great
number that Travel up and down, called Licentiates, having their Licenses to
Authorize them from the Tribunal of the Ceremonies.

Their Mausoleums, or Tombs, are very stately, to the number of 680, besides
many of lesser Note; but they Bury their Dead after they have kept them as long
as they please without the Cities, according to the manner of the Eastern
Countries; their Coffins are very Rich, so that one of them sometimes costs
1000 Crowns. The Catacombs of the Grandees are stately Arched Vaults in
Mountains, or Plains, over which, when the Body is in, they raise a little
Mount, planting Fragrant Trees in good order on it: Before this they Erect a
large Altar of white pollished Marble, or Alleblaster, fixing Candlesticks, one
upon it, and one on each side. They Place Statues, or Figures, in Rows,
representing a History of the deceased's Actions, and are very curious Artists
in resembling Passions of Grief, Joy, Fear, etc. to the Life. The Chinese
reckon 3036 Men Famous for their Virtues and Valor; Two hundred and eight
Virgins, and Widows, Renowned for Piety, Chastety, etc. whose Memories are
Celebrated in their Stories, and Poesies; they are also honored with Titles,
Temples, Inscriptions, and Triumphal Arches.

There are in this Kingdom 32 Princes, or petty King's Palaces, resembling
that of the King's, but much less. The Cities are Governed by Mandarins, as I
before hinted; and when any one gets the King's Letter to the Tribunal to be
admitted, the Names of the Cities are Written on thin Boards which are cast
into a Vessel, and on their Knees they draw, and he whose Name comes up is
allotted the Government of that City; yet there is juggling in this, for the
Tables are so, where Money is given, that they seldom fail of a rich City,
though it is but for a set time, viz. 3 Years, least they should corrupt
Justice, or gain on the Affection of the People to raise Rebellion; however,
they are Reverenced like petty Kings, and abundance of Royal Hosteries are
built in Cities, and on the Roads, to entertain them in their Travels, at the
King's Charge, where every thing is in a Magnificent readiness, when they know
there is a Mandarin on the Road: There is also places for the Entertainment of
the Curriers, and to furnish them with fresh Horses.

The Mountains yield Gold and Silver, and therefore the Country is stored with
Treasure, though Gold indeed is more a Merchandise than a Coin amongst them;
the presents therefore that they make are excessive, as 10, 20, or 30000 Crowns
at a time. The King eats in Gold Plate, and all his Nobles, and those that are
invited, at a vast number of Tables in Silver and Porcelain, so that the
Furniture at a great Feast amounts to 5 or 6 Millions, for there are Cups set
with Diamonds, and other Stones of vast value; some are entire Stones, very
Rich, and the Noble imitate the Court, as far as their Ability will allow them,
they being very Rich, for they usually get in their 3 Years Government, as
Viceroys of Provinces, or Mandarins of Cities, a Million of Crowns; and those
that are of the Council of State, called Calaos; or, the upper Tribunals, much
more by Bribery; for though they protest against it, and there are severe Laws
in this Case, no Office passes the Seal without a considerable sum of Money
underhand.

There is in this Kingdom vast quantities of Copper, Tin, Iron, and other
useful Metals, of which they make great Guns, Idols, Statues, Dishes, Cups, and
other Things: their Workmanship is very fine; of Copper and Tin they make vast
quantities of Money, with little holes in the middle to string the pieces, and
so they pass as ready told, in 500, or 1000 on a String; and 1000 of their
Deniers is given for a Chinese Tuel, or Crown. Their Exchange is made in Bank,
or places appointed for that end; on one side this Money is the Name of the
Reigning Prince, and on the other that of the Tribunal that caused it to be
Coined. Their Gold and Silver is not properly to be called a Coin, as being
only cast into Ingots like Boats of different weights and value; some of those
of Gold are vallued at 20 Crowns, and those of Silver at half a Crown, and some
more.

When they bury their Dead they burn a great many gilded Ingots, which they
call Loans of Gold and Silver, vainly fancying the Ashes turns to Copper in the
other World, and serves their Friends to purchase Houses, Horses, and
Provision, likewise to bribe the evil Spirits that they should not injure them,
and that so the good Spirits may be Fee'd, to hasten their Transmigration,
suffering their Souls to enter into Men, and not into Beasts.

There is abundance of curious white Silk, and Wax in China, and by reason of
the vast Silk Manufactures made all over the Kingdom, the Ancients styled it
the Silken Kingdom, so that many Vessels and Caravans are loaded with it for
other Countries. Most of the Men, nay, the very Lackeys, and the Women all of
them wear Silk, and the richer sort have it Embroidered with Gold, Silver,
Pearl, and other Ornaments.

The fine Wax peculiar to China, is not made by Bees, but a little Fly as big
as a Flea lays an Egg that breeds a Worm, which piercing the Wax Trees to the
Pith it issues out and hangs upon the Branches like drops of Dew, and by the
Sun and Wind, is hardened and whitened, in such quantities, that it serves the
Court, the Nobility, and Temples, to make fine transparent Tapers.

Furs are in this Kingdom in vast quantities, and almost every one wears a
finer or coarser sort of them, as they are able, for the Linning of their
Garments, Seats Chairs, Couches, etc.

To mention the several sorts of Fruits and Provisions, would be almost
endless, they have almost all we meet with in Europe, and a large addition of
what we have not in variety of Fruit, especially of delicious taste. During 3
Months of Winter, they have vast store of Game, and on the Rivers they pitch
Nets 200 Yards long, and set dead Wild fowl on their feet, as if they were
alive, for stakes to decoy the living; as Ducks, Phesants, Wild Geess, etc. of
which, and other Fowl, so many are taken, that they are sold for little or
nothing. They have 3 sorts of Bears which they Hunt, one called the Man bear,
the other the Dog bear, and a third the Pig bear, because their Snouts and
Faces a little resemble these. Their Paws boiled and well ordered, are a great
dainty among the Chinese, and the Tartars much admire their Fat, which they
eat: These are scarce, but for Deer, wild Boars, Ellands, Hares, Conies, and
the like, they are in vast plenty in most of the Provinces.

After all this, the Weather is piercing cold in the Winter Season, and very
hot in the Summer; so that in the former, they keep Fires in Stoves, and in the
latter, retire the better sort into cool Vaults and Cellers. Their Firing is a
kind of a Stone-coal dug in the Mountains, and sometimes in the Plains, except
in Woody Countries, and they are at great charge in Carriage: It gives as
violent a heat as Charcoal, and the heat is very lasting. They sleep on Mats,
or Carpets, and in the Daytime sit together in clusters on them, the better to
preserve the Heat, for the Colds are sometimes very Excessive; the richer sort
have Beds, and the Stoves are under the floors of their Rooms, which sometimes
by reason of the excessive Heat take Fire, burning the House, and surprising in
the sudden Flames, all that are sleeping in it.

The Chinese that they may be Magnified by Strangers, take a pride to be very
civil to them, and give them the upperhand at their Feasts, seating themselves
according to their Degrees; yet the Eldest give place to those who come from
the remotest parts.

When any Ambassador arrives from the Day, his Embassy is allowed till his
departure; he is furnished with all manner of Provisions, Horses, Letters,
Barks, and lodged in the Royal Palace, where every two days the King sends him
a sumptuous Entertainment of all sorts of Varieties. They take great care, and
a kind of pride in their Apparel, the poor among them going very Neat and
Decent. The learned Men affect a grave Gesture, and count it a sin to appear in
any thing contrary to the Rules of decent Behavior and Urbanity.

The Women affect Modesty, Chastity and Honesty, keeping themselves covered, so
that when they present any thing to their nearest Relations, they lay it down,
their Hands being covered with their Sleaves, and retire with Silence: They
rarely stir abroad, and are exceeding Submissive and Obedient toward their
Husbands, there being nothing, they command them, though never so difficult,
but they willingly Enterprise.

Upon their Festival Days, they have a great number of Illuminations, and
Fireworks, representing diverse Creatures and Figures in the Air; so that on a
Hill at a distance, one would think all the Cities were on Fire. The Lanthorns
in the Palace, and Royal Halls, are vastly Big, viz. 20 Cubits, and sometimes
more in Diameter, holding 100 Lamps, or Tapers, so that they cast a glorious
Light, and Figers turning in them by the force of the Smoke, represent in swift
motions many curious Actions, as Fights, Dances, Hunting, Hawking and the like.

CHAP. XIX. Travels through Tartary to Muscovy, and what is observable on the
way in those vast desert Countries; the Nature of the People; their manner of
living, with a particular Description of Astrakan, and the Sturgeon fighting in
the River Volga.
HAving visited China, and learned what I thought convenient, for it is not
good to be too Inquisitive, for fear of being taken as a Spy. I began to be
weary of the Fatigue, and of so long an absence from my Native Country,
wherefore I resolved to take the first opportunity to return home, and it was
not long e're Fortune befriended me to pass by Land; (for the way by the
Caspian Sea is very dangerous, for that little Sea, or rather great Lake, is
full of Flats and Shallows, very tempesteous in most Seasons, and has a great
number of Rocks in it, with dangerous Eddies, or Whirl-pools, by reason about
100 large Rivers discharge themselves violently into it;) for there was a
Caravan going from Pekim to Bokara, and in it I entered my self with all
Necessaries for my Journey, and in 15 days the Weather being very fair, and our
Stages large, we reached Soezi, the last Town of China, without the great Wall;
and here I stored my self with abundance of good Ruburb that grows in their
Gardens, which stood me in much stead when I came into the cold Countries; and
from hence we journeyed mostly North-west, and the principal Towns in our way,
was Baretola, Kechemire, Kiboal, Samark, and some others, which by reason of my
Indisposition on the Road, I shall not undertake to describe. Let it suffice
then, that the Tartars inhabit mostly this vast Track of Land; in some places
very Mountainous, in others, vast Deserts and Forest, the ground Sandy and
Stony for the most part, and all along I could see Snow. On the tops of the
high Mountains, though in the beginning of Summer, the People are Rude and
Simple, most of them living by feeding Cattle, which they drive from one place
to another, carrying their Wives, Children, and all they have along with them;
pitching Tents in their Encampments, especially where they find pleasant
Springs, and stay there till the Grass is Eat up, and then they remove: The
Tartars are a very numerous People, and spread a vast track of Land in Asia and
Europe, and Principally they are thus divided, viz. The Precopenses, Asialica,
Antiqua and Cathur from their Principal Provinces, which may be termed, though
there are other numerous little Divisions too many here to mention; and though
they are a cruel kind of People, our Caravan met with no onset by the way,
though we see numerous Hoards of them on either hand. As we see their Houses
are mean and inconsiderable, and their Diet mostly raw Flesh in many places,
and above all, they are great lovers of the Fat of Bears, yet they give not
their Minds so much to Robberies as the Arabs, or other untractable Nations,
because few of them know the use of it, or at least have no great esteem for
Money; some are Idolars, and some Mahometans.

This Track abounds in Furs, and there are some Mines of Gold and Silver found
in many parts, but they little regard Diging it; and so barbarous are they,
that many of them dress their Children at great Feasts, to entertain their
Guess, as the choicest of Dainties; nor do they refrain from Feastings on their
Dead: There are a great many strong Stags and Hearts I saw in my Passage, which
they use to Ride, carry Burdens, and draw their Wagons, or Sledges.
Mulbury-Trees grow in some places along the Roads, especially bordering on
China, which are laden in their proper Seasons with Silkworms that produce much
Silk, but they little regard it, it being mostly gathered by the Banians, who
live scattered among them, who send it to Persia and other Countries, and have
rich Merchandise in return; for here the coldness of the Country obliges them
mostly to habit themselves in Furs, and thick course Cloathings. They trade
much in White and Black Fox Sables, Heart and Fawn Skins; they have vast
Forests of Black Wood, wherein many huge Bears lurk to surprise Travelers,
which made us keep close together when we passed such places, and have our Eyes
about us, as well as our Firearms in readiness; and so keeping the Road,
though not without many turnings, and ruged ways, when we had passed Samark,
and it brought us to Bockar, where I staid some time to refresh me, for I had
been ill of a Flux by the way, which still held me so, that I took no great
pleasure to make any curious remarks here, and had I done it, as I was
informed, there is nothing worthy of Note in the Town, the Houses being plain
and low Built, the Streets crooked, and no Antiquities memorable. Here the
Moscovites and Yousbecs Tartar are driving a considerable Trade together in
Furs, and other Commodities.

Having here pretty well recovered, by the assistance of a German Physician, I
found in this place, I thought, a convenient opportunity to pass to Astrakan,
which in a few days, I had, passing part of the way in Sledges, drawn by Hearts,
that run with them very swiftly; and an other part, by taking Horse, there
being a kind of a little Caravan, made up by the meeting of diverse Travelers.
The Muscovites use Sledges, that in the Winter they slide swiftly over the Snow
and Frozen Rivers, having Beds in them, and covered over with Tilts like
Wagons, so that they are a warm Convenience; notwithstanding in Winter,
Travelers have been Frozen to Death in them.

Astrakan is Seated on the Great and Famous River Volga, which at 70 Mouths, or
Channels, discharges its Water into the Caspian Sea, and so forcibly, that it
keeps it stream unmixed with the Salt Water for many Leagues. In this River,
the Muscovites have a great Fishery for Sturgeon, which they catch in abundance
very large, so that the Eggs sometimes found in one of them, may weigh 100
Weight: As for the Flesh, they pickle up and send it into diverse parts of
Europe, some they press to make Oil, and the Eggs they salt to make Ragous to
serve them instead of Butter, which in Lent is denied them, and this is the
Cavere so much used in many Countries. In the Summer, there are so many
Muskela's, or Sting Gnats, about this River, that Passengers are miserably
Stung and Blistered by them, though they wrap themselves up, and defend them
all they can.

We were forced to stay before this City, till we obtained leave of the
Governor for admittance; which after a little attendance, was granted: It is
Seated in 48 Degrees North Latitude, in an Island of the Volga, 13 Leagues from
the Mouth of the River, and appartains to the Great Czar of Muscovy. It is
encompassed with a double Wall, without any other Fortification, except some
few Towers, half Musket Shot one from an other. The Great Guns planted there
are fine pieces, and about 80 in number, it stands low on gravelly Ground, so
that the heat is excessive in Summer, and the People are constrained to Bath
themselves in cool Water in Troffs placed in Vaults; yet the Soil produces good
Fruit of sundry kinds, they have store of excellent Mellions, especially the
Karpous, or Water Mellions, their Rhinds Green, but of a Rosey Red within, of a
pleasant taste, cooling and delicate to quench Thirst. There are diverse sorts of
Grapes, of which they make a kind of pleasant Wine, but it soon Sowers: All
this while, no private Person dares touch a Grape till the Governor has made
choice of them, and other Fruits, for the Czar's Table. There are diverse
Nations inhabiting here, drawn by the Convenieney of Trade, and the sweetness
of the Air. The Armenians entirely possess one Suburb, and the Nogais Tartars
an other, which resemble a City, being Fortified with Wooden Ramports, and the
Deputy Governor Commands there; within the Enclosure stands a pretty
convenient Mosque, but the Houses for the most part are made of Bullrushes, of
which there are about 2000. They keep a Market in the Morning in their Quarter,
and the Mascovites keep theirs in the Evening, in the middle of their City; yet
this City is often insulted by the Calmuc Tartars, which constrains the
Inhabitants for their better Repose, to send them Presents, which the Tartars
call a Tribute of Bread, Fish, Flesh, and other Provisions, and they drive a
Trade with them for Furs and Horses, of which they bring great plenty; besides
the Muscovites are many times obliged to them, for their assisting them with
Men in the time of their Wars.

CHAP. XX. Travels in Muscovy, and Observations of what is worthy of Note; as
to the Towns, Rivers, Mountains, Commodities, Heats and Colds, Laws, Religion,
Manners and Customs of the People, etc. and from thence through Poland and
Germany into Holland.
HAving a desire to see Muscovy, and particularly Moscow, the chief City, I
made it my business to find an opportunity to leave Astrakan, and pass thither.

As for this vast Country, it is bounded on the West with Lithuania and
Livonia; on the East, with Tartary; on the North, with the Frozen Ocean; on the
South, with the Caspian Sea, the Ottoman Empire, and Paulus Maeotis. It is
branched with many large Navigable Rivers, as the Tanais, Borhistenes, Volga,
etc. It is divided into 9 Provinces, viz. Novog, Radia, Valademira, Plescovia,
Rhesen, Servia, Parmia, Condoria, Petrosa and Muscovy, though from this last,
the whole Track takes its Denomination.

Toward the Southern parts, it is pretty plentiful of many things of Value,
yielding Corn, Cattle, Furs, Flax, Hemp, Wax, Honey, etc. but the Northern
parts lie very cold, the Earth being so long covered with Snow, that the Ground
is chilled, and produces not its Fruits kindly; yet Furs are gotten off of
White, Black and Red Foxes, Gray and Red Squrrils, Minever Ermins, Wolverin, or
wild Dogs. The Woods which are generally Fur and Birch, abound in Ravenous
Creatures, particularly, Wolves and Bears, which in the extremity of Weather,
pinched by Cold and Hunger, comes in great Clusters to the Villages near the
Forest, and puts the Inhabitants to flight many times, killing and devouring
them and their Cattle, so that at such times, by way of prevention, they are
forced to be on their Guard. But as to these, and other matters of the like
nature, I shall take them in course, as my Travels lay in this Country, which
is of vast extent from North to South, if you measure from Cola to Astrakan,
which bends somewhat Eastward, which is reckoned the length of it is
accounted 4260 verst or ruff Miles, though one of them makes not above 3
quarters of our Miles though Northward. Beyond Cola, there is a large Country
unto the River Tromschua, that runeth 1000 verst Miles, but the ridged Winter
Frost renders it not much inhabited, and little fruitful in Summer. As for the
Breadth, if one goes from that part of the Czar's Teritories, that lies
farthest West, on the Narve side, to the utmost parts of Siberia Eastward,
where are diverse Garrisons, it is 4200 verst Miles: But to come near as a
Traveller, considering how to get the safest and easiest way to Moscow, it
being in June, when the Rivers were open, I was persuaded to Embark on the
Volga, which I did with a Merchant of that City, who showed me a great deal of
kindness, the Vessel being his own; for from Astrakan to Moscow, it is
accounted 18000 verst Miles. We sailed till we came to the Mouth of the River
Cama, which discharges its Waters into the River Volga, and so made our way by
Water and Land to Cazan, which the Muscovites, a few Ages since took from the
Tartars, and is the Metropolis of a Kingdom. It is a City of considerable Tade,
it was formerly walled with Timber and Earth, but upon annexing the whole
Kingdom to the Crown of Muscovy, the great Czar Vasiliwich walled it with
Freestone. The Building is not Stately, yet very Commodious, for the
Inhabitants, who are a mixed People, as they are on all the Borders; we lodged
and refreshed our selves here, and passed in a 11 days through a fine Country,
well Watered, and very Fruitful, to a considerable fair Town, which we reached
in 10 days, called Nisnovogrod, where Occa falls into the Volga. This is the
head of a Shire, or County of that Name, and from hence by Rezan, and so
passing a tedious Journey through many difficult ways, we came to the River
Moscow, on whose Banks the City of Moscow stands. I should have told you I left
my Merchant Trading up the River Camaon, on whose Banks are several and pretty
Towns, but he took care to provide me a Guide, who accompanied me to Moscow,
the nearest way over the Land, and to help me to Imbark where the Rivers
offered to lessen our Journey, for I did not think fit to fall directly down
the Volga into the Caspian Sea, which would little have furthered me.

Being arrived at the head City of Moscow, I entered on the River side, and
finding some English there, I was not long destitute of a Habitation, and being
Evening when I entered, I thought fit to rest that Night, and the next day went
to take a view of the City, which is very large. The Form of it is in a manner
round, with three strong Walls, circling the one within the other, the Streets
lying pretty commodiously within all the Heart or Center enclosed by the inmost
Wall, is called the Czar's Castle, or Palace, very large in Circle; the Houses
of ordinary Persons are but indifferently built with Timber, Loam and Mortar,
covered with Boards or Bark of Trees; but the Houses of the Nobles are pretty
Sately. The Churches are many, and they are Adorned on the tops with Globes of
Copper, and gilded Spires. That of Blaneshina or Blessedness, is of curious
Architecture, after the Fashion of the Greek Churches, whose Tenants in
Religion, the Muscovites devoutly hold; the Church of St. Michael is nothing
inferior to it, but above all, the Cathedral called, Our Ladies Church, is
large and stately; in it the Czars are Crowned by the Patriarch. The Market is
kept in the Castle, or within the inward Wall, unless the River be Frozen over,
and then it is partly kept thereon, and sometimes altogether; so that upon the
Ice bareing all sorts of Carriages, there appears to be a kind of a Fair,
because the People bring vast quantities of Goods from remote places on their
Heads. The Castle is on a rising Hill, well Watered and Fortified, and the
Princes's Palace very conveniently contrived, but his Attendance upon public
Occasions, as at the Audience of Ambassadors, and the like, is more
Magnificent, they being in great Numbers mostly Arrayed in Cloth of Gold and
Silver, rich Furs, Velvets, Pearls and precious Stones; Battle Axes of Gold are
carried before the Czar, and his Robes exceeding rich of Goldsmiths Work,
poudered with precious Stones and Imbroderies of Pearl; their Feasts are served
up in Dishes of Gold, the meanest Vessel being Silver, and both kinds very
numerous. The Diet is choice, and well dressed, according to the Russian
Fashion; their Drink is Wine, Mead, and sometimes strong Aquavitae, which
among them is ^alled Russ Wine.

In this City are still to be seen some Ruins of the Walls the several Fires
have made, for I was told it contained 41500 Houses before the Crim Tartars
reduced it to Ashes, Anno 1571. and in it destroyed 80000 People, and besides
the Houses, 1500 convent Churches and Chapples. The Poles burnt it Anno 1611.
and Anno 1676. an Accidential Fire happened Burning 20 days, but now Guards are
appointed, to take care of Fire, and have Sallaries allowed them. There is one
thing Admirable, which is a Bell raised in a large Tower; this Bell is 24 foot
in height, and I was told, though it has been chipped off some Tuns of Mettle
to make it ring better, that it weighs 176 Tun, and the Clapper 4 Tun, which is
pulled by a Rope to sound it on particular occasions, for it cannot be raised
by reason of its vast weight.

Provisions are very plentiful here, as Fish, Fowl, Venison, Hares, and other
Dainties; for the Woods, Rivers, and Lakes, which are very many and large,
abound with these, and diverse other useful Creatures, and in some parts of
Moscovy, they draw their Sledges with Rain-deer, who do the Office of Horses,
and run more swiftly. In my passing Tartary, I observed the like; they also
used there great Dogs for the same purpose, and on the Borders, I met several
riding on Elks.

I saw in this City many Bath-stones, and other Stones, which in the Winter are
used in all places, which prevents their being pinched by the ridged Frosts,
which are extreme from October till March, accompanied with vast Snows, so that
in that Season, there is little stiring abroad; for the Air is so piercing,
that many have been stifled with it going out of their Houses, especially too
early; and they report in that Season, it is frequent to find People frozen to
Death in the Streets, and many are brought in Dead in Sledges frozen, though
they have Beds there to lie on, and Tilt Coverings of Furskins over them; and
for this time all the Rivers and Lakes are locked up, the Ice usually a Yard
thick or more, yet they have store of Grain, as Wheat, Rye, Oats, Maize, etc.
Plums, Pears, Cherries, black and red, Hurtle Berries, Apples, Rasps,
Strawberries, and other delicate Fruits; for so the Almighty Wisdom has
ordained it, that when the time of Thaw comes, which is usually the end of
March, the Snow being cleared off the Ground, after that becoming dry in 14
days, Flowers, and all other products of the Earth sprout out and flourish
incredibly; the Woods show a pleasing Green, and the Birds every where warble
Mellodiously, especially Nightingals, who Sing more distinct and clear than any
where else. The Storks busy themselves in Building in ruined Edifices, Hawks of
all kinds in the Rocks and Sea-shoar-cliffs, Eagles in the rockey Mountains
more Northernly; the Hare in Winter is White, sheds her Coat, and becomes the
color of ours. The Lakes and Rivers are stocked with Swans, and variety of
other Water Fowl, so that the face of things seem admirably changed, and the
Country is so pleasant, that those who should see it in Winter how Dismal, and
in a manner Desolate it appears, (and knows no more) would conclude it
impossible, or take it for quite an other Climate. Therefore I took my
opportunity of Traveling here, whilst it was seasonable, for the dreadful
Stories I heard of Winter, made me sometimes almost fancy I had an Ague in my
Bones at the Relation of them; but the Muscovites are hardy, answerable in a
good degree to the Climate, and are more patient of Cold and Hunger than
others, by which means they have the advantage of their Enemies, in firing them
out by Winter Camps, and other Fateigues: For a Russ Soldier told me, he had
often made his Bed in the Snow without any Tent, only hanging up his Mantle
against that part, from whence the Weather drove, and turning his back to the
Wind, his Drink being the cold Stream, with a little Oat-meal dusted into it;
and the Forage for his Horse, consisted in that Season, of Twigs and Bark of
Trees, and yet performed well the service undertaken; others to harden and
inure themselves to the Cold the better, go abroad Hunting the Beasts that bare
the Furs, have come sweating out of their Bath Stoves in the ridged Season, and
leaped Naked into a River, where the Ice has been broken; and it is a remedy
among them against the Numbness of their Limbs, occasioned by cutting Winds, to
roll themselves in Snow; yet for all this, there are many tender among them,
that cannot endure these hardships.

The Women are much confined at Home, and very Obliging and Obedient to their
Husbands, yet so much Heat as they endure, being closed up in Winter, tending
their Fires, makes them but of a bad Complexion, yet they mend their Faces by
their Husbands allowance, with a Red and White Paint, but easily discernable;
yet being the Fashion, is not minded, and especially, among the Vulgar: If a
Man sometimes beats not his Wife, she will be Sullen, and fancy he loves her
not, and they have a Custom, when they first pretend Courtship, among other
Presents, to send a Whip to show the Woman what she has to trust to, if she
prove Disobedient, and this they take more kindly than the rest; but I find
these matters, though proper to be known, yet some digression from Travels,
have drawn me to launch too far this way, therefore now I come something more
home to the purpose.

The next chief City of Moscovy is Novogrod, pleasantly Seated, and a place of
considerable Trade; the Building mostly of Wood, as generally the Building is
in all this Country, the Streets in many places not paved, but planked with
Furr, jointed and laid in so, that it shoots the Water off commodiously; it is
the head of a Province or Shire, where the Court of Justice do determine
matters, is held by a Duke and Dyack, the Latter acting in the nature of a
Secretary; and these Courts are held in all chief Cities, but an Appeal lays
from them to the Office of the four Chetfrids at Moscow, who are chief Judges
of the four Quarters, or Divisions of the whole Country of Muscovy, each
holding an Office for his District or Quarter, and all the Shires or Provinces
apply themselves to the Office of that Lord of the Chetfrid they are under,
then the matter is laid before the Czar's Council, and what they Determine, is
sent back to be put in Execution.

Vologda is an other principal City, seated on a River of that Name, where is a
great Trade for Furs, Hides, Tallow, Corn and other Merchandise, bringing in a
considerable Revenue in Customs and other Taxes to the Prince, who has a part
in this an other places, for almost every thing that is sold, so that his
Incoms are very great, accounted no less than 13 Millions of Rubbles a Year,
and a Rubble is reckoned according to Exchange, a Mark English.

Voldomir is an other City of considerable Trade, and gives name to a Province;
it is built very regular, and pretty well Fortified, and is watered by a
considerable Stream, at leastways very near it: But besides Moscow, the Towns
or Cities of chief strength, are Vobsko and Smolensko, Cazan and Astrakan lying
on the Borders, and defending the Country against the Inroads or Incursions of
the Tartars. Jaruslave, an other fair City for its commodious Situation on a
high Bank of the Volga, is in great Esteem: The Country about it is exceeding
Fruitful in Corn-pasture, Fruit Trees, and has a great Fishery on the River. In
this City, they say, dwelt the Russ Prince Vlademia, Sir-named, Jaruslave, who
at the Mediation of Sneno, the Dane, married the Daughter of our King Harold.

Perislave is a considerable City, commodiously built on the Banks of a great
Lake, yielding in it abundance of Fish, and enriching it by Trade from such
Towns as border on that Lake, or the Rivers that fall into it.

Rostove may be numbered among the rest; for here is a great Trade for Furs,
and other Commodities, bought up to disperse into other parts of Europe, and
Merchants come hither as far as Persia, some say from China, beyond the great
Wall built to exclude the roving Tartars, of which I have already spoke of.
There are a great number of other Towns, the Country being mostly to the
Southern parts full of them, but not so considerable as these I have named; for
the Houses are of Wood, most without any Lime or Stone, built very close and
warm, with Fur-trees plained and piled over one another, fastened together with
Notches or Dents at every Corner; and between the Timber for warmness they
stuff in Moss, and the Houses have Stairs leading out of the Yard into the
Chamber, and this manner of Building seems more agreeable to the Country than
any other, as being far warmer than Stone or Brick in the extremity of Winter,
and in Summer, the Moss being pulled out of the Chinks, lets in the cool
breathing Air to refresh them; and of this Timber, they have such plenty, that
for a small matter a House may be Built with many Appendages, or Conveniences
for Shops, Merchants, Warehouses, or private Families, for 20 or 30 Rubbles,
or little more; and when the Houses fall to decay, they store them considerably
with Fireing and other Necessaries, as Perma, Weclinda, Totam, Kentisma,
Solovetsky, Ocona, Bombasey, and None-nosks, are famous for their Salt Pits,
where great quantities are made, and out of which the Czar has a considerable
Revenue, as 3 Russ on every hundred Weight.

The Rivers that water this Country, besides what I have named, are Wichida, a
long and large River which rises out of the Country of Permia, and falls into
the Volga. Duna, that empties it self into the Baltic Sea, by the Town of
Riga. Onega, that falls into the Bay of Solovetsko, ninety Verst from St.
Nicholas. This River below the Town of Cargo Polia, meets with Volock, that
falls into the Finland Sea, by the Town of Yama, so that from the Port of St.
Nicholas, into the Finland Sea, one may go by Water to Suchana. This River
flows into Duyna, and so into the North Sea; there are abundance of Fish in
it, and in the open Season it is in a manner covered with Waterfowl. Duyna is
many hundred Miles long, which falls Northward into the Bay of St. Nicholas,
a Bay so Named by one Chancelour, an English Man, who first found a North-East
passage to Russia, in 1553. and called the Bay St. Nichola's Bay, from an Abbey
Dedicated to that Saint standing near it; and upon notice of his arrival, was
sent for with great Joy by the Czar to Moscow, whether he went on Sledges 1500
Miles, and was received in great Joy, and highly Feasted with great State and
Magnificence, the Court appearing in all its Splendour overjoyed now in hopes of
an open Trade by Sea, for before they were obliged to carry their Merchandise
through the Hastill Territories of Poland, Sweeden, and other Countries, to
ship them for these parts; and hereupon Ambassadors were sent to England, and a
free Trade granted with large Privileges, whereupon a Company now called the
Muscovy Company, settled Factories at Archangel, and other Towns adjacent,
having Lands allowed them, and an Agent, or Consul permitted to reside at
Moscow, though since the Dutch, and other Nations, have found the way, and
interloped upon them: This Bay lies in 64 Degrees North Latitude, yet the
Country about it is very pleasant in the open Season, and in the River stands
an Island called Rose Island, where are Roses Damask, Red Violets, and
abundance of pleasant Flowers and Fruits. There is a Monastery near it of 700
Monks, who live after the Greek manner, and have large In-coms, for they
receive rent for the Lands lying many Miles round them. However, there is in
this Country many deserts and wast places, especially to the Northward, with
rockey Shoars and craggy Mountains; but on the latter, they breed Goats, and a
kind of wild Horse, Volverins, or wild Dogs, but the latter mostly in the Woods
near the Rocks, they find a Fish called Morso, a Sea Monster, who by the help
of his Teeth, clambers up to get his prey of Eggs that the Wildfowl lay in the
Pits, and hollow places; his Teeth are about two foot long and better for use
than Ivory, of which they make Knives and Sword halfs, etc. They fancy that in
pursuing these on the Ice, and the Flakes breaking away, some of their People
were driven by the Currants and Winds on the coast of America, and stocked in a
great length of time that large fourth part of the World, because there is some
resemblance between them, but I fancy this opinion Groundless. They Hunt
likewise the Seals on the Ice, and kill them by striking them on their Noses
with Clubs, and make good Merchandise of their Skins, and the Oil they get from
them.

As for the Nobility of Muscovy, they are fourfold; The First are called
V^^^n^y Knazey, and these are of chief Authority, as being the Ancient
Nobility, that is, exempt or privileged Dukes.

The second are the Bojazens, such as the Czar honors, besides their
Nobility with the Title of Counselors.

The third are the Vayavodey, or such as have been Generals of Armies, or done
some great Exploits for their Country.

The Fourth and lowest degree are such as have the Title of Knazey, or Dukes,
but descend from younger Brothers of the chief Houses; all of these have
privileges suitable to their Degrees, and make a considerable Figure.

The Parliament is held at Moscow, composed of the Clergy and Nobility,
summoned by the Czar, who sits in his Throne in that Assembly, and others
according to their Degree. Then the Dyack, or Secretary, reads what is purposed
by the Prince to be propounded to them; the Patriarch, with his Bishops, and
other Clergy, are hereupon required to give their Opinions first in order, who
generally consent to what is propounded, and the Nobles agree with them, as
thinking such Holy Men cannot Err; then is it drawn up and sent to be
proclaimed as standing Law in the principle Cities and head Towns of the
Empire. The Moscovites, as to their Religion are Christians of the Greek
Church, very superstitious in their Worship; for they often in their Devotion
beat their Foreheads against the floors of their Churches, till they are
Swelled, and sometimes Bloody; they pay a Veneration to Saints, and
particularly, to St. Nicholas, whom they style their Patron, they Reverence the
Virgin Mary, St. Peter, and others. They have the Cross and Holy Water in high
esteem among them, and their Bishops go in Procession to hollow the Rivers once
a Year, at which time the People strive for the Water; many leap into it, and
dip their Infants, though the weather be extreme cold: This Water so Hollowed,
is likewise given to the Sick, with a fancy it will restore them, or by
cleansing, make them fit for an other World. They keep four Lents, and then
they abstain from strongs Liquors, and all gross sort of Food, as Flesh, etc.
they observe certain Vigils, watching in their Churches by Night, repeating
Arisons, and bowing their Foreheads to the floor a certain number of times.

Their Marriages are celebrated as ours, but with some odd different
Ceremonies, viz. The Bride stoops down and knocks her Head against the
Bridegrooms Show, in token of her Submission and Obedience, and the Friends of
the Bride bow to him; then they break Bread and Eat it among them, intimating
that by this Marriage, the Friends on either side are united as the crumbs of
Bread were in the Loaf, and that they are to account themselves as one Man, and
one Family, etc.

The Funerals of their Dead are very solemnly performed; they Wash and Apparel
the Body very neatly, then are their Mourners appointed for some days to Howl
over it, and often to demand what was the occcasion it died, seeing it wanted
nothing of Wordly Goods, as Meat, Drink, Riches, etc. naming the sorts and
kinds, and then set up a hideous Lamentation, much like the wild Irish: If it
be in the open Weather, it is put into a Grave in a few days, but in the hard
Weather, when the Ground cannot be dug, they pile the Bodies up in a House,
they call God's House, and when the Season is practicable, every one fetches
away his Dead, and buries it.

The Muscovites are generally very Corpulent, and of a large size, strong, and
of late grown Dexterous in the feats of Arms, particularly Firearms; they have
abundance of great Ordinance, some carrying Bullets two foot Diameter. They are
courteous to Strangers, unless they get in Drink, and then they are very Rude
and Mischievious; and this they often do, for the Men and Women are excessive
Drinkers, so that many have been Murdered by them in their drunken Revels;
before Dinner they usually drink a Cup of Aquavitae, which they say, gets them
a good Appetite, and after Dinner carouse stoutly of Mead, and other strong
Liquors, and then ^o to sleep on Benches.

The better sort wear exceeding Rich Garments, as Scarlet or Velvet lined with
Furs down to their Ancles, loose like the Greeks, and under them Vests or
Wastcoats of Cloth of Gold or Silk Imbroidered; the Scull of the 12 Caps
Imbroidered with Gold, Silver or precious Stones, according as they are able,
and over it a Cap or Bordering of Sables, Ermin, Minever, or the like: the
Women, unless Head attire, are clothed almost like the Men, with open Sleeves
down to their Fingers; they wear Girdles Imbroidered, or Plated with Gold and
Silver, but with the poor Mousack, or Country Peasant, though he keeps the
Fashion it is as hard as with us; his Garments are course Cloth, or Sheepskin,
with the Wool on, but every one has a differently suiting to Winter and Summer,
for in the Latter Season it is very hot, more then commonly in England, yet it
lasts but June, July, and August. They much delight in Music, though it be but
Indifferent, for I heard nothing like that of other nations whilst I remained
amongst them; as for Learning the lower degrees affect it not, addicting
themselves to Husbandry, and Handicrafts; very obedient they are to their
Prince, never disputing his Commands, or Injunctions, what ever they be, paying
their Taxes and Customs, though somewhat heavy, very cheerfully. If in a Law
controversy the Judge cannot decide it, he demands if they will kiss the Cross
on their Affirmation, or denial; if the Defendant does it, he is acquitted of
his Debt, or Injury done; if both require it, then they draw Lots, and he that
has the better Lot, is only allowed it, and concluded to be in the right. But
in Criminal matters they use Tortures, and those very severe ones, to extort
confessions, but if the party hold out against them he is acquitted. They have
one sort of Execution very odd, which is, by putting Criminals under the Ice to
be smothered in the Waters, but cannot be done at all times, wherefore they
have many more, as Hanging, and the like.

These are the Principal matters I observed, or was Informed of in this
Country, worthy to be placed in a History of this Nature; and now fearing to be
Winter locked after my having been in so many warm Regions, I bethought me of
Removing nearer home, because the cold Season was approaching, wherein I was
very sensible, it would be very Incommodious for a Stranger to travel in these
parts, and therefore I took an opportunity of a Caravan going for Poland, part
of which Country I passed, but had little or no time to take a survey of it,
only thus much I shall say in General. The Borhistenes bounds it from the
Muscovite Empire on the East, on the West it has the Vistual, on the North the
Baltic Sea and Sinus Trinitus, on the South Hungary; and is divided into 10
Provinces, viz. Luconia, Lithunia, Vollina, Samogita, Pedelia, Russia, Nigra,
Podlasia, Mosovia and Poland; and the Latter giving the Country its generally
accepted Name. These Provinces are Branched with several Navigable Rivers, as
Vistua, Raben, Bog, Mimel; its Metropolis is Cracow, or Craconia, where usually
the King has his Residence. It is an Elective Kingdom, and at present the Regal
Lot by free choice of the Nobility and Gentry, is fallen on the Vallian and
Renowned Duke of Saxony, who is crowned King of Poland, and has received the
Homage of the greater part of the Poles. Cracow is Situate on the Banks of the
River Vistua, Navigable 400 Miles, being as it were Encompassed with distant
mountains, and fortified with strong Walls; the Buildings are very fair. This
Country produces Tar, Rosin, Pitch, Wax, Honey, Barley, Oats, Amber, Tallow,
Hides, Minerals, and other Commodities; and therein by Trading are found the
Commodities of diverse other Nations: we stayed not here, but passing some other
Province Entered Germany, by the Way of Hungary, Austria, etc.

This Famed Empire is bounded on the North with Denmark, and the Danish Seas;
on the East with Prussia, Poland and Hungary; on the South with the Alps; on
the West with Flanders, Holland, etc. The Cities and Towns of this Empire may
be properly divided into 3 parts, as first, the Hans Towns, that enjoy large
Previledges and Immunities, about 70 in Number. 2. Those called Imperial
Cities, by reason of their great Privileges above the rest, in Coining Money,
bargaining, acknowledgement of Subjection, unless to the Emperor, whom they
acknowledge their Protector, and pay him Annual Tribute so. And 3dly. those
under the Electoral Princes, which are commonly called Principalities; the
chief Rivers are the Danube, and Rhine; the first runs about 1500 Miles, and
receives 58 Navigable Rivers to swell its Stream, and at last falls into the
Black Sea: the second passes through Germany and Belgia 800 Miles, and falls into
the German Ocean.

This large Country produces Silver Mines, Copper, Lead, Tin, Iron, Corn, Wine,
Alum, Quick Silver, Linen, Woollen, Linnen-Stuffs, Silks, store of Cattle,
and many other Commodities? and from hence by Land and Water I reached the Low
Countries, and briefly, I so directed my way, that I came to Amsterdam, the
chief trading City in the Province of Holland. It is seated on the River Tay,
which on the North side of it, flows like a large Sea; when on the South the
River Amster running through 3 Lakes, enters its Streets, and falls into
the River Tay; and by the Addition of a new City to the old, it is become very
Commodious, and Strongly fortified; and in it are to be found the Commodities
of almost all Nations, though the Country produces nothing very considerable of
its own, but these things come by Navigation, for most of the Inhabitants are
Merchants, who is Goods are brought by Vessels to their Doors, and Warehouses;
and the People are generally Frugal, Industruous and Rich.

CHAP. XXI. A Voyage from Amsterdam in Holland, to Cales in the Spanish
Dominion, and Thence to America; giving an Account of what happened on the Sea,
and in some Islands, touched at, etc.
BEing at Amsterdam I began seriously to consider of my Travels, and whilst I
Ruminated on many things, a strange fancy came into my Head, that I had not
completed my first undertaking, in visiting the several Parts of the World,
because I had not been in America; though the fatigues and dangers I had run
through might have been a sufficient Motive to have put a stop to my further
Progress in strange Countries, and give me satisfaction enough to have returned
home; but the report of the Golden Mountains, and other things, egged me on,
made me seek for an opportunity to pass to Cales, where I doubted not but by
one means or other, to get a Passage into the Spanish Indies, for that was it I
Aimed at; for the other I understood are little considerable, as to Travelers,
and have nothing Extraordinary to be found in them, and besides are mostly very
well known to my Countrymen: therefore in describing New England, Virginia,
Barbados, Jamaica, etc. I should have furnished their Curiosity with nothing
that is rare, and new to them. I had not waited a Week before an opportunity
offered, and I Embarked with such necessaries, as I had procured. Entering the
Bay of Biscay, we were taken with a violent Storm, and sprung our Mizen; it
held us for 24 Hours, so that every moment we thought we should become a prey
to Neptune's Watery fry, and this Storm was more terrible, and threatened more
danger than any I had seen before, which made me repent my attempting so
rashly, as thinking God was angry with me for my presumption, and then
concluded if I could get safe ashore I would rest quiet, with what I had seen
and felt; the Storm at last blew over, and then a fresh gale, Providence so
ordered it, that we reached the desired Port.

Being now on Land again at Cales, or Cadiz, in the Dominion of the King of
Spain, such is man's frailty, I found my desire of Traveling not so much
quenched, as in the Tempest I fancied it. A secret Inclination promised, and
urged me on, that seeing I had made so many weary steps in 3 parts of the
World, I should now venture upon the proposed fourth, held to be Larger and
Richer than any of the other three, and as fortune would throw it in my way, to
make me more resolved on it, a Spanish Merchant whom I had been Intimately
Acquainted withal in London, I renewed my Acquaintance with him, and he
Entertained me very civilly, but when I opened my Mind, and unbosomed my
Intentions, he told me it would be a very difficult undertaking, because the
Officers of the Port had very strict Orders not to permit Strangers to Embarque
for the Spanish Indies, least they might be sent thither as Spies to discover
the Havens, and Strength of the Forts, and other things that might be
prejudicial to the Government. I told him I had no such Intention, that
curiosity was only to inform my self, as a Travellor, of what was rare to be
observed in a World, which the alwise God had so Admirally framed and ordered,
and when I gave him a general account in what Parts I had been, and showed him
my Papers of Memorandums, and curious Remarks, he was satisfied, promised to do
his Endeavor for the furtherance and security of my passage, and to furnish me
with Money suitable to the Country, upon Bills I gave him to receive by Exchange
in London; and then he let me know he was a Part-owner in one of the Ships,
that was to accompany the Galeons, called the St. John's D' Vlua; and to be
brief, when the Fleet was ready to Sail, he gave the Master private orders to
conceal me in his Cabin, and use me as a puculiar friend of his. I had pretty
well learned the Spanish in England, which with little more attention I
doubled, not to Improve so well in my Voyage as to be taken for a Spaniard
among the Native Spaniards of America, who, I was Informed, but corruptly spoke
the Language of old Spain. In a little time a warning Piece was fired for the
Fleet to weigh Anchor, and though our Ship was narrowly searched, I so well
wraped my self up in a Ticking, and lay instead of a Bolster at the Bedshead,
that I was not discovered, though they turned up the Quilt, and other covering to
see if any had absconded under them, that were not Licensed to depart.

Anchors weighed, and the Wind being fair, we set Sail with a prosperous Gale
till we came to Colfo d' Yeguas, a very turbulent Sea, where the Ships and
Galeons rolled and tottered extremely, the Waves dashing violently, by reason
of an Eddy occasion by a current that set into it, and the Galleon who went
only a Convoy, having conveyed us thus, left us as concluding we were out of
danger; especially of the Barbary Corisaries, and then by the Masters advice I
showed my self on the Decks, as not fearing to be carried back again, or
hindered in my further passage; and having the Wind constantly favorable, we
steered our course without meeting with any thing Remarkable, till we made the
Land of America, about 6 Weeks after we set out from Cales. Here I saw many
Dorados, or Golden Fish, sporting in the Water, so called, because their Skins
are of the Color of Gold, and the Sailers with Hooks and Lines catched a great
many of them: they Eat something like a Herring, but more short and Sweet. The
first Land we stood in with, was Desseada, or as the Spaniards have named it,
The desired Land, as being first found by Collumbus, when he discovered the
Western Indies, but passing by it we stood with another Island, called
Margalanted; Passing by that and Dominica, we arrived at Guadalupe, where we
before designed to Refresh ourselves, and casting Anchor in a safe Road before
the Island, as many as would, had leave to go on ashore. The Indians who
Inhabit it, no sooner saw our Ships which they had long waited for, and
Expected by their Recoining the Course of the Moon, which is the account of the
Months they keep, but they came running to the Shore with Provisions to
welcome and refresh us; which were Sugar Canes, Plantons, Tortois, and some
Fowl, and for it they received Knives, Beads, and such like Trifles; and many
Rowed to the Ships in the Canoes, Boats clouterly made like Troughs out of the
main body of a Tree. These People were naked Except a cloth to hide their
Priveties, and many of them like the Ancient Britains had scarified on their
Faces, and other Parts, the Figures of Flowers, Suns, Moons, Stars, Birds,
Beasts, and the like; and rings in their Nose, which they looked on as their
chief Ornament. They are Idolaters, worshipping the Host of Heaven. The
Commanders gave some of them Wine, that came aboard, which they Eagerly
coveted, but a little soon made them Drunk, and kick up their heels on the
Decks, as being only used to drink Water, and a Liquor that Distills out of the
Plantain Tree. Yet for all this kindness, we could not but suspect they
Murdered two of our men, who went into the Woods to gather wild Fruit, for
though we searched and stayed for them, they returned not, nor could be found,
which made the rest more cautious to venture too far.

Leaving this Island we Sailed within sight of the Land of Puerto Rico, and
then of St. Domingo, a very large Island, and here the Ships separated to the
several Ports they were bound, as Havana, Honduras, Jucatan, and others; yet we
kept together 4 Sail, being bound for the Mexicaian Province, and came into the
Sound, where we found the Sun, it being in August, exceeding hot, and afflicted
us the more because we were becalmed, and one of the Sailers in the Evening
leaping into the Sea to cool himself by Swiming, was unfortunately seized on by
a Monsterous Fish, which they called a Tiburon, a kind of Crocadil, that pulled
him under Water, and devoured him; who is surprising Tragedy became a warning to
the rest, yet hoping to be revenged, we let down two large Hooks, fastened back
to back, with a strong Rope, and Baited with a stone of flesh, and took one of
these Fish, but not the Murderer, as we found by his Gorge, when we opened him;
he was as much as Sixteen men could Hawl on the Deck, though they let down a
noose Rope under him to hold him fast hampered; he proved to be 12 yards long,
and being killed the Spaniards cut him up, and salted part of his flesh, which
had something of the Taste of Beef in it, being very firm and hard; and soon
after a fresh gale Springing up, and we had sailed a few Leagues, the man at
the Topmast-head cried out, Land, which did not a little rejoice us, for the
hot weather on those broad Seas had rendered us faint and sickly, but it being
near Sunset, and the Coast dangerous to enter on in the night time, we lay off
till the next morning, and then stood into a part rockey on either side, and
presently discovered it to be Vera Crux, otherwise called St. John d' Vlliua,
and came so near in 6 Fathom Water, that by a Cable we fastened our Ship, that
entered foremost by Cable Ropes, to the Rings that were placed for that purpose
in the Wall of the Fort, which we saluted with our Guns. In this place Hernando
Cortz, the famous Spanish Captain, first entered, when he made his Conquests in
Mexico, sinking his Ships that his Soldiers might be the more resolute in the
undertaking, as having all hopes of returning cut off, and with a Handful of
men did such Exploits, that made the World Amazed, and this being the Port to
which our Ships were bound we went Ashore.

CHAP. XXII. Travels from St. John D' Ulha to the great City of Mexico,
describing the Towns in the Way, Countries lying about them; with many other
things and Relations, Ancient and Modern; from the first Conquest made by the
Spaniards, to this present time.
THE proper name of this Seaport Towns is St. John d' Vlha, the other Vera
Crux, being given to it from the old Haven or Harbor of Vera Crux, lying 6
Leagues from it; for that proving dangerous for Ships to ride at Anchor in, by
reason of the violent North Winds, it was forsaken, and the Spaniards removed
hither, as being more safe by the means of a Rock which skreens off that Wind:
and here were the first Majestrates, Judges, Aldermen and Officers of Justice
named. Great was the Concourse of the People when we landed, and the Religious,
who have Monasteries here, received us in procession, because they understood
there were some Missionaries on board, sent out of Spain to assist in
converting the Indians, and upon the Account of some of them, who took
particular notice of me, during the Voyage. I had a very good Lodging appointed
me, and great Feasting was made with store of Fowl and Fish, of which the
Country is very plentiful, and as a last Course Sweet meats and Chocolett were
brought in; Te Deum was sung in the Cathedral Church, and some Shows presented,
but my mind being bent an other way, I little minded these things.

I rested the day of Landing with my Companions, and the next took a survey of
the Town, and places about it; I compassed it in 3 quarters of an hour, and
found the Situation to be on Sandy ground, except on the South West, where it
is Moorish, and full of noisome Bogs at a little distance, which in hot weather
causes it to be somewhat unhealthy: the People in it are generally Rich, and
the Inhabitants may, as near as I could compute, be between 3 or 4000. The
Houses, Churches and Cloisters are mostly built with Timber, the Streets are
few, yet have intercourse by narrow Lanes, or other passages; so that it has
been often much Indamaged by Fire: The Trade is considerable there from Mexico,
as being the convenientest part also from Cuba St. Domingo, Jucatan, Portoello,
and by the way of the latter from Peru, Cartagena, and all the Islands lying on
the North Sea. There is a Castle on the Entrance, founded on a Rock, and
another Rock that makes the Entrance of shipping unacquainted with the Harbor
very difficult each are the chiefest Strength of the Town, and under these the
Ships lie safe at Anchor, sheltred against the fury of the North Wind, which is
many times there very violent, so that the Houses in the Town Rock and Totter
exceedingly, that the Strangers conclude they are falling on their Heads.

The next day I found a great many Mules brought by the Owners to be Let, to
such as had a mind to leave the place and Travel further. I embraced this
opportunity, and sent on Board to bring my Baggage on Shore, which I Laded on
one of them, and retained another to ride on; and so taking leave of those
whose Business or Curiosity detained them longer, I set forward to visit
Mexico, a famed City, and the chiefest in these parts, but at a considerable
distance from St. John de Vellun. The Road from hence for three or four Leagues
I found very Sandy, but open and convenient for Traveling, and without meeting
with any thing remarkable, I came to Oldvera Crux, Inhabited by Spaniards and
Indians; the Indians met us a considerable way from the Town, and offered us
all the kind respect imaginable, sounding their rustic Musicks, and Dancing
before us, Tuning their Voices, which was more Melodious than their Music; and
indeed entering the place, we were very civily received as Strangers, the people
crowding to ask what News from Spain, and of the Affairs of Europe, we
satisfied their Curiosity as well as the time would permit, and then they
brought us Flowers and Sweetmeats, and we presented them with diverse European
trifles, of which they seemed very fond, rather for the sake of whence they
came than for their value.

They Conducted us to the Marketplace, which is in the middle of the Town, and
made Arbours of green Boughs under two large spreading Elmes, for us to repose
in and refresh our selves, and thither brought us plenty of Sweetmeats,
Diet-bread, and Chocolet, having before placed Tables and Benches for the
purpose, and the Indians particularly Assembled about us in great numbers,
welcoming us into the Country. This place is but of indifferent Building, and
not of any considerable Trade, for want of a good Harbor; the Buildings are of
Wood; and here I observe the Friars have a great Command over the people, for
what they order them they immediately do, rendering to them profound Honors and
Respects Having refreshed our selves here, we gave the people Thanks for their
Civility, and so took leave, reaching a little before Night a small Indian
Town, where we Lodged, and found very good Entertainment of Turkeys, Hens,
Capons, and Fruits.

The next Town of Note we came to was Xalappadela Vera Crux, Consisting of
about 2000 Inhabitants, Spaniards and Indians. This Town is a Bishop's See,
standing in a Fruitful Soil, yielding store of Indian Wheat, called Maize, and
some Spanish Wheat; it is encompassed with Indian Villages, Farms of Sugar,
Cochinil, and Pastures, that breed a great many Mules, and other Cattle in the
Town; there is a large Church and Chapel, both belonging to a Cloister of
Franciscan-Friars, who live very loosely considering the Vows they make when
they enter into that Order, living Riotously, and forgetting Chastity, many of
them living more like Gentlemen of great Estates, than Men under the ridged
severity of the Religious Order they profess.

The next place we Arrived at was Lu Rinconda, which is only a kind of a
Carevan-fair, or Inn, yet here we found store of Provision, and particularly,
pleasant Spring Water, which much refreshed us, considering the Heat we
endured, for it being the beginning of September, the Weather was exceeding
sultry in this Valley; the Country about it showed very Green and Pleasant,
Consisting of a great number of Farms, producing Corn pasture, and Fruits; but
Lodging here in the Night time, we were terribly pestered with the Gnats that
stung us intolerably, so that when we rise we scarce knew each other, though at
Sunrising they go away in swarms, and come not again till after Sunset; we
passed some Villages that Day, and by Night reached a Town called Segura,
Inhabited by Spaniards and Indians, to the number of 1000. Hernando Cartez
Built this Town as a Frontier, on the first progress of his Conquests in
Mexico, against the Cullicacans and Tepeacus, who were Confederates with the
Mexicans, and much annoyed the Spaniards in the beginning of their Enterprise,
taking 12 of them, Sacrificing them to their Idol, and then made a merry Feast
of their Flesh, for which Cortez assisted by the Claxcullan Indians took
Tepeacus by force, and brought them with all their Territories under subjection
to Spain, Condemning them to perpetual Slavery, in Revenge for the Murder of
his Spaniards, and overcame likewise the Cullucacans, destroying their Idols,
and forcing the chiefest of them to attend him as his Servants or Slaves; here
we found store of Plantains, Sappotes, and Chicosapotes, which are Fruits of a
pleasant taste, very juicy and sweet, also fair Clusters of Grapes, so that
here, and in many other parts of the Country, if Vineyards were allowed to be
Planted, they would produce as good Wine, if not better, than that of Spain,
but the Spainish Kings have prohibited it, least it should hinder the Trade
between the two Countries; for indeed except Wine, Spain affords them little
but what they have among them, or might reasonably be contented without.

Out of the Road to Mexico, a little Westward, stands the famous Town of the
Tlaxcallans, who making an Alliance with Cortez, were faithful Friends to him
in his Wars, after they had tried his strength, helping him to atchieve those
Victories, which for a long time scarce could be credited in Europe, for they
perceiving their numerous Forces, could not prevail against his handful of
Spaniards, concluded them to be Gods, and consequently innumerable, because
neither of their two Arrows they carried on their Standard took Effect, though
shot in, wounding many of them, they having a Prophecy, that when they missed,
the Victory would always go against them. Upon which, after many bloody Battles
wherein they lost 40 or 50000 of their Men, they submitted, and became ever
after constant friends to the Spaniards, and utter Enemies to Monte Zuma, then
Emperor of Mexico, and his Successor; and by their assistance, Cortez took that
great City, and many other places, for which this Town had greater Privileges
allowed it, than any other in Judea: This Province of Tlaxcallan had then 28
Towns and Villages depending on it, cont^ining 150000 Families, which are now
mostly inhabited by Spaniards; the Indians in this part being kept under, and
very poor, having little other wealth than the Corn, called Centli, though in
the Town of Tlaxcallan, there are Artifficers of both Nations, and the Indians
outdo the Spaniards in making curious Earthen-ware, working in Gold, Silver,
Feathers and other Manufactures. A little before one comes to this Town, there
is the Ruins of their Ancient Wall that stood as a Boundard, and Strangers were
forbidden to pass it on pain of being Sacrificed in their Temples to the Idols,
of which they had great Numbers, and for no other fault, Cortez's Men underwent
this Fate. Tlaxcallan is pleasantly seated, there is still a great Market kept
in it, where sometimes 5 or 10000 People assembled. It has several Churches and
Chaples in it and Cloisters of Tarians, who grow rich out of the labor of the
poor Indians, some being employed to fetch them Wood, Water, and to Fish for
them, being paid at the public charge of the rest. The two Streets of
Ocotelulco and Fizatian are very fair, and the best inhabited of any other: the
Town is not fortified, as indeed few in the Spanish Indies are, except the
Seaports that are apt to be insulted by the Buckaniers; the building is low,
and very indifferent, it is a Seat of the chief Officers of Justice sent from
Spain every three Years, who is called the Alcalde Major, whose power extends
to all the Towns within 20 Leagues circumference. The Indians likewise have
among themselves Alcaldes Regidores, and Alguaziles superior and inferior
Officers of Justice, appointed yearly by the Alcalde Major, who keep them in
awe, fleecing them at their pleasure, and exacting their service without any
satisfaction.

Keeping on one way, we came to a City called by the Spaniards, la Puebla de
les Angeles, or the City of Angels: I visited this City during my stay, and
found it very Rich, being pestered with Cloisters and Monasteries, which is a
sign of Wealth, for in poor Towns they rarely settle. It is seated in a low and
pleasant Valley, about 3 Leagues from a very steep Mountain, always covered
with Snow, though the Heat in the Valley is very great; it was first Built and
Inhabited in the Year 1530. being 20 Leagues from Mexico; it is a Bishop's Sea,
and his Revenue is yearly about 20000 Duccats, the Inhabitants are accounted
between 10 and 12000. They carry on a fine Cloth Manufacture there, which is
sent over all the Indies, being as good as that of Segovia in Spain; there is a
Glass-House and a Mint, wherein is Coined most of the Silver that comes from
Sacatecat, to be sent to Spain; it has curious Gardens about it, replenished
with Fruits, Flowers, and Fountains, and the Fields that Enclose them are very
pleasant, abounding with Wheat and Sugar Farms.

Continuing our Journey after a considerable refreshment, we passed through
many pleasant Villages, leaving considerable Towns on either hand to Guaco
Cingo, Inhabited by Spaniards and Indies, to the number of 6 or 700. There is
in it a Cloister of Franciscan Friars. This place is like Tlaxcallian, has many
Privileges granted by the King of Spain, because it Confederated with Cortez,
against Montezuma. The Friars here Entertained us with Singing and Dancing,
boasting that they had brought up several of the Town to do it, some of which
they produced, and made them Dance to their Gittars with Castinets, and this we
found to be the last Town of note, till we came to Mexico, which lies about 30
Miles from the way, up and down, over rising Hills and descending Valleys, with
a mighty high Mountain before us, that overlooks Mexico, and the vast Lake it
is Seated on. This Mountainous Alp has perpetual Snow upon it, and in pa^^ng
the Spurs we found a great alteration in the Air, for here it was very Cold, to
what we had felt before. In this Mountainous way the Mexicans endeavored to
stop Cortez, by laying mighty Ceders across, but not staying to defend the
Barocades, with some pain he removed them, and Marched his Army of Spaniards
and Indians to the Plains of Quichatipec, in the Jurisdiction of Tezculo, where
he gave 100000 of Montezumas's Forces Battle, and Battering their Ranks first
with his Field Pieces, and then breaking in with his Horse, utterly defeated
them; whereupon, diverse Towns upon the Lake, and on the Borders of the
Mountain, submitted to him; the Terror of him growing so great, that those who
submitted not fled out of their City, which made him put out a Proclamation for
their return, promising that no Injury should be done unto them.

CHAP. XXIII. My Arrival at Mexico; a Descriptien of that famed City, what it
has been, and what at present it is; the manner of Building; nature of its
Inhabitants; Riches, and plenty of the Mountains, Lakes, and places about it,
etc.
AFter a tedious Journey, being Arrived at the great City of Mexico, the Head
of the Northern Spanish Indies, I shall have occasion to speak more
particularly of it, than of other places I passed through, as to what it now
is, and in general as to what it has been, in its most flourishing splendour.

This City is large in Compass, and stands on two Lakes, which some have
concluded to be but one, because of their nearness and Communication of their
Waters, but they appear different in three things particularly; viz. one ebbs
and flows by the force of the North Wind, and the other does not; the Water of
the one is Sweet, the other is Salt and Brackish; one has great store of Fish,
and the other is destitute of any, though they have both their source or
Springs that feed them from the great Mountain that overlooks the City. The
Houses in this City are Built more stately, especially those of the Nobility
and Gentry, than in other places; the Viceroy of the Mexacanian Province has
his Palace here, and so has the Archbishop. The Churches are many, Founded
mostly on the Heathen Temples, which were in the flourishing state of the City,
very numerous, and had Pyramides in the Midst of a vast height, on which the
Idols stood, to whom they offered Humane Blood in Sacrifice, and sprinkled the
Walls and Pillars of the Idol-Altar with it; there are in the City several
Spacious Streets, and great Markets, affording all sorts of Provisions and
other Necessaries. The Lakes by reason of the abundance of Boats and Canoes
that Trade on them, furnish the City with store of plenty, especially with
multitudes of Fowl and Fish taken there, the former being allured by a certain
Oily tough Scum on the Water, which they eat as Food; besides there are many
Trading Towns on the Banks where the Boats take in Loading, and constantly
supply the City. The Monasteries and Nunneries are a graceful Ornament to the
rest, their being almost of all the Orders. The Churches have Curious Spires,
with Gilded Crosses on their Tops and the whole Fabrick's Built with Stone of
rare Architecture. Water comes almost into all parts of the City, by small
Conduits, for though the Streets were formerly watered by Channels from the
Lake, they are now mostly stopped up, and firm Ground made where Houses are
Built; for after the Conquest, Cortez divided the Ground where the Houses had
been Consumed by Fire, or void spaces, were some to the Indians, and some to
the Spaniards, and free Leave was given by Proclamation, for every one to come
in and Build, so that it was soon Rebuilt; but since the Spaniards have in a
manner dispossessed the Indians of their part; for though many Live in the
City, yet are they obliged to hire the Houses at dear Rates, that were formerly
by Grant from the Court of Spain, their lawful Patrimonies, or Inheritance. The
Spaniards Built their Houses in their own Fashion, and the Indians theirs
according to the custom of the Country. Cortez Built his where King
Montezumas's stately Palace stood, which in the Siege had been consumed with
Fire, and a vast number of Wild Beasts of all sorts that he kept there in
Wooden Cages Burnt in it, lamentably roaring and howling as the Fire approached
them; and this House is the most stately in the City, being the Seat of the
Viceroy of all the Province, and is called the Palace of the Marquess d'
Valla, for that Title the King of Spain conferred on Cortez, after he had
obtained his amazing Victories, over such a mighty Nation, considering his
Forces were but a handful of Spaniards; but that which seemed in all humane
probability to give him success were the Bullets, and Chain-Shot, proceeding
from his Thundering Artillery, for the Indians unacquainted with such Engines,
took their roaring and breathing flame to be the Voice of the Angry Gods that
fought against them, and when the Shot made Lanes among them, they took them
for their Thunderbolts, or destroying Angels, sent as Messengers of their
vengeance, to cut them off, not thinking any thing in nature could be of so
violent a force, as to beat down Ranks of Men before them with such swiftness
that the Eye could scarce trace the Deaths they gave. This, and the Spaniards
Armor proof against their Arrows, made their Courage stoop and languish though
otherways a Valiant people, as appears by their disputing it in the City from
Street to Street, and fortifying themselves with intrenchments as they
Retreated, though by the Sword, Pestilence, and Famine, 10000 or more, lay Dead
within the Walls. In this War Montezuma was Slain by his own Subjects, against
their Wills, for being taken Prisoner, when multitudes of Indians assaulted the
Palace, where Cortez and his Spaniards were, he was constrained to go to a
Ballcony, or Battlement, to desire his Subjects to desist, and come to a
Parley, when one of the enraged multitude not knowing him in the hurry, struck
him with a sharp Flint on the Temples, which wounded him so much that he fell
down, and soon after Died; yet at that time Cortez was forced to retire out of
the City, to strengthen himself in Flaxcallan, and at his second time took it,
by the help of the Vergantines, or Vessels he Besieged it with, on the side of
the Lake, which stopping up all passage for Relief, Famine, and its attendant
Pestilence, proved their worst Enemy, yet submitted they not, but disputed it,
as I have said, till Quahutimo C -- their New King, seeing things brought to
the last extremity, endeavoring to fly by way of the Lake, was surprised by
the Spanish Vessels, and made Prisoner, at that time by Cortez's persuasion
(who would not give him his Wish to kill him, though he desired it,) Commanded
his Men to lay down their Arms, and then about 60000 came out of their strength
and submitted, have Lived a long time on the Flesh of the Slain; yet Famine
notwithstanding had so pinched them, that they looked like the shadows of Men,
Lean, Meager, and very Ghastly.

Over again the Palace, they Built Arched Docks, to lay up the Ve^gantines, in
perpetual memory of the notable Service they had done; but they are mostly
wasted by Time; and other Vessels Trading on the Lake are in the wet Season
laid up there. However this Great City is sometimes unhealthful, for as much as
there arises at certain times a noysom Vapor from the Lake, and at those times
the Winds blow little to purge the Air, because of the Enclosure of Mountains.
The Spaniards a long time stood on their Guard, after the taking of Mexico, the
Citizens keeping 2000 Horse and Arms, for Horsemen, always to be in a
readiness when the Trumpet should sound; but by what they have consumed of the
Indians in their Mines, and in working on the Lake, in making great
Intrenchments, other Works, and particularly, by their Cruelty, they have so
far exhausted them, that those Forces are laid aside, and they live secure
without fear of surprise; for the City lies open in most parts, and in all
defenseless, except the strength of the Inhabitans being destitute of Bullwarks
and other considerable Fortifications, though an exceeding Rich City, and the
Lading of 20 or more Ships are brought yearly to it, by the way of the North
Sea, containing the best and Richest Commodities of Spain, and other parts of
Christendom, bought up by the Spaniards to this purpose, and from the South Sea
it Trafficks with Perue; it Trades also with several Eastern Nations, by way of
the Pilipinas.

Money is daily Coined in the Mint to a great value, the Silver being brought
on Mules from the Mines of St. Lewis de Saccatecas, about 80 Leagues more
Northward, and beyond them the Spaniards by Conquest, and the voluntary
submission of the Natives, have gained the possession of very large Countries.
There is in this City a University, which was formerly only a School. The
Officers here are as in the great Cities of Spain, and it is Computed to have
in the City and Suburbs 50000 Houses, and to the latter, called Guadalupe, the
Indians are mostly confined. The Spaniards Styling themselves absolute
Conquerors and Disposers of their Persons and Fortunes, being very proud and
insulting over them, a Conqueror among them being termed a Title of Honor, so
that the most Beggarly among the Spaniards will proudly boast to be descended
from one of the first Conquerors, and Style himself a Don, though he has not
one Foot of Land in Possession. There are many fair Gardens and Orchards about
this City, with pleasant Summer-Fountains, and other things suitable for
recreation in them.

The Buildings are with Stone and Brick, but not high, to prevent their being
shaken, and overthrown by Earthquakes, that often happen in this Country. In
the narrowest Streets 3 Coaches may go abrest, and in the broadest 6; They keep
a vast number of Coaches here, some account them 15000. those of the Nobility
and Gentry very stately, overlayed with Gold or Silver, and the Corners
embolished with Precious Stone, Ivory, or Mother-pearl, the Lining and Seats
are Cloth of Gold, Silver, or East India Silks. The Shops are every where
stored with Rich Merchandise, and by this you may guess at their Riches and
dexterity in Workmanship. A Viceroy of Mexico, Anno 1625. sent the then King
of Spain the representation of a Poppinsay, a Bird bigger than a Phesant of
Meltal, and Precious Stones, so artificially placed, as to represent us several
Colors, and all parts very lively, and it was estimated at half a Million of
Duccats. In the Church belonging to the Cloister of Dominican, is a Silver
Lamp, curiously wrought, with 300 Branches, beside 100 little Lamps for Oil set
in it, each of different Workmanship, valued at 400000 Duccats, and with such
like curious Works are the Streets made Rich and Beautiful from the Shops of
Goldsmiths. The Spanish Women are here very Beautiful, and take a far greater
liberty than allowed in Spain, in Gaming, Drinking, and making Visits; nay,
they will from their Windows, or Ballconies, invite Strangers as they pass the
Streets, to play at Primera, and other Games, and such as accept the offer are
plentifully Feasted with Wine, Sweetmeats, and other Dainties, though this
sometimes prove fatal, for the Spaniards though so far removed, have not
altogether forgot the imbred Jealousy of their Spanish Ancestors, who brought
it out of Spain with them. Many of the Spaniards Marry with the Indian Women,
and beget a race called Mollotos, of a Tawney Complexion; nor spare they to
take away the Indian's Wives, if they like them better than their own; they
boast themselves to the poor credulous Natives to be the Valiantest and most
Accomplished Men in the World, and that all Nations Tremble at the Name of a
Spaniard, and by this, and other Artifices, they keep them in great awe and
subjection, assuring them, that no Nation under Heaven is able to deliver them
out of their Hands, or in Battle to stand before them.

As for the Spaniards Attire, the Fashion alters not here, but it is with the
better sort excessive Rich, and the meanest will go as Fine as possible, though
other Necessities crave the sparing of it. The best Silks, Damask, Cloth of
Gold and Silver, Embroideries of Pearl and Precious Stones, are commonly worn
amongst them: nay, among Trades-people, a Blackamoor, or Tawney Young Maid,
will make a hard shift to be in the Fashion, with a Neck-Lace or Chain of Gold,
Bracelets of Pearl, and Ear-bobs of large Pearl or Precious Stone; and though
their Garments are very Rich, yet they overlay them with Gold, Silver-Lace, or
Embroidery of Gold and Silver, and these sort of Wenches are allowed or wincked
at to be Curtizans or Common Women, to satisfy the Spaniniards Venery, to
which they are insatiably given, and they have allways change of Apparel,
especially for Summer and Winter, though the Winter here consists only in
terrible Rains, and the overflowing of Lakes and Rivers, with innundations,
occasioning many times the Destruction of Houses, People, and Cattle, and
continues some Months. They are here very Superstitious, both Spaniards and
Indians, for at the invitation of the Priests they make excessive Offerings to
the Shrines of Saints, as Crowns of Gold, Bracelets, Precious Stones, Vessels
of Silver and Gold, so that the Monasteries and Churches may well be said to
enjoy the Profits and Pleasures of a Golden World; for their Revenues, or
yearly Incomes, are more than in any part of Europe; nor do these
Ecclesiastics tie themselves to the strictness of the Rules of their Orders,
but pass away the time in diverse Recreations. They have pleasant Gardens,
Fountains, Baths, Music, and plenty of Provision to Excess, so that this
exuberiance or super abounding of this Country, has corrupted the Manners of
the begging Friars, and rendered them as stately as petty Princes, particularly,
their Superiors, who scarcely give place to any. Their Lodgings are stately,
and the Roofs of their Cloisters and Churches adorned with Mosaic Work and
Guildings of Gold; some Altars are of Massive Gold, others of Silver, Pillars
of Brazil, and Marble of little esteem among them; and this Glorious show of
Pomp and Grandeur draws the poor Indians to Admire and Adore them, though
before their Heathen Temples were very Magnificent, but not comparable to
these. They have Tabernacles of Gold and Silver, Christial, and other precious
things to enshrine and carry the Host about in Procession; so that I may well
say, the Riches of the greatest King or Potentate I have yet spoken of, may in
some degree of Magnificence fall short of what I saw here, if I take the Clergy
among the Laity.

In the Marketplace of this City, which is very Spacious, there are Arched
Piazza's, and Shops furnished with Costly Wares, and before their Shops are all
manner of curious Fruits Sold, that the Country affords; the Arches of the
Viceroy's Palace, with the Walks of the House, and the Garden, belonging to
it, takes up almost one side of the Market; at the end of it is the principal
Prison, strongly Built of Stone, and next it the Beautiful Street called La
Pateria, or the Goldsmiths-street; where are to be seen the value of many
Millions in Plate and Jewels. The Street of St. Augustine is very fair, where
they Trade mostly in Silks. Tabuca is the longest and broadest, where mostly
are Shops vending Iron-ware, Brass, and Steel, made into things fit for use and
Service, and this is of very stately Building. In the Street Del Aquilla, the
Houses of the Gentry are mostly seated. It is called so from an Eagle of Stone
placed there, upon the Conquest of the City. There is a kind of a Park, or void
place, shaded with Trees, where the Gallants and Ladies with their Trains and
Equipages air themselves in the Evening, and here much mischief is done by
quarrels, upon the account of Jealousy in Courtship, and hundreds of Swords at
a time have been drawn, to Revenge or rescue a Revenger, and carry him off to
Sanctuary, where being once Lodged, he is out of the power of the Law; yet
after all, the Lake at present much undermines the City, for that the Springs
permit but of few Cellars; in laying in Dead Bodies the Coffins are half
covered with Water, and many of the stately Buildings sink, so that they are
forced often to repair their Foundations, by laying new ones on the old, that
seem as it were to be swallowed up in a quicksand.

This City has but 3 ways to come into it by Causey, the one is from the West,
and that is a Mile and half long; another from the North, containing 3 Miles;
on the East there is no entrance by Land, but on the South the Causey is 5
Miles in length, and by this last way Cortez entered when he made his Conquest
of it.

About this City, as well as in other places, are diverse kinds of delicate
Fruits, as the Nuchili of diverse Colors, a Fruit which eaten, stains like
Black-Cherries, and colors the Urine as red as Blood, so that Strangers
unacquainted with its quality, really fancy they void Blood; this put the
Spaniards into great frights at their first coming, and their Physicians being
ignorant of the Operation applied Remedies to stanch Blood, till the Indians
gave them to understand better; the skin of them are thick, and full of small
prickles, which touching the Lips stick in them, and make them for a time stick
together, so that the Voice will faulter, but this skin is easily pealed off,
and then the Fruit appears of a Scarlet Red. There are also Apples, Pears,
Quinces, Pomegranets, Musk-mellions, Chess-Nuts, Wall-Nuts, Figs, Lemons,
Oranges, Citron, and abundance of other Fruits, known in Europe. But one Tree
more Admirable than the rest, not known amongst us, the Metel, which they Plant
and dress as they do their Vines. It has near 40 kinds of Leaves growing on
it, which serve for diverse uses; for, when very tender, they make Conserves of
them, when more grown, Paper, Flax, Mantles, Shoes, Mats, Girdles, and Cordage;
on other Leaves grow Prickles so strong, that placing them in Frames of Wood
they make saws of them; from the Root there comes a Juice like unto Syrrup,
which by heat is made into Sugar; they make of it also Vinegar, and a sort of
Wine, that stupifies the Indians to Drunkenness. The Rhin'd roasted heals Sores
and Ulcers, applying Poltisces to them; and from the uppermost Branches
distills a Gum, which dissolved in Wine, Antidotes Poison: And to conclude with
this City, there is nothing in or about it wanting, to make it happy; but the
Temper of the people, who are restless, in a Country flowing with all Delights
Nature or Art can afford them in any degree.

CHAP. XXIV. Travels into diverse other parts of the Mexican Province,
describing the particulars that are Curious, and worthy of Note; As also in the
Peruanian Province, as well Islands, as Continent; and all that is Rare and
Remarkably found in America.
HAving thus Traveled to Mexico, and described it as particularly as Prospect
and Enquiry could inform me; I now undertake briefly to do the like of the
Country of Americas, as far as it is yet known to the Europeans, or Indians, I
conversed with those parts.

The chief Division therefore of this great part of the World is two fold, viz.
the Mexicanian, and Peruanian Provinces. Mexico gives name to the greater half
of America, and is called Nova Hispania, or New Spain, from whence the Kings of
Spain Style themselves Hisaniour Reges. The Mexican Track contains chiefly
the Northern Parts, comprehending many large Provinces, or Countries, already
known, and many not yet well discovered, as the parts that lie between it to
the Northern or Frozen-Sea, viz. Mexico, Quivira, Nicaragna, Jucatan, Flerida
virgina, Norumbega, Nova, Francia, Corteralis, Estoliland, and some others, so
that the Compass of this part already known is at least 23000 Miles.

The Peruanan part contains all the Southern Track, tied to the Mexican by the
Isthmus, or straight of Darien, being between 12 and 17 Miles over in some
parts, from the Northern to the Southern Sea. This part contains the Provinces,
or Kingdoms, of Castella, Aurea, Gunia, Peru, Brasil, Chille, in compass about
17000 Miles.

Mexico, as I observed, abounds with Gold sanded Rivers, producing many
devouring Crocadils, though not so big as those in the Nile in Egypt, which the
poorer sort of the Indians take and feed on their Flesh, as a great dainty.
There are several Mountains casting fourth Flames of Fire in it, as
Pepochampeche, Popocatapec, and others, nay, all the Southern parts, as far as
Leon in Nicaragua produces many of them, but the latter I have named, is one of
the chief; it stands 8 Leagues from Chollola, it is a steep rockey Mountain.
Ten Spaniards attended with Indians to carry their Water and Victuals,
undertook to take a Survey of it, and approached so near the top, that they
heard a terrible noise, occasioned by the Erruption of Fire; then the ground
shaked so terribly, that they durst not approach no nearer, however, they
perceived the Vulcan or Cavety whence the Fire Issued half a League in compass
out, which Air and Fire proceeded, rebounding with a terrible Noise, Shrill and
Whistling, so that the whole Hill trembled, and the top near this Mouth was
covered with Ashes, about knee-deep, and as they were viewing it, such a shower
of Fire fell, that had they not stepped under the craggy over-hanging of a Rock,
they had there been roasted to Death; but in an hour or two, it clearing up,
they hasted down much affrighted, but without any harm: This Mountain before
the coming of Hernando Cartez, had for ten Years dissisted sending forth
Flames, and when it began again according to a prediction among them, the
Indians looked for some great misery to befall them by change of Government.
The Ashes blown in the Air, are many times scattered 10 Leagues from the foot
of the Mountain.

This chief Province, called Mexico, is further divided into six Parts, viz.
Themistian, Nova-gallicia, Mechoacan and Gaustachan; the first is the noblest
and greatest, containing six Cities, of which the principal is the rich City of
Mexico, the Seats of an Archbishop and Spanish Viceroy; the next is la Richla
de los Angeles; the third Vellazuca; the fourth Antiquera; the fifth Mexcioca;
the sixth Ottopan, besides these there are a great number of Villages, or large
unwalled Towns on the Roads and Borders of Rivers and Lakes, inhabited by
Indians, Spaniards, and Mestizoes, a mixed Generation of Indians and Spaniards.

Near Mexico, is Tacuba, a pleasant Town enclosed with Gardens; in the way to
Chapultepec, is Taluco, a Town much traded to, and in the Woods breed Hogs,
producing Bacon as good as our Westphalia. Traveling Westward, the Town of la
Piedad presents it self at the end of a Causey, whether the People much resort
from Mexico, to pay Adoration to the Image of the Virgin Mary, enriched with
Crowns, Chains of Gold, and precious Stones, valued at a Million of Duccats.
There is a pleasant Town bending to the North, called, la Soledad, or the
Solitary Wilderness, where the Barefooted Carmelite Friars have their
Residence; but if this be a Wilderness, few places can be accounted pleasant,
for it affords Fruits, Flowers, Shades Fountains, and every thing that can
delight Mankind. And heither resort the Nobles and Gentry to take their
Pleasure, who bring great Presents to the Friars, so that they live Fat and
Plentiful on the outward appearance of Sanctity; for in their Oratory, and
Cells made in Rocks, they hang Whips of Wire, Girdles with sharp pricking
Needles to wear next their Skin, shirts of Hair, and other mortifying
Materials; but one of them ingeniously told me, they were placed there more for
show, than use, to move Peoples Charity toward them, and brought them a vast
income of Money, and all sorts of Provisions; and indeed though they have out
of a design given this place the name of a Wilderness, it seemed to me an
Earthly Paradise. At Tadubaya, not much distance from this place, is a very
rich Cloister of Franciscans, with curious Gardens and Orchards belonging to
it; they have a stately Church there, and the Indians have been taught by the
Priests to be Choiristers, and sing very fine.

I have spoken somewhat already of the Province of Guastachan, which I passed
in my Travels from St. John de Vlhua, to Mexico. It is a very plentiful
Country, abounding in Sugar, farms Pasture, Corn, Cochinil, reaching as far as
the Valley of Guaxaca, a very rich place, but having spoke of the most material
Towns in my Passage, I shall pass to the third Province, called Mechoacan,
which is about 80 Leagues in circumference. This Province is very rich,
abounding in Mulberry-trees, which feed a great number of Silkworms; also in
Wax, Honey, Black Amber, diverse colored Feathers, of which they make curious
Works, and the River abound with store of Fish. The chief City of this Province
is Valodolid, a Bishop's See; the Towns of Note are Sinsonte, which before the
Conquest, was the Residence of the Indian King of the Province Pascuar and
Coliman, inhabited by Spaniards and Indians. There are also two good Havens,
called St. Anthony and St. James, or Santiago; the King of it, called Caconzin,
was a great Friend to Cortez, and much assisted him in his Wars against the
Mexicons, willingly yielding himself a Vassal to the King of Spain, though it
was ill requited; for don Nunio de Guzman, first Ruler and President of the
Chancery of Mexico, after the Conquest picked a Quarrel, and made War on this
Province, took the King Prisoner, who was quiet and peaceable, not stiring
against him; and when he had stripped him out of 10000 Marks in Plate, Gold, and
other Riches, he inhumanly burnt him at a Stake, with diverse of his Nobles and
Gentry, who seemed to rejoice that they were accounted worthy to suffer with
their King, and in Death bear him Company into the other World.

Nova Galia, or the fourth Province of Mexico, is well watered with two large
Rivers, viz. Piastle and Sansebastian; it contains many great Towns of
Spaniards and Indians; the chief is Xalisco; the next Guadalajara; the third
Coaza; the fourth Corupostalla; the fifth St. Espirit; the sixth Capala, now
called Nova Mexico, a Frontier on the Northern Indians, from whence the
Spaniards frequently make Inroads and War upon them, and much incroach that
way, to the great Wast and Destruction of those poor People, who would live in
quiet, and do good Offices to the Spaniards, if they might be permitted; but
their thirst after the Mines of Gold and Silver, they suppose to be in that
Country, and not yet discovered, is the main incitement that makes them push
their Swords so violently that way, though they often meet with their Match;
for these naked People are very Warlike, and in their flights after a Discharge
of their Vollies of Poison Arrows, chamber up and run upon the Rocks like Wild
Goats; their dwellings are for the most part in the Woods, where they make
Swamps, and fortified places of Timber and other Materials, rudely piled and
fastened one to another, and that which incites the Spaniards so eagarly, to
possess themselves by Conquests of these Northern parts, besides the Treasure
they find in them, is, out of Mistrust or Jealousy, least the English from
Virginia, and other Collonies, should be industrious in subduing and steping in
before them.

Thus having briefly run over the chief Mexicon Provinces, under the Spanish
Dominion, I now proceed to take a Survey of some others, and in the first
place, of Quivira, seated in the most Western part of America, over against
Tartary, from whence not being much distant, many suppose that this new World
was first inh^bited from thence, for the Indians in their Manners Likeness, and
many Customs among them, much accord with the Tartars, they make their Cattle
their chief Riches, feeding them in the Plains, Valleys and Mountains, the
Country affording every where store of Pasture, and those that look after the
Cattle, carry Tents with them for shelter, and dress their Food in the Fields
as the Tartars. This, and the Southern parts of America, appears to be far
better Peopled than that toward Europe, so that though it is but a conjecture,
yet it is a very probable one, that the first peopling this Country, was from
Asia, either accidentally by Shipwreck, or driven out of their Country by
Famine, War, or such Calamities; they were constrained to seek new Habitations,
and so after much wandering at Sea, found out this Country, though the Indians
have a tradition, which is a received Opinion amongst many of them, that their
God with Blazing Fires, lighted and guided them Day and Night, over the
Northern Rocks and Mountains, covered with Ice and Snow, feeding and cherishing
them by the way with Pulse and other Food, when they had been oppressed by
Gyant-like Enemies, and driven out of their former Habitations. The Inhabitants
of these parts take a greater pride in Glass Beads, and other Trifles, than in
Gold and Jewels, and are easily imposed on for the Exchange of the Hides of
their Cattle; they make Coverings for their homely Cottages; of their Bones
they make Bodkins and Needles; of their Hair, Thread; of their Sinue, Cordage;
of their Blood, Drink; and of their Flesh, Meat; of their Horns, Paunches, and
Bladders, Vessels: Some are of Opinion, that there is a Traffic on this Coast
from China, or Cathagina, from whence Vasquez de Corovado made a Progress into
some parts of it, with his Army of Spaniards, which he saw from the Rocks, and
high Mountains, on the Sea Coast, Ships at Sea, not of common Building, seeming
to be well laden, and bearing in their Prows Pillicans, which could not be
conjectured to come from any Country, but one of the two before named.

In Quivira, there are but two Provinces that are well known to the Europeans,
and those are Cibola and Nova Albion Cibola Lys on the East, where a City gives
that Name to the Province; the next to it is called Tolontua, a pleasant place
in a very temperate Air, Situated on a River of that Name; the third Town that
offers is Tinguez, inhabited by Spaniards, and in it, the Jesuits have a
stately College, and are appointed to Preach to the Indians in those parts.

Nova Albion, lies on the West side toward Tartary, this was discovered in the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, by the Renowned Englishman Sir Francis Drake, who
gave it this Name upon the King of the Countries Surrendering his Crown of
Network and Feathers, curiously wrought, and submitting himself and people to
the Queen's Protection. It is in some parts inhabited by a few Spaniards, but
not yielding any considerable store of Riches, they have not much coveted to
People it, though it abounds with Fruit pleasant to the Eye and Taste. The
People are very Courteous and Affable to Strangers, but mostly given to their
old Idolatry, practicing Charms; and some affirm they dance with the Devil on
certain midnight Feasts, and revels, offering him human Sacrifice. The Bounds
between this Quivira and Mexico, is Marvir Miglio, or Californio.

The next belonging to Mexico in the Northern Tract, is Jucalan, the first that
Discovered it by Francisco Hernandez de Cordovo, Anno 1517. who asking an
Indian the name of that Country, and he not understanding the Spanish, answer
Jucatan, which in the Indian Language, is, What do you say, and from thence
they named it, and so it has ever since been called. This Country is at least
900 Miles in Circuit, and a kind of a Peninsula. It is fixed over against the
Island of Cuba, and divided into three parts; Jucatan properly so called, which
has in it the Cities of Campeche, Valadolid, Merida, Semancus, and one which
for its Greatness and Beauty, they call Caire the chief; the Commodities here
are Honey, Wax, Hides and Sugar, Cana, Fistula, Sarsaparila, etc. As for Food,
it produces great store of Indian Maize, and is well Watered and Wooded in all
parts; the Timber is so good, that the Spaniards Build Tall-Ships there; they
have store of Turkeys, and other Fowl, which with other Commodities, they pay
as Tribute to the Spaniards for their Possessions, who keep them low and poor,
which makes them apt to fall into Mutinies and Rebellions.

Another part of this Track is called, Guatemala, where the Cruelty of the
Spaniards has destroyed near a Million of the Natives; yet this Country is
populous, and has many flourishing Indian Towns in it. The chief Cities are
Guatemala, Cassuca and Chiapa; it is well Watered with Rivers, and has some
large Lakes full of Fish, and at Seasons, covered with wild Fowl; it abounds in
Fruit, Corn and Cattle.

The third part of Jucatan is Acasamil, an Island over against Guatemala, which
the Spaniards usually at this day call, Sla Cruz; it lies advantageous for a
Harbor, and the advantage of Trade.

The fourth Division of the Northern Track under the Government of the
Spaniards, is Nicaragua, standing South East from the City of Mexico, about 450
Leagues; yet it agrees with it in the Temperature of the Climate, the People
are of good Stature, active and strong, and of Complexion indifferent White.
Before they were brought under subjection, they had standing Laws, and many
politics in their Government, particularly, if one robbed an other, he was not
put to Death, but became his slave till his service had made Satisfaction for
the Damage done; they had no Law for the Murder of a King, as concluding none
would be so wicked as to act such Villainy. This Country gives a pleasant
prospect, and abounds in all things necessary for human support; here grows the
famous Tree so much Written of, which if a man touch but one of the Branches
with his Finger, it presently whithers: There are great Flocks of Parrots, as
of Crows or Pigeons in England; also Turkeys, Quails, Rabbits. The Spanish
Cities here have a Bishop's See, and Granada standing on a Lake of fresh Water,
about 300 miles in compass, which continually Ebbs, and Flows, though it has no
intercourse with the Ocean.

And thus much, having thought fit to speak of the Mexicon Provinces, and the
Dominion of Spain, wherein I mostly Traveled, I now come to speak in their
Order of the Peruanian parts, for richness in Gold and other Metals.

This principally contains 5 large Countries, as I have already hinted. This
Southern part of India is held to be Richer than the Northern, for although it
wants the convenience of Traffic by the Northern Sea, which the other has, and
is therefore obliged to send its Commodities to Pannama, and from thence have
them Transported over the Straight, or Isthmus, by the River Chiagree, to
Portabel, upon the North-Sea, yet the great store of Gold, Silver, and other
Metal, make richly amends for their pains and Travel, and such store is found,
that a Prohibition or Injunction is laid by the Court of Spain, not to open new
Mines, till the old ones are sufficiently wrought; the huge Mountains of Potosi
are thought to consist mostly of Gold-oar, and here grow all such Fruits as are
found in Spain, beside many others natural to the Country; the Olives are
larger than those of Spaia, the Oil sweeter and clearer, the Grapes yield Wine
stronger than Spanish Wine, and here they have more Liberty than in Mexico to
make it, because it cannot be so well brought from Spain; they have store of
Wheat and other Grain, the Soil all lying under the high Mineral Mountains,
being very Fruitful, the Water that descends fatning the Valleys, for there is
but little Rain, and the Evening and Morning Dews give great refreshment. The
Viceroy has his Residence in the City of Lima, a place much subject to
Earthquakes, and of late has been terribly shaken, and almost destroyed by 'em;
there is held a Court of Chancery, and it is an Archbishop's See. It is well
fortified since the Bucaniers have made so many Depradations and Pyracies on
the Coast; two Miles from it is a convenient Harbor or Port, called Callau,
where the Ships lie that convey the Treasure to Panama, and other Ships that
Trade to diverse parts, and beside Casteella Aura, or Golden Casteel. Chille is
very Rich in Golden Mines, which has caused an obstinate War between the
Spaniards and Indians that Inhabit it, who are very hardy, and dextrous at
Firearms, most part of them being the Sons of Spanish Women by Indians, so
that a great many of the best Soldiers out of the Neatherlands and Italy have
been sent thither under an Experienced Captain, who has the Command, as a
Recompense for his Service in Europe. The Spaniards by their Wars have got
strong footing, and are possessed of 3 principal Cities, beside many Towns of
Note, as the Conception, which is a Bishop's See, Santjago, and Valdivia, this
latter, took its Name from a Governor so called, whose thirst of Gold through
Covetousness to grow Rich on a sudden, in using great Oppression, made the
Indians of Chille break out into a Bloody War, and surprising him in his House,
poured melted Gold down his Throat, saying, Since he had so eargerly coveted
it, he should have his fill of it, and so much of it as should last him all his
Lifetime; and accordingly it did, for the scalding Metal presently killed
him, but the War ended not with his Death, but has at times continued ever
since.

As for Guiana and Brasil, the latter belonging to the Crown of Portugal, and
States of Holland, by reason of their remoatness I had not an opportunity to
Travel there, and since I can speak little of them, than what I have from
Report, viz. that they are Rich, and Flourishing Provinces; I shall pass them
over, and return again to Castella Aure, in the Southern or Peruanian Track.
This contains the North part of Peru, and part of the Isthmus, that runs
between the North and South Sea, and beside the Gold in it, it is plentifully
stored with Silver, Pearl, Spices, Medicinal Herbs, and Drugs; it is divided
into 4 Provinces, the first is called Castella del oro, the second, Nova
Andaluzia, the third, Nova Granada, the fourth, Carthagena Castella del oro; is
Situate in the very Isthmus, and not over peopled, by reason of the unhealthful
Air, occasioned by the noysom Vapors arising from large standing Lakes, or
Pools; the chief places here belonging to the Spaniards are Theomimay, or
Nombre de Dias, on the East; the second, which lies 6 Leagues from Nombre de
Dios, is Portabel, chiefly Inhabited by Spaniards, Mulottos, and Blackamoors;
this latter, has a very fair and goodly Haven, from whence it seems to derive
its Name, well fortified at the Entrance with 3 Castles, where the Guns reach
and Command one another; in these places Drake braved the Spaniards, and did
Exploits worthy the Fame of his Country. Nombre de Dios (so called by Didacus
Niquesa, who after many crosses at Sea, first Landed here, Founding this and
Portobel,) is now in a manner forsaken, by reason of the little Commodiousness
or Security of the Harbor, lying open to the insults of Pirates, and more for
the unhealthfulness of the Air coming off the Sea, and some Lakes near it, so
that it was once removed, by an Order from the Court of Spain, in hopes that
the Air might become more healthful in placing it some little distance from the
Sea, but it little availed.

In this part of the Indies it was, that our Valiant, though Unfortunate
Countryman, John Oxenham, Arriving with about 60 Companions, drew ashore his
Ship, covered it with Boughs, and passing over Land cut down Timber in the
Woods, of which, he made a Pinnace, and Navigating the South Sea, took several
Spanish Prizes, richly Laden with Gold and Silver, and safely recovered the
main Land; but there by the Mutiny of his Company, about sharing the Booty, all
miscarried, for they gave the Spaniards time to set upon, and cut several of
them off, among whom he fell, Courageously Fighting; and so the Riches, to the
Value of a Million of Duccats, which might have plentifully satisfied them all,
was lost by their division among themselves.

Nova Andeluza, has for its principal City Tocoio, by the Spaniards, new Named
St. Margrets, and an other little inferior to it, called St. Espiritu, both
Rich in Trade, and the Country throughout gives a good Prospect of Plenty and
Pleasure. Nova Granada, is Situate on the South Side of Carthagena. It contains
6 principal Cities, viz. Tungua, supposed to be directly under the Equator;
Tochamum Popaian, a very Rich Trading City; Sta fee, or St. Faiths, an
Archbishop's See, and a Court of Justice and Chancery, Governed by a
President, 6 Judges, the King's Attorney, and two High Justices of Court, who
have allowed them out of the King's Treasury 6000 Duccats a Year. Palama and
Merida, and through this Country of Granada, lies the Road way to Lima, all by
Land. It is strong, by reason of its Situation, much among stony Crags or
Rocks, which environ it, and through which there are very narrow passages, yet
is it full of pleasant Valleys, which yield much Fruit, Corn, and Indian Maize;
it affords Silver Mines, and many Golden Sand Rivers.

Carthagena, the last Province of Castella Aurea, is of a very Fruitful Soil,
but not without some evil quality; for it produces a Tree that grasped by the
Hand proves a rank Poison, and the party hardly escapes without loss of Life,
or Member; the Chief City is Carthagena, Surprised and Plundered by Drake, Anno
1585. who, beside a Rich Booty, carried from thence 230 pieces of Ordinance. It
is now reasonably well Fortified, though not so strong as Portobel; the City is
Fair and very Rich, by reason of the great quantity of Pearl brought thither
from Margarita, and the King's Revenue, which for all Nova Granada, are sent to
this place; it is a Bishop's See, and in it are many Stately Churches and
Cloisters, adorned with Riches; to this City likewise comes yearly small
Vessels, Laden with Indico, Cochinele, and Sugar, made and had in the Country
of Guatemala; the Spaniards thinking it safer to Ship their Goods in those
little Vessels on the Lake of Granada, in Nicaragua, and from thence to send
them hither, to be Shipped in the Galeons, that come from Portobel, with the
Treasure of Peru, than to send them by Honduras, in which way, they have become
a Prey to other Nations. The City next in Rank, is Abuida; the next, Sta
Martha, Inhabited by Spaniards, who are very Rich; it is Seated on the River
Abuida, otherwise named St. John; and Rio di Grand Venezuel, and New Cales, in
this Track, are Towns of considerable Note, Rich, and Populous; and these three
Provinces, viz. Andaluzia Nova, Nova Grana, and Carthagena, the Spaniards term
it their Terafirma; for that from the North, they are the strength of Peru, and
the basis of this Reverse Pyramid.

There are yet many Rich Islands under the Spanish Power, as that of Margarita,
Situate in the Sea, near Castella Aurea, called the Jewel-Island, from the
great quantity of Pearl and Precious Stones found about it. It is true, it is
but poor in Fruit Trees, Corn, and Herbage, having scarcely any upon it; the
Water is likewise scarce, as is any thing good or pleasant, so that the
Inhabitants in the hot-seasons will exchange a Tun of Wine for as much curious
Cool Spring Water; but the Jewels got there make large amends, by greatly
enriching the People, so that there are many Rich Merchants, who have 30, 40,
or 50, Blackamoor Slaves, kept purposely to dive for Pearls, and other Precious
things. These are let down in Baskets, and feel about the Rocks and places
where they suspect they are, and will stay under Water a Quarter of an Hour,
and when their Breath begins to fail, they give the Sign, by pulling a Rope to
those on the surface in their Boats, to draw them up with such things as they
have rifled the Ocean of; and their Masters are obliged to Feast and make much
of them, least out of a sullen humor they should under Water be careless of so
weighty a business, where they cannot see them act, nor give them directions;
for the Spaniards, though they love the Profit, are themselves averse to the
fatigue and hazard in procuring it; for many times these poor Diverse are drawn
up with a Leg or an Arm off, and sometimes taken quite away by some devouring
Sea-Monstrous Fish; at other times when they Dive without a Basket or Rope,
they are sucked by the Water under the hollow caveties of the Rock, whence they
cannot with all their struggling disentangle themselves, but there unavoidably
perish. From this Island, the Pearls are sent to be dressed and bored at
Carthagena; where is a Fair Street, of no other Shops than Pearl-dressers.
Commonly in the Month of June, there is a Ship or two ready in this Island to
carry the King's Revenue, and Merchant's Pearls thither; and one of their
Cargoes is seldom valued at less than three or fourscore Thousand Duccats,
which sometimes falls into the Hands of Free-Booters.

Cuba, is an other Island, 300 Miles in length, and 70 broad, found out by
Columbus, in his second Navigation to these Coasts; it is full of Woods, Lakes,
Rivers and Mountains, the Air Temperate, the Soil very Fruitful. It produces
Brass of exact perfection, and some Gold, though not so fine as in other parts.
It abounds with Ginger, Cassia, Mastick, Aloes, some Cinnamon, Canafistula,
Sarsaparilla and Sugar, great store of Fish, Fowls, and other Flesh; so that
the ships on their return to Spain, take in much Provision here. The chief
Cities are St. Jago on the Northern Shore, but James de Valasco is a Bishop's
See. Havana, which is also seated on the Northern Shore, and is a very
commodious Haven for Shiping, so strongly Fortified, that the Spaniards term it
the Key of America, to lock up the Door or Entrance; here usually Rides the
King of Spain's Navy, and in this Port meet all the Merchants Ships from
several Ports and Havens in Islands or Continent, and commonly in the Month of
September, join all the Treasure, as I may say, of America, all the King of
Spain's Revenues, with as much more of Merchants Goods, which is often worth 30
Millions: It has two strong Castles, one at the point of the Haven, where the
Entrance lies toward the Sea, and the other on the other side within, almost
over against it, and by reason the passage of the Entrance is so narrow, that
not above one great Ship at a time can sail in; these Castles admirably defend
it, or may well do it against a strong Naval Force. I took a view of these
Castles, and found them very strong and regular, there are besides others, 12
pieces of great Brass Ordinance, called by the Names of the 12 Apostles, yet
the Dutch, and other Nations, have sometimes insulted them in the Mouth of this
Haven, and taken considerable Prizes within sight and reach of the Castle Guns;
and in the Year 1629. they took no less than 7 Millions, most of it the King of
Spain's Treasure going for Cales, and from one Friar they took a Cabinet of
Gold Chains, Pearl, and precious Stones, worth 40000 Duccats, and forced the
Galleons on shore, in a River near the Port, which Miscarriage being laid to
the charge of Don Juan de Guzman Y Torres, the Admiral, at his return to Spain,
he was Imprisoned, and soon after lost his Head.

The next that presented was another Island, much greater than any I have yet
mentioned, now called Hispaniola, anciently by the Natives Hatie. It is in
compass 1500 Miles, the Air very Temperate, Soil fertile, and has in it several
rich Mines; there is a considerable Town from the Neighboring Coasts, for this
Island produces Amber, Ginger, Sugar, Hides, Wax, and many other Commodities;
the Gold is here very fine, and the Sugar Canes larger than in other places, so
that one of them will fill 20, and sometimes 30 Measures. The Corn usually
yields a Hundred Fold, the whole Island being Fertilized by 4 great Rivers
proceeding from a huge Mountain standing in the Center, viz. Juna running to
the East, Artihinnacus to the West, Jacchius to the North, and Naibus to the
South. The Woods are vast, and breed abundance of wild Swine, whose Flesh is a
great Dainty, yet the Country in many places is but thinly inhabited, because
the Spaniards on their first possessing it, destroyed about 3 Millions of the
Natives.

The chief City is St. Domingo, where there is a President and Court of
Chancery, with six Judges, and other proper Officers. It is likewise the Sea of
an Archbishop, who, though he possesses not so great a Revenue as the
Archbishops of Mexico and Lima, yet his Honor exceeds them, for he is Primate
of all the Indies: This Island having been conquered, and settled, it bares
Precedence by Antiquity; there are other rich trading Cities and Towns, as St.
Thomas, St. Isabella, St. John Maragna and Porto, where the Merchants Trade
much, and are very Wealthy.

America, is at this time so called from Americus Vespusius, who claimed the
Honor of naming it, though Columbus first discovered it, as has been already
hinted. There are in all the Spanish Indies (for other Nations possess large
Territories, as well as they, where at present, my Travels lay not, and
therefore I shall not undertake now to describe them) four Archbishops, viz. of
Mexico, Lima, St. Domingo and St. Fee, and about 30 Bishops subordinate to
them; the public Administration of Justice is Principally committed to the two
Viceroys of Peru and Mexico, the former residing at Lima, and the latter at
the City of Mexico, and with subordination to other Presidents, Governors, and
chief Justices, except the President of Guatemala, and St. Domingo, who are
accountable only to the Council of Spain.

CHAP. XXV. The Nature, Superstition, Manner, Customs, Labor, Diet and
Observations of the Indians in particular, and in General of the Spaniards;
showing the Tyranny of the Latter over the former, and many other things worthy
of curious Remarks, with my Return for England by the way of Spain, and other
matters.
THus having taken a Survey, and discribed the greater Inhabited part of the
new World (as many term it, which Nature had so long reserved from our
Knowledge, as her private Tireing-room, that being decked in all her Beauties,
and Golden Ornaments, she might at length appear more glorious than at first;)
pursuing my Method, I now in the close come to speak more particularly of the
Inhabitants, and chiefly of the Indians, for the Humor, Customs and Religion
of the Spaniards, which vary little in this distant Region, are already
sufficiently known to Europeans.

The Indians are Vassals to the Spaniards, and for the most part little better
than Slaves, to be at their Beck, and fulfill their imperious desires with the
labor of their Bodies, and the little Wealth they can scrape together, for
though in the Towns alloted them, where they are in any Number, they are
allowed Officers of their own, yet they dare act little without the concurrence
of the Spanish Magistrates, even among their own Tribes; and to keep their
courage low, they are deprived of offensive Weapons, and great Penalties laid
on such, where, upon search, they shall be found. The Friars and other
Ecclesiastics, command their service for nothing, having a certain number
allowed at the public charge of other Indians to do their Drudgery, as
fetching Water, Wood, Fishing for them, Tilling and Sowing their Ground, and
the Seculars allow them but half a Ryal a day, though they compel them to leave
their own Land untilled, leaving their Families to come many Miles to serve
their turns; and to this, they are pressed to severe Penalties, being
inflicting on the Refuser for a set number of days, as shall be required, and
many times these poor Wretches leave their Wives and Children starving at Home
in the mean time; and when they have done their Work, they are sent away with
little or nothing, except sometimes Threats and Cudggeling, if they dare
dispute it, or so much as murmur at what is said to them, or else turned over
to an other that will give the Spaniard any allowance for their Labor,
according to the first, or standing Agreement, though the work be never so
hard, or above their strength; though indeed, they are mostly of very strong
Bodies, and well proportioned in their Limbs, and would be far more industrious
than they are, had they any tolerable Encouragement. But seeing their Lives and
Estates are at the mercy of the Conquerors, few, considering their vast Number,
strive to increase Riches, but content themselves with a supply of ordinary
Food and Raiment, going mostly Barefooted in all Seasons, and any Passenger
traveling the Road, may require an Officer to furnish him with an Indian or
Moor, to guide his Mules, and carry heavey Trunks; and after they cavel with
them at the Journeys end, for some pretended neglect, and send them back with
Blows instead of the promised Reward of their labor. If they refuse to Work
when ordered, or run away when Hired, they are sought out by the Officers, and
publicly Whipped in the Market place; this, and more severe Usuage, than I think
fit to name, least it should not be credited amongst compassionate Christians,
makes many of them weary of their Lives; so that coming Home from these Labors
and Abuses, they have refused to Ea^ and voluntarily pined themselves to Death,
notwithstanding the Tears and Persuasion, of their Wives and Friends, to incite
them to a patient bareing of the Sufferings, and live.

As for their Religion, some in the remoter parts are still Heathen Idolaters,
paying Adorarion as covertly, as they can the imaginary God's of their
Ancesters, and lay a great stress on their Protection, as Fire, Air, the Sun,
Moon, and other things by several Names; for anciently they Worshipped a great
number of Gods, and had stately Temples Erected to them, sacrificing Human
Flesh and Blood on their Altars, either of Prisoners taken in War with one
another, or such as voluntarily offered themselves, or were chosen by Lot: The
Names of their several Idols, and manner of their Ancient Worship not being
proper to my Subject, but rather for a History. I shall pass them over, however
at present, they have a kind of public Esteem, or a kind of Veneration for
certain Beasts, which they make exceeding much of, and cherish as their
Gaurdians or Titul^rs, though they profess the Romish Religion, as the Priests
have incerted it unto them and one thing I took special Notice off, that they
were more Admirers of the Pictures of those Saints, that have Pictures of
Beasts painted by them, as St. Mark, with a Lion, St Luke, with a Bull, St.
Dominick, with a Dog, and a flaming Torch in his Mouth, etc. then of those that
are without such Emblems con^e^^ing that they like them the better, and comply
with the Devotion paid to them, because it agreed with the Worship of their
Ancestors. Those that are able, are very careful to buy the Picture of one
Saint or other, as their fancy leads them, and give the Priest Money to have a
place for it in the Church; and by this a great deal of Money is screwed out of
them, for from that time the Priest styles the Party, the Patron of that Saint,
and he is obliged to bring Offerings, and leave before him, especially on his
Day, very considerable, which being left, the Priest sweeps away, and Converts
it to his own use, selling then the Wax Candles they offer many times over and
over, which, with other things, brings a great Income. Where there is a number
of these Saints in a Church, and often he stirs them up with Tauntings and
Revilings, to mind it as a Duty, or to expect some great punishment from their
angry Saint, if they slack in their Offerings, and many times he lays hold of
Sickness in their Families, or Death of Cattle, telling them for want of their
Offerings, and neglect of their Devotion and Charity, their slighted Saint is
Angry, and has thus punished them, which frights them into large Contributions;
on which, the Priests lives Fat, and laughs in his Sleave at their Simplicity
and Ignorance. Yet for all this, he himself so little fears the Saint, that he
will throw his Picture out of the Church, if the party who owned him dies, and
none of his Kindred, or others, come at a set time, after Proclamation made,
with their Offering, to own and new Patronize him, declaring such Saints as
have none to offer to them, are useless and incumber the places in the Church,
where others might stand who have Patrons that would bring Offerings; and the
Picture being thrown out of the Church, is carried to the Townhouse, and then
if the Friends of the Owner will have it again, they must pay the price that
will be set upon it, which is usually more than it cost at first.

The Indians are very Ignorant in their Devotion, and undiscerning in matters
of Religion; for if they be asked any material point, their usual answer is, It
may be so for ought they know; and indeed, those that should be their Spiritual
Guides, labor to keep them as Ignorant as they can, that they may the better
work their Ends on them, though when they come to Church, they outwardly in
Jestures appear very Devout, and are careful when at the point of Death, to
have a Confessor, and receive the Extreme Unction, though some of the heads of
them that are somewhat more Learned than the rest, are held secretly to
practice Magyck, and traffic with the Devil; some affirm they can change their
shapes into Beasts and Birds, and in that shape, some of them have been shot,
yet as soon as Dead, they were in their own shape again; though this, I
believe, may be a tale of some Spaniards, who had Murdered them, and forged it
upon them to excuse their own Guilt. Yet this is certainly Recorded, that one
Gomez and Lopez, Heads of Indian Tribes, and both in years, who had seemed very
Devout in the Romish Religion, were justified by several Witnesses, to be seen
Fighting on a Mountain; the first, in the shape of a Lion, and the latter, in
that of a Tiger, and when the first came home, he was much Bruised, Bitten and
Wounded, and of it soon died; and though he confessed nothing of it to the
Priest, who Confessed him, and gave him the Extreme Unction, yet the latter by
the Spanish Justice, was seized and Tried, and hanged as a Magycian, or a
Practiser of Charms and Witchcraft. Its true, they had been a long time mortal
Enemies, and the one might be guilty of the other's death; but as for their
transforming their shapes, that I leave to believed, or dis-believed, at your
pleasure.

The Indians keep the Festivals of the Romish Church with great Mirth and
Jolitry, Singing and Dancing; to conclude them after an Antic fashion, they
act the Show of the Wise Men's coming to Christ at his Nativity, with their
Offerings, etc. in their Churches or Chapels, and have every thing prepared
there suitable to that purpose, making great Mirth and Feasting after it is
over; and on such days the Priests fairs well, for there are few that offer not
Money, but Fowl, Bacon, Coco-Nuts, Wax, Tapers, and the richest amongst them,
are procured to present the Kings of the East, who fail not to provide Gold,
Frankincense and Mirrh, and all this falls to the Priest's share who manages
the Show.

Their Funerals are after the Romish Fashion, unless upon some Disgust they are
refused Christian Burial, but that may be recalled for Money; they Marry, and
live very peaceably in their Families, the Women being very Obedient to their
Husbands, owning them to be their Lords and Rulers, thinking nothing they can
do too much for them; they are very Fruitful in Children, and most commonly
Healthy, so that though such multitudes of them have been purposely Destroyed,
consumed in the Mines, and put in Lakes and Rivers, yet the Spaniards, who are
not by half so Fruitful, are but a handful in Number to them, though these few
have so broken their Spirits, and kept them under, that now they are of no
Courage comparable to what Historians Report of their Ancesters, who disputed
it in many well fought and Bloody Battles with the Spaniards, putting them hard
to it before they could bring them under subjection, and settle what is now, by
the Pope's Donation, the King of Spain's claim in Sovereignty, as rightful
Inheritance, though indeed their Orders are for kind usage to the Indians, and
that they shall not be made Slaves, but have in a due proportion an equal Foot
with the Spaniards; but these things are not minded, and their Complaints when
made to the Spanish Magistrates as little regarded, for they have rarely any
redress; but if they put any Abuse or Affront upon a Spaniard, they are
severely punished, and compelled to make a threefold restitutution for any
thing they defraud them of; beside Corporal Punishment, there lies an Appeal of
Punishment in ordinary Cases, from their own Magistrates, to the Priest of the
Town where they live, who determines the Sentence, whither after given by the
Magistrates, the Criminal shall be Punished, or Acquitted; and if he be
Punished, then the Priest has the ordering of it in the Church; and this the
Indians seem to rejoice at, saying, their being Whipped by the Church Censure
is for the good of their Souls, and cannot any ways redound to their Disgrace;
and whilst the Priest is in the Town, the Indian Magistrates dare not inflict
Punishments, or lay Fines, without his Leave and Approbation, therefore
sometimes they contrive to do it in his Absence; but this often displeases him,
and makes him exert his Power, to cause those Magistrates to be whipped in the
Church, who dared to do it in Contempt of him; and so Absolute are they over
the Towns where they are placed as Curates, that the people dare not repine,
but seem willingly to accept of what Stripes or Punishments are laid on them by
him, foolishly conceiting that his Wisdom, Sentence, and Punishing Hand, is the
Wisdom, Sentence and Hand of God, whom they have been Taught, is above all
Princes, Judges, and Worldly Officers, and so that the Priests as his
Ministers, are above all secular Power and Worldly Authority.

As for their lying, it is only in Mantles wrapped about them, in their Houses,
on the bare Ground, or some Mat or Quilt under it; the better sort have two
Rooms on a Floar, without any other Story; the poor have but one; the Chimney
is in the middle of the Kitchen, and a hole made for the Smoke to go out at the
Top of the House, so that the Soot spreads the Roof, and they live in a
continued Smoke, whilst their Fires last; their Meat they sell to the Spaniards
is course, saving their Fowl, as Shins of Beef, sliced and dried in the Wind,
then seasoned with Salt and Water, and rolled up in little hard lumps, which
boiled, serves them in their Travels; they make likewise Frixola's of
Turkey-Beans and Maize, of which, they have great plenty, and industriously
seek for Hedge-Hogs in the Season, which they count a dainty Dish, and the
Spaniards also Eat them, they Tasting like a Sucking-Pig; but whether this
Creature is Flesh or not, or to be Eaten in Lent, there is yet a Dispute among
the Priests; some allow the Eating of them, others contradict them; so nice are
they in frivolous scruples, when in weightier things their Consciences are not
touched. When the Indians get Venison in the Woods they Bury it, and cover it
with Boughs, until it corrupts or stinks, then they parboyl it with a Herb like
our Tansey, then dry it in the Wind, and afterward in Smoke, and so boil it
well; and indeed it Eats very short, but according to their Dressing not over
Savory; they have other sorts of Provisions, yet are but indifferent Cooks.

Their Liquor is chiefly Chochalet, made ordinary, with Coco-Nuts, and some
other ingredients, but not Costly, with Spices and Persumes, as the Spaniards
make it; when they have a mind to be Drunk, they have another sort of Liquor,
made of Coccos Molasses, and the juice of Tobacco-Roots, which they keep in a
Jarr a long time, till it has a strong stinking Scent, and then they get a
great many privately together in a House to Drink it; for it is Prohibited
them, because when they are Drunk, they are Raving, and in a manner Distracted,
committing Outrages on their own Family and others; and for that reason they
are Prohibited Wine also, unless as a Cordial, when they are Sick or Faint; yet
the Spaniards entice them to their Houses, and privately Sell it them at Dear
Rates, for their own great Gain; for they know when they are Drunk they will
Spend all they have to the last Peney, if they can get Wine for it, not
disputing the Score, how much soever they are Cheated; and when they are Drunk
they Quarrel with them, their Money being first all Spent, and turn them into
the Streets, so that the Stocks are combered with them, and on this particular
account many Spaniards have got very great Estates.

This Country is often subject to the Plague of Locust, as well as violent
Earthquakes, prodigeous Thunders and Lightnings, and in some places great
innundations; yet by these Calamities the Priests gain much Money, by carrying
the Saints in Procession, and Selling them Bread stamped with the Image of a
Saint, to protect their Persons, Fields, and Houses, and much more Money for
Masses, to the Saints, when the Calamities is over, by whose Intercession, they
make the Indians believe, it ceased. Purgatory brings them a vast Income, few
Indians Dying but leave so many Crowns, for so many Masses to be said for the
good of their Souls.

Thus Reader having, as I think, given you a satisfactory Account of this
Golden Country and People, tired with long Travel, I now prepare to return to
my Native Country. You may remember I was got as far as Havan, and gave you
also an Account of Hispaniola, etc. being then successfully Embarked with the
Galleys, without meeting any opposition from Enemies, though we heard there
were several abroad; we weathered two or three Storms, and lost but one Ship in
the Gulf or Streights of Bahama, of 600 Tun, very Richly Laden; and having at
length a prosperous Gale, came to Cales in 8 Weeks, from our last loosing
Anchor. I had got something of Value in the Indies, which I Quilted up in my
Clothes and Bed, it lying in a small room; and after I had viewed the Town,
(which is now Fairly Built, and well Fortified, though in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, the English made themselves Masters of it, and almost destroyed it,)
I went to visit my Merchant, who received me with great kindness, asking many
Questions of my Travels, which in brief I resolved him, and made him sensible
how desirous I was to return to my own Country; and after so tedious a Travel
of almost encompassing the Globe of the Earth, there to repose my self, and
keep my Promise with my Friends, who I knew would be overjoyed to see me
return; he did not oppose it, but kept me off with delays, in laying before me
the danger I was in, of being taken by the French, or Barbary Corsaries, that
infested the Seas, unless I staid for a Convoy; I was ruled by him, and he
entertained me with all the Civility imaginably, and no sooner the English
Ships were to Sail, and such an opportunity offered, but he gave me notice of
it, presented me with Rasins, Sugar, Oranges, Lemons, and a Cask of good
Canary; sent several Letters by me to his Correspondents in London, and so we
friendly took leave of each other. I soon agreed for my Passage and Diet, at
the Master's Table, and so to be brief, came safe to London; where, my Friends
after so long absence, my Speech being much altered in Toneing the Languages of
diverse Nations where I had been, scarce knew me, though before to their great
satisfaction I had written to them, from the Downs, of my safe Arrival there;
but when they saw by evident looking, it was their Prodigal returned in safety
from strange Lands, after so much Toil, Fateigue, and Hardship, the Escaping so
many dangers, etc. the Fatted Calf, was instantly Killed, great Feasting and
Rejoicing ensued, which being moderated by time, and a little over, to avoid
ten Thousand Questions, of where I had been, and the particulars of what I
observed, at the Request of those that had done so well for me, and now so
Lovingly received me, I took leisure time to Write what you have perused,
hoping it will give my Countrymen as an entire satisfaction as I have had, in
the undertaking and performing my Travels, and then no doubt but both of us
will be well pleased.

FINIS.

