THE Case Stated BETWEEN ENGLAND And the United Provinces, In this present
Juncture. Together with a short view of those Netherlanders in their late
Practices

As to -- Religion, Liberty, Leagues, Treaties, Amities.


Published for the Information of, and a warning to England;

By a Friend to this Commonwealth.

-- They rewarded me Evil for Good, Psalm 35. 12. And Joab said unto Amasa,
Art thou in health my brother: and Joab took Amasa by the beard with the right
hand to Kiss him, but Amasa took no heed to the Sword that was in Joabs hand;
so he smote him therewith in the Fifth Ribb, 2 Samuel 22. 9, 10. Who knowing the
Judgment of God (that they which commit such things are worthy of Death) not
only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them, Romans 1. 32. For thus
says the Lord of Hosts, After the Glory has he sent me to the Nations that
spoiled you; for he that touches you, touches the Apple of his Eye, Zach. 2.
8. London, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, and are to be sold by Anthony Williamson at
the Queens-arms in Paul's churchyard, near the West End, M. DC. LII.

The Case stated between ENGLAND and the UNITED Provinces, in this present
Juncture.
HAd it pleased the supreme disposer of all things (who changes times and
seasons, and does with the Nations of the World as he pleases) to have
continued the ancient Amity and friendship that has been between the
Commonwealth of England and the United Provinces (which on our parts has
always been endeavored) It would have been matter of great content unto us, to
have wanted the opportunity of discourses of this nature, the English Nation
having given for almost a century of years together, the most unparalleled
Testimonies of their affections and love unto those Countries; but since they
seem to choose War rather then Peace, in bringing their armed Fleets to our
borders, and there in a hostile manner assaulting, and endeavoring to destroy
part of our Navy, whilst the Amity between them and us continued, yea, even
when their Ambassadors were treating with us for a strict League and Union; and
notwithstanding the great tenderness of this State to avoid every thing that
might lead to a Rupture, saving the undoubted Rights and Dominion of this
Nation, and the Justice they ought to administer to their People, thereby
enforcing us to some engagement; and seeing how necessary it is in such times
as these, that the People be rightly informed in the state of things, I have
briefly placed a few things together as the state of the Case, whereby the
People of England may know, how much it concerns them to look about in this
present Juncture.

When the Spaniard was likely to have swallowed up the People of the United
Provinces, their Liberty and Exercise of the Protestant Religion in the days
of Queen Elizabeth, and the sad groans of those then distressed States; were by
their Public Ministers breathed forth to the State of England; though the
constitution then of this Nation was under Monarchy; Though the Nation had but
then abandoned the practice of the Popish Religion professed therein for many
hundreds of years before, which greatly dissetled the Peace thereof, and caused
many Rebellions; Though this Nation was then engaged in War with Ireland and
the Countries about; Though the chief Government thereof was by a Woman, matter
of encouragement to Enemies both abroad and at home to design upon England;
Though all these were very great grounds, wherefore England should have looked
to her self, and not empty her Treasures, and weaken her Force for the
preservation of others, especially when that thereby she was likely to provoke
the Spanish Powers against her self (as it afterward fell out in 1588) yet so
open was the heart of the People of England to receive the cries of the United
Provinces, so tenderly did they resent their Condition, that as if it were not
now the Dutch, but the condition of England; they willingly espoused their
Quarrel, undertook their Protection: the Parliament of England advanced Queen
Elizabeth several subsidies for this work, and England enabled her to lend the
Dutch eleven hundred thousand Pound Sterling, (which was a great sum of money in
those days, and to them especially, who could then hardly raise any
considerable sum for the management of so great an affair in all their
Provinces) shipped them over many thousands of English men, when their own
Country afforded very few Soldiers: and all this when neither League, Amity,
or Reciprocal kindness required them thereunto; and which through the goodness
of God) put a present stop to the Spaniard, who was breaking in upon them like
the breach of the sea; and in time helped them into that condition which has
occasioned them to give themselves the title of High and Mighty States; and
assisted their Nation so, not for a year, but for above four score years; not
in the beginning of their Wars only, but till the last year, that by Peace
there was an end of War; not when their condition had a probable dress of
advantage upon it, but when it was under the greatest improbabilities: and this
not with a thousand men's lives only, but with the lives of many thousands,
whose blood was shed in their Wars. Nor did the necessity of our Engagements
with Rebels within, and the neighbor Nations round about, cause us to withdraw
our help from them; but so dear were their Liberties and the profession of the
Protestant Religion with them to us, that it seemed to be but one Nation, one
Cause and quarrel; being entertained by us with the affections of Brethren, the
love of Friends, and the respects of Neighbors and Allies; nor have we envyed
at, but rejoiced in their welfare and prosperity.

In process of time when the late King of England, thought fit to put in
execution, what had been before contrived in his Father's days; to wit, the
enslaving of England; and to that end advanced his prerogative, above the Law,
by which he ought to have ruled, both by his oath, and the constitution of this
Nation, and his power upon the consciences of his Subjects in the Injunction of
superstitious Innovations in Religious Services (which with his tolleration of
Popery, permitting of many Jesuits, and the Popes Nuntio in England, himself
being sometimes seen at Mass) were black symptoms of the Antichristian
darkness coming upon us: and to advance this end levied Arms against the Scots,
who (then) both saw and opposed those growing mischiefs; when these things
answered not his expectation, but rather turned both Nations into union to
withstand such proceedings, he countenanced, if not commissionated that horrid,
and not to be paralleled Rebellion in Ireland, the blood whereof is not stopped
to this very day; and yet when he saw the Parliament more resolved to oppose
his wicked and Tyrannical proceedings, and that nothing would serve them, but
Justice on his evil Counselors, and security for their Laws and Liberties,
being grieved that he had condiscended to any thing (though it was their due,
and what was forced from him) that concerned their Liberty; and that he might
recover all that the People of England had got of their own of him and his
Predecessors, at once by the Sword; he set up his Standard at Nottingham,
bidding thereby defiance to the Parliament, and the Laws of England; whereupon
the flames of War broke forth in every part, and nothing but the levying of
Arms, and the sad calamities of War abounded in all parts of this Nation: When
the Parliament were thus enforced to wrestle with the powers of the King, the
Malignity and opposition of most of the Nobility and Gentry; the whole
Prelaticall and Atheistical party, the Court, and Monopoly Dependants; the
name of a King which had then some awe amongst the people, the Treachery and
apostasy of many of their Members and Officers in Civil and Military
Employments: The War of Ireland, and the Powers of foreign Kingdoms, who in
point of Interest might be expected to engage against them; and that through
the blood of the People, and the hazards of War, they were constrained to
proceed for the obtaining of that Liberty, which the King was in duty to have
preserved From whom could they expect any affections, but from the Dutch? who
in point of Interest, being themselves a Commonwealth, but even now torn out
of the Jaws of Monarchy through a sea of Blood, and millions of Treasure: In
point of preservation, we being the Generations of those, who took their Cause,
out of the dust, and set it in the Throne; and who balanced always the late
Kings envy and malice to that State: themselves also having the designs of the
Prince of Orange in their own Bowels, working up toward the height of that
Tyranny, which the Enemies sword would have set up in England. And in point of
gratitude to those people, who had chosen the Neatherlanders before their own
safety, in theirs and the Neatherlanders greatest times of danger, were so
deeply engaged. One would think that their affections, their bowels, their
money, their force, and their very souls should have been ready, to be powered
out for the Parliament, whom God made formerly the very Instruments of their
being, and upon whom they might write the Foundation under God of their
Prosperity, at least that they should not malign their Cause, or advantage
their Enemy. But instead thereof their Envy to our Nation, Malignity to our
Cause, assistance to our Enemy, affronts and scorns to us and our friends in
the day of our calamity, have exceeded; Shall I say any, nay all our neighbors
round about; they became our enemies Treasury for Money, their Magazine for
Arms and Ammunition, their Arsenall for Artillery, and warlick provisions both
by Sea and Land; their refuge and shelter, their place for counsel and advice,
and no doubt had publicly asserted our enemies interest, had not the
consideration of their great advantage in getting the Trade and Riches of
England into their hands by our wars, persuaded a seeming Newtrality.

Nor did these things satisfy them, as if they thought they could never show
respect enough to our enemies, and enmity to us; Borrel and Raynswoold their
Ambassadors, in the year 1645. coming into England, upon pretense of
reco^ciling our differences, besides other disservices, in the then House of
Commons assigned the Justice of the quarrel on the Kings side (an unparaleld
affront, and every way unfit to be given by any, especially by Foreign
States, who were not concerned in our civil differences) and which the Lords
and Commons in Parliament then took notice of in their Declaration to the
States General of those Provinces.

Afterward Mr. Strickland, our Agent, had the Door of the States General shut
against him for the space of about one year and a half, and never admitted
audience; though at the same time Macdowell, Agent for the King of Scots, had
admittance, to whom when Dr. Dorislans was added, he was assassinated in their
Provinces, and to this day not so much as a Warrant sent forth by the States
General for the apprehending of those murderers, nor have they proscribed them
their Dominions, nor any thing done by them, whereby their abhorrency of the
Murder of a public Minister might appear.

Nor have things rested here, but when the Lord Saint Joh^ and Mr. Strickland
were lately sent over Ambassadors after the death of the Prince of Orange (upon
whom as a cause some of the former injuries against us were laid) how were they
affronted, and endeavored to be mischieved by Prince Edward, who called them
Dogs to their faces; and Apsley who designed to strangle the Lord Saint John
in his chamber (to say nothing of all the abuses attempted upon them by the
ungoverned multitude, and on their followers, and the assaults on their houses)
and though they were some days in their power, after complaints and demands of
justice made, yet were not secured, and brought to justice, or proscribed to
this day; which being added to the former affronts and injuries, and the
delays in the treaty, though it provoked not the Parliament to a demand of
present reparation (so tender have they always been of a breach with them) yet
they so ill resented it, that it was one reason wherefore they recalled those
Ambassadors.

It will be too long to reckon up the several supplies of Officers, Soldiers,
Arms, Ammunition, Artillery, Money, Ships, and Provisions, that have been
issued from those Countries for the assistance of the late King, and the then
King of Scots his son, in their wars against the Parliament of England, in
England, Scotland, and Ireland; particularly the 20000 Arms, 26 Field Guns, and
250 Barrels of powder, shipped aboard two ships at Amsterdam for England; when
the King of Scots was lately at Worcester with his Army, and at the said Kings
desire. Likewise, the many intolerable injuries, depredations and Murders
committed on several of the English Nation, as in the case of Amboyna, 1622.
sufficiently known to the world, and which was perpetrated even when the
people were alive that saw what the English had done for them in the days of
Queen Elizabeth, and soon after a solemn Treaty and Agreement made of all
differences between the Nations in those parts: The many high Insolences and
affronts given this Nation at Sea, in dragging the Colors of England under the
Sterns of their ships, after they had most injuriously taken their ships and
goods from them, and caneing the Seamen for being (as they called it) against
their King; some of this practiced on several English but the last Summer, and
the robbing of the English Merchants of their ships and goods at Sea to very
great values. Such things being fitter for a Volume then a few sheets of paper.

It will take up too much time also to particularize their late securing our
ships and goods several times that were within their coasts, there being no
cause given by us for such proceedings; The marching of their Forces to their
frontier Towns, beating up of Drums for Volunteers to man 150 sail of ships of
War, which they declared to us they were providing; their people calling for
Arms against us, and raging after such a manner, as the English Merchants went
not without danger in their streets, and all this when their Ambassadors were
treating with us here for a strict League and Union, and when we had no
thoughts of engaging against them, or began any preparations to reinforce our
Navy, though it was high time after such alarms as those, for the Parliament of
England to provide for the security of their Seas and Traffic.

And that they might indeed show their good will to this Commonwealth, after
much time had bin spent in treating for a more strict Union, and things were
drawing to some conclusion, is it not manifest that they meant nothing less
then a peaceable accommodation, and intended their treaties as the disguised
Ushers of treachery and war; in that Trump on the 19 of May 1652. with 42
ships of war, came up to the Downs, and there assaulted our General Blake,
who riding near Foulstone with fourteen ships only, was enforced for some time
by himself and afterward with the rest of his Fleet, to maintain four hours
sharp fight till night parted them. In which the providence of God mightily
appeared, in preserving our Fleet, and repelling the enemy to his loss and
dishonor and thereby delivered this Island at that time from the design,
treachery, domination and cruelty of those people, who when their tongues were
smoother then oil, prepared war in their hearts, and with their hands put it in
execution. Nor can it be otherwise understood then a designed engagement, if so
be his anchoring in Dover Road with his Fleet, when extremity of weather did
not enforce him; his refusing to strike, when Dover Castle by their shot
summoned him thereto: the denying the Merchanrs of Dover the night before the
fight, to perform their accustomed civility to visit their Fleet; his sending
two of his ships to Major Bourn, who lay there only with eight sail of ships,
the striking of those ships, and their endeavors seemingly to excuse Van
Trumps coming so near, and alledgeing the reason why he came no nearer, (viz.)
to avoid giving offense, in regard of the controversy (as he called it) of the
Flag; and that he intended no injury to the English Nation: which made Major
Bourn jealous that they intended some mischief; therefore he commanded out two
ships to attend their motions, and sent General Blake notice of their being
there: His moving the next day toward the French Coasts when General Blake
came in sight of him, and upon speaking with a Dutch Vessel, which made all
the sail she could to him, and wafted her Flag to signify as much; his coming
up presently with full wind and sail to General Blake, who rode alone from his
other ships; his refusing to strike (the ancient and undoubted acknowledgement
of the English right and sovereignty in the adjacent Seas) when General Blake
summoned him thereunto by a Gun without a Ball, another with a Ball, his
fiering through General Blakes Colors, and falling upon him with a broad side
immediately without any parley, before General Blake gave him a broad side; his
setting up presently a red Flag, which being the sign before given; the rest
of his ships fell on our General, and maintained with him and his other ships, a
very hot fight, as aforesaid, and as by the narrative of the engagement, and
the examinations of his own Officers, and letters relating thereunto, printed
by order of Parliament, and ordered to be given unto their Ambassadors, as an
answer to their Papers and Desires for the proceed of the Treaty does appear.
Together with his being angry with one of the said Captains in Holland, because
he struck sail to our Friggats, as he came from the Streights, as the said
Captain and the Lieutenant now taken prisoners, upon their examinations
acknowledge; besides what other accounts we have received of their debates, and
preparations to engage our Fleet.

Now what has England done to these people, that might occasion any such
disingenuous and hostile proceedings? Oh, that they would produce their cause,
that we might answer thereunto, and leave it to the world to judge! Certainly
had they any real cause to assign, that might bear weight in the balance we
should have heard thereof ere now; for they are a people that are seldom
wanting in things of that Nature.

Only we heard that the granting of Letters of Mart by us, has been made use
of to incense those people against this State, and by making of them mad, under
that pretense to shed their blood in an unjust war, and to hasten their own and
the destruction of their Country. There is nothing more clear then that the
granting of Letters of Mart, in cases where Justice is denied to be done, after
it has been duly sought (as is our case) is a necessary, lawful, and just
way, according to Reason; and the Laws of Nations, practiced throughout the
world, and by themselves; and that such Letters of Reprisall are so far from
being the occasion of War, that they are in such cases the ultimate
Preservatives against National Engagements (otherwise for Injuries done to the
Subjects of any Nation by a Foreign People, War must effect the satisfaction,
or it may be lawful for any to rob and spoil on the Seas, that are enabled
with power so to do) it might occasion some discourse of that nature at large,
and the quoting of their own, as well as the practices of other Nations for
Instances: but thus has been the case with us, that for very great Injuries
and Blood, and after above twenty years waiting in some cases for Justice of
them, which being denied, the Justice of this State renewed but one Letter of
Reprisall upon them in the case of Mistress Paulet, granted by the late King
for recompense of 20000 l. principal, besides charges, of 20 years standing,
her self and Family being brought thereby to a morsel of bread; yet when that
was understood to be made use of by some Malignant spirits, to prevent that
Union, which was said to be endeavoring by their Ambassadors in their Treaty,
that all occasion might be taken from those that sought occasion of difference,
this State suspended that Act, before it was fully satisfied; and not only so,
but all Letters of Reprisall upon the French, who had so notoriously, and to
very great damages injured the Merchants of England; notwithstanding that these
wronged men had been at a great deal of costs to set out ships for recompense,
and had not accomplished it, being thereby enforced to sit down by the loss of
those charges also. And all this to remove any occasion of clamor, that might
unduely happen upon the searching of Dutch Ships for French Goods; though it is
a known thing that the French covered their Goods in Flemish bottoms, to avoid
giving the English satisfaction: and this we did, notwithstanding that we paid
the Dutch for the fraught of the French Goods found aboard them, without taking
any of their goods at any time: the contrary whereof our Merchants have found,
when as the Dutch have taken not only the Portugal Goods found aboard the
English, but such English Ships and Goods also, without making of satisfaction
to this day, of which we have pregnant testimony; yet the searching for French
Goods aboard their Vessels, is so equitable and necessary, that it is
impossible (unless we land Armies in France) to have any reparation, so long as
the French may wholly manage their Trade in Dutch Vessels.

But to any rational man, this cannot be the cause of the late transactions of
those people to us; for first a long time before any Letters of Reprizall were
granted, they performed all those evil Offices aforementioned in the general;
and since those Letters of Reprizall both on themselves and French for their
sakes, have been suspended: their Admiral with his Fleet came to our Borders;
and whilst we lay securely, in a time of friendship and Treaty, came upon and
assaulted part of our Navy, as is formerly mentioned at large; whereby it
appears, that as they formerly helped on our destruction so far as it concerned
their profit, and to lay us, and our Liberties at the feet of a bloody Tyrant,
so it is now their resolution, as they are able, to bring down this Nation to
serve their Lusts and Cruelty; and this as a reward for our saving of them from
the sword of Spain, and spilling our blood and money on the ground to lay the
Foundation, and secure the structure of their Riches and Prosperity. The Blood
of Amboyna showed formerly how such things relished their Pallats; and the
clapping Captain Green and his men in Chains of late: together with the
outrages committed on our Ambassadors, and several English people in their
Territories: their several Arrests on our Ships and goods in their Ports, and
the late Engagement of Van Trump do now clearly demonstrate.

Though every weeks occurrences filled our ears with the noise of their
preparations, and the ranting and vile expressions against this State: the
abuse of the English there, and their Ambassadors giving our Council of State
and Parliament, Papers of their Resolutions of setting forth one hundred and
fifty ships of War, extraordinary (which we might then very well conclude, and
have cause now to be assured, were intended against us) yet till those Papers
came, the Parliament moved not at all, in any extraordinary preparations: and
then how requisite it was for this State to prepare, for the security of their
Seas, and of that part of the ancient and undoubted Dominion of England, let
the world judge. Yet, so did they prepare, as only to secure their own Right,
and what high time it was so to do, the forementioned insolent and hostile
behavior of some of their ships to Captain Young, for which the States gave
one of the Captains a chain of gold, and of Van Trump, to our Navy, whom they
continue still in his Employment, thereby owning his late action is evident to
all men.

It is worthy observation to consider unto what a height of Ingratitude,
Injustice and forgetfulness, the pride of these men has lifted them up; It is
not unknown to the world, and to themselves, though they would willingly forget
it, what was their condition, when England first undertook their protection,
and what England has done for them; how they have permitted them to pass
through their Seas, to manage their Merchandise, and required only their
striking to our ships and Castles in acknowledgement of our Sovereignty. And to
fish in our Seas, sometimes upon the requiring of a certain Tax, sometimes
freely, and yet so bold are they upon our former Indulgence, and condiscentions
as to come up to our very doors, and by treachery and force endeavor to snatch
the Dominion thereof out of our hands, though they cannot assign one
particular, wherein the English has designed or attempted any incroachment
upon their Rights and Privileges; but have maintained them against all their
opposers. And no doubt but those men, who with so much impudence and wickedness
have attempted, to dispoyle us of so ancient and Indubitable a Right, whereby
our very defense (for those Seas, and our Ships, are the outwalls and Bulwarks
of this Island) is endeanoured to be broken; will also as they have opportunity
labor to dispossess us of our Land Inheritance.

But as the former Kings of England took a severe course to chastise and cut
off such luxuriant Exorbitances, and as the Providence of God has in their
late Engagements given them a very great check, so we doubt not but the Wisdom
and Justice of the State (through the assistance of God) will so effectually
proceed in the vindication of such wrongs, as shall let them know, what Right
of ours they have encroached upon, and by effectual ways persuading them from
attempting such usurpations for the future. What high time it is to take order
with such men, and reduce them to their proper bounds, let the World judge; and
if that hereafter this State exercises a more strict Command over their own
Jurisdiction, in letting those men know at what rate they shall buy their
Intrenchment on our Liberties, they may thank themselves for such experience.

It is not the bare Complement of striking the Flag, that has been the
occasion of these late contests, as they would seem to pretend, to gull and
cheat well minded people, as if so be for such a slight thing, as the putting
off a man's hat, or the not putting it off, were the ground of the late
engagement, or of what shall ensue thereupon; In vain is such a snare as this
set in the sight of England; But it is the absolute and substantial Sovereignty
of the narrow Seas, which on our parts by such a deportment as the striking of
the Flag, or Topsail to our ships on those seas, is required to be
acknowledged, and so has been for many hundred years, understood, agreed unto,
and acknowledged by the Nations of Eruope, which the Dutch by refusing to
strike would deny. O d. Lords and Commons in in Parliament, April 5. 1643.
A thing of such high importance, that the former Kings would never endure, but
in their Commissions to their Captains at Sea, commanded them to require
obedience thereto by all, or to fire, sink, or destroy them; and which both
Houses of Parliament in their Ordinance to that purpose, commanded their
Maritin Officers.

Now the Dutch refusing to strike, do deny our Title, and by their armed Fleets
endeavor to take possession of our Inheritance: therefore though to extenuate
their hostility, and cover their designs, they would fain make the striking of
the Flag a frivolous thing; yet it is of as much concernment to us, as the
Dominion of those Seas, and therein of our defense, and the commodity of
Fishing, which those Seas yield in abundance; and which themseves have found to
be of so vast an advantage, as that they know it to be the great staple of
their Trade and Merchandise, and the food of many Families; the sweetness
whereof they having tasted through our former Licenses, and our late neglect by
reason of our Wars, would now to settle it upon themselves, force into their
own hands.

And this together with the managing of our Trade for our best advantage, held
forth in the Act for Navigation; and what else may be found convenient for such
an end, may be strongly presumed to be the true grounds of their quarrel
against us, and of the late engagement, though the assignment of the latter is
too gross for them to hold forth to the world: for that is as much as to take
upon them to give law to England.

The truth is, what through the negligence of former Kings, and the corruption
of their Ministers of State, the overlooking the subtilties and encroachments
of these people, the ties of gratitude and friendship that were supposed to be
upon them, and the confusion of our late wars, they had not only got a Staple
of Trade as aforesaid; but had almost ingrost all our Trade, and thereby
spoiled us of our Navigation and Maritin Defense. Our long voyages about the
world, which carried the reputation of England through all the parts thereof,
being curted to their borders, and mostly in their own ships, to fetch from
their stores at the second hand, and to retail it in England; by reason of
which, our gallant ships being drawn up and neglected, in a little time, we
might insensibly have those locks of ours cut off, and be fallen upon by them,
when we were not in a capacity to resist.

Now because the Commonwealth of England is through the mercy of God, brought
out of its war and blood; and through dear experiences taught to mind its own
concernment, and to foresee and avoid such snares as these. And because the
Dutch see themselves prevented of ^^aking our Markets, emptying our Pockets,
and fishing in our troubled waters, as they had done for many years before,
therefore are they offended, and would now by force, if they could, conclude us
under that and a worse necessity, and rather then fail, embroyl us and their
people in a bloody war, which themselves have already begun, And this is the
true reason wherefore they have all along assisted the late: King and his son
in all our wars, and have been troubled at the late rout at Worcester, and
our other successes, as much as the Gavalier; because they knew that a
Commonwealth would deprive them of those sweet Bits, and might be expected to
pursue things for their own advantage.

Besides, they had large experience what their gold could do at Court, which in
a Commonwealth well ordered would be of little effect: and no doubt these
things had prevailed with them openly, to have asserted the Kings interest, had
not (as I have said before) the advantage of trading to all our ports during
our wars, blinded them into a seeming Newtrality.

It Is true, Nature has shut them up from all Merchandise, if our passage
through the North and South Seas were denied them; therefore has this Nation
made their Seas so far open, as to give them liberty through them to pass unto
their traffic; and that they may safely pass, have been at the vast costs of
strong Navies: but must they therefore deny our dominion thereof, and to make
such acknowledgement as ought to be, and has been time out of mind agreed
upon, and submit^ed to by all Nations? Or must therefore the Riches in those
Seas be as much theirs as ours? This, were it in their own case, would be said
by them to be an inference very foreign, and would not be endured, nor indeed
ought it so to be. Because a man permits a thorough-fare through his ground for
the accommodation of Travelers, or the Country, shall the passenger therefore
refuse to acknowledge the propriety of the owner to his land? Shall he refuse
to perform such a thing, as he shall require for the acknowledgement of his
propriety, lest in time it become common through prescription? shall the
Herbage, Corn, Wood, or whatsoever grows upon it, or the Mines under it, be by
him claimed with as equal a right as the Proprietor? Or will it be good
manners or honesty for such a passenger with armed force, to deny the
acknowledgement of the right of the owner, and to endeavor the making common
the said land, and what grows upon it, or within it? If the Proprietor
hereupon shall to such persons shut up his passage, and with armed force secure
the growth of his Land from such intrusion, and blood should be drawn
thereupon; whom will you judge in such a case to be the occasion thereof, the
Proprietor, or such an ungrateful and injurious passenger? This, upon due
consideration, will appear to be much our present case, and which I should be
more large in; but that a learned Treatise on that subject, will be shortly
brought forth to common understanding in the English tongue.

Nor ought the specious and gilded Covering of a Treaty for a more strict union
to have any influence at all, to ^harm the English Nation into the least
parting with any thing of their undoubted Rights, or loss of time in
prosecuting their opportunities for satisfaction and security: in regard that
both by former and later experience, we have not found such sincerity as may
lay a Foundation for us to pitch upon in that particular, and where we cannot
be assured of that, as a Foundation; to what advantage will the conclusion of
any thing be, or what encouragement is there for any proceeds in things of
that nature? For though Leagues are confirmed with all the sacredness that man
knows of to bind the performance, yet if advantage be Paramount to such
stipulations, when a fair opportunity is presented, no bonds be they never so
high and intrinsecall, will be able to preserve those Leagues from doing Homage
to the supreme Deity of Gain and Profit. Principles that center not in the
performance of Leagues and Covenants further then are for advantage, what
differ they from that Tridentine one, That Faith is not to be kept with
Heretics. And upon such Quicksands, the Foundation of true Peace cannot be
laid. And indeed the English Nation have by experience found, that some States
have not retained that simplicity in point of Treaties, which England has held
forth to them on all occasions.

I wish that our Neighbors of the United Provinces had administered nothing of
this nature to us, whereby we may be rationally put to a loss in this
particular. Certainly their carriage in the business of Amboyna, within a year
or two after the conclusion of the Treaty in the year 1619. and their not
making satisfaction to this day, though it should have been by the year 1625.
their choosing Arms rather then satisfaction for other injuries done by them to
us, and the late assault of Trump on our Fleet upon our Borders, whilst we were
in Amity, treating for, and near a conclusion of a strict Union, gives us just
ground so to understand them: and we wish that the serious reflects on what
their carriage has been to other States in this particular, mentioned in the
later end of this discourse at large, besides our own experience, to say no
more, gave us not fair warning how we trust those, who when they speak of
Peace, have War in their hearts; If their former ill Offices to this State had
been reflected on, as they did deserve, there would have been occasion enough
wherefore this State should have refused any treaty with them, til satisfaction
had been first given, and security. But notwithstanding all, the Parliament
hoping that their own former actions had reproved them, and being willing to
take all opportunities to continue friendship between them and us, as they had
always done heretofore, past over all other considerations, and having given
their Ambassadors honorable and friendly Entertainment, ordered the Council of
State to treat with them; in which there was an uninterrupted proceeding, till
by the late hostile assault of our Navy by Van Trump, themselves cut the Cords
thereof, and gave us to understand what dealing we were to expect at their
hands.

Notwithstanding, when a little after the said assault, the Lord Pauw came over
to England as an extraordinary Ambassador, pretending that he had full power to
accommodate all things. The Parliament gave his Lordship honorable
Entertainment, and the Council of State, notwithstanding their other great
occasions, were rather before hand, then otherwise, in the management of the
Treaty, desiring if it might have been rather an accommodation then a war;
Yet during the space of almost three weeks, the time that he was here, he
neither agreed with the Parliament in the matter of Fact of the late Assault,
nor proposed any thing in way of satisfaction, nor in compliance with that one
Demand of the Parliament viz. To have satisfaction for their extraordinary
charge they had been put to by their late Preparations and Assault. Nor
produced full power to conclude what should be agreed upon; But desired that
the matter of the Assault might be past over, or put into examination: And that
there might be a cessation of Arms whilst those things were treated on; though
when the Spanish Plenipotentiaries at Munster did earnestly desire a cessation
of acts of Hostility both by Sea and Land, whilst the late Treaty was at
Munster: The States Plenipotentiaries, particularly, the Lord Pauw himself
answered, That it was not usual for States to make any Cessation of Arms
during a Treaty, and was utterly against it. Though that cessation was desired
by the King of Spain, whose Government the States had shaken off, and the war
was on that Foot: And the cessation which the Lord Pauw desired of us, was in
the name of that State, whose Navy in the time of Amity and Treaty had
endeavored to have surprised our Fleet at our doors.

And when he heard that our Fleet was set sail, June 26. It staying in the
Downs all that time he had been here, expecting what conclusion should be made,
the next day he desired a Pass and safe convoy for himself and the rest of
the Lords States Ambassadors, because as he said a cessation of Arms was not
granted; though the Parliament put the cessation only upon the paying or
giving them security for the extraordinary charge they had been put to by them
as aforesaid, as the Parliament Declaration mentions at large. And having taken
their leave of the Parliament on the Wednesday after, they departed toward
Gravesend, and so for Holland.

Now let all Europe judge between us and the Neatherlanders; what could we have
done more for them, then we have done? or has any Nation done so much for a
Foreign people! The Loan of hundreds of thousand pounds, the Blood of
thousands of English, men, Love, Tenderness, Bowels, Affections, the Espousing
their Quarrels, undertaking their Protection, when they were at the lowest, and
like to be swallowed up quick; even then when our outward condition was
seemingly weak, being newly come out of Papacy torn with intestine tumults,
engaged in War with other Nations, governed chiefly by a Woman; and all this
when no tie of League, or Friendship required any such thing, or former
Civilities: This has been the dealing of England toward them, not for a year,
but for a score of years, not with the affections of Friends only, but with the
love of Brethren, not for our advantage to give Law to them, possess their
Towns, and Riches, or to add them to the Territories of England; but to enable
them to give Law in their own Borders, to possess their Habitations, and
Estates in safety, and to make them not only distinct from their Enemy; but
entire, strong, and absolute in their own Jurisdiction: we picked no Quarrels,
or made pretenses to keep their Cautionary Towns, no, we delivered them; though
all our money is not paid to this very day. We made not our selves a third
party to serve our selves upon them, or have we joined with their Enemy. We
envied not their Prosperity or Riches, but rejoiced in their good condition. We
wished not them broken, that we might be replenished; nor has so much as a
thought to destroy them, come into our hearts: we have not beat the Drum, or
sounded first the Alarm of War to them, or made the first preparations
thereunto, though we have been thus ill requited by them, for all our Love,
Money, our pouring forth of our Blood for them, and hazarding thereby our own
being, though we have been thus maligned and hated, even beyond the measure of
the Cavaliers hatred, Envy and Malignity. Thus endeavored with the exercise of
our Religion, Lives, Liberties, Wives, Children, Estates, and all that is
precious and dear to us, in the world, to be delivered into the bloody power of
that Tyrannical King, who had wanted not a will to betray even themselves to
the Spaniard, as he did those Nobles of Flanders, who had sent to him for
protection, and whose heads the King of Spain cut off? Thus affronted in
Parliament by their Ambassadors in the year 1645. who to their faces gave the
Justice on the Kings side. Thus shut out of doors, when our Agent Strickland
could not have audience with the States General, though he waited for it a year
and a half. Thus murdered barbarously when our Resident Dorislaus was
assassinated in their Territories. Thus scorned, abused and assaulted by the
uncommanded Rabble; cursed by Prince Edward to our Ambassadors faces, and
designed to be strangled by that vile Apsley, when our Ambassadors were last
there. And this notwithstanding all our former Injuries, we were treating with
them for a more strict Union Thus slighted in that slow Treaty to no purpose;
and the plain Declaration of their looking for a Scotch line to measure our
Ruins, before they would measure our Peace: Thus tortured and barbariz'd in
those of Amboyna; kicked out of doors in being dispossessed of those Islands
contrary to League and Agreement. Plundered and robbed in the taking of our
ships and goods, that traded that way, and to other places, to great values;
Trod underfoot in their disgraceful dragging our English Colors after their
Sterns, when they had robbed our ships.

Thus dared by the Commonaltie beyond measure, in their belching out of Oaths,
Curses, Slanders; and by their Masters in preparing Fleets to infest our
Coasts: beating up of Drums for Volunteers; and endeavored to be destroyed in
Trump's late assaulting our Fleet in the time of Treaty, and whilst there was
Amity between us: Greater Love and Assistance then by the English to them has
not been shown to a People Never was love so ill requited and abused, never was
patience so much provoked, nor ever had people a juster ground, to look them in
the face in case of Engagement, which they have now forced, the righteous God
will judge between them and us.

The People and Cause of God in this Nation is Holiness to the Lord, All that
devour it, shall offend, Evil shall come upon them. Jer. 2. 3.
Scotland has found it so with a witness: Even the People of God amongst them,
who endeavored its destruction. Ireland is yet paying dear for it, and upon
France are the Vials pouring out; those of our own Nation that assisted this
Cause, in the beginning, and were eminent therein in Godliness and honesty,
falling upon this stone, afterward have been broken in pieces, so tender has
it been in the sight of God, Zach. 2. 8
Even as the apple of his Eye. Oh, thou Belgia! what will become of thee in the
day, when thy rage, thy cruelty, they malice, thy scorn, thy ingratitude, thy
opposition to this hallowed thing, shall come into remembrance, and is not that
day already begun? When every crying Eze. 25 3. 26. 2.
aha, every Eze. 25 6.
clapping of thy hands, every stamping with thy feet: Every rejoicing in thy
heart, with despite; every of thy taking Eze. 25 12, 15. 35. 5.
vengeance, and revenge for the old hatred; every of thy saying she is Eze. 26 2
broken, she is turned unto me, I shall be replenished, she is laid waste;
Every of thy taking them up on the Eze. 36 3.
Lips of talkers, and making them the infamy of the People; Every of thy Eze.
35 12.
Blasphemies, in saying, they are laid waste, they are given us to consume,
Eze. 35 10.
when as the Lord was there. Every of their Zeph. 2. 8
Reproaches and Revilings shall be remembered, and carry with it a weight of
vengeance for Recompense: Every Jer. 12. 14
evil neighbor will be visited in the day that God does Jer. 46 10. Isa. 63. 4.
avenge the Controversy of his Cause; what then will become of you, that have
done more against it then all the ill Neighbors? He has begun it already, the
Kings, and great ones of England, Scotland, and Ireland, have drunk deeply of
the Jer. 46. 15, 16, 18 22, 27, 28, 29.
Cup; they are become a desolation, and their Cities shall not return; The
People have wallowed in their blood, have Isa 8. 21.
cursed their God and their King, and looked upwards. Even Godly men that have
walked in this Psalm 125. 5
craoked Path, God has led them forth with the workers of Iniquity: God has
been Zac. 8. 2
jealous for it, with a great jealousy, and out of the 1 Samuel 17. 37
mouth of the Lion and the jaw of the mighty has he plucked it, and set it up
on Deuteronomy. 28. 1.
high; He has lift up his Is. 13. 2 Gant. 2. 4.
Banner, upon it, and advanced it as a Isa. 55. 13. Zac. 9. 16
sign to the Kingdoms of the Earth, whoever will not bow down unto it, we may
rationally expect, according to the precedent series of divine Providence, must
be broken in pieces. And who are you, oh ye Neatherlanders, that dare to set
your selves against the Lord, against what he has done, and is doing in these
Nations; to endeavor to strike out all the glorious Characters of his
footsteps and presence, what his Arm has brought to pass for him, and his
mighty Power established in these Dominions? Who are you that dare to think,
that you can root out this Cause, and give the lie to all the appearances of
God, the Prayer, the Faith, the Praises of his Saints in these Nations? Who are
you that say their 1 Kings 20. 23
Gods, are Gods of the Hills, therefore we will fight with them in the Valleys.
They stood against their own Forces, but they shall not against ours: The Land
is given them in possession, but the deep is ours, and we will swallow them up
as in the belly of Hell? Our God is the same, and so is our Cause on the Sea,
as well as the Land; Spain found it so in the year 1588. and All others have
since our late Wars and Troubles.

Take heed least Divine Power work revengeingly there, as it has begun upon
you already, and bury your Carcasses in the mighty waters: and take heed,
least that though we would pass by, yet God will not pardon what you have done
against his Cause and us. What is it that has turned your hearts against your
friends, and set you to so ill requite their Love, their blood, their hardships
for you? What is it that has made you to affect and assist that cursed thing
of Monarchy in these Nations, which you before us, saw to be a Plague, and
adventured your All to be rid of it, and which has confounded all its
supporters; and which God has made to appear to be an accursed thing as clear
as the Sun at noon day? What is it that makes you retrograde to your Principles
of a Free State, that having known the benefit of Freedom, through the Blood of
England, you should endeavor the slavery of England?

Why should you be angry, that we stand upon our Legs, and honestly proceed, to
serve the advantage of our impoverished Countery, and to improve, what God in
nature, Providence, and by the dreadfulness of War, has handed to us? Why
should you covet our Trade, and Riches, and not rather be contented with what
God gives you, though it were with a sparing hand? Why should you rather
delight to see us in our Blood; our Cities and Habitations laid waste; Our
Bodies, Wives, Virgins, prostituted to the mercy of the Bloody Enemies of God
and us: and rather then fail, endeavor it with your own hands, then that you
should be disappointed of the sweetness of that gain, you got by our Losses and
Ruins? Why should you be grieved at the heart, that you did not fully assert
the King of Scots interest, when as you see God is against him, and against his
bloody House; And the Lord knows how much you are under vengeance, for what you
have done for him, already? Would you be thus measured to your selves?

Do you think that the Cause here which has in its weakest condition born
down all before it like a mighty Torrent, will not quit it self against your
unrighteous Attempts?

Think you that this State, who to do their People Right, have not spared King,
nor Constitution, Friend or Brother; but have traveled through ten years
bloody Wars; waiting upon God for such a day as this, Even in the way of his
Judgments, which he has brought forth; Ought or can with a Salvo to their
Duty, and a due regard to the presence of God, with them in pursuing Right, and
the Reputation he has put upon them, permit the People of England to be so
grossly injured? No, no, should they, which I trust never will be; the Lord
will find a way, to preserve his Cause amongst Us, and right Us on our
Enemies; for it is God that manageth our Cause and Interest, whose wonted
Presence as we found it upon your late Assault; So we doubt no, but that he
will Signally manifest that he is with Us upon our future Engagements.

In the humble confidence of which, we go forth, and wait upon him for a
Blessing on our Undertakings.

I had thought here to have concluded; but sithence the States of the United
Provinces, and their Abettors talk so much, of the Reformed Protestant
Religion, and of Liberty, and endeavor to insinuate some Indearment upon the
hearts of many, upon that account: It seems to me to be worth the while, and
very necessary a little to discourse, how far those States, have by their
Actions appeared considerable, at to those two grand and noble Interests, and
those things being well weighed, together with the Cause now on foot in
England, their Carriage to other States in point of Leagues, Treaties and
Amity, and particularly with this Nation, how far it is safe for England to
enter into a strict League and Union with those People.

Interest is the true Zenith of every State and Person, according to which they
may certainly be understood, though clothed never so much with the most
specious disguise of Religion, Justice and Necessity: And Actions are the
effects of Interests, from whom they proceed, and to whom they tend naturally
as the stone does downward. So that unless it be in some things seemingly
contrary Acted, now and then, the better to work about the grand End: (for the
Devil himself mostly deceives, when he appears as an Angel of Light) and in
cases of necessity where force and power constrain another Course, (which will
return into the old Channel, the first opportunity) thereby the measure of
every state and person may be taken and determined. Therefore it will be
requisite to instance in some of the practices of the United Provinces in
reference to the things proposed; where by some Judgment may be given therein;
And if such Presidents be not according to what they do pretend, yet it is but
their own Picture, by which if they would not have themselves known, they
should have forborne by such Practices, to have set it forth to the world, or by
their late Actions to necessitate Us in point of our safety and intimate
concernment, to set forth any thing of that nature, for a warning to England:
It being so far from us to delight in the uncovering of their nakedness,
that we wish (if the Lord had pleased) that there had been no such things done,
or any occasions offered us, to take notice thereof, since we have wished so
well to, and done so much for their advantage.

First, concerning the Interest of the Protestant Religion: True it is, that it
has been there for many years professed, and exercised; and with the fruit of
the power of Godliness, in many before time, and we hope at this present that
some are there eminent for the profession thereof: and they have been a place
of Refuge to many precious Saints, from the bitter persecutions of the Enemies
of God, and true Religion, Isay. 16. 4.
which God has always taken well even of Moab, and has rewarded it with long
and many kindnesses, and for his peoples sake, and the hiding of his outcasts,
has lengthned the tranquillity of places, who otherwise have been the people
of his wrath: And if any thing prevail with God to save them from destruction,
certainly this will be a chief one: but withal it is to be considered,

1. That all other Religions, have had their professions there as well as the
Protestant, and the Exiles thereof received and protected, even of what is most
contrary to the Doctrine of the Gospel of Christ, and the Scriptures.

2. The Exercise and Protection aforesaid is upon a State principle of
advantage, not upon a principle of true Religion, whereby they not only keep
quiet at home, but draw all such people to their quarters. (It being the only
place of such privilege in the world) and thereby have been possessors of
their Virtues, Ingenuities, Friends, Occupations, Persons, and Estates.

3. In the 36 Articles that themselves proposed to England, as the matter of a
Treaty for a strict Union formerly, and in their late Treaties here, they have
neither mentioned, nor proposed any thing concerning Religion.

4. In point of gain, they have not only deserted the opportunities of
effecting the liberty of the true Protestant Religion in other places, which
they might have done by their power and interest; and particularly their own
flesh and blood. Contrary to their holy and perpetual Union (as it is styled)
but have assisted Popish Princes against the poor Protestants; when they have
been contending in blood for their Religion and Liberty, as by the following
instances may appear.

In the 13 Article of the Union of Vtricht, in the year 1579. it is said; That
what concerns the point of Religion, Those of Holland and Zealand shall
dispose of it according to their pleasure, and the other Provinces of this
Union, may regulate themselves according to the intention of the Treaty of
Peace about Religion made between Archduke Matthias, Governor and Captain
General then of these Lands, with those of his Council of the States General in
the year 1558.

In the first Article of the said Union is promised an Eternal Union, and never
to separate, (consequently never to forsake the members that have signed the
said Union; Amongst those that signed the said Union, are also those of
Antwerp, those of Gant, and those of Bruges.

Contrary to this Union those of Holland and Zealand, made a Truce with the
Spaniard in the year 1609. for 12 years, and a peace in the year 1648. and left
out the said Towns of Antwerp, etc. notwithstanding that there was all
likelihood, that they might have delivered those Towns, from the yoke of the
Spaniard, and have obtained freedom, if they would for those of the Protestant
Religion in those Towns, especially for Antwerp, as by what follows may appear.
For the Town of Antwerp, it is true it was taken by the Duke of Parma, and in
the Spaniards possession; but how easily it might have been re-taken, will
appear, when as it is considered, that upon a new League and Agreement made
with Lewis 14. King of France, and the States of the United Provinces to pursue
the War against the Spaniard conjointly: the said King drew 20000 Foot, and
4000 Horse into the Field in Flanders, according to the third Article of the
said League, infesting the Spaniard on the one hand, whilst the Prince of
Orange drew his Army forth toward Antwerp, upon the same Article, to assist
the taking in of which, the French over and above the former agreement of men
and money, lent them 3000 horse and 3000 foot, which also were shipped and
landed, as desired, ready to join in performance of that exploit. The Prince of
Orange having taken in the Castle of Teemche, lying by the Scheld beyond
Autwerp; The French the Town of Dunkerk, might easily have made himself Master
of the Town of Antwerp; they within having as good as tendered themselves up to
him; yet the Prince of Orange neither besieged nor assaulted the said Town: but
having left the Castle of Teemche, as soon as he had taken it, in a manner, the
design pretended against Antwerp vanished, to the great discontent of the
French, whose 6000 supplies were not made use of, and committed many outrages,
in the County of Waes, and the leaving that Town in the hands of the Spaniard,
and the poor Protestants there, their own flesh and blood (called in dirision
Brothers) to the oppression of the Catholics, and other mischiefs to this
very day; contrary to the Union aforesaid, whereby they were obliged to redeem
them (if taken) out of the hand of the Spaniard.

How easy it was for them to have possessed Antwerp, the forementioned
particulars do evince; and the whole Army of the Prince of Orange that were
there know, and the world is not ignorant thereof: And all this for no other
reason, as can be imagined, but that the Town of Antwerp being thus reduced,
would have drawn to its self its ancient and great Trade, which Holland and
Zealand enjoyes, whilst Antwerp continues in the hand of the Spaniard, and the
Scheld shut up.

In the year 1624. presently after the Treaty of Campeigne, made between Lewis
13. King of France, and the States of the United Provinces, concerning a
Subsidy against Spain; another little Treaty was at the Hague, between the
King of France, and the States, wherein the States agreed to furnish the King
of France with 20 ships under the command of Admiral Haultaine in a design to
shut up Genoa by water, whilst the Constable Lesdigueries should besiege it by
land.

The War between the Protestants of France, of which Rachel was the chief, and
the King of France falling out in the mean time, the said King agreed also by
his Ambassador Monsieur de Belluion with the said States for 20 ships against
the Protestants of France, whereof having received 8. the French King by his
Ambassador Monsieur d'Espesses at the Hague, moved the States, that in regard
he had present need of the other twelve ships, which were not yet ready, that
the States should let him have twelve of the twenty that were designed for
Genoa, to be commanded by French Officers, though the Lords States judged it
better, that they should be commanded by their own. And these ships were to be
employed against the Duke of Sonbize principally, who was tending to England
for relief: Whereupon the Lords States deputed the Lords of Essen, Noortwyck,
and Bootelar, to enter into conference with the said Ambassador; who after many
debates the 12. of April 1625. at the Hague, did finally agree and conclude,
First, That the 20 ships should he forthwith sent to Sea, and that the Admiral
Haultain, that should command them, being come to the height of Callice and
Dover, shall give advice thereof to his Majesty's Troops being at Haure de
Grace, That they may there imbarque themselves, and that they then do join
with the Fleet, and conjunctly steer their course to the Isle of Wight; where
being informed where the Duke of Soubize did keep himself, and what Forces he
might have: And having first resolved how they might set upon him, then they
should put aboard the French Foot into 12 of those ships, which afterward
should be commanded by French Officers, under the conduct of the Admiral
Haultain, and this notwithstanding without removing out of the ships, the Dutch
Captains, Officers, or Mariners: but in case they should be informed, That the
Duke of Sonbize was reduced to obedience, or that the 12 ships of Supplies were
arrived, then the said 20 ships shall remain under the conduct of their
Captains; and the last 12 arrived ships shall be commanded by French Captains;
and then the 20 according to Treaty, might pass, as it was agreed on.

These ships were employed against the Duke of Soubize, and the charge defrayed
by the French King; and if any of the said ships came to miscarry in the French
service, the loss was to be made good by the French King.

Whilst the Admiral Haultain was at Sea in the Design aforesaid, a Gentleman
came to give his wife a visit; who asking her how she did, she told him, That
she was very much perplexed, and troubled in herself, not being able to satisfy
her own Conscience: For if she prayed for the prosperity of her husband, then
she should pray against her own Religion: For her husband served against the
Protestants: And on the other side, if she prayed for the Protestants, then she
should pray against her Husband.

Yet it is observable, how God crossed the Dutch in point of advantage in this
business: For though the ships performed very great service for the King of
France, and the poor Protestants were utterly subdued; yet the King of France,
or the Cardinal Richelieua little after ordered a great number of their
Merchant ships to be kept by force in the French Harbors, and altogether, some
with their Cables, Anchors, Lading, and what else belonged to them, were sunk
in the Channel of Rochell; for which great loss and charge, the Dutch were
not paid in many years after. And when they were paid, it was by piecemeals,
being enforced to give great Bribes and Presents for the accomplishing thereof.

And to all this I might add, what they have done in assisting the late King of
England and his son against the truly godly of this Nation. But this is already
discoursed.

When a people come to be bold on God, 5.
and in presumption of his favor, upon some good act or other of theirs; take
liberty to commit all manner of wickedness, even to the putting out the face
of Religion, supposing that God is engaged to pass by their iniquity, because
of some acts of righteousness, and make such use of his patience and
long-suffering, which should lead them unto repentance, 2 Pet. 3. 9.
as to think he delays his coming, and therefore fall on beating their
fellow servants, and eat and drink with the drunken, and of his holding of his
peace, and permitting of them success, that he is one like unto themselves, and
approves of their falsness and wickedness. Here what the Scripture says in
this particular, Psalm. 50. 21, 22. These things have thou done, and I kept
silence, thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a man as thy self: But I
will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes. Now consider this,
ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver
you. Isai. 61. 8. I the Lord hate robbery for Burnt-offering.Jerem. 7. 4, 8,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Trust ye not in lying words, saying, The Temple of
the Lord, the Temple of the Lord: the Temple of the Lord are these, Behold, you
trust in lying words that cannot profit. Will you steal, murder, and commit
adultery, and swear falsely, and burn Incense unto Baal, and walk after other
Gods whom you know not, and come and stand before me in this House, that is
called by my Name, and say, We are delivered to commit all these abominations.
Behold, even I have seen it. Go to Shiloh, where I set my Name at the first,
see what I did to it, for the wickedness of my people Israel.

And now because you have done all these works says the Lord, and I spoke to
you rising up early and speaking, but you heard not, and I called you, but you
answered not: therefore will I do to this House as to Shiloh, and I will cast
you out of my sight, as I have done your Brethren. Therefore pray not thou for
this people, neither lift thou up cry nor prayer for them, neither make
intercession to me, for I will not hear thee. Matthew. 24. 48, 49, 50, 51. But
and if that evil servant shall say in his heart, My Lord delayeth his coming,
and shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and to eat and drink with the
drunken: The Lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looks not for
him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut him asunder, and
appoint him his portion with the Hypocrites: There shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth.

2. For the Interests of Liberty, it is true, they are in a condition of a
Free State; but so far from establishing others in the same condition, who have
groaned under the sad oppression of Tyrants; that it is known to Europe, how
their great design has been to be Free Men themselves, and to make the world
(as far as they are able) their slaves and vassals. So far have they been from
the true Principles of Freedom, which is ready to make others as free as it
self.

We need not run far for Instances of this nature, nor multiply them: Our own
late experience will be enough to evince this particular. The kindness, blood,
and money aforded by the Parliament of England in the days of Queen Elizabeth,
1575
put them into the condition of Liberty from the Sword of Spain: The power and
interposition of England in the days of King James, caused them to be declared
a Free State. 1609
The Valor and Arms of English men has stood by them, to seucure their
Freedom. Yet when the Parliament of England were enforced to contend in blood
for Liberty and Religion, against the Armies of our late Tyrant, and his son,
who sought to destroy both, and had the influence of the same designs, upon
themselves by the Prince of Orange. Yet none contributed more assistance to
that King and his son, then the United Provinces: and none more scorned,
abused, and injured the Parliament and their Friends, then the Neatherlanders.
In so much that they appeared as one body, and carrying on the same design as
members thereof, and that the same soul possessed them, appears in what they
have lately attempted upon this Nation, as has been at large mentioned in the
former part of this discourse.

Much might be also said concerning their endeavor to monopolize all Trade
into their own hands; having by their League with the King of Denmark, begun in
the year 1649. and ratified in the year 1651. which was managed by Vlefeld,
Ambassador for that King, agreed with the said King for the passage of the
Sound at 140000 Pattacoons, or Dolors per annam for certain years to come, and
that the said King should not (during those certain years) let it at the same
rate to any other Nation: whereby they have in effect excluded all other
Nations from the Baltic Trade; The Eastland Trade. The Trade of Sweden,
Lyfeland, Prussia, Poland, Pomerania, Silesia, etc. in regard they have the
passage of the Sound at so low a rate, and that others must not only pay the
King of Denmark's old Toll: show their Pass to the Dutch Commissary; but pay
the same Toll over again, if they come to Holland: also all other ships, that
formerly used from Holland to Trade through the Sound, or return through the
Sound to Holland, or other places. And in effect have forced the Merchandise of
the Baltic Sea (viz) Masts, Pitch, Cables, Iron, Copper, Brass, Clapboard,
Tar, and other Stable Commodities, to their own Markets, where they put their
own prices upon them, and it is at their choice, whether they will part with
them or no.

Also by their denying all Nations to sail or trade to Graveling, Dunkirk,
Newport, Ostend, Blackenbergh; they have taken to themselves all the Commerce
of Flanders and those parts; during their war with Spain, and in the mean time
themselves did furnish those of Brabant, Flanders, Consen, Dunkirk, and
Graveling: And by their treacherous, cruel, and inhumane dealing with the
English in Amboyna in the year 1622, and dispossessing of them out of those
Islands; have monopolized the Trade of Nutmegs, etc. from all the world, and
wickedly have ravished, and detained it from the English; but I shall forbear
further discoursing hereof; it being besides my purpose largely to treat
concerning these things; only this may be taken notice of; that where they
have seen any thing of advantage, if by cunning, force, or fraud, they have
been able; no consideration of Right, Friendship, Leagues, Humanity, or
Religion, have held them from the endeavoring the accomplishing of the same.

For their carriage in point of Leagues, and Treaties, I shall only give some
instances, of latter years, for proof of which we shall not be enforced to
history; but to the living Testimonies of the present times, in which I shall
be necessitated to be a little large. My first shall be of France.

In the year 1627 a Treaty of Confederacy or Alliance was agreed on at Paris,
August 28. between Lewis the 13th. King of France, and the States of the United
Provinces, to relieve each other, and to secure the Trade and Commerce of each
other; but this was not ratified, till the year 1630. At this Treaty it was
agreed on, likewise,

That if the King of France did enter into a war with Spain the Dutch were to
assist him; and the King of France was to do the like: as long as the Dutch
continued the war with the Spaniard; also both parties coming to break; they
were not afterward to make Peace with Spain directly or indirectly, but
conjoyntly, and with the consent of both parties, and that under the word Peace
was comprehended also, a Truce or suspension of Arms, as by the third Article
thereof does at large appear.

This was concluded on the thirtieth of June 1630. between Monsieur de Beangy,
Ambassador of the King of France: and the Commissioners of the Lords States of
the United Provinces; and ratified to continue for the space of seven years;
being occasioned by several offers of the King of France; both of men and
money; in case the Dutch should continue the War with Spain; and not to make a
Peace or Truce without the consent of the King of France: 100000. l. Sterling.
(viz.) 1

A million of Livers to the Dutch yearly, whilst it continued as aforesaid. 2
That in case he came to break with Spain, he would enter the Low Countries,
with a powerful Army, which the Dutch should reinforce with 10000. Foot, and
1500. Horse; and should make on their side a powerful onset, on the place
agreed on, with 30000. Foot and 4000. Horse. 3. That if good Considerations
move the States to continue the war; that he would give them a greater sum of
money then a million, as long as the war should last.

The Lords Commissioners of the States in answer, proposed that the King of
France should break with Spain, and fall into the Country of Artois and Henault
with 40000 men; and that they would then fall upon him with all the power they
could make.

That till such time that as the King of France did fall into open war into
Artois, etc. the Lords States should be free to make a Truce or Peace with
Spain; but after they are jointly entered into a war, neither shall make Peace
or Truce without they other.

That if the Lords States shall not think fit to yield to a Peace with Spain;
the King of France shall give them two millions French money to be paid at
London or Venice. 200000. l. Sterling.
But the States having a mind to continue war with Spain; struck up
immediately into an Alliance, as aforesaid. Notwitstanding which, the States
did endeavor to make a Peace or Truce with Spain, and the States of Flanders,
without the advice or consent of France; as appears by several passages, of the
underhand dealing of the Dutch with the Spaniards, in a Complaint made by the
French Ambassador to the States:

It is true, this Treaty with the Spaniard took no effect, because they could
not get their ends of the Spaniard, and the State of Flanders, though they had
been contriving to make a Peace with Spain two years together.

When the said Treaty was broken off, the States of the United Provinces began
presently to treat with Monsieur Charnasse, Ambassador for France, about a
League Offensive and Defensive; which though the Province of Holland liked not,
because being rid of the Spaniard, they expected the French as a more powerful
Enemy; and therefore protested against it; yet that prevailed not; but at the
Hague, April 15. 1634. an Offensive and Defensive League was concluded on;
wherein no Peace was to be made with Spain, entering upon war conjoyntly. And
that the present Treaty shall no ways prejudice that which was made the 17th.
of June 1630. but to remain in full force and power in all things. And this
Treaty was made for the space of seven years; to begin from the day agreed on,
as also the preceding Treaty of the year 1630. shall continue for the time that
is therein agreed on; and that this Treaty shall be renewed at the end of seven
years, if both parties were willing to it, as by the 6, 7, and 10th. Article of
the said Treaty does appear: Signed and sealed by Charnasse, and the Lords
Commissioners of the States.

In the year 1635. February 8. A League Offensive and Defensive was concluded
and ratified by Lewis the 13th, and the States General of the United Provinces;
where the ninth Article says expressly: That in case after the signing,
sealing, and ratifying of this Treaty for a breach with Spain; either Party
should come to make a Peace, Truce, or Suspension of Arms, that then this shall
not be done, but by a conjoynt consent of the King of France, and the Lords
States of the United Provinces: likewise both Parties are obliged to break
conjoyntly, and to enter into a War against the Spaniards, and their Adherents;
as often as they happen to break or to violate any of the Conditions agreed on
in the Treaty of Peace, or Truce, which shall be made; without which neither
Party can afterward make any new Treaty of Peace or Truce, then conjoyntly, or
by common consent, conditionally that if it come to be violated, his Majesty
and the Lords Estates shall enter conjoyntly into open war, against those that
are the brekers thereof;An in the 14. Article it is agreed on both sides: That
this present Treaty shall no ways derogate from any thing that was agreed on
in the former Treaties of the 15. April, 1634. ma^e at the Hague, which shall
remain in full power, and entire to be executed in all points.

Presently after this Treaty both Armies joined hard by Maestricht, and took
Tienen, and besieged Loven; and the State lost Schenchen Schans; to recover
which both Armies came and encamped; and it was retook afterward by the Dutch.

Notwithstanding all this, presently after the ratifying of this solemn Treaty;
and that the war was already begun with Spain, and the French had entered into
it partly for their sakes; there were more Overtures made by the Spanish side
concerning a Peace with the Dutch; who presently began to enquire after them so
far; as that the Prince of Orange and the States General, sent their Attorney
General Musch to Craneberg to speak with Don Martin Axpe, Secretary to the King
of Spain about it, and this without the consent of the French, who coming there
found that this Secretary had no sufficient procuration from the King to Treat;
besides the Spaniards were too strange and exorbitant in their demands, that
there was no hope of gaining any thing; whereupon Musch returns, and makes
report of it to the Prince of Orange, and the States General; whereupon this
Treaty was broken, and the war carried on very fiercely, but the Dutch would
never confess any of this to the French Ambassador Charnasse, when he told them
of it, but denied it, saying, there was no such thing; and this was told the
Lord Pauw, who presently after went Ambassador into France, by the King of
France; who likewise denied it; there the King told him plainly, That these
secret proceedings did contradict their solemn Treaty; and how much it did
differ from the justice his Majesty had used toward them. The Dutch, to excuse
themselves, said, That they had communicated it to Charnasse; but it was after
they had notice given them, that their design would not take, and that the
Spaniard stood too much on Tipto.

This League Offensive and Defensive concluded in the year 1635. was renewed in
the year 1636. where in the tenth Article it is expressly set down that this
present Treaty shall no ways derogate from the former Treaties made beween the
King of France and the said States, dated at the Hagne September 6. 1636.

In the year 1637, there was another Treaty, where the 7th, Article says, that
it shall not derogate from the former Treaties but shall all remain in force
and vigor, to be Religiously observed, and effected on both sides.

In the year 1639, where in the 7th Article it is expressed, that it shall no
ways derogate from the things concluded on in the former Treaties; but shall
remain in their full force and vigor to be religiously kept on both sides.
Made at St Germains, 26 April, 1639.

Nevertheless the Dutch Treat again with the Spaniard; whereupon in the year
1640. Monsieur de la Thuillerie was sent Ambassador into Holland to let the
States know, that they could not conclude a Peace with Spain, but conjoyntly;
His Commission being to hinder a Peace or Truce without France: to tell them,
that they were not capable to make a Peace or Truce without his consent: that
it would be quite contrary to their Treaties, Honor, and Interest: and that if
he perceived any such inclination in them, to protest against them for breach
of Leagues and Covenants.

Whereupon in the year 1641, was made another Treaty: the 6 Article of which
says, that it shall no ways derogate from any thing that has been formerly
agreed on: all which shall remain in their full force and vigor to de
Religiously observed on both sides. Made at Paris, Feb. 14. 1641.

In the year 1642. there was another Treaty made, where in the 6th Article you
have the same as is mentioned before in the sixth Article, 1641. made at St
Germains, Jan. 7. 1642.

In the year 1643 there was another Treaty, in the sixth Article of which is
expressly set down as in the forementioned 1642. made at Paris, March 3: 1643.

The King happening to die in May following, his son Lewis 14th succeeding him,
this Treaty was reconfirmed by him, August 30. 1643.

In this year 1643, the Lords States of Holland began to consult of sending to
Munster, to treat of a Peace with Spain without the consent of France: at which
the other States were offended; and Monsieur de la Thuillerie was no ways
backward to persuade them from making a Peace, but pari passu, according to the
Treaties.

Therefore whilst the Lords States were busy in sending Plenipotentiaries to
Munster, there was a Treaty made in the year 1644. called Ligue Guarantie. In
the third Article of which Treaty are expressly the words of the ninth Article
of the Treaty made with Lewis thirteenth, and the sixth Article says, that
this Treaty shall no ways derogate from any thing that has been concluded on,
in former Treaties, which are to be vigorously and religiously observed by both
parties. made at the Hague March 1. 1644. and the 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7. Articles
speak expressly, that no Peace shall be made directly or indirectly, without the
consent of both, in very full and Emphaticall expressions, which I forbear to
mention, because of brevity.

In the year 1645. another Treaty was made for the carrying on of the War
conjoyntly, and not to make any peace without the consent of each other:
abrogating nothing that concerned former Treaties; but all those things
remaining in full force and virtue.

The King of France understanding that the States of the United Provinces were
resolved to make a Peace with Spain, in the year 1646. offered the Dutch a
greater sum of money, and more men then ever was agreed on formerly; in case
the Dutch would stick to their Treaty of Ligue guarantie in the year 1644. and
that neither party should make peace without the consent of the other:
conformable to these Articles.

1. That the King should assist during that year the States General with
1200000 livers, sterling. 120000l.
for no other use then to maintain an extraordinary supply of Soldiers,
whereupon the States do promise faithfully and Religiously to assault their
Enemies with all their force and power. 2. That the King of France shall give
assignations for the said money, to be paid all of it before the end of October
following. 3. In consideration whereof the States do oblige themselves, to
raise a strong Army, and to bring them in the field; and to make some
considerable enterprise: the King of France also promises the same in the Low
Countries, to disadvantage his enemies as much as lies in his power. 5. This
Treaty shall no ways derogate from the former Treaties, which shall be
faithfully and religiously observed and effected. Signed and Sealed at Paris,
April 6. 1646.

In explanation of the third Article, the King of France was to bring an Army
into the field of 18 or 20000 foot, and 4 or 5000 horse, by the fourth of May
following. The States obliged to set to sea 30 men of war of 2, 3, 4, and 500
tuns to hinder the enemy from entering into Flanders by Sea, and to invest such
Towns by sea, as the King of France shall besiege by land, hindering relief to
such Towns, either from the King of Spain or any other: also to keep their
Army in the field, so long as the good of the common Cause shall require it,
and the season of the year will permit. According hereunto both armies drew
into the field: but the Dutch held the French in suspense, appearing well in
the field with their army; but when they were desired to undertake some
notable Enterprise, they put the French off with delays, of which the French
King complains, but to little purpose; for not long after, the Dutch begin to
treat with the Spaniard without the consent or advise of the French, which was
chiefly set on by Holland.

Then comes the Marquess de Castle Rodrigo from Brussels to the States with a
full power to treat, the same was confirmed from Munster: the Earl Penneranda
sends word of it by his Secretary to the States Ambassadors at Munster, and
Monsieur Le Brun, the King of Spains Ambassador came personally to the Hagte,
and showed the Original Copy of the said power to the States, dated June 7.

This stirred up many to conclude the Peace suddenly.

The French Ambassador made several complaints hereof to the States, also that
the Catholic Religion was not permitted at Hulst, according to the Treaty in
the year 1635. desired their resolution in writing for the tolleration of the
Catholic Religion in those Towns that should be taken that Summer.

Then Monsieur le Thuillerie went to Breda to consult about marching of the
armies, which was carried on but coldly, though there seemed great advantage to
offer it self, and all likelihood to carry Antwerp, which France urged very
much. The Prince of Orange replied, That they had not men enough; secondly, he
knew not, in case the Town should be taken, how to satisfy France in point of
Religion; France willing to give them any content, thereby to take them off
from making Peace with Spain, freely offered them a supernumerarie of 3000
horse, provided that upon reducement of Antwerp, the Catholic Religion might
there be tolerated. Signed D' Estrades at Breda, June 22.

The Lords Commissioners accepted with all humble acknowledgement the tender of
3000 Horse, but withal desired the loan of 3000 Foot, June 29 following. The
Duke of Orleans by Captain Remond sent this answer, wherein he granted their
desire both of 3000 Horse and 3000 Foot, provided that the Catholic Religion
be allowed as aforesaid. Made at Breda, July 4. 1646. Signed Remond.

Whereupon the Lords Commissioners promised to the King of France and Queen
Regent, that the Town of Antwerp falling into their hands, they would leave
there the exercise of the Catholic Religion free and public. Made at Breda,
the 11 July, 1646. and signed by the Commissioners, and in explication of the
said agreement, the Churches left for that purpose shall be four.

But that it may appear, not only how the Dutch did one while Treat with the
French, and make a show of Friendship, and that they would not break their
Leagues with the French, yet did deal underhand with the Spaniard for the
conclusion of a Peace, as I have showed already. I shall now show you how
unhandsomely they served the French, after the grant of these supplies, and how
they might have taken Antwerp, if they had pleased. Upon the ratification of
the former things, the Army of the Prince of Orange advances toward Antwerp,
and he was with his Army the 26 of July at Stechen; then at Loqueren, the
French Supplies came according to Promise. Teemche Castle lying by the Schelde,
beyond Antwerp, was taken in; the people of Antwerp did as good as offer up the
Town to the Prince of Orange The French in the mean time had taken Dunkerk,
Antwerp would have followed with ease; But the Prince of Orange left Teemche
Castle as soon as he had taken it, though that was the time to have taken
Antwerp, and never besieged or assaulted the said Town; but the design thereof
soon vanished, and the 6000 Auxiliaries not made use of, to the great discontent
and damage of the French; who by sparing such a number, were disinabled to
undertake any considerable thing that Summer, and to the ruin of the poor
Protestants there, as I said before; and the Treaty of Munster with the
Spaniard went on, without the notice or consent of the French. And the French
Ambassador told the States, that some of the State-Plenipotentiaries at
Munster, had been with the Spanish Plenipotentiaries, and assured them, that
although the Army of the States General should march into the field, yet they
should only lie still, and effect nothing to the prejudice of the Spaniards.
Also the French Ambassadors showed the States several Letters which they had
received from France, making mention of some Letters intercepted of
Pennerandas, wherein ^ee writes, That the Peace was agreed on, without having
any regard to the French Interest, which was not so much as named by the Dutch;
and though the other Provinces should he against it, yet because Holland was
for it, they would soon bring the other Provinces to a compliance, as it did
appear afterward.

But to proceed, the War being carried on against the Spaniard conjointly from
the year 1635. to the year 1647. It brought the King of Spain very low: Who
thereupon sent his Ambassadors; The Lords Conde, De Penneranda, and A Brun, to
solicit the Dutch to a Treaty of peace; who notwithstanding all the
forementioned Leagues and Treaties to be faithfully and religiously kept, that
no Peace or Truce should be made with Spain without the consent of both
parties, having entered into a Ligue Guarrantie several times for that purpose;
the French being thereby deeply engaged against the Spaniard; and having begun
these Allyances and War upon the desire of the Dutch; yet they entered upon a
Treaty of Peace without the consent of the French; and notwithstanding the
several speeches of the French Ambassadors; the Letters of the King, and at
last the Ambassadors Protest; the 30 Januar, 1648. A Peace was signed, sealed,
and ratified at Munster* between Philip 4. of Spain, and the States of the
United Provinces.

I shall only give you a touch of the proceeds of the French Ambassadors, with
the States during this Treaty, and the States to him: and so conclude this
long, yet necessary and pertinent story.

The States General having taken their final resolution for a Treaty of peace
with Spain, Monsieur de Thuillerie the French Ambassador Extraordinary, the 15
November 1647.presented a paper to the said States, wherein he told them,

That he understood, that they were upon the point to send their
Plenipotentiaries to Munster, to conclude their Negotiation with Spain, and
that nothing was wanting to be done but signing; that he thought it convenient
to mind them, that he had spoken with them concerning the reciprocal
obligations that were between France and them; which invited them to stand firm
to what has been formerly agreed upon; to which he had received no answer: it
being requisite that he should have one to give to the King and Queen Regent;
that they might give their Plenipotentiaries advice at Munster, what they may
expect, especially, since that, at that time, the Spaniard flattered himself of
the hope he had to separate that State from the Crown of France. Therefore he
desired them earnestly, to consider what had been formerly agreed on, between
them; and that he had good hope of their great wisdom and wonted loyalty, not
to send their Plenipotentiaries to Munster, otherwise then with Orders
conformable to those obligations aforesaid, and the Ancient friendship they had
always with France.

Hague 15 November. 1647. Signed, De la Thuillerie.

The States resolution being once for all confirmed, they answered this Paper
with silence. The Here Van Nederhorst, was the only man of the
Plenipotentiaries that scrupled the signing of the said Treaty; and his reason
was, because their League and Covenants with the French King, were not yet
abrogated, and that Oath of Agreement, by which they were tied to him, not yet
taken away; who being one of the Plenipotentiaries, feigning himself not well,
desired leave of the States for his healths sake to come home; but the true
cause why he desired to come away, was to avoid signing, it being against his
Conscience for the reasons aforesaid.

The King of France understanding that the Treaty between the Spaniard and the
Dutch was agreed on and signed, sent a Letter to the States dated 14 Februar.
1648. wherein he tells them,

That he had heard with the greatest admiration what had past at Munster the 30
Januar. where the greatest part of their Ministers and Deputies had signed a
particular Treaty with the Ministers of Spain, that he could not imagine, that
their Ministers had acted therein according to their Intentions; and that he
doubted not, but that as soon as they should be informed thereof, they would
give those necessary Orders, whereby they will remedy all what has been done
to the prejudice of so many solemn Treaties agreed on at several times, between
that Crown and them, which did hold forth expressly, that the Negotiation of
Peace shall continually march hand in hand; and that no Peace shall be agreed
upon, but by joint consent of both parties: that for the farther manifesting
thereof, he had sent many particulars to his Ambassador Extraordinary, to
communicate to them on his behalf, at that conjuacture of business of so great
consequence, to whom he conjured them to give full credit.

Signed Lewis, and then De Lomeine.
Paris 14. Februar: 1648.

The 3: March afterward, Monsieur La Thuillerie had audience given him in the
Assembly of the States, where he made great complaints against their irregular
proceedings in the Treaty of Peace with Spain, against their own solemn
Treaties with France,

That the King his Master did think himself highly injured by their breaking of
their Vows and Covenants which they had mutually promised (viz.) That they
would never lay down their arms, till they had wholly beaten the Spaniard out
of the Low Countries, and not then neither, but with the consent of both
parties, that the King his Master could not choose but protest against their
unworthy dealing, in forsaking them now, on whom the French had built their
strongest hopes, and from whom they did expect in the like conjuncture, in
which they now were, the reciprocal assistance, which the French had given to
the Dutch, in their affairs, both of Money and Men, which they had spent to
curb the ambition of Spain, with whom the French were good friends, but by
their solicitations, the French had entered into that chargeable War, whereby
the burden of the Dutch, has been lighter, and those that were the Dutch's,
they had made their Enemies. That they could not be ignorant, in what state and
condition the French were in the year 1634. how generously they declared War
against the Spaniard, in the year 1635, In which year was made that solemn
Treaty never to make any Peace with Spain, but with the mutual consents of both
parties: he called the world to judge, how careful France had been to observe
those Treaties, and that the Plenipotentiaries of France, were such Religious
Observers of their promises, that they staid twenty one months at Munster,
expecting the coming of the States Ambassadors, before they would receive any
one proposition from any Public Minister whatsoever; and withal if it were
lawful for him to tell them, that this one Action of theirs, did very much
eclipse the candor, which that Commonwealth did profess: That the King his
Master could not believe, that what was done, was according to their Orders,
and that so many honest and Noble persons, that did compose that body of State,
would break their solemn Leagues and Covenants, which they had formerly made
with the King of France: therefore the King his Master did hope that they would
not break so just and necessary a League. I dare not say, (said he) if you deal
thus by us, what other Princes will think of you, that may have to deal with
you. Your Ratifications are not yet exchanged, and you may refuse to deliver
them to the Plenipotentiaries of Spain; you are our Allies, therefore more
obliged to us, then by words; wherefore I do maintain (said he) that you can
go no farther, and that you and we have our hands tied, If so be we do any
thing that concerns a peace with Spain, if we do it not with the consent of
both parties.

Made at the Hague, 3 March, 1648. Signed, De La Thuillerie.

Monsieur de la Thuillerie, receiving no answer to this, upon the 17 of March
following, demanded Audience, where he made another Proposition much like the
former, being resolved not to give over propounding, till he had gotten an
answer: Who at length gave him this for answer.

That they were heartily sorry, Note, Pennerands Letter intercepted, says,
that the French were not so much as named in the treaty by the Dutch.
there could not be the like Treaty of peace concluded on between the two
Crowns of Spain and France, as they had made with Spain. That they had
commanded their Plenipotentiaries to use their utmost endeavors to bring those
two Crowns to a good agreement, but all what they had done, was labor lost, to
the great grief of the States.

That it was in vain to insist any longer on this point at Munster, both
parties being so unwilling to be reconciled. And this was the Judgment of the
Lords Mediators and others, that have knowledge thereof: Or else the States
General would not have sent for their Ministers home. That notwithstanding
they were resolved to use all possible means, to bring those two Crowns of
Spain and France to an agreement; and that there be a fair correspondence kept
between the Crown ofFrance, and the States of the United Provinces; and that
they would send to their Plenipotentiaries to farther with all faithfulness an
accommodation between Spain and France.

Monsieur de la Thuillerie, perceiving the Dutch to be resolved to conclude the
peace at Munster, sent in this Proposition to the Assembly, to let them
understand how highly discontented the King his Master was, with their
proceedings in making a peace with Spain, without his consent, (quoting their
Leagues) and that if they proceeded on in that Treaty, as they had begun, his
Master would be enforced to let the world know how unhandsomely the Lords
States have dealt with him, and that he was obliged to take notice how they had
dealt with the Spaniard to his prejudice, contrary to the Treaty 1635. renewed
1644. where they were to proceed pari passu, both in war and peace. That if the
Dutch had a mind to conclude a peace, that they would communicate to the French
Plenipotentiaries at Munster, how far they had proceeded in their Treaty with
Spain, (which they had not performed all the while they had been at Munster
according to agreement) for the Treaty does say expressly in one of the Articles,

That they shall communicate their proceedings conjointly, if they enter into a
Treaty of peace at any time with Spain; which must be also with the consent of
France: Therefore he humbly desired them to write to their Plenipotentiaries to
communicate their proceedings in writing to the French Plenipotentiaries, as
their loving friends and allies: and also that his Master did desire them to
desist from Treating according to former agreement aforementioned, till both
parties agree to carry on the Treaty again conjointly, which the Lords
Ambassadors of France had done being sent to by the Spaniard to Treat, which
they refused to do, because the Dutch had minded them of the agreement;
therefore his Master desired them to do the like by him.

All this (said he) was laid open to the Plenipotentiaries of this State at
Munster, by the French Plenipotentiaries, notwithstanding the said
Plenipotentiares came confidently the next day to the Plenipotentiaries of my
Master, and told them that they would proceed very speedily to the conclusion
of their Treaty with the Spaniard; whereupon the French Plenipotentiaries could
do no less then protest against their proceedings, who have formally declared
at Munster, that the Dutch have broken the Treaties made between them and
France. And that they have protested against the Authors of such an Act, so
contrary to all Public Faith, and all manner of Reason and Decency: And what
ill consequences should follow that business, are to be imputed to the
Contrivers and Abettors of that unworthy action, of concluding a peace without
the consent of both parties according to the Articles of agreement; and this
the Plenipotentiaries of France have been fain to do, to prevent a Rupture in
the Union, between France and the States of the United Provinces; and to clear
their Consciences and Duties toward his Majesty's of France, who could never
persuade themselves (if the present Opposition and Protestation had not been
made,) that in a business, in which there is only treated to keep to an Enemy
some secret promises, or to accomplish several Treaties so solemnly made with
an ancient friend, the Spaniards should have had more power over the
Plenipotentiaries of the said Lords States of the United Provinces to engage
them to a breach, then those of France have had to persuade them to observe the
agreements and treaties made between France and the Low Countries.

But this Proposition having taken no effect, the next day Monsieur de la
Thuillerie, put in another Paper into the assembly,

That they would be pleased to send thus much to their Plenipotentiaries, that
they should not sign their Treaty of peace with Spain, till France had likewise
made an end of their Treaty of peace with Spain. This the assembly would not
do, because it was to the prejudice of their affairs. Thus all along till the
treaty at Munster was concluded and ratified, the French Ambassadors at the
Hague, and the French Plenipotentiaries at Munster, never gave over propounding
to the States, what wrongs the States of the United Provinces had done, and the
Crown of France had sustained by their breach of Contracts, solemn Leagues and
Treaties; but none of them prevailed, though France at their desire had begun
and prosecuted the War against Spain, whereby Spain was brought low; which
contrary to their many solemn Contracts, to Ingenuity and Gratitude, was taken
up by the States, and made use of to serve their advantage, leaving France
alone to contend with Spain to this day; refusing to lend the King of France
supplies of money, whereof he had occasion, according to the treaty of
Campeigne, 1624. when the French King supplied them; and having tied up their
hands from assisting the French against the Spaniard by their League de non
offendendo. The Plenipotentaries of the States of the United Provinces that
transacted this affair, were Bartolt, Van Gent. John of Matenesse. Adrian Pauw.
I. Knuyt. G. Van Reed. J. V. Donia. William Ripperda. Adr. Claut.
Notwithstanding these proceedings with the Spaniard, the King of Spains
Ambassador Le Brun, complains that the States have broken 17 Articles of the
late treaty at Munster.

I have been the larger in this, because it is so full necessary, and pregnant
an Instance, whereby at once the States inside is turned outside exactly; and a
rare President and Caution given to this Nation and all Princes, to discern
these serpents under all their green and smooth expressions of friendship; and
their most solemn stipulations for that purpose; of which in my judgment I
could omit nothing: I shall therefore be more brief in the following Instances,
and forbear the quoting as many as I intended, least by too much prolixity I
might offend.

The next that I shall produce, is Portugal, who whilst under the Command of
the Spaniard, were understood and Prosecuted as Enemies by the Dutch, because
one with Spain.

But in the year 1640. the Kingdom of Portugal, making themselves free and
distinct from Spain, all good Patriots in the united Provinces did look upon
it, as a business of great good and welfare, and an order was made for a
cessation of Arms at Sea against the Portugal.

But those of the East and West Indie Companies (true Lucriones) showed their
regret at this public joy, foreseeing by this that their Piracies exercised
against the Portugals there must come to an end; and the conquests also, that
they had promised themselves over the Portugal in the East- Indie and Brazil.

This beginning of friendship in the cessation of Arms pleased the Portugal
extremely, who sent an Ambassador to the Hague; where there was a truce
concluded on between the Portugal and the United Provinces for twelve years:

But the craftiness and cunning of the Dutch, is worthy observation; for
because the East Indie and Brazil were so far off, the Hollanders caused this
clause to be inserted; That the Truce should not begin in the East Indies, till
within a year, and in Brazil till within half a year after the ratification
thereof.

In the mean time the Hollander, before, and in the time, gave order and
express advice to their men at Brazil and elsewhere, to do their best to take
all they could get from the Portugals, as indeed they did, for they took
Angola, St Tomce, and Marinsan; and in the East Indies they took Mallacca: also
in Brazil they took and confiscated diverse Portugal ships, coming to honest and
Cordial friends, as the Dutch.

The Truce being made; and both Parties as well the Portugals, as the
Hollanders, having full notice of it; the Portugals at Angola relying upon the
Truce, admitted the Hollanders as friends with a great deal of joy and alacrity
into the Castle, but the Dutch being no sooner entered, they took and turned out
the Portugals, and having boarded them in an ugly rotten Bark unprovided of
provisions, sent them to traverse the sea in a thousand dangers; with the same
deceit they entered into the Islands of Marinsan and St. Tomce.

Ambassadors were sent from Portugal to demand these places, the Hollanders
produced the said clause of the Truce; which was all the Portugal could get
from the Hollander; for said they, There is no wrong done, in regard, that in
that clause is said, That each side shall hold and keep, what he can take and
in such a time: Whereupon the Portugal Ambassador said to them very well; That
that must be understoodBona fide (viz) That which should be taken without
having any knowledge of the Truce.

But those of the West Indie Company, and those that were in their service, had
full knowledge of the Peace or Truce, and nevertheless had treacherously fallen
upon the Portugals, and taken from them those places; who no ways suspected
any such cheat, but admitted the Dutch as friends. The Dutch having made the
business less suspected, in regard they expressed great love to the Portugal,
and ordered a cessation of Arms, before the Portugal had desired them; but for
what end the world may judge: which action was the more cruel and treacherous,
in regard that the King of Portugal, had but then torn himself from the
Spaniard into his own rights, and in this Infancy of his Government was thus
dealt withal.

Besides all this, the Government of the Dutch in Brazil has been so ungodly,
unjust, and full of tyranny (the most part that were sent over thither, being
broken Merchants, lost and undone men, Roagues and Whores) who must make their
fortunes by the Portugal; made the Portugal despair of ever being well ruled by
such a Rabble, and caused them to revolt against the Hollander, having most
just cause so to do.

And it is not to be omitted, how justly God has punished the West Indie
Company in Holland, who are brought to nothing, and what supplies soever (to
their infinite great charges) have been sent thither, they have either
miscarried, been beaten, or lost one way or other. And the places aforesaid
taken from the Portugal by treachery, are in the Portugals hands again; so that
God seems to have blown upon that Company and Design.

The Portugal Ambassador could never obtain any satisfaction, or so much as
reason from the Hollanders for what they had done.

My third Instance shall be Sweden.

According to the Treaty between the King of Denmark, and the Emperor Charles
the Fifth, as Earl of Holland and Zealand, made at Splers 1554. and according
to the ancient custom; the Dutch were to pass the Sound, only paying a
Rosenoble; the ships, being then never known to be visited or searched; and
this was paid because of the Lights, Tuns, and marks at sea, preserved by the
King of Denmark: which Treaty after the separation of the United Provinces from
Spain, the King of Denmark observed not; making what rules and exactions he
pleased, and breaking them when he would; searching the ships also, through
which many came to be confiscated: for having contraband goods, or any
commodities that they gave not account of to his Officers in the Sound: and as
the Dutch were strong or weak in their Convoyes, the Customs or Toll was
increased, or diminished, and sometimes they past free, the Swede always.

The Dutch being no longer able to control the King of Denmark (being the
only King at Peace then in Europe) they send three Ambassadors to the King of
Sweden, who at the only request of the States General, 1640.
made a League of Alliance with the said States in the same year, and confirmed
it again in the year 1645. being by them called a League Guarantie, purposely
to keep the Dane in awe, being besides the League of Commerce.

The Queen of Sweden in the year 1643, and 1644. entered Denmark, and made war
against it: The Dutch according to their League (which was to assist one
another, in case the Dane should assault either of them, with 4000 men, or
ships to the proportion of the charge of so many men) sent relief to the Queen
of Sweden, or rather 50 ships into the Sound: and at the same time an Ambassy,
(viz) Schaep, Zoneck; Andree; to let the Dane know, si tu non vis, hic faciet.

The Dane not knowing how to turn himself, in dealing with them both, entered
into a Treaty, as well with Sweden as the States of the United Provinces.

The Queen of Sweden had full satisfaction given her: but the States of
Holland, by reason of the practice of the Prince of Orange, who was allied to
the King of Denmark, by his marriage of the King of Englands daughter, could
not obtain their full liberty for their passage of their ships through the
Sound: nor have the Treaty of Spiers made good to them, though the Queen of
Sweden advised them to stand to the Treaty of Spiers, and she would maintain
them in it: yet they obtained a reasonable rate, and that their ships should
not be visited, showing their Passes from the Admiralty, and by word of mouth,
telling what they had in their ships: with which the Dane was forced to be
content, and never could afterward, cause the Dutch ships to be visited:
whereby the Hollander had a great advantage, and paid no more then he had a
mind unto.

The King of Denmark being by this means brought somewhat low, and the Queen of
Sweden high, having made peace with him and the Emperor, Vlefelt, an Ingenuous
man, and able to raise and restore the Kingdom of Denmark, gave the Dunish King
direction, that henceforth instead of curbing, and slighting the Hollander, he
should court and cajole them, by giving them hopes of gain and profit:
whereupon the King of Denmark honored the four Earls of Nassaw, the
Rheynegrave, and the Lord of Bredero, with the order of the Elephant: Vlefelt
going to Holland about this Errand, courted them much, represented how
formidable Sweden was, and that they did endeavor to undo their trade in the
East Sea, (though there was little likelihood of this in regard the Hollanders
were great husbands, and managers of their affairs, and by their money had
known how to set forth Monopolies, Sweden having little trade in comparison.

But notwithstanding all the foresaid respect and love of the Queen of Sweden
in entering into a League Defensive against Denmark, on the Hollanders score,
and at their request as aforesaid, whereby the States had their opportunity of
making their terms of advantage for the Sound as aforesaid. She wishing them
to stand to the Treaty of Spiers and she would mrintain them: and contrary to
the League Guarantie wherein the States General are bound to assist the Swede
against the Dane with 4000. men, and ships proportionable to that charge, and
to maintain the Queen of Sweden free of the Sound so far as those men or
proportions would reach; she being then free of the Sound, and the League of
Commerce; the said States General in the years 1649. and 1651. have made and
concluded a League Defensive, and a Treaty of Redemption with the King of
Denmark, by which the Dutch are obliged to assist the King of Denmark against
Sweden, or any other Prince or State so far as 4000 men, or their
proportionable charge in Shipping will extend: and whereas the Queen was before
free from paying of Toll, she must pay the old Toll, if she trade that way to
Holland the Dutch having hired the Sound for some certain years of the Dane at
140000 Pattacoons or Dollors per annum as aforesaid, and is engaged during that
time, to let it to none other at that rate: all this expressly against their
Leagues with Sweden in the years 1640, and 1645. wherein they promise Sweden
the same thing. Ex quibuscunque causis bello involvatur. Of which the Swedish
Ministers have made several complaints to the States General.

I shall add no more but what our own experience of their carriage to England
does afford us; and that only in a few words, leaving the full disquisition
thereof, and of their carriage, and horrible cruelties in the East Indies
(chiefly under Coene) as extortions, imprisonment, killing, etc. upon the
innocent inhabitants, besides the English, to some other Pen, it being so well
known to us whom this concerns and I having been necessarily so large already
in other particulars.

What England has been to them, and how they have requited it, is before
discoursed: Many complaints were made against them in point of Trade in the
East Indies, and other parts, which occasioned several Treaties between them
and us, and in the year 1619 all things were concluded. Notwithstanding which
in the year 1622. was committed that barbarous and wicked murder on our
English in Amboyna, and the dispossessing us of those Islands of Spices to this
day; without making any satisfaction for the blood then shed, the spoils then
committed, the breach of the Treaty then made, and the Merchandise then and
since taken from the English, though it amounts to great sums, and should have
been perfected in the year 1625, or before it, to say nothing of any other
particular. Certainly the Judgment of God, and the Justice of Man will have a
time to purge such blood from the Earth, which it has defiled, and render unto
them according to their deserts.

But paramount to all, was Van Trumps late assault, when we were in Amity, upon
their own offers, treating for a more strict Union; as is elsewhere mentioned
at large in the Parliaments Declaration: from the mischiefs and sadeffects of
which, God alone by his great mercy and providence, has delivered us.

And to all this let it only be added, That they are already in a League
Defensive and Offensive with France; a League de non offendendo with Spain; a
League Defensive with Sweden against Denmark, and Defensive with Denmark
against Sweden, and all other Nations.

To sum up all; If so be by the instances mentioned, and what else may be
brought of the same nature; those of the United Provinces have made it to
appear (as it seems to be very clear) that they have been so far from
asserting, (though they pretend nothing more) the true reformed Protestant
Religion, and Liberty, that they have not only deserted strangers, that have
professed and contended for the said Principles; but their own Flesh and Blood,
contrary to their holy and perpetual League and Union, called the Union of
Vtrecht in the year 1579. as in the case of Antwerp, Gant, Bruges; but have
assisted the Popish Princes in the wars against their Protestant Subjects, as
in the case of Rochell; and tyrannical Princes in their wars against their
Protestant Parliament and People, contrary to the fundamental Laws of their
Kingdoms, as in the case of England; and furnished bloody Rebels with Arms, and
Ammunition, and all other provisions, to commit the most hellish massacres upon
the Protestants, as in the case of Ireland.

If so be that their sole business is to be free themselves, and to have all
the world their slaves, as they are able, as is manifest by the whole proceed
of their affairs; and to shut up the commerce of the world from any but
themselves, as in the case of the Sound, East Indies, Amboyna, Antwerp,
Flanders, etc.

If so be the strongest and most sacred Stipulatious, and Leagues solemnly
sworn before God, and oftentimes renewed upon the same sacredness, made upon
their own desires, and necessity, and grounded upon old and new courtesies and
friendship, and upon their own interests; others have quitted Peace for their
sakes only, and weltred in blood to effect their requests, have been broken as
two before the fire, and of no validity, as in the case of France, Sweden, and
England; and where they have made show of tenderness and affection, to help up
a Kingdom rising from the ground, and yet design it only as a cover, to
possess their strength and riches, as in the case of Portugal.

If so be they can easily swallow down Leagues contrary one to another, as
Earth is to Heaven, as in the case of Sweden, Denmark, France and Spain.

If so be that when they seem mostly to desire Peace and strict union, they
intend it as a disguise to cover their designs of treachery, and surprise, as
in the case of Trumps late assault.

If so be the Basis of their actions Divine and Humane, and the whole of what
ever they do attempt, be advantage and profit; and that Religion, Liberty,
Principles, Leagues, Treaties, Friendships, Assistance, must serve as often as
they judge it fit, and think themselves able to accomplish it, though never so
contrary to the being of Humanity, and all the Rules of Honesty and
Faithfulness in the world, as in the instances aforementioned.

And lastly, if so be we of this Nation of England, do believe that there is
such a Cause of God this day amongst us, that will take off the Isa. 9. 4. 10.
27. 14. 25. 58. 6.
Burden and the Yoke, and cause Jer. 23. 5, 6. Ezekiel, 45. 9. Isa. 56. 1. Genesis
18. 19. 2 Samuel 8. 15,
Justice to be administered equally to all, and Isa. 9. 7. 16. 5. 42. 4. Ps, 99
4. Dan. 7. 22.
establish Righteousness and Judgment in the Earth: And that as it has done
much hereof in England already, so it will perfect it, and that God his will
herein, will cause to be declared, and to proceed to other Nations, till the
whole Romans 8 22.
Creation that is now groaning under the exorbitant and wicked lusts of Kings
and great ones, whether in Monarchies or States, be delivered into freedom; and
that this Cause will Jer. 12. 14. 46. 10. Ezekiel. 28. 24.
Chastise every one that has opposed it, or born evil will unto it.

Then (I say) let England judge things rightly, and take heed how they make
Leagues and Union with such a people. How they forbear to mind what the Mich. 6
9. 1 King. 20. 42. 2 King. 13. 19.
voice of Providence says to them, or neglect to take the opportunities that
such a signal hand of God (as has lately appeared) has put before them, to
secure themselves, do justice to their people, and maintain the Reputation of
that Cause amongst them, which God has written his Name upon both at Sea and
Land, in such unparalleld and glorious Characters.

And let every man take heed how he Jer. 7. 16. 11. 14. 14. 11 Genesis 19. 16. 17.
26 14. 12. 14, 16 1 King. 22. 28. 30. 32.
seeks to bind the Hand of God, when he is shaking his Rod over a people,
especially when they have upon them the symptoms of Displeasure; and how they
stand in the way of Gods designs in the world, and how they express more
tenderness to such a people, then to the security, Blood and right of their
Contrymen, and the will of God, which we ought to pray to be done in earth
as it is in Heaven.

For when the Lord is moved from his Throne, to do his great works in the
world, in routing Antichrist, making of his name glorious in the relieving the
Ps. 103 6. 146. 7.
oppressed, delivering the Isa. 61. 1.
captive, helping him to Psa. 72. 12
right that has no helper, throwing down the unrighteous Powers and Kingdoms,
appearing as the righteous Judge of all the Earth. And lastly, in setting up
his Psalm. 2. 6.
King on his holy Hill of Syon; which he has said shall be done, and we
believe and expect it to be done in these later times of the world. Let all
men, yea the people of God, take heed how they stand in his way: For if his
Psalm. 2. 12.
Wrath kindle but a little, happy are all those that trust in him.

FINIS.

