THE CASE TRULY STATED BETWIXT THE Dean and Chapter of Christ's Church in
OXFORD, And WILLIAM ADKINS Butcher, concerning Frideswides Meadow near Oxford.
THe Dean and Chapter of Christ's Church in Oxford were seized in see, in right
of their Church, of a certain Meadow called Frideswides Meadow, lying near unto
Oxford, and the said Meadow lying near unto Oxford was, during the time that
Oxford was a Garrison for the late King, very much turfed and dug, and had
several Bulworks made upon it, and the Rivers of Charwell and Thames were by
His Majesty's soldiers turned in upon it, and lay all over it during the late
wars, the better to keep the enemy from the Garrison; by reason of which
digging, turfing and floating, and the long lying of the waters upon it, the
same was almost altogether spoiled, and did bear nothing but Flags and Sedge,
and did become marshy ground, so that after the wars the same was very little
worth.

Whereupon Dr. Reynolds (now Lord Bishop of Norwich) the Dean, and the then
Chapter of the said Church, conceiving that they were not enabled by any
Charter or Grant to hold the said Meadow in their own hands, and to their own
uses, but that according to their trust they were obliged to let the same at an
improved rent in Corn for the benefit of the whole Society, which consists of a
100. Students and diverse other Scholars, and being desirous that the said Meadow
should be improved and made good again for the benefit of themselves and their
successors, did by their Indenture under their Common Seal, bearing date on the
20 day of Feb. in the year of our Lord 1649. demise the same unto the said
Will. Adkins for 21. years thence next ensuing, at and under an improved rent
in Money and Corn, according to the Statute of the 18. Eliz, and also finding
by old rent, rolls and records, that the old rent of the said Meadow was 10 l. 6
s. per an. or there abouts, they did improve the same in Money and Corn, which
now usully amounts Communibus annis to 35 l. per an. which has been since paid
and employed for the benefit of the whole Society, according to the intent of
the founder, and the said will. Adkins did also then pay to the said Dean and
Chapter for a Fine for the said Lease the sum of 500 l.

That afterward the said Will. Adkins was at very great Charges for several
years together, in throwing down the Bulworks which were upon it, in dreining,
scouring and trenching the Rivers and Ditches; in laying soil and Compost upon
the same, and in planting many trees thereupon, and in other good husbandry,
which cost the said Will. Adkins at the least 800 l. in so much, that he did
thereby improve the said Meadow to be worth yearly as much more as it was worth
when the said Will. Adkins did first enter upon it.

That after this the said Will. Adkins did renew the Lease from the Dean and
Chapter again, who by their Indenture under their Common Seal, bearing date the
10. day of March, 1654. did demise the same unto the said Will. Adkins for 21.
years thence next ensuing, at and under the said former improved rent in Money
and Corn, for which said new Lease Adkins did pay unto them the sum of 300 l.
for a Fine; whereby it appears that the said Adkins did disburse in Fines and
the said other Charges for the improving of the said Premises, the sum of
1600 l. at the least.

That the said Meadow after all his said Charges disbursed upon it, not being
worth above 100 l. per annum, the Profits thereof hitherto have not near
satisfied unto him the yearly Interest of his Money, and the College yearly
Rents and Taxes, that he has paid for the same.

And yet not withstanding, after the Restitution of His Majesty, Dr. Fell being
made Dean of the said Church, he and the present Chapter being desirous to have
the said Meadow to their own uses again, and pretending that the said Adkins's
Lease was void in Law, in regard that the said Meadow had not formerly been
demised, did without allowing any satisfaction to Adkins about two years since
Commence an action of Ejectment in the name of one Thomas Hud^^^^^ (...)
Adkins. and the said Cause coming co trial at the same A^zes for the County of
Oxford, in the year 1661. the said Defendant Adkins did then make proof of all
the said matters of fact, and the Jury were then ready to have given a Verdict
for Adkins, but Dr. Fell the Dean, and Dr. Dolben the Treasurer of the said
College, being both present in the Court, perceiving the same, did move the
Judge that the matters in difference betwixt the parties should be referred to
the determination and award of an Arbitrator of their own choosing, and
thereupon it was ordered at the said Assizes, that a Verdict by consent should
be found for the Plaintiffs, and that all the differences betwixt the parties
should be referred to the said Arbitrator, and that the Postea should remain in
the hands of the Clerk of the Assizes until Mr. Justice Windham should give
order to the contrary, as by that order may appear.

Upon which reference the said Arbitrator did take much pains to settle the
differences betwixt them, but could not; and did therefore at last (to prevent
the ruin of the said Adkins and his family) on his Award in writing; bearing
date on the 28. day of October, 1661. betwixt the said parties, award that the
said Dean and Chapter should pay to the said Adkins, toward the satisfaction
of all his Moneys and Costs, the sum of 600 l. at our Lady Day then next
following; and that in case the said Moneys should be then paid, that then the
said Adkins should surrender up his possession and Lease to them; but in case
that the Moneys should not be then paid, that then the said Adkins or his
Assigns should hold and enjoy the said Meadow for the term of 7. years only
then next ensuing, and should at the end of the term of 7. years deliver up his
Lease and possession to the said Dean and Chapter, as by the Award may appear.

And although the said Arbitrator did not award unto Adkins one half of the
Moneys due to him, or that in case the said Moneys should not be paid to him,
did award to him but one half of the term, he having 14. years to come in his
term at the time of the said Award; yet the said Dean and Chapter did refuse to
stand to the Award made by the said Arbitrator of their own choosing; and yet
notwithstanding all the said premises, the said Dean and Chapter did in the
last Mich. Term commence a new action of Ejectment in the name of the said
Thomas Hudson their former Lessee, against the said Adkins for the recovering
the possession of the said Meadow from him, and the Cause did come to trial this
last Assizes at Oxford, and a Jury did appear, which were returned by the
Prothonotary the last Term by order of the Court of Common Pleas.

And the Defendant Adkins having made full proof of all the said Moneys
disbursed by him for the benefit of the Inheritance of the said College, and
all the said before mentioned matters of fact, the Jury after a long and full
evidence given on both sides, did find their Verdict for the Defendant Adkins.

And yet notwithstanding it is endeavored that a Proviso be added unto the Act
for confirming of College Leases, that the said Act shall not extend to
confirm any Leases made of any Lands which were not let or dimised for eleven
years or more before the year of our Lord 1640. which Proviso if it should
pass, would destroy the said Lease of Adkins, and many more Leases, which this
Dean Fell and the present Chapter of Christ's Church have confirmed of Lands
never let before in Lease, till Bishop Reynolds let them at that time when
Adkins took his Lease of him.

And likewise at All Souls College in Oxon they have renewed several Leases
of Lands that were never put in Lease, till much about the time Adkins took his
Lease of Bishop Reynolds, and at New College in Oxford they have renewed with
many Tenants within this year and a half, and confirmed their Leases of Lands
that were never put in Lease before about twelve years ago by those that were
then Governors in that place.

And yet Adkins doubts not but to prove and make it appear that the said Meadow
has been in ancient times demised at an old Rent, and the said Lease is good
by the Laws of this Land, if it be not avoided by the said Proviso.

And it is manifestly known that Dr. Fell who lays claim to half this Meadow for
himself, as he is now Dean of Christ's Church, was never formerly invested in
any part of it, nor those five Canons likewise who seek to take the other from
Adkins, and the improved Rent from the Students, which likewise were not
formerly invested in these Lands. And the other two old Canons are those that
were there when Bishop Reynolds let the Lease to Adkins, and took their Fines.
and remain established Canons there still.

The premises considered, it is humbly submitted to judgment what these Leases
can be worth to those Tenants who have paid great Fines, and have renewed their
Leases within these two years, with these Governors, if they be called away,
and other Governors put in their places.

And therefore the said Adkins humbly prays and hope, that the Proviso shall
not pass, but that his Lease may be confirmed as well as other College
Leases, and that the Law may determine the Title of the same betwixt him and
the said Dean and Chapter.


