The Right Honble: Roger Earl of Castlemayne Baron of Limbrick. etc.
portrait

AN ACCOUNT Of the Present WAR Between the VENETIANS and TVRK; WITH THE STATE
of CANDIE: (In a Letter to the King, from Venice.)

By the EARL of CASTLEMAINE.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for H. Herringman, at the Anchor on the Lower Walk of
the New-Exchange. 1666.

TO THE KING.
Gracious Sovereign,
I Sent Your Majesty this Account at my Return from Candie, emboldened by the
Orders You were pleased to give me (when I left England) to acquiant You with
all I found New abroad; and this I could by no means call Old, seeing to me the
Cause and Progress of the War was altogether unknown. From You ( Great Sir) it
had a gracious Acceptance, and from You again it begs Reception, since by Your
Commands it is now made Public: Nor will Your People be unwilling to hear how
miraculously Christendom is Defended against the Common Enemy of our Faith and
Peace.

This is that Man of Sin that exalts himself against all that is called God;
and that great Leviathan, whose Teeth are thought so terrible; yet in his
Nostrils there is fixed a Hook: For certainly never did Providence more plainly
appear, then in giving Bounds to this Monster at Sea, where had he been but
ordinarily Victorious, with terror he had appeared at their Doors, to whom now
his Name is hardly known.

It Is in the Deep he has seen Gods Wonders, and where he never had the least
Success, though that be the Grand Argument of his Belief and Doctrine.

That Memorable Battle of Lepanto made him then know, That our United Force
could stop his Fury; But now the Victories at Fogies, Nixia, and the Dardanels,
have apparently proclaimed his weakness, and that the Venetians themselves are
more then Match for him.

It Is past my reach ( Sacred Sir) to find in Humane Reason how Men so
approvedly Stout as these Infidels are, and not unacquainted with Maritime
Affairs, should always so degenerate at Sea, as to seem contemptible to half
their Number, who have no extraordinary Traffic to make them more Experienced
then themselves: Nay, which is yet more wonderful, Why should the Apostates
that command these Ships (who were, whilst Christians, admired for their Valor
and Conduct) turn presently inconsiderable, as if with their Faith they became
Bankrupts of their Natural Talents too!

The Pirates of Tripoli, Tunis, and Algiers, do far excel all other Turks in
Vessels; nor put they one scarce out whose Officers are not Renegades, of
eminence in their respective Professions, and drawn thither by the great
assurance of Gain and Profit. Yet about Ten Years since, Sixteen of the best of
these (sent as Auxiliaries to Constantinople) were ruined by Lazaro Mocinigo
(that thrice worthy General) with the Armata Sottile, his Fleet at Oars only:
when as one Ship of the Republiques has in a dead Calm destroyed as many of the
Enemies Galleys, as he had then to oppose these Rovers.

Nothing ( Mighty Prince) but this Christian State could ever Parallel You, who
have a Puissant Foe now on Your Hands, and yet no noise of Drums within Your
Streets: Your Enemy must be acknowledged also much to resemble theirs, in
commencing a War when 'twas least expected, and presently forced to seek means
of avoiding Fighting and Encounters.

May You then Both be for ever Victorious, as hitherto in all Engagements You
have been; For as Religion compels me to wish the one, so the Laws of God and
Man obliges me to the other, as bearing the indelible Character of

Your Majesty's faithful and most obedient Subject, CASTLEMAINE.
London, May 23. 1666.
Reader,
YOu have here a very exact Map of Candie (considering the bigness) with all
its remarkable Places and Fortifications, and also the manner how the Turks
Attaqu'd it two several times. first on the East and South sides of the Town,
Anno 1648. Secondly (because they found those places strong) on the West, in
1649. And lest you should confound the one with the other, there is a ^^rick'd
Line that passes between them. Nevertheless, you must know, That there was a
Battery for a little while in the second Attaque against St. Demetrius Fort, as
you may see farther in the Explanation of the Map. And if all the Figures in it
be not successively set down, you must impute it to the Gravers mistaking my
Directions: yet they will be sufficient to show each Particular. If you think
fit carefully to peruse the Map, and its Explanation, you will find it much
conduc^ to the History of the Siege. Remember also, that the part of New-Candie
in the East corner of the Map, is part of the New Town which the Turks have
built, and where they now lie closely Besieging Candie, having transferred
their Leaguer from their Tents to this walled Town, which is commodious enough,
and reasonably well built.

The Explanation of the Map of Candie.
A The Castle to defend the Port. B The Port. C The Arsenal, or Storehouse to
make and repair the Galleys. D The Gate Sabionera. E The Gate St. George. F The
Gate Jesus. G The Gate Panigra. H The Gate St. Andrea. I The Gate Tramatta. K
The Gate of the Mole. L The Bulwark Sabionera. M Bulwark Vitturi. N Bulwark
Jesu. O Bulwark Martinengo. P Bulwark Bettelem. Q Bulwark Panigra. R Bulwark
St. Andrea. S Mount of Sabionera. T M. of Vitturi. V M. of Martinengo.
Outworks.
2 Fort St. Demetrius. 3 Crepa Core. 4 Palma. 5 St. Maria. 6 Mocenigo. 7
Panigra. 8 Revelin St. Niccol^ 9 Rev. Bettelem. 10 Half Moon Mocen^go. 11 Rev.
Panigra. 12 Rev. St. Spirito. 13 Redoubt St. Andrew
30 The Turks Quarter in both the Attaques.
The first Attaque, 1648.
31 Battery against the Port. 32 Battery against the City, Bulwark Vitturi,
Jesus, and St. Demetrius Fort. 33 Batt. against St. Mary, and Martinengo, after
removed to 34. 35 Batt. against Palma, and Vitturi, after removed to 36. 37
Batt. that made the Breach in St. Demetrius.
The Palma was taken, and in it a Battery raised against Crepa Core. There was
a Battery raised on the Counterscarp which made the great Breach in Martinengo.
^ The Approaches of Cussaim Bassa Chief Commander. ^ The Aproaches of Assan
Bassa. Breaches made by Mines were in Palma, S. Mary, Jesus, S. Demetrius, and
Martinengo. In Jesu 5 Mines were Sprung, and 9 countermined; the breach was 54
Italian paces. In Martinengo 7 were Sprung, and 8 countermined; the Breach was
84 Italian paces. This place was taken by the Turks, and maintained for seven
hours.
The second Attaque was on the West side of the Town (as the former was on the
East and South): This began Aug. 20. 1649. and ended October. 6. following; and
is distinguished from the first by a pricked line between them. The Batteries
in this Storm were against Mocenigo's Out-work, Bettelem, and Panigra: These
63, 65,
Batteries are marked with Figures, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66. There was in this
Attaque also a Battery against S. Demetrius, (marked with fig. 61.) but being
repulsed there, the chief fury of the Turks was during the Attaque against
Mocenigo's Out-work, which they took thrice, but were driven out again with
great loss of Men, and eight Banners. 68 The Approaches of that Assault against
S. Demetrius. 70, 71, 72 The several Approaches on the West side in this
Assault.
map of Kandi (Herakleion) The City of Candy

The Old Town



map of eastern Mediterranean Mediterranean Sea.



May it please Your Majesty,
THE Kingdom of Candie, since the taking of Rhodes and Cyprus, has ever been
the aim of the Ottoman Emperors, to the end (the Christians having no harbor
in the East) they might fall upon the West with all security and ease.

In the year 1645. (when the whole Christian World was at odds) Ibraim, the
Father of the present Monarch began this War, who in the depth of a long Peace
unexpectedly set upon the Venetians, and made this the pretense of his Quarrel:

It seems in their former Agreement (among many other Articles) the Republique
did engage not to give shelter to the Knights of Malta in any of their Ports or
Havens. In 1644. it happened that the Galleys of the Order took a Sultana, who
with three Millions of Crowns was going to pay her Vows at Mecha: These making
homeward with this great Booty, were constrained either for want of good
weather, or water, by stealth to strike into a by-Port of Candie; where (having
put on Shore some Horses they had got) after Refreshment they safely returned
to their own Isle.

The year following the Turk provided a Fleet (in great and small) of 460 Sail,
protesting to the Senates Ambassador it was for Malta; but when they had
passed by, near as far as Sapienza, they again tack't about, and without the
least Declaration of War, landed Sixty thousand Men, which presently sat down
before Canea. The Republique being in this manner surprised, provided for their
defense as fast as they could; yet before their Courage was awaked they lost
the whole Kingdom, except the Metropolis Candie, and three adjoining Insulets
(of much value for their Ports) viz. Carabusa, Spina longa, and Suda. This
prosperous Success made then the Grand Signior own the War, laying openly the
sheltering the Malteses to the charge of the Senate; but had he received any
check at the first, 'twas privately decreed (to satisfy the Venetians) that
the Captain Bassa should lose his Head, as if the design had been his
Capriccio, without the least order for it.

After the taking of Canea and Rhetimo, they soon became Masters of the Field,
and in 1648. began the Siege of Candie, making then so furious an Onset, that
they entered the Breach, and for seven hours were within the Town; but the
Valor of the Defendents beat them out again with infinite loss and damage. In
Anno 49. they made another Assault, which proving vain, they have now left off
for ever the thought of winning the place by Storm.

On a rising Ground (where formerly the Enemy pitched their Tents) near three
Miles from the Old, they have built another Town, which is called New-Candie;
here resides the Bassa, and here have they fortified themselves, blocking up
the City, so that there is now no Commerce but by Sea, which sends yet plenty of
all things that can be requisite or needful.

If the Turk were prosperous here, he had not the like Success in Dalmatia; for
this being nearer home, the Venetians so got the start, that they not only
preserved their own, but took whatever they designed, still beating all
Supplies, though thrice exceeding theirs in number. Of 46 places taken, none
was preserved but Clissa; the rest they have destroyed, leaving waste in breadth
at least fifty miles, and so along even to the Confines of Albania. The Towns
upon the Shore ( Zara, Sebenico, Trau, Spalato, Almissa, Cataro, and Budoa,)
being a defense for the Gulf, they keep (as before) well Fortified: Nor has
the Turk on the Seaside but Narento, and Castelnuovo, both which are so shut up
with the Galleys there on purpose attending, that they are able by Pyracie to
do no harm at all.

When the War here began, part of the Morlacks (who are Croats, or Dalmatins,
but so called from the Hills where they lived) revolted from the Sultan, and
threw themselves into the Protection of the Republique: These, though kindly
received, do not inhabit the Towns, either out of fear they may again fall
off, or by reason that having store of Cattle, they could not attend them with
such commodity and ease. Their dwelling then is under the walls of the Strong
Places, where they build Huts; and here being well defended, they lie secure,
enjoying the advantage of the Fields; and besides, whenever they please they
can make their plundering Excursions into the Enemie's Country. Against these
the Turks bear a mortal hatred, at no time giving Quarter, unless it be to put
them to new pains and torments. Never were people more agile and strong of
Body, or that could suffer hardship with more patience then they; and yet for
all these innate Virtues, they cannot be made Soldiers, (I mean the major
part) since no Art will Reduce them to the exact Rule of Martial Discipline:
the greatest good they are now fit for is to do harm, which commonly happens,
they daily running out in headless Troops, and often returning home with
Cattle, Slaves, and other useful Booty.

In their Sea-affairs the Republique is so Triumphant, that were the
particulars at large writ, 'twould seem it may be far more fabulous then true.
'Twas long after the War broke out before the Navies met, the Venetians being
loath to hazard a Fight, which had they once lost, and the Turks become Masters
of the Mediterranean, the destruction of them, and of Christendom too,
perchance must have also followed. The first business then of their Fleet was
to furnish their Maritime Towns with Men and Necessaries; and by doing this
they had many private Encounters, in which having still the better, it gave
them such heart and vigor, that since the year 47. they got many famous
Victories, and by them are become so terrible now, that (unless it happen by
chance) it is impossible to meet with the Enemie's Fleet abroad.

In the beginning of the War the Republique was at a great expense, their
Officers affirming, That for the first four years they spent near thirty
Millions of Pistols, which is above twenty of our Sterling money: And this may
possibly be true; for never was Army more duly paid; which caused the best
Soldiers from all Parts even to make Friends to be in their Service. The Rates
are still the same; but (through their wants by the length of this contest) the
Payment is thought so bad, that at present few come, unless they are Spirited,
as Planters are sent to the Indies. Seventeen thousand (within a little either
under or over) are the number of those in this Service; for in the Kingdom of
Candie there are not above 6000 in pay, 1000 more there are in their other
fortified Islands, in the Garrisons of Dalmatia 4000 (besides a Regiment which
the Pope maintains at his Charge); and lastly, in the Armata they keep about
6000 more. Thirty six Livres a Month is the Contract with the Common-Souldier,
and this to be reckoned according to the Standard of the place where they are,
which makes the income different; for 36 Livres in Candie amount not to above 3
Reals, but in the Army they are equal to 4r, or eighteen shillings. Of this, in
Candie the Soldier receives 6 s. 9 d. per mensem, and 16 ounces of Bisquet a
day, and in Clothes to the value of 15 or 20 s. a year. In the Armata to each
is paid only 4 s. 6 d. a Month, and the like allowance of Bisquet as before: and
after they have satisfied for their Arms they imbezil, if any thing remains,
their Credit is owned, which presently the poor wretches sell for five or six
in the hundred. Yet these last are thought to fare the best, by reason their
Duty is easier; (for those of the City mount the Guard every second Night) and
besides, are more in the way of pilfering, and of sometimes getting Prizes.

The Allowance to their Officers is very different also: for the Tramontans, or
Foreigners (to encourage their coming) have far more then what they give the
Italians; and the pay of both is reckoned by Ducats, which may be valued at 3
s. 9 d. apiece.

Italians are thus paid per mensem. To a Colonel 100 Duc. Lt. Colonel 080 Duc.
Major 060 Duc. Captain 040 Duc.
To each of these is lowed also the pay of 3 Common-Souldiers. Lieutenants they
have none. Ensign 020 Duc. Sergeant 010 Duc. Corporal 006 Duc.


Strangers are thus paid. To a Colonel 150 Duc. Lieut. Colonel Major Captain
each 100 Duc. Lieutenant 050 Duc. Ensign 030 Duc. Sergeant 015Duc. Corporal
010 Duc.


Besides, in every Tramontane Regiment there is the Stato Colonello allowed,
which is 200 Ducats a Month; and this to Regale his Lieutenant and Major, who
commonly have a share, though herein he may do as he please.

Every Captain also has Capo Soldi, which is about 6 d. a Head to an Italian a
Month, and 12 d. to a Stranger, for as many as they have in their Company. This
Money they may convert to their own use, but the institution was to distribute
it according to their discretion amongst those that did well deserve.

The Reformado's have half the pay of their former Office: And for the Horse,
they are not 500 in all, each of which have 16, the Cornet 40, the Lieutenant
60, and the Captain 120 Ducats a Month, with some other Accidental perquisits.

That which these Officers do duly receive for their monthly Subsistence, is
the bread, and about a third of the Italian pay; the rest is in Arrear for the
greatest part; and unless they can make good friends to the Cashier they must
expect long, or sell this, as the hasty Common-Souldier did before them.

Concerning the Naval Force which they have, it consists of three sorts of
Vessels, viz. of Galliasses, Galleys, and Ships.

A Galliasse is a Machine of wonderful advantage in these Inland Seas, being a
Gally in respect of its Oars, and yet resembling a Ship in its strength and
ornament. These the Republique (of all Christian Princes) alone use; and though
the Turk has many, yet he neither knows how to make them so good, nor to manage
them with that dexterity the Venetians do. Five hundred Slaves and 300
Soldiers go to the well maning of one of these, which (being ever the
destroyer of Galleys) in a Calm will be too hard for a Ship; but if the wind
blows, the Ship is reckoned to have far the greater advantage. Of these there
are constantly six in the Fleet.

For Galleys, there are in Dalmatia five; one in Corfu, and the like in Candie
to be employed about Dispatches; and in the Armata 24, each of which, one with
another, carry 180 Slaves, and about 100 or 120 Soldiers. Of Slaves in their
Fleet there are near 8000, consisting of Turks, of Christians condemned, or of
miserable people that sell themselves for about 5 l. to the end of the War.
These last have 4 s. 6 d. a Month, and are not put into chains as the rest. The
daily provision for all is 18 ounces of Bisquet, a little Rice and Oil, and
perchance a coarse Shirt and Drawers in the year.

Of great Ships the Venetians maintained about 25 formerly, and 16 now, amongst
which there are but 5 of their own, the rest hired; for they find it less
chargeable, or at least freer from trouble, to be at a certainty, and that
without hazard, then to lie liable to the Cousenage of Officers, which all
Commonwealths are subject to: and were it possible to find Galleys and
Galliasses, they would doubtless agree for them after the same manner also.

The Rate they pay for Ships is 1650 Ducats a Month, which comes to about 305
l. English: For this the Captain is bound to keep 60 Sailers, and to obey all
Commands of the General, as if the Vessel wholly belonged to the Republique.

The Ships which they have of their own are those they take in War; and when
there are many they sell most of them, preserving still a few to be a perpetual
Remembrance in the Eyes of all, of their remarkable Valor and Bravery.

This is the whole number of their Navy; and with this they so affright the
Turk, that now, on purpose to engage, he dares not appear; and should he set to
Sea 200 of the best Vessels he could get, they would not only attaque him, but
be all more assured of a Victory then the odds of two to one can give a sober
Gamester. To demonstrate then the Courage of these, and the fear of the other,
nothing can better do it then what happened in the year 53. For at that time
Fosculo (the Venetian General) with the like Fleet, strengthened with a few
more Ships, drove into the Harbor of Rhodes 8 Galliasses, 80 Galleys, and 64
Men of War; and though he used all possible means to provoke them to fight, yet
nothing could draw them to it. This made the Admiral of Malta declare, That he
looked upon that Action as greater then all the Victories they had lately got;
for then the Chance of War (he urged) was only contrary; but by this their
cowardice the Turks confessed themselves now fully overcome and vanquished.

Moreover, it must needs be wonderful, that the Great Turk and his should lose
of all sorts above 2000 Sail, and yet they never took but a Gally of the
Republiques, and one poor Pink of Victuals. Nor has the Venetian lost by the
accidents of Fire and Storm 30 more, though now the War has been of so many
years continuance.

I had almost forgot to acquaint Your Majesty, That the Knights of Malta have
yearly (till their now joining with the French at Gigery) assisted this State
with 7 Galleys, which is the usual number they ever keep. Yet though these
Christian Heroes be as brave as the Swords they wear, the Venetian Fleet are no
ways fond of the help; and this, I suppose, proceeds from their being Match
enough for the awed Enemy themselves; and besides, they think the Knights are
never backward in the Plunder, when as sometimes in Service they will dispute
the Generalissimo's Orders, and make their own Admiral Judge whether the Action
be safe and fit.

That which the Armata now does (the Turk being thus terrified) is to rove
about the Archipelago, exacting Tribute of the Isles, and watching for Galleys
that hover up and down, as also for the Caravans of Egypt and Asia, which
often they light upon, to the infinite enrichment of the Grandees, and to some
benefit also even of the smaller fry.

The Islands here are all small, and many in number; nor can they be but poor,
seeing (besides their loss by petty Robberies on both sides) they now pay a
constant Tribute to the Venetians also. These receive of them about 150000
Crowns per Annum: But the Turk is content with less, as not willing wholly to
destroy his Subjects, which at present he cannot defend. Though the Republique
thus Command in the Aegean, the Inhabitants think it not ill spent still to pay
the Grand Signior something; and the reason is, because they know not how
otherwise to be out of danger of ruin by sudden Invasions, when the Christian
Fleet is distant from them. Of all these Isles Cerigo and Tino are only
Fortified by the Senate. Each of these has a small Fortress, which heretofore
they thought fit to keep, that upon any occasion they might here have an
assured Harbor of their own. Those that are Garrisoned by the Turk are
Tenedos, Lemnos, Metelin, Scio, Negropont, Lango, and Rhodes; for the rest,
they are all open Tributaries (as I said) to both: but in more awe of the
Republique, because they are Masters at Sea. And this is a loss, or at least a
dishonor (in not being able to protect their own) that the Infidels suffer for
their beginning of the War.

The Venetians have often also hereabouts disbarqu'd, and taken several Towns
and Forts; yet not with an intention to keep them, or to go on with a Conquest,
since they cannot spare Men for the first, and want a strong Army for the
other: but this they have done, either to demolish some Offensive Place, or to
let the Turks see, they can Conquer on Land as well as on Sea; or lastly, by
the design of a new General to get Reputation, in showing his Wit and Courage.

Though no great Prince had fewer Subjects then Your Majesty in this War, yet
none had those that have done things of more note; and herein each of Your
three Mighty Kingdoms had some, that have Served well, and thereby gained much
Honor and Reputation.

Amongst the English that Fought bravely, Captain Thomas Middleton (who had his
Ship hired in the Service) did a most prodigious Action. It happened that the
Admiral, intending a Design about the Dardanels, put Middleton in so desperate
a place, that he was in danger from Land to be sunk at every Shot. He advised
the Commander of it, and withal told him, That the peril of himself and Ship
did not so much trouble him, as to be set where it was impossible for him to
offend the Enemy. Having no answer, or at best a bad one, and seeing it could
not prejudice the Fleet, he drew off a little the Vessel (his only Livelihood)
from the needless danger 'twas in. When the business was over, they dismissed him
(in a Council of War) with the Title of Coward, and all the Soldiers being
taken away, he was left only with some 50 English, to return home, or whither
else he pleased. He had not parted long from the Armata, but in a stark Calm
met with 25 Sail, of which 18 were the best Galleys the Great Turk could make
in all his Fleet. These crying out in derision, That they would eat English
Beef for Dinner, fell upon him, wanting no assurance, being assisted with the
stilness of the Air, and their own Strength and Number. But for all this
confidence they missed their aim; for after a long and sharp Encounter, the two
Bassa's that Commanded were killed, with 1500 to accompany them; and besides
the many that were wounded, the whole Squadron was so shattered, that they had
hardly Oars to get off, and were all unfit to Serve, at least for that year.
The Captain had neither Wind, Sails, nor Tackle left to follow them; but with
much ado he yet afterward came safe to Candie, and there presented to the
General a whole Tun of salted Heads of those he had killed in their often
boarding. His Excellency was astonished at the thing, and after all the
caresses imaginable, he acquainted the Senate with it, who with universal
consent Ordered him a Chain and Medal of Gold, as a Testimony of their high
Esteem, and his own commendable Valor. Middleton afterward died on his
Journey home, leaving a Son who Commands here a Ship, and is very well esteemed
by all the Nobility for his Resolution and Conduct.

About the first of the War Captain George Scot of Fife brought also a Ship to
the Fleet: He was so skilful in Gunnery, that he could not only kill a single
Man with his Cannon, but would also dismount any Piece that offended the
Christians at the Siege of Candie. The Heads of the Armata had such a value for
him, that he was usually admitted into their most privy Debates. He, when he
advised them to an Enterprise, would always be the foremost in the danger; and
in this manner he did to his great Reputation at Fogies. The Venetians were
there about 20 Ships, and by the Captains counsel determined in the Harbor to
fire the Enemies Fleet, consisting of about 140 Sail. Scot entered first, though
there was on each side a Castle to defend the Port. The Admiral with the rest
followed; but having begun their Design presently retired, fearing to be burnt
themselves, especially seeing the Night drew on so fast: In the mean while the
Captain had cast Anchor in the midst of the Turks, and plying them every way
with his great Guns, so hindered the putting out of the Fire, that had the rest
done what they ought (though already the damage was great) there would not have
been (they say) so much as the least Mast left. Every body gave him over for
lost; but yet in the morning he was seen to return, not only with a French
Pettach which the Master had forsaken, but also accompanied with a Galliass of
the Enemies, and with one of the flaming Galleys too. He had a Son with him
from the beginning, who at last was thought the better Engineer: but both, to
the sorrow of all, sickned and died in the Service.

In the year 45. came Colonel Brereton hither, an Irishman by Birth and later
Extraction, but originally of the Cheshire Family. He brought a Regiment from
Germany with him, and behaved himself so upon all occasions, in ordering
Affairs, as well as in personal Valor, that they made him Sargente Generale,
and thereby, in the vacancy, General of the Arms; which Charge also he should
have absolutely received, had he not died (as lately he did) of a Fever in
Candie.

Great Sir, It is here to be remembered, That the Republic trusts no Gally or
Galliasse (being of so easy a Conveyance, and thereby a bait for a needy
Soldier) out of the hands of a Noble Venetian, who for such a slight thing
cannot be imagined to hazard his so considerable Fortunes at home. On the other
side, they never give the Command of the Soldiery to any of their own
Gentlemen; but all the Officers (except some few of their ordinary Subjects)
from the highest to the lowest are hired Strangers. The reason is, That finding
the Roman Republique (which they much imitate) was always endangered, and in
the end ruined by its own Nobilities too much knowledge in War, and interest
with the Men at Arms, they strive to make theirs Statesmen and Overseers,
leaving the executive part to the Soldiers of Fortune, whom Money has made
their Servants: And moreover, by this gathering of Foreigners their People are
not lessened, few of their own being lost, though in an overthrow the number of
the Slain be great.

But it is not ( May it please Your Majesty) for all this to be thought, they
blindly leave all to the disposing of Strangers: for they reserve the directive
Power to themselves; and to that end choose every three years a Captain General,
commonly a graver Senator then knowing Soldier. To him for the avoiding
confusion and Parties (like to the old Dictators) is given the whole Authority
of the Senate: He then advises with the Capi di Guerra (who are all also
Gentlemen) viz. the Proveditore, the Captain Extraordinary of the Galliasses,
the like Officer of the Ships, with some others: and after he has heard their
Opinions, absolutely determines himself: and then the General of the Arms in
the best Military Order he conceives, executes his Commands and Will.

In this sort then do they balance the Ambition of their own, in using them to
advise and not to act; and hereby can they check the insolence of the
Soldiers, in taking away all direction from them, and punishing the least
grumbling with a severe Chastisement.

Thus (though in short) may be seen the manner of this War, which began through
the Turks unsatiable avarice of getting Candie; and without this, it is certain
they can never be quiet in the Levant.

It is true, They have got the Kingdom (the Venetians without their Walls
having not a foot left); yet are the Turks still frustrated in their aims,
since they have no one Port to winter a Fleet in; and on the contrary, the
Christians have here the same Harbors as formerly for their Navy or
Free-booters, and more elsewhere then they had before the beginning of the
Troubles.

The advantage the Enemy has now got, is hardly yet of greater consequence then
the enjoyment of so much Ground, for which he has paid (besides infinite
dishonor and losses) at least 400000 Men; when as on the side of the
Republique there died not a fourth of this, though the Clime and Pestilence
were great destroyers; nor could the tenth of the loss be called their own and
proper Subjects.

After all this stir, and purchase at so dear a rate, it is a most certain
truth, The Turks are here now thus weak, that a sudden Recruit of 10000 Men
would utterly beat them out of the Island: All people do therefore wonder why
it is not done: But some of the Reasons I find for it are these ensuing.

To get this Supply must be by the Aid of Foreign Princes, or by Levies made
at their own Charge.

From Christian Allies the Force now required cannot be expected without
Solicitation and Embassies; neither if this would obtain it, could it be done
without the Turks having notice of it; and doubtless thereupon would they send
a Supply to their own, by which, what so many Men at present can, twice the
number perchance will be scarce then sufficient to perform, but more especially
if afterward (through some disgusts, or by their not being able to do what
they came for) this friendly Succor should retire, the Republique will be left
with a stronger Enemy on their hands, and so in a worse condition then before.

If it be expected the Venetians should do it themselves, I must answer, I
verily believe they are not able, having run behind (as they say) so much in
the beginning; But if at last, through private Contributions, they could for
once make such a Levy, yet this their intention would be soon known, and most
of the same Inconveniences follow: And thus if not able to finish the Project
(the Turks being increased) double the number of those that now keep Garrison,
must be hereafter requisite. Nor can it be but hard to maintain new comers,
since through the poverty of the Public they are forced to shuffle with the
few that Serve.

So much does the exhausted yet cunning State fear over-briskly to engage this
lazy Prince, lest Anger should raise him to that Life and Fire, which by
experience his Natural Temper never can.

The most obvious and easy way now left with this little Supply to regain
Candie, seems to be, when the Barbary Pirates shall provoke Christendom to
punish their Robberies, to take that opportunity of sending from their Coast 20
Sail, which with a fair Wind in ten days will certainly arrive at the Isle. The
very sight of such an unexpected Succor will so amaze the Turk, that wise men
think he will capitulate and be gone; but no body doubts of the Success if they
come to blows, since all his strength here amounts not to 20000 good Men, which
being in dismay by this unlooked for help, cannot be able to resist the
Venetian Army, both thus reinforced, and also assisted by 60000 Natives, who
emboldened by the new Aid will undoubtedly be up in three days.

Notwithstanding this, they make no question at Constantinople of getting in
the end the Place: for they well imagine how poor the Public is, and that the
report of not being able to keep touch with their Militia, has done them such
discredit, that scarce any now voluntarily come to their Service. They know
too, that the Taxes are heavy on the Venetian Subjects, and hope thereby they
may be moved through desperation to Rebel, it being impossible (they think) to
feed them much longer with the expectation of Peace, which hitherto has made
them bear their Load with such Quiet and patience.

Moreover, the War, as it is now managed, costs the Grand Signior little, the
Island maintaining the Force he has there; and for the present havoc at Sea,
it commonly belongs to private Merchantmen; and therefore he resolves to
depend upon time, which as it brings change, so if it proves in the least
unfortunate to the Republique, he is certainly sure of his ends.

After this manner does he think to weary out the Venetians, and in fine force
them to ask Peace, which he resolves not to grant, unless it be bought with the
surrendering of Candie, and its other remaining appendices.

The Senate being well convinced of this, a considerable part (as the Rich and
the Old, who neither want, or are fit for Preferment) wish for an Accommodation
on these Terms; for fearing the conclusion will be thus, they desire betimes to
spare their own and Subjects Purses; but the Major part are still for War: And
this is also thought to move them to it.

1. First, The Gain the Men of Action make by the Trouble: For heretofore the
Public Treasury was to a Miracle full, and the Nobility poor; now, on the
contrary, by the Prizes yearly taken, by the advantage of Offices, and by often
buying Debentures of the Soldiers for 6 per Cent. the Particulars are all
rich, whilst the Cecca is wholly exhausted and dry.

2. The assurance that no Christian Prince will either now quarrel or plot
against them: And theresore they deem it prudence to be yet in a way of
regaining the Kingdom, especially while by so doing, they protect their dear
Terra Firma from the danger it ever lies subject to, by the still pretending
Successors of the Confederates in the League of Cambray.

3. The incertainty how long after this also they shall be yet quiet; for
'twould be ridiculous by so disadvantageous a loss to purchase Rest, when it is
impossible to be assured but the following Month a new pretext of War will be
found, unless they yield up Zante, Cephalonia, and Corfu, and so in infinitum.

These are some of the chief Arguments which make them refuse all Treaties of
this sort; and the rather, since by the coolness of the Turk they doubtless may
sustain this defensive War with their own yearly Income: But they pretend they
are in Debt, and that it is not half enough.

Republiques are always ill Managers of their Money, when great and
extraordinary Disbursements are made: for the Receipts and Payments passing
through so many hands of their own, every body gets: Nor are they yet in fear
of punishment, if their Thefts exceed not all shame, seeing their Relations are
their Judges; and besides, each man knows for the most part himself guilty of
what is imputed to his fellow.

The Venetians had yearly heretofore to the value of 800000 l. English, and
perchance have half as much more now by their unusual Impositions; and to speak
truly, their indispensible Charges are great: for (besides the Robberies of
Ministers, and the numerous Civil Magistrates, that draw much) they must not be
looked upon as if Candie, Dalmatia, and the Fleet were the only things of
Expense: Istria and Friuli (which are parts of Italy) lie sometimes liable also
to the Incursions of the Turk: Nor were it prudence in them wholly to
disfurnish their Estates in Lombardy, which is bounded with so many gaping
Princes.

For their better continuing the War, there is hopes still left, that their
Subjects will patiently bear the Taxes imposed without Insurrections. It Is the
present Custom of the Senate to send for Money with a Complement (calling it a
Donative) to the Towns and Territories belonging, (as Padua, Vicenza, Verona,
etc.) and then the Chief of these Places raise it as they themselves think fit.
Now these well know, if the War upon necessity should end, by reason of their
denial to contribute, That the Senate being in Peace, will no longer entreat
them to give this, but then force them to pay more, both to punish their crime,
and also to re-fill their drained Coffers against a new occasion: For 'twould
be a folly in them to think ever to quiet the Turk by Concessions.

To make the Port desist from troubling Christendom, is not by yielding, but by
sending them home with Loss. Were therefore the Enemy unkennell'd here, he must
needs return with great confusion and disgrace: For this footing which he has
now in the Kingdom, is the only thing he can show for the unspeakable damage
that from time to time he has suffered; yet should he at last master the Place,
he would not think he has paid too dear, seeing by the purchase he quite drives
the Christians out of the Levant; and let them then be never so strong at Sea,
without a new Conquest they can only molest and not hurt him; for the weather
and want will force them back, leaving him his desired Rule and Signory.
Besides, with Candie must also fall Zante, Cephalonia, and perchance Corfu too;
both the first Places being inconsiderable for strength, but of wonderful
utility to Christendom, as a Recess for their Fleet, and abounding in all kind
of Plenty. If then these Islands be taken, Italy must needs be in an ill
condition, the Turks Navy Harboring safely so near, with which he can Land in
a trice what men he please, whenever he shall think fit to Invade.

When I arrived here, I much admired why the Enemy from the neighboring
Continent did not on a sudden Transport 9 or 10000 Men, and thereby possess
himself of these places that are weak, being a great loss to his Foes, and so
pertinent for his Designs and Business. But I have since found (besides the
Venetians possibility of preventing) there are other causes that wholly divert
him from the Enterprise.

As, first, Should he make the Surprise now, yet he could not accomplish his
purpose of setting upon the West: For seeing the Infidels declare, They are not
to increase their Empire by Victories at Sea, they will at no time willingly
engage with the Christian Fleet; and therefore confess by the overthrows they
have had, That theirs is at present to Transport Men and Necessaries, and not
to Fight. Now whilst Candie stands, and the other Harbors that depend on its
resistance, if the Turks shall send their Navy to fall on Italy, they are sure
to be met by ours, which they acknowledge will ruin them as often as they are
assaulted. And thus till they have wholly subdued the Kingdom, they can have no
safe passage for their Fleet to these Isles, let them take what Season of the
Year they please.

Again, It thwarts the Turkish Maxim, to hazard much (without an indispensible
necessity) in the getting of a place, whilst behind there remains something yet
to be subdued; And their ground for it is, That undoubtedly believing one day
to be Masters of the whole World, the method to be used is a progression by
degrees, and Patience; taking first the thing next them, and then what borders
upon what they got last: And by this means they are not only free from an Enemy
at their backs, and danger in Retreats, but have thus lulled asleep
Christianity hitherto, as thinking it self yet far enough from danger, having
lost but one Town more then it had before. But should the Grand Signior on a
sudden step too forward (as when by taking of Otranto he got footing in Italy)
he is sure to be presently beaten out, and in danger also to awake his Enemies
so far, that all Christian Princes might again join in a League, which is the
only thing he fears. To avoid therefore this, when Christendom is at Peace does
he commonly begin a War with Persia; and if afterward differences break out,
he leaves then that usually fruitless Enterprise, to gain upon them, who, were
they united, would Conquer more in Five years then ever he yet got in Fifty.

I cannot think this ( Royal Sir) altogether a Christian Bravado, but that
which may be probably imagined, if I look upon what the glorious Venetians
themselves with a small Number have done, or consider how destitute of Men and
Strong Places all his Provinces are; or lastly reflect upon the wideness of his
Dominions on this Sea; so that 'twere impossible to defend them all were they
ordinarily populous; but they are not so, as I said; and besides, most of the
people there are also Christians. I cannot estimate his Strength by what it is
in Hungary, and thereabouts; for those Frontiers being but comparatively
little, he can defend them with his prime Men; and therefore if ever his ruin
be by force, he must be played with on that side only, and attaqu'd on this.
Here his Enemies may pick and choose; and if by chance one Country be found well
manned, the Wind without charge in 24 hours will carry them to another, which a
hundred to one will yield without resistance. Doubtless he is but weak, as may
be seen by his late utmost endeavor against the Emperor: And yet his seeming
Greatness strikes such terrors in every body near him, that all now allow there
is no medium left, but either Christianity must destroy this Antichrist, or he
it; that is, in their Earthly Rule and Dominion.

The present State then of the Venetian Affairs is; The City of Candie is in a
good condition, the Island lost; in Dalmatia and the Sea they have had the
better, and yet the Turk expects his ends: And this is a Misfortune the
Republique has, That their nearest Neighbors think they want no help: And thus
may they be tired out, if not beaten at last, to the infinite loss of
Christendom.

Gracious Sir,

To conclude, No War (as hitherto) was ever more extravagant then this; for in
it the Republique has lost a Kingdom, and yet are still Victorious; And though
the Turks be Conquerors, the World may nevertheless see, That they are no
longer Invincible.

Venice, November. 14. 1665.
A Postscript to the Reader.
ON the 15th of April, 1664. the present Generalissimo Andrea Cornaro Embarked
himself at Malamocco, who civilly received my Resolution of accompanying him
into the Levant. It was then the expectation of all that much would be done
that year, since the Turk had drained himself to the utmost in his great
Preparations against the Emperor: But yet the Venetians did nothing, wanting
what they said they expected; and so on the 20th of October following I
returned to Venice with Nicolo Cornaro the General of Candie, to whom I was
particularly obliged for many favors in his Government, on the Seas, and in
the Lazaretto also. You must know none comes ever from the East into Italy
without keeping a Quarantena, which is forty days Separation, to try whether
he be infected with the Plague or not; and the reason is, because they have a
received Opinion, That the Grand Signiors Dominion is never free from that
Pestilential Contagion. In the Lazaretto then, or place of Sequestration, I had
time to digest these Observations; and this I can assure you ( Reader) that the
matter of fact is undoubtedly true, since I made use of nothing which was not
affirmed by the chiefest Commanders, and those of different Nations and
Interests.

Here we had News of the dishonorable Peace made with the Vizier by the
Court-party at Vienna, which saved his Head, but brought them little Honor and
Reputation; for the Christians were not only the death of old Ali Bassa (their
best Commander) with ten thousand Janissaries; but put the whole Army into such
a consternation, that had Montecuculi pursued his advantage, it had been the
greatest Victory perchance that ever was.

Never were the Venetians more troubled then at this Accommodation; for now
their Enemy had no body to divert his Fury, and was ready also on the Confines,
with all manner of Necessaries, to fall the next Spring upon Dalmatia. Cataro
was the place they feared would be first assaulted; nor is it so strong but
that they might well apprehend a danger.

Thus stood their Affairs when I took leave of the General for Rome; nor did
the Senate then think of any thing but defense, having quitted all thoughts of
regaining the Kingdom of Candie. Yet this real occasion of fear at last blew
over; for the Turkish Army (as it were) quite mouldred away through the
looseness of the Grand Signior, having wholly abandoned himself to pleasure: Nor
did the Vizier's coolness contribute little, who was newly escaped from an
eminent danger in Hungary, and therefore now cautious how to begin a new
project, seeing his utter ruin must needs accompany the unsuccesfulness of the
Action.

This prime Minister is Son and immediate Successor to the late Vizier; a thing
not to be paralleled, as I take it, in all their Story. He is esteemed a man
of Wit, and a great pretender to Astrology, but no Soldier; which though it
may well agree with the Constitution of a Christian Government, yet never can
suit theirs: for not to go forward in Conquest, with them is assuredly to
effeminate their Men, and presently to relapse into a far worse condition. His
being otherwise bred makes him not beloved by the Militia; and this is
increased by the hatred they bore his Father: for after the Men at Arms had
murdered Ibraim the late Emperor, upon the Proclaiming of him that now Reigns
an Act of Indemnity passed, to pardon the numerous Guilty. Nevertheless, the
old Bassa found means by degrees (upon other pretenses) to bring all to
execution; which thing, though by Providence it has half ruined the Empire (in
scarce leaving one good Officer behind) yet the punishing of Regicides has
entailed such a Blessing on him, that he went not only with gray hairs to the
grave, but left his Son also Heir to his wonderful Greatness and Power.

The Venetians having weathered this Storm, and thereby discovered the
incurable Lethargy of the Port, resolved to be offensive again, and now to
provide for the driving them out of the Island. The Marquess Villa they
appointed General of the Arms, who is a Ferrarese by birth, and was formerly in
the Service of Savoy: He was not in the Army during my stay, Vert-Miller a
Switz having then this Office; but now the Affair is recommended to him, and in
it he has had Success; for the Turks are both hindered from expected Supplies,
and also at present closely Besieged in Canea; which if the Republique can take
(as it is verily hoped at Venice) no body then doubts of a through Conquest.

Nor will any thing ever be greater in Story then this, That a handful of men
(perfidiously surprised by the dreadfullest Enemy on earth) should yet continue
a War more then 20 years, and at last send him home naked, after so
unexpressible a loss both of Blood and Treasure.

FINIS.
IMPRIMATUR,

May 12. 1666. Roger L'Estrange.


