LA PICARA, OR THE TRIUMPHS OF Female Subtilty, Displayed in the Artifices and
Impostures of a Beautiful Woman, who Trapann'd the most experienced Rogues, and
made all those unhappy who thought her handsome: Originally, A Spanish
Relation, Enriched with three Pleasant NOVELS. Rendered into English, with some
Alterations and Additions, By JOHN DAVIES of Kidwelly.

LONDON, Printed by W. W. for John Starkey, at the Mitre within Temple Bar.
1665.

IMPRIMATUR,

ROGER L'ESTRANGE.
September. 30th. 1664.
To the worthily Honored, Sir JOHN BERKENHEAD KNIGHT, Master of the Faculties,
and Master of the Requests to his Majesty, and one of the Members of the
Honorable House of Commons.
SIR,
THe world is come to that improvement of experience, as to account
Dedicatories, more certain acknowledgements of obligation than any Noverint
Universi, especially when there is a great distance of Quality between those by
whom they are made, and those to whom they are directed. That this should be
thought such, I am rather pleased, than troubled, since, my being obliged,
argues my being known, to you, and consequently, that, from the one, I derive a
satisfaction; from the other, an advantage.

The last Piece, which came abroad under my obscure name, was The Travels of
the Embassy from the Duke of Holstein, into Muscovy, and Persia. The excellent
Person who was the original Author of it, Olearius, obliged, with us, most of
the Neighboring Nations, who also rendered his work into their several
Languages. I am told it was not unkindly received here; only the occasion I
have to speak of it now, is, that the coming forth of the English Translation,
with greater luster, than happily it had done otherwise, is, among those of some
others, due to your encouragement.

But I am not to date your notice of me from that; I must descend much lower,
to a Time wherein you thought it dangerous to know, or be known to, many. Be
not startled; when dangers are over, there remains only a pleasing remembrance
of them. It was, long before the Committee at Derby-House, was advanced into a
Council of State, an Age since, considering the subsequent reign of Tyranny and
Barbarism, and the perpetual alarms and frights, whereto worried Loyalty was
every where exposed. These you have happily weathered out, and seen the
contrivers thereof at last overtaken by the slow pace of divine Vengeance, an
advertisement to All Christians and Lay Elders, who either gratulate or envy
you the favors of a Prince, for whom you would have run yet greater hazards.

As to the Piece I now present you with, I have only this to say. It is a
Spanish Relation, written by D. Alonso de Castillo Savorsano, a famous Author
of that Nation. One of the most refined Wits of France thought it worth his
pains, to render it into the Language of his Country, with all the graces and
advantages it might derive from either. I have done it out of the latter, with
a freedom of alteration and addition, as my fancy led me, to make it the most
divertive I could in ours, which is the only recommendation of all things of
this nature. My Author promises his Readers a continuation of the Story, if
what is already published be kindly entertained: I do mine, the like, upon the
same precaution; but with this particular inducement, That it will give me
further occasion to assure the world how much I am,

Sir, Your most humble, and very much obliged Servant, J. DAVIES.

Books Printed for and Sold by John Starkey at the Mitre betwixt the middle
Temple-Gate, and Temple Bar in Pleetstreet.
Folio's.
THe Voyages and Travels of the Duke of Holstein's Ambassadors into Muscovy,
Tartary, and Persia, begun in the year 1633. and finished in 1639. containing a
Complete History of those Countries; whereto are added the Travels of Mandelslo
from Persia into the East Indies, begun in 1638. and finished in 1640. The
whole, illustrated with diverse accurate Maps and Figures, written originally by
Adam Olearius, Secretary to the Embassy, Englished by J. Davies of Kidwelly.

The World Surveyed, or the famous Voyages and Travels of Vincent le Blanc of
Marseilles, into the East and West Indies, Persia, Pegu, Fez, Morocco, Guinny,
and through all Africa, and the principal Provinces of Europe.

A Practical and Polemical Commentary, or Exposition, upon the third and fourth
Chapters of the latter Epistle of Saint Paul to Timothy, by Thomas Hall. B. D.

Brevia Judicialia, or an Exact Collection of approved forms of all sorts of
Judicial Writs in the Common-Bench, together with their returns, by Rich.
Brownlow.

Thesaurus Brevium, or a Collection of approved forms of Original and Judicial
Writs in the King's Bench, with their special Directions, by J. C.

Action upon the Case for Slander, or a Methodical Collection of thousands of
Cases in the Law, of what words are Actionable, and what not, by William
Shepherd, Esquire;.

Guillim's Display of Heraldry.

Blundel's Treatise of the Sybels.

A General Collection of Discourses of the Virtuosi of France upon Questions of
all sorts of Philosophy, and other Natural Knowledge, made in the Assembly of
the Beaux Esprits at Paris, by the most Ingenious persons of that Nation,
Englished by G. Havers.

The Commonwealth of Oceana, by J. Harrington, Esquire;.

Quarto's.
A Collection of Declarations, Messages, Speeches, Remonstrances, etc. which
passed betwixt King Charles the first, and the long Parliament, in the years
1641, 1642, 1643.

Richard Baxter's Treatise of Saving Faith.

The History of Gavel-kind with the Etymology thereof, containing a vindication
of the Laws of England, together with a short History of William the Conqueror,
by Sylas Tailor.

Andronicus Comnenius, a Tragedy, by John Wilson.

Heraclius Emperor of the East, a Tragedy, by Lodowick Carlel, Esquire;.

Octavo's.
An Historical and Geographical description of the great Country and River of
the Amazones in America; with an exact Map thereof, Translated out of French.

The Shepherd's Paradise, a Pastoral, by Walter Mountague, Esquire;.

Aminta, the famous Italian Pastoral, translated into English.

Plowden's Queries, or a Moot Book of choice Cases in the Common Law,
Englished, Methodized, and Enlarged by H. B.

An Exact Abridgement of all the Statutes in force and use, made in the 16th,
17th, and 18th. of King Charles the first, and in the 12th, 13th, 14th, 15th and
16th. of King Charles the second, viz. from the 4th. of Jan. 1641/2. to the
24th. of November. 1664. by William Hughs, Esquire;.

Finch's Discourse of the Law in four Books. Engl.

Tho. Goodwin. Opuscula Theolog. Lat.

Tho. Hall Apologia pro Ministerio Evangelico. Lat.

-- Translation of the second Book of Ovid's Metamorph.

-- Treatise against the Millenaries.

The works of the famous Mr. Francis Rabelais, treating of the Lives of
Gargantua, and his Son Pantagruel, to which is newly added the Life of the
Author, translated out of French into English by Sir Thomas Urchard, Knight.

Rome exactly described, as to the present state of it under Pope Alexander the
seventh, in two curious Discourses written in Italian, and Englished by J. B.

Twelves.
Tho. Hooker's Missellanies in Divinity.

Rich. Baxter's Call to the Unconverted.

LA PICARA, OR The Triumphs of Female Subtilty.
The First Book.
THERE is a Treatise in the Spanish Tongue, entitled IL PICARO, which being
rendered into English, under the Title of THE ROGUE, or, The Life of Guzman de
Alfarache, the humor took so well in this Nation, that He and his Rogueries
were several times committed to the Press. The Design of that Work was to
represent a Person, on whom either Nature, or a strange ascendency of Mercury
had bestowed so liberal a Talent of cheating, thieving, and circumvention, that
he not only trapan'd all he dealt with, but also became a Precedent and
Pattern to all those, who, out of necessity, or inclination, have been forced
to live by their shifts, or, as some would have it, by their wits. The present
Tract has some resemblance to the excellent Piece before mentioned, inasmuch
as it brings in a Woman, engaged in as great designs as those of her
Predecessor Guzman, but with this disadvantage, that the weakness of her Sex
obliges her to make use of the assistances of Men for the better prosecution
thereof. Both Treatises were originally written in the Spanish, a Language we
are obliged to for most pieces of this nature: and as, in the former, the
Relation is pleasantly interrupted by certain merry tales and stories; so in
ours, there is an intermixture of Novels, to heighten the Reader's satisfaction
and divertisement.

The draught I am to give of this Miracle of Female subtilty may be of very
great advantage to three sorts of persons. Those who feel in themselves a
certain disposition to be wicked, may be admonished, and reform, before they
have occasion to repent; they, who, defying all advertisement, are resolved to
be mischievous, may, out of an apprehension of the ensuing punishment, be
deterred into caution; and the innocent and virtuous may learn a lesson of
prudence and circumspection, to avoid those snares that are laid for them. The
things I write are not supposititious, or framed in my own imagination, but
such as really happened in one of the most eminent Cities of Spain; which yet
if any man have not faith enough to believe, I have no other advice to give
him, but that he would travel to those places, where our Scene lies, to
disprove me.

As to her Person, She was young, sprightly, and very beautiful; three
dangerous advantages, when they are attended by those endowments for which she
was no less famous, to wit, Craft, Impudence, Hypocrisy, and an insatiable
longing for the goods of other people; and all these strengthened by a bent of
nature, as being the issue of Parents, who, instead of giving a timely check to
these vicious inclinations, rather encouraged her in them by their example, as
being addicted to the same themselves.

Seignor Trapassa, Father to this excellent person whose atchievments we intend
to describe, had been condemned to the Galleys, for having assumed to himself
the Order of the Knighthood of Christ, before he had made the necessary trials,
upon which his Majesty bestows that honor, by the judgment of his Sovereign
Council of Portugal. His design in doing it, was that he might more
conveniently follow his profession of stealing about the Court, where he was
respected as a Knight, and the better, under that cloak, to play those pranks
of villainy, wherein he was such a Professor, that the most expert might have
heard his Lectures. A certain Woman, whom he used to trade withal, incensed
against him upon the account of some jealousy, that he reserved not all his
kindness for her, put in a charge against him, the issue whereof was, That he
got the said preferment in the Galleys; where he passed over the term of his
condemnation, and somewhat more. He was disposed into that Squadron, which is
called the Squadron of Spain, and translated from Toledo to S. Mary's Port,
with the rest who were in the same Predicament of Slavery. He had made an
attempt to recover his liberty, but the plot being discovered, he was put to
greater hardship than he had otherwise been.

As soon as the Lady Estephania (so was called the jealous Woman, who had shown
him that trick) understood that he was gone to exercise that painful
employment, though she were not of an over-compassionate nature, very seriously
repented her, that she had been the cause of his misery, and considered that
she could not make a better satisfaction for that injury, than by proffering
her self to him in marriage as soon as the time of his penance were expired.
What inclined her the more to this kind of reparation, was, that she had
already had a Daughter by him, which Daughter is the subject of the present
Treatise. With this resolution, she left the Court, and went to Sevil, hoping,
in that great and famous City, she might the sooner hear some news of him, whom
she had reduced to so great misery, and whom she would gladly once more see at
liberty.

Estephania had a house very well furnished, being a Genoese's Widow, who had
left her very well to pass. That, and the care she took to go somewhat high in
clothes, gained her such a repute at Madrid, that she was looked on as a person
of some quality: but she soon lost that, when the history of her life came to
be known, especially this particular of it, that, out of an excess of
jealousy, she had preferred to the Galleys a young Gallant, whom she had often
entertained in a feather-bed. That imprudent sally made her abominable in the
sight of her most intimate acquaintances of her own sex, whose indignation she
allowed to be the more just against her, when she considered, that she had cast
away her self on an impostor and a rascal fit only for the Galleys.

These reasons and reproaches obliged her to remove from Madrid to Sevil,
taking all she could conveniently carry along with her, and selling the rest,
which brought her in a considerable sum of money. Having thus ordered her
affairs, she went toward Sevil by Coach, with two Maids to wait on on her,
intending to continue there, till the time of Trapassa's serving in the Galleys
were expired; which being near out, (for she kept an exact account of it) she
understood that the Spanish Galleys were arrived at S. Mary's Port. She
immediately went thither, not so highly clad as she was wont to go at Sevil,
but in a more modest habit, that it might not be afterward cast into her dish,
that she had been the wife of a Galley-slave, and withal one she had courted
out of his chains into her embraces.

She immediately understood that her Gallant was in the Captain's own Galley,
very jocund, and advanced to the office of a Foreman, a preeminence among the
Slaves which exempts them from rowing, and he had acquired it of the General by
the pleasantness of his conversation; nay, had he not had that charge, he was
by this time grown so well acquainted with the Galleys, that he minded not much
whether ever he got out of them. But the arrival of Estephania remedi'd all.
Her first business was to treat about his liberty, speaking to those persons on
whom the business depended, and presenting them with certain sums of money,
before Trapassa had any knowledge of her design, whom he could not have seen,
as having not yet stirred out of the Galley. So that he was extremely
astonished, when he came to understand, that some persons did not only use
bare solicitations in order to his liberty, but were also liberal of their money
to procure it, yet could it never come into his thoughts, that his old Love
Estephania should have changed the cruel humor, he had left her in, into one
so mild and obliging.

All things being concluded and agreed upon for Trapassa's liberty, his chains
were knocked off, and he was told, that he might go whether he would. In the
mean time he could not imagine who had procured him that happiness, which was
no small one, inasmuch as though the poor Slaves have served out the time of
their condemnation, yet are there some causes found that hinder their being set
at liberty, nay some are so unhappy, that having been condemned for four years,
are forced to stay there five, or six.

Seignor Trapassa was extremely astonished, when he found himself in the
presence of his Estephania, and understood, that it was only by her means he
had recovered his liberty; she received him into her arms, and he, to express
his gratitude, returned so obliging a reception with the like caresses; so that
the kindness he then received of her, made him forget the resentment he might
have of the miseries she had occasioned him. He was troubled to find her in a
much different habit from that he had left her in at Madrid, for he knew not
that it was out of design she had so disguised her self, nor could she at that
time give him an account of it, by reason of the Captain and others being
present, who had conducted him, and whom she was obliged to entertain at
dinner. Having treated them as well as she could, all withdrew, save only
Trapassa, who continued still in the Inn with his Mistress. Finding themselves
alone, they reiterated their caresses, and outvy'd one the other in assurances
of the satisfaction they conceived at that interview. Trapassa rendered her his
thanks with all the grateful acknowledgments imaginable, for the pains she had
taken, and the goodness she had had to deliver him out of the cruel torments he
endured. On the other side, Estephania begged his pardon for the mischief she
had done him, and all the miseries her malice had caused him, telling him
withal, that she could not imagine any other way to repair the injury she had
done him, than by joining hands with him in matrimony, if he liked the
proposal, since she already had a daughter by him, and wealth enough for both
of them to live at their ease.

I leave you to judge whether this motion were not pleasing to Trapassa, one
that would have snapp'd at the least proffer of good fortune, upon his coming
out of so severe a School of penance. As if he had forgot the former, his
Answer was in renewed embraces, thereby satisfying her with what joy he
accepted of the advantageous offer she made him, entreating her to give him an
account of his Daughter, whom he was passionately desirous to see.

Estephania overjoyed to find his sentiments so consonant to her expectation,
presented him with a noble riding-suit, which she had purposely caused to be
made for him, and the next morning betimes they took their journey toward
Sevil, where Trapassa finding his Daughter (who might then be about eight years
of age) he acted a part he never had done before, that is, was solemnly married
to the Lady Estephania, in facie Ecclesiae. They changed their lodgings, and
indeed the quarter of the City where they had lived, being resolved to lead
another kind of life than they had done before. For Estephania imagining, that
the hardship which her dear Love had endured in the Galleys, had abated
somewhat of his former extravagancies, and that the gray hairs he had brought
thence would reclaim him from his debauches, endeavored to get him some
creditable employment in Sevil, as well to keep him out of idleness, as out of
a consideration that he should bring in something toward the house. But an
untoward disposition, such as was that of Trapassa, is not so easily brought
into discipline, and if he had as yet behaved himself with some reserv'dness,
it proceeded from the influence, which the perpetual admonitions and rebukes of
his wife had over him, and not out of any bent to virtue in his nature; so
that, through his own neglect, he could find himself no other employment, than
that of frequenting Gaming-houses, and Plays, and those other places, where
those, who are naturally inclined to sloth, think fit to spend the greatest
part of their time. This carriage of his extremely troubled his wife, who yet
willing to avoid all matrimonial discontents, winked at his disorders, and
endeavored to find some comfort in the conversation of her Daughter, whose
beauty was already become the common discourse of the City.

Idleness, the seminary of all sorts of vices, by degrees brought Trapassa into
his former custom of Gaming (the Sea wherein so many Estates are wracked) so
that beginning at first to play for little (as if it had been rather for
Recreation than otherwise) but afterward venturing more and more, he in a
short time made a shift to lavander whatever he could lay hands on of his
wife's. She was sensible enough, that many of her things were wanting, and
doubted not but her Husband was the conveyer of them; but all she could do was
to weep, and bemoan her self, charging none with her misfortune, but her self.
Trapassa perceiving her so much troubled, promised reformation; but the damned
lechery of Gaming prevailing more and more upon him, his luck was such, that in
four years he either sold or pawned whatever was worth it in his house. Finding
himself at last reduced to very great necessities, he began to cast about how
he might recover himself a little: he would have been content his wife (who was
as yet handsome enough) should have condescended to lewdnesses unworthy her
recovered reputation, but he perceived she was grown so honest, and so altered
from what she had been before, that he had not the confidence to speak to her
of any such thing. For she was so extremely troubled at the disordered
demeanor of her husband, that she grew in a manner careless of all things; nay
she little minded the education of her daughter, who was by this time come into
the -- teens, and, by reason of these distractions in the family, lived as she
pleased her self, appearing every day at her window, and that not with little
affectation.

The grief and regrets which poor Estephania conceived at her being reduced to
necessity, heightened by the discontent caused her by her husband, brought her
into a sickness, whereof she died about a year after, with a perfect repentance
for her past mis-carriages, reinforcing at that extremity all her spirits, that
she might die as happy a death, as her husband had occasioned her living an
unhappy life. She was very poorly buried, Trapassa having not the means to
bestow any more cost upon her than he did. He was in his turn troubled, at her
death, and acknowledged, but too late, his great oversight in that he had so
long continued his debauches, and that if he had followed her good advice, he
might have lived handsomely all the rest of his days. All the comfort he had
now left, and all the hope on which he grounded his happiness, was the beauty
of his Daughter, which he thought such, as would bring him a Son-in-law, that
might relieve his necessities; never considering that the virtue of the Age
consists in wealth, and that all perfections and graces have no charm in them,
if deprived of the attractions of riches.

The unfortunate Trapassa, as crushed as he was with miseries, continued still
a constant frequenter of the Gaming-houses, not indeed to play himself, for he
had not wherewith, but to receive what he had sometimes given, to wit, the
Barats, a little present the Spaniards are wont to bestow on those, who look on
them while they are playing, when they have had a good hand, and this is
commonly the surest revenue of those who have ruined themselves by Gaming.

The little abode which Trapassa made at his own house gave his daughter the
greater freedom to follow her own inclinations. She would be perpetually at the
window, which induced abundance of young Gallantillos to make their appearances
in the street she lived in. The Father, who was not ignorant of what passed,
though he might have prevented, yet winked at it, out of the desire he had to
see his daughter advantageously matched, that she might afterward help him out
of his necessities. This indeed was the most likely means he had to recover
himself. He thereupon left the little Rufina (so was his daughter called) to
her own liberty, hoping, that, by her insinuations, she would in time have the
disposal of their hearts and purses who courted her. His design proved more
fortunate than he had imagined, inasmuch as among the many, who languish'd for
her, there happened to be one very rich, who was over head and ears in love with
Rufina. She assumed the title of Donna, a title belongs only to women of noble
extraction, because her Mother had taken it before her, which if she had not,
her Daughter would not have balk'd it, as being an honor which costs little or
nothing.

The person who was so remarkably her Suitor had the Agency of some affairs of
Peru, one whose credit much exceeded his estate, was accounted very rich in the
ensuring Office belonging to the Indies, and about fifty years of age. Though
he knew well enough that his Mistress had no fortune, and that he must withal
be charged with the ruined person her Father, yet was he resolved to take her,
for better, for worse; whence may be deduced this observation, That when Love
becomes Master of an aged person, it is a very hard matter to dispossess him.
Laurentio de Saravia (so was this amorous Elder called) was so besotted with
the beauties of Rufina, that the Treaty of Marriage was concluded in less than
eight days, and he had the earnest of a happiness, which he thought would have
lasted as long as he lived. He took his Father-in-law into his house, though he
knew him to be a great Gamester. The first days of the Nuptials were spent as
they are wont to be in such Solemnities; he gave his wife new clothes, rings,
and jewels, yet suitably to her condition; for being a person pretty well
stricken in years, he was no lover of excess, an humor which pleased not
Rufina, who minded nothing so much as gaudy clothes, and longed for whatever
she saw worn by women of a quality much above hers; and this abated not a
little of the love she bore her husband, who was of an Indian disposition,
covetous, and careful to preserve his estate. Knowing, as I told you, that his
Father was a great Gamester, and a person run out of all he had, he trusted not
his wife with the keeping of his Cash, no not with the management of what was
spent in the house; which quite defeated the hopes of Trapassa, who imagined,
that, upon the marriage or his daughter, he should command what were in her
power; so strangely was he possessed with the restless spirit of gaming.

Rufina, perceiving her husband was taken up with his affairs, took occasion to
go abroad every morning, upon pretense of a certain devotion she had
undertaken, that it might please God to make her a Mother. With this excuse she
blinded her husband, but the true motive of her sallies, was to show her self
in the Streets and at Church. The first of those who upon sight of her, fell in
love with her, was a Citizen's son of Sevil, one of the most debauched young
men of his time, one, to say all of him in a word, who had brought himself
almost to the same condition as Trapassa: he was descended of virtuous Parents,
but his disorders had drowned their good reputation. His name was Ruperio, a
Spark of a goodly presence, and one who proved so fortunate in the courting of
Rufina, that she was wholly at his devotion, hoping to receive such great
presents from him, as might put her into clothes suitable to her beauty, which
was more than she could have expected from the Miser her husband.

The first demand she made to him, was very modest, considering it came from a
Merchant's wife, to wit, that he would bestow on her a Gown of the same Stuff
and Fashion as a Neighbor of hers had, whom she named, and withal a
gold-watch to hang by her side, promising him in requital of that favor that
she would not deny him any that lay in her power. Ruperio, who by his insolent
boastings had raised her into a persuasion of his being a person that had
thousands at his command, promised to do what she desired; but being not able
to perform, he set his wits to show that trick, which his purse could not. He
happened to be well acquainted with her whose Gown was to be his pattern, he
went to her, and entreated her to lend it him, pretending it was only for the
representation of a Comedy, which was to be acted in a Nunnery. It could not be
denied on such an account; so that at the end of three days, which time he told
Rufina that it would be making, he sent it to her house, while her husband was
abroad in the City about his business. The Watch he told her was not yet
finished, but that as soon as it were, it should be brought her, entreating her
in the mean time to accept of another of lesser value, as a hostage for the
appearance of the other. She returned him her hearty thanks, was extremely
pleased to see that he had been so punctual, and to show her self grateful, she
gave him all the satisfaction he could expect from her.

He took leave of Rufina, who resolved to persuade her husband, that a certain
Kinsman of hers had sent her that Gown from Madrid, that so he might not be
jealous of her. On the other side, Ruperio was contriving how to get it
returned to her, of whom it had been borrowed. Saravia not knowing him, he
effected his business by this cheat. About three or four days after the
delivery of the Gown to Rufina, he puts himself into the habit of a Servingman,
and just at dinner time comes to Saravia's house, saying that he was Servant to
the Lady to whom that Gown belonged. Saravia ordered him to be brought in,
which being done he told him that he was sent by his Mistress for the Gown she
had lent Madam Rufina, only to see the fashion of it. Saravia turning toward
his wife, asked her what Gown the fellow would have? She presently knowing her
Gallant, Friend, said she to him, come hither to morrow morning, and you shall
have it. But my Mistress, replies Ruperio, has commanded me not to come back
without it; for this afternoon she is to go a Christning, at which she is
Godmother, and she must needs have it. How shall I know, replies Rufina, that
you have any relation to that Lady, and that you now come from her? The crafty
Companion perceiving what she would be at, and that she had no mind to return
it, The Gown, said he, is of such a color, the Trimming such and such, and it
was sent you in a green cloth, done about with a silk fringe. Saravia hearing
him give such particular marks, Sweetheart, said he to his wife, you have
nothing to reply, for since he demands it with so much earnestness, it must
needs be his Mistress stands in need of it, and if you are unwilling to rise
out of your place, give me the key of your Trunk where it is, and I will go and
fetch it. Rufina upon this had not a word to say, and at last ready to burst
with indignation, she rose from the Table, took the Gown out of the Trunk, and
delivering it to Ruperio, Present my humble service, said she, to Madam
Leonora, and tell her, I beg her pardon, that I sent it not home sooner, which
I could not, in regard she has not been here since who borrowed it for me to
have another made by it.

The disguised Gallant received the Gown, and left Rufina, her eyes all on
fire, and vexed to the soul, to find her self so impudently affronted. Saravia
asked her upon what account she had borrowed that Gown; she made answer, That
she had done it at the entreaty of an acquaintance of hers, who was desirous to
have such another, as being extremely taken with the fashion of it. She
persuaded her husband to any thing, who, poor man, understood little of the
world besides his trading. In the mean time, she was extremely incensed against
Ruperio for the slovenly trick he had put upon her, in depriving her of a
garment she was much taken with, and whereof she thought her self indisputably
possessed. She thereupon resolved to be revenged on him, what ever it cost her;
but thinking to communicate her design to her Maid, who was privy to all her
secret designs, Trapassa, who overheard them, came to know the whole story;
and being acquainted with the Gallant, as being one who hanted the
Gaming-houses, and conceiving himself obliged to revenge the affront done his
daughter, he meets him in the street one day, and tells him, he desired to
measure the length of his Sword, upon what account he should know, when they
were come to the place. Ruperio followed him out of the City, and being out of
Peoples sight, Trapassa told him what had occasioned his giving him that
challenge. They presently drew, and made several passes, but at last Trapassa
proved the more unfortunate, for he was run through the heart, so that he died
immediately, having not the time to make the least act of contrition; a
judgment commonly happens to those who lead such Lives as he had done. Ruperio
took Sanctuary, and Trapassa's Body was brought to his Son-in-law's, where it
was received, with a mixture of joy and grief; joy, that the House was
disburthen'd of one of the most humoursome and insupportable persons in the
world; and grief for the future charges of his enterrment.

In the mean time, Rufina made it appear by her lamentations and tears, that
his death caused her as much affliction as it brought her husband joy. She
would not hear of any consolation, pretending she had lost all her support in
this world, for all the kindred and friends she had were now exchanged for a
husband, whom she could not affect. On the other side Saravia thought himself
the happiest man in the world, to have a wife handsome and young as his was.
But she was indeed a little too handsome and too young for him; that proportion
of Age, which Parents ought chiefly to mind in the disposal of their Children,
was not observed in this. It Is not to be expected an old Man can please a young
Girl. When a woman comes once to slight her husband, she is in the way to fancy
any body. But for Rufina, the passion she had withal of going highly in
clothes, and to be revenged of Ruperio, made her break forth into all the
excesses, that exasperated Womankind can fall into, defile the Marriage Bed,
and implicitly give her self over to all those things, whence she might derive
either satisfaction or advantage. Nothing ran so much in her head as the injury
she had received from Ruperio, which she thought such, that she would not have
Lived, but out of a hope to be revenged of him. But in regard she must have
other hands than her own to do that, she sought out all opportunities
imaginable to assure her self of a Gallant, who would vigorously execute her
commands.

One of those Fridays, which are solemnized with a great concourse of people
from Easter to Whitsuntide, in Triana part of the Suburbs of Sevil, through
which passes the Quadalquivir, the famous River of Andalusia, and the
Looking-glass of that wealthy City; Rufina went into a Boat covered with
branches, to go and see that Festival, to which she was carried, by the express
order of her husband, by a Neighbor of his, whom he thought one of the most
discreet and virtuous Women in the world. But he was not the first Man that was
deceived in a Woman; for, on the contrary, she was one of the wantonest and
withal the simplest of the whole Sex. She therefore took up a Boat for her
self, Rufina, and two other Women of their acquaintance; but though she had
given the Water-man his full fare; yet was she easily persuaded by him to take
in other persons into the Boat, and among those, a young Man, who had his
Sentinels at the Waterside to give him notice of such an opportunity. As soon
as they were got into the Boat, Rufina unveiled, and the Gallant (whom we will
call Felician) had no sooner seen, but he was surpised with her Beauty. He
thought her so handsome, that he persuaded some of his friends, who stood on
the Riverside, to come into the Boat, and to effect that, greased the fist of
the Water-man. Being all got in, Felician took his place next to Rufina, into
whose favor it was his design to insinuate himself. He was Son to a person of
Quality, who had raised himself to a vast fortune in the Indies, and had no
Children but only this, who disposing of his wealth, as he pleased, it was
conceived it would not be long ere he scattered abroad what his Father had not
in so short a time raked together. For he was a constant Gamester, a perpetual
Courter of Ladies, and he maintained a considerable crew of Hangers-on, who did
him no other service than accompany, and encourage him in his debauches.
Besides these noble qualities, he was extremely extravagant in point of
clothes, a vice not extraordinary in those young men of Sevil, who have all
things at their own disposal, as he we speak of had.

Having, as was said, seated himself next to Rufina, and his Camerades next to
her friends, the Boat put off, and went very leisurely down the River, for
which the Water-man was so much the better paid. Felician thought this time so
precious that he lost very little of it; he discovered his Love to Rufina in
such obliging expressions, that she gave absolute credit to his words, and, by
her attention, satisfied him, that she was not displeased with his company.
Felician was a very ingenious person, and of an excellent good humor, upon
such occasions as those; he delivered himself with such a smartness and grace,
that the Ladies were extremely well satisfied, especially Rufina, who thought
nothing comparable to his conversation. She gave him her name, told him where
she lived, and what profession her husband was of, and in a word made him a
kind of Confession of her more secret affairs. Felician was as open to her,
concluding his discourse with a thousand protestations of service and
obedience. The afternoon was spent in complements and courtship, and to the
great satisfaction of Rufina, who had two designs to carry on at the same time;
one, to be revenged of Ruperio, by the assistance of Felician; the other, to
cajol the latter out of somewhat toward clothes and her extravagant expenses.
Nor did the business happen otherwise than she had designed it.

From that day Felician began to frequent the street where Rufina lived,
especially when he had intelligence that her husband was abroad about his
affairs. Rufina, on the other side, resolved not to be over-easily conquered;
for when she remembered how she had been served by Ruperio, it raised in her a
certain fear of receiving the like affront from another. Before she admitted
his entrance into the House, she thought fit to make trial of his liberality.
Of this she was in a short time pretty well satisfied, for Felician had been a
prodigal all his Life, but upon this occasion exceeded all he had done before,
sending her presents of clothes, jewels, and other things, besides the expenses
he was at in treatments and collations: So that Rufina was the most satisfied
Woman in the world. It Is commonly said, that the higher a Man's enjoyments are,
the sooner he is cloyed, but it happened otherwise with Felician, for his
affection to Rufina increased daily, and came up to that height it could not
well be greater.

It happened about this time, that Ruperio got at one time above six hundred
Crowns at play. He went always very high in clothes; but this unexpected good
fortune made him somewhat exceed his former gawdiness. But with that good, he
had this ill fortune, to find out, that Felician was seen very often in the
street where Rufina lived, and to infer thence, that he made some addresses to
her. This jealousy awoke the love he had sometimes had for her; it troubled
him that he should have any Rival, and thereupon he resolved to retrive himself
into her favor, and repair the injury, he was now sensible, that he had done
her. Upon this account, he passed several times through her street, which
caused not a little perplexity to Felician. Rufina was enraged to see that the
Impostor had the impudence to make any pretense to her favor, after the
notorious affront she had received at his hands. She considered there was no
way to be rid of his importunities, but to engage her beloved Gallant Felician
in her quarrel, by persuading him, that Ruperio's design was to displace him
out of her affection, which if he valued, he would find some means to check the
insolence of his Rival, and deliver her from his odious Courtship. See what
employments Women do many times put on their Gallants! setting them on, like
Cocks, to fight, till they have destroyed one the other.

Rufina thought it not prudence to acquaint Felician with what had passed
between her and Ruperio. No, she took a safer course: She told him, that
Ruperio was continually importuning her with very advantageous proffers, which
yet, for his sake, she slighted. Felician believed her, and that the rather, in
regard he met him every day, and many times in the night, walking the rounds
about his Mistress's house. To incense him the more, she added, that were it
not for that troublesome person, she would see him oftener than she did. There
needed no more; Felician being thus enflamed into jealousy, met with Ruperio
one night in his Mistress's street, when he knew Rufina was a-bed, and her
husband looking over some Accounts, which concerned his Agency. As soon as
Felician had perceived Ruperio, he called him by his name, and having talked a
little while together, to avoid the discovery of any quarrel in the Streets, he
conducted to a little byplace, which happened to be over against the room where
Saravia kept all his papers, and where he then was, very busy looking over
them. The two Rivals being come to the place, Felician addressed himself thus
to the other.

Signor Ruperio, I have for some days past observed, that you have frequented
this street more than you should have done, and I was somewhat at a loss to
know, what might occasion your coming hither, in regard there are several
Ladies of worth, which might oblige you thereto. But I have at last discovered,
that Madam Rufina is the cause of your diurnal and nocturnal haunts hereabouts;
and this I am assured of, not only by what I have seen my self, but also by the
relation of her servants, to whom you speak, and whom you would corrupt by
presents to introduce you into their Mistress's favor. I have been her Servant
a good while, and the services I have done her have gained me her affection, so
far that I have received the greatest favors from her that I could expect. I
am not a person much given to boast of my good fortunes; but to prevent your
further progress in this affair, I am forced to make you this particular
discovery, which I doubt not but you will entertain as a great secret, as every
person of honor ought to do. I have acquainted you with my love, and the
advantages I have made of it, to oblige you to forbear all applications to this
Lady for the future. Which if you do, you will exempt your self from many
inconveniences, and ease me of those resentments, which I am now full of.

Ruperio hearkened very attentively to the discourse of Felician, and Rufina's
husband no less, hearing things that concerned him so nearly. And yet though
the story he had heard was extremely prejudicial to him, and could not but add
very much to his disquiet, yet must he needs stay to take Ruperio's Answer;
which was to this effect.

Signor Felician, I cannot wonder at all, that you should be so careful to
observe, with what devotion I courted Madam Rufina, since you were so much
concerned in it as you tell me; and I believe you will be as little surpised
at my being engaged in the same design, being, as I find you, ignorant what are
the grounds of my Love, and the reasons I have to prosecute it. I am as
backward as your self to proclaim the favors I receive from Ladies; but since
you express your self so freely to me, I conceive my self obliged to do the
like to you, that you may think my procedure the less strange. I was in this
Lady's favor before you were, and I obtained of her the same thing you boast
so much of: by some misfortune or other, I have lost it, yet not so, as but
that I hope, in time, I re-instate my self into it again, which to do, assure
your self I shall do whatever lies in my power. If I prevail, and that she will
admit the continuance of my services, as I hope she may, your only remedy is
patience; for I am so far from quitting this pretension, that I shall do my
utmost to prevent her giving any entertainment to yours, and bring her to such
a pass, as not so much as remember, that you ever thought of her.

With that they both drew, Felician maintaining, that he only ought to pretend
to her, and Ruperio standing upon the same terms. The dispute was soon ended,
his Sword, who was in present possession proved the more fortunate, Ruperio, by
a thrust through the heart, falling upon the place. The noise of the Swords was
not very great, for Felician had done his work so suddenly, that none heard any
thing of the quarrel, but only Saravia, who, for his own reputation, would
have kept it secret. That the Body might not lie in that place, Felician took
it on his Shoulders, and laid it before a Monastery, and went for refuge into
another, till he found what would be done in the business.

Saravia, astonished at what he had seen and heard, began to be enraged against
his wife, contriving how to be revenged of a Woman, whose perfidiousness was
the more notorious, the greater reasons she had to be gratesul and loyal. She
was fast asleep in her bed, never dreaming what had happened in the streets upon
her account. The first thing came into Saravia's imagination, was altogether
for revenge, to effect which his course would be, to go up straight into her
chamber, and to dispatch her, in bed, with a dagger. But he considered with
himself, that the Murderer having carried away the dead body from his door, he
might be charged with killing her without any cause, and that he would want
proof, as having for witness but two servant-maids, who were more likely to
depose against him. He therefore resolved, as the surest way to dispatch her,
to give her a secret dose of poison, such as might remove her after a certain
time: but he thought withal, that he should not satisfy his own just
resentment, if he any longer delayed a vengeance which required immediate
execution. He proposed to himself another expedient, which was, to leave both
City and Wife, and to go to some other place: but that design was soon over
with him, he having many affairs undetermined, and fearing the sinister
judgments might have been passed upon such a resolution, to the shame and
confusion of a man of his age and reputation. This reflection brought him to
his first design of sending her going with the poniard. But before he executed
that cruelty (which yet rightly taken was not any, but a just punishment for
her offense) he thought it requisite, sor his own vindication, to leave, in
writing, the reasons, which had induced him to commit that murder. He took pen
and ink, and began to set down the affront he had received from his wife, and
the revenge he had taken: but upon second thoughts, and imagining he had not
sufficiently expressed the heinousness of her crime, he tore what he had
written; and this he did to the third time, so great were the confusion and
disturbance of his thoughts. He set himself down to write the fourth time; but
remembering that he was to begin his revenge with adulteries, and could not do
it because he knew not the several appellations thereof, he was at last
satisfied, that he should be sufficiently revenged if he had but once
dispatched his wife. A good part of the night slipped away in these disquiets,
viz. in writing, correcting, blotting out again, and tearing all he had
written. At last, being absolutely resolved in that rage to execute his design,
he made another writing, without any blot, having beforehand well considered
what he should set down; and when he had expressed, the best he could, the
injury he had received, he was o're-come by so pressing a grief that he fell
down and died suddenly.

All this past, while Rufina flept. Awaking of a sudden and not finding her
husband in bed with her, she called him, and seeing he made no Answer, she put
on her petticoat, and went into his closet, where she found a candle lighted,
and Saravia lying on the floor, dead. She was astonished, as well she might;
all she could do was to call up her Maids, who immediately came to the sight of
this strange spectacle. They were no less surpised than their Mistress at the
strangeness of the accident. As they were going to convey the Corpse to one of
the best rooms in the house (before the neighbors had any notice of the
adventure) Rufina met with a paper, which seemed to be not quite finished,
wherein she found these words.

That my justification may be the better known to all those who shall read this
paper, I declare, that all my unhappiness proceeds from the lightness and
inconstancy of my infamous wife, who, profaning the holy Sacrament of Marriage,
by the sacred Tie whereof we were joined together in the face of the Church,
without any consideration of the great affection I bore her, has prostituted
her self to two Gallants at the same time, when having quarreled for the
precedence, which either of them pretended to over his adversary, the more
unfortunate of the two was killed by the other, before the window of my house.
Having thus been witness os my own disgrace, and heard the whole story of my
dishonor, it was but just I should revenge my infamy, thus -- Then ended the
writing, for death surprising him at that word he immediately expired.

Rufina was extremely distracted at both what she saw and what she had read, so
that, for half an hour, she knew not in a manner where she was, considering
with her self, that the greatest secrets in the world will be discovered at
last, and that it is Heaven's pleasure they should be so, either for our
reformation or our punishment. The death of her husband raised in her a certain
mixture of fear and affliction: a fear, to see how sudden it had been,
occasioned by the resentment of an injury which she had done him; the
affliction, to see her husband deprived of life, and her self ignorant how to
disguise so unhappy an accident. A little remorse of conscience, like a qualm
over her stomach, troubled her, that she had been so perfidious to a man, who
had loved her so well, and, by marrying her, had raised her from beggary to
plenty. The great affection which the Neighbors knew that he had always born
her, gave her a little confidence, and induced her to take the advice of one of
her Maids, which was to carry her husband's body into his bed, and to cry out
the next morning so loud, that the Neighbors might here it, whom she might, by
her excessive lamentations, persuade, that she had found him dead by her side
when she awoke; and that her two Maids, to carry on the cheat, should give out
that their Master had taken a surfeit, and died suddenly of it.

Having thus laid their design, day came, Rufina cried out, and lamented with
all her might, and the next Neighbors came in, who found her halfdress'd,
weeping, and tearing her hair through madness, that she had lost so good a
husband. Her two Maids acted their parts very well, by relating the cause of
their good Master's death, and saying, that they advised him not to eat so
much, or that otherwise he must expect to repent it. All were satisfied with
these reasons, and some of Rufina's friends were busy about her, out of a fear
she should have swounded, so well did she personate the afflicted Lady. They
did all lay in their power to comfort her, who, amidst all her grief, had not
forgotten to burn the paper she had found, lest it might have proved a
testimony of her miscarriages. Some Officers from the Magistrate, who are never
wanting upon such occasions, came in soon after, and upon the allegations of
the Neighbors, that the deceased had ever lived very lovingly with his wife,
went their ways, satisfied that she had not any way contributed to his death.
Saravia was buried, and Rufina was so put to it to act the part she was then
engaged in, that she thought not of doing what Widows commonly do upon such
occasions, that is, to make the best provision they can for themselves, out of
what their husbands have left. So that one of his Nephews, as soon as the Uncle
was buried, seized on all in the house, and Rufina was forced to go to Law with
him, to recover what she might lawfully lay claim to.

Let us return to see what became of Ruperio's body. Being found in the morning
by the religious Inhabitants of the Monastery, and not known by any of them,
they were going, without sans ceremony, to bury it, had they not been
prevented by a Citizen, who advised them to expose it in some public place,
that it might be known, and that if he were one that had father or mother, or
friends in the City, that they might know the misfortune happened to him; that
by that means, they would secure to themselves the charges of his interment, as
also the fees due for other prayers and devotions, in order to the repose of
his soul. This advice pleased the Superior of the Monastery, who immediately
sent word to the Magistrate, that they had found in the morning a young man
dead at their Chutchdoor. The body was disposed into a little place near the
Monastery, with two lighted wax-candles, by which place there passed by not
long after a man that knew him. He told them who he was, and then went and
carried that sad news to his Friends, who were extremely troubled at his death,
his Father having often foretold him, that he would come to such an end; for,
from the life he led, there could not any thing else be inferred. He was buried
in the Monastery, and a strict search was made for him who had committed the
murder: but Sevil being a vast and populous City, no discovery could be made
of him. Only Rufina knew who it was, by the absence of her Gallant, Ruperio's
death, and the paper she found in her husband's closet. She was infinitely
satisfied to see her self revenged of a person, who had done her such an
affront; and it was a great happiness to her, that no notice had been taken of
the blood, which the deceased had spilt at the place where he was killed. Had
the Magistrate known of that, it would have brought her into some trouble, for
the Neighbors would have testified, that they had often seen those two Rivals
in that little street.

By this means Rufina is become a Widow, but withal poor and destitute of all
accommodations, having only the stock of her beauty to set her self up again;
and that, together with her honor (if it may be said she had any left) she
resolved to prostitute, that she might live in some measure sutably to what she
had done before. Saravia's Nephew, who had taken possession of all his estate,
was sentenc*d to pay Rufina somewhat upon the account of dower; but it was so
inconsiderable, in respect of the expense she was wont to be at, that she was
forced to leave the house she was in and take one of a lower rent. Nor had this
Nephew what he expected by being heir to his Uncle, for the estate was
extremely perplexed, so that having even'd* accounts with the Creditors, he had
but little left for himself.

Rufina, having removed into another Quarter of the City, and being young,
sumptuous in clothes, and perfectly handsome, did not as many other Widows are
wont to do, who, as soon as their husbands are marched off, dress themselves as
fine as hands can make them, and deriving a little advantage from their
mourning seek out opportunities to show themselves to the Gallants purely out
of a design to get other husbands. But ours, though young, had had so great
experience, that she resolved to play another game, and that no small one.

There was come in the Fleet from Peru a man born amidst the Mountains of Leon,
who had begun his fortune by the relation of a Servant to a Merchant of Sevil,
and one who, upon his Master's cost, and some little trading into the Indies,
was grown rich, insomuch that within few years, he was accounted one of the
ablest Merchants that traded to Peru. He makes another voyage thither, being
advanced to a certain public employment, and having thereby added much to his
wealth, he was returned again to Sevil, in that years Fleet, where he sold the
commodities he had brought over at double what they had cost him; so fortunate
was he in all his ventures.

Marquina (so was this lucky Merchant called) was a person of about fifty years
of age; the most covetous and wretched'st natured fellow that ever was. He
grudged himself what he eat and drunk, though even below moderation; nay he
many times fasted purposely to spare so much. He had no more servants than he
needed; his whole Train consisted in a Factor, a Lacquey, a Moor-slave, who
looked to his Mule, and a Maid to dress his pitiful Commons. He kept his Family
so short in point of victuals, that it was wondered any one would serve him; his
Miserdisposition found the whole City discourse; another would have been
ashamed of it, but he only laughed at it, applauding himself, and making it
his whole business to heap up wealth, whereof he had abundance.

Rufina hearing this account of him, began to consider all the circumstances,
and after she had a little reflected thereon, she concluded, that he might be
made an excellent Cully, whom if she could smite, as she expected, her
condition would be better than ever it had been. Marquina lived without the
City, in a little Tenement he had purchased of one who ought him some money,
which he knew not well how to get in otherwise; for he was naturally so perfect
a slave to his profit, that he little minded his pleasures. So that he got that
Tenement, with a neat house on it, very cheap, and in satisfaction for his
debt; it stood near S. Bernard's Monastery, in the midst of a pleasant valley.
He lived here to spare the rent of a house in the City; he had so fortified it,
that no thieves, either by day or night, could make any breach into it; all the
doors were of extraordinary thickness, the windows had bars and grates, the
walls very high and very strong. He had secured the place within with many
Firearms, which he always kept charged, Halbards, and Partisans, which were
disposed near the gate. He was forced to take one person more into his retinue,
to wit, a fellow to order his Garden, and to make the best advantage he could
of it, a married man, who should carry the fruits and other things to the
market to make the best of them, so vigilant was his Avarice. His treasure was
disposed into a secret place behind his bed where he lay himself, in strong
iron chests; and every night before he went to bed, he, like an over-doing
Constable, searched all the rooms in the house. Thus did this wrerched fellow
live, though he had no children to succeed him, for he had never been married,
nor intended to be, though very advantageous Matches were daily proffered him.

Rufina had laid her design to bring in this covetous Merchant into the noose,
and to effect it, she communicated it to a person who was excellent at such
things, and an ancient acquaintance of her Father's Signor Trapassa. This man
had played some pranks at Madrid, which had occasioned his removal thence to
Cadiz, and his atchievments there, his departure thence to Sevil, where he went
lurking up and down, and spending some money, which it had cost him more hazard
than pains to get. He was one of the most accomplished men in point of Thievery
of his time, but very fearful of falling into the hands of Justice, lest there
might rise up in judgment against him some of his former offenses; which were
such as had preferred him to the Galleys, where he had made acquaintance with
Trapassa, and had continued it at Sevil. This person (whose name was Garay),
Rufina took to assist her in the compassing of her design. Having given him
instructions what he was to do, and told him, that Marquina returned not to his
house, till about Sunset, as he was wont to do, they both passed by Marquina's
garden, he on a Mule, and she on a good Horse. She had put off her Mourning,
and put on another dress, with a hat and feather, as the Sevil-Ladies are wont
to go, when they are in the Country.

They passed by the Garden, just as the Gardener was opening the door. Garay
coming up to him, Friend, said he, here is a Lady would not willingly go into
the City to day, if you will afford her entertainment this night. I will
satisfy you to your own desires; besides that you will do us an ex^raordinary
kindness, for you will thereby prevent a great misfortune which she cannot
otherwise avoid. The Gardener, who was afraid of his Maste^s displeasure, told
him that he durst not be so bold, as to receive any person into his house,
without his knowledge, though he had not expressly forbidden him the doing of
any such thing. But Garay, who knew the virtue and power of money, took a
considerable sum out of his pocket, and giving it to the Gardener, Here,
friend, said he, take this in earnest of more. The Gardener's wife longing to
know what business they might have with her husband, comes up to them, and
seeing the proffers were made him, undertook to lodge the Gentlewoman in her
own room, making it appear to her husband, that their Master should never come
to the knowledge of it, in regard their houses were at a good distance one from
the other, and that they should not be so unhappy, as that he would that night
search the whole house, as many times a toy took him in the head to do.

In fine the wife's arguments prevailed, so that the Gardener was content the
Gentlewoman should lodge secretly that night at his house, upon the receipt of
six Ryals which Garay gave him as an earnest of a greater sum promised him.
He thereupon took down Rufina off the horse, and brought her into the Garden,
where she took leave of Garay, who had already received the orders whereof we
shall give an account hereafter.

Being come into the Gardener's room, she took off what covered her face, and
astonished the Gardener and his wife at the sight of her beauty, though she
seemed to be very melancholy, as if some great misfortune had happened to her,
to wit, that which she had ready to relate to Marquina, in case she might come
to speech with him. The Sun was hardly set, but he came into the Garden: the
Negro entering a little before to have the door opened, which he himself locked
on the inside, and carried the key along with him. He chanced to be that night
a little more weary than he used, which occasioned his going to bed very
betimes, after he had eaten a piece of bread, and some of his own Garden
fruits, and washed them down with a glass of spring water. He only visited
that part of the house where he lodged himself, and came not down to the
Gardener's, which escaped not his privy search, when he thought of it. His
family, who kept more fasting-days in the year, than the Church her self had
appointed, supped that night, in imitation of the Master, very soberly.

Marquina gets up the next morning betimes, and gives the Slave money to go to
the market, while he went about his affairs in the City, with order to have
dinner ready against his return. Rufina was at a loss how to compass her
design, finding things fell not out according to her expectation: but still
waiting the opportunity, she told her entertainers that she was extremely
troubled at her Uncle's stay (so she called Garay) and that all her sadness
proceeded thence. The Gardener's wife, who was a good hearty woman, found her
all the diversion she could.

Marquina comes home at noon, with an intention to dine in his garden, and
before he sat down, he would needs take a turn about it, to see if any thing
were wanting; and he observed that there wanted some pieces of wood for the
more convenient watering of the several Knots. As he was going to the Gardeners
to see if he had any fit for that purpose, the wife perceiving him coming, very
hastily shuffled Rufina into a little back-room, where she was wont to lie: but
in regard it could not be done so suddenly, but that Marquina coming in might
hear the ruffling of the silks, and see Rufina's shadow, he steps into the room
where she was retired, and having found her, he led her out by the hand, and
bringing her into the light, he found her so beautiful, that he was astonished
thereat. The Gardeners wife wondered, that her Master, instead of chiding her,
as she expected, only asked her who the Lady was. She answered, that, the
night before, passing by their door with an ancient Gentleman, who seemed as
sad as her self, they had very earnestly entreated she might be lodged there
but that night, to avoid a great misfortune, which would have happened to them,
if they had gone any further.

While the Gardener's wife was giving Marquina this account, he very
attentively considered the strange Lady, who seemed to be extremely troubled in
mind, which added to the attractions of her Beauty. Marquina was so taken
therewith, that discarding his unsociable and covetous humor, he told the
Gardener's wife, that she had done very well, in entertaining that Lady, though
contrary to his orders, which in such a case were not to be observed, where
compassion and charity plead for the relief of those that are in trouble. This
Lady, said he, deserves a better reception than she has found in your poor
lodgings, I heartily proffer her my house, if she will but honor it with her
presence. Rufina thanked him very civilly for his obliging proffers, and
entreated him to allow her the privacy of some other lodging, for the little
time she had to stay there, in regard she expected an Uncle of hers to come and
fetch her away that night.

Marquina, who began to be enflamed, was sorry to hear that her stay at his
house would be so short, but after a little pause, he told her, that though it
were but for an hour, she would infinitely oblige him, in the acceptance of
the proffer he made her with so much affection. She, who expected that cue all
the while, told him, that, to make some return to so great civilities, she was
ready to wait on him. With that she went to Marquina's apartment, whither he
led her by the hand, to the great satisfaction of the Gardener's wife, who
extremely wondered to see her Master, contrary to his custom, of a civil and
obliging humor. As she passed through the rooms, she took particular notice of
all things; for though Marquina were naturally a very covetous person, yet, as
to the furniture of his house, he was otherwise. He had very rich Tapestry,
Chairs suitable thereto, and Cabinets of Ivory and Ebony, nay indeed many things
brought out of the Indics, which though they cost him not much there, are here
of very great price. He immediately commanded his Slave to prepare an excellent
dinner, an employment he undertook with great alacrity, as knowing he might
make some advantage of that extraordinary liberality of his Master. Rufina
dined with him, who treated her still with the best the Table afforded, with
importunate excuses that there were no better for her.

As soon as they had dined, he conducted her into a chamber, set forth with a
great number of excellent pictures, where there was also a sumptuous bed, of
China-work, and entreated her to repose her self on it, a custom the Spaniards
have in Summer, as soon as they have dined, by reason of the sultriness of the
Country. He entreated also to give her disquiet some remission, out of an
assurance, that she should be as safe in his house as in any Sanctuary, and
that she should not want any thing lay in his power. She again returned him her
most affectionate thanks, and complying with his desires, she staid alone in
the room, which was the same where Marquina took his repose every day. He went
into another, where he laid himself down, much troubled and disquieted, as
being fallen deeply in love with his fair Guest, and not knowing by what means
he might induce her to favor him in what he desired of her, which if he could
effect, he concluded himself the happiest man in the world. Before he
acquainted her with his design, he was desirous to know the cause of her grief,
and what might occasion her stopping at his Garden, and thereby find whether
there were any obstruction that might oppose his desires to serve her. To be
satisfied in this, it was requisite he staid till she aw^ke; but she slept not
at all, for she spent the time in considering, what Answer she should make him,
when he came to question her.

Marquina thinking it now time to speak to her, in order to the satisfaction of
his curiosity, goes into her chamber, telling her it was a close day, and that
he was afraid she might over-sleep her self, and craving her pardon that he had
taken the boldness to give her that caution. She thanked him for the tenderness
he had for her health, and assured him, that she had not refreshed her self at
all, the trouble she was in not permitting her to take any rest. He begged of
her that she would no longer smother the cause of her disquiet, and renewed the
proffers he had made to serve her to the utmost of his power. Having returned
him her thanks, and thinking it now time to make some progress in her design,
she gave him this relation of her adventures.

Granada, one of the most famous and eminent Cities of Spain, is the place of
my birth; my parents (there is no necessity I should name them) are of the most
ancient and most noble families of any in all the Mountains of old Casteel, and
the whole issue of their matrimony was only a Brother of mine and my self. My
Brother spent the youthful part of his age in courting Ladies, and, among other
young persons like himself, he played some mad pranks of youth, which obliged
him, for fear of falling into the hands of Justice, to absent himself from
Granada; and for my part, I made it my only business to serve and humor those
who had brought me into the world. I spent the days at my needle, not taking
example from my companions, who only minded their divertisements; nay I was so
ignorant what love meant, that I laughed at whatever related thereto, and
thought those, who spent their time in courtships and entertaining those they
called their Gallants, little better than so many distracted persons. But Love
it seems would punish this contempt of mine, and you shall see how he did it.
My Father and Mother being one day gone to visit a friend of theirs in the
Country, who had buried his wife not long before, I heard in the street the
clashing of swords, as if some people had been fighting. I looked out at the
window to see what might be the matter. I had never been guilty of such a
curiosity before, and had it been God's pleasure I should have shunned it then,
I should not now be telling you my misfortunes, which are such, that I shall
never think on them without tears. I there saw, to my sorrow, three men with
their swords drawn, fighting against one, who defended himself with so great
courage, that he not only made his party good a long time against so many
enemies, but also hurt two of them in the head, he himself having received
only a slight wound. These three Hectors finding themselves so worsted by one
person, resolved to do their utmost to take away his life; so that exasperated
by their wounds, they pressed upon him so much, that he was forced to retreat
within our gate, where they gave him two several thrusts into the breast, upon
which he fell, and was left for dead. Moved with compassion to see so proper a
young man so disadvantageously engaged, I came down to the gate, calling my
Maids about me, to see what might be done for him, (our house being in a
lone-street) for those who were come upon the noise we made were so few, and
those unarmed, that they were not able to part them. We locked the doors and
brought him in, and a Surgeon was immediately sent for. His wounds were so
great, that we thought fit to dispose him into a bed, in a ground-room, where
my Brother was wont to lie. The young man thanked me very civilly for the
favor he received from me; but alas! that good office began with Compassion,
but ended in Love. The Surgeon viewed his wounds, but could not presently
give any certain judgment of them, though he whispered me in the ear, that he
thought they might cost him his life. That account of him struck me to the
heart, for having seen him fight so gallantly, I must needs acknowledge, that I
had even then conceived an inclination for him. But his kind expressions
afterward, and his thanking me so gentilly for the obligations he said I had
put upon him, raised it into a perfect Love. My Father and Mother returned from
their visit, and, ere they were got to our house, were told by one of the
Neighbors, a person of some quality, what had happened in their absence, and
how that I had put a period to a quarrel, by entertaining the wounded party
into their house, out of compassion and a fear that he might be killed; whereat
they were well satisfied, and commended the charitable office I had done at
such an extremity; for they were persons who gladly embraced any opportunity to
exercise their charity. They visited the wounded, encouraged him to take heart,
assuring him he should want nothing their House could afford, and acknowledged
it well done by me, that I had so rescued him, upon which I took occasion to
spend most of my time in waiting on him; him, I say, who is the cause of all
the troubles and afflictions which lie so heavy upon me. At the second
dressing, the Surgeon assured us that his wounds were not mortal, which
caused much joy in our House, particularly to me, who became every day more and
more passionately in love with him. As often as I could get out of my Father
and Mother's fight, I went to pass away the time in his Chamber, for which
kindness he made me extraordinary acknowledgments.

This young Cavalier was born at Pampeluna, and one of the most eminent in that
City. His business at Granada was to prosecute a Lawsuit, against a very
powerful person, who finding but little justice of his side, that the cause was
of great importance, and that notwithstanding the favor he had in Court, the
Judges must pass sentence against him, would put a period to the Suit by a
shorter cut, and rid himself of his Adversary, by employing three Men to
murder him, who were his own menial Servants. A month slipped away, ere
Leonardo (so was the wounded person named) got out of his Bed, having all that
time been attended with as much care as might be. The second day after his
getting up, he had the opportunity to see me, for my Mother was gone abroad
upon a visit, wherein I accompanied her not, because I had a greater mind to be
alone with my young Gallant. He discovered himself to me so opportunely, and
gave me such sensible assurances of his affection, that it raised a no less in
me toward him, insomuch that there past mutual promises of fidelity between
us. I knew nothing all this time that my Father was upon a treaty of Marriage
between me and a Gentleman of Granada, who was infinitely desirous to enter
into our alliance, while I was very well satisfied with the choice I had made
my self. Leonardo, coming to hear of the others pretensions to me, was not a
little troubled at it; but the only remedy was patience, in regard he would
make no discovery of his Estate, till his Lawsuit were ended, which he hoped
would be in a short time, and I in the mean time kept my Father in play with
persuasions, that he would not be overhasty in concluding my Marriage with the
Granadine.

Leonardo being perfectly cured, and requiting the kindness and noble
entertainment he had received at our House, with many considerable presents,
returned to his own Quarters, to bring his business to a final end. For my
part, my troubles increased more and more upon me; for my Father, never giving
me any notice of it, as if I had been a person not at all concerned, concluded
the contract with the Granadine, and passed his word he should have me; which
when I came to understand, I was so stricken, that I minded not what I did.
This new Servant of mine, who expected ere long to be my Master, came to give
me a visit: but I soon satisfied him, that he had reckoned before his Hostess,
for whereas he had flattered himself into a foolish imagination that he should
have found the kindest reception in the world from me, he met with such a
repulse, as he himself concluded, must rather proceed from the aversion, than
any indifference I had for him. In a word, being not of those Favorites of
fortune, who promise themselves the attainment of things impossible, he easily
discovered, that my refusal was the effect of some other cause, than the
modesty, which a young Maid ought at least pretend to upon such occasions: and
knowing withal that the wounded Leonardo had lodged some time in our House, he
presumed, that my disdain toward him was occasioned by the love I had for the
other, and thence inferred, that having not been so happy as to prevent him in
the acquisition of my favor, he had, at best, but a hazardous after-game to
recover it. The jealousy he conceived upon this presumption obliged him to
make trial of all the ways he could imagine, to be assured of it, so as that he
might not do any thing, whereof it should afterward repent him. Should all do
so, there would not be so many groundless quarrels. I was in an extraordinary
confusion during these overtures; I acquainted Leonardo with my condition; he
came to see me that very night, and we agreed, the next, to leave my Father's
house, and to go to some of his Relations, where we might be secretly Married.
The expected hour being come (unhappy hour to me, considering the misfortunes I
have run through since!) as my Dearest and I were going out of the House and
crossing into another Street, my jealous Servant (who spent the nights to be
assured of his suspicion, which he now found to be too true) presently knew us,
and, attended by two Servants, he set upon Leonardo, never thinking of any such
surprise; so that ere he had the time to draw his Sword, he received three
mortal wounds, and fell down dead, having not been able to speak one word. The
little noise which the murderers had made, occasioned the Neighbors to come
out with lights, upon the appearance whereof they ran away, fearing they might
be discovered. By this time there was a great stir at my Father's, that I could
not be found, while I was in a manner dead, to see my Dearest lying breathless
at my feet. Having recovered my self, I considered it was to little purpose for
me to stay in the street, after such an accident, so that putting off my
Pattins, and tucking up my Coats, I ran away as fast as I could, to a friend's
house of my Father's, an aged person and very poor, whom I told what had
happened to me, and how much it concerned me not to stay any longer at Granada.
Whereupon taking a Horse, he set me on him, and brought me to the next Village,
where we took up another for him, and thence we are come hither, to avoid my
Father, who, accompanied by Officers, makes a search after me, as I have
understood by the way. For that reason I thought it not safe, that we should go
into Sevil as soon as we came hither, but that it was better I concealed my
self in some place near it. It was the pleasure of fortune to direct me to this
Habitation of yours, into which, upon extraordinary entreaties your Gardener
ventured to receive me for this last night.

Thus Sir, have you the story of a wretched Maid (if there ever were any such)
whose only comfort now is in the good entertainment you are pleased to afford
her. May Heaven requite your charity, since there cannot be a greater than to
relieve such as are afflicted and persecuted to the extremity that I am.

The conclusion of this dismal story, which Rufina had had the time to invent
and study so well, was a shower of Crocodile-tears, which raised such a
compassion in Marquina, that he could not forbear them himself. The subtle
Baggage, who notwithstanding her counterfeit tears observed all the actions of
Marquina, perceived that he gave credit to her feigned story, and that Love
began to enter at that breach which compassion had made in his heart. This
encouraged Rufina to prosecute her imposture, being now in a manner confident
to bring it to some effect. They continued a good while together, she weeping,
as if she had done it for a wager, and he endeavoring all he could to comfort
her: but that comfort came not up to the height of offering her the remedy she
could have wished, for he had not yet overcome his covetous humor.

Having with great attention considered the great beauty of Rufina, her
affliction, and strange adventures, and that this happiness was as it were
fallen into his mouth, he inferred that Heaven, as a signal addition to his
former happiness, had directed her to his House. This was the first love that
had ever moved Marquina's heart, and, in all sorts of persons that first
passion ever acts violently. Is Marquina fallen in love? He must needs then be
liberal. Has he entertained Rufina into his House? That kindness will be the
dearest to him that he ever did. O Love! O insinuating Passion, who do
bewitch the World, who do ruin and beset Men! what Metamorphoses do thou
not work in them? what Dispositions do thou not change? what Resolutions do
thou not dispense with? what Felicities do thou not disturb? And what Hearts
is it not in thy power to soften? That of this insatiable Miser, which had cast
off all sense of humanity toward his nearest Relations, love has changed; so
that he has transformed a covetous and sordid Person into a liberal and
magnificent. He is extremely taken with Rufina; he is passionately in love with
her; she will ere long be Mistress of his heart and wealth. She said many
things in her relation, which might have betrayed her, had not the affection,
wherewith Marquina hearkened to her, closed both his Eyes and Ears: nay, he was
so prepossessed with his passion, that he would have believed many other things
from her, though they had been more improbable than they were.

The effect of this sad narration of Rufina, was, that Marquina proffered her
all the favor and assistance she could expect from him, his Estate, Life,
Heart and Soul, giving her the title of absolute Mistress of all he was
possessed of, further entreating her, of all love, to give over thinking of her
misfortunes, and assure her self that she was in a House where she might
command, and that what ever she desired, her orders should be obeyed, as far as
it lay in his power. Rufina very kindly thanked him for so many generous
proffers, concluding her complement with a fresh shower of tears, a kind of
tempest she could raise, when ever she either pleased, or stood in need thereof.

With these artifices, she became Mistress of Marquina and all he had, so as
that she might dispose of him and it, as she pleased. Her beauty had given him
a kind of Itch, and he was mighty desirous to try whether she would be as
willing to cure him of it: but he knew not well how to acquaint her with his
indisposition; he resolved at last, in case he could do no good upon her by his
submissions and presents, to use the last remedy, which was to Marry her. This
is a Bait that many times takes the shyest of that subtle Sex; but when they
are so taken, he that does it is commonly snapp'd himself. I told you before,
that Rufina had no other design than to examine the Chests of the greedy
Merchant, and that she would not be any way engaged till she were secure of her
prize; for the rascally trick shown by Ruperio, had made her extremely
distrustful.

Marquina staid all that day in his Garden, and neglected his business in the
City; but the next morning betimes, leaving his Guest asleep, he takes his
Mule, and goes about his ordinary occasions, having charged the Gardener's
Wife, to get a good breakfast for the Lady, as soon as she were awake, and to
have a care of the House. He locked the Chamber Door where his Money was, and
as he went out, charged the Gardener not to suffer any to come into his Garden,
but the Old man who had brought Theodora thither, for that was the name the
dissembling Rufina had given her self.

That done, he went about his business, attended by the little Negro, whom he
gave Money to buy Provisions for a good Dinner. Rufina got up, and the
Gardener's wife punctually obeyed the orders she had received from her Master,
treating her the best she could, out of this respect, that all the Domestics
made their advantage of those magnificences. Rufina comes down into the Garden,
where she took occasion to commend the walks, and contrivances of it, for the
Gardener kept it in very good order, and well supplied with herbs, fruits, and
flowers. Finding the Sun beginning to grow hot, she went into the House, where
casually meeting with a Lute, on which Marquina's factor was wont to play, she
set it in Tune, and made that her entertainment, till such time as Marquina
returned from the City, who hearing her at it, was not a little glad to find
that perfection in her more than he knew before. Perceiving that Marquina
hearkened to her Music, she joined her Voice to the Instrument, to breed one
maggot more in his brain than he had already. She sung so excellently, that
Marquina was ravished at the melody, and acknowledged that it was not the Voice
of a mortal Creature, but an Angel come down from Heaven. He continued his
attention a while, imagining she would have begun another Song; but perceiving
she laid by the Lute, he comes into the Room, and, transported with joy, How
has this poor Habitation been felicify'd, said he to her, by your retirement
into it, most adorable Theodora? What happiness did the hour of your arrival
here bring me who never had known any before? What honor have I received in
beholding your transcendent Beauty, and to observe in you from time to time a
thousand unknown excellencies which are not discovered at the first sight? This
house may, no doubt, enter into competition with Heaven it self, since such an
Angel honors it with her divine presence. What I say, Madam, is but little, in
comparison of the passion I have for your worth, which were it to be commended
proportionably to the apprehension I have of it, I think the most eloquent
persons that ever were, would be at a loss for expressions suitable to so
adorable a subject. You press too hard upon me, Dear Sir, replies the
counterfeit Theodora, seeming to blush at those excessive praises; I am not
such a stranger to my self, but that I know it argues excess in the highest
degree, to bestow such extraordinary commendations, on a person that deserves
so little. Had I mistrusted your being within hearing, I would have put off my
diversion to another time, since it is not unlikely my Voice may seem harsh to
you, compared to the excellent ones of this City, which you often hear, unless
it be, that generous natures have an inclination to favor persons of mean
parts, by flattering them, by their praises, into an imagination, that their
endowments are greater than indeed they are. No more complements, I beseech
you, replies Marquina, raised up to the highest pitch of besotted Love, my
words come short of my faith, and I am to assure you withal, Madam, that
though I have heard excellent Voices in Sevil, (for I must confess there are
some such) yet yours is infinitely beyond any of them. Your most humble
Servant, Sir, says Rufina, your commendations are infinitely beyond my deserts,
and the honor you do me can do no less than raise in me a hearty wish, that my
poor abilities might find you some further diversion with this Instrument,
since you are pleased to acknowledge your self so much satisfied therewith: But
my troubles are so great and pressing, that in what I did, I minded only my
own. I must see them at an end, ere you leave this House, says Marquina to her,
and therefore let me entreat you, if you cannot conclude an absolute peace with
your afflictions, at least condescend to a short cessation of arms.

These reiterations of your favors must needs extremely oblige me, replies
Rufina, and consequently force me to a greatful compliance with your commands,
as far as lies in my power: but I cannot promise it you so fully as I wish,
finding the person who brought me hither, has forgotten he did it, otherwise
he would have found some means to have given me a Visit once in three days. Let
not that create you any trouble, replies the amorous Merchant, but rather
imagine there may be some just cause of his neglect. I have some apprehension,
said she, that he may be returned to Granada, out of a fear, that, being missed
there, he might be questioned as a Complice of my escape; and this would prove
the greatest of all my misfortunes, for if he be gone, he has carried all I
had along with him. Never fear it, says Marquina, for he must have more
compassion than to forsake you in so great an extremity; but though he and all
else fail you, assure your self, I shall not, whereof I cannot give you a
greater assurance, than you may derive from this sincere protestation, of my
being so passionately your Servant, that I imagine not my self to be the same
person I was before I saw you. This transformation is wholly to be attributed
to your Divinity, and thence you may infer the influence you have over me.

Having so said, Marquina made an absolute discovery of his Love; the cunning
Gypsy pretending she understood not his meaning, returned civil Answers to the
proffers he made her, acknowledging her self extremely obliged to him for his
kindness, and that she doubted not of the performance of what he was pleased,
out of his own good nature to promise. By this time, Dinner was set on the
Table; they both sat down, and the entertainment was very noble, suitable to
the Love of the Founder; for where that little Deity comes once to reign, the
first Act he makes, is for the banishment of all baseness and avarice.

Rufina and Garay had agreed together, that he should come to her, when he were
sure the old Merchant was abroad, and that he should disguise himself like a
Beggar, that he might not be known, nor any suspicion be conceived of him. She
had studied several ways to chouse the Merchant of some part of his Treasure,
but she could not fix on any one she thought might prove effectual, the Chamber
where it was Locked being extremely fortified. She had continued there three
days ere she had either seen or heard from Garay, and during the time, she
expressed so great a discontent, as put Marquina to much trouble, in regard it
kept him from making those free discoveries of his Love, which he would
otherwise have done. In the mean time Rufina, who watched all occasions,
cunningly discovered the place where the Old man hid the Keys of his Iron
chests.

Marquina went, according to his custom, into the City, which being observed by
Garay, he comes to his House in Beggars weeds, as they had agreed together,
with two Crutches. Being got under the Window, at which Rufina was looking out,
he begged an alms of her. She threw him down something, and asked him whence he
came, whereto Garay answering that he was of Granada, she seemed to be
extremely glad, and thereupon turning to the Gardener's wife, Let us go down a
little into the Garden, said she to her, this poor fellow is come out of my
Country, I would fain have some discourse with him, to know what news he has
brought thence. The poor Woman suspecting nothing, made no difficulty to let
him into the Garden. Rufina asked him how long it was since he had left
Granada; whereto he answering, about nine or ten days, she continued her
questions so long, that the Gardener's wife weary of their discourse, and
having something else to do, left them. Being rid of her, they considered what
was to be put in execution the night following, and agreed upon the course they
were to take, to possess themselves of Marquina's Treasure.

That done, Garay departed, and Rufina went up to her Chamber, telling the
Gardener's wife, she had understood so much from that poor fellow, concerning
her affairs, that it would not be long ere she returned into her Country. The
Gardener's wife, and the Maid were little pleased to hear that news, as fearing
their Master would, upon her departure, reassume his niggardly humor, and
keep as miserable a a house as he had done before, nay happily put himself and
all the servants to a greater penance in their diet, to get up what had been
squandered away, during her abode there.

Marquina being come home found Rufina that night more cheerful than at any
time before; which gave him the confidence to acquaint her more freely with his
love then he had done, and to assure her of the disquiet he was in upon her
account. Rufina seemed not to take it amiss, nay by a greater familiarity then
she had expressed toward him before, she raised in him some hopes of seeing
his desires satisfied: whence the old dotard began to presume, that the fort
would in a short time be taken in upon reasonable terms. Upon this
presumption, he bestowed on her a Ring, which he had purposely bought for her,
wherein was a Diamond worth about an hundred crowns, set about with little
Rubies. The Lady gave him many thanks for so noble a present, and in requital
promised him a Lesson on the Lute, to which she sung some new Aires, though she
quarreled at the dullness of the Instrument. Marquina promised her a better the
next day. They parted for that time, but with different thoughts, Marquina
desirous to obtain those favors he expected from Rufina, and to oblige her
thereto by presents, which overcome the greatest difficulties; and Rufina
contriving how to compass the robbery she intended.

The next day, Garay (a person of great experience in such designs) got some
others of the same profession to carry on the work; and having observed
Marquina going into his house, they staid till he were gone to bed, which was
somewhat late, for Rufina, who held a correspondence with them, had purposely
kept him up. About midnight, Garay and his Camerades brought a thing that had
the figure of a man, stuffed with straw, having about him a cloak, which cast
over his shoulder, covered his face, and pitched it over against the principal
window toward the garden, which was that part of the house where Marquina
lodged, and left it there fastened to a stake they had thrust into the ground.
The night was somewhat dark, and so more proper for their design. Having placed
that figure, as I told you, they knocked at the door so loud that it might have
been heard from one end of the Garden to the other. Marquina awakened thereby
leaps out of his bed, it being strange to him to hear such knocking at his
garden door, at such an unseasonable time, as being a thing had never happened
to him before. He called up his servant, and bid him see who knocked at the
door. The servant went out between sleeping and waking to see what the matter
was, calling as loud as he could, Who knocks there? But no body answering, and
he not minding the figure that stood in the garden, told his Master that there
was not any body.

Marquina upon that got into bed again and composed himself to rest, but it was
soon interrupted, for Garay knocked more violently than he had done before,
which astonished him the more, and obliged him to send down his m^n a second
time, to see what the matter was. Bringing his Master the same account he had
done before, he got up himself, puts his cloak about him, and calls at the
window, Who knocks at my door thus unseasonably? Whereto no Answer being made,
he grew the more enraged; but looking a little more earnestly about the house
than his man had done, he perceived the figure planted before his windows.
Marquina was extremely afraid, at the sight of a person, who, as he thought,
knocked at his door, yet made him no answer, and assuming more courage than he
was naturally Master of, he said to him very loud, It Is basely done of you,
Sir, to abuse me thus, you shall find I am not a person to suffer it; pray keep
on your way, and disturb not my rest any more, if you think not your self
invulnerable, and that a brace of good bullets will make no impression in your
enchanted skin.

Having made that bravado he shut to the window and went to bed; but he was
hardly got warm in it, ere they began to knock more violently than they had
done before; which obliged him to take a fire-lock, which he kept always ready
charged for the security of his money. Opening the window, he found still in the
same posture, him, who would not have stirred out of it, had he not been forced
by some other. What obstinacy of impudence is it in you, said he to him, very
much incensed, to do a mischief, you are nothing the better for, in thus
disturbing my rest? it is impardonable, and deserves an exemplary chastisement;
be you gone immediately from my door, or I shall send you going the next way.
Whereupon cocking the fire-lock, and aiming at him, and the other never
stirring, as it were out of a presumption, that he had not any firearms,
wherewith he might make good his threats, he gave him notice the third time,
that he would not oblige him to do a violence which he was unwilling to do. At
last perceiving he minded not any thing he said, but as 'twere defied him, he
resolved to give fire, not only to frighten him, but, if he could, to hurt
him. He shot, and the figure fell to the ground, upon which Garay, who was not
far off, cries out with a doleful tone, O God, I am killed; and immediately he
and his Camerades made a great noise at the sight of a man so unfortunately
murdered.

Marquina was extremely troubled at what he had done, it being observed, that
covetous persons are for the most part cowardly, and extremely fear whatever
may cause them any loss. He shut the window, and in a great fright awaking
Rufina (who had greater things to mind than sleeping) told her what he had
done. She seemed to be extremely troubled at it, and much blamed him, that he
had executed so cruel a resolution. For since he knew himself to be safe enough
in his own house, he might have suffered them to knock at his door till they
had been weary; that he had better endured that noise, and lost a little of his
rest, than be in the trouble he was in, that he had been the cause of a man's
death. She added several other reasons, which so confounded poor Marquina, that
he knew not what to do. She advised him for his safety, to go immediately and
take refuge in the Monastery of St. Bernard, it being certain, that if the dead
person were found there the next morning, he would be carried to prison, as
being murdered so near his house. Marquina was so perplexed, that he wished he
had never come into the world; and it is to be imagined, that if Rufina had not
been very highly concerned to dissemble upon this occasion, she would have died
with laughing. He raised up all his people, and told them what had happened,
and all blamed him, for his being so forward to commit such an action, which
made the poor old dotard almost mad. He imagined himself already apprehended,
his money carried away, and but a small matter between him and hanging, at least
if he were obliged by tortures to acknowledge his crime, never considering that
it was pardonable for one man to kill another in his own defense. At last, he
resolved to go to S. Bernard's; but knew not how to dispose of his money. He
thought it no prudence to leave it at the discretion of his Servants; to carry
it to a friend's house (in case he had any, for persons of his humor have very
few) he had not time. In this distraction he desired Rufina to advise him; she
seeming very much troubled, and no less fearful than he, pretended she could
not give him any; but after a little pause she gave him that advice, which she
had prepared long before, and he followed it. She asked him what money he might
have in the house? He ingenuously confessed that he had about four thousand
crowns in gold, and somewhat better than half the said sum in silver. I Will
tell you what I would do, were I in your case, says the subtle Picara, (since
it cannot be carried to a friend's house without being seen) I would bury it
in the garden, in some place, where you may afterward find it, by some mark
you shall set to that purpose. This you must do your self, so as that your very
servants may not know any thing of it, lest they might be tempted to prove
false to you; for the times are such now, that a man must have a care whom he
trusts. I would assist you herein, and keep your counsel, were it not that I am
afraid, when the search comes to be made, and I be left here, I shall be the
first taken; and I would be loath to run my self into that hazard, having but
just escaped those I have acquainted you with. In the midst of his affliction,
Marquina was troubled to perceive by his guest's discourse, the disturbance she
was in upon his account, and what struck him most to the heart, was, that he
saw himself upon the point of losing her. This consideration forced from him
not only tears, but also bitter exclamations against the malicious crossness
of his fortune. Rufina desired him to be of good courage, persuading him to do
as she advised him, and hope the best. So that having commanded all his
servants to go to their several chambers, and not to stir thence, he and
Rufina, whom only he durst trust, went to the place where the money was. It lay
in a huge chest, covered all over with iron-bars, and the keys were so
extraordinary, that it was impossible to counterfeit them, or to get a piece
thence by any other wile than what was invented by our subtle Ferret.

They first took out all the silver, and then put the gold into a little box,
and, having brought all into the garden, they made two holes, at some distance
one from the other, in one whereof they put the silver, and in the other, the
gold, setting a mark that they might find the places again. Marquina took along
with him two hundred crowns in gold, and gave Rufina fifty, to shift for her
self, till the business were accommodated.

That done, they went up into the house, whence they might see several persons
walking with a light; 'twas Garay and his camerades, who represented the
Magistrate, which Rufina showing him, advised him to make all the haste he
could to St. Bernard's. To do that, they got over the garden wall, as being
afraid to open the door, for they perceived the actors of this comedy kept a
watch there, with such authority, as if they had really been the Officers of
Justice. All Marquina's family followed him over the wall, fearing they might
come into trouble for their Master's fault. Marquina and his Mistress lurked
somewhere thereabouts, till it was day, that they might have the Church-door
open, to get into the Monastery. Garay was hard by, to see what became of
Marquina and his people. Finding he had left his house, and got into the
Monastery with Rufina, he went about an hour after Sunrising to St. Bernard's,
in the habit of a Secular Priest, that he might the better speak to Rufina. She
told him how things stood, and how they had buried the money in the garden, and
that it was all in silver, intending to reserve all the gold for her self.

About midnight Garay and one of his Camerades went along with Rufina,
disguised in man's clothes, to the garden. They helped her over first, to go
and see whether there might be any body in the house, but all were vanished as
if the house had been visited. She thereupon called Garay and his companion,
and, having taken up the money, they carried it away, and took up their quarters
at one of the farthest Inns of the suburbs. Having been merry a while, and
drunk their own healths, and to the good success of their future designs, they
went all to bed, the two men together, and Rufina by her self. As soon as she
found they were asleep, she puts on the same habit, and returns to the garden.
She took up the little box of gold, and, without any disaster, got safe to the
Inn before her companions awaked.

The next day, having divided the silver, whereof she and Garay had the best
part, and sewed up the gold in her clothes, she left Sevit, taking Garay along
with her, who, finding what advantages he might make of her company, resolved
to run fortunes with her. They took their way toward Madrid, to which place
they will be got, by that time we shall see what is become of Marquina, whom we
left in St. Bernard's Monastery.

Having continued there four days after Rufina's departure from him, he knew
not what to think of her that she came not again, as she had promised. He
addressed himself to one of the Monks, who had great acquaintances in the City,
and entreated him to inquire what proceedings there might be against him, upon
the murder he had committed. The Religious man promised him an account of it;
but having inquired at those places where he might most probably hear thereof,
no body could give him any satisfaction. He thereupon told Marquina, that he
might safely go abroad and needed not to fear any thing. He went out one night
to a friend's of his, whom he acquainted with all that had past, as also the
great perplexity he was in, desiring him to make a more particular enquiry into
the business, than he thought the Religious man had done. He did so, and gave
him the same account as the other. Yet would not that satisfy him, but he must
desire his friend to go to his house, whereof he gave him the Mistress key. He
went, and found it without any body in it, and his Mule dead, for want of meat
and tendance. He went with this news to his friend, advising him to come out of
the Monastery, and go home, and thence about the City, as he was wont to do.
The death of his Mule troubled him not much, so glad was he to find himself
once more at liberty: the only thing gave him any disquiet, was, that his
Theodora (under which name Rufina went) came not to see him. But he imagined
the cause of it might be, that, being a young Maid, she had sheltered her self
some-where, to keep out of the hands of Justice, or that happily she might have
been met with by her Father, who, as she had told him, sought after her. He
went to his house, whither came soon after the Gardener and his wife, and the
other servants. He goes into the Garden, and, notwithstanding all the fear and
distraction he had been in, remembered the place where he had hid his money, and
was not a little glad to find the mark where he had set it; so that before he
went to bed, he resolved to secure his treasure in its former garrison. As soon
as it was dark, he takes the Gardener with him, and a Lanthorn and Candle, and
goes first to the place where the Silver was, and bids him digg. He did so, but
there was nothing to be found, whereat Marquina was extremely surpised. He
went thence to the place where they had laid the gold, and there they found as
little, only Rufina knew what was become of all. He walked several turns about
the garden, with much vexation, imagining the marks might be misplaced; but
what in looking after the marks, and what in digging; the night slipped away,
so that at last dispairing to find any thing that night, he behaved himself
like a person distracted. The Gardener knew not what he looked for, nor for
what reason he had brought him thither. The poor man resolved to have a little
patience till the next morning, being still in some hope to find what he had
hidden. He went to bed, or rather to spend the night in unsufferable torments:
but as soon as it began to dawn, he got up, and having called up the Gardener,
they returned to the work they had been at the night before. Having dug
again at those places, where he was confident he had laid the money, all they
could find was, that there had been two holes made there before, and that money
or something else had been hidden there, but all was removed. This assurance
made him run stark mad, throwing himself on the ground, running his head
against the wall, and doing such things as raised a compassion in his servants,
who thence concluded that he had lost his money, and suspected the feigned
Theodora, to have robbed him, by the orders he gave them to search after her
all over the City. But she was far enough out of his reach, and had so well
secured his money, that it was not likely it would come into his chests any
more. He kept his bed a good while, our of a pure madness, that he had so soon
lost, what had cost him many years trouble and pains to get together. The
robbery was soon divulged all over the City; some, who knew not his humor,
pitied his misfortune, but such as had experience of his insatiable avarice,
were not a little pleased to find him so justly punished.

The end of the first Book.
LA PICARA, OR The Triumphs of Female Subtilty.
The Second Book.
AS soon as our subtle Picara had done her work at Marquina's, and had made a
broken Merchant of one, who was accounted the wealthiest about Sevil, she
thought it not prudence to make any long s^^y, for fear of falling into the
hands of Justice, whose Officers would be abroad, upon the solicitations of
the party robbed. She was gotten far enough out of the way, ere he was sensible
of his loss, for the next night after they had taken away the Money, she and
Garay hired two Mules, upon which they came to Carmona, which lies about half a
days journey from Sevil. They had taken up two places in the Madrid-coach,
which was to pass through that City, and take them up as it went. They lighted,
at Carmona, at one of the best Inns, where Rufina, keeping out of sight, was
resolved to expect the Coach, considering with her self, what she might come to
in time, now that she was already Mistress of four thousand Crowns in Gold, in
good double Pistols and Quadruples, which was all that penurious Merchant had
gotten together, during his whole Life, with much pains taking, and many a
hazardous venture into the most remote Climats. Behold here, the exemplary
punishment, which many times happens to those miserable wretches, who become
the Slaves of their own wealth. And what infinitely adds to their misfortune,
is, that people are more apt to congratulate than bemoan it: for how can they
expect that others should have any kindness for them, when they themselves have
not any but for what they lay up in their Chests?

The Coach which our fortunate adventurers expected to carry them to Madrid,
came at its usual time to Carmona. There were in it already six Persons, a
Gentleman, and his Lady, a Priest, two University-Scholars, and a Servant
belonging to the Priest, a young Lad about fifteen years of Age. They all knew,
that there were two persons to be taken in at Carmona, who had paid somewhat
extraordinary, for the best places. They accordingly resigned them, as soon as
they perceived their coming toward the Coach: but Garay, who was a very civil
and obliging person, would needs recommend his interest in the place to the
Gentleman's Lady, whom he seated on the left side of Rufina, and sat himself in
the forepart of the Coach, with her Husband.

All being placed to their content, they left Carmona on the Monday morning, it
being in September, when most Fruits are ripe. All thought it a great
happiness, that they had met so good Company; but Rufina and Garay had another
secret satisfaction, arising from the thought of the good prize that had
brought them into that good Company. The Gentleman was a Person of excellent
discourse; the Priest, of a very sociable and conversative humor, and the two
young Scholars made it appear, that they had not mis-pent their time at the
University, every one being desirous to make the best discovery he could of his
abilities. The Priest took occasion to tell them, that he was going to Court,
to get a Privilege, to put two little pieces of his into the Press, being such
as some Friends of his had assured him he should oblige the World in the
publication of them. The Gentleman, who sat next him, was a person acquainted
with Letters, and expressed a great curiosity to know what they might treat of.
Doctor Monsalvo (so was the Priest called) told him they were Books of
Discourses, and Divertisements; representing to him that things of that kind,
were kindly received at Court: that one of them was entitled, The Staple of
Discourse and Complements; and the other, The Flowers of Helicon; that the
former contained twelve Moral Novels, with an intermixture of Verses; and the
Flowers of Helicon was a collection of Poems written by him, during his
Residence at the University of Salamanca. He told them withal, that, if they
thought it not tedious, he would entertain them with somewhat out of the
former, when ever they should be at leisure to give him attention.

Rufina, who was a great lover and reader of such Treatises, entreated the
Doctor, if it were no trouble to him, to read one of his Novels, promising her
self, from the assurance she had of his excellent parts, that the style and
conceptions would be answerable to the worthiness of the Author. I have
endeavored, all I could, Madam, says the Doctor to her, to conform my self to
the style now used at Court; my Prose is free from affectation, and
consequently will not weary the Reader, nor are the conceits so flat as to
produce the same effect. I make it my business to give my Writings a little
life and smartness, which may raise in the Reader an earnestness to know the
period of the adventures. I write as I speak, because I see Men love those
things that are natural, better than those which smell of too much study and
affectation; and take it from me as a thing very certain, that it requires a
certain measure of confidence for any Man to write as the times go now; which
proceeds hence, that so many excellent Wits busy themselves in writing, and
publish things as admirable as ingenious, and not only Men, who profess
Letters, but also some Women. Among the latter, how are we to celebrate the
ingenuity of Donna Maria de Zaras, and Soto Mayor, who has worthily deserved
the title of the Sibyl of Madrid, as also the reputation she has acquired of
an excellent Wit, and to do admirable things in Poetry, having lately put into
the Press a piece containing ten Novels, which are looked on as so many
miracles, by those who are Judges in that kind of writing? The excellency of
her Prose, and the subtilty of the designs, together with the insinuating
intertexture of the Verses, have given mate to the best Pens of Spain. Donna
Anna Caro de Malien, a Native of our City of Sevil, comes not much behind her,
and may be allowed near the same measure of praise. Her sweet and harmonious
Verses suspend the Spirits, and charm the Ears of all that hear them, as has
been seen, by those published by her the last Carnaval, at the new Palace,
built by his Majesty, near the Course, which may be called the eighth Wonder of
the World, since she speaks of it, with an eloquence answerable to the
preparations which had been there made, many days before, for the divertisement
of their Catholic Majesty's. The Doctor having ended this discourse, he took
out his Book of Novels, and, the Company having composed themselves to silence
and attention, he entertained them with that which follows.

THE FIRST NOVEL.
All Covet, all Loose.
VAlentia, one of the most eminent Cities of Spain, the Nurse of so many noble
Families, the Center of ingenious Spirits, and the sacred Receptacle of the
Bodies of diverse Saints, gave Birth unto Don Alexander, a Person of noble
Extraction, Young, and Master of all those excellent Qualities, for which Men
are either loved or admired. Having left his Country about twelve years before
in the company of an Uncle of his, who had the command of a Troop of Horse in
Flanders, he behaved himself with so much gallantry in those parts, that he was
in a short time advanced to be Cornet, under his Uncle, who dying, he supplied
his place, and so continued twelve years in the service of this Catholic
Majesty, Philip the Third, against the revolted Provinces of the Low Countries.
He was, at last, in compensation of his Services, honored with the Order of
Saint James, with the ordinary allowances belonging thereto.

During that part of the year, which makes a kind of cessation of Arms in those
colder Countries, his abode was in the City of Antwerpe, where, by certain
Letters from Valentia, he received the news of his Father's death, which made
him, being the eldest, heir of a very considerable estate. He might indeed now
have lived plentifully on his own, and pursued his pleasures, as many other
young Cavaliers did, who place all the felicity of this Life in the infamous
enjoyments thereof: But he, a dutiful Son of Honor, chose rather to continue
the exercises of War, and serve his Country, than by a sudden exchange of
employments, blast his reputation, and incurr the reproach of a person
impatient of hardship, and touched with a spice of effeminacy. This
consideration discovers him to be much more stayed than those young Gentlemen,
who prefer whole Skins, the shameful blandishments of Ease, and the warmth of
their own Fires, before the honor, which a person truly deserving that name
should endeavor to purchase in the service of his Prince. But Don Alexander
considering withal, that he could not, upon this news of his Father's death,
avoid taking a journey to Valentia, to order the disposal of his Estate, he
desired leave to do it, of his most serene Highness the Archduke Albert, who,
finding the just occasion he had to go, easily condescended, proffering him, at
his return, what advancement he could reasonably expect: which obliged him to
make the more earnest promises to come back into Flanders, contrary to the
presumptions of many, who imagined, that he had made an Exit from the Military
Stage, thence forward to follow the more pleasant divertisements of a Civil
life.

Being come to Valentia, where his Relations and Friends kindly entertained
him, he began to order the management of his affairs, not trifling away his
time in unprofitable diversions, whereto young Men are but too much addicted.
For though he were a Soldier, yet was he no lover of Gaming, a disposition for
which he was much to be commended, considering his Age and Quality: inasmuch as
Gaming occasions a thousand misfortunes, and unhappy accidents, whereof there
had happened not a few at Valentia. Nor was Don Alexander as yet any way
inclined to Love, though he could not want occasions to express his Courtship,
and how far he had studied the Mysteries of Love and Eloquence, since what
added much to the Luster of that City, was the great number of fair Ladies,
shining in it like so many stars. But his most ordinary employment was the
exercising of his Horses. Of these he had four excellent ones, extremely well
managed, which he had bought in Andalusia, and on which he rode a hunting the
Bulls, according to the custom of the Country, showing himself, at that sport,
more dextrous than all those who were accounted the Bravos of the City.

It Is a custom in Valentia, that at the beginning of the Spring, for the space
of about fifteen days together, most of the families of the City go about the
Silk-husbandry, which they have in the adjacent Villages. One day, Don
Alexander rid abroad into the Country, through that delightful Plain which is
near a Garden not far from Valentia, known by the name of the Monastery of our
Lady of Hope, and having spent the whole afternoon about those pleasant
Gardens, refreshing himself with the sweet scent of the flowers of the
Orenge-trees, whereof there is good store thereabouts, (the Sun being so low
that it seemed to be equally divided between us and our Antipodes) he passed by
a Country house not far from the pleasant River of Turia, where he heard, at a
small distance, one playing on a Lute, so well, that he thought he had not
heard any Music comparable to it before. He stopped his horse, imagining the
person playing on that Instrument so excellently might also sing to it. He
expected a while with much impatience; but the Musician putting the Instrument
into several different Tunes, did not what he so much desired, which was, to
hear her voice. In the mean time night came on, and Don Alexander extremely
delighted with the place he was in, gave his horse to his Lacquey, and causing
him to remove a little distance off, he staid alone, under the green Balcony,
whence the Music came, to find out who made it. But he had not waited long,
ere he could perceive, by the light of the Moon, that it was a Lady, who being
got into that Balcony to take the advantage of a gentle wind then blowing,
began afresh her delightful Music on the Lute, whereto she joined that of an
admirable voice, singing an Air, which made an absolute conquest of that Heart,
wherein all the hardships of War had not made the least breach. Whence we may
deduce this Remark, That Cupid can do more in a minute, than Mars, in a
Troy-siege.

To say the same thing again in other words, The excellency of the Voice, and
the transcendent nimbleness of the hand, the compliance and competition between
them, so ravished our young Gallant, that he wished she might never give over,
at least not till he were satiated with that pleasure. But the Lady laid by her
Instrument, and leaning her breast on the Balcony, though 'twere night, made a
shift to see the young Gallant, whom her Music had ti'd so long by the ears;
who also perceiving her, would needs make his advantage of so blessed an
opportunity. So that getting as near her as he could, he broke forth into this
Complement: How infinitely happy must that absent Gentleman be, Madam, (for in
the Verses she had sung, she bemoaned the absence of a certain person) who
deserves so excellent a voice to bemoan his absence. I should be extremely glad
of his acquaintance, that I may give him that of this good news, that he is so
obligingly bemoaned by so deserving a Lady as you seem to be.

The Lady wondered to find her self surpised, but recovering out of her
astonishment, though she knew not the person who had spoken to her, she gave
him this Answer. As to the Song you heard, Sir, you are not to imagine it sung
out of any tenderness I have for some person now far from me, and therefore you
may spare your self the trouble to learn who it may be, and consequently to
tell him how highly he is in my favor, as you imagine. What assurance can I
have of that, says Alexander, knowing, by what I have heard from your own
mouth, the predominant passion of your soul? How, I pray, Sir, may you be
concerned in that, said she to him? Very much, replies he; for the enchantment
of your voice has been so powerful over him who has heard it, that it is not
without reason he requires assurances of what he asks you, to prevent the
disquiet, which he must otherwise expect.

She could not forbear laughing at this discourse of Don Alexander's, and
telling him withal, that Women do prudently, when they are flattered, not to
believe any thing that Men say to them, in regard they never speak truth,
representing things, not as they really are, but as they appear to their
beguiled imaginations,. Wherein, I pray, says Alexander, do you think, Madam,
that I have told you any thing short of truth? Mistake me not, replied she, I
do not charge you with a coming short, but going much beyond it, for you are so
prodigal of your commendations of a person you are yet very little acquainted
with, nay have not so much as well viewed, that, you must either laugh at my
simplicity, or think me a great admirer of my self, if I should credit what you
say. To convince you of either your error or palpable flattery, of many, I
need only give you this one instance, that, when I my self, and others whose
judgments I dare trust, think I do not sing tolerably well, you would make me
believe, that my voice has raised you into ecstasies, when another would not
have a minute's patience to hear me. Nay, Madam, replies he, take heed your
reproaches rebound not upon your self, disparage not your self so far, and
slight not Truth so much as to call her by any other name than her own; you
have an admirable voice, and the subject of the words you sung must needs be
such, since it is not to be imagined you sung them in vain. To make them
perfect, there needs only the mixture of a little jealousy, were it not that
the happy man, upon whose account those words were made, knowing your worth,
cannot give you any.

Upon this the Lady removed from the place where she was, that she might more
commodiously proceed in her discourse with Don Alexander, (though she knew him
not) for she imagined he could not talk at that rate without some ground. Which
made her say to him, If you make any comparison between that enchantment you
speak of, and the suspicion you seem to have, I can assure you, that you are
very well read in the art of Flattery, and therefore I beseech you, attribute
not a melancholy humor I am subject to, to any regret occasioned by the
absence of any person, for I was never yet troubled with any such thing, and I
think shall not as long as I live. I would give all I am worth in the world,
says he, conditionally what you say were true. Would your hazard be very great
in that, replied she? Very little, said he, considering the account upon which
I proffer it; but I should say no less were I possessed of all the world, and
think it well bestowed. I am extremely happy, answers the Lady, to hear things
so highly spoken to my advantage; but I should be transcendently vain, to
imagine I should raise love in any person before I am seen by him: nay, I dare
promise you, that if you had seen my face, you would not happily be so resolute.
My hearing cannot deceive me, replies he, and I presume, that the person, who
is so excellent to satisfy that part, may be the like in other things, which
the envious night permits me not a view of at present. And when you consider,
that in the discourse I have had with you, I have not talked of beams, nor
splendour, nor used those expressions, which they seem to have studied; who with
affected Hyperboles, make it their business to flatter and abuse Ladies, you
should in some measure assure your self, that I begin to conceive an unfeigned
passion for you. Well, to humor you a little, says she, I have some
inclination to believe you, which will be much confirmed, if you tell me who
you are. I have a desire, said he to her, first to deserve it by my services,
that, in case there may be any thing wanting in me, as to Quality, those I hope
to render you may supply the defect. Nay then I am satisfied, said she, that
you are a person of Quality, when you have such a distrust of your self. Pardon
me that I am forced to leave you, for I hear my self called to receive some
company newly come into the house, and if I should not immediately be gone,
some would come and find me here. Do me the favor then, says Alexander, to
give me leave to wait on you here to morrow at this time. I know not whether it
may be in my power, said she to him, however do you not fail to come hither;
and though something may prevent my giving you the meeting, yet shall I think
my self very much obliged to you. I shall infallibly expect you, replies the
enamored Gallant, more fixed in my resolution than the Stars, you see, are in
the firmament. Your last words, replied she, if I cannot-sleep to night, will
find my thoughts a diversion to deceive the dull season; but when you come
next, I beseech you, be not so liberal of your Hyperboles, methinks they grate
the ear, and I think all that use them great Flatterers, and consequently no
great honourers of Truth, especially considering how meanly I deserve.

Having said thus, and given him a very obliging salute, she got out of the
Balcony, leaving Alexander in a little disturbance, to see that she left him so
soon: for he was extremely taken as well with the excellency of her voice, as
that of her discourse. He had a great desire to know who she was, and she had
the same curiosity concerning him, for she immediately commanded a servant to
follow him, and not to return till he had discovered who he was: which he did
without much trouble, inasmuch as not far thence, he saw him get up on
horseback, and knew him, and presently returned with the news to his Mistress,
who was overjoyed to hear it was Don Alexander, of whom she had heard such
noble things, and seen behave himself so galantly at the Hunting of the Bulls.

Don Alexander, being come home, inquired of a Neighbor of his, who that Lady
might be to whom he had spoken; and describing to him the place where she
Lived, he understood her name was Donna Isabella, (the Surname, for some
reason, I shall forbear) a Lady of great repute in the City, and of
extraordinary endowments, whose understanding was equal to her beauty, Daughter
to one Don Berenguel Antonio, a person of great fame for his long services in
the Wars, who having quitted the Military life, and Married, well advanced in
years, had left that fair Daughter, who was then Fatherless and Motherless,
with a very inconsiderable fortune; in regard her Father's estate consisted
most in Pensions bestowed on him by King Philip the Second, in requital of his
Services. This Lady lived with an Aunt of hers, an ancient Gentlewoman, who for
the most part kept her Bed, and was then retired to that Country House, to look
after her Silk-husbandry.

Thus was Alexander fully informed of all he desired to know, though he had
already had a particular account of the perfections which made the City of
Valentia full of discourses of her Beauty and Wit, which was such that she had
the reputation of writing good Verses, a quality very recommendable in a person
of her Sex and Quality. Alexander had never seen her, and was very desirous to
do it, even before he had seen her; and understanding she Lived at that
Country House, his desire was the more enflamed: which made him Ride abroad the
oftener, hoping to be favored with such another opportunity as he had met with
before. But he had not that happiness a good while, her Aunt being so sick,
that she could not stir out of the room where she lay. About fifteen days
afterward, the old Gentlewoman being a little recovered, she had the liberty
to go and see the Profession of a Nun, at the Royal Monastery of Zaida, which
was not far from the Country House: At which Ceremony all the Gallantry of
Valentia, of both Sexes, was present. Donna Isabella came thither also, but
having her face covered with her Mantle, and attended only by one of her
Women, she got into a little obscure Chapel.

Alexander, on the other side, who failed not to be there, hoping to meet her,
on whom he had fastened his affections, wondered very much that he found her not
among the other Ladies; and suspecting she might be one of those who were
retired into that Chapel, and had their faces covered with their Mantles, he
went in to them, with two other friends, to whom he said, (presuming it was she
as soon as he saw her) The new-made Nun is not much obliged to these Ladies,
who retire to a place, whence they cannot see those Ceremonies, which all the
rest are so desirous to do: but I attribute this indifference to the little
inclination they have to become Nuns. Isabella was not a little pleased to see
Alexander, whom she had before observed in the Church, and wished not so well
attended as he then was. However, changing her Voice, she returned him this
answer. Being not invited to this Feast, we cannot expect the same welcome as
those that are: And for the little curiosity we discover to see the Ceremonies
used, at the reception of a Nun, having seen the like several times before, we
do not much mind this, in regard the seeing of it but once is enough to
satisfy a person inclinable to be a Nun. Nay then, I see, says one of
Alexander's friends, that you are not of their number who have a desire to
enter into that Profession. I have no Answer to make you as to that, replied
she, save that a person cannot enter into this state of Life, unless he be
thereto called by God, a favor I do not yet find in my self that she has done
me. We may then, replies Alexander, infer from this discourse of yours, that
you are not Married, but desirous to be so. What my inclinations are, as to
Marriage, said she, I am not obliged to give you any account, who are very far
from being related to me so nearly, as that I should acquaint you with my
resolution in a business of that concernment. However, you may satisfy us so
far, Madam, says Alexander, as to let us know, which condition of Life you
would rather choose. Which I pray, Sir, would you advise me to, said she to
him? That of Matrimony, says Alexander. What, whether I have the accommodations
requisite to enter into that state, or not? replied she. If all be wanting,
says he to her, you must endeavor to forget your self, for she who is not born
to be a Nun, and cannot be Married, must remain Newter, as being incapable of
both. I could very well follow that advice, said she. But if you please, Madam,
says Alexander, to discover, what your Mantle permits us not to see, I will
give you a better advice.

Coming up nearer her, as if he were confident of that favor, she met his
desires, and purposely gave him a full view of one of her fair Eyes, which
Alexander's two friends also took notice of. If the advice you intend to give
me, said she, should prove to my disadvantage, 'twere better, I should still
continue undiscovered, though to hear your advice, I should not think it much
to answer your expectation. That can do you no prejudice, says Alexander to
her, in regard we have observed some things which assure us, that you ought to
choose the state of Matrimony, in which you would make the person you should
think worthy your enjoyments, the happiest Man in the world: Nay, ere I know
any more of you than I do already, I wish my self the person, for whom that
felicity is reserved. His two friends affirmed the same thing on their own
behalf, being extremely satisfied with her Wit, and the little they had seen of
her Face, Can there be any happiness comparable to mine, said she, who have
three such handsome Persons at my Devotion, of whom it is in my power to make
one the happiest Man in the World? Well, Gentlemen, since you cannot expect I
should make a sudden choice in a business of this concern, you will give me
leave to examine your several perfections, that I may pitch upon him, who, in
my judgment, may pretend to most.

Upon that every one began to celebrate his own worth, and undervalue his
Competitors. They passed away some time in that pleasant discourse, without any
offense taken, though the place they were in should have minded them, that some
other Conversation would have been more suitable: But now adays, young people
are grown to that height of Profaneness, that they make little difference
between Churches and Exchanges. But the Lady having had the patience to hear
what every one had to say on his own behalf, she answered them altogether,
thus; I am fully informed of the qualities, and deserts of Persons every way so
excellent; I am now to advise with my Pillow, to know which of the three I
should prefer, though to tell you the truth, I have in a manner resolved upon
my choice already, finding in my self a stronger inclination for one of the
three than for either of the other two. The person I mean has many excellent
qualities, but the particular inducement I have to think him worthy my
approbation, is, that I know him to be a very great Wit; all I have to object
against him, is, that he fears I am already engaged to some other, whence I
infer he is jealous, and consequently of an ill nature.

Alexander immediately apprehended she spoke of him, reflecting on what had
past in their discourse the first time he had seen her. The time being come for
people to go out of the Church, the three Lovers out-vy'd one the other to find
out passionate complements to take leave of the Lady, Alexander purpofely
staying to be the last, only to whisper these words to her. It Is too great a
Tyranny, Madam, toward a Servant so passionately yours, in so long time not to
vouchsafe him a full sight of you: I beseech you, be more kind to him
hereafter, least your further disdain may have some fatal effects on him. The
indisposition of an Aunt, replied she, whom I must constantly attend, I hope,
you will think an allowable excuse; and what I tell you is much more true, than
the expressions you make to me of your Love. But I will endeavor your
satisfaction, and put a period to your complaints, when, possibly, you least
expect it. Alexander had not the time to make her any Answer, and so he parted
from her, leaving her deeply in Love, and extremely desirous to discourse with
him more at leisure.

Some few days after, Fortune favored her with an opportunity to her own
wishes, at the same Balcony where he had spoken to her the first time. As soon
as she perceived Alexander, she came down, and they discoursed a long time
together without any interruption. The effect of this interview and long
conference, upon Alexander, was, that his Love, before little better than
kindled, now broke forth into a flame. Isabella came not much behind him, yet
had that command of her passion, as not to grant him the greatest kindness that
can happen between persons of different Sexes, though it were out of this only
reflection, that to have done it, at the first interview, would have argued
such a compliance and easiness of Nature, as no Violence of affection should
ever be able to excuse.

Alexander being now fully satisfied that Isabella was both a great Wit, and a
great Beauty, writ several Love Letters to her, and the better to express his
passion, he also sent her some Verses of his own composure. Isabella knew, that
Alexander, among so many other qualities he had acquired, was also skilful in
Poetry, and consequently was the more surprised and satisfied therewith. Some
of his Missives she very modestly answered in these terms.

THE LETTER.
THose Commendations which transcend the merit of the Person on whom they are
bestowed, do rather injure, than oblige, and disparage the judgment of the
Giver, in as much as the Receiver, thinking her self unworthy the honor,
justly takes the Elogy for a Satyr. I am not so much a Stranger to my self, but
that I can distinguish between Flattery and Truth; nor am I so poorly conceited
of my self, but that I think I deserve somewhat of the praises you give me. I
shall think it an obligation, if you abate some part of what you tell me, and
find out a mean between excessive praise and contempt, for the former my own
imperfections advise me to look on as an abuse. I have no great experience of
your disposition, and therefore think it not strange if I give not the credit
you expect to your Poetry, because it is the Language of Fiction; nor yet to
your Prose, because it proceeds from the same Author, who, it is very likely
has read Romances. Whether they were the dictates of a sincere Affection, or
an obliging Complement, it is only in the power of Time to discover, and with
all to assure me, whether I am to acknowledge your civilities, or resent the
injury you have done me.


The fair Isabella found out an expedient to convey this Letter into the hands
of Don Alexander, her newly caught Gallant, who, desirous to set himself right
in the opinion of his Mistress, and assure her of the sluency of his style in
things of this kind, caused the Messenger to stay, and take along with him this
Answer.

THE LETTER.
I See then, Madam, so that you procure your own satisfaction, you care not
what inconveniences I may run into; since that to be more moderate in your
praises (as you seem to desire) cannot be without so much the greater prejudice
to my reputation, in that I think my self far short of transcendency, in that
particular, and I am forced to bring in the excess of my Love, to supply the
defects of my Poetry. That I may therefore be no more guilty of such a crime, I
will henceforth express my self in Prose, and in some measure do what you
command me in your Letter. You would find it no great difficulty to believe me,
if you knew what I feel; nay though out of modesty you pretend to be ignorant
of it, I defy you to do it, unless withal you resolve never to consult your
Glass any more. Well, Madam, it may be the time of your conversion is not yet
come, when it shall, your eyes will be opened, and you shall find, that, of all
the hearts, subdued by the charms of your Beauty, mine may happily be the least,
but withal the most passionate captive. Time, which gives all things their
birth, perfection, and period, shall be the Touchstone, to try whether this be
Truth or Fiction; nay I leave it to the same old Gentleman to assure you of a
thing, you yet pretend to be ignorant of, which is, that, while I live, you
shall be sole Sovereign Mistress and Directress of my Inclinations. And then
happily good nature, gratitude, and generosity will rather advise you to
acknowledgements of the love I bear you, than a resentment of the injuries you
charge me withal.


This Letter gave Isabella that satisfaction concerning her new Gallant, which
she expected. The frequent visits were continued of Alexander's side, and the
Epistolary correspondence on both sides: so that the inclinations they had one
to another were, by these degrees, heightened into a noble flame of mutual love.
His Mistress commanded him above all things to keep his pretensions to her very
secret, which he inviolably promised to do. Nay she was so scrupulous as to
that particular, that if in the Church, or some other public place, her
Gallant did so much as cast his Eye on her, in the company of some friend, she
immediately imagined, that he acquainted him with his passion; and, as if she
had heard all their discourse, she failed not to send him a Letter concerning
it, if she could not see him time enough, that he might receive her reproaches
himself. Alexander cleared himself the best he could, still assuring her of the
contrary; and enflamed with love and indignation, all he could do was to dispel
that diffidence, which troubled him extremely. But the same Love, which is wont
to reconcile the lesser differences and dissatisfactions that happen between
Lovers, helps them also out of the greatest and most difficult. 'Twas
Alexander's design to marry this Lady, though her fortunes were very low: but
he delayed the doing of it, till he had effected a business he was then engaged
to prosecute. His Uncle and himself had done the King very considerable
services in Flanders, for many years together, and he was then making his
applications to his Majesty for some Command in compensation thereof. And the
obstructions and delays he met with in that affair contributed more to his
after-happiness, than the expedition could have done, as will appear anon.

Isabella had taken order that he should not be seen in the street where she
lived, much less look up to her window to be seen by her, and it was punctually
observed by Alexander, who was not known to have given her a meeting any where.
But she her self was the first forgot what she had enjoined; it happened thus.
During the time of the Carnaval, which, in Valentia, is celebrated with
Mascarades, Balls, Tiltings and Disguizes, Alexander had in some of these met
with his Mistress, yet without discovery of more than ordinary kindness between
them, though they had talked, and danced together. One evening, after the Ball,
there was to be a meeting of certain Ladies, at the house of a Friend of
Isabella's, to which she with some others had been invited. Alexander and some
other friends of his were to be there, not in order to any Ball, but only to
discourse. Isabella came there betimes before any of the rest, and soon after
her a Woman, very sumptuously attired, attended by two Gentlemen-Ushers of her
own retinue, whom her mother had ordered to wait on her to that Neighbor's
house, who was very much her friend. Alexander coming into the Room, was very
kindly received by the Ladies then present, whom he endeavored to entertain
the most lovingly he could, till the rest of the Company were come in. The Lady
who came in last rise from her seat to go and look upon a piece of Tapistry,
that was in the room, wherein there were represented lighted Torches; the
admiration she expressed at the excellency of the workmanship, obliged
Alexander to come also to see it. There was pen, ink and paper upon the Table;
Laodamia (so was the Lady called) took the pen in her hand, and drew several
strokes upon the paper; Alexander took occasion to commend all she did with
such high complements, that his Mistress, who was already possessed with a
jealousy, to see him so near her, was almost ready to burst with indignation
to hear them. He, minding only his own diversion in all he did, took no notice
of it; nay on the contrary, being acquainted with Laodamia, through her
Brother's means, whom he often visited, and a person of much freedom in his
behavior, he continued his gamesome humor, and snatched out of her hand a pen
she was making to write withal. After which, having dashed a little ink upon
her hand, he jestingly told her, that the blackness of the ink never appeared
less than it did then. She pretending to be displeased at that freedom, gave
him a clap on the shoulder with her hand, to get off the ink; but perceiving he
laughed at the revenge she had taken, she gave him another harder than the
former. Isabella, who minded their jeasting more than what was said to her by
the Mistress of the house, (with whom she was then discoursing) starts like a
fury from her seat, and not considering what she was doing, gave Alexander such
a blow over the face, that his nose bled. The poor man was extremely startled
at it, and all he could do was to take a handkerchief out of his pocket, to
receive the blood; telling his Mistress, very coldly, Well, Madam, you see, I
have kept the secret you committed to my trust; you have first revealed it, and
transgressed the Law you had made your self. Concluding this reproach with a
low Congy, he quitted the Room, and went home.

Isabella had no sooner given the blow, but she was infinitely troubled at it,
not so much out of the respect she bore to the Mistress of the house, who was
her intimate friend, as for her, who had occasioned her jealousy. In this
Interval, her Sisters, upon whose account this meeting had been appointed,
coming into the house, Isabella had the opportunity to retire with her friends
into another room.

Being got together, only they two, My dearest Isabella, says her friend to
her, what do you think of? How are you grown another person than what I have
ever known you? I have hitherto admired your modesty and reserv'dness; how you
should now be guilty of such a miscarriage in Behavior, is the matter of my
astonishment. The action you have done, assures me, without your speaking,
what, in many words, you should hardly have persuaded me to. I was ignorant of
this Affection of yours, because you ever kept it secret; and since I know it
by this discovery, I am more obliged to your Jealousy, than your Friendship.
Alexander is a person of worth and quality; I am very glad he is your Servant.
You may hence-forward publicly own him, for it is to no purpose to dissemble.

Isabella was at such a loss, that she knew not what to answer: but having a
little recovered her self, I must acknowledge, my dearest Acquaintance, replied
she, since this eruption of my jealousy and indignation has betrayed me, that
Alexander is my humble Servant; my inconsiderate passion, has, to my shame,
discovered what I kept not only from your knowledge, but that of all others. I
must acknowledge, I say, that Alexander serves me with a violent passion, which
yet exceeds not the affection I have for him. I never saw him so indifferent,
as he discovered himself in this last action; his familiarity with Laodamia
touched me to the quick. That short fury, which we commonly call jealousy,
forced me to that extravagant discovery of my love. Since what is past cannot
be re-call'd, says her Friend to her, let us find out some remedy to alleviate
the inconvenience, for it is not fit we should be deprived of Alexander's good
company, nor he of the pleasure of this meeting. Besides, we should not give
Laodamia the time to make any reflection on this accident, or conceive
apprehensions which would be disadvantageous to you. What is to be done in this
conjuncture, replied the jealous Lady? The only way I can think of, says her
friend, is, immediately to write to him. She followed her advice, and sent him
these Lines.

THE LETTER.
JEalousies, when they are really the effects of Love, though expressed with
some harshness, are rather to be accounted favors than affronts, by a Lover,
whose soul exhales a sincere passion toward his Mistress. The injury I have
done my self in wounding my reserv'dness, is greater than the violence you will
do your self in passing by what is now past. It much concerns my reputation,
that you immediately return to the Meeting. But if you persist in your
resentment, you will have further occasion, if the loss of my favor may give
you any.


A Messenger was immediately sent with this Letter to Alexander, who expressed
much gladness at the receipt of it, and, without any recollection, obeyed his
Mistress, as being satisfied in mind, that nothing discovers a real passion
more than jealousy. He comes very gaily into the room where the Ladies were,
which Laodamia perceiving was not a little troubled, for she doubted not of his
being in love with Isabella, though she thought so well of him as to wish he
had rather addressed his affections to her self.

Alexander, finding himself in the presence of Isabella, thought it not fit to
speak to any other, ere he had first assured her of his compliance with her
desires. Approaching her with a graceful smile, he made her this complement. I
have considered this room with as much respect as if it had been a Temple, and
your person no less, since it not only kept me from profaning the one, and
offering any violence to the other, but also from revenging my self by that
kind of Duel, which the Law permits between Gallants and their Mistresses.
Isabella replied, Being so much, as I am, a Servant to Madam Laodamia, I have
taken upon my account the affront you have done her, when she would have shown
you a kindness, never thinking of any Law that permits a man to revenge himself
of a Lady by way of Duelling. Laodamia, knowing that that indiscreet action of
Isabella's proceeded merely from her jealousy, would not be engaged in her
excuse, so that she very confidently made answer thus. There was never so great
a familiarity between us, Madam, as might oblige you to take my part with so
much passion, in an occasion wherein I should not have wanted confidence to
revenge my self: but not knowing any thing that should oblige me to jealousy,
and thinking not the affront done to me so great as you would persuade me it
were, my precipitation was not accordingly so great as yours. I am very glad
you make me the riddle of your interpretations; let them be thought such by
whom you please, but for my part, I have already given them a more easy
solution, such as none in the company can be ignorant of. Isabella not a little
moved at the freedom of that discourse, would have replied; but the Mistress of
the house unwilling the difference should go any further, interrupted them, and
obliged them to sit down, for several other Ladies were coming into the room.

Alexander was, that night, not only very sumptuous in his habiliments, but
also full of excellent discourses, insomuch that there were few Ladies in the
company, who were not much taken with him, among whom Laodamia was the most
concerned of any. Her thoughts were full of what had happened between her and
Isabella, and show was now resolved to use all the artifices she could, to get
away that Gallant from her: wherein at last she had her desire, as shall be
seen anon.

All the favors which Alexander received of his Mistress, were done by her
with extraordinary demonstrations of affection, for indeed the Lady had a
greater kindness for him than any other, though at that very time she loved
another absent Gentleman, whom she had granted more particular favors than
ever she had Alexander. For the Gallant then absent had received of her by way
kindness, what in matrimony is called Benevolence, and consequently had she not
been lost to all modesty, she would have kept the promise she had made him,
since the breaking of that and her own Reputation were not distinct actions.

This Gallant of hers, whose name was Don Fernand Corella, had made a journey
to Madrid, to prosecute a Suit at Law against the Count of Concentayna, his
Uncle, for a considerable Estate in Lands, which at last was decided in the
Sovereign Council of Arragon. He was returned to Valentia, with a Decree to put
him into possession of the said Estate, which amounted to two thousand Crowns
per annum. Isabella was extremely put to her shifts, not knowing how she should
keep in with both these Gallants, and satisfy them at the same time. She
considered that her Honor was engaged with Don Fernand, and her Love with
Alexander: her affection being so much the more heightened toward the latter in
requital of his assiduous attendances, as it was remitted toward the former,
by reason of his absence. So that it is as much a miracle to see some Women
forget their engagements, (when they to whom they are made are once out of
sight) and mind only the present enjoyments, as to see Geese go barefoot.

But as drowning persons will catch at any thing, and the distressed are
commonly glad of any advice. This Lady, whom we represented before one of the
greatest Wits of her Nation, reduced to this extremity, must needs advise with
a Maid, whose fidelity and secrecy she had great assurances of, resolving in
her self to find out some expedient, whereby she might make sure of the one and
not lose the other. She received Don Fernand into the House, in the night,
thinking she could not civilly deny him the reiteration of a kindness she had
once granted him; and she kept the other in hand with Love Letters, allowing
him not to see her as often as he desired, as well to add fuel to his love, as
that the other, whom she was more obliged to favor, might have the freer
access. Her excuse to Alexander was, that she wanted not overseers, that her
friends were very shie in point of Honor, that one of them watched her day and
night, and that the greatest pleasure he could do her, was, to forbear passing
through the street where she lived, till she had assured him that the coast
were clear. Alexander who really loved her, and suspected nothing of the
imposture, easily credited all she said, and punctually obeyed her.

Don Fernand was willing to require the kindness he had received from her, by
marrying her; but having a mother alive who would not have been well pleased
with that marriage, he took occasion to put it off, hoping it would not be long
ere she were removed out of the way, as being very ancient. So that he passed
away the time very jocundly with his Mistress, while she, by her cunning
insinuations and artifices, endeavored to bring Alexander into a fool's
paradise, and make him believe all proceeded from affection.

There happened about this time a difference between Alexander and another
Gentleman, of the most eminent about the City, whose name was Don Garceran, as
they were playing at Tennis. Some Friends interposed between them, and 'twas
conceived they were made friends; but the reconciliation proved such as neither
was satisfied. Alexander was a person of a generous open nature, grounding his
gallantry on the emploiments he had had in Flanders, and imagining that no man,
having any thing to say to him, would do it otherwise than by the ways of
Honor. But his Adversary, conceiving he had more reason to be offended than
the other, who had not expressed so much resentment, smothered his malice, in
hopes of an opportunity, wherein he might revenge himself with advantage.

Don Fernand was gone to a certain place in the Country, where he staid three
or four days. Isabella, who had a great kindness for Alexander, sent him word
to come to her house in the night, but so secretly and with such caution that
none might perceive it, inasmuch as the freedom she gave him, concerned her
reputation in the highest degree. The Amorous Cavalier obeyed her in this, as
he had done in many other things she had commanded him, coming thither at such
hours as it was not likely any should see him. Thus, by his credulity he
promoted the designs of the subtle woman, who would craftily make the most of
both her Gallants, so that, preventing their being jealous of one another, nay,
knowing that they were Rivals, she gulled them both. Had she been free to make
her own choice, no doubt, she would have pitched upon Alexander for her
Husband. But Fernand being aforehand with her, she could do no less, though
'twere only out of a fear to lose him, and prevent the reproaches he might
make her, than keep him still in play, and expect the performance of the
promise he had made to marry her, as soon as his Mother were marched off. But
out of an apprehension that even then he might possiblv break his word with
her, she thought it prudence, to give Alexander also a little more line. Upon
these considerations, she suffered her self to be courted by both: but of this
kind of demeanor this Age affords but too many examples, which have bred great
troubles and disturbances in the most considerable Families.

Alexander being now more kindly entertained by his Mistress than he had been,
began to conceive a hope to obtain of her, within a short time, the Grand
Favor can be expected from a Woman. But he reckoned without his Hostess; for
it was her fear, that, if she obliged him in what he so much desired, he might
become absolute Master of those inclinations, which she had so dexterously
divided between them both. However Alexander passed away the time pleasantly
enough, during the absence of Fernand; but as soon as he was returned to
Valentia, Isabella began to put on a greater reserv'dness, and would not be so
much as seen by Alexander. She made him such plausible excuses for it, that he,
loving her as he did, believed all she said, though not without some suspicion,
that there might be somewhat else in the wind: upon which account he often
disguised himself, that he might, undiscovered, visit the street where she
lived in the night. But he never could meet with any person, of whom he might
conceive any jealousy; yet that disguise did him a courtesy; for by that
means he escaped being discovered by the Cavalier who sought to be revenged of
him. That he met not with Fernand in that street, proceeded hence, that
Isabella, foreseeing all inconveniences, had ordered, that Fernand should come
to her house, through that of a She-friend of hers, which was in another
street, and had a backdoor, leading into a Garden joining unto Isabella's, in
whose embraces he spent the whole night.

It happened, one night, that Alexander being in the street where his Mistress
lived, his Adversary, Don Garceran, attended by two of his servants, comes into
it by another way. Being not well assured it was he, they followed him at a
distance, being loath to do another that mischief which they only intended
him. Alexander at last observed them, and finding himself unfurnished with
Pistols, to deal with persons who never went without them, as having only his
Sword to defend himself, he bethought him to make the signal he was wont at
Isabella's door, who, as good luck would have it, was come down stairs, after
she had put Fernand into bed. She looks out at the window, to see what her
second Gallant would have, who, as soon as he perceived her, desired her
immediately to open the door, otherwise he was a dead man, in regard Garceran,
his enemy, followed him, and he was destitute of weapons to defend himself. The
Lady imagined that Alexander would only have put a trick upon her, and only
said so, that he might come in the sooner: but Alexander, with many oaths,
affirmed he said nothing but the truth, and that Garceran, with two others,
were coming upon him. Isabella was extremely troubled at his discourse, and for
answer, told him, that a certain Gentlewoman of her acquaintance was come to
see her, and to be her Bedfellow that night, and that she durst not open the
door, lest he might be seen by her. Alexander pressed her the more to do it,
aggravating the danger he was in, and charging her that she had little love for
him, when she denied him entrance into her house in so great an extremity,
which the greatest stranger in the world would not have denied him. Isabella
told him again, that she could not do it without prejudice to her reputation;
that as to the Love she bore him, be needed not doubt of it, since it could not
be greater than it was, and called Heaven to witness, that she was extremely
perplexed, that she could not satisfy his desires. Alexander told her, that
since her friend was in a room above-stairs, she might without any scruple open
the door, and let him stay below, till such time as he might retire with safety.

Isabella, seeing him so importunate, imagined it proceeded from some suspicion
he had conceived of her, and that he had seen Fernand coming into the House. To
be assured whether it were so or no, she looked into the Street, and saw the
three Men who pursued him, and whispering one to another, as being in some
uncertainty whether it were the Person they looked for. These circumstances
fully satisfied her, that Alexander was in very great danger; and to find some
expedient to give him entrance, she bid him expect a little and she would see
whether she could open the door. She went up stairs to see Fernand, who,
wondering at her stay, asked her what occasioned her going down. She told him
her Aunt was not fallen asleep, and that she could not come to Bed, till she
were, desiring him to have a little patience.

Having thus satisfied him, she went into another room, to consider with her
self what might be done in such an extremity. On the one side, she saw Fernand
possessed of her Bed, a person of a fantastic humor, yet one whom she was
engaged to, and had made Master of the most precious thing she had, and still
humored out of a hope to be one day his Wife; so that her Honor was on his
part. On the other, the Love she bore Alexander would have prevailed with her,
not to suffer him to be assassinated by his Enemies, which he must run the
hazard of, if she relieved him not, it being in her power to do it: So that she
was strangely distracted, not knowing whether she should follow the dictates of
Honor, or those of Love. At last, after diverse considerations, that of Honor
prevailed with her, and obliged her not to receive Alexander into the house.
For if she did, she reflected that her reputation would be endangered two ways;
one, that it could not be done without Fernand's hearing of it, who would
thence take occasion to break his promise; another, that if Alexander were
pursued by his Enemy, and that he should see him come into her house, he would
be apt to make an ill construction of it, and that might come to the ears of
Fernand, even though he saw him not.

Having thus resolved to stick to the surer side, she went down stairs, and
finding Alexander still at the door, My dearest Love, said she to him, Heaven's
my witness, how willing I am to satisfy your desires, by giving you entrance,
not only into my house, but even into my heart, which is absolutely at your
disposal. I see you are pursued, as you told me, but it were too great an
inconvenience to me, that you should be seen coming into my house at such an
unseasonable hour, being a person yet so unblemished in my reputation as I am.
I beseech you consider with your self what discourses it might occasion.
Besides my Friend, who is my Bedfellow this night, is awake, and, as Women are
extremely inquisitive, she will be desirous to know the occasion of my stay,
and who has kept me so long from her, for there is a very great familiarity
between us. Pardon me therefore, that I cannot grant your desire; it is the
greatest affliction imaginable to me, that I must leave you in such a danger,
but reflecting on that of my reputation, I know you would not have me to hazard
it, since I doubt not but you are so generous, as to prefer my Honor before
your own Life.

This unworthy treatment of his Mistress, in so pressing an extremity, went to
the very heart of Alexander, nay he was so startled to find himself thus
undeceived, that it would not have troubled him much if Garceran had set upon
him, that he might be revenged of the affront done him by Isabella, by Dying
before her Eyes. I should never have imagined, said he, parting from her, that
you could have been so barbarous, as to put me off so poorly in so dangerous an
exigency, or so inexorable, upon the entreaties of so faithful a Servant. You
never had any real kindness for me; that reputation you stand so nicely upon,
would have run no hazard, either as to your Friend, or my Enemy, by your
receiving me as a Husband, upon which account only I made my addresses to you,
upon which if you, ungrateful Woman, had entertained me, and not insisted on
frivolous respects grounded on such maxims as I cannot like, my heart had at
this time been absolutely at your disposal. To make it deservedly such, has
been the main end of all my Courtships and Services, but Heaven would not
permit it; and since I could find no compassion in your heart, I will go and
try what I may expect from my Enemy, with a resolution never to forget a
procedure I am so much astonished at.

Isabella would have made him some Answer, and, extremely moved at his
discourse, was resolved to hazard all, to assure him of her affection. But when
she went to call him, he was got a great way down the street, pursued by
Garceran, who being assured he was the person he looked for, was going to set
upon him. His resentment of her unkindness, considering the imminency of the
danger, seemed just to her, and being extremely troubled thereat, after she had
blamed her self, she quarreled at Heaven, which in the mean time secured her
Lover from danger, and reserved him for happier adventures. Garceran coming
within Pistol-shot of Alexander, perceived that he had met with his Friend Don
Jaymo, who, with his Servant, was going home to his Lodging, which prevented
him from executing his design. For Garceran being, in appearance, and that
before several persons, reconciled with him, all would have blamed him, had he
assaulted him upon the old account, especially at advantage, and with
Firearms. So that seeing he had lost such a fair opportunity to revenge
himself, he slipped aside, to avoid being known, imagining he had not been
discovered. Alexander related the whole story to his friend, and how he had
been pursued thither; which he much wondered at, seeing Garceran so little
minded the engagement he had made before so many persons of quality, and that
so slight a business should stick so close to his heart.

It was by this time very late, and as well for that reason, as to be satisfied
of what he suspected, Alexander being near Don Jaymo's Lodging, resolved to
take part of it that night, which his friend was very glad of. They got in, and
ere they lay down, they fell into discourse about what had passed. Alexander
opened himself to Don Jaymo, and acquainted him how things stood between him
and Isabella. Don Jaymo had heard somewhat of the mutual love there was between
her and Fernand, and was vexed to see his friend had so far mis-plac'd his
affections, and particularly at the resolution he had made to Marry her;
whereupon he could not forbear telling him what he had heard of her and
Fernand. Which Alexander understanding, he immediately presumed, that the
reason why she opened not the door, must needs be, that her former Gallant was
with her. A thousand passages came into his mind, but he particularly reflected
on the prohibition, which the crafty Gentlewoman had made him, of speaking to
her in the night, and that it was only since Fernand's return from Madrid:
Upon which communicating his thoughts to his friend, they jointly concluded,
that Fernand must needs be in the House with her. To be fully assured of it,
they ordered a Servant of Don Jaymo's to examine the business, and to continue
in the Street, till it were Day: and for further certainty, another Servant was
appointed to stand centry in the other Street, by which Fernand was wont to get
in at a backdoor. With this precaution, they went to Bed together; but
Alexander was in such a disturbance, that he could not sleep a wink. About half
an hour before Day, one of the Servants brought intelligence, that he had seen
Don Fernand going out of the House belonging to Isabella's Friend, and that
about the same time, he had seen Isabella in one of the Windows that looked
into that Street, looking on him as he went out, and that he was sure it was no
other than she her self. This account satisfied Alexander so fully, that all
the Love he formerly bore that impudent Woman, immediately vanished. 'Twas not
imaginable, that Fernand frequented that House, upon the account of the
Mistress of it, who being turned of fifty, could not be courted by any
Gallants. Besides, she had the reputation of being a very charitable person in
Love-affairs, and was wont to promote the enjoyments of younger people, and to
give excellent directions how they might most cautiously accomplish their
desires.

The night following, Alexander would himself, from the House of a certain
friend of his, see Fernand getting into the Sanctuary of that charitable
Sollicitress, and for his further assurance, he lay perdue upon the Roof,
whence he discovered, that that favored Gallant continued there, till word was
brought him that he might make his entrance into Isabella's. That very night,
the dissembling Gossip, would needs endeavor to satisfy her Lover, as to the
dissatisfaction he might justly have conceived of her. To leave nothing
unattempted, and to keep in as near as might be with all, she sent Alexander a
Letter, by a Servant-maid, in whom she reposed great trust, and who was not a
stranger to the Loves of both the Gallants, and promoted the design of her
Mistress in abusing them, for the advantage she reaped thereby. Hearing she
staid to speak with him, he called her up, and received from her a Paper
containing these words.

THE LETTER.
Signor Alexander,
I Should not think the resentment you justly have against me so great as I do,
were I able to express the trouble I am in to have been the occasion of it.
That I have not been so compassionate as the exigency required, be pleased to
attribute to the tenderness I had for my own Honor, the consideration whereof
made me inexorable. I love you beyond my own Life; but one of my Birth and Sex
may be pardoned, if she sacrifice all things to the security of her Reputation,
rather than expose her self to the censures of ill Tongues. You may well
imagine, when I denied you entrance into my House, that my good Name must run a
strange hazard with that troublesome Bedfellow, whom, to my unhappiness, I was
then forced to entertain. Notwithstanding the resentment wherewith you left me,
you could not but observe the distraction I was in: whence you may infer, how
thankfully I have since acknowledged the indulgence of those higher powers, who
rescued you out of a danger, which I thought unavoidable. You could not have
lost your Life in that adventure, but mine must have run the same hazard, and I
do not know any thing but Honor, which I should prefer before two things I
account so precious. Let me therefore conjure you, to smother your resentment
of it, and to appease your indignation: which if I may obtain of you, I shall
think all the devoirs your Love may require little enough to requite it. Your
compliance with my desires herein will inform me what tenderness you have for
her satisfaction and Life, who prays Heaven to preserve yours, as she wishes it
may here is, who loves you with all her soul.

ISABELLA.


Alexander was extremely incensed at this Letter, and though he did all he
could to dissemble it, yet the Maid looking on him very earnestly during the
perusal, sufficiently observed it in his gestures. He entreated her to walk
into the Garden, and stay for an Answer, which was this.

THE LETTER.
YOur satisfactions, hitherto, have ever heightened my Love, but this last has
wrought in me a quite contrary effect, for I know it to be as far from truth,
as I am from dissimulation. I never thought my self a person to be entertained
only to pass away the tedious interval of another Man's absence, nor to act
the ridiculous part you have put me upon, only to come upon the Stage, between
the several Acts of your secret prostitutions. If it be any satisfaction to
you, know, I have disengaged all resentments of your Hypocrisy, and shall
never complain of the frivolous Elusions, wherein you suffered my Love to
Languish; no, I am more obliged to your Denials, than ever I should have been
to your Caresses. My Life indeed would have been secured, if you had received
me into your House; but my Honor would have been irrecoverably lost, if,
without my discovery of it, you could have exercised your Charity on two
several persons, the same night. It Is very probable you loved me beyond your
own Life, when, being so closely engaged to another, you thought me the fittest
Person in the World to make your Diversion. I am really obliged to those who
intended to be my Murderers, since by their means I came to discover your
imposture. Make sure of that fortunate Gallant, whom your charitable Neighbor
was ushering to your Bed, while I was knocking at your Door. Make sure of him,
perfidious Woman, and henceforth, keep all your Cares and all your Caresses
only for him. Live as happily with him as the Conscience of your Inhumanity
toward me will permit, and never think more of Alexander, who, for his part,
disclaims all future thoughts of you.


It was not long ere this Letter came to the hands of Isabella, whom the Maid
found in that Neighbor's House of hers, through which Fernand had access to
her. She received it with some disturbance, and asking the Maid, what humor
she found him in, she told her, that he had made her a very cold Reception, and
that he expressed nothing of the Kindnesses he was wont to do, at other times.
Isabella a little cast down at that discourse, It seems then, said she, I am
not to promise my self any great satisfaction from this Letter. Having opened
and read it, she was like one put into a fright, not able to speak. Her Friend
asked her what it contained? she thinking it too great a burden, to acquaint
her by word of Mouth, gave her the Letter to peruse. The old Croney, no less
disturb than the young Mistress, found, that Fernand's love was discovered, to
the great disadvantage of her Reputation, in as much as it clearly expressed,
that it was through her House, Fernand made his approaches to her Friend,
whereat she was extremely afflicted. Isabella was so troubled at the contents
of that Letter, that she cursed the day and hour she had suffered Alexander to
court her: The only comfort she could raise to her self, was, that she knew
him to be of so generous a disposition, that, though he had a just occasion to
be incensed against her, yet would he conceal her weakness, and not publish the
correspondence there had been between them. This kind of generosity might happily
be a little practiced in the Golden Age, for the people living in this, have so
far forgot the Tradition, that they aggravate Truths deplorable enough, with
affected Lies and Calumnies, for which we must ever acknowledge our selves
obliged to the ruling Casuists of the Times.

But Isabella's unhappiness was not yet come to its height, and the malice of
her ill fortune thought not this affliction heavy enough. When the wheel of
that vagabond-Goddess begins to turn, every spoke of it brings a new
misfortune, one disgrace coming still in the neck of another. It happened then,
that as the Maid was coming out of Alexander's lodgings, to bring the Letter to
her Mistress, Fernand saw her with it in her hand, she having been careless to
hide it, because she was dis-satisfi'd with Alexander, who had only that time
omitted to make her some present. Fernand immediately began to suspect
somewhat, and, undiscovered, followed her to the house where Isabella was, and
got into one of the upperrooms, without any body's taking notice of it. The
Maid, by a second oversight, having left the door open, he easily saw what
passed, he heard the Letter read from one end to the other, and withal, their
several discourses and comments upon it; the afflicted Lady bursting forth into
indignation at every word, and not imagining she was overheard, she
sufficiently expressed her resentment of so pressing a misfortune.

The Gentleman in the next room, who would have been glad of any occasion to
break the promise he had made to marry her (for a Lover once admitted to
enjoyment has other-guise thoughts than he who is still kept in hope) hearing
all these things, conceived them a very fair pretense to disengage himself. He
therefore goes very confidently into the room where they were, and addressing
himself to Isabella, who was most startled at his presence, I expected, said
he, considering the mutual obligations between us, that you would have
corresponded thereto, with a sincerity suitable to my desires, which aimed only
at this, to see us one day made one by marriage, and to enjoy those pleasures
lawfully, and without any sting or remorse, which we have, upon hopes of the
accomplishment of that sacred Tie, presumed to anticipate. But since,
ungrateful creature, I find you lost to all modesty, and have entertained new
Gallants, I am free, to dispose of my self as I shall think most convenient:
since it were neither just, nor rational, I should be inseparably bound to a
person, destitute of all conduct and honor, and so live the rest of my days in
perpetual jealousies and distrusts.Having so said, he left the room, a little
troubled at the distraction of the Women, but well satisfied in his own
thoughts, that he had drawn his neck out of the collar, that is, shifted
himself out of an affair, which bred him a great deal of trouble, since his
prosecution of it to that point had been with the dis-approbation of his Mother.

It Is not to be imagined, that the constancy of any Woman, should be able to
endure so great a shock of misfortune. Isabella fell into a swound between the
arms of her Friend, and continued in it a long time; but at last being come to
her self again, she spoke such things as raised a great compassion in her who
heard them. She sought for remedies to her misery, and not finding any strong
enough to re-engage Alexander, who was acquainted with her former engagement,
nor yet to bring back Fernand, whom she knew she had offended, she was not able
to smother the grief she conceived to find her self so justly slighted by both.
She imputed all her misfortune to her own mis-government of her self. Whereupon
she fell a tearing of her hair, and spoke whatever rage could inspire into a
Woman exasperated in the highest degree.

She passed away the rest of the afternoon in continual disquiet, not finding
any comfort in either her friend's discourses, or her own. In the evening, she
went to her own house, but her distractions went along with her, so that it is
not to be imagined but the night proved as restless, as the day had been
unfortunate. Let us a while leave her in her bed, now the secret Remembrancer
of her former miscarriages, in the midst of her troubles and transportations,
and give an account what became of Alexander.

As soon as he had dispatched away the Maid with his Letter to Isabella, he
sat down a while to consider with himself what course he should take, for he
saw there was nothing to be expected there, and that it was not for his
reputation, to continue his visits any longer. He had always had a great
inclination for the fair Laodamia, ever since she had occasioned Isabella to
break forth into that extravagant discovery of her jealousy; He considered she
was a Gentlewoman well descended, and of a great fortune; and thereupon he
resolved to make his addresses publicly to her, by demanding her in marriage
of her Father and Brother, which they, upon the first motion, very willingly
granted, even with great demonstrations of gladness, inasmuch as Alexander was
a person generally beloved in his Country, as being endu'd with those
qualities, which deserved the respects and esteem of all. The Contract of
Marriage was soon drawn up, and the business immediately spread over the whole
City of Valentia.

But when this news came to the ears of Isabella, imagine whether she were not
extremely troubled thereat, nay so much the more, in that he pitched on the
person, whom of all the world she had most reason to hate, ever since that
fatal meeting, wherein she had expressed so much indiscretion. She said a
thousand things against her, and made many imprecations against him and her
self, charging Heaven with injustice, and sometimes bemoaning her self, and
sometimes cursing her misfortune. But it was not only one she had to curse;
for the very same day it was seconded by another, yet greater, inasmuch as
Fernand, having had a plausible occasion to break the promise he had made to
her, treated about a marriage, with another fair and rich young Lady, whom his
mother had long before recommended to him. The Contract was in a few days drawn
up, and though done as secretly as could be, yet was it soon known all over the
City, and it was not long ere the news came to the ears of Isabella. She still
retained a slender shadow of confidence in the love of Fernand, which made her
imagine he would not break the promise he had made to her, conceiving she had
sufficiently obliged him thereto by the highest demonstrations of love and
tenderness. Thus she flattered her self, till the very day that she was clearly
convinced of the contrary, saw his marriage concluded, and her self absolutely
forsaken. But reflecting on the other side, what an unworthy breach of trust
she was guilty of, toward him, to whom she had devoted her honor, how could
she imagine he should not leave her in the lerch? How could she expect, if they
intermarried, he should be able to live with her in perpetual disturbances and
alarms? The very day that certain news was brought her of this Gentleman's
being married, she fell into such extravagance, that she would be revenged of
her beautiful face; she gave her self several blows, tore her hair, and did all
the actions, which could only proceed from madness and despair. Her fair eyes
became two fountains, perpetually running; and when her sighs and grief gave
her a little freedom of speech, Wretched woman that I am, would she say, of
whom all good fortune has taken its last leave; how deserv'dly is thy
ingratitude requited with ingratitude? How justly art thou punished, for having
kept thy faith to a base, treacherous, and perfidious person, after thou had
entrusted him with the disposal of the dearest thing thou had in the world?
Thou see, he denies the debt; thou see, he paies it with inconstancy and
oblivion. Let all easie-natur'd, and inconsiderate women take example by me;
let those, who, deluded by flatteries and feigned caresses, are drawn in to
lose what they shall never recover again, cast their eyes on my misery, and
then consider whether there be any other in the world, whose affliction may be
compared to mine. I wish for what all others abhor, Death; but it is deaf and
inexorable, nay slights me, and will not come and put a period to my troubles.

Having thus bemoaned her self into some remission of her grief, she went to
see her Friend, through whose house Fernand came into hers; who though she
endeavored all that lay in her power to comfort her, yet was her trouble so
great, the cause of it so pressing, and so little hope of any remedy, that all
her remonstrances prevailed nothing. The only expedient that seemed then to
offer it self, was, to forbid the Banes, since there was some ground to do it.
But what proof could be made of so secret a Love, without any promise of
marriage in writing, or any testimony, but that of a Servant-maid, who,
belonging to her, would not have been so easily credited? A fair warning-piece,
Ladies, for those, who, at the same time, admit the Courtships of several
Gallants, without making any reflection on their Honors, the loss whereof they
are not sensible of, till, by their subtle cajollings, they are brought to
remediless extremities. The last and surest expedient this unfortunate Woman
could pitch upon, was to become a Nun, upon which account she was received into
the Royal Monastery of Zaida, three days after the Marriage of Fernand had been
fully concluded.

This sudden change occasioned a great deal of noise and discourse in Valentia;
all wondered at it, especially those who knew her to be one of the handsomest,
and the most desirous to be courted, of any Lady in Valentia. It was indeed a
kind of miracle, to see a young Lady, who spent her time so passionately at
Balls, Plays, and other public meetings, exchange all those nobler enjoyments
of life, for the imaginary felicity of mortification and retir'dness. This
sudden resolution was attributed, at first, not to the true cause thereof, for
things were carried so closely that very few knew it: but to the secret
inspirations of that wind, which blows where it lists, and is pleased to
amuse mankind with the strange ways it takes, to transplant the affections of
such as are ordained to eternal bliss, from the transient vanities of this
world, to the constant pursuance of the perpetual joys of a better. Thus this
Lady met with a kinder Spouse than she could have expected elsewhere, and
spent the rest of her time with great content* blessing her former afflictions,
and the crosses of her love, which had brought her to the tranquillity she now
enjoyed. When she seriously reflected on the gracious designs of divine Love
upon her, she thought it an act of gratitude, to acknowledge, to some friends,
how it had made her miscarriages the subject of its indulgence, and, instead of
punishing, had rewarded her weakness; nay such was her desire to give God the
glory of her conversion, that she frequently used this expression, That in that
House, wherein there are many mansions, she hoped there was one for such
penitent Magdalens as she, who, by timely repentance, expiate the follies of
their greener years. Nor was this acknowledgment of hers unrewarded even in
this life; for she became the Oracle and spiritual Directress of all those,
whose Lovemisfortunes reduced them to any extremity, especially those of her
own sex, of whom she so effectually convinced many, that, disgusting the world,
they embraced a Religious life. After some years she was advanced to the
Government of the Monastery, after she had put forth several little Tracts of
Devotion, whereof one was in Verse, entitled, A Basket of Spiritual Flowers,
or a Collection of Divine Poems. These spread her fame into diverse parts of
Spain, but at Valentia, the sanctity of her life, and her charitable directions
to such as had occasion to address themselves to her, were the admiration of
all, insomuch that she was reputed a Saint, even while she lived.

Fernand had a wife, but God was pleased to punish his perfidiousness with her
barrenness, for she bore him no children; and instead of the great fortunes he
expected with her, he had many bags, full of Law-sutes, troubles, and
differences with other people, and not a few discontents with his wife. He
wished, but too late, that he had rather entered into a Monastery, than into
Matrimony, the inconveniences whereof sufficiently convinced him, that Isabella
had made the better choice. He visited her often, and was obliged to her for
her prudent and pious admonitions. Nay to satisfy the world, that she had left
behind her in it all her resentments of his demeanor toward her, there are in
a volume of Spiritual Letters which she put forth, several Letters she had
written to him, upon occasion of some difficulties he had proposed to her.

On the contrary, Alexander was the happiest man in the world in his disposal
of himself; his Laodamia brought him many fine children, and, by the death of
some friends, a far greater fortune than he could have expected. They also
visited their old acquaintance Isabella, who received them kindly, and gave
them occasion to admire the strange attractions of Divine Love in that person,
and the esteem they had before for the excellency of her endowments, was now
converted into a reverence of her sanctity, and an admiration of her conduct.

THis pleasant Novel entertained the Company till they came to their Inn that
night. Every one took occasion to commend Doctor Monsalvo, as well for the
smartness of his Invention, as for the excellency of his Style. The old
Gentleman told him, that if the whole Piece were answerable to the Pattern he
had shown them of it, no doubt but his Novels would be very well received in
the World, and that he would gain as much Reputation by them, as they had had
Pleasure: and thereupon he earnestly entreated him to communicate somewhat of
the others to them, that so their Traveling might be the less tedious. The
Doctor gave him and all the rest of the Company his very hearty thanks for the
good opinion they had of him, and proffered them, when they should be weary of
discoursing, to divert them with some of the other Novels, till they came to
their Journey's end, provided they thought them not tedious. They all, with
much gladness and thanks accepted of his proffer.

Being come within a Musket Shot of the ancient City of Corduba, heretofore the
chiefest of the Kingdom, while the Moors were possessed of all Spain, after
Sunset, an unexpected accident caused them to make a little halt. Two
Gentlemen being come out into the Fields, upon a challenge, which one had sent
to the other, and having fought, one of them was worsted, being run through the
Body in two several places; which had obliged his adversary to make his escape,
to get into some place of sanctuary. The wounded person cried out for some body
to receive his Confession, just as the Coach passed by: which being heard by
the Company, Doctor Monsalvo, who was a Priest and Confessor, could do no less
than get out, accompanied by Garay, and Mistress Rufina, who had a great desire
to see the Wounded man. They came to him, and as soon as the Doctor had
received his Confession, and given him Absolution, he lost his Speech, being
supported by Garay. The Doctor returned to the Coach, and having called several
times upon Rufina, who pretended she could not get away Garay, the Coachman
perceiving it began to grow dark, put on the Horses, having sent them word what
Inn they should take up. Rufina was much troubled to see the Coach gone, having
left her and Garay behind, charitably exhorting the Dying person to recommend
himself as much as he could to the mercy of God; but he was so far gone, that,
to spare them further Exhortation, he gave up the Ghost. They were much
troubled what they should do with the Body, when certain Officers of Justice
came in, who, having at a distance seen the Dead person in the Arms of Garay,
and a Woman standing by, and had notice before that two Men were seen going out
of the City, with a design to fight a Duel, presently imagined, that Garay was
one of them, and consequently the Murderer of the other; upon which
presumption, he was sent to Prison, and order given the Jailer to put him fast
enough. Rufina had more favor, being confined in the House of one of the
Officers, who was to have a care to her forthcoming. They both used all the
arguments they could to clear themselves, from having any thing to do with the
Murder, alleging upon what occasion they came to the Body. But their own
words would not be taken, and it was presumed the Duel had been upon the
account of Rufina The Judge ordered her to be brought to his own House to be
further examined, which was accordingly done. When she came thither, there were
in the Room several Gentlemen, and among others a Genoese, a very rich
Merchant, whom some business of his own had brought thither. They had no sooner
seen Rufina, but they all admired her Beauty and the Majesty of her Air, but
the most satisfied of any was the Genoese, who, to give him his due, was of a
very amorous constitution. Rufina was extremely troubled that such an affront
should be done her by the way, as perceiving that if they were staid the next
day, they should lose the opportunity of continuing their journey. The Judge
put several Questions to her, concerning the Duel, and the Gentleman's Death;
whereto she answered, that she knew nothing of it, that she was coming in the
Sevil-Coach, to go for Madrid, accompanied by some other Persons then in the
Inn, whom she named; That as the Coach passed by, a certain Person, who had
been Wounded upon the Highway, not far from them, called out for some body to
receive his Confession, and that a Priest who was with them in the Coach, went
out to do it, with whom also she went out of curiosity, accompanied by an Uncle
of hers, who came along with her. They ordered, in regard it was grown late, to
adjourn the business till the next day, that a more exact enquiry might be made
into it, and, in the mean time, that all who came along with the Coach, should
not stir from Corduba, without permission. This done, Rufina was brought back
to the Officer's House, where she was to continue that night. The Genoese, who
lived not far from it, accompanied her; but though he had lived at a far
greater distance, he would have thought it no great way to wait on a Lady, with
whom he was already over head and ears in Love. Taking leave of her at the
Officer's house, he proffered her all the Services lay in his power, for which
she thanked him, yet taking it for no more than a Complement. The Vexation she
conceived at her being thus unexpectedly staid, brought her into some fits of a
Fever, the first, of a Tertian, which she afterward fell into.

The next day, all the persons, who came in the Coach, being examined, gave the
same account as Rufina had done before, whereupon Garay was set at Liberty.
Other witnesses also who knew somewhat concerning the Duel, were heard, and
gave the Judges a perfect knowledge of the Murder. Garay went immediately to
visit Rufina, expressing himself extremely troubled at her indisposition; he
did all he could to cheer her up, that they might prosecure their Journey: but
the Physician, who had visited her, advised her not to remove thence, till she
had recovered her Fever, and told her, that she could not travel any further,
without hazard of her Life; which being so, the Coachman was forced to leave
them behind, but they were adjudg'd to defray the charges of their stay, and he
to deliver up what they had in the Coach. The Genoese came often to see the
fair Traveller, at the Officer's house, and began to treat her very nobly, an
humor the more remarkable in him, who, for sordid niggardliness might be
compared to the covetous Marquina; but Love, though but a small Deity, yet many
times does very great miracles, turning Avarice into Prodigality, and Cow^rdice
into Courage.

Rufina kept her Bed fifteen days, during which time, she was constantly
visited by Signor Octavio, (so was called the amorous Genoese) and after the
Visit, came in a Servant with a treat of Sweetmeats, and Wild-fowl, which the
Officer and his Wife were glad to see, for the best share fell to them. At
last, the Lady, with her Health, recovered also her good Complexion, and her
Beauty, and the Genoese continuing his civilities, proffered her a House with a
fair Garden, which he had on the side of the pleasant River Quadalguemir.
Garay, whom she called her Uncle, advised her not to refuse that proffer, for
he had discovered the Man to be extremely in Love with her, that he was very
Rich, and that they might get as much out of the Genoese, as they had out of
the covetous Marquina. Rufina accepted the proffer, and set things in order to
go to the Genoese's, and to continue there till she had recovered her self so
well, as that she might prosecute her Journey. The Genoese would not have it
known at Corduba, that he had brought her to his Country House, to prevent
peoples talk, and other inconveniences that might have ensued. So that, with
the consent of Rufina, he gave out, that she had left the City in order to the
prosecution of her Voyage. Accordingly, there were two Mules brought for her
and Garay, and two others to carry their Luggage, and having left Corduba,
toward the Evening, to blind the eyes of the inquisitive, they kept on their
way toward Madrid: but having Rid out about half a League, they turned back
again, and took up their quarters at Signor Octavio's, which was not above two
flight shots from the City. There he expected her, with a magnificent Supper,
which he had provided. Here the Genoese discovered his Love to her more freely
than he had done before. He was a person of about forty years of Age, of a good
Manly countenance, having buried his Wife some two years before, by whom he had
had no Children. He was a wholesale Merchant, and traded in all sorts of
Commodities, insomuch that all the other Merchants, not only of the City, but
also of other places thereabouts came to him, for he held correspondences in
all parts. He was a very thrifty person, nay, to give him his due character, I
should use other expressions. He had some yearly Revenue, besides twenty
thousand Crowns in ready Money, and sixty thousand in Credit, and his own
Trading, which was very great. He was a great Student, and had studied at Pavia
and Bologna, before he became Heir to his Brother, who Died a very Rich man in
Spain, and that Inheritance it was, that occasioned his Marriage at Corduba. He
had so passionate an affection for Rufina, that he used all the ways he could
imagine to insinuate himself into her favor. Upon that account it was that he
proffered her the use of his Country House, to take the Air, and recover her
Indisposition, conceiving, that, being at his own House, it would be the more
easy for him to compass his desires. She had been told by Garay, that this
Merchant was a well-feather'd Fowl, and might be easily plucked, and since this
good Luck had fallen to them by chance, they should make the best advantage
they could of it. That night, they only Supped, and every one went to his
rest, for it was very late. The Genoese made as if he would have returned to
the City, and lie there; but his Servants, whom he had before instructed,
persuaded him not to go abroad at that unseasonable time of the Night, for fear
of meeting with any Thieves: besides, there being a Press in the City, many
young Men presumed to do mischief in the Night, and robbed all they met. At
last, being persuaded not to stir out, he was glad to pass away some part of
the Night in discoursing with Rufina, and being got to Bed, his business was to
consider, by what means, and with least charge, he might obtain his desires of
her. Several things came into his mind, but the easiest he could find, suitably
to his humor, was to forget her, and never think of her any more; for he knew
the Age we live in to be such, that it is a miracle to get any kindness in
Love, without Liberality.

The next morning he commanded somewhat should be made for her breakfast, not
imagining she was up: But when word was brought him that she was out of Bed,
the Genoese would needs go into her Chamber, to chide her for rising so soon,
and by that means to see whether Rufina's beauty were any way obliged to
artifice. He found her kembing her head, and so he had a full sight of her
hair, which was of a great length, and of a Chestnut color. The Genoese gave
God thanks, who, with so many other perfections, had bestowed on her such an
excellent Head of hair: but he was much more astonished, when, upon her
dividing them into two parts, to make him an answer, he saw her Face, as
beautiful as it had appeared to him when she went to bed; a thing able to
inflame a person less inclined to Love and more to Avarice than he was,
inasmuch as there is not a greater charm, to secure a Lover's heart, than to
see that the beauty of his Mistress is natural, and scorns to borrow any thing
of Art. Rufina indeed was not much troubled to look after waters, paints,
pomatums, unguents, and such things, wherewith such women, who stand in need of
them, hasten on their age with their wrinkles, and lose their youth ere they
are aware. She only washed her self in fair water, and needed no other
vermilion to heighten the beauty of her face, than that of her own lively
complexion. The Merchant asked whether she would be pleased to see his Garden?
She made answer, that she was extremely obliged to him for the trouble he gave
himself to divert her; and to satissie him how kindly she took that favor at
his hands, she went along with him just as she was, without putting up her
hair, which hanging down over her shoulders, added much to her beauty, and it
is not much to be doubted, but she had a design in it. She went down with this
new Gallant of hers, who thought it an extraordinary pleasure to have her by
the hand; and in that posture she saw the whole Garden, seeming to be much
taken with the delightfulness of it.

Having recreated her self with him, till the Sun Sun began to be somewhat hot,
she returned into the house, and broke her fast, after which, having discoursed
of several things, she desired to see the whole house. The amorous Genoese
desiring nothing so much as that she might see his wealth, shows her a great
number of excellent Pictures, done by the best Painters in Europe, some very
rich pieces of Tapestry, Cabinets of Ebony, of several fashions, embroidered
Beds, and all sorts of Household Stuff of great value. In a word, there wanted
not ought of those things requisite for the furnishing of a house fit for a
Nobleman. Having seen all the rooms, he opened a curious Closet, near which
there was a little Oratory, and in that Closet there were a great many pieces
of Painting, done at Rome, of extraordinary value, Agnus-Dei's of gold and
silver gilt, and Flowers, done as near the life as could be imagined. The
Closet was full of Books, very richly bound, and neatly disposed into gilt
Drawers. Garay, who was a curious person, and had read much, was looking very
earnestly on the Titles of the Books, which were in one Drawer, and having put
that into its place, he took out another, wherein there were others very
curiously bound, but had no Titles on the backs. Garay opens one of them, and
finds the Author of it to be Arnaldus de Villa Nova, and near that were the
works of Rosino, Alquindus, and Raymundus Lullius. The Merchant perceiving him
so taken up with the perusal of those Books, asked him what he looked on so
attentively. I find here, Sir, replies Garay, a great many Books of Chemistry,
and, from the curiosity I observe in your collection of Treatises of that kind,
I infer, that you have studied that Science. It Is true, says the Genoese, I
have spent some time in the perusal of those Authors; but how far, I pray, are
you acquainted with them? Only so far, replies the other, that I have spent
the best part of my life in that study. Nay then, says the Genoese, you must
needs be a very great Chemist. I am not to acknowledge what I am, replies
Garay, we shall talk another time of these things more at large; for the
present, I shall only tell you, that, besides these Authors, I have read all I
could ever meet with that treated of this Science. I have turned over the works
of Avicenna, Albertus Magnus, Terno, Pythagoras; the Secrets of Calidus, the
Book of the Allegory of Morillus, that of the Secret Stone, and that entitled,
De tribus verbis; besides many Manuscripts, which I never showed any man. The
Genoese was almost out of of himself for joy to hear these things. I am
extremely glad, said he to him, that this Science pleases you, for I have a
particular inclination for it. I know it very well, replies Garay, (which he
said, having already resolved how to put a slur upon him) but in regard I place
a great confidence in you, I will tell you a thing in your ear, which you will
be much astonished at. It is this (whispering him in the ear) that my Niece
knows, without any study, in a manner as much as I do of this Art, and is very
fortunate in the practick part of it, as you shall see by experience. But I
entreat you not to speak to her of it at this time, for she would not have it
known to any, nay would not take it well. Garay could not have pitched upon a
more likely way to bring the Genoese into the gin; for his avarice was such,
that he would have parted with his Soul to find out the Philosopher's stone,
hoping, if he once got that secret, ever afterward to swim in gold.

Rufina busied her self at the other end of the Closet, while Garay made this
discourse to the Genoese, and was looking upon some other curious and pleasant
Books, for there were of all sorts. Yet was she not so attentive, but she heard
somewhat of Garay's discourse, concerning Chemistry, and perceived the Merchant
was much taken with it. The truth is, Garay had some knowledge in that Science,
and that he had spent a considerable sum of money, to find out the Philosopher's
Stone, which though many had sought, yet could not any affirm they had met with
it. The success he had had in that business only satisfied him of their folly,
who spent their time and estates in so ridiculous a disquisition, and he was
glad to have met with such an opportunity, to recover some part of the money he
had squandered away therein: for the Genoese, crediting what was told him by
Garay, imagined himself somewhat above a Prince. He told him, that, in that
very house, he had all things requisite to make the experiment, and thereupon
brought him into a room full of Furnaces, Alembicks, Glasses, and Crucibles,
with all the instruments used by the Chemists, and good store of char-coal.
Garay seeing that, concluded the Merchant would be easily taken, and what made
him the more confident was, that he imagined he understood all those Books,
whereas Garay was satisfied he knew only so much of them as would serve to
bring him into the noose. In fine, they gave over talking of it any further at
that time, though the Genoese was unwilling to quit the discourse. They went
down thence into a ground-room, the windows whereof looked into the fairest
part of the Garden, where dinner expected them. After dinner, Garay, pretending
it was his custom to take a nap, left the Merchant alone with Rufina, to whom
he took occasion to make a full discovery of his love, assuring her, that all
he had was at her service, and desiring her to dispose of it as she pleased.
She seemed to entertain the proffers of his affection with much kindness, yet
at that time she only raised him into a slight hope, showing her self very
pleasant to him.

Having seen a Lute, in one of the rooms above-stairs, she desired it might be
brought down; for her Music, at which she was excellent, contributed much to
the bringing about of her designs. The Merchant, who had a little skill at that
Instrument himself, was very glad to hear that she used it, and caused it to be
immediately fetched, saying that his deceased wife played excellently well upon
it, and that about a sev'n-night before, having entertained some of his friends
with a Collation, they had set it in tune. The Lute being come, Rufina began to
play, and made it appear, that there were very few could excel her at that
Instrument. The Genoese was astonished at her dexterity, and to bring him
absolutely to her lure, she sung an Air to it, but with such a grace, that he
was at a loss, whether he should more admire her hand, or her voice. The truth
is, she had a particular excellency in both, so that his excessive
commendations of them, were not so full of flattery as might be expected from a
person passionately in love. With a modest blush, which spread it self gently
over her face (a thing she could command, though never acquainted with shame)
she seemed to express a certain bashfulness, and ere it was quite dispelled,
Signor Octavio, said she to him, what I have done was only for your diversion,
be pleased to receive it with some regard to the desire I had to endeavor your
satisfaction; which yet I have not done without much temerity, before a person
of so delicate an ear as you are, and one, no doubt, wont to hear the best
voices in the world. I never heard any, replies Octavio, that came near yours,
and therefore I beseech you, let not your modesty cause you any prejudice; nay
rather be proud, Madam, of the excellent endowments you have so liberally
received from heaven, and acknowledge the favors it has done you; be more
sensible of your own worth, and think my approbation below it; and yet when I
was a young man, I was much addicted to Music, and some would needs persuade
me that my time was well bestowed in it. I must confess, the Spanish Tongue
comes not so naturally to me as the Italian, the graces and beauties whereof I
have better studied upon the Theorbo, which I am so far Master of, as in some
measure to satisfy the hearer. Whereupon perceiving that Rufina would have
laid by the Lute, he desired her to make use of it a little longer, and to sing
one Air more, which she, to honor him, did.

Octavio took occasion to give his dear Rufina greater commendations for the
excellency of her voice than he had done before, and she, to renew her thanks
to him, for the favor he did her. He thought it time to give her leave to take
a little rest, and he went himself into another room to do the like. Garay, on
the other side, instead of sleeping, was contriving how to get the
Philosopher's stone, not for the credulous Genoese, but out of him. He had so
far persuaded him of his abilities, in that Science, that he desired nothing so
much as to be as knowing in it as he was, but all out of no other design than
to satisfy his own insatiable avarice. He imagined that if he could find the
Philosopher's Stone (a Rock rather, against which so many have wracked
themselves) all his household stuff should be of gold, that he should become a
Croesus, and that the wealthiest about the City, compared to him, would be
little better than beggars.

Garay had also a long discourse with Rufina, about the means how they should
get the Gudgeon into the net: he gave her some instructions in writing, that
the Genoese might find she knew something of the Science, at least the terms
of it. Rufina got them by heart, and, to begin the cheat, Garay asked for some
links of a Gold-chain she had brought from Sevil. It was a large one, and if
there were a dozen links taken from it, they would not have been missed. Being
come into the City, he goes into a Gold-smith's shop to melt down those links,
and reduce them into an Ingot, which he brought back to the house, and
communicated his design to Rufina.

Octavio, who had slept all this while as soundly as if he had not been in
love, comes in to them, and they began to talk of several things, far from
having any relation to the business he had been about, which Garay did
purposely to engage the other to fall first into that discourse, and indeed
within a quarter of an hour, he was gotten into the subject of Chemistry. Garay
discoursed of it after the rate of a man that had spent his whole estate in the
work; insomuch that Octavio was astonished thereat, for though he pretended
much skill in the Science, yet could he not but acknowledge himself much
inferior to the other. Garay, desirous to give the Merchant all the
satisfaction he could desire, told him, that he could turn what Metal he
pleased into gold. The Genoese was ravished at the proposal, and earnestly
entreated him that he might see it done. Garay asked him whether there were any
char-coal in the house; the Genoese told him there was good store, for he had
had the curiosity to make some trials thereof himself. They went up both into
the room where they had been before, and finding it full of Furnaces, Creusets,
Alembicks, and other Chemical Instruments, Garay said to him, Here we have all
things requisite for the present. He caused some fire to be brought, and having
put a little Copper into a Creuset to melt, the Genoese saw it melting: Garay
took a box out of his pocket, wherein there was a paper full of powder, which
he said was the most principal ingredient in the whole work. He put it into the
Creuset, which having brought as cleaverly as he could to a window, he poured
out the melted Copper, and put the Ingot of gold into its place, and when he
had covered it, he told the Genoese, that it should not be stirred thence for
half an hour. That time they spent in discoursing of several things in
Chemistry, wherein Octavio desired to make some further progress. At last,
Garay thought it time to show him what he had done, and so opening the Creuset,
he took out the Ingot and showed it him. The covetous Miser was almost out of
himself for joy to see it, though he were not fully satisfied of its being
perfect gold. Garay wished him to have it tried by a Goldsmith; which trouble
he would needs take upon himself, and having found that it was very fine gold,
of twenty two Carats, he returns extraordinarily well satisfied. While he was
gone out, Garay instructed Rufina, how to effect their design upon Octavio, who
being more covetous than amorous, would have them immediately to begin the
great work of finding the Philosopher's Stone. He promised Garay extraordinary
recompenses, and told him, that he would be at the whole charge, though it
should amount to twenty thousand Crowns.

Garay, who had contrived how he intended to gull the Merchant, returned this
Answer to the great proffers he had made him. Signor Octavio, said he, I am now
gone almost seven years beyond the grand climacterical year of my life, which is
as much as to tell you, that I have past the greatest and best part of it. It
were no hard matter for me, with the help of the Science I am now Master of, to
spend the little which is yet to come, at my ease, and it may be more
plentifully, than some of the wealthiest Grandees of Spain; and that I can be
without any man's favor or assistance, I think you may have observed your
self. And in regard I have no children, to inherit my estate, which, I thank
heaven, is somewhat considerable also in Lands, the main concernment I have in
this world, is to look after this young Woman, my Niece. She is already but too
rich, in that she has all I have, though her Father, who was my elder Brother,
left her no mean fortune. She might, had she a mind to it, be as nobly married
as she was before, for her late husband was descended from the noblest houses
of Andalusia. Nor were it hard for me to add to her wealth, you know it; but
such is my confidence in you, that I will tell you the reason why I do not.
That I am the ablest Alchymist in all Spain, is known to many, which being also
come to the ears of his Majesty, I am sought after every where; but I have
hitherto had the happiness to keep out of their clutches, who are perpetually
emploi'd to find me out, having spread a report, that I was gone ^o^ England.
It is not out of any contempt of the honors and wealth of this world, that I
avoid the searches of those, whom his Majesty has enjoined to bring me to him,
but out of this consideration, that I would not purchase any favor with the
loss of my liberty, for I must expect no less, than to spend the rest of my
days in a noble kind of captivity. I will express my self more clearly to you.
His Majesty has at the present very great Armies a-foot in several parts,
which put him to a vast expense, such as his own Revenue and what comes from
the Indies are not able to defray: so that, to satisfy his ambition, he is
forced to make use of the industry of his Subjects. Now were it my sad fortune
to be found by those who so narrowly search after me, the King, knowing that,
with the assistance of my Art, he might easily recruit the charge he is at,
would immediately dispose of me into some Fortress, where being confined for
the rest of my days, I should be perpetually kept at work, to augment his
Treasures, and supply his pressing exigencies. I should not think it much to do
it once or twice, but the avarice of men is grown to that height, that they
are not satisfied with abundance, if they have the least apprehension, that the
source of it may ever be dried up. This is the true reason, Signor Octavio,
which obliges me to keep out of my own Country, and to play least in sight; and
therefore receive what I have told you as a great secret, such as I should not
have communicated to my own Brother, had he been in the world: but I have that
confidence of you, that you will never reveal it.

Octavio returned Garay his most affectionate thanks for the great trust he
reposed in him, and thought himself so happy in the discovery he had made to
him, that he conceived the greatest Nobles might justly envy him. His Answer to
him, was, that the grounds and motives, on which he concealed the excellent
knowledge he had acquired, were just and rational, since that no doubt but he
would be confined, though for no other reason than this, to prevent his
carrying over such a Secret into another Country, to serve a King that were an
enemy to his Catholic Majesty. He acknowledged himself infinitely obliged to
him, and wished it were in his power to serve him; but having only the wealth
he was possessed of to proffer him, he entreated him to dispose of it as freely
as if it were his own, and since he had shown him a trial of his abilities,
that he would not think that enough, but ere he left Corduba, give him such
further instructions, as, being observed, he might not miscarry in the great
work. Garay promised to satisfy his desires, telling him withal, that so
precious a thing as Gold could not be gotten but with Gold, and that the
foundations of all designs require charge; that the Philosopher's Stone could
not be found without cost and much pains; that if he were resolved, he should
attempt the doing of it, he must be at the whole charge, and that afterward
the profit should be equally divided, and that in a short time he would be
glutted with wealth.

The Genoese, ravished at that proposal, proffered to spend all he was worth
upon that account. Rufina promised to assist them. Nay, says Garay to her,
there is such a necessity of your assistance; that we shall not be able to do
so well without it. They thereupon resolved, that within two days they should
begin the great work. Garay told him, that the principal of the divine Elixir,
(so the Chemists call the perfection of their work) was formed of the solidity
of Mercury, and other things which he named to him, together with the urine and
excrement of a red-hair'd child; that all was to be put into an Alembick, with
powder of Aloes, the infusion of Opium, Toads grease, Arsenick, and Saltpeter.
But he hoped to do it chiefly with the urine and excrements aforesaid, which he
ordered Octavio by all means to procure, as being the most necessary ingredient
of all.

He promised to find it, and, to begin the work, the Me^chant delivered him
five hundred Crowns in gold, to buy certain precious drugs, which he said were
necessary; and this the Genoese did the more willingly, as well out of the
confidence he had to receive them multiplied into so many thousands, as out of
a design he had thought on the night before, of making Rufina his wife, and by
that means assuring himself of Garay. Whereupon, that very evening after
supper, he took occasion to carry Garay along with him into the Garden, and
acquainted him with his resolution. The Alchymist thought it a good way to
further his work, and accordingly he approved of his intention, and
acknowledged it would be a great honor to his Niece to meet with so worthy a
Person; but that there was one Obstacle to be first removed. What may that be
says the other? Garay told him, that his Niece could not be Married, till a
Dispensation were first obtained from Rome, in regard, that, out of the
extraordinary regret she conceived at the loss of her late Husband, she made a
Vow to enter into a Religious life; that the occasion of their going to Madrid,
was to receive six years Arrerages of a Rent due to them from a person of
Quality, who was very backward in paying, in order to her reception into a
Nunnery; but that as soon as the Dispensation were come from Rome, they would
conclude the Marriage, which he doubted not but she would accept, not only out
of the compliance she had ever expressed toward him, but also out of this
consideration, that she was to match her self with a Person inclined to the
study of a Science, wherein she had naturally attained so great perfection.
Octavio was the most satisfied Man in the world to have such a parcel of good
words given him, insomuch that from that very hour Garay became absolute Master
of all he was possessed of.

Garay and Rufina having conferred notes upon this new Overture, were more
confident than ever, to compass their design. He freely laid out the Money
received of Octavio in Drugges, persuading him they were not to be had under
such and such rates. He also furnished himself with new Furnaces, Creusets and
Alembicks, pretending that those in the House before, were not for his purpose.
In the mean time, the silly Merchant was enquiring up and down where he might
have the Urine of a Red-headed Child, which he had much ado to get; for the
Mothers fearing it was to be used in some operation of Witchcraft, would not
easily let him have it; but Money is omnipotent, and can do any thing. Garay
could have done as much in one Day as in a hundred, as to the performance of
what he had promised, but the poor Merchant must be fooled some way or other,
till he met with an opportunity to smite him, and take a Dog's leave of
Corduba, with as much as he could shift away on two good Horses, which lay
Ledger in a secret place for that purpose.

He disposed all the Distillations into the Furnaces, in the presence of
Octavio; he bought some Metals, as Brass, Copper, and Tin, several sorts of
Salts, and other things commonly used by Chemists; and setting Fire to the
Furnaces, they Distilled what had been put into them, but contributing nothing
to the business, and only to abuse him, who was at the charge of all the
Foolery. As to Octavio's Love, he was much better treated than he was before;
inasmuch as since the proposal of Marriage, Rufina, the better to carry on the
main design, grew more kind to him, especially in Garay's absence, which the
besotted Cocks-comb was so transported with, that he knew not whether his head
or his heels were on the ground.

About this time Octavio received a Bill of exchange of a considerable Sum, to
be paid within twenty days after sight. This, with the breaking of some of his
Debtors in other Countries, put him into some fear of doing the like, if his
attempts in Chemistry proved not successful. But to prevent all inconveniences,
he did what most of his Quality and Kidney are wont to do, who being upon the
point of breaking, secure what they can of their Estates, that they may
afterward the more commodiously remove into some other Country. So our
Merchant, finding himself within some distance of breaking, provided for the
misfortune, in case it should happen, and so promoted the mischievous plot of
Garay and Rufina, whom he truly acquainted how affairs stood with him, as if
they had been his most faithful Relations. Garay had left in the custody of a
certain friend of the Merchants, a good sum of Money, and some Jewels of great
Value, with order they should not be delivered to any but one of them two.
Besides which, he brought some to his Country House, and hid them in a secret
place in the presence of Rufina, of whom he had a confidence, as if she had
really been his Wife. Garay, who was still busy about his Distillations, put
him into good hope, that within twenty days he should see the end of the great
work, and his House full of Gold, to recover the loss he had received by his
Debtors.

About this time, there happened a business which obliged Octavio to take a
Journey, to advise with a Correspondent of his, how to prevent the misfortune
he saw coming upon him. Garay and Rufina being entrusted with the House,
thought it a fair opportunity to dislodge, and make the best they could of the
present game. They secured all the Money and Jewels they could come at, and
left the Plate and some other things, they could not so conveniently carry
away, behind them, though with some regret, thinking it more prudence to make a
safe retreat with what were considerable, than to hazard all, by grasping at
too much. Having therefore laden themselves with what was most precious, they
left the Furnaces, and the Alembicks, made the Philosopher's stone at the cost
of the absent Merchant, and took Horse while the people of the House were fast
asleep. They took their way toward Malaga, and traveled all night, having
about them above six thousand Crowns in Money and Jewels, and left, upon a
Table near the Furnaces, a paper of Verses, to hasten the credulous Merchant to
hang himself.

Two days after their departure he returns home, very ill satisfied with his
Journey, in that he had not done any thing in the business which occasioned it.
All the hope he now had was in his Uncle, Garay, imagining, by his means, he
should yet be able to show his head, and not only keep up his Reputation, but
also be Richer than ever he had been, such a strange Mist had the Witchcraft of
Chemistry cast before his Eyes.

He came not to his Country House till after Night, where he found the Servant
whom he had left with Garay and Rufina, for the rest of his people were in the
City. The Servant received him with a sad countenance, and being got up stairs,
he asked him (fearing somewhat were amiss) where his Guests were, of whom the
Servant could give him no account, as having not seen them when they went out,
and could only say, that, two Nights before, they had locked him into the Room
where he lay, which he had been forced to break open, because he could not
otherwise get out. They searched up and down, and found that the Chests had
been opened, and all the Money conveyed away. This was not the worst the
Merchant feared, but that they had also been with him, in whose custody he had
greater sums of Money, and the most precious of his Household Stuff. It being
too late to make any enquiry that Night, he thought it his best course to go to
Bed; but desirous to visit the Furnaces once more, he finds on the Table the
Paper, left there by Garay, which having opened, he found in it these Lines.

Signor Octavio,
IT is the just reward of those who attempt things impossible, to be shamefully
disappointed. Many of your Profession have been ruined by their Faith, in
things relating to their Trade; it was therefore but fit you should repent your
Credulity, in a business you understood not. It was indeed impardonable, to
expect to see that done by any Man, in a few days, which the Sun, who has a
greater power over the Metal you were so covetous of, cannot perfect under four
or five hundred years. Your loss, I must confess is great, but you have this
comfortable consideration, that you may now defy Chemistry, and all its
cheating Professors, to show you such another trick as we have done. But, to
avoid all future Temptation, take this hearty advice from two dear Friends of
yours; put all the fine Treatises you have of that pernicious Art into your
Furnaces, and, having set Fire to them and your House together, fairly run away
by the light of it.


The poor Merchant had no sooner read them, ere he was convinced, they were his
kind Guests who had robbed him, and extracted what he had in his Chests and
Cabinets with more ease than he had infused it into them. How he spent the
Night, is only to be imagined, being just upon the point of Breaking, and not
knowing any means to remedy it. All the hope he had, was, that the Money and
Jewels which he had left in a friend's hands, were safe enough; nay he
despaired not to find out those, who had done him the mischief. He turned
himself from one side to another, not out of any disturbance, occasioned by his
Love to the subtle Rufina, (for that was absolutely lost with his Money) but
that he had been so basely trapan'd by a beggarly Rascal. Then did he begin to
curse Chemistry, and all the Authors that ever writ of it, whereas he should
rather have given God thanks, who, by the cheat which was put upon him, had
prevented the prosecution of his design, which might have absolutely ruined
him. As soon as he perceived any appearance of Day, he got up, and went into
the City, to his House, whom he had entrusted with the keeping of his Money and
other things. He asked him whether Garay had been with him? the other answered
that he had, and had taken away whatever he had in his custody, and that
therein he had followed his own orders. That word struck him almost Dead; nay
the resentments he expressed of that loss were so great, that if the other had
not known the cause of it, he would have thought him out of his wits. He
comforted him the best he could, and told him, that his only course was to
make a speedy search for the Robbers. He did all he could to that purpose,
sending Officers and others several ways; but that which Garay and Rufina had
taken was so extraordinary, that they could never meet with them. So they
returned to Corduba, to be paid for their fruitless pursuit, by him who had
sent them, which, as his affairs stood then, added not a little to his
affliction. This adventure was soon known all over the City; and the Genoese,
not able to accept of another Bill of exchange that had been sent him, was
forced to absent himself, and to return to Genua, with what he could make by
the sale of his Goods. By this means he turned Bankrupt, and defied his
Creditors, who could not find any thing he had left behind him. The same thing
happens many times to those, who, with small Estates, engage themselves in too
great affairs, presuming upon this, that, if it comes to the worst, they can
secure themselves by an escape.

The end of the second Book.
LA PICARA, OR The Triumphs of Female Subtilty.
The Third Book.
GAray and Rufina rode on a good round pace, but kept in obscure ways, and, in
four Nights, they would not take up their Lodging in any Town or Village, but
in open Fields, for fear of being surpised by the Officers, whom they doubted
not but the Genoese had sent to enquire after them. They had shifted their
Clothes, and having disguised themselves as well as they could, they carefully
avoided all those places where they had the least apprehension they might be
known. It was Garay's charge to provide Victuals; and being about the beginning
of the Spring, they found it no great inconvenience, to lie abroad in the open
air. They got into a thick Wood just as the Sun was ready to set, and fearing
that a thick Cloud, under which they were, might break upon them with too great
violence, as there was some likelihood, by reason of the great Thunder and
Lightning that had gone before, they went into the thickest part of it, the
better to secure themselves. Other Travelers, upon the same apprehension, had
taken refuge at a place, near that where Garay and Rufina were. The noise they
made in discoursing, raised in Garay a curiosity to come and over-hear what
they said; and through the means of thick Bushes, being come near them, he
perceived they were three Men, one whereof, speaking to the others, said; If
this Tempest lasts all night, I doubt we shall be disappointed of our design. I
fear me so too, replies another, and no doubt but the Hermit of la Serre will
be out of all patience that he has expected us so long. O that Brother Crispin
is an excellent fellow, says another of them: his Religious frock covers a
great deal of mischief, and he is so insinuating in his behavior, that he is
very much in their favor, who bestowed the Hermitage upon him. He is so
transcendent an Hypocrite, replies another, that he is able to blind all the
World: he has the reputation of a virtuous person all over the Country, and
there is not within twenty Leagues about a more consummate Villain than he is.
I have been acquainted with him these twelve years, says the Second, and his
profession has been to receive Thieves, and their Booties; and he has been so
fortunate as never to be suspected Guilty of any crime of that kind, whereas so
many other poor Rogues have been taken and trussed up, at the first falling
into the hands of Justice. It must needs be acknowledged, says another, that
his Hermitage is a very convenient place for persons of our profession, and the
Cellar he has made under it, is such a place, as the Devil himself would never
find out. We could never have met with a more secure place, to put up the
fifteen hundred Crowns we yesterday disburthen'd the Merchant of. 'Twas the
most considerable Robbery that has been committed in this Country of a long
time. If it would but hold up a little, says he who had spoken first, I hope to
make as good a Prey, yet before it be Day.They thereupon advised concerning the
means how to execute their design. Garay missed not a word of all they had
spoken; the Country he was acquainted with as well as if he had been Born in
it, and very well knew the Hermit, whom, till then, he had accounted a person
of great sanctity, so far was he from imagining, that he drove such a Trade,
and that his Hermitage had, for so many years, been the refuge of
High-way-beaters, and House-breakers.

Having made this strange discovery, he returns to the place where he had left
Rufina, and gave her an account of what he had heard from those Robbers. They
continued there without making any noise, they and their Horses, till such time
as the others were gone, considering with themselves how they might make their
advantage of that unexpected adventure: And taking their way to a blind Inn,
not far thence, they stayed there the remainder of that Night, and all the next
Day. Having, in that time, considered what they had to do, they went both
toward the Hermitage, where Brother Crispin (so was the Hermit named) lived,
and being got within a small distance of it, Garay bound Rufina to a Tree, upon
which she cries out as loud as she could, Is there no body to relieve a
wretched Woman, ready to be Murdered here? O Heaven, revenge the injury done
to my innocence. On the other side, Garay acted his part, saying, It Is in vain
for thee to call any body to thy relief; thou have not long to live, and
therefore recommend thy self to God, for thou shall not escape out of my hands;
as soon as I have bound thee to this Tree, I will dispatch thy Soul into the
other World.

At the first noise of her crying out, Crispin hears her, and being all alone
in the Hermitage, a thing seldom happened, for, most nights, he had the
company of some of the tribe, who though guilty of much watching, were not much
either of sanctity or miracles. The Hermit came out with two good
Pocket-pistols, and being got near the place, whence he had heard the noise, he
discharged one of them, which happened very luckily for Garay. For it being
resolved upon the question between him and Rufina, that he should run away as
soon as any came near them, it might be conceived, the discharging of the
Pistol had frightened him. He presently mounted one of the Horses; and leading
away the other, he rid away with all the speed he could. Crispin comes near the
Tree, and, by the light of the Moon, perceived Rufina, weeping most bitterly,
and seeming to be astonished, through that fright she was in. Seeing the
Hermit coming toward her, What art thou returned Traitor, said she? will
nothing deter thee from executing thy cruel design? Come, take away my Life,
and put me out of further trouble, and doubt not but one time or other, Heaven,
since it will not rescue, will revenge my innocence.The frock'd Hypocrite,
hearing this discourse, and perceiving thereby that she mistook him, made her
this Answer, Madam, I am not the person you think me to be, but one who comes
to relieve you in this extremity, and to save your Life. What is become of the
Villain, who would have taken it from you, and has obliged me, contrary to the
rules of my Profession, to take Firearms to pursue him, not doubting but what
I do will be accounted an act of meritorious charity in the sight of God?

Having thereupon unbound her, Rufina cast her self at his feet, saying, It
must needs be, Brother Crispin, (for she knew his name) that you had some
revelation from Heaven, of the violence intended me, since you came so
miraculously to my relief, and that with Arms so contrary to your Profession.
Heaven reward you for the charitable assistance you have afforded an innocent
Woman. I cannot express the resentment I have of the kindness you have done me,
otherwise than by submissions and vows, as being obliged to you for no less
than my Life, which the fury of a Brother was just going to deprive me of.

Crispin was extremely taken with the Woman, (nay notwithstanding his vow of
chastity, he had a kindness for the whole Sex) but he was yet master of so much
modesty and reserv'dness, that he sorbore all discourse of Love and
Familiarity; and continuing in his counterfeit sanctity, My dear Sister, in the
Lord, said he to her, I think my self far from deserving all the favors it
pleases God to do me: but I endeavor all lies in my power to Live virtuously,
serving my Creator in this solitary place, where it has been the pleasure of
his divine Majesty, that I should be a means to save your Life: I heartily
thank him for it, and am extremely glad, that what is done is to your
satisfaction. For this night, I can only proffer you such a reception as a
poor Cell can afford, where you may continue, till you have accommodated your
affairs, and reconciled your self to your Brother. I assure you it is
absolutely at your service, and I offer it you with such a cordial affection,
as a good Christian ought to have for his Neighbor, for I had not put my self
into this habit, were it not to exercise such charities as these.

Rufina renewed her thanks to him for the civil proffers he made her, bursting
forth afresh into feigned tears, a thing some Women can do when they please,
but this had the knack of it beyond any. She gladly accepted of his kindness,
as what conduced very much to the compassing of her design. They thereupon took
their way toward the Hermitage, and Brother Crispin, seeing Rufina was
somewhat weary, endeavored to comfort her with all the kind words he could
think of, and at last took her by the arm, to help her forward. He opened the
door of the Hermitage, and when they were got in, Rufina was not a little
astonished, to see a rough Plank, which he pretended was his Bed, with a
Crucifix at the head of it, and on one side, hanging up by a Nail, an
Instrument made of good Whip-cord; wherewith his credulous Zealots believed
that he disciplined himself: all the other furniture of the Room consisted in a
little rotten Table, which, by much traveling and removing from place to
place, had brought four feet to three.

Rufina finding the room so poorly furnished, and the person who made his abode
in it so mortified and reserved in his behavior, began to repent her self,
that she ever came thither, and imagined that Garay had mis-understood the
conference of the Robbers in the Wood. But the devout Hermit put her out of her
dumps, for taking notice of her looking a little strangely on the
accommodations of his House, he said to her, My dear Sister, you may happily
think this a very poor Lodging, and that you will have but an ill Nights rest;
be not troubled, I will Lodge you much better than you imagine. 'Twas your
happiness to come hither at this time, now that there are not any here upon
their spiritual retreats, which some devout souls of your Sex are wont to make
at this Hermitage, sometimes for eight or ten days together. Some of these, for
the greater convenience of their devotion, have sent hither Beds, and some
other Household Stuff. Incomparable Hypocrite! Having asked her whether she
lived at Malaga, and she telling him that she was a stranger in those parts, he
would have persuaded her, that there were Beds in the Hermitage for such as
came to make their spiritual retreats there, which was a damnable lie: but the
truth of it was, that he, for his own ease, had very good Quilts, and other
necessaries for a bed or two, for the entertainment of the secret camerades who
came often to visit him. These conveniences were disposed into a low room,
which was also the Treasury, where those birds of prey, put up such things as
the true owners of them never intended should be acquainted with the place. He
thereupon desired her to have a little patience, till he went down to fetch
some bedcloaths, which having brought, he made her a bed in a little Cell, at a
small distance from his own. They had a better supper then Rufina expected,
there was some boiled meat and broth, and a cold Rabbet, which Crispin
pretended had been lest at the Hermitage by one of his Penitents, a very devout
old Gentlewoman, whom he was infinitely obliged to; and to close their
stomachs, they had some excellent fruits, according to the season.

Rufina was a woman much inclined to mirth, but at this time, doing her natural
disposition some violence, she seemed to be very melancholy and reserved, and
so continued all the time they were at supper, eating very little, the better
to express her weariness, and being troubled at the accident, which had
befallen her. The Hermit in like manner pretended he had no great stomach,
whether the meat was not dressed to his mind, or that he did it out of a
compliance with his fair guest, whom he looked on so attentively all the time
they were at supper, as if he had been to read a Lecture of her Physiognomy. At
last, having taken away the meat and cloth, the Hermit, desirous to know of
Rufina, the cause why her own Brother would have taken away her life, entreated
her to satisfy him, which she did in this short account of her self.

Though it cannot but add very much to my affliction, to make a rebearsal of
the occasion of it, yet the kindness you have done me, my dear Brother, being
so transcendent, I should be a very ungrateful person, to deny you the
satisfaction of some account of her whom you have so highly obliged. I was
born, said she, in the City of Almeria, of noble Parents, my Ancestors having
been famous there for several ages. All the children they had were only my
self, and a Brother, who is a year older then I am. My Father and Mother left
this world, and me in it a little before I was fully arrived to the fifteenth
year of my age. There were those who thought the face you now see not
unhandsome, that is in other words, several persons courted me in order to
marriage, but my Brother opposed it as much as lay in his power, charging my
Suitors with some defects or other, in their estates or extraction, so that not
any one of them obtained what they so much desired. I believe the true cause of
my Brother's refusals proceeded from a desire he had that I should go into a
Nunnery, where I had two Aunts, and he get to himself somewhat of the fortune
my Father had left me. I discovered his design, by their continual pressing of
me to become a Nun. But I never had any inclination to that kind of life, and
so my Answer to them was suitable thereto; which incensed my Brother so much
against me, that he never looked kindly on me since.

While these things were in agitation, a young Gentleman, who had left Almeria
ere he was ten years of age, returned from Flanders, where, for the good
services he had done his Majesty, he had been advanced to the command of a
Company of Foot and a Troop of Horse. He came accordingly in a very good
equipage, both as to Clothes and Horses. He had a pretty considerable estate,
and had not received any thing from it since his departure from Almeria, so
that there was a good sum lay ready for him. He one day chanced to see me at
Church, and liked me so well, that he inquired who I was. Some gave him an
account of me, and soon after, he began to make his addresses to me, and to
court me by Letters and other ways. To make my tale short, I was not insensible
of his affection, but considering with my self the equality there was between
us as to birth, and the excellent endowments he was Master of, I complied with
his love, and admitted him to come into the house, but upon the assurance he
gave me, that his courtship was really in order to marriage. He visited me with
much freedom, for my Brother was then sick of a disease, which had brought him
almost to death's door, (I would it had carried him quite into that cold room,
my condition would not be so sad as it is at the present.) One of my former
Suitors, being not a little troubled to see a Newcomer so highly advanced in my
favor, began to watch him, and in a short time saw him let in and coming out
of our house, at an unseasonable time of the night. He made a very
ungentlemanlike advantage of that discovery; for, envying any other should have
what he could not obtain, he gave my Brother an account of what was done in his
house. One day coming to visit him, and being all alone with him, he told him
what he had seen. My Brother, who had recovered a little of his strength, began
to get up, and by his own observation was confirmed in what the other had told
him. Yet could he not be revenged of me, by reason of his weakness, and put it
off to some other opportunity. He seemed to be extremely troubled that I had
engaged my affection to that Captain, and protested that he would have been
much less, had I made choice of any other, for he had had some difference with
his elder Brother, and ever since, they had never been good friends.

At last, my Brother recovered his former health, and finding the Captain gone
from Almeria, he told me, that he would carry me to see an Aunt of ours at
Malaga, who was a Nun of the Order instituted by St. Bernard. I believed him,
and not imagining he knew anything of the correspondence between the Captain
and my self, I was very glad of the opportunity to see that Aunt, whom I was
much obliged to, for several things she had sent me of her own working. We
prepared our selves for the journey, and rode each of us on a horse, with two
servants on two others to wait on us. Being come into the wood near this place,
he ordered the two servants to go before, to prepare a lodging for us, and
being come to the place where you found me, just as day was taking its last
leave, he threw me off my horse, and put me into the condition you found me in,
wherein no doubt I had perished, had not you fortunately relieved me, for the
discharging of the Pistol made him get away before he had done the work he
intended. May God, the requiter of all good turns, remember the charitable
assistance you did me, which was so strange, that I shall never forget it as
long as I live.

The Hermit having heard this story, took occasion to comfort her the best he
could, and promised her to do any thing that lay in his power; whereupon they
parted for that time, and went to their several Beds; she, to that which had
been prepared for her, and he, to another, that lay in a secret place, very
well furnished; for, however he blinded the world with an apparent austerity,
he was a person who loved his ease as well as any other. He was deeply fallen
in love with Rufina, and mighty desirous to acquaint her with his passion; but
the fear of scandal made him a a little reserved. He spent the whole night
without any rest, contriving how he might best make a discovery of his love to
her.

As soon as it began to dawn, he got up and soon after him Rufina, who going
into the Church belonging to the Hermitage, found him on his knees before the
Altar, which obliged her to do the like, at a little distance from him. He
thought fit to continue his devotion a while, but not without much distraction,
for he could not forbear looking on her, to such a height was his love grown in
one night. On the other side, Rufina, who was as well read in Hypocrisy as the
Hermit, was resolved to outvy him at kneeling, in which posture she continued
somewhat longer than she could have wished. At last perceiving that Crispin had
done his prayers, she also ended hers. Whereupon the holy Brother comes to her,
and said to her, Blessed be the great Preserver of Mankind, my dear Sister in
Christ, for his infinite mercies; be it his good pleasure that you may live
happily all the rest of your days, and have all those enjoyments of body and
mind you can your self desire. I pray tell me, excellent creature of God, how
you rested this night. Very well, my beloved Brother, replied she, I thank your
kindness, though the trouble I am in suffers me not to be quite free from
disquiet. There is nothing more argues a devout Soul, says Crispin, than a
sweet and humble compliance with the will of Heaven; put your confidence in him
who has numbered the hairs of your head, and doubt not but this heaviness will
be turned into joy. If it be his blessed will, it shall be so, said she, though
we see not the means how it will be effected. O excellent creature! cries out
the amorous Hermit, how highly meritorious in the sight of God is this holy
acquiescence and resignation?

Having so said, he brought her into a little room, out of which they had the
prospect of the fields, where being both sat down, Crispin began to open
himself to her in this discourse. When I seriously consider, Madam, the strange
effects of beauty, how the pursuance of it forces men into disturbances, and in
a manner transports them out of themselves, I cannot choose but pity and excuse
them, because the frailer part of man endeavors its own satisfaction, and the
heart is naturally inclined to desire that which the eye contemplates with a
certain pleasure, especially having for its object the most delightful thing
that God ever framed. You may hence take occasion to imagine, Sister, what
reflections we should make on the celestial beauties, and those supernatural
miracles which transcend the reach of our senses. When I left the world, which
was in an age not much acquainted with the wickedness of it, I proposed to my
self, as far as I could with a respect to humanity, to keep my self at as great
a distance as I could from the sight of that admirable sex, which is not
undeservedly called, the fairer half of the world; inasmuch as I have already
put away childishness, and began to entertain thoughts suitable to manhood, and
apprehended, that to be exempted from the charms of women, was a privilege
wholly angelical. I am at the present much more satisfied as to that
particular, than I could have been in that state of innocence, and I find there
is an absolute necessity I should keep out of your sight, or fall into the
snare I see the devil laying for me. The sum of this discourse, Madam, is to
show you, that beautiful faces are very dangerous, and that, since my first
sight of yours, I feel my Soul in a very great hazard. Be not startled, I
beseech you, to hear me talk after this rate; this discourse, I must confess,
is very disconsonant to the habit I have on, and the proposition I have
embraced: but these have not unmann'd me, and consequently not exempted me from
humane infirmities.

With these words there might be seen spreading over his face a certain blush,
as if he could not make the first overture of such a thing without expressing
somewhat he was never truly acquainted with, Shame. Rufina, with a counterfeit
modesty, seemed to do as much as he had: but Occasion presenting her fore-lock,
and telling her that that was the most likely way to bring about her design,
she would not give him an absolute denial, but made him this Answer. Though I
know my self not to be of their number, who, by their beauty, may engage men
into any disquiet, yet must I acknowledge, Brother Crispin, that, as to this
point, I am of your opinion; for the attractions of Beauty are so powerful,
that I my self, though a woman, am carried away therewith, as well as others,
and know not a greater pleasure, than that of seeing a handsome face, and
admiring the effects of it. And therefore I wonder not at all, that men are
reduced to some extremities, when they are passionately in love, since it is to
be imagined, that the force of beauty operates with an extraordinary influence.
Nor do I think any more worth my admiration, to see it has its effects as well
on those who are retired out of the world, as on those whose affections are
most inclined thereto, inasmuch as they have not attained a degree of
perfection purified from the dross of all humane enjoyments: And therefore, I
have reason to think my self the more obliged to the charity you have shown me,
since I understand, that your exercising of it is not without the Ioss of your
quiet, and somewhat of scandal. I could wish with all my heart, that I were not
the cause of so much trouble in the world; but in regard you are not heard by
any but my self, you need fear nothing as to that particular. You were desirous
to know the History of my Adventures, I am no less to be acquainted with yours,
and particularly to understand what might have obliged you to leave the world
so soon, to live in this solitary place, and with so great austerity. For
though I doubt not but you did it in order to the salvation of your own soul,
yet methinks I perceive in you those excellent endowments, for which you might
have been esteemed in your youth, and put off the execution of so hard a
penance till another time.

Rufina's discourse was as the counterfeit Hermit could have wished it, and
thereupon being transported with joy, he came more home to his purpose, and
told her in plain terms, that the charms of her beauty had so enchanted him,
that, from the minute she first came into his house, he had not had any rest,
he loving her as passionately as man could be imagined to love woman. Rufina,
who minded her own work, entertained the discourse with somewhat of kindness,
excusing it upon the account of humane frailty: so that giving him some hope,
that he should obtain his desires, he seemed to be the most satisfied person in
world. Rufina pretended indisposition, and for two days together kept her bed,
where she was treated by her charitable Entertainer, with the best meat could
be had for money, which was brought to the Hermitage in the night time, by his
Camerades.

It may seem somewhat strange, that Rufina should have the confidence to
continue all alone in that solitary place, with a person of whose wickedness
she had a sufficient knowledge: but she knew withal the passion he had for her,
and inferred thence, that a real Love never being without respect, she could
not imagine he would ever injure her. What further assured her, was the hope
she had put him in to treat him more kindly, when she had certain notice
brought her, that her Brother had left Malaga; besides, that the apprehension
she had lest she might be discovered, kept her from requiting, as she thought
her self obliged, the extraordinary kindness he had shown her. Thus she drew in
by degrees the Rampant Hermit, who, to further on the work, promised her to
make a diligent enquiry, by the means of his friends, whether her Brother were
at Malaga.

That night, Crispin's three intimate friends came to the Hermitage, bringing
along with them above two thousand Crowns in gold. This was the robbery they
were engaged upon, when Garay overheard their discourse in the wood. The
discovery had been made by Crispin, in a house of the City, where he was wont
to receive alms, and the rain having prevented the execution of the design
that night, they had now done their work, by thrusting a little boy into the
house where the money was, who made a shift about midnight to open the door for
them.

The three Robbers brought the money that very night to the Hermitage. Crispin,
who was unwilling they should see what female-company he had in the house,
received them in his own chamber, and treated them with a Supper. As they
supped, they discoursed of diverse things. There was among them one, who having
quitted his Studies, had engaged himself in that infamous kind of life, not
regarding his extraction, nor his endowments, which were much beyond ordinary.
This person furnished them with discourse upon all occasions; whence it came
that Crispin desired him to divert them a little, and, to drive away the time a
while after supper, to entertain them with some History or Novel, for he had
abundance of them. He pressed him the more earnestly, that Rufina might also
participate of the diversion, who, from the room where she was, might hear all
their discourse. She was very glad, to find, that Crispin was the secret
entertainer of so virtuous a Society, and immediately concluded by their
discourses, that they were the same persons, whom Garay had overheard in the
wood. The young man, whom the Hermit had entreated to tell them some story,
displayed the excellency of his wit and memory, in the relation of the ensuing
Novel.

THE SECOND NOVEL.
The Knight of the Noble Order of the Marigold.
DOn Pedro Osorio, a Gentleman of very high Quality, was born at Ville-Franche
de Vierco, an ancient City, upon the confines of Galicia. He was descended from
a very noble Family, and was brought up in his own Country, with his elder
Brother Don Fernand Osorio, and a Sister called Donna Constantia: but his
Father and Mother leaving this World ere he was full fifteen years of Age, he
was forced into that course of Life, which is commonly taken by the younger
Brothers of Noble Houses, who have not much left them, and with the little
Money he could get together, he went to trail a Pike in Flanders. He behaved
himself so gallantly there upon several occasions, that he got the Colors of a
Company of Foot, and after other successful encounters against the Dutch, he
was advanced to the Command of the same Company. Having afterward in that
Charge made yet greater demonstrations of his Conduct and Valor, his most
Serene Highness the Archduke Albert prevailed with his Majesty to bestow on
him the Order of the Knights of Alcantara, with an assurance of the first
Commandery, that should be void, belonging to that Order. Having obtained that,
he still continued his Military employments, till such time as there was a
Cessation of Arms made between the King and his Enemies of the Low Countries,
to last a year and a day. This opportunity, together with the news he received
out of Spain, of his Elder Brother's Death, obliged him to desire leave to make
a journey into his Country, where two Children his Brother had left, and his
own Sister, stood in need of his presence; the former, to be protected by him;
the latter, to be disposed of in marriage. Don Pedro arrived at Ville-Franche,
fifteen days after his Sister's departure thence for Vailladolid, where the
Court was then, with an Aunt of his, a Widow, his Father's Sister, who would
needs have her along with her; this old Lady, who had a great kindness for her,
having resolved to leave her all she had at her Death, in hopes she might with
those advantages meet with a better match.

As soon as Don Pedro was come into his Country, he took order about his
Brother's Estate, and the Tuition of his Nephews, whom he left in the custody
of an ancient Kinsman of his, whom having entrusted with the care of their
education and maintenance, he resolved to go and visit his Sister at
Vailladolid. As he was setting things in order for that Journey, passing
through the broad place of Ville-Franche, he saw abundance of people, going
toward an Inn, which was at the end of it, accompanying two Litters, in one
whereof there was an old Gentleman, and, in that which followed, a young Lady,
whose transcendent Beauty, heightened by the sumptuousness of her attire,
ravished the eyes and hearts of all that saw her, but above all those of Don
Pedro. He was so enflamed by that transient sight of her, that, covering with
his Cloak the Order he was of, he followed the Litter, so transported out of
himself, that he reflected not on what those who observed him might say of his
demeanor. He saw her lighting at the Inn-gate; and if he was before raised
into a kind of astonishment at the beauty of her Face, he was now no less, at
the handsomeness of her Body, the magnificence of her Clothing, and the
sweetness of her Complexion. In a word, he was reduced to such an extremity by
the passion he immediately felt in himself for her, that he made enquiry, and
set himself to find out, who that miracle of perfections might be, which had so
of a sudden surpised his Heart, and attained so absolute a disposal of his
Liberty. He was soon satisfied as to that particular, for, meeting with one of
her Servants going from the Inn toward the Marketplace, he with much civility
asked him, who that old Gentleman was, and whither he was then going? The
other, who understood civility well enough, returned him this Answer, The
Gentleman, whose name you are so desirous to know, and who is my Master, is
called the Marquess Rodolfo, a person of the highest Rank next to Sovereign
Princes, who comes into Spain, an Ordinary Ambassador, from the Emperor of
Germany, to his most Catholic Majesty the King of Spain. He brings along with
him his beautiful Daughter, the Lady Margaret, to be married to Leopoldus, his
Excellency's Nephew, who is at the present at Vailladolid, a Gentleman of
extraordinary worth, who in the flower of his Youth left Germany, to go and see
foreign Countries, attended only by four Servants. He has traveled over all
France, England, and Italy, and is now resolved to make his abode in Spain,
having already continued some time at the Court, with a very great Train. He
has a House magnificently furnished, and is very highly in favor with his
Catholic Majesty, and well respected by all the Nobility about the Court; nay
his generosity and excellent conversation have acquired him the esteem of all
the greatest persons in this Country. This marriage of Signor Leopoldus had
been treated of in Germany, with this Lady Margaret, the only Daughter of my
Master, who leaving his Country upon his being honored by the Emperor with
the present Embassy, has solicited the business with greater earnestness; so
that his Imperial Majesty seems desirous that this Match should go forward. We
came by Sea, but had such distress of Weather, that we were like to be cast
away several times. While we were in that danger, my Master, a Gentleman much
inclined to Devotion, made a Vow that if he escaped, through the intercession
of the glorious Patron of Spain, (for whom he has a particular Devotion) he
would visit the place where his sacred Body lies buried, so well known all over
the World for the great Miracles daily done there. Being come to Vailladolid,
my Master continued there fifteen days, during which time all things were
agreed upon in order to the Marriage. That great affair being concluded, he
would needs perform his Vow, and go to Saint James's. His Nephew Leopoldus is
not come along with him, but stays at Vailladolid, to send to Rome for the
Dispensation, for the Lady Margaret and Signor Leopoldus are Cousin-Germans.
Thus Sir, I think I have satisfied your desire, as to the question you put to
me.

Don Pedro gave the Servant very great thanks for the account he had given him
of his Master, and assured him he would requite his kindness, if it lay in his
power, and so took leave. This discourse happened after night, as they walked
over the Marketplace, it being so dark as that the Marquess's Servant could
not take any particular notice of Don Pedro, who did all he could to avoid
being discovered. The account he had received, that the Beauty, which had
stolen away his heart at the first sight, was already engaged, and, within a
short time to be married, caused him to return home a much sadder Man than he
had left it. This affliction, with the love which he already had for her,
bereaved him of all rest. That very night, he would needs go and see the
Marquess and his Daughter at Supper, yet so as that he might not be perceived
by them. The master of the House placed him so as that be might see all at his
ease, yet not be seen himself; and this was to leap out of the drying pan into
the fire. The next day, the Marquess went thence, so as that Don Pedro saw not
the Lady Margaret any more that time: nor was he much troubled at it, for
having in the night advised with his pillow, to find out some remedy for his
disquier, he found it necessary, that he should not be seen, either by the
Marquess, or his Daughter, or any one belonging to them, that he might the
better compass a design which only Love could inspire him withal.

The Kingdom of Galicia is very full of mountains, and consequently the way to
Saint James's must be troublesome to travel, so that the Marquess could make
but short Journeys, whence Don Pedro inferred, that he could not be back in
less than twenty days; presuming he would make some abode at Compostella, to do
his devotions, and refresh himself, ere he set out for his return. Accordingly,
be disposed of his affairs in order to the design he had bethought himself of,
and, taking leave of all his acquaintance, he went to Pont-ferrada, a Town
which lay four Leagues further from the Court than Ville-Franche. He took up
his Quarters at an Inn, whence he stirred not in the daytime, but only took
the air a little in the night, yet with such a caution not to be known to any,
that he discovered himself to none of the Inhabitants, but only his Landlord,
whom he acquainted with his quality, and the design had brought him thither. He
was attended only by one Servant, whose fidelity and courage he had many years
experienced, for he had served him as a Soldier, and waited on him, from the
time of his first departure from Ville-Franche. Felician (so was this faithful
Servant named) perceiving his Master more melancholy than he had been wont to
be, and that somewhat kept him from resting in the night, for he heard him
disquietly turning in his bed, and sighing ever and anon, he imagined that the
cause of his disturbance was not at Pontferrada, inasmuch as if it had been, he
would not have failed, night or day, to discover by his visits, what could not
be known by his disquiets and sighs. Thus this discreet Lover not discovering
any thing of his secret passion, Felician could not ghess at the occasions
which bred such a distraction in his mind: nay though he did all lay in his
power to pry into it, yet could he never meet with any satisfaction. One day,
finding his Master all alone, and not able to endure that reserv'dness in him
any longer, he thus spoke to him.

I should never have imagined, Sir, that you could be guilty of so great a
closeness toward a servant, whom you have ever found faithful, and to love you
even beyond his own life. You have heretofore thought me worthy the knowledge
of your most important secrets; pardon me, if I presume to tell you, that your
silence now gives me just cause to conceive, that you have not the same
thoughts of me, and that I must be guilty of some crime, whereof I have not my
self the least apprehension. Wherein, I pray, Sir, may I have offended you? You
must needs harbor some ill thoughts of me, since you conceal from me the
disquiets which deprive you of all appetite to meat or rest. Sure they proceed
from Love, or I am mightily mistaken. You close not your eyes all night, and
spend the day in retirement, avoiding all society, and giving your self up to
perpetual solitude, and melancholy; which I am extremely troubled to see. You
have left your Country, telling your friends that you were going to Court;
whereas you continue in an obscure place, where you are afraid to be known.
It Is impossible for me to forbear grieving at it, as long as I am ignorant of
the cause thereof. Pardon my curiosity, Sir, which however impertinent, is an
argument of my faith and readiness to serve you. I know it to be the duty of a
good and faithful Servant, punctually and implicitly to obey the commands of
his Master, without insinuating himself further into his secrets, than he is
willing he should be acquainted therewith. I have hitherto kept my self within
those bounds, and have so lived with you as that I fear not any reproach you
can make me. But now at last, my ancient fidelity gives me the boldness to ask
you, what business may have brought you to this place; what occasions your
disquiet, and what you intend to do in this obscure Inn, where you admit not of
any enjoyments? Have you a greater confidence of the happy Master of this
House, whom you have known but within these four days, than of an old Servant,
of whose zeal and fidelity you have had so many experiences? You have
heretofore thought my advice worth the asking, nay have followed it, in things,
for ought I know, of as great importance as this is.

Felician having thus ended his complaint, his Master conceived himself obliged
to make him some Answer, which was this. Felician, I must confess, I have
looked on thee, and that justly, as my friend, a title I may well allow one who
has shared with me, in war, the dangers, in peace, the enjoyments I have been
engaged in. It is a very hard thing, not to say impossible, that any man
should, in the disposal of himself, take a course contrary to that intended him
by Heaven; though it be said, that a wise man shall have dominion over the
Stars, that is (as Astrologers expound it) humane Prudence shall elude the
decrees of Fate. I am born to love a Beauty, which surprising my heart, has
withal possessed it self of all the faculties of my Soul. I find my self no
longer Master of my own liberty, that I am not able to make the least disposal
of my will, and so it were a madness for me, to oppose the inclination, whereto
the sovereign Powers have made me subject. I suffer my self to be foolishly
carried away by my passion, though I know well enough that I attempt a thing
absolutely impossible, and beyond my strength. This is the cause of my
disquiet, musing, and melancholy, spending the nights without rest, and the day
in solitude, suffering a thousand asflictions which I cannot express, and
loving where I am not to hope the least return of Love, by reason of an
invincible obstacle that lies in my way. This is that destroys my enjoyments,
and poisons all my joy. I have seen that divine Beauty, that mortal Angel, that
prodigy of miracles, who passed through our Town with her Father the Marquess
Rodolfo: the excellent endowments she is Mistress of, and which thou may have
admired as well as my self, are all the excuse I can allege for the blindness
of my passion; but they feed it not with any hope. There is an obstacle lies
between me and the possession of her, which I shall find it impossible to
remove. This transcendent Beauty is already made sure to a Gentleman of great
worth, who is her Cousin-germane, named Leopoldus, and methinks I see her
ready to join hands with him. I hear such high commendations of his excellent
parts, that I find the little hope I had ready to leave me. I love her, or to
say better, I adore her, and if I may judge by the present agitations of my
heart, I may say, it will never be disengaged from the passion I have for her.
I know it is madness in me to think of her, and that I cannot, without
extravagance, ever hope she may be mine, to the disappointment of a young Lord,
who, with the advantages of blood, has all those of nature. Nay I think it
almost impossible to find out some means to acquaint her with my Love, and to
get a Letter conveyed to her. I know that the houses of Osorio, Toledo,
Astorga, and Ville-Franche, whence I derive my extraction, are not inferior to
those of Rodolfo or Leopoldus, and consequently that I am as nobly descended as
she is; that would not be the greatest obstacle, if I could but make my self
known at Court. I hear that she intends thither, when she returns from her
pilgrimage; I have but three months to carry on this business, which is the
time requisite to get the dispensation from Rome. I have a long time considered
with my self of the means, how I might get access to her, and that I conceive
the most likely to take, is to counterfeit, what indeed is but too real, a
certain distraction of mind. By acting the mad-man's part, I might so disguise
my extravagancies, as that the Father, pleased with my humor, may happily carry
me along with him to the Court. This certainly is a design fantastic enough,
and not only contrary to my quality, but absolutely opposite to the opinion I
should endeavor to raise my self in the world. I have a certain confidence,
that at Court I shall be known to very few, because I have been a long time out
of Spain. Besides these considerations, the habit I will put on, being
altogether extravagant, I shall be so disguised, that my nearest friends and
relations will hardly know me. If, by this means, I can get into the Marquess's
house, I shall hope the plot will take. For I have heard this Lady is not fully
satisfied with the marriage, having understood that her Cousin is a person of a
debauched life, and inclined to Women; and that she admits of his addresses
only out of obedience to her Father. I have communicated my design to the
Master of the house, as being a discreet person, who may serve me, and puts me
in hope to get me into the Marquess's service, when he comes to give him an
account of my pleasant extravagancies, as we have already agreed together.
Thus, my dear Felician, have I given thee a faithful character of my self, thou
know now as much as I do, as well of my affliction, as my love; mistrust not
the confidence I have of thee, and assist me with all thy wit and industry, or
expect ere long to be a witness of my departure out of this world.

Felician, out of compliance with his Master, approved of the project, though
he doubted much the success of it. He saw his Master was too far transported to
receive any prudent advice; so that he promised to assist him according to the
design he had laid to get access to his Mistress, and troubled not his thoughts
with any thing but how to compass it. It was his business therefore to get
clothes made for Don Pedro, suitable to his extravagance. He put him into a
Cassock after the old fashion, with puffs at the sleeves of green cloth, and
large skirts, a Cloak somewhat like a Rocket, very short, and a Milan Cap, of
green Plush. Being thus disguised, he changed his quarters, and went to the
Host's Brother's house, who also must of necessity be acquainted with the
secret. All this could not be done without some yellow pieces, whereof he had
brought good store out of Flanders, with some Jewels of value he had gotten by
gaming, at which he was very fortunate.

About this time the Marquess, with the beautiful Lady his Daughter, were upon
their return from their pilgrimage. Before they got to Pontferrada, the beams
of his Litter broke, so that he was forced to come to the Town on horseback,
and to stay there two days, while the Litter was mended. The Marquess took up
the same Inn where Don Pedro had lodged, as being the best in the Town. The
Host being taught what he had to say to the Marquess, for the furtherance of
Don Pedro's design, soon met with an opportunity to do it. For, as most persons
of Quality, when they travel, are very inquisitive to know what is rare or
remarkable at the places through which they pass, the Marquess desirous to hear
what there might be at Pontferrada, called for the Host. Having traveled
several times before into Spain, he spoke the Language very well, was a very
sociable person, and glad of company.

The Host being come into the room, he began to ask him concerning the
Antiquities of the Town, the illustrious Families had lived in it, the
dispositions of the Inhabitants, the beauty of the Ladies, and such
particulars: wherein the Host satisfied him, giving him a very exact account of
all he knew. Among the antiquities and remarkable things of the Town, he came
to speak of Don Pedro, telling such stories of him as might raise a desire in
the Marquess to see him. There is come, said he to him, within these fifteen
days, a very rare person to this Town, fantastically clad in a green stuff; but
there is a greater extravagance in his behavior than there is in his clothes,
and yet in the height of his distraction, there may be observed certain shadows
of understanding and staiedness which render him excellent good company. Being
asked by some of our Inhabitants, who he was, I am, said he, Son to the River
Sil, which passes by the walls of this Town, and descended from one of the most
illustrious Families of Galicia. He expects to be treated with your Honor, and
your Lordship, in discourse, though he is known by the title of Knight of the
Noble Order of the Marigold. The fooleries he tells to make good the title he
assumes, are so ridiculous, that they force Laughter from the most melancholy.
He seldom comes out of his Lodging, feeds high, and we cannot imagine whence
he should have means to live at that rate. He has a Servant to wait on him,
who knows the length of his foot, and complies with him in his madness, either
for his advantage, or that he has a soft place in his Head, as well as his
Master; and I think them both very well worth your notice. I wonder the Knight
has not been yet to wait on your Excellency; for he is mighty desirous to
converse with Strangers, and finds them out as soon as he hears of their
arrival.

The Marquess was much pleased with this Relation of the Host, and desired him
to bring him acquainted with that noble Knight. The fair Lady Margaret
expressed also a desire to see him, for she had been present at the Host's
discourse. He gladly satisfied them, being overjoyed the Prologue of the
design had taken so well. He went to his Brother's to fetch him, having before
told the Ambassador, that he must treat him honorably, if he expected to make
any sport with him; inasmuch as, being extremely self-conceited in his madness,
he would be put out of all humor, if he were entertained with any dis-respect,
or indifference.

The Marquess, who was a person naturally inclined to mirth and civility,
promised him he would observe his directions. Whereupon the Host marches away
for Don Pedro, who came into the room very humorously in his fool's coat,
making wry mouths, and some fantastic gestures, the introduction to his future
extravagance. The Ambassador, how serious soever he would appear, as being
obliged by his quality to dissemble, could not forbear Laughing, to see him in
that equipage, attended by Felician, who, on the other side, acted very well
the part had been given him. He went to receive him at the Chamber Door, with
this complement; Welcome to the noblest piece of Gallantry that ever Spain saw;
welcome the mirror of all the brave Knights that ever were celebrated for
their heroic Actions. The News your Excellency tells me, replies Don Pedro,
deserves not the reward may be expected for it: you are extremely mistaken, if
you think your self the first of those who have admired Nature's prodigality
toward me in excellent parts and endowments. Give me the favor at least,
answers the Marquess, to be one of the most faithful witnesses thereof, which
no doubt I shall, if you please but to honor me a while with your sweet
company. For as a rich Diamond pleases all the world, so the attractions of
your countenance, and the transcendent insinuation of your behavior forces the
admiration of all that see you.

Don Pedro was by this time got near the fair Lady Margaret, whereupon looking
with a certain astonishment on her miraculous Beauty, My Lord Marquess, said he
to him, I beseech you forbear at present the praises you are pleased to give
me, for it were to profane those which are due to this excellent creature. I
pray let me know whether she be your Daughter, for if she be, you will be much
concerned in the Elogies I shall give this -- this -- this -- (well) Miracle.
Her coming into the world was to embellish our Hemisphere, to supply Cupid with
fresh Darts, to become the Lodestone of Hearts, the delight of the Eyes, the
astonishment of the Universe, the masterpiece of Heaven, and the miracle of
Nature. By the Noble Order of Knight-wood I am of, I swear, that the very
minute I first cast my Eye on this accomplished Beauty, I found my heart was
grown rebellious, and no longer mine; my will bereay'd of all freedom; and my
soul become absolutely her Slave. In a word, Sir, I think my self somewhat
different from what I was before, and the more I feel my self, the more I am
astonished at the strange Metamorphosis. The commendations you give me,
renowned Knight, replies the Lady, smell too much of slattery: I am confident
you do not your self believe one half of what you have said, and therefore it
will be hard for you to persuade me to it. You consider not that you act
against your own Sentiment, when you speak against your Conscience. I should
never advise a Gallant, who would raise himself an esteem with the Ladies, to
hazard his own disappointment by so ill a Prologue; for to give undeserved
praises breeds a suspicion of imperfections; and to be forced to the belief of
falsehood brings truth into question. The truth, I tell you, replies the amorous
Extravagant, is such, so pure, so clear, and so far from all suspicion of being
otherwise, that you shall ever find it as plainly in my Mouth as in your own
Looking-glass. Be not so hasty, honorable Knight, says the Lady to him, be
pleased to take a Chair, for we desire to discourse with you at leisure. Were
it Heaven's pleasure, Madam, says Don Pedro, as soon as he was sat, that I
might ever continue near you: but I see the honor you are pleased to do me
will be but short, and my joy soon be over, for I understand, that within two
days you leave this place, and if you go without me, I shall dye out of pure
grief. In the mean time, give me leave to look on this mansion as the Empyreal
heaven, since so great a Deity has honored it with her presence. We forget
all civility, says the Marquess, when we fall into other discourse, before you
have first entertained us with your own noble adventures, that we may thereby
know what respects we ought to pay your worth. There is not any due to me Sir,
replies the disguised Cavalier; but that the service, I have vowed you, may be
the better received, I will give you an account of my extraction, and relate
you the perfect history of my Life hitherto: be pleased to afford your
attention to what I shall say.

The Kingdom of Galicia was heretofore governed by Counts, and afterward by
Kings. Gondomar reigned in that time, and continued a Widdower after the burial
of his first Wife, by whom he had no other Children but the Infanta,
Theodomira, who coming to reign after him was called the VVenching-Queen. She
fell in love with the Gallant Ricaredo, one of the richest and prope est
persons in the Kingdom. He ever kept about the Court, and was a Kinsman,
though somewhat afar off, to the King, but his principal Favorite, by which
means he had access into the Queen's chamber, and got of her that favor
whereby Mankind is propagated. I proved to be the issue of that amorous Union,
and the good hour of my birth happened at a time that the King chanced to be at
his Daughter's lodging. The pains of Childbirth surpised her, and being a
Novice in such adventures, she could not dissemble her Labor, even in the
presence of her Father, who imagined it was some other accident had happened to
her. Her Women holp her to Bed, not knowing the disease that troubled her; but
not long after I came into the world, it seems, to run through all the
misfortunes that have happened to me since. Being received into the world by a
faithful Servant, who knew of my Mother's Loves, she took me in her Lap, to be
delivered to a Brother of hers, who was also acquainted with the business. As
she went out of the Infanta's Lodgings, she meets with the King, going to visit
his Daughter. She was afraid his curiosity would have egged him on to examine
what she had in her Lap; which made her turn back of a sudden, and, by a secret
pair of stairs, go down into the Garden, where having disposed me into a little
wicker Basket, she put me into the River Sil, which ran by the wall thereof,
and told the Infanta that she had delivered me to her Brother, as they had
resolved. I was carried awhile on the Crystal waves of that clear River, but
at last, the water growing somewhat rough, I sunk, and was received into the
arms of the God of that River, who encompassed by his fair Nymphs, conducted me
into his own Crystal palace. You may happily imagine this discourse a feigned
story taken out of the inventions of the Poets; but give me leave to assure
you, that the business happened no otherwise than as I tell you.

I was brought up by the Nymphs in that secret Mansion, and instructed by the
God of the River, who wished I might prove worthy so noble an education. He
caused me to be instructed in all manner of Sciences, and spared no pains to
make me an accomplished person. I learnt three or four Languages, but
particularly the Latin above any of the other. Being arrived to the twentieth
year of my Age, Love, to show his omnipotency, and that all places are under
his jurisdiction, caused his flames to fasten on me even through the water. In
that Virginal company of Nymphs, there was one, for whom the God of that watery
habitation had a particular esteem; and she deserved it, for she very much
excelled all her Companions; her name was Anacarsia. Her endowments were
extraordinary, and her beauty beyond all comparison. In complexion and stature
she came somewhat near this fair Lady your Daughter, and had the same advantage
over the rest of the Nymphs, as the Delphick Torch has over the other Planets.
She played excellently well on all kinds of Instruments; to sum up all in a
word, she was a prodigy of all perfections. I fell so passionately in love with
this beauty that I had not a minute's rest, from the time that little Deity had
wounded my heart, with the mortal darts of her sparkling Eyes. I found it a
hard business to discover my love to her, in regard I could never meet her
alone. She was perpetually haunted by some of those who lived in that Crystal
palace; they followed her every where, and would never be out of her sight. But
one day, when all the other Nymphs were gone to a Musick-meeting, at which were
also to be read certain Lectures of Poesy, being the ordinary divertisements
of the God of that River, the divine Anacarsia purposely pretended some
indisposition, to give me an opportunity to speak with her. She sent me notice
of it, by one who came to tell me from her, that she kept her Bed only for my
sake, than which I could not have expected a kinder complement from one of her
Sex. I went to her chamber, and found her carelessly laid on a Bed of Moss,
exceeding in whiteness the fine Sheets she lay on, and disputing as to splendour
and light, with the Sun, who then beheld her. I was startled at the sight of so
many charms, and was upon the point of losing all Sentiment, an effect natural
enough in those who are truly touched with love. But recovering my self a while
after, though still much troubled, and my tongue but as it were newly loosned,
I took the confidence to make this discourse to her.

Adorable Nymph, the glory of these deep Habitations, but the unavoidable Rack
of those hearts, which are captivated by your Beauty, my soul, since the first
time I saw you, is absolutely disposed to serve you; I have no further power
over her, she is wholly yours, and glories in her slavery. Treat her as a thing
belongs to you, and as I have vowed her to you with an inviolable fidelity. You
have done me an extraordinary favor in allowing me to declare the amorous
passion I have for you: may I further hope that you will allay it, and if I
should be admitted to that degree of felicity, should I not be the happiest and
the most glorious of all men?

The fair Anacarsia infinitely pleased with so obliging a discourse, and the
worth she observed in me, highly honored me with her affection, and compli'd
with my amorous desires, in such sweet and melting expressions, as put me in
hopes of the happy accomplishment of my Love. But it was not long ere our
discourse was interrupted by the God of the River, who finding neither of us at
the Meeting, came straight to her Chamber, and slunk in so softly, that he
overheard some part of our amorous conference; which so incensed him against
me, that he immediately resolved to give a check to my presumption. He laid
siege, with his clear waters, to the chamber of Anacarsia, and ere he had quite
damm'd up the door, he cast me out with such violence, that I was got to the
bank of the River. I presently heard a voice saying unto me, Guadomarus, thou
art descended from Kings, though it be a long time since they have had Scepters
in their hands; Princes of another Family have displaced them. Thou art born a
Pagan, choose what Law thou think best; if thou will follow my advice, thou will take that which is observed in this Kingdom, under which lived thy
illustrious Ancestors. I have justly banished thee out of my dominions, because
it was not fit I should suffer profane love to be made to a Nymph who had vowed
her chastity to me, as I had mine to her. I have promised her my protection and
assistance in all things. Keep henceforward within thy Kingdom, and assure thy
self I wish thy good and advancement, so far am I from doing thee any
discourtesie. Whithersoever Fortune shall dispose of thee, be confident, thou will not be out of the reach of my care.

With those words the waters of the River seemed to stir themselves into a
gentle curl, which being presently laid, it became as smooth as it had been
before. I immediately found my self (by what adventure I know not) in a
Kitchin-garden, in the midst of a bed of Marigolds, which I looked on as a good
Omen, and thought my self obliged to derive my name thence. Afterward, at my
baptism, I took the name of Peter Gil of Galicia, taking the surname from the
Kingdom which had been heretofore in the possession of my Predecessors, who
have been dead these four hundred years, as I have found in History. Besides
that name I have taken as an additional title, that of Knight of the noble
Order of the Marigold; I have assumed it my self, for an illustrious Hero, as I
am, may be his own Herald, and by what appellations he pleases raise himself
above the sphere of the common sort of people.

Thus have I given your Excellence an account who I am, and discovered to you
my true Original. If the qualities and endowments I own, deserve the Honor to
be received into your alliance, give me leave, O most illustrious Marquess, to
make my addresses to this super-celestial Beauty, this Miracle of our age, whom
Nature was humorously pleased to frame for the delight of the eyes, and torment
of hearts. I only expect your good will, give it me, I beseech you, and
thereby satisfy my extraordinary passion. I think you so generous, that you
will not deny it me, if you consider, that granting it not, you bereave me of
my life, which you know is the most illustrious of any in Europe; and are
consequently satisfied, that the world, losing in me, the most renowned Knight
it ever had, must withal lose the worthiest Kinsman of his Catholic Majesty
King Philip.

He delivered these last words with such pleasant gestures, the better to
express the violence of his passion, that both the Marquess and his Daughter
had much ado to forbear laughing. Felician was astonished to see the force of
that passion, which, of an accomplished Gentleman, made a ridiculous
laughing stock; and could turn a person of eminent parts and judgment, one not
long before consulted in Flanders as an Oracle, into a counterfeit Extravagant.
For if he had not pretended the loss of his wits, he had lost all the hopes of
his love; and he could not have gotten near so fair a Lady upon any account but
that of madness.

The Marquess composing his countenance to more seriousness, returned him this
Answer. Signor Don Pedro Gill, the most illustrious, and only Knight of the
Noble Order of the Marigold, I am extremely pleased with the knowledge you have
given me of your person, and the account you have entertained me with of your
miraculous birth and noble education. Had a person, less illustrious than your
self, acquainted me therewith, I should have mistrusted his discourse, and
imagined he told me fables: but a person of your worth and quality ought to be
credited in all things. What further confirms me in the truth thereof is, that,
he is no less then a Prince who speaks to me. Believe me, I have a great
respect for your rare Qualities, and such an honor for your person, that I
would assure you my own is wholly at your service. I have that esteem for your
friendship, that I shall endeavor the continuance of it while I live. I wish
my self a natural Inhabitant of this Kingdom, that I might have the greater
opportunities to further your satisfaction. I shall stay here but till such
time as his Imperial Majesty shall send order for my return; but during the
abode I shall make here, command me in any thing lies in my power. As for the
permission you desire to make your addresses to my Daughter, I from this time
give it you, and I allow her to accept of it, and to entertain you kindly: but
she is already made sure to a Cousin of hers, and I have sent to Rome for a
Dispensation, which once come, the Marriage will be concluded. This obstacle
lies in your way, and you will find it a hard matter to remove it. I am sorry I
had not the happiness of your acquaintance before; for how gladly would I have
embraced the honor of having a Son-in-law of your worth and quality, and to
see my Family allied to the Blood Royal of Galicia? The end of most Courtships
is Marriage; of yours you see it cannot be. To address your self to my Daughter
upon any other account, I know you would not; the husband she expects is a
person of so much gallantry, as not to receive any such affront.

The disguised Extravagant broke forth into great resentments upon his obliging
discourse, which made excellent sport for all that were present. But having
laughed their fill, the Marquess and his Daughter could not forbear making
charitable reflections on that strange kind of distraction. It pitied them to
see a Gentleman every way so accomplished, fallen into such unheard of
extravagancies, as to allege himself descended from a River, and brought up in
it, five hundred years before. While some that were present, purposely to urge
him to speak, opposed the stories he had told them, and he endeavored to give
them satisfaction, the Marquess acquainted his Daughter with a thing had come
into his mind, which was to carry Don Pedro along with them to the Court, it
being likely he would find them excellent sport by the way. They resolved to
treat him as a Person of eminent quality, having understood by his Servant,
that he was really such, and that upon his recovery out of a great sickness,
that madness had seized him. The Lady Margaret was very well content, leaving
it to some other time to acquaint him therewith. Don Pedro Gil coming to take
his leave of the Marquess said to him, That since he was so unhappy as not to
deserve his fair Daughter's hand, in the quality of a Husband, he would allow
him to love her with a virtuous Love, such as even her Husband should not
disapprove. The Marquess gave way, desiring him to honor him with his company
at supper that night, for that he had somewhat to communicate unto him. Don
Pedro gladly accepted the proffer, and thereupon they parted.

The Marquess and his people talked very much of Don Pedro, wondering at the
strange kind of madness he was fallen into. He acquainted them with the design
he had to take him along to the Court. The Master of the house where he was
lodged happening to be then present, told him, that he doubted Don Pedro Gill
would hardly be persuaded thereto, if the Marquess treated him as an inferior;
for he was mighty self-conceited, and stood much upon his honor; but if he
were willing, there would arise another difficulty in the manner of his
traveling; in regard, said he to him, your Excellency going by Litter, I think
he would be loath to go by horse. We Will find an expedient for that, says the
Marquess, which is, that my Daughter, as his Mistress, shall command him to
entertain her at the side of her Litter; for if his love continues, he will be
glad of the opportunity; and he shall have an excellent horse, richly
harnass'd, which I have led after me, to ride on when I am weary of the Litter.

Don Pedro, who had been acquainted with all these discourses, failed not to
come to supper, to which he had been invited. The Marquess received him very
civilly, and caused a chair to be set for him, near his Daughter, which he
thought a very signal favor. They talked of diverse things, the Marquess
finding he had an excellent wit in his intervals, which ever closed with some
pleasant extravagance. They were very merry at supper, and were obliged for
their diversion to the merry discourses of Don Pedro. At last, the cloth being
taken away, the Marquess broke his mind to him in these words.

It Is a thousand pities, most renowned Knight, that a person so accomplished as
you are, and one furnished with all the excellent endowments that recommend men
to the favor and esteem of Princes, should as it were defy their Courts, and
spend your time and talents in such an obscure place as this is. I have heard
that the reason of this your retirement is, that you have not means to live
sutably to your condition and the rank you should maintain. If it be so, give
me leave to propose an expedient to you, out of the particular esteem I have
for your Signory. I shall take it for a very great favor, if you will be
pleased to go along with me to Valladolid, where you shall be treated, in my
Quarters, with all the submissions and respects due to a person of your
quality, yet so as that it shall not cost you any thing. By this means coming
to be known, and your worth spreading it self, you may meet with a rich wife,
of some illustrious Family; wherein my Daughter may do you a kindness, in
regard she, having occasion to see many of them, will advance you into her
favor, for whom you have most inclination. Let me obtain of your Knighthood
the favor I desire of you; live freely with us, since you would have me
believe, that the love you bear my Daughter is pure and sincere; I will
undertake it shall be kindly taken by the Husband she hopes to have. I expect
your Answer to this particular, and I desire it may be consonant to the esteem
I have for your worth.

Don Pedro was extremely satisfied, that the Imposture had taken so well, and
immediately apprehended, that, living in the house with the Marquess, he should
be near her whom he adored, which was the main end of his desires; whereupon he
returned him this Answer. No temptation in the world should have forced my
removal from this place, but the extraordinary Civilities I have received from
your Excellency. I had resolved to spend the rest of my days in this
retirement, as conceiving it the best course for a person of my Quality, whose
Revenues are much below his Honor, to confine himself to some place, where he
is not much known, and so avoid the charge of Servants and Clothes. But the
respects you are pleased to have for me, together with this transcendent
Beauty, who, by the forcible attractions of her divine countenance, draws
hearts after her, as the Thracian Orpheus did living creatures, stones and
plants, by the harmonious sound of his Harp, have made me wholly at your
service. I shall not trouble either you or my self to tell you how persons of
my Quality ought to be treated, as thinking it enough, that I have already
acquainted you with my Titles, and particularly that I am of the Blood Royal.
The greatest favor you can ever do me, is, that you command me to wait on your
Daughter, which if you do, I shall the more willingly accept of the proffer you
are pleased to make me.

The Marquess finding him willing to go along with them, all that remained to
be done was to persuade him to do it on horseback, which he was content to do,
that he might the better entertain his Mistress at the side of her Litter. Don
Pedro helped the Lady into her Litter, being proud in his mind at that
introduction of his service to her, and that he had the happiness to take her
by the fair hand, continuing his attendance on her from their departure from
Pontferrada, till they came to Valladolid. All the way along, he entertained
her with pleasant discourses, intermixed with amorous expressions, and at every
Inn they came to, she failed not to give her Father an account of the divertive
discourses she had had with Don Pedro.

The last day of their Journey, Don Pedro would needs feel the pulse of his
Mistress as to her intended Marriage, and endeavored to discover how she was
inclined thereto. He brought the business upon the Stage, so dexterously, as
that she might not suspect him guilty of any impertinent curiosity. It is
commonly observed that persons any way afflicted are apt to break their minds
to any people, but especially to those with whom they are familiarly
acquainted. Accordingly, to ease her own thoughts, and satisfy Don Pedro, she
made him this Answer. Worthy Knight of the most honorable Order of the
Marigold, I must needs acknowledge, that my Cousin Leopoldus is a person
endowed with all the Qualities, capable to raise a Woman's Love to the highest
pitch, but I have withal discovered him to be so fickle, and one so naturally
inclined to address himself to all sorts of Women, not regarding whether they
be nobly or meanly descended, that it very much cools my affection toward him,
and makes me fear his alliance, though I find my self sufficiently inclined
thereto, could I perceive any likelihood of his reforming himself of that
insufferable humor. But, far from that, since my coming into Spain, when he
should have endeavored to give me greater assurances of his affection, I find
him as indifferent as to my satisfaction as ever: and God knows with what
apprehensions I am induced to condescend to this Match. For if I am now
frightened at the thoughts of his mis-carriages, what must I not fear, when he
shall become my Master? The obedience I owe my Father, and the necessity I find
that this Marriage should be concluded, for the composure of some differences
in our Family, make me wholly passive in the business, and so content it should
go forward. I admit of his Addresses not without some violence to my own
inclination, and all I can do, is to pray Heaven, that it would inspire him
with better resolutions.

Don Pedro could have wished that she had not been so resolute, as she seemed
to be. He therefore, though then personating a Fool, answered her as a wise
Man, and advised her to bear a while with the failings of her Cousin. Despair
not, Madam, said he to her, but Don Leopoldus may become another Man, and that
if he be such as you describe him now, that volatile humor will be fixed in
him, when he shall come to be possessed of so fair and accomplished a Lady. But
he resolved, upon the first opportunity should present it self, to express his
mind to her in other terms, and to make a full discovery of himself to his
Mistress.

They came that day to Valladolid, and Leopoldus met them half a days Journey
short of it. He was very kindly received both of the Marquess and his Daughter,
whereat the disguised Don Pedro was not a little troubled: for finding Don
Leopoldus a very graceful person, he began to entertain some doubts of the
success of his enterprise. The Marquess thought fit to make him acquainted with
Don Pedro, that, by the Character he gave him, he might accordingly treat him.
Nephew, said he to him, I pray take notice of this noble Cavalier, who has
honored us with his company from Galicia, for his person, and the rare
qualities he is Master of are such as deserve the highest esteem. I desire you
to respect him accordingly, and assure your self all you do will be below his
merit, not only upon the account of the Royal Blood from which he is
descended, but also the Romantic title he assumes to himself, of Knight of the
honorable Order of the Marigold. He pretends a jurisdiction over all those
places where ever any of that Herb grows, and never sees it, but he thinks of
the complexion of a Mistress he once had, who spent most of her time in
Kitchin-Gardens, in one whereof it was Love's pleasure to make him a Captive to
her Beauty, as she was gathering some Marigolds.

This description made Don Leopoldus take a particular notice of Don Pedro, and
he doubted not, as well by his accoutrements, as by the fantastic title he had
taken to himself, to conclude him a most transcendent Extravagant, and that, as
such, they had entertained him into their Company. Accordingly, to comply with
his Uncle, he made this complement to Don Pedro. Most honorable Knight of the
Marigold, I shall receive your acquaintance with as great satisfaction as I
should do that of the greatest Monarch in the world, and think my self
infinitely obliged to you, that, being a person of such extraordinary parts,
you were pleased to honor the Marquess my Uncle, and my Cousin, with your
company so far out of your own territories. In acknowledgement of that noble
favor, be pleased to accept the proffer I make to you of ever being your most
affectionate and most humble Servant, than which I cannot expect a higher
relation to you, when I consider the character my Uncle has been pleased to
give you.

Don Pedro returned him his most humble thanks, and said to him, I have so high
an esteem for whatsoever this fair Lady is concerned in, that I shall make it
my business to sacrifice all you think most excellent in me to her satisfaction
and yours, as long as it shall please his Excellency to give me leave to be of
his retinue. How, replies Leopoldus, may we expect that further happiness as to
enjoy your company for some time? I see no reason you have to be so glad of it,
replies the Marquess, for you are to know, that Don Pedro Gil is fallen deeply
in love with your Cousin, and that it is his affection has occasioned this
acquaintance, though he has assured me, that, since he understood she was
designed for you, that Love is turned into a pure fraternal friendship, and
under that innocent passion he endeavors to oblige her what lies in his power.
Be pleased to take my further assurance of it, says Don Pedro, that no thought
of that may break your rest; for that consideration laid aside, I should think
my self capable to raise a jealousy even in Narcissus himself, were he now
alive: for I dare, without any vanity, affirm it, that there is not a person in
the world may be compared to me either as to gracefulness of body; or
accomplishments of mind. I am sufficiently convinced of the truth of what you
say, says Leopoldus, though I have not known you long: and therefore wholly
relying on the promise you make me, I shall fear nothing as to your
pretensions, which were they any other Man's, I should not be guilty of so
great an indifference.

With these discourses, they got to the Court, and the Ambassador being
alighted at his House, he there found many Ladies, impatiently expecting the
arrival of the fair Lady Margaret, who was received out of her Litter into the
arms of her designed Husband, whereat Don Pedro could do no less than conceive
a little jealousy. Leopoldus, to begin the demonstrations of his Love, had
prepared a magnificent Supper, to which were invited all those, of both Sexes,
who were come thither to receive the Ambassador and his Daughter.

Don Pedro went to Bed presently after Supper, extremely troubled in mind, that
he had engaged himself in an enterprise, wherein he found so great
difficulties. He could not imagine any means to bring it about, so as that he
might come off with credit; he met with too many Obstacles, and what afflicted
him most of all, was, the resolution the Lady had taken to satisfy her
Father's desire, who was desirous the marriage should be concluded with
Leopoldus, though he had been acquainted, as well as she, with him
mis-carriages. Felician could not forbear grumbling at the resolution of his
Master, which must have ended amidst those difficulties. He exposed himself as
an Extravagant person in a Court where he might have raised himself into
esteem, and out of a hope not likely to be brought to any effect, he ran
himself daily into new inconveniences. The Master and Servant spent some part
of the night in discoursing about the business, till at last Don Pedro fell
asleep, with a resolution to discover himself to his Mistress, and, if his
addresses were not well entertained by her, to return immediately into Galicia.

The visits of the Cavaliers and Ladies, continued six days, during which time
the Marquess and his Daughter were often seen, both of them taking much
pleasure in the pleasant demeanor of Don Pedro, who acted the part he had
undertaken so admirably well, that his Extravagancies became the discourse of
the whole Court, all speaking of him as one of the most humorous Fools that had
come upon the Stage of a long time; insomuch that some advised the Ambassador
to bring him to the Palace, assuring him the King would be much pleased with
his behavior. Don Pedro coming to hear of it, seemed to be very angry, and
excused himself, out of a fear his Majesty might not entertain him, suitably to
his quality and extraction; that he would not run the hazard of receiving an
affront, and that the least dis-respect shown him would force him to violent
resentments thereof. The Ambassador pressed him no further, lest he might put
him out of humor, perceiving he liked not the proposal, and put it off to some
other time, when happily he might find him more inclined to compliance.

Leopoldus, who was also Lodged in the Ambassadour's house, had only two
Servants to wait on him, whom he trusted with the knowledge of all his
Loveadventures. It happened that both these fell Sick at the same time, a time
when he should have shown more reserv'dness in his Amors, to raise himself
into a better esteem with his Mistress; but he, on the contrary, minded his own
enjoyments above all things, and never considering the present posture of his
affairs, he continued his Night-visits, as he was wont to do before her
arrival. Being thus disappointed of their attendance, who were best acquainted
with his humors, he conceived he could not pitch on a fitter person to
accompany him than Felician, who, with the leave of his Master Don Pedro, went
along with him. Finding him a subtle fellow, and experienced in such affairs,
he thought him a person fit for his purpose, and accordingly that he might
trust him with any thing. He took him along with him three or four nights
together to a certain House, out of which he came at a very unseasonable hour.
Though Felician went in with him, yet durst he not be so impertinently
inquisitive, as to ask who was the Mistress of the House, till the third or
fourth night that he had accompanied him thither; and then being alone with a
Servant-maid (who taking example by her Mistress began to express some kindness
toward Felician) he asked her whose House that was, and to whom Leopoldus made
his Visits. Love and Secrecy are seldom found in the same Lodging. She was a
Servant, and in love with Felician; there needs no more be said, to make it
apppear, that she satisfied him in whatever he desired to know. Felician
understood from her, that that House belonged to his Master's Aunt, and that
his own Sister was the Person whom Leopoldus had at rack and manger, upon a
promise of Marriage she had gotten from him a little before under his hand,
she, by reason of her retiredness, being innocently ignorant of the treaty of
marriage between him and his Cousin the Lady Margaret.

Felician, having pumped out all these particulars, failed not to give his
Master an account thereof the next day. Don Pedro was extremely surprised
thereat; not without indignation against his Sister, though that procedure of
Leopold raised him into some hope of effecting his design, presuming the more
upon it, in that being equal, as to birth, to Leopold, he was resolved ne
should never marry any other, than her whom he had so highly dishonored. He
thereupon commanded Felician to acquaint the Maid who had made those
discoveries to him, that the marriage of Leopoldus and his Cousin was agreed
upon, and that a Messenger was sent to Rome for the Dispensation, not
forgetting the rare accomplishmen^s of the Lady Margaret; to the end she might
acquaint his Sister therewith, to see what course she would take, and how she
would remedy the affront intended her. He punctually executed the orders he had
received from Don Pedro, so that the night following Donna Blanca (so was Don
Pedro's Sister called) was acquainted with the whole business. She thereupon
had a great contestation with Don Leopold, who impudently denied that he had
any thing to do, as to marriage with his Cousin. In fine having done all he
could to vindicate himself, and appease Donna Blanca, she pretended to be
satisfied with him, provided he more fully justified his innocence the next
morning. So she dismissed Leopold, who went away well satisfied, imagining her
to be so too: but resolving with himself not to give her any visit a while, he
pretended some indisposition. Don Pedro understood that night from Felician all
that had passed between Don Leopold and his Sister, and was extremely incensed
against her that she had given credit to the deceitful words of a perfidious
man. However he thought fit to let pass two days, to see what course his Sister
would take in that time, commanding Felician to prosecute his discoveries.

The next day, Don Leopold not coming to clear himself, as he had promised,
Donna Blanca was so enraged, that she would stay no longer, but resolved to be
satisfied from the mouth* the Ambassador, of the affront intended to be done
her. She took a Coach, and veiling her face, came to his house, but at such an
unfortunate time, that she met Don Leopold at the door, who, discovering who
she was, presently imagined what might occasion that visit, and that her coming
thither was to acquaint the Ambassador how he was engaged to her, and to show
him the promise of marriage. Don Leopold received her with extraordinary
kindness, which she taking otherwise than he expected, added the more to his
suspicion. He told her, he had something particular to acquaint her with, and
entreated her to go along with him to a room at some distance from his Uncle's
lodgings. Donna Blanca would not be persuaded a good while to give him that
satisfaction, telling him, that she must first speak with the Ambassador, and
that afterward he should talk with her as long as he pleased. That Don Leopold
endeavored to prevent, assuring her, that he was at that time very busy,
looking over a Packet of Letters he had received from the Emperor. He was so
importunate with her, that she would hear him before she spoke with the
Ambassador, that at last he prevailed. Whereupon conducting her to Don Pedro's
chamber, he entreated him to keep her company, till he came back to speak with
her.

Donna Blanca having her face veiled all this time, Don Pedro knew her not, but
by the discoveries he had received, he suspected her to be his Sister. On the
other side, he was so transformed by the extravagance of his clothes, and, what
added much to his disguise, his perpetual wearing of Spectacles, that she could
not have the least imagination of his being her Brother. Don Pedro kept her
company a while, without enquiring into the occasion of her coming thither, and
at last, leaving her locked up in the room, he went to look for Don Leopold, to
know how he would have him dispose of her. He was then busy with his Uncle,
sent one to desire Don Pedro, to entertain that Lady a while, with this excuse,
that, as soon as he could, he would come and dispatch her. Don Pedro returning
to his Chamber, immediately locked the door.

In the mean time, the Lady Margaret had understood, that her Cousin had spoken
to a Woman with her face veiled, in one of the walks leading to the
Ambassador's house, and desit'd Don Pedro to conduct her to his chamber. The
jealousy she conceived thereat raised in her a desire to know who she might
be, which she might easily discover, by reason there was a passage from her
lodgings to Don Pedro's chamber, and at the end of it a door, whereof she had
the key. She opened it very softly, lest she might be perceived, and that just
as Don Pedro, coming into the room, found his Sister with her face unveiled,
expecting to be seen only by Don Leopold, whom only she staid for. As soon as
he had taken a slight view of her, he made this discourse to her.

Ungracious and unhappy woman, unworthy the House out of which thou art
descended, and that I should call thee my Sister! Is it possible thou should
be guilty of so strange an oblivion of thy self, as, relying on the vain
promises of a treacherous person, to come into this house to seek him who has
abused thee, and to whom thou have impudently prostituted thy self? Come thou
to importune a man that has forgotten thee, and to court him who has so
palpably deceived thee? If, besotted with a fond love, it be thy design to be
married to him, thou have friends to whom thou might have communicated thy
desires, rather than have abandoned thy self to a man who treats thee with so
much contempt, and, notwithstanding all his caresses, laughs at thee in his
sleeve. He is upon the point of marriage with his Cousin; art thou so simple,
as that thou only should be ignorant of what is known all over the Court?
Had I not a respect for the place where thou art, this sword should dispatch
thy criminal Soul into the other world, that thou might be an example to all
such simple Gulls as thou art. Have thou so far forgotten the respect due to
thy Aunt as to profane her house, by assigning Leopold his nocturnal meetings
in it? Thou should have bethought thy self who thou art, that he is of no
better House than thy self, and that thy quality is as high as his. It Is a
great happiness to thee, that an humor took me to come into this Court, though
thou see me in this ridiculous habit, to prevent, what lies in my power,
Leopold's further abuse of thee; which I will do with the hazard of my life.
Tell me, infamous woman, what has passed between you, that I may take some
course therein, and dissemble not the truth in any thing, for it concerns thee
no less than honor and life.

The disconsolate Donna Blanca heard this discourse with her eyes fastened on
the ground and flowing with tears, without giving him the least interruption:
but at last, to obey her Brother, whose indignation she saw justly grounded,
she told him, in few words, how Leopold had seen her at a certain public
meeting, that he liked her, and, having inquired out her lodgings, he had sent
her several Letters; that having continued his addresses to her with great
demonstrations of affection, she had granted him entrance into the house, and
that upon a promise of marriage under his hand (which she had about her) she
had permitted him to dispose of her as he pleased. In fine, she gave him a
particular account of all that had happened between them; whereupon he, to add
no more to her affliction, put her in some hope, that Leopold should be forced
to perform the promise he had made her.

The fair Lady Margaret had heard all this discourse, at the door which was
between her lodgings and Don Pedro's chamber, extremely astonished how a person
of quality (such as she found Don Pedro to be by his discourse) and one of such
an excellent wit, could put on a Fool's coat, and behave himself as an
extravagant in their house, and all about the Court. She was ignorant of the
causes of that strange Metamorphosis, and yet she had a certain suspicion, that
it might be upon her account. On the other side, she reflected on the double
treachery of her Cousin Don Leopold, in treating of a marriage with her, having
given a promise of the same thing to another, and that a person so highly
qualified as Donna Blanca seemed to be.

Being fully satisfied as to those two things, she would not stand to hear them
any longer, but rushed into the room so of a sudden, as that she had not the
time to put any thing over her face, nor he, to dissemble his indignation.
Seeing her coming toward them, Ah Madam, said he to her, what mean these
Ambushes? What Is your design therein, Sovereign Princess of my Soul, and
absolute Directress of my inclinations? Do you use such a treachery against
those who could not so much as imagine you guilty of any such thing? I wish so
great a Beauty would not give me any more such apprehensions, for another
surprise of this nature would make me die out of pure joy, as it has been the
fortune of others to die out of an excess of grief. There is no dissembling any
longer, replies the Lady, for I am fully assured that you are not the person
you seem to us to be, and that the affliction you are in requires rather secret
and real resentments, than personated extravagancies. My curiosity heightened by
a little jealousy, procured me the discovery of more than you imagine; I have
found the perfidiousness of my Cousin Don Leopold, greater toward me than I
could have expected, considering his pretended kindnesses. I would fain be
delivered out of the confusion I am in, and I earnestly entreat you to resolve
me this riddle, for its obscurity perplexes me very much: but before you take
that trouble upon you, give me leave to carry this Lady your Sister to my
lodgings, and if my Cousin comes in the mean time to enquire after her, you may
tell him, that she went away much displeased at his long stay, and leave the
rest to me.

Having so said, she took Donna Blanca along with her, assuring her she would
do all lay in her power to serve her, which put her in hope of a better success
in her affairs, than she could have derived from either her Brother's
indignation or Leopold's treachery. The Lady Margaret left Donna Blanca among
her Women, and returns to Don Pedro, who though at first supriz'd at the sight
of her, and the thought of her having overheard the infamy of his Sister; yet
was he withal glad of it, since her jealousy and curiosity had discovered his
transformation, and the unhandsome carriage of her Cousin. Don Pedro therefore
was very glad to see his Mistress returned, as might be seen by the
cheerfulness of his countenance. She desired him to take a chair, and doing the
like her self, she opened her mind to him in these words.

I have been in an extraordinary confusion for some days past, and so incensed
against my Cousin Don Leopold, to see the strangeness of his behavior toward
me, that I come to receive your advice how far I ought to resent it, and withal
to be satisfied in some things, whereof I must yet acknowledge my self
ignorant. One is, and that much raises my wonder, to see you counterfeiting the
Fool and Extravagant, in a Court, where you might rather act the part of a
person of Honor and Gallantry, as having the advantage of being Brother to so
fair a Lady as Donna Blanca, who, besides the recommendation of beauty, seems
to be Mistress of many other good qualities. You may infer from my discourse,
that being of the quality I suppose you to be, you dishonor your self in
representing the Natural and ridiculous person, as well in regard of the habit
you have assumed, as the extravagant actions wherewith you amuse the world.
Which since I cannot imagine you would do but that there must be some great
mystery in it, I am the more desirous to know your motives thereto, in that I
conceive it will be a means to clear my mind of certain doubts which now lie
somewhat heavy upon it.

Having delivered this with the best grace in the world, the fair Lady was
silent, and left Don Pedro the liberty to make her this reply. If you find me
at any loss, Madam, in satisfying your desires as to this particular, I
question not but you will have the goodness to attribute it, to that
distraction poor mortals are subject to, when they address themselves to the
objects of their vows and adorations. You cannot be ignorant, (though you knew
it not by experience) that Love is a powerful Divinity, to whom men sacrifice
all things; no impostures but he invents; no intrigues but he is author of; no
difficulties but he overcomes, to compass his designs. This premised, I am in
the next place freely to acknowledge, that the day you passed through
Ville-Franche, which is the place of my birth, I found my self wounded by the
lightning of your fair eyes. I did all lay in my power to oppose that passion;
but it still proved predominant, and the engagement I knew there was between
you and your Cousin Don Leopold could not abate ought thereof. Nay though I
knew all the particulars of that engagement, wherein you rather compli'd with
the commands of a Father then your own inclinations, inasmuch as you looked on
that too happy Kinsman, as a fickle person, unworthy your affection, a truth I
have since heard confirmed by your self; nay though I saw the marriage in a
manner concluded, yet all could not break the resolution I had taken to
disguise my self as you have seen to traverse it, and fortune now seems to
favor my designs. I am not therefore, Madam, to repent me of the slurre I may
have put upon my Blood and the noble House from which I am descended, in acting
the Fool's part in yours, into which it was my business to introduce my self by
all means imaginable, since the imposture has proved so fortunate, and that I
begin to conceive some hope of attaining my desires. You know, Madam, that I
durst not have presumed to make you a real discovery of my self; for besides
that I should run the hazard of not finding credit with you, I came in at a
time when your marriage was in too great forwardness to be easily crossed by
afterapplications. In fine, it was Heaven's pleasure, that a strange
conjunction of my Sister's misfortune, and your own just jealousies, should
give you a discovery of what, happily, I should yet a while have kept from your
knowledge. My true name is Don Pedro d' Osorio and Toledo, and consequently I
may affirm my self to be of the most eminent Families of Spain, since I am
descended from the Seignors of Ville-Franche and Astorga. I have the honor to
be Knight of the Order of Alcantara, and I have acquired it by some years
services done his Majesty in Flanders, with hopes, ere long, to be gratified
with an advantageous Commandery. I have given you an account of my Quality, and
have not concealed from you my presumption. All I how now to Apologize for, is,
my Love; and, I am the more confident of your pardon as to that, if you but
ever so little consider the unavoidable influence of your own attractions. Nay
I cannot but account it a happy offense, since it has proved the occasion of
your being undeceived; and when I make a joint reflection on my own happiness,
and my Sister's credulity, I cannot repent me of a disguise, whereof the
satisfaction infinitely exceeds the shame. For it is in your power to restore
me the honor I have deprived my self of, only for your sake; and I shall
force him, who has cajoll'd my Sister out of her Honor, to perform the
promise he has made her, or it shall cost him his Life.

The fair Lady was ravished to hear these words from her disguised Lover, and
thought her self obliged to make an extraordinary return to so extraordinary a
demonstration of affection. And being now fully undeceived as to the Sycophancy
of her Cousin Don Leopold, she made him this Answer. Signor Don Pedro, That you
have, upon so slight a ground as the little beauty I can pretend to, engaged
your self in an enterprise so prejudicial to your reputation and descent, I
cannot but look on as a transcendent expression of your Love; though I do not
excuse you as to this, that the noble accomplishments you are master of might
no doubt have more happily and more worthily been otherwise employed. I have
resented, as I ought, the little respect my Cousin expressed toward me, and
therefore it is but just he should not enjoy me, since it may be inferred from
the forwardness of his matching with another, that he never truly intended it.
It must needs be an extraordinary joy to me, that I am undeceived before we
were joined by that Tie which only Death can dissolve. I am satisfied as to
the little affection he had for me, and I do yours but justice, when I assure
you, that I shall be so far from forgetting it, that I shall endeavor all lies
in my power to requite it.

This was delivered with so obliging an accent, that the amorous Cavalier would
have cast himself at her feet, would she have permitted it. He returned her his
thanks with a thousand submissions for so extraordinary a favor, and the sweet
encouragement she was pleased to give his Love. It was not now a seasonable
time to expatiate into Complements; Donna Blanca was left in the Lady
Margaret's Lodgings, whose return she expected, and Don Pedro looked for Don
Leopold, to enquire after the Lady he had recommended to his custody. The Lady
Margaret went to comfort her whom she had left among her Women, and to put in
execution what had been resolved, between her and Don Pedro. About half an hour
after her departure thence comes Don Leopold to his Chamber, to look after the
Lady he had left there. Don Pedro told him, that he could stay her no longer,
that she was gone, thinking he would not have come to her again. Nay then, I am
glad I staid so long, says Leopold, since my stay has occasioned her to do as
I would have had her, which was that she might be gone out of the house. This
Woman plagues me extremely, and it was no small happiness to me, that she met
not with my Uncle, for I should have been much troubled had she had any
discourse with him. Don Pedro asked him some odd questions, as he was wont to
do, to sift something further out of him, but Don Leopold would discover no
more. The other easily apprehended, by the little had fallen from him, what
course he intended to take; and the indignation he conceived at his slighting
of his Sister was so great, that it was not without much violence done himself,
he forbore calling him to account for it.

In the mean time the Lady Margaret had visited Donna Blanca, of whom she had
received a punctual relation of her Loves, which were but too much confirmed to
her by the promise of Marriage she had brought with her. And after she had
entered into a second admiration at the double perfidiousness of her Cousin Don
Leopold, she sent to desire her Father to come to her, who being alone with
her, she made him this discourse.

It has ever been a laudable custom, that Fathers should dispose of their
Daughters in Marriage, as they either pleased themselves, or found most
convenient for their affairs, but with this caution, that it should not be
absolutely done contrary to their wills and inclinations. Many are yet willing
to do so, out of a presumption, that Matrimony will change Men's humors: but
it is seldom found to work that effect. Those therefore may be said to do
well, who, referring the success to the higher Powers, by an implicit
obedience, comply with the disposal of their Parents: but those, in my
judgment do better, who use some precaution, and endeavor to prevent the
inconveniences, which they must otherwise fall into. I have ever been ready,
Sir, to do whatever you commanded me, especially in the business now in
agitation, though I have found my Cousin Don Leopold to be of a disposition so
contrary to mine, that I promised my self little satisfaction from our being
joined together in the inseparable estate you intended. I have endeavored to
obey you, though with some violence to my own inclinations, which directed my
affection to other persons not inferior to him, either in quality or estate. I
consented to this Marriage because you seemed so much to desire it. When it was
fully concluded, there was a person sent to Rome for the Dispensation; and even
during that time, when I expected my Cousin should have expressed most Love to
me, I have found he has done quite contrary, since he has given a promise of
Marriage to another Lady, whom you shall presently see.

She thereupon called for Donna Blanca, whom she had left in her own Chamber,
and who immediately came before the Ambassador. Having disposed her into a
Chair, the Lady Margaret continued her discourse. This, Sir, is the Lady I
spoke of, to whom my Cousin has given a promise of Marriage under his hand,
which she now has about her, and you shall see, how this perfidious person
became thereby master of her Honor. Coming hither to speak with you, and
complain of the affront intended her, she met him, who, giving her fair woe ds,
locked her into Don Pedro's Chamber, under pretense that you were busy, and
that it would be long ere you would be seen by her. Some little curiosity
occasioned my going to that door, which is between my Lodgings and his, and
there I came to the knowledge of this business, having overheard some part of
their discourse. I thought fit to bring this Lady to my Chamber, to give you
further satisfaction of so pressing a Truth. Her quality is great, since she is
of the House of Osorio and Toledo, two of the most illustrious Families of
Spain: She is resolved to make the case known to her Friends, who are very
noble, and of great credit in this Court, that they may oppose my Marriage and
prevent our common affront. I have hitherto obeyed you as a Father, I now
appeal to you as my Judge, and I be seech you discharge me of so unjust an
obedience for the future: for I am resolved rather to confine my self for the
rest of my days, in the most austere Monastery about this City, than ever be
Wife to a Man so insensible of worth and honor.

The Ambassador was extremely astonished at both what he saw, and what he had
heard. He examined the promise made to Donna Blanca, and found, that that
discovery alone was sufficient to prevent his Daughter's marriage with Leopold.
He immediately resolved to break all to pieces, and to dismiss his Nephew, that
there might be no more talk of the business. He caused the Ladies to withdraw,
and sent for his Nephew, whom he showed the schedule he had made to Donna
Blanca, asking him whether he knew the hand. He not a little troubled, and
changing color, began to deny it: but the Ambassador told him, that as he
could not do it sincerely, so it would be very unhandsomely proffered, since
the truth would be proved by several of his Letters written with the same hand.
At last Don Leopold, not without extreme confusion, acknowledged, that, blinded
by Love, he had indeed made that promise, but he would lose his Life ere he
performed it.

Don Pedro having quitted his Fool's coat, and put on a very Rich suit, with
the Cross of Alcantara on the Cassock, and the Cloak, heard this discourse from
a corner of the Room where he was disposed, and not able to endure any longer:
Signor Leopold, said he coming up to him, have a better care what you say, and
consider her quality whom you injure. Her birth is at least as noble as yours.
She is my Sister, and, as such, I am obliged to vindicate and protect her: if
you perform not the promise you have made her, I wear a Sword by my side which
shall force you to do it, if Honor will not. I have already considered what I
am in duty obliged to, as to that point, replies Don Leopold, and no Man shall
force me, by menaces, to do any thing against my will. This so enraged Don
Pedro, that he gave Don Leopold a challenge. The dispute grew higher and
higher, which obliged the Ladies to come in between them, and to give order the
doors should be shut, lest they might get out to fight.

While these things passed, the Ambassador minded not the person of Don Pedro,
and imagined him some other person come thither after his Sister: for, seeing
him so well clad with the Cross of Alcantara, and without Spectacles, which he
constantly wore, he knew him not: but having considered him better, he found
that he who challenged his Nephew was the same person, who, by his pleasant
extravagancies, had found him so much sport. The Lady Margaret perceiving her
Father had his Eyes fastened on him, with some astonishment, imagined the cause
of it, and gave it a check in these words. He, Sir, whom you see in a habit so
different from that he was wont to wear, and who seemed so ridiculous to you,
is Don Pedro d'Osorio and Toledo. When this dispute is over, you shall know the
motives obliged him to that disguise.

The Ambassador was the more astonished at that, and would have pressed his
Daughter to make a further discovery of that secret, had he not seen the two
Cavaliers, with Swords drawn, ready to make that Room the place of their Duel.
He ran in between them, and endeavored by mildness to persuade his Nephew, not
to contest in a business, which was not to his advantage; that if he satisfied
not the injured Cavalier, mischief would follow; that he should not rely on any
protection he might hope from him, inasmuch as seeing the little reason he had
of his side, and the affront he intended that Lady, he should rather be against
him, by assisting his Adversary, than countenance him in so unjust a business.
That as to his Daughter, he might quit all hope of her, that he should never be
her Husband, and that it would discover a great poorness of spirit in her, if
she had any thoughts of kindness for him, after she had been so unworthily
treated by him.

Don Leopold, finding himself pressed with reproaches on all sides, and withal
harkening to the advice of his Conscience, thought it best, to follow his
Uncle's counsel. He thereupon went with open arms to his true Wife, to whom he
once more gave his hand as a Husband, and then embraced his Brother-in-law,
whom he yet knew not. The Lady Margaret thought it a good opportunity, before
the whole Company, to give her Father an account how Don Pedro had fallen in
love with her, how he got into his Retinue in the quality of a Jeaster; that
she conceived her self obliged to requite the extraordinary demonstration of
his affection to her, by an exchange of hers to him, if her Father approved
thereof. The old Gentleman had so much metal left, as to admire the strange
conduct of Love in all its operations, and particularly, how it made the wisest
Men mad, and the Mad wise, making its advantages of extravagance it self, to
compass its designs. Without any further demurring, he gave his consent,
whereupon the Lady Margaret took him by the hand, and Don Pedro was so happy,
as, by odd and unlikely means, to see all his desires accomplished. The
solemnities of both the Marriages were put off till eight days after; all the
Grandees about the Court came to them. The Balls thereat, and the Tilting were
extraordinary: but what more nearly touches the story, is, that the King
honored these two Cavaliers with great advantages, wherewith Don Pedro had
also those of a numerous issue, for which Don Leopold needed not much to have
envied him, being the most satisfied man in the world with his choice, whom he
infinitely loved, and thereby made it appear, that the Inclinations of two
persons, before they are united by Matrimony, though by some intervening
occurrences somewhat remitted, may yet, by that sacred Tie, be heightened into a
noble and vigorous flame of perfect Love.

THE Novel was liked and commended by all that heard it, nay Rufina was
extremely satisfied therewith. Brother Crispin, who reposed a very great
confidence in her, was nothing troubled that she should over-hear the designs
laid by him and his Camerades to search those places, where they had notice
there was anybooty. Crispin approved of some of the Robberies proposed by them,
and opposed others, for the inconveniences he found in the execution thereof:
for they looked on him as a person of great authority among them. His
experience in affairs of that kind was such, that he assumed the title of
Director, or rather Dictator of that famous Society: insomuch that not any one
durst contradict what he had once decreed. It was by this time grown very late,
so that they would not make a Divident of what they had brought in that night,
leaving it to be done at the next meeting, and committing it to the custody of
the Hermit, who was their very faithful Steward. Crispin's Companions being
gone to their quarters, he thought it incivility for him to do the like ere he
had made a visit to Rufina, to wish her a good night's rest. He found her a
little more cheerful than he had ever observed her before, whereat he was very
glad. He asked her what she thought of the Novel; she told him, that she
thought it very pretty and full of diversion, and that if she might often hear
the like, they would procure some abatement of her melancholy. Take a good
heart, Madam, says the Hypocrite to her, I hope you will here see an end of
your affliction; we shall endeavor to find you all the divertisement we can,
and it is possible you may not repent your being among us, if you will but remit
something of your reserv'dness, and lay aside, as a thing extremely strange in
this place, some part of your modesty. Rufina thought it time to alleviate her
severities with some affability, and to quit her feigned grief. From that time,
she began to treat the Hypocrite with greater kindness, that she might the
better execute the design she had to make a Novice of an old Projector. Crispin
went to bed, half laid asleep with her favorable looks, and the hopes derived
thence, that the Fort would within a short time be reduced, since he had made
his approaches so near, and taken off the Mask of his feigned Hypocrisy.

The next morning at the very break of day, Crispin's companions left the
Hermitage, to seek out their livelihood, at their cost, who least mistrusted
them. The Hermit himself was soon after for his march into the City, to beg
alms, where he was wont to receive any. He went to take his leave of Rufina,
who desired him to make very diligent enquiry for her Brother, giving him the
marks of his face, person, and clothes, much different from those whereby Garay
might have been found out. He locked the door on the outside, and carried away
the key with him, which Rufina was not much troubled at; for she had brought
with her from Corduba some of those keys, which open all locks, an invention
better than Picklocks, and some other devices, which she had used at the
Genoese's. Thus was she left all alone in the Hermitage, having beforehand
appointed Garay to come to her as soon as Brother Crispin got to Malaga; which
he accordingly did, mounted on one of the two horses he had brought with him.
Rufina having heard him, opened the door, and gave him a short account what
trade Brother Crispin drove, of his falling in love with her, and how there was
a considerable sum of money in the Hermitage, brought thither the night before
by his Camerades. Rufina had resolved to carry away all the ready money, in
order whereto, she sent away Garay back to the City, to get some
sleeping-powders, to be administered to Crispin at his return, that so they
might have the whole night to do their work in. Garay brought the powder's
before Crispin got home, for he spent the whole day in begging, and returned
not to the Hermitage till toward night.

Being got home, he was very kindly received by Rufina, whereat he was
transported with joy, for he grew more and more in love with her. He showed her
what he had gathered that day, and besides what had been voluntarily given him,
he had very uncharitably taken, of his own accord, two silver spoons, and a
neck-lace of pearl. The neck-lace he immediately presented Rufina with, and put
it about her neck, with a thousand amorous complements. She gave him infinite
thanks for his Present, after which they supped very merrily together, he ever
and anon entertaining her with some discoveries of his love, whereto she gave
him very favorable Answers, promising it should not be long ere he had of her
what he so much desired.

It had been ordered among the Ferrets that frequented the Hermitage, at the
last Committee, that a general meeting should be had there that night, as well
for the division of the former booty, as the making of new proposals. Crispin,
who was not willing Rufina should be seen, and expected some secret kindness of
her, thought it concerned him to prevent it. As soon as they were come
together, he found out an evasion to disperse them. He told them, that he had
received notice from the City, that there was a strict search made for a person
who had treacherously murdered another; and inasmuch as Sacred places were no
Sanctuaries for such cowardly Offenders, he feared there would be some sent to
the Hermitage, and if it chanced any one of them should be apprehended for some
other crimes, he might be seized and carried away prisoner, and afterward,
brought to the Torture, confess what he had not been charged with at his
apprehension. Persons of that profession are commonly startled at any thing;
accordingly they soon credited what their Director said to them and left the
Hermitage, adjourning the Assembly to the fourth night after. By this means
Crispin was left alone in the Hermitage, with his Mistress, who had promised to
give him satisfaction that night; whereat he was almost out of himself for joy,
thinking he should never see the hour, that should give him the possession of
that Beauty.

Soon after they went to supper, which was very magnificent, for Crispin had
brought some, both wild and tame, fowl, ready for the spit, and a good large
bottle of Malaga, which is the best of any wine in Spain. Rufina having played
the cook, and made all things ready, they began both to eat very heartily,
their minds disburthen'd of all care and trouble; healths were drunk, Rufina
out-vying the Hermit at that exercise, and having the management of the bottle,
she took care that Crispin never drunk without the powder prepared for him. He
drunk as liberally as the other filled, till at last, tumbling down under the
table, he fell dead asleep, insomuch that Rufina, to try whether the potion had
wrought its effect, pulled him by the ears and nose, to awake him, but it was
to as little purpose as if she had done it to a dead corpse. With that
assurance, she went down into the Cellar, which was under ground, and out of
certain chests she found there, she took all the money she met with, whereof
there was no small quantity. She disposed it into bags, which she tied with
cords, and into long leather pouches, wherein the Thieves had brought it, they
having robbed a rich Drover who was going to Madrid. That done, Rufina comes
out, and, by a signal, got Garay to her, who lay hard by perdue for that
purpose.

They took all the ready money they could find and put it on Garay's Bay, and
got up on the other horse, and put forward toward Mal^ga, extremely pleased
that they had so easily trapann'd the subtilest and most experienced Thief in
Europe. They left some things behind them, which might have been well worth the
conveyance thence; but it was a Maxim of theirs, never to burden themselves
with any thing that might be known or challenged. They soon got to Malaga, and
took up their quarter's in Garay's Inn, Rufina not being seen by the people of
the house, that night nor the next day. She knew what night the Conclave of the
Hermitage was to meet; but ere I tell you what course she took, methinks I
hear Crispin snoring, and calling to me, to give an account of him. He spent
that night more innocently than he had done any one of a long time before, for,
never stirring from the place where he had fallen asleep after supper, it may
be presumed he thought no hurt. By that time the Sun was got high enough to
raise the flies from creeping to flying, he awoke, having not the least
apprehension of what had happened to him in the night. He called Rufina,
recollecting himself so far, that by his excessive sleepiness he had missed the
opportunity he had so much wished for; but all his calling was to no purpose.
He sought her all about the house, in the Church, in the Cellar, and not
finding her, he went out into the fields to look for her, thinking some strange
accident must needs happen to her, when he found all the doors locked. He made
a second search for her, but finding the chests opened, and the bags of white
and yellow pieces dislodged, he was convinced of his being robbed, and that the
poor innocent woman, frightened by the thieves, had made her escape, and lay
lurking somewhere about the neighboring fields, inasmuch as she would not
venture to go far in a dark night. He sought after her till he grew weary, but
she was got far enough out of his reach. At last, hearing no account of her, it
came into his mind that she might be guilty of the robbery; which struck him so
to the heart that he was ready to hang himself, to think that so famous a
Rogue, and one that had been, for so many years, the Dictator of a Crew of
Villains, should be so basely trapann'd by a woman; and then he inferred that
all she had done was only to bring him into the noose. However, he went that
day, as he was wont to do, to Malaga, to try if he might find her in the City.
He met Garay, but having never seen him before, he was never the nearer.

Rufina and Garay had set things in order for their departure to Casteel; but
she would not go till she had served the hyppocritical Hermit such a scurvy
trick as that she might never fear any requital from him. She knew the time of
their meeting at the Hermitage, a place intended for other uses than to be the
Rendezvous of a pack of high-way-men and house-breakers. That they might be all
found together, to receive the chastisement due for their villainies, she writ a
Letter to one of the Magistrates, acquainting him with the time, when, and the
place where he should find the Malefactors, and how they might be taken. That
done, Garay and Rufina took their way for Toledo, toward which place, we shall
leave them on their way, to give an account what was done upon the Letter. As
soon as it was night, the Magistrate, attended by some of his men, went to the
Hermitage, besieged it, and got in. He found in the first place Crispin, little
thinking to receive such a visit: yet was it seasonable as to the present
securing of his life; for they were beginning to squabble about the money lost,
and the others charged Crispin with treachery, and it is likely he had had the
worse among them, being but one to three. Having secured him, they searched the
whole house, and at last, went into the Cellar, where they found his
Companions, as also ladders of cords, pick-locks, iron-crows, and all the other
engines fit for Gentlemen of their profession. They also searched the chests,
in which they found several pieces of Plate, and other things of value,
undeniable demonstrations of the devout exercises of that virtuous company.
They were all taken and brought away Prisoners. Crispin himself was so much at
a loss, that he knew not what Answer to make to what was asked him. Whereupon
one of the Officers made him this comfortable discourse: Ungracious and
unfortunate man, vile Hypocrite, who, covered with the cloak of sanctity, do
commit such robberies! How will the world be surpised to find it self so
mistaken in thee? How will others, who have entered into that holy profession of
renouncing the world and its enjoyments, suffer in the respects of men, when
the infamous History of thy life comes to be published? Were not the charities
bestowed on thee every day by so many good people, sufficient for thy competent
subsistence, that thou might spend thy time comfortably in a place so holy
and so convenient for the serving of God as this is, but thou must give thy
self over to the basest and most disgraceful employment in the world? Thou art
now fallen into my hands, and I promise thee, that neither thou, nor thy
companions, shall get out of them, till you are to be honorably conducted to
the Gallows or some worse place.

With these just reproaches, he carried them away to the City, where they were
condemned to die, all the others having, upon the Rack, confessed several
crimes, charging Crispin to have been the man, who gave them intelligence of
the robberies, that were to be committed, and many times opened the door for
the better execution thereof. As for his part, he expressed so much courage and
resolution in the midst of his torments, that he obstinately denied whatever
was laid to his charge. Yet could not all prevent the passing of the sentence
upon him, but the execution of it was a little delai'd, as to him, by reason of
his falling into a violent Fever in the prison: but his companions were all
trussed out of the way. Not long after, Crispin being, upon his recovery, to
follow them, went out of the prison, at noonday, in woman's clothes, not
without the great astonishment of all the world, who expected to see his Exit
hence, and to the greater affliction of the Jayler, who was conceived to have
been corrupted with money, and to have set him at liberty. But he cleared
himself, by producing the person who had furnished him with the clothes,
wherewith he had disguised himself, who was condemned to spend the remainder of
his life, though he lived ninety-nine years, in the Galleys.

The end of the Third Book.
LA PICARA, OR The Triumphs of Female Subtilty.
The Fourth Book.
Rufina and Garay were by this time gotten to the Imperial City of Toledo,
where they had resolved to settle themselves. To give the greater credit to her
reputation, she pretended that Garay was her Father, and took a very fair House
in the most eminent quarter of the City; her train consisting of a Slave she
had bought at Malaga, a waiting Gentlewoman, a Lackquey, and a Gentleman Usher,
she had taken up at Toledo. She put on the habit of a Widow, and Garay, very
handsomely clad for a person of his Age, went under the name of Don Jeronimo,
and she under that of Donna Emerentiana, their Surname de Menezez, assuming
their descent from the illustrious Family of those, who, under that name, are
so well known in Portugal. She bought Household Stuff suitable to the condition
of a Widow of Quality, and accordingly she was visited by the chiefest Ladies
of the Quarter, who were extremely satisfied, as well with the charms of her
beauty as those of her conversation, insomuch that they accounted themselves
very happy in her Neighborhood. She soon became acquainted with many of her
own Sex, who took for Gold all that Glister'd in that subtle Woman. Going every
day to hear Mass in the great Church, it could not be long ere she was observed
by some of the young Gallantillos of the City, who, having dispatched their
Devotions, spend some time in contemplations of the Ladies who may be present.
Accordingly, she being noted to be one newly come to Toledo, and withal very
handsome, there wanted not those who began to Languish for her, and make their
Addresses to her.

While she is informing her self who were the richest and likely to have most
ready Money, that she might not, for want of practice, forget her old Trade. We
shall leave her taking her measures, and her new Gallants preparing for their
amorous adventures, and take a turn to Malaga, to see what became of Crispin,
after he had so cleaverly got out of Prison.

Finding himself once more at liberty, he left Malaga, and got into a Wood, not
far from the City, where he continued till Night, and then he went to the
Hermitage, where he had Lived many years in the reputation of a good Christian,
and a person of a very exemplary Life. As soon as he was convicted of the
crimes laid to his charge, there was put into his place a very Religious man,
who went about to several Churches, begging alms, to build a little Hospital
there. He was not as yet fully settled in the Hermitage, the place being not yet
furnished. Crispin got thither in the night, and opposite to the South Side of
it found a place, where he had laid up somewhat against a Rainy day. Breaking
up the ground with a Hoe he had left in the Wood, he came at last to a little
Earthen pot, wherein was a Bagg, and in that all the Money he had reserved, of
all the Robberies he had been engaged in; for he ever had two shares of the
Booty, for his two Offices of Director, and Concealer, of the good Company
which frequented the Hermitage.

With that Sum, which might amount to five or six hundred pounds sterling, all
in Gold, he went to the City of Jaen, where he had a friend of the same
profession. This friend of his had heard of his escape out of Prison, whereat
he had been not a little troubled, inasmuch as he might have made some
commemoration of his Camerade upon the Rack, with whom he had been engaged in
several Robberies. He was very glad to see Crispin at liberty, in hopes of his
direction and assistance in some new enterprises. Crispin was but poorly
accoutred, as having been uncas'd of the Hermit's habit, which he had shown
himself unworthy of; but the Bagg he had so well Lined was a sovereign remedy
against Nakedness. He gave his companion Money to buy him a Light-colour'd
suit, and having taken off his long Beard, he put on a Periwig, which, with a
Sword by his side, disguised him so that he seemed to be quite another Man, and
not to be easily known even by those who had been particularly acquainted with
him. In that Equipage he continued some time at Jaen, till there happened an
opportunity to commit a considerable Robbery at Andujar, which was very
faithfully divided between him and his companion. But fearing the person who
had been Robbed would make a diligent search after them, Crispin thought it
their best course to be gone thence in time, the adventure at Malaga being
still fresh in his memory.

They took into their company a third person, whom they met with by chance, a
young Man, born and bred in the City of Valentia; and they came to Toledo,
where they had never been but as they traveled through it. The new Camerade
they had taken in, was called Jaimo, a poor Rope-maker's Son of Valentia, who,
for some roguish exploits he had done there, which brought him some Money, had
been obliged to absent himself thence for some years. He was a handsome,
fair-hair'd, sprightly young Man, and besides the accomplishments of his
person, he had an excellent Wit, and was not inferior, in subtilty, to either
Crispin or his Camerade.

This young Adonis went very Gallantly, upon their charges who either were
ignorant or mindless of the old Proverb, Fast bind, fast find. He had the art
to transform into the current Mode all the Clothes he got by slight of hand,
and so disguised them by changing the Laces and Trimming, that the very Owners
could not have known them. On a certain Festival day, he put on a very Rich
suit, and went along with Crispin to Mass, in the great Church, and into the
same Chapel, where Rufina was at her Devotions, under the name of Donna
Emerentiana. Though, as I told you, she was in a Widdow's habit, Crispin knew
her at the first blush, and was not a little glad to see her. He kept himself
from her knowledge, for fear of being discovered, though there was no great
fear of it, as he was then accoutred. He showed Rufina to his Camerade Don
Jaimo, who was infinitely taken with her; and having desired him to dog her,
so as she might not perceive it, he did it so cunningly, that he kept his Eye
on her, though seeming to look another way, till he saw her go into her House.
He was very glad to hear by the Neighbors, that she Lived there, and that in
great Reputation, under the name of Donna Emerentiana de Menezez, lately come
from Badajos, with her Father, to live at Toledo.

Crispin had a devilish pique against her, for the scurvy trick she had shown
him at Malaga, and heartily swore, that since he had so fortunately discovered
her, he would not leave Toledo, ere he had called her to an account for the
Money she had carried away from the Hermitage, together with the interest, and
all the charges of his Imprisonment. To compass his design, he instructed Jaimo
what he had to do, and whom he should represent, without making a real
discovery of himself to her. It was not long ere an opportunity offered it self
to prosecute the design they had agreed upon. One evening, about an hour before
night, there chanced to be a quarrel in the Street, where Rufina lived, wherein
there were two Men wounded. The Officers of Justice presently came in, and
carried the wounded to their Houses to be dressed, and secured some others that
happened to be then in the street, though nothing engaged in the quarrel; which
occasioned others to run for it, it being no great pleasure to come into trouble
and restraint for another Man's crime.

Crispin's plot took its rise from that Quarrel. Jaimo, instructed by that
subtle Hypocrite what he had to do, had taken the Cross of Knight of the Order
of Montesa, an honor bestowed by the King only on the natural Inhabitants of
the Kingdom of Valentia; and to that purpose he had gotten a very light
handsome black suit made him. In this Equipage, being come to Rufina's house,
and having given his Cloak to Crispin, he drew his Sword, and went in, acting
the part of a Man much astonished. Finding the door which led up stairs open,
he goes up, and came into the room where the jovial Widow was with her Maids.
They were a little startled to see a Man coming in to them with his Sword
drawn, without a Cloak, and in a manner frightened out of his Wits. Rufina rose
from the place where she was sat, and found the Impostor in the posture of a
suppliant, addressing himself to her in these words. If compassion be not at
too great a distance from so beautiful a countenance, be pleased, Madam, to let
your House be my Sanctuary against the Officers of Justice by whom I am
pursued. That I have Killed a man, I must acknowledge, but it was in my own
defense, in this street, where he had set upon me with advantage. The Officers
persuing me at the heels, I had infallibly been taken, had I not very
courageously made my party good, by laying two of the most forward with their
Bellies to the Sun, who with the Commissary had me in a manner by the Collar. I
escaped from the rest, by the pure activity of my Legs; for it is prudence for
a Man to give way to the Magistrate, whom he is obliged to respect. But they
persisting still in the pursuit, I found your House open for my safety, and I
have taken the boldness, shutting the door after me, to come up into your
Chamber. I therefore most humbly beseech you Madam, if it may be done without
your inconvenience, that you would dispose me into some secret corner of your
House, till the people now in the street be dispersed, and that I may safely go
hence. But if my presumption puts you to any distraction, or give you any
trouble, you need only give me the least signal, and I will immediately go out
into the Street, though I were sure to leave my Life in it, as choosing rather
the horrors of Imprisonment, than to be over-importunate to so fair a Lady.

We have already given a description of this fine Orator. Rufina looked very
earnestly upon him; and she who never had loved any thing comparably to Money,
immediately found her self susceptible of an inclination toward that young
Man, who seemed to her as eloquent as she had thought him handsome. Whereupon
she returned him this Answer. You have done me but justice, Sir, when you
thought me sensible of honor and compassion; persons of my condition are never
destitute thereof toward such as you are. I presume, by what I see of you,
that you are a person of Quality; and therefore sympathizing with your
affliction, I heartily proffer you my House, to continue in it as long as you
shall think fit, to avoid the pursuit of those who look after you: for it were
not just you should fall into their hands, since, by my means you may be
secured from so great a danger. Fear not any thing here; for though the
Officers should come into the House, I shall put you into so secret a place,
that they shall never find you.

The young Spark gave her a thousand thanks for so signal a favor, which
obliged her to make him this further discourse. You very well know, Sir, by the
habit I am in, with what reserv'dness I ought to live in my House, and yet I
freely proffer you the security you promise your self in it, till you have
accommodated your affairs. But I have a Father, now from home, who will expect
an account of my demeanor: and if, at his arrival, which it may be will be
this day, he will entertain you with a Room in his Lodgings, as I am confident
he will think it an honor, I shall be content. The young Gallant renewed his
thanks to her, for that continuance of her kindnesses, and he expressed himself
so gentilly, that she was more and more taken with him.

In the mean time, those who were of the Plot, knocked very confidently at the
door, calling upon them to open to the Officers. The family was at first a
little startled; but Rufina, recovering her self out of the little disorder
which appeared in her countenance, took Jaimo by the hand, and led him into an
upper Room which had a double Partition, before which there was a piece of
Hangings, and left him there, with an assurance it would be impossible to find
him out. That done she went to open the door, and Crispin impudently comes in,
without the least fear of being known, being disguised as he was. He was
attended by some Rogues of his Profession, who with Lanterns and Firearms,
personating the Officers of Justice, uncivilly rushed into the Room where
Rufina was. Crispin gave her a kind salute, and counterfeiting his Voice
suitably to his Person. I know, Madam, said he, that it speaks a kind of
incivility, to come so boldly into a VViddow's House; but my Charge obliges me
thereto, and therefore you will excuse me. The Lieutenant Criminal has
commanded me, to search all the Houses hereabouts to see if I can find a
Malefactor we look for. Our search has hitherto been to no purpose, and we
have but this one House to search; give us therefore leave to look into all the
Rooms of it, that we may satisfy our Superiors, and withal our own
Consciences. You may assure your selves, said she to them, upon my word, that I
saw no Body come into my House; but, that you may not think amiss of me, or
conceive me a Woman to shelter Murderers, and Mischievous persons, search, and
see whether you can find the person you look for.One of the Maids took a
Wax-candle to light them, and they visited several Chambers, yet not too
exactly, that the slightness of the search might be thought a Courtesy.

That done, he civilly took leave, recommending the prosecution of the plot to
his Camerade. The counterfeit Knight came out of his hole, pretending an
extraordinary gladness, that he had escaped their hands, who sought after him,
and in expressions full of acknowledgment, he highly celebrated the favor he
had received from the fair widow. She, who, the more she looked on him, more
and more fancied him, made him a thousand demonstrations of Friendship, assured
him he should be waited on at her house according to his worth; and if he would
have the patience to stay till her Father came in, she was confident he would
not suffer him to go out of the house that night.

The Gallant, who perceived the Lady began to grow warm, was the more earnest
to beg a leave which he saw would not be easily granted him, told her, it would
be his best course to take Sanctuary in some Religious house, whence he might
send notice to his people at the Inn, where he was; that he was to go the next
day for Sevil; and that he thought it not safe for him, to go that night to his
quarters. Rufina, troubled to find him so resolved, more earnestly presses his
stay, represented to him the great hazard he ran, and desired him by all means
to stay two hours longer.

Jaimo, who desired nothing so much, was persuaded to do so. She desired his
permission, to go and take order about some things her Father had left her to
do, whereof she was to give an account at his return. This was only a pretense
to get out, to confer with her slave, in whom she reposed great confidence,
what course she should take. She took her into another room, and freely
acknowledged to her the inclination she had for that Knight; that it troubled
her to let him go out of the house, lest he might endanger his life, or at
least hazard his liberty: but on the other side, she knew not, whether Garay
would take it well that she detained him, and that he should be in the house
all night. At last, much troubled at these difficulties, she desired her to
give her the best advice she could, and what she would resolve, were she in her
condition.

The Slave, who was as subtle a baggage as her Mistress, and immediately
apprehended, that the advice she would best like must be such as promoted her
passion; I must acknowledge, Madam, said she to her, that it would argue an
excessive easiness of nature in you, considering the short time you have known
this Cavalier, to unbosom your self so far, as to give him a passage into your
heart; and I think you would do imprudently on the other side to persuade
Garay, when he comes, to suffer his abode this night in the house. My advice
is, since the house is large enough, and that there are two or three empty
rooms, into one whereof he may go through your lodgings, that you lodge him
there, and make not any body acquainted therewith. It shall be my care to bring
him thither, when I have made his bed, and supply him with all things
requisite, without Garay's knowing of it. You know Garay is to be gone within
these two days for Madrid, and then you may freely enjoy your self with this
young Gentleman, whom it will be easy for me to persuade, that the search
being still about the street, it is absolutely necessary that he stay, if he
will not hazard his life or liberty. The Slave's advice was extremely pleasing
to Rufina, who ordered her to go immediately and lay clean sheets on the bed,
and to put the Cavalier in possession of the room. 'Twas presently put in
execution, and not long after, the amorous Widow went by a private pair of
stairs, to visit her Gallant. You will happily wonder, Sir, said she to him, that
without my Father's permission, I have ventured to receive you into my house,
and that in the night: but to secure a person of worth, there may be a little
breach made of the rules of modesty. I have thought it most convenient, that,
as I have been a means of your avoiding the eyes of Justice, so you should also
keep out of my Fathers, to the end you may be here in all safety. Be pleased to
think your self obliged to me for this little service; but I render it you very
heartily, nay I think it necessary, in order to your safety.

Jaimo, who perceived this fish would come into the Weel, multiplies his
acknowledgments by thousands for this new favor. That begat abundance of
pleasant discourses between them, whereof the issue was, that he heightning his
flattery by his eloquence, insinuated himself more and more into her good
opinion; and celebrating, one after another, all the perfections and
accomplishments of Rufina, he got the absolute disposal of her heart. Yet would
she have a little further trial of his sincerity, to see whether it were only
her beauty that drew him in, and whether it were true that the charms of it had
so suddenly transformed a person, who fearfully fled into her house for
shelter, into a confident Lover.

Upon this the Slave coming in, and giving her Mistress an account that she had
obeyed her commands, she took Jaimo by the hand, and led him to the room
prepared for him. He found it light enough, as having in the midst of it a
Branch, of Crystal, wherein were many wax-candles, and a magnificent Collation
staying for him. He was a little surpised to see she left him alone, but her
excuse satisfied him, that she would be with him again, as soon as she had seen
her Father in bed. At her departure out of the room, she beheld him with eyes
so full of love and tenderness, that that new demonstration heightened the
Gallant into an absolute confidence of the good success of his enterprise.
Garay was not so far stricken in years, but that he had the courage left to
pretend to the possession of Rufina; he acted the part of her Gallant, and had
he not been already married, he would have treated of a marriage with her. He
kept his wife at Madrid, who, as many others do that are cast off, and
slighted, bestowed the time of her Husband's absence on such as would accept of
her kindness. Some years had past since he had heard from her, whereupon
imagining she might be dead, he had resolved upon a journey to Madrid, to make
a secret enquiry after her, that, in case she were removed out of the world, he
might prosecute his intentions to marry Rufina, who was infinitely obliged to
him. Upon this account it was that he resolved his departure within two days.

Leaving him in those thoughts, let us return to Rufina, who set him to supper
as soon as he was come in, and, pretending some indisposition, excused her self
that she could not bear him company. It being his custom to go to bed as soon
as he had supped, Rufina staid, till word was brought her, that he was fast
asleep, and then went to her Gallant, causing her own supper, which was that
night somewhat more than ordinary, to be carried along with her. As soon as the
cloth was taken away, during the interval which the servants had to sup,
Rufina, who was more and more in love with her new Guest, entreated him to give
her an account of his life, and sincerely to acquaint her with his name, his
country, and the occasion of his coming to Toledo. Jaimo, whose design it was
only to abuse her, entertained her with this Romance, whereto she gave very
earnest audience.

My Country, Madam, is Valentia, one of the most eminent Provinces of Spain;
you know it well enough by name, and happily are not to learn, that it has a
great advantage over several others, as well in regard of Nobility and wealth,
as the temperature of its climate, and the delightful fertility of its soil. I
am of the noble and ancient Family of Pertusa, well known all over that
Kingdom. My name is Don Jaimo de Pertusa, and the King, for the many good
services done him by my Ancestors, has honored me with the Order of Knight of
Montesa, and the Commanderie of Silla, which is the best of any belonging to
that Order. Besides what that brings me in, I have in other estate as much as
may amount to three thousand Crowns per annum. I am the only Son of the
Family, and I made my addresses to a noble Lady of the City I was born in,
named Donna Blanca Ceintillas, of one of the most illustrious Families of
Valentia, a Lady of excellent endowments. I have served her with all the
affection imaginable, whereto she gave me no return, as being pre-ingag'd to
another Cavalier, who was also a Servant of hers, named Don Vincent Poiadas;
whereupon seeing my Rival preferred before me, I was exasperated beyond
measure. Don Vincent was a person of such an humor, as that nothing would
satisfy him, less than to rid out of the way whatever might obstruct his
amorous pretensions. Accordingly, one night, meeting with me in the street
where my Mistress lived, attended by three servants, he set upon me, though I
had but one with me. I defended my self as well as I could, but at last came
off with such wound; as it was conceived I must have di'd of them. There could
never be any perfect discovery made of him who had hurt me, though every one
suspected who it might be: but the common report coming in to the Magistrate
that Don Vincent was my Corrival, he was imprisoned; but, having cleared
himself either by favor or money, he was set at liberty. Being recovered of my
wounds, and reflecting on the advantage, wherewith my Rival had engaged me, I
thought it but a just requital to fall on him, upon the same unequal terms. I
therefore surpised him in the same manner as he had done me, and the result
was, that he got off much more wounded than I had been. There happened to be
some in the street, who knew me, and took their oaths against me, a thing not
much practiced at Valentia, in regard the truth is seldom discovered by that
means. Upon this accident it is, that I came thence, for Don Vincent was so
dangerously wounded, that the Surgeons gave but little hopes of his
recovery. I saw his Friends were resolved to revenge his death, and was afraid
to fall into the hands of Justice. This obliged me to leave Valentia, and to
come to this City, where I have now been about a month. I have understood by a
person of this City, who has correspondents in several others, that he whom I
had hurt is out of all danger, nay in perfect health, and that the treaty of
marriage between him and Donna Blanca is concluded, whereof I have a greater
resentment, then of having this day met with two men, who hired by Don Vincent
came hither purposely to murder me. They set upon me in this street, one I
have mortally wounded, as I think, and by that means made a shift to escape out
of their hands, with the assistance of those who came in to part us. I found
your house open, and being come into it for refuge, I find my self secure, and
that all I have to fear now, is, your fair eyes. Avoiding one prison, I am
fallen into another; but I think my imprisonment so pleasant, that, if you
discharge me not, I shall continue it as long as I live.

Thus did the counterfeit Don Jaimo conclude his relation, leaving Rufina
extremely satisfied, to see in that Cavalier, not only those endowments which
might deserve love, but also such initiations of affection, as raised in her a
certain hope she might one day be his wife: which having discoursed within her
self, she immediately made him this Answer. Signor Don Jaimo Pertusa, I am very
much troubled, that you should come to the knowledge of me at Toledo, upon so
sad an occasion to your self; but it abates much of it, that you intend not to
return so soon into your Country, for I could wish your residence in this City,
and assure you, for my own particular, that if I could oblige your stay, I
would endeavor it by all means possible, nay though it were fatal to my
liberty. The advantages you would make of it might not happily amount to much,
yet can you no less than think your sel^ obliged to me, for the good will I
bear you, considering the little time I have had the honor to know you. Such
as it is, if it oblige you to any reciprocation, I shall think my self but too
too happy, and that I have attained the greatest of my wishes. In order to such
a design, Heaven has not happily made me handsome enough; but I dare stand on my
good nature, and withal that I have otherwise wherewith to satisfy a person of
your worth and quality. Madam, replies Don Jaimo, I kiss the very dust you
tread on, though I think not my self worthy enough it should be touched by my
mouth, when I consider the favor I receive from you. Yet can I not but think I
have fully satisfied whatever I ought you, since I have resigned up to you my
heart and soul, and so I fear not any Action you may have against me, as to
that particular. As to your forcing of my will, you may spare your further
trouble, I am already sensible, Madam, that it is at your devotion, and
therefore you may forbear ineffectual remedies, where there needs only that
Sovereign one of your Beauty, which is so full of virtue, that it has
transported me out of my self, that I might be absolutely at your disposal.
'Twas a happy day to me, that I was set upon by those Assassins of my Country,
since the mischief they intended me has procured me the favors I have
received from you. Now I wish Heaven would prolong my Life; for if you approve
of the affection I have for you, as you are pleased to assure me, in spite of
all the storms of my ill fortune, I shall get into a haven where I may defy
all dangers, I mean that of your good inclinations toward me. The thought of
them gives me respit, and fills me with an absolute oblivion of my Country,
since I must look on a place, where such happiness is prepared for me, as my
Paradise.

These discourses, and others yet more amorous, passed between Don Jaimo and
Donna Emerentiana; and the crafty Youth had the length of her Foot so rightly,
that she was easily ensnared in the subtle Webb of his cunning insinuations,
and made it her main business to ingratiate her self more and more with him.
The time insensibly passed away in these amorous conferences, insomuch that it
was two in the morning ere Rufina retired to her own Chamber, yet troubled,
that she was forced to do it so soon; and the Impostor Jaimo presently went to
Bed, extremely pleased, that his Camerade's plot had taken so well. Crispin was
extremely perplexed, that all that Day and the next, he had received no news of
what passed, by reason of Garay's being in the House: but as soon as he was
gone, for Madrid, the amorous Rufina gave her self more liberty, being still
more and more deeply in Love with her Guest. Jaimo acquainted Crispin, by a
Letter brought him by the Slave, how he was favored by Rufina. Crispin
answered him by the same hand, and withal sent him a Purse with a hundred
pieces, to get her in to Play, and to make presents to the Servants, that he
might be sure of them when occasion served.

The day of Garay's departure for Madrid, Rufina was taken up with the
reception of two Gentlewomen of her Neighborhood, an employment she was not
at all pleased with, for she wished them far enough, and her self in her
Gallant's company. As soon as they were gone, she went to her beloved Jaimo,
whom we shall Don -- as long as this Scene of the imposture lasts. She found
him tuning a Lute, which her Slave had brought him; for he was an excellent
Musician, and had a smack of Poetry, an accomplishment not extraordinary in the
Natives of Valentia, where there are also admirable Musicians. Rufina, hearing
him at a distance, came softly into his Chamber, charmed with the sweet harmony
of his Lute, which he touched with a miraculous dexterity, and being not seen
by the young Man, she hearkened to him a good while, perceiving he intended to
sing a Song, as he afterward did with an admirable grace, and he had made the
Verses, which were upon the occasion of his Love. This added to the flames of
her affection, which were before grown too violent for to keep within the
bounds of modesty: but what most ravished her, was, that the Verses he had Sung
were made for her, and upon the accident which had happened to him. VVhereupon
the Love-stung Widow coming up to him, What, said she, Signor Don Jaimo, you
are Master of those excellencies which I little imagined? I am extremely glad
of it, yet wonder not much thereat, as knowing Valentia to be famous for
excellent Voices. Mine is but ordinary, said he, and it is rather the words,
than the goodness of the Voice that induced me to Sing. I find, said she, this
Song is very new, and that it was not made two days since. It Is very true, says
Don Jaimo, yet is it not to be much wondered at, since the subject, upon which
it is made, has such an influence over me, as would make me undertake things
impossible, as transcending whatever yet I thought worth my admiration. No
flattery, I pray you, said she to him, for though I know that what you say is
not true, and that you Men allow a distance between your words and thoughts,
and, when you do not love, most pretend it, yet I cannot but take all kindly
from you. You may be deceived in both, Madam, said he^, and therefore be
pleased to believe me, that I think my self extremely happy in that unhappy
adventure, which procured me the glory of your acquaintance. All I have to beg
of you is, that you take a more particular notice of my freedom, and thence
infer, that my Soul cannot be fuller of affection toward you than it is.

In fine, these and other insinuating discourses screwed up the feigned Widow
to such a height of kindness, that the crafty companion began to desist from
the enterprise which had occasioned his coming to her, and seriously dispose
himself to assure her more and more of his love. And thinking her fully
satisfied with the relation he had made her of himself, he became so familiar,
as to desire her to give him the like account of her extraction* She thought
fit to make her condition equal with his, and accordingly, she acquainted him
in a short discourse, how she was descended from the illustrious Counts of
Menezez in Portugal, though she had been born in the City of Badajos. The
crafty companion immediately apprehended what Game she would be at, and that
her design was to oblige him to Marry her. This was directly contrary to the
sentiments of Crispin, who would not by any means that he should think of any
such thing, but continually reflect on the dangers they are apt to run into,
who following the profession he was engaged in, are concerned to be expeditious
in the execution of their enterprises, lest being, by some unexpected accident,
prevented, they come to make their last Wills on a Gibbet, before they are
willing to remove into the other World.

The young Gallant grew more and more warm in his love toward Rufina,
particularly upon this account, that, according to her relation, she was nobly
descended. He thereupon did all lay in his power to heighten her affection
toward him. She on the other side, had the same thoughts, so that concurring
in the same desires, as Lovers mutually passionate, Rufina behaved her self so
freely and familiarly toward him, that he might easily perceive she had
discarded all modesty: insomuch that, upon little entreaty, she permitted him
to invert the order of the Alphabet, and to put Q. before P. But in the midst
of her enjoyments, she remembered her old Acquaintance Garay; she reflected on
the familiarites had passed between them; she considered how much she was
obliged to him; and that he was looked on all over the City as her Father. She
imagined to her self the resentment he must needs have at his arrival, when he
found that she had basely forsaken him. She bethought her self to give him a
sum of Money privately, and to dismiss him: but thinking more seriously of it,
she thought it a better course to leave Toledo before his return, and to
persuade Don Jaimo to carry her into his Country, Valentia. She resolved within
two or three days to declare her mind to him, for Garay was not expected home
till fifteen days after.

In the mean time Rufina and her Gallant passed away the time very jocundly,
and he, being very heartily in love with her, was fully resolved to give
Crispin the bag, and not to proceed any further in his first design. 'Twas in
the Wintertime, when the Nights are longest, that these Lovers deceived the
slow-paced Season with an intermixture of Caresses, Songs, and amorous
Discourses, nay many times, they sung together, their several parts, to a
Musical Instrument, which he played on. One night, after they had Sung and
Talked of several things, Rufina entreated her Gallant to entertain her and her
Maids with some pleasant Story, or Novel, if he knew any. The young Man, who
was Versed in all things, and of an excellent Wit, was content to answer the
desires of his Mistress, to give her a new demonstration of his further
perfections, and said to her* Though to such a Person as you are, divine
Emerentiana* and my dearest Mistress, my discourse will seem very ordinary, yet
so punctually would I obey your Commands, as if I knew what you imposed on me
were only for a trial of my compliance: And in regard I do it, in this, so
much of a sudden, I hope to find you the more ready to excuse my failings. The
Novel I intend to tell you, I heard from an accomplished Cavalier of Valentia;
I thought it not unpleasant, and shall endeavor to present it to you as well
dressed as I received it. Whereupon having recollected himself a little, he
began his discourse thus.

THE THIRD NOVEL.
The Trapanner Trapann'd.
IN the great and famous City of Sevil, the Metropolis of Andalusia, Mother of
so many noble Families, and excellent Wits, the Treasury of all the Wealth,
which flows into Spain from the West Indies, was born Don Pedro de Ribera, a
very accomplished Cavalier, of the illustrious Family of the Dukes of Alcala,
so highly esteemed all over the Kingdom. By their death, from whom he derived
his being in this world, there fell to him an estate of four thousand Crowns
annual rent, upon which he lived very nobly at Sevil, being the most remarkable
Person at all public actions done about the City. He had at Madrid a
Cousin-german, who followed the Spanish Court, and was gone thither about some
affairs of great importance, which he had brought to a happy issue. Having
lived there a while, he liked it, and the conversation of the Cavaliers
inhabiting it, so well, that he exchanged the place of his birth for that
illustrious City. He there became intimately acquainted with an old Cavalier,
whose name was Don Juan de la Cerda, a person who had raised himself into a
general esteem, by the excellent endowments he had. Besides which he was
honored with the illustrious Order of the Patron of Spain, with a Commandery
of two thousand Ducats of annual rent. This old Gentleman was a Widdower,
having but one only Daughter, to whom all his vast Estate was to fall at his
Death. Nature it seems had made it her particular business to enrich this young
Lady, with all the graces and perfections to be wished in one of her Sex. Which
occasioned the envy of all the Ladies about the Court toward her, since she
had, in point of Beauty, the same advantages over them, as the Sun has over
all the rest of the Planets. Her Father, Don Juan, wished her married with a
person to his mind, that is, one equal to her, in estate and extraction. Don
Rodrigo de Ribera (so was called Don Pedro's Cousin whom I spoke of first)
might have aspired to the honor of making his Addresses to her, as well upon
account of the House, from which he was descended, as the familiar acquaintance
there was between him and her Father, Don Juan. But being a younger Brother, he
thought himself too low, in point of estate, to pretend to so advantageous a
match. However he thought fit to make some proposal to the old Gentleman, on
the behalf of his Cousin Don Pedro, who lived at Sevil, whom he highly
recommended to him for his excellent Qualities, and the greatness of his
Estate; for he was the only Son of a Noble house. Don Juan took it very kindly
from him, but thought it withal prudence, to make further enquiry into the
business, knowing that persons speaking for their own Relations are commonly
very partial, and think it no mortal sin to exceed the truth. So that Don Juan,
immediately writ to a particular friend at Sevil, earnestly desiring him to
give him an account of the Person and Estate of Don Pedro de Ribera, inasmuch
as it highly concerned the honor of his House, to meet with a Cavalier worthy
his alliance, to be Husband to his only Daughter Donna Brianda.

'Twas not long ere he received an Answer, wherein his friend confirmed all
that Don Rodrigo had said of his Kinsman, with somewhat more, protesting in the
conclusion, that he was so far from being partial or insincere, in the account
he had sent him, that he rather told less than truth. He thereupon went to Don
Rodrigo, and told him, that he might write to his Cousin, and assure him he
should be very welcome, if he had any inclinations for his Daughter. He made
him Answer, that he would, and Don Juan, as a further obligation, would have
his Daughter's Picture sent him, that he might therein find some of the rare
qualities that were in her, permitting his Cousin to be present at the taking
of it, that he might assure Don Pedro, the Painter had not flattered her, and
that the Copy was below the Original.

Don Rodrigo failed not to write to his Cousin, to whom he also sent the
Picture, celebrating the virtues of that amiable person, which the Painter
could not represent, as he had done the lineaments of her beautiful
countenance. His Cousin Don Pedro was extremely satisfied therewith, and
referred it to him to make some overtures in the treaty of Marriage, till he
came thither himself, for the further prosecution whereof, he sent him a full
procuration.

In the mean time Don Pedro was preparing for his journey to Madrid, to wait on
his Mistress, who, having received his Picture, was as much taken with it, as
he had been with hers. Leaving his retinue at Sevil, till a rich Livery, then
making, were finished, he began his journey, having only one person to wait on
him, and a Groom to look to their Mules, who followed them at a little
distance. Don Pedro carried always about him his Mistress's picture enclosed in
the same Letter, wherein his Cousin had sent it him. Being come within half a
days journey of Toledo, he sent away the Groom, to provide Lodgings for them in
the City. He had entertained at dinner some of the Inhabitants of Orgaz, which
was the place where they had baited. The cloth being taken away, they fell to
Cards; he lost his money, and was vexed, which occasioned their playing on till
he had recovered his losses, and by that time it was grown later than he could
have wished. Being horsed, he and his man put forward, but ere they had rode a
League, night surpised them, so that they made a shift to lose their way, and
got in among certain Olive Trees, about half a League short of Toledo. Not
knowing where they were, and fearing to go too far out of their way, they
thought it their best course to alight, and rest themselves under one of the
Olive Trees, till it were day. They accommodated themselves the best they
could, and weariness soon laid them asleep, yet little dreamed of the
misfortune which was to happen to them. Being in their first sleep, which is
commonly the soundest, four men came to the place, very softly, for the noise
of their Mules brought them thither; and these were of a profession, which for
the most part finds those that are of it more work by night than by day. They
had then been upon a design which had not taken, and so they were returning
somewhat disconsolately with empty pockets to Toledo.

Coming up to them, and finding them both asleep, they tied their hands behind
them, and took away all they had, but their Doublets and Drawers, and, to get
off with more speed and safety, they made use of their Mules. Don Pedro, being
thus basely surpised, was exasperated at the misfortune, but his Man told him
that it had happened to them through his fault, because he had not given over
playing sooner. They discoursed of it, till the Birds gave them notice of the
approach of Aurora. Soon after, hearing the noise of some cattle not far from
them, they called to him that looked after them, who came up to them, and
unbound them, very much bemoaning the condition they were in. They asked him,
how far it was to Toledo, and he told them it was not quite half a league, but
if they would go along with him to a Country House hard by, he would gladly
show the^ the way, and that he doubted not the Lady, w^^ lived in it, would
relieve them in that extremity. They took his advice, and he brought them to a
very fai^ house. Having knocked at the Gate, it was immediately opened by an
old man, who was Steward to the Lady, and had the oversight of the Shepherds
and the profits arising from the Sheep. The Shepherd who brought them thither
went in to the Lady, and in few words gave her an account of the misfortune had
happened to those Strangers, and the condition he had found them in, whereupon
she ordered them to be brought up to her chamber. Don Pedro presented himself
to her, very much abashed to see himself almost naked, as having about him
only an old Coat, which the Shepherd had lent him. He told her that his
journey was for Madrid, about a Lawsuit of great importance, not discovering
who he was, but only that he was a Gentleman of Sevil, named, Don Ferdinand
Sanchez de Trivegno. The Lady, whose name was Donna Victoria, was much troubled
to see him in that deplorable condition. There were in the house two chests
full of clothes, which had been a Brother's of hers, who died not long before.
She ordered two suits to be brought out, which they put on, that which Don
Pedro had proving so fit, that the Lady was much taken with his person, and had
her eyes always fastened on him. She invited Don Pedro to dine with her, which
he did, taking occasion ever and anon, to make extraordinary acknowledgments of
the favors he received from her.

They continued two days in that Country house, ere the Lady made any discovery
of the affection she had for Don Pedro, save only what she did with her eyes,
which were the silent interpreters of the trouble she was in. Don Pedro was not
insensible of it, and had some discourse concerning it with his Man; yet had he
not the confidence to tell him what he really thought of it, being (as he was)
upon the point of disposing himself otherwise. The Servant advised him not to
let slip so fair an opportunity, and told him he should not be so hard-hearted,
toward a Lady of so great worth, and one that had so highly obliged them. The
solitude of the place, the beauty of the Lady, and the silent discoveries she
made him by her gestures, obliged Don Pedro to answer her affection. He entered
into some Lovediscourses with her; but though she were really in love with him,
yet would she not grant him any particular favor, unless he first assured her
she should be his wife, and that she had a promise of it under his hand.

Don Pedro, on the other side, had so great a kindness for her, that he had in
a manner forgot the Mistress, whose Picture he carried about him, and advising
with his Servant, (who was a dangerous Confident, and a subtle fellow) what he
should do, he told him very roundly, that he ought not to let slip so sweet and
favorable an opportunity; that he might easily have the enjoyment of her, and
withal give her the promise of marriage she desired, provided he put not into
it his own name, but filled it with the supposititious name he had assumed,
since she knew neither his Country nor extraction. Don Pedro followed his
advice, and thereupon had his desires of Donna Victoria, who having made the
blot, could do no les^ than give him leave to enter. He continued there four
days, at the end whereof, acquainting the Lady that his business at Madrid was
of such importance as required his personal attendance there, she consented to
his departure, on condition he would return again as soon as he could; which
he, with oaths, promised to do.

The next morning betimes, he departed, leaving the Lady o're-flown with tears;
he was somewhat troubled, or at least pretended it. The Lady having furnished
him with all things necessary, he put forward; but ere he had gone far, he
received some part of the chastisement which he deserved for his
perfidiousness, for the Mule he was mounted on being apt to start gave him a
fall, whereby he so sprain'd one foot, that he was forced to make some stay at
Illescas, a place half way between Toledo and Madrid, and to send for
Surgeons to set all things right again.

Leaving him there confined to his chamber for some days, let us return to
Donna Victoria, who very much bewailed the absence of her Gallant, the very
thought of whom caused her no small affliction. A Servant of hers who had made
the bed where he lay, sound, under the bolster, a Picture of the Lady whom Don
Pedro was to be married to, folded up in a Letter which his Cousin had writ to
him from Madrid, which she delivered to her Mistress, who opening the Paper,
saw the Picture, whereat she was much disquieted; but she was much more
astonished, when she cast her eye on the ensuing

LETTER.
Dearest Cousin,
YOu will receive herein enclosed the Picture of the Lady Donna Brianda de la
Cerda, which is very exactly taken from the Original; I doubt not but the
charms of her Beauty will oblige you to hasten your departure. Her Father, Don
Juan de la Cerda, expects you with great impatience. In the mean time the
Contract of Marriage is a drawing up, and will be ready, before you be here to
sign it. Assure your self you will be extremely satisfied, that you have found
so excellent a wife. I am

Your affectionate Cousin, Don Rodrigo de Ribera.


Donna Victoria had scarcely come to the period of this Letter, but, through
the trouble she received at the reading of it, she fell into a swound, and
continued therein above half an hour, in the arms of her Maid. At last she came
to her self, bursting into sighs and tears; she railed at the Sevillian
Impostor, but much more at her own simplicity, that she had so lightly
prostituted her honor to an unknown person, whom so strange an adventure had
brought to her house. She spent that whole day in weeping and bemoaning her
misfortune: but considering withal, what hazard her reputation was in, she
resolved it should not be said of her, that she had been so basely affronted by
any man. Whereupon with the light she received from the Letter, of the occasion
of his journey, and the person to whom he was to be married, she put things in
order to her removal to Madrid; which she might better do than any other, in
regard she had not any Kinsman near enough to whom she might communicate her
intention. She communicated her design to Albert, an old Servant of hers, who
had brought her up from the cradle, and was very glad to wait on her.

Upon this resolution, she caused two Wagons to be laden with all things
necessary to furnish a house fit to receive a person of Quality, and took her
way toward Madrid. Being come thither, she commanded her Servant Albert, to
enquire whereabouts lived Don Juan de la Cerda, and whether the young Cavalier,
whom he intended to make his Son-in-law, were come from Sevil. She understood
by him, that he was not yet come, but that they expected him, which much
troubled the Lady, who knew nothing of the accident had happened to him near
Illescas.

The first thing this affronted Lady did, was to take a house for her self,
near that of Don Juan de la Cerda, and ordered Albert to live in it as Master
thereof. That done, she sent him to Don Juan's, to enquire whether she wanted a
waiting-Gentlewoman, for she would disguise her self, that she might not be
known by Don Pedro. The business had the effect she desired, for Donna Brianda
was then enquiring for a widow to wait on her, a custom much practiced in
Spain, where Ladies of quality have several of them, whom, being Widows, they
call Duennas. When this was proposed by Albert, who went under the name of
Father to his Mistress, Donna Brianda not only received her into her service,
but her Father, Albert, was also entertained into Don Juan's. Albert gave his
Mistress an account of his Negotiation, whereat she was extremely satisfied: so
that having put her self into the habit of a Duenna, she went the next day to
present her self to Donna Brianda, conducted by her pretended Father, Albert.
They were both very kindly entertained by Don Juan de la Cerda and his
Daughter. Donna Victoria wished she had not been so handsome, that the Suitor she
expected might be the less taken with her; however, she courageously resolved
to prosecute the imposture she was engaged in. Donna Brianda asked Albert, what
Countryman he was. He told her that he was born at a place called Utrera, near
Sevil; that his name was Stephen de Santillana (by which we shall henceforth
call him) that his Daughter had been married to a Merchant of that City, who
di'd as he was going for the West Indies, leaving so great Debts behind him,
that all his Estate went to satisfy his Creditors. Don Juan hearing that
Santillana was of Andalusia, asked him, whether he had lived any time at Sevil.
He told him, that he had often been in that City, but that his Daughter had
lived there. Don Juan would not at that time enquire any farther, nor enter
into any discourse with him concerning Don Pedro de Ribera. Donna Victoria was
entertained as Duenna to Donna Brianda, who took such an affection to her, that
she trusted her with all her Keys, to the great discontent of her other
Servants, who had lived with her many years. Santillana told them that he had a
House of his own, not far from Don Juan's, and a Wife (for Marcella an ancient
Maid of Donna Victoria's was to act that part) whereupon he had no Lodgings
assigned him in Don Juan's.

It is now time we return to Don Pedro de Ribera, who being recovered of his
fall, came to Madrid, and lighted at the House of his Cousin Don Rodrigo, who
was much troubled that he had not been there sooner. He told him the cause of
it, and gave him a particular account of all had passed in Donna Victoria's
Country House, even to the promise he had made her, under a feigned name. Don
Rodrigo asked him, what quality the Lady was of, whereto be answered, that her
name was Donna Victoria de Sylva, and that she was of one of the most noble
Families of Toledo. Don Rodrigo was very much dissatisfied with his procedure,
reproaching him with the unworthy action he had done, in abusing and
dishonouring that Lady, and that it was to be feared, she might hear of his
coming to Madrid in order to a Marriage with another, and find means to be
revenged for that affront.

They afterward fell into discourse concerning Donna Brianda, and Don Pedro
told him, he extremely fancied the Picture he had seen of her, but that, with
the other things he had been robbed of, he had lost it: though he knew well
enough, he had left it under the beds head at Donna Victoria's, which troubled
him not a little, however he dissembled it. Don Rodrigo told Don Pedro, that it
were fit he put himself into other Clothes, before he waited on his Mistress,
and that he must keep within doors till they were ready. Within two days a very
fair riding Suit was brought him, wherein pretending he was but newly come to
Town, he goes to the House of Don Juan de la Cerda, by whom he was received
with great demonstrations of kindness. Notice was immediately carried up to
Donna Brianda, that the person designed to be her Husband was coming up to her
Chamber, where she was with her Maids about her, who had just made an end of
Dressing her. Don Pedro coming in, conducted by Don Juan and Don Rodrigo, was
infinitely satisfied at the sight of his Mistress, whom he very civilly and
discreetly saluted, for he was a person of an excellent wit and a confident
carriage and demeanor. He found by the original of Donna Brianda, that the
Painter had done his work very faithfully, a virtue not much practiced by
Painters, especially upon such occasions as that was. He was ravished, to see
so great a Beauty, and she on the other side was well satisfied with the
handsome personage of Don Pedro.

There were yet some things to be done in order to the absolute conclusion of
the Marriage, at which there was a necessity of Don Pedro's presence; whereupon
he, Don Juan, and Don Rodrigo withdrew into another room, where they locked
themselves in with a Notary, and some Friends, who were to be witnesses at the
Articles of the agreement. Donna Brianda continued all that time in her
Chamber, with her Servants, talking of Don Pedro, her Husband-to-be, every one
congratulating her good fortune, save only Donna Victoria, who saying nothing
at all, her Mistress observed it, and being all alone with her, Donna Theodorn,
said she to her, (that was the name she had assumed) whence comes it, that,
while all the rest celebrate the happiness of my choice, you only are silent?
Methinks you might have contributed somewhat to the public congratulation,
though you had done it only out of complaisance. I pray give me some reason
for it. Donna Victoria had done it purposely, in prosecution of her design, and
this question came as seasonably as she could have wished it, so that she made
her this Answer. As to the person of Don Pedro, Madam, there is not any thing
to be said against it, nay he is so accomplished, that there is not any thing
to be wished in him which he has not already. My silence proceeds hence, that
I had a particular knowledge of him at Sevil, for I lived in a Quarter of the
City, which he much frequented. I neither will, nor ought to conceal from you
the occasion of his so often coming thither, for it is my duty to be faithful
to you, as having no other design than to serve you, and endeavor your quiet,
so as that you may not live in a perpetual dis-enjoyment of your self all the
rest of your days. Know then, Madam, that if you match your self with Don
Pedro, you will be brought to a kind of civil death, instead of receiving the
satisfactions of wedlock. Donna Brianda was much astonished at this discourse,
and pressed her Duenna, to discover to her more clearly, what she had but too
great a desire to tell her. Whereupon entreating her to retire into a more
secret place, where they might not be observed by her other Women, Donna
Victoria gave her this malicious account of the perfidious Don Pedro.

I should not live with the respect and duty I owe you as my Mistress, nor
according to the affection I bear you, if I expressed not my self clearly to
you, in a business wherein you are so highly concerned, and on which depends
your greatest felicity in this world. Know then, Madam, that Don Pedro fell in
love with a Lady at Sevil, one very handsome and well descended, in a word
wanting nothing but a fortune suitable to her quality. He courted her so
earnestly, that she, finding her self obliged by so great demonstrations of
Affection, Letters, and continual Embassies, attended with presents, from Don
Pedro, satisfied his desires, upon a promise that he would make her his Wife,
whereof there are many witnesses. But the business was to be kept secret for a
time; for Don Pedro's Father was then alive, who, having received some
intelligence of that Love, endeavored all he could to prevent Don Pedro's
marriage with Donna Elvira de Monsalvo; so was the Lady called. The continuance
of his visits to her produced living proofs, which were two Sons and a
Daughter, who are at this time with the Mother. When Don Pedro's Father was
removed out of the way, (which happened not long after) Donna Elvira expected
he should make good his promise, and marry her, but he, for some time, came not
so much as to see her. What inconveniences she was put to from the time of
their acquaintance she knows to her sorrow, and I am not ignorant thereof, for
I Lived near her, and went often to her House. Being now convinced that he
intended to leave her in the Lerch, she discovered the business to two
Cousin-Germans of hers, who were so enraged thereat, that they immediately
resolved to oblige Don Pedro, by force, to perform the promise he had made to
their Kinswoman. Don Pedro went to a certain Farm he had, not far from Sevil,
to avoid his Adversaries, who, knowing he went out of the way purposely because
he would not satisfy their Cousin, resolved to be the death of him. Things
were in this posture when my Father brought me to Madrid, where I have been
about these six weeks. This is the account I can give you of Don Pedro, who
must not think himself secure in this Court, for the Lady's Kinsmen, whom I
know to be gallant and stout Persons, as soon as they hear of his being here,
will be sure to attend his motion, and revenge the affront done to their
Cousin; nay it will be easier for them to do it here than at Sevil.

Donna Brianda heard very attentively the story told her by the Duenna, and was
extremely troubled, to find Don Pedro so far engaged with another. She asked
her a thousand questions, among others, whether he was much in love with that
Mistress, whether that Donna Elvira was very handsome, etc. whereto she made
such Answers as were suitable to her design, which was to put Don Pedro clearly
out of her favor. Donna Brianda resolved to give her Father an account of all,
and leave it to him to inform himself more fully of the business. She
immediately went to the Room where he was to speak to him, for all things were
concluded as to the Marriage.

In the mean time, Donna Victoria was left in the outer-room, where the Women
and Duennas are wont to wait. There came in to them a Servant of Don Pedro's
whom he had sent to the Post for Letters from Sevil. Enquiring for his Master,
to give him the packet, Donna Victoria told him, that he was within, but that
as soon as he came out she would deliver it to him. Having opened the packet,
she put into it a Letter she immediately writ, and, sealing it up again, came
where her Mistress was. She asked her whither she was going with those Letters?
The other answered without the least discovery of any malice, that they were
directed to Signor Don Pedro, and had been brought thither a little before by
one of his Servants from the Sevil-Post. Curiosity was an ingredient of the
first Woman, and it is very fruitfully spread through the whole Sex. Donna
Brianda showed her self nor free from it on this occasion, and she was the more
excusable considering the story had been told her by the subtle Duenna. She was
tempted to open the packet, wherein finding one Letter written with a Woman's
hand (which was that written by Donna Victoria) she could do no less than open
it, and directing her Eye down to the bottom of it, found it subscribed by one
Donna Elvira de Monsalvo. She read it, and was confirmed in what before she not
fully credited.

THE LETTER.
My dearest,
YOur absence and my indisposition have reduced me to such extremity, that I
cannot imagine I have any long time to live, it being impossible I should hold
out, after the news I have heard of your resolution to be married at Madrid,
which cannot easily be done, without a transcendent baseness, by a person so
nearly engaged to me as you are. You know that you cannot bestow on another
what is so lawfully due to me, especially if you make the least reflection on
the precious pledges there are between us thereof. I have no other advice to
give you, as things now stand, but that, if you are at such a loss of all shame
and conscience, there is a God in Heaven, who sees our most secret thoughts,
and passes a just judgment on them; and that I have many noble friends, who
measuring the small account you make of them by your slighting of me, will not
fail to revenge the affront done to us all. I hope we shall not be forced to
those extremities, considering how highly you are obliged to do things suitably
to the nobleness of your Birth, and to acknowledge, as you ought, her, whom,
while we both Live, you must look on, as

Your lawful Wife Donna Elvira de Monsalvo.


This Letter fully satisfied Donna Brianda that all she had heard from the
malicious Duenna was true. Her Father coming into the room as she had done
reading it, she acquainted him with all that concerned Don Pedro, showing him
the Letter from Donna Elvira. He was extremely astonished, to find that a
Cavalier of so noble a Family, had abused a Lady of such quality, and that,
having Children by her, he should be so impudent as to make his addresses to
his Daughter. He forbore reproaching him therewith, till he had better informed
himself from a Friend of his of Sevil, then at Madrid, whom he immediately went
to look for.

Don Juan was but hardly got out of doors, but Don Pedro and his Man came in,
for his man having told him that he had delivered the packet to one of Donna
Brianda's Women, he was come to receive it from her, since it was not brought
to his Cousin's, whither all his Letters were directed. It was his fortune to
meet with Donna Brianda in the outer-room, where her Father had left her. I
should not have returned so soon, my dearest Lady, said he to her, had not
somewhat extraordinary obliged me thereto; it is to receive some Letters, which
my Man tells me he delivered to one of your Women. She thought, says Donna
Brianda, that you had been still with my Father. I casually meeting her as she
was coming into the room, asked her what she came for. She answering, it was to
deliver you the packet, I took it from her, and (presuming that a Cavalier of
your age and complexion could not have lived to this time in Sevil, and not
have an inclination for some Lady) a certain conjunction of curiosity and
jealousy persuaded me to open it. That curiosity has done me a courtesy, and
has satisfied me in some things, which before I only suspected: and therefore
I forbear desiring your excuse, since I have received so good an information,
before I was any further engaged with you; for had it come too late, I had been
ruined. Here Is a Letter from a person you should be well acquainted with; this
would have been enough to undeceive me, but it only confirms a relation I had
received before, upon which I was almost resolved to put such a check to your
pretensions to me, as that you should have but little encouragement to continue
them. Farewell, my presence will but trouble you, this Letter will acquaint you
with what you are not ignorant of.

Don Pedro receiving the Letter out of her hand was not a little surprised, not
imagining what might have happened to him. He read it, and presently inferred,
that it was a trick put upon him by some envious person, who was desirous to
obstruct his happiness. Meeting with Donna Victoria (whom, as we said before,
he knew not in her Widdow's habit) Ah Madam, said he to her, what forgeries are
these? I a Mistress at Sevil, and of this name? I children by her, and that
upon a promise of marriage? If it be not the greatest lie that ever humane
malice invented, let me never look Man in the face again. For my part, replies
the subtle Duenna, I find my self inclined to believe, that what you say may be
true; but your main concernment is to bring my Lady to that persuasion. I know
her to be of such an humor as not easily to quit a resentment, which she
entertains upon just grounds, and I much question whether she will admit your
addresses any further, for I know she has acquainted her Father withal, and
he is gone to a Gentleman of Sevil, an intimate friend of his, who is now in
this City. I am very glad of it, says Don Pedro, for he will find it to be an
absolute imposture, and that there is not any Lady in Sevil that goes under the
name of Donna Elvira de Monsalvo. But I beseech you tell me, Madam, whether
your intimacy be very great with the Lady Donna Brianda. So great replied she,
that I am the only person in her favor, and to whom she is pleased to
communicate her thoughts. If it be so, says Don Pedro, it is possible you may
procure me the favor from her, that I may vindicate my self. I much question
whether she will ever speak to you again, said she, for she is extremely
incensed against you, and when once angry, if justly, she is the hardest to be
appeased that ever I knew. But, said he, if you are so much in her favor, you
may prevail somewhat with her, by representing to her the extraordinary
affection I bear her. It is in my power, said she, to do with her what you
desire; but what will you give me if I can procure you a favorable audience
from her? Any thing you can desire, said he to her, if you mind only matter of
advantage. You see I am very young, says she, and consequently may hope to be
married again, money is the only thing I want; if I do what you wish, may I
rely on your liberality for my reward. That you may know how earnestly I desire
it, says he, do what I desire, and I will make your fortune he^vier by five
hundred Crowns than it is. I most humbly thank you, replies she, but I must
tell you, Sir, that I have been so deluded by the verbal promises sometimes
made me by a person of your quality, that I have reason to mistrust whatever
is promised, if I have it not in writing. You will be pleased to excuse me,
Sir, if my fear to be deceived as I have been force me to these precautions,
and to assure your self, that those satisfied, I will endeavor to serve you to
the utmost of my power. To give you absolute satisfaction, as to that point,
Madam, said he, help me with pen, ink and paper, and you shall have the
security you desire your self.

Donna Victoria would see the issue of it, and so brought him what he desired.
Don Pedro kept his word with her; nay either out of ignorance of the form of
such obligations, or to make a greater expression of his earnestness that she
should assist him, he proved so liberal, as to give her a Blank signed and
sealed, not mentioning the sum whereto he obliged himself, telling her he had
not specified it, out of a design to requite her beyond his promises,
proportionably to the service she should do him, in the recovery of his
Mistress's favor. She saw this happened according to her wishes, so that
acknowledging the favor Don Pedro had done her, she promised him her utmost
endeavors to deserve it, by recovering him into the favor of his Mistress.
The amorous Cavalier believed her, and took his leave. Albert coming in soon
after, Victoria gave him an account of what progress she had made, and putting
into his hands the Blank signed by Don Pedro, bid him write above his name a
formal promise of marriage, dating it about the time of his being at her
Country house near Toledo, with two witnesses: which Albert did, imitating as
near as he could Don Pedro's hand.

That day, Don Juan failed to meet the Gentleman of Sevil, and put off the
visit he intended him till the next. In the mean time, Donna Victoria
understood from Donna Brianda, that she was resolved to lead Apes in hell,
rather than have Don Pedro to her husband. Having already trusted her Duenna
with some of her secrets, she thought she might make an absolute discovery of
her self to her, and thereupon told her, how that before her Father had treated
of a marriage between her and Don Pedro, she had been courted by a person of
Honor, named Don Sancho de Leyba; that she had some inclination toward him;
and that the persuasions of her Father had prevailed with her to entertain the
applications of Don Pedro; but having discovered his unworthiness, she was
resolved to re-address her affection to Don Sancho.

Donna Victoria was almost out of her self for joy to hear that news, for it
put her into a confidence that her design would take: and the more to promote
it, she disposed Donna Brianda as much as lay in her power to favor Don
Sancho. He must needs be displeased with me, says she to her, yet I doubt not
but a Letter from me will re-engage him my humble Servant. The crafty Duenna
proffered to be the bearer of it, on condition she might do it by Coach. Donna
Brianda was very glad to find her Woman so ready to serve her, especially in a
business which she was so much pleased with; and so she commanded a Coach to be
made ready, and that she should go immediately to see Don Sancho, to whom she
writ a Letter. Donna Victoria took Coach, pretending to go to Don Sancho's
house, but she went to her own, and bid the Coachman return to Donna Brianda,
and tell her, that for fear notice might be taken of the Coach, she would go
afoot to the place where she had sent her, conducted by Santillana her
pretended Father. From that house, she writ two Letters, one, to Don Juan,
desiring him to come to her; the other to Don Sancho, to the same effect, with
directions to find the house.

While the Letters were carried abroad, she put off her Widows habit, and put
on that of a person of the highest quality, expecting these two visits with the
accustomed ceremonies of Spain. Don Sancho de Leyba was not long a coming,
though he knew nothing of the person who had written to him. There had not past
many complements between him and Donna Victoria, but word was brought her, that
Don Juan de la Cerda was alighted out of his Coach, and was coming into the
house. Sir, said she to Don Sancho, I am obliged to speak with the person who
is coming up all alone. Not but that you may hear the discourse we shall have
together; and therefore let me entreat you to stand behind this Curtain, whence
you will hear all we say, for it concerns you more than you imagine, and will
prove to your advantage. Don Sancho compli'd, not knowing what might be the
issue of this precaution.

Don Juan came in, and having taken a seat, Donna Victoria (whom he knew not as
she was then dressed) addressed her self to him with this discourse. I doubt
not, Sir, but you somewhat wonder, you should be entreated hither by a Letter,
and that from a person not known to you. To recover you from that confusion, I
will give you an account of my self. I was born in the Imperial City of Toledo,
the only Daughter of the House from which I am descended, and Heir thereof. I
am of the Family of Sylva, so well known all over Spain, that I need say
nothing of it. As to my quality, I am to tell you farther, that my Father was,
in his time, honored with the Order of St. James, and my Brother, of that of
Alcantara, with the command of a Troop of Horse under his Majesty in Flanders.
Upon his death, I retired to a Country House I have near Toledo, where I lived
privately, contenting my self with the innocent enjoyments of a Country life,
without the least acquaintance of any thing of Love, till that, one morning a
Shepherd of mine brought to my house, two men, who had been robbed and stripped
the night before by certain High-waymen. I took compassion on them, especially
him, who by his demeanor seemed to be the Master, and out of two chests of
clothes my Brother had left, I furnished them with two suits, wherewith they
covered their nakedness. They seemed to be very thankful for so seasonable a
favor; but the more considerable of the two has treated me very ungratefully,
which is the ordinary style of Courtiers, and has required my charitable
offices only with flatteries and deceit. I was so simple as to be cajoll'd, by
the caresses he made me, during four days that I kept him at my house, and he
prevailed so far with me, that I was no longer at my own disposal. The
reiterated oaths and protestations of a person of that worth, raised me into a
persuasion that he really loved me, and that induced me to love him again; to
be short, upon a promise he made me of marriage, he got me in an humor to
grant him the greatest of favors. He made me believe that his going to Court
was for the prosecution of some Law-business that concerned him very highly. He
desired my leave to go to Madrid, promising to return again in a short time,
but with such demonstrations of love as might easily have prevailed with one
who had not fancied him so affectionately as I had done. I supplied him with
all things necessary, and he left me extremely troubled at his departure. Now,
by a Picture and Letter he left behind him under the bolster, I found that the
occasion of his coming to this Court was in order to a marriage between him,
and that miracle of Beauty, Donna Brianda, your Daughter. Now our Honor being
the most considerable thing we ought to be tender of, I could do no less, upon
this procedure of Don Pedro, than resolve to come to this Court, and to apply
my self to my friends, that, by their favor, I might cross the marriage he is
about, and you will find, that I may easily do it, if you but see what Cards I
have to play. I conceived my first overture should be to acquaint you with my
disgrace, the dishonor I have run into by the acquaintance of Don Pedro, and
his treachery toward me, that receiving it from my own mouth, you may not be
too forward to conclude what is already resolved between you, as I have
understood. With the Paper I have here in my hand, I will prosecute him to the
utmost; it is under his own hand and seal, and witnesses to it: be pleased,
Sir, to peruse it, and see whether I have not reason to prosecute this
ungrateful and perjured man, and to force him to a performance of the promise
he has made me.

Don Juan was astonished at this relation of Donna Victoria's, and, by what was
put into his hands, found out the disposition of Don Pedro, and concluded him a
fickle imprudent person, who pursued his enjoyments, without any thought of the
consequences thereof, and thereupon he resolved there should be no further talk
of any marriage between him and his Daughter. Opening the Paper which Donna
Victoria had given him, he found in it these words.

THis present writing, written with my own hand, and sealed with my Seal,
witnesses, that I, Don Pedro de Ribera, an Inhabitant of Sevil, acknowledge my
self to be the lawful husband of Donna Victoria de Sylva, an Inhabitant of
Toledo, and that I will perform the present promise I make her of marriage
whenever I shall be, by her, thereto required. Signed and Sealed in the
presence of Albert and Marcella, Servants to the said Donna Victoria.

Don Pedro de Ribera.


Having read this promise, and knowing the h^nd and seal of Don Pedro, Don Juan
said to her, Madam, I am very much troubled, that Don Pedro (a person so well
descended as he is) should be guilty of so unworthy an action, and a demeanor
so full of treachery; for at the time when he gave you this writing, he was
coming hither purposely to be married to my Daughter. But the account you have
given me of him is such, that I assure you, I will have no more to do with him,
since you have so much reason to oppose it. Prosecute your own right, and leave
him not till you have obtained your desires, and be assar'd, I shall assist you
to the utmost of my power, since I find your honor so highly concerned in it*
I have some friends here, and those powerful, I will engage them all to serve
you, that you may find I am a person, who prefers a just cause before all
self-interest.

Donna Victoria gave him very humble thanks for so great a favor, and the
tears that fell from her at the close of her discourse, heightened his zeal and
tenderness toward her. Don Juan took along with him the writing which Donna
Victoria had shown him, that he might thereby induce Don Pedro to an
acknowledgment of his fault. With those protestations he took leave of Donna
Victoria, promising to see her again within a short time, and to return the
promise of marriage, reiterating the desires he had to serve her. He thereupon
left her, giving Don Sancho the liberty to come upon the stage. As soon as he
had taken a seat, You have understood, says Donna Victoria to him, if so be you
have heard the discourse between Don Juan and my self, what has passed between
me and Don Pedro. Upon which account (as you have heard from her Father) you
find he is never like to be husband to the fair Donna Brianda. She sent me
hither to acquaint you, that what has been done on her part in order to the
marriage between her and Don Pedro was purely out of compliance with the
commands of her Father, and that she is glad of the occasion she now has to
quit him, and reassume that kindness and affection she ever had for you. What
I say, you will find in writing under her hand, when you have perused this
Letter. Don Sancho, having read it, was the most satisfied man in the world, to
find his blasted hopes now beginning to spring again.

Donna Victoria perceiving it, to consirm his satisfaction, continued her
discourse to him thus. I know, Seignor Don Sancho, you will be astonished in
your self, how this Letter should fall into my hands. It is my self only can
unriddle it. Being in love, as you are, you know that that little Divinity is
the Author of many disguises and transformations, as you are taught by Ovid in
his Metamorphosis, and consequently you doubt not, but that I, loving an
unconstant person, who had had such precious pledges of my affection, should
leave nothing unattempted to recover my honor, and oblige him to the
satisfaction of what he owes me. I am come to this Court, with a design, being
what I am, to get into the service of Donna Brianda, and have effected it. For
though you see me in this house, (which was taken upon my account) I live in
hers, waiting on her in the quality of a Duenna, a part I have assumed, the
better to elude Don Pedro, and to do all say in my power to put him out of my
Mistress's favor: and I have also brought that so far about, that I am
confident there will never be any marriage between them, and she is wholly
inclined to favor you. Now consider with your self what you would have me to
say to your Mistress, for I am just going to put on my Widows habit, and I must
return presently, and am afraid she will think I have staid too long. If you
will return her an Answer, you have here all things requisite to do it. I think
it were fit you should, that Donna Brianda may see, I have punctually obeyed
her commands. As to the secret of my disguise, I pray keep it such, for it
concerns me, that it should not be discovered a while. I rely on your
discretion, and, knowing you to be a person of Honor and worth, I presume you
will not discover it.

This discourse very much surpised Don Sancho, who took occasion to commend
her courage and generosity, and returned her his most humble thanks, for the
favor she had done him, in entrusting him with the secret of her Love, and
prayed Heaven to give him life to acknowledge and require so great an
obligation. He promised her not to discover any thing till she commanded him to
do it; and thereupon, seeing her in haste to be gone, he writ a Letter in
Answer to what he had received from his Mistress, full of amorous complements,
and pro^estations of fidelity to the last gasp. While he was writing, Donna
Victoria but on her Widow's habit, and made all the haste she could to Don
Juan's.

In the mean time Don Pedro, extremely resenting the imposture put upon him,
acquainted his Cousin Don Rodrigo with it, whereupon they went both together to
Don Juan's. He not being within, they asked for Donna Brianda, who came out
without any ceremony to receive their visit, that it might be the shorter; for
she had no great mind to see Don Pedro. The poor Gentleman endeavored to
vindicate himself, swearing a thousand oaths, that he never heard of any Lady
in Sevil, of the name mentioned in the Letter, and that no doubt some envious
person had put this trick upon him: and that if Don Juan should upon enquiry
find it to be true, he would be content to lose his honor and life, nay more,
the hopes of ever enjoying her.

The earnestness of his discourse put Donna Brianda into some doubt, that what
she had heard was some imposture advanced purposely to obstruct his
pretensions, and referred it to her Father to make a full discovery thereof.
Her Answer to them was, that she was not at her own disposal, that it was her
duty, to comply with that of her Father, and consequently, she could not quit
the ill-impression she had received of Don Pedro, till she were better informed
of the Truth: that her Father would come in ere long, and that she could take
no resolution without his orders, in a business of so great importance.

While they were engaged in this discourse, Don Juan comes in from the visit*
he had made to Donna Victoria. Don Rodrigo made him a short relation of what
had happened, and renewed to him the just complaint which his Cousin had reason
to make of the crime laid to his charge. Whereupon both desiring him to hold
his hand, at least till there were an exact enquiry made into the business, he
desired them to sit down, and gave them this Answer.

Gentlemen, I went out in hopes to be informed by some friends of Sevil, now
here, whether that which is imputed to Don Pedro were true, and I could not
meet with them: but if I had found them, it is possible they might know nothing
of the business, for Sevil is a great City, and some parts of it lie at such a
distance from others, that they may well be accounted different places. What I
found most certain is, that Don Pedro has made a promise of Marriage to a Lady
of Toledo, who entertained him at a Country House of hers, after he had been
robbed by certain Thieves; and what is yet more to be considered, she thought
it not much to secure his affection by the forfeiture of her Honor. I have it
from the Lady her self, who sent for me, and showed me the promise under his
hand, which since we all know, there can be no evasion.

He thereupon showed it to both the Cousins, who were both at such a loss that
they knew not what to say, especially Don Pedro, who sufficiently betrayed his
guilt by his astonishment, but swore withal that he had not made that promise
under his own name, but under a feigned. But Don Rodrigo knowing all the
circumstances of the business, was most liberal of his reproaches to his
Cousin, which raising a certain compassion in Don Juan, forced this discourse
from him. Signor Don Pedro, We find by many experiences, that a young Man, once
fallen in Love, will do any thing to obtain his desires. That Love should
overcome you, I wonder not at all; but what occasions my astonishment, is, that
you should have the confidence to address your self to a person of the quality
this Lady is of, and dishonor her, without ever considering, that, in time,
she might acquaint her friends therewith, who would be sure to revenge the
affront. And what adds to this astonishment, is, that you durst do such an
action when you were coming hither purposely in order to your matching with my
Daughter, for whom, if any credit may be given your Letters, you pretended to
have a passionate affection. I see not how your heart could be capable of such
a competition of passions, that you should pretend the greatest inclinations
imaginable for one, and treat of a marriage with another. Being a person of
Honor, I doubt not but you will make it appear in your actions, and that is,
that you stand to the promise you made to the Lady Victoria, though it were
only out of this consideration, that it argues a more generous nature to do
that willingly, which must otherwise unwillingly be done. The Lady is not so
destitute of Friends as you happily imagine; she is now at Madrid, come expressly
to recover her debt, which no doubt she will; and her cause being so just, it is
not likely she will want assistance. My advice is, that you endeavor to
prevent the ill reports which the business must raise of you; perform what you
have promised, and let not your Love to my Daughter blind you any further, for
I am resolved to shut her up in a Cloister, for the remainder of her Life,
rather than she shall ever be your Wife.

With that he rose up, and, without any complement, went into another room.
Donna Brianda followed him, and the two Cousins, without so much as a word
exchanged, went home, where Don Rodrigo fell into bitter expostulations with
his Cousin, for his engaging himself in so unworthy an action. Don Pedro had
nothing to reply, but that he was astonished how that promise came to be signed
with his own name, having made it only under a supposititious.

Leaving them in that confusion, making several reflections on the adventure,
let us return to the feigned Waiting Woman, who was got back to Don Juan's, and
had delivered Don Sancho's Letter to Donna Brianda. She was infinitely
satisfied with it, as fearing he would not have been so easily retriv'd into
her service. Donna Brianda acquainted her, how that Don Pedro and his Cousin
had been there; what had passed between them and her Father; and that he had
absolutely dismissed them, it being discovered, that Don Pedro had committed
another impertinence, and had made a promise of Marriage to a Lady of Toledo,
who was come express to Madrid, to obstruct his pretensions to her. Donna
Victoria pretended the greatest astonishment in the world, and burst forth into
imprecations against Don Pedro.

In the mean time there came a message to Donna Brianda from a She-Cousin of
hers, inviting her to a Comedy which was to be represented at her House, that
night, whereto she sent Answer, that she would come. Donna Victoria having made
so successful a progress in her business, bethought her self of an invention
that should bring it to an absolute period, for she had the management of all.
She told Donna Brianda, that if she pleased to wave her going to the Comedy she
might have a meeting that night with Don Sancho, in a secure place, to wit at
her Father's house, where she might do what she pleased her self. The Lady had
a great kindness for Don Sancho, and was desirous to prevent the reproaches he
might make upon her former discarding of him, and so she accepted the proffer
made by her Woman. She immediately sent for Santillana, and gave him a Letter
for Don Sancho, whereby he was desired to come that night at eight to Donna
Victoria's house. He was sent with another to Don Pedro de Ribera, acquainting
him that Donna Brianda, notwithstanding the indignation of her Father, and what
she her self had said, was resolved secretly to marry him, and desired to meet
him that night, at a House, whither the Bearer would bring him, and that he
should not fail to be there at nine. The two Cavaliers kindly received their
Letters, especially Don Pedro, who being but a little before dismissed, was
re-call'd to join hands with Donna Brianda, and imagined it done by the
intercession of the Waiting-Gentlewoman, to whom he thought himself infinitely
obliged, and the present he had made her well bestowed. The two Gallants failed
not to be there at the time appointed, and in the mean time Donna Brianda and
her Woman took Coach, leaving Don Juan at home, ready to go to bed. They went
to Donna Victoria's house, which seemed to be that of Santillana, where they
were received by Marcella, Victoria's maid, who went under the name of her
Stepmother. While Donna Brianda was expecting the arrival of Don Sancho, she
sent Albert with a Letter to Don Juan, which contained these words.

THE LETTER.
Sir,
MY Lady Donna Brianda, instead of going to see the Comedy, whereto she had
been invited, is come to my Father's house, with a resolution to be secretly
married to Don Pedro, notwithstanding your prohibitions to the contrary. I
conceived it my duty to give you notice thereof, it is your work to take what
course you think fit to prevent it; for my part I have done what lay in me, and
I shall not need to fear any reproach from you, since I have sent you timely
notice of her intention.

Donna Theodora.


Santillana was dispatched away with this Letter, and ordered not to deliver it
till half an hour after nine, which he did. In the mean time Don Sancho failed
not to come, precisely at his time, and was directed to his Mistress, who gave
him such satisfaction as silenced all his complaints. Victoria left them
together in a room, where she locked them in. Not long after came Don Pedro,
according to the time appointed him, and was received by Victoria, who disposed
him into a room, without light, alleging it concerned him, that he were not
seen; that he should forbear making any noise, and that it would not be long
ere his Mistress came to him. He promised to obey her in all things, and staid
there so long as that Victoria might shift her self into Clothes suitable to
her quality. That done, she went into the room, and speaking very low, it was
no hard matter for her to deceive Don Pedro, and to make him believe he was
very much in his Mistress's favor.

Leaving these young people thus matched let us return to Don Juan, who
received the Letter from the Duenna just as he was getting into bed. The old
Gentleman was extremely surprised thereat, and going out of doors, attended by
Albert, he went to the Commissary's house, which was hard by. The afflicted Man
acquainted him what posture things were in; whereupon the Commissary taking
some of his people about him, they went to Albert's house, where, after some
knocking, they were let in. They happily had a Lantern with them, and it did
them good service, for they found the House without any light. They lighted a
Torch, and went into several rooms, in one whereof finding Don Sancho and Donna
Brianda, the Commissary asked them what they did there? Don Sancho told him he
was there with his Wife, which was confirmed by Donna Brianda. Don Juan would
have run him through; but the Commissary telling him she was not with the
person he imagined, that that Gentleman was Don Sancho de Leyba, a person of
great quality and well known about the Court, Don Juan could do no less than
approve of their Marriage, though 'twere only out of a satisfaction, that she
was not fallen into the hands of Don Pedro, whom he hated extremely, for the
strange pranks he had played.

They went thence into another room, which they found locked, and thereupon
threatening to break open the door, Don Pedro opened it within, and comes out
telling them he was there with Donna Brianda his wife, and that it was with her
consent, he was come into that house to marry her. Upon that discourse Donna
Victoria came out of the room and said to him, You are deceived, sweet Seignor
Don Pedro, I a^ not the woman you think me, but Donna Victori^ de Sylva, who
expects from you the reparation o^ her honor; the recovery whereof obliged me
t^ enter into the service of Donna Brianda, serving he^ in the quality of a
Waiting Woman. Don Juan de (...) Cerda looking on her a little more attentively
that he had done, knew her, as also did the fair Lad^ Donna Brianda. Both of
them reflecting on the disguises she had run through to retrive her Honor,
very seriously commended her courage and contrivances, and as much blamed Don
Pedro, who finding himself convinced, and condemned of all, ratifi^^ once more
the promise he had made her. Don Sanch^ and his Mistress were ensur'd one to
the other, an^ the solemnity of their marriage ordered to be eigh^ days after.
They proved both very happy in their wives, of whom they had many children, who
were the comfort and felicity of their Parents. But particularly for Don Pedro,
when he reflected on the strange adventures whereby Donna Victoria engaged him
to his duty, he looked on all as so many extraordinary demonstrations of her
affection, toward him, which occasioned his to be multiplied toward her,
besides the kindness he had for her upon the account of her ingenuity. For wit
in a Woman is a great enflamer of Love, especially that Woman's wit which is
ever best at a dead lift.

RUfina and her Maids were extremely pleased with this Novel of Don faimo's;
that eloquence which was so natural in him, added as so many precious grains to
the perfect metal of his other excellent qualities, rendered him of so good
weight in her esteem, that she could no longer forbear expressing it in her
words and actions. On the other side, the Gallant, finding her so tractable,
resolved to desist from the intention he had to rob her, and wished for a
handsome opportunity to acquaint her therewith, which soon happened. For Rufina
persuading her self that Don Jaimo was the same person he had described himself
in his relation, told him, that she had some intentions, before her Father were
returned from Madrid, to leave the house she was in, to carry along with her
all the best household stuff, and to go with him into Valentia, since he was so
powerful in those parts, and descended from so illustrious a Family, and that
her Father would not be dis-satisfi'd with her marriage, when he should come to
hear of it.

The disguised Cavalier was forced, upon this occasion, to discover how it had
been resolved that he should trapan her, and not desirous she should continue
any longer ignorant of the imposture, My dear heart, said he to her, having
experienced the kindness and affection wherewith you have been pleased to
honor me, I were the most ungrateful person in the world, if I should keep you
in darkness any longer. No, I will make an absolute and full discovery of my
self to you, and tell you such things as have hitherto not so much as entered
your imagination; and certainly I were not pardonable, if the sincere affection
I bear you did not somewhat alleviate my crime. I do not say it consists in my
loving of you, for it is impossible, that those who have once a sight of your
divine beauty should not love you: I have seen it, and, subdued by your charms,
am become a captive thereto, my liberty and all the powers and faculties of my
soul being absolutely at your disposal. It Is a Victory, Madam, which you might
easily obtain over hearts much more rebellious against Love than mine is, which
became your slave, upon the first sight of those two Suns; and this is a truth
I shall never recant while I live.

The meaning of this Preamble is, to induce you to pardon me the offense I have
committed against you. I now ingeniously acknowledge, that I am not the person
I described in the account you obliged me to give me of my extraction, though
it be true I was born in Valentia; but one meanly descended, yet of people of
good repute. My Father got his livelihood by the labor of his hands, and the
sweat of his brows, being by profession a Rope-maker. Me-thought I had some
apprehensions above my condition; and therefore unwilling to fall to my
Father's laborious trade, I went into Casteel, having before been in Andalusia,
and I made those advantages of my Travel and the conversation I met with, and
improved the natural Talent I had so well, that I never wanted either friends
or money. I came to this City in the company of a man named Crispin, who had
been a prisoner some time at Malaga, for some crime he would by no means
acknowledge to me. The person has obliged me, having born my charges all the
way; nay more, he has lent me money, out of a confidence of the reality I had
to serve him, in the secret trade we drove together. He declared his mind to me
one day, and advised me, by some pretense or other, to get into your house, for
he knew you had good store of money, and was desirous to disburthen you of some
part of it. From the discourse he made, I inferred, that he had been a prisoner
at Malaga for some robbery. Now to compass our design, we pretended a quarrel,
which should oblige me to take refuge in your house: and in the mean time, you
have entertained me with such extraordinary kindness, and have so nobly obliged
me, that I find the favors you have done me will frustrate Crispin's
intention. And therefore now that I acquaint you with the trick we designed to
put upon you, assure your self I will endeavor to retort it upon himself, and
get out of him what money he has, to chastise him for his folly. For heaven
forbid I should prove ungrateful to a person who has obliged me so highly as
you have done. I have discovered my Soul to you, dispose of me now as you think
fit, for I am resolved to perish, ere I ever consent you shall receive any
injury, though I have disclaimed the quality, I had unjustly assumed.

Rufina was extremely exasperated against Crispin, not so much for his design
to be revenged on her for the prank she played him at Malaga, but upon an
apprehension that he might have acquainted Jaimo what kind of person she was,
and what trade she drove. Whereupon consdering that he had so ingenuously
discovered himself to her, and acknowledged even to the meanness of his birth,
she thought her self obliged to do the like, and to give him a sincere account
of her descent, course of life, friends, in a word, all her adventures, to her
arrival at Toledo. But Love and Wine make people talk more than they should.
Jaimo was glad that Rufina was no better descended than himself: that equality
of condition not only occasioned a greater kindness, but begat thoughts of a
match, between them. They resolved to leave Toledo, and to take up their
habitation at Madrid; but Rufina told him, she would first be revenged of
Crispin, who intended to serve her such a base trick. Jaimo undertook it,
telling her, that under pretense of their acquaintance and friendship, he might
easily bring him into the noose, and not only leave him mony-less, but also
find him a good secure lodging, lest he should attempt to revenge himself.

With this resolution, leaving Rufina's he went to Crispin, whom he found at
his lodging, not expecting to have seen him so soon. He was overjoyed to heat
how his Companion had insinuated himself into Rufina's favor, whereupon the
other telling him, that to make sure work of her, he wanted a sum of money, as
well for expense, as to gain the Servants, the Apostate Hermit answered he
should not want it. By this means Jaimo thought to oblige him to a greater
confidence of him, heightning the intended cheat with a thousand oaths of an
inviolable Friendship. Thus was that old experienced Turn-key of villainy
brought into a Fool's paradise; for, that Jaimo might live sutably to the
relation he had made of himself, he gave him a hundred pieces in gold, to be
disposed of as he pleased, hoping to have them returned, attended with six
times as many. He took them out of a bag where were five or six hundred more,
some part of his former atchievments. Jaimo observed the place, where he put up
that treasure, and swore to himself, that he would not sleep heartily till be
had altered the property of that bag. While Crispin was gone out to give the
Hostess order for a brace of Partridges and a Rabet for his, and his Camerade's
supper, he went to the port-manteu, wherein the money was garrisoned, and opening
the chain (a thing he could do as cleaverly as any of his profession) took out
the bag, and disposed it into a place, whence he might easily remove it at his
departure. They supped very merrily, which ended, Jaimo took leave of Crispin,
putting him over head and ears in hope, that he would bring his design to a
period.

He went straight to Rufina's, who it may well be presumed, received him very
kindly. He gave her an account what had passed between him and Crispin, and how
he had with his own money promoted the design he had to chouse him. Being alone
with her, he showed her the goodly pieces, for she had a great affection to
money of that color. Jaimo represented to her, how much it concerned them to
leave Toledo, before Crispin should take notice of the loss of his money. Rufina
told him, that she knew an expedient for that, which was, to serve Crispin such
a trick at Toledo, as she had done at Malaga. Having thereupon writ a large
Letter to the Magistrate, whose province it is to persecute such people, they
set things in order for their departure, and met with two Wagons, then going
for Madrid, wherein they put their goods, taking only the She-slave to wait on
them. They went to the Court, where, as in a Sea, so many Rivers meet, having
resolved that Rufina should not appear, till they had some news of Garay.

Leaving them there, let us see what was the effect of the Letter sent to the
Provost. As soon as he had read it, he went, according to the directions
therein received, attended by some of his Officers, to Crispin's lodging, who,
impatiently expecting, that Jaim^ should make his way into Rufina's house, and
thereby put him into possession of all her money, was taken in his chamber, and
thence conducted to prison. Not long before, one of the Judges of Malaga, had
been at Toledo, to look for him, and not finding him, had left with the Provost
some observations on his Physiognomy, by which, though the habit he then was in
disguised him very much, it was more then presumed, that he was the person.
They seized on what he had in the house, among which he thought the Gold, which
Jaimo had eased him of, had been, for he knew nothing of its departure, which
happened well for the two Lovers, who were already dislodged. The issue of his
imprisonment, was, that, being put to the Torture, he could not keep his own
counsel, and so was sentenced to receive the reward of his confessions,
Hanging. 'Twas Heaven's kindness toward him, that he should end his days with
some remorse for his sins, for though that be the ordinary exit of such as
engage themselves in that wretched kind of life, yet are there many of them
whose guilty souls, are, by sword and pistol, dispatched into the other world,
without the least act of contrition. This was the end of poor Crispin, who made
a public acknowledgment of all the robberies and villainies he had committed,
while he was a Hermit, to the great edification of the people. He was also
observed to have this generosity, that he named not any person who had been
engaged with him in his designs; nay though he knew, the present misfortune had
been procured him by his Friend Jaimo, yet he Christianly forgave him and all
the world at his death.

In the mean time Rufina and Jaimo were married as soon as they came to Madrid,
but kept out of Garay's fight. He went soon after to Alcala, where he had been
told his Wife was, but finding her not, he struck in with some of his own
Profession, and the result was, that being surprised in a Robbery, they were
all condemned to the lash, and six years recreation in the Galleys. He was
brought to the chain at Toledo, which eased his mind a little, for, thinking
Rufina had been there still, he writ a Letter to her, desiring her, in regard
she had gotten all she was worth by his cooperation and assistance, that she
would have compassion on him, and exempt him from that penance, by buying a
Slave in his stead, a thing commonly practiced. The Beater enquires for Rufina,
where he had directed, but the Neighbors told him, that she had left Toledo;
so that honest Garay, burdened with Iron, Years, and Hardship, came to have
that relation to his Catholic Majesty, which he and many others, though they
justly deserved it, little expected to be preferred to.

On the contrary Don Jaimo lived like a Prince at Madrid, where he soon met
with some of his own Constitution, a sort of people, who, like Foxes, never
fare better than when they are most cursed. They committed some secret
Robberies, with such caution and industry, that the Authors thereof could never
be discovered, whereby they were so fleshed and encouraged, that they daily
found out new designs. There was started up about this time at Madrid an
excellent Company of Players, brought together by the excessive charge and
liberality of a Grandee of Spain, a person of vast Wealth. What his design was
in it, I know not, whether he did it out of charity, or for his particular
divertisement, or upon some other account to me unknown; but he made it his
business to see it furnished with all things requisite. He was desirous they
might have the advantages of the Feast of the B. Sacrament, at which time, the
Players of the City may, during all the days of the Octave, represent their
Plays in the open streets, where all are welcome without paying; and this is
done every year at Madrid, at the time of that Feast. To effectuate his design,
he bought them some new Plays of the best Poets in Spain, whom he paid well,
and put upon some other pieces, for the accomplishment of that famous Company.
So that another Company, which was then at Madrid, being too weak to stand in
competition with this, was forced to leave the City, and go to Toledo, where
they had, from that Imperial City, the ordinary Salary for representing the
best pieces they had, at the same Feast. This new Company had the whole Court
to it self, and the said Grandee gave them by way of advance four thousand
Crowns, to provide Clothes suitable to the Pieces they intended to represent.
This sum of money was brought into the House of one of the Players, an
ingenious and understanding person, for whom the rest had such respect, that
all things passed through his hands; he also took care for all things, and gave
a very faithful account thereof. He disposed this money into a great Chest,
whereof he always carried the Key about him. Jaimo's company soon had an
inkling of it, and thinking it a noble prize to hook in that money, they
proposed several ways to compass it, but at last referred all their
deliberations to Jaimo, whose advice they had, upon other occasions, found the
best. He desired time to consider till the next day. That night he spent in
communicating the business to his Wife, whom he acquainted with the several
proposals of his Camerades. She gave him infallible directions how the business
should be effected. Jaimo had the reputation of being able to do somewhat in
Poetry, upon which they laid the Plot, and it was approved by his Companions.

The next day, Jaimo was clad like a Scholar newly come from the University, in
a Cassock and long Cloak very bare, and spotted in many places. Thus accoutred,
he smelt as strongly of the Poet as if he had fed on nothing but Verses from
his Mother's milk. They fitted his Nose with a good large pair of Spectacles,
which were fastened to his Ears with a Lute-string, a thing very common in
Spain, and furnished him with a huge broad-brimm'd Hat; in fine he had all
things requisite, to act the part of a ridiculous and extravagant Poet, which
was the way they conceived most likely to compass their design.

He went thus to the Comedians, who were met at their Theater, and upon the
rehearsal of a piece, which was to be represented within three days. He
addressed himself to the person who had the oversight of the Company, for he
had inquired out his name, and coming to him with a great many congees, (after
he had asked him how he did.) I am a Poet, Sir, said he to him, so you take it
not ill. The Comedian, as we told you, was a very apprehensive person, and
often had to do with such phantasms of extravagant Men, such as Jaimo seemed to
be by that abrupt introduction. Many years may you be so, Sir, replied he,
assure your self, it shall not trouble me at all. The design of my studies,
says the other, was to become eminent in Divinity, that so I might be capable
of a good Benefice, in order to which I have already taken the degree of
Batchelour of Divinity, in the University of Iracha, with the great applause of
all my Countrymen; for I am a Biscayan, to serve God, and your illustrious
Company. I was born at the Town of Ordugna, and I have the advantage to be
allied to the most honorable families of that ancient place. I am known by the
name of the Batchelour Dominico Joancho, and my fame is great in my own
Country, which I told you is Biscay. There it was (not slighting the Talent,
which it has pleased Heaven to give me gratis, by causing me to be born a
Poet) that I addicted my self to the study of Poetry, wherein I have been
wonderfully fortunate; and finding that all people admired my works, and many
were importunate with me to publish them, I would needs make a trial what kind
of fancy I might have in the writing of Plays. Those I have made are not such
as are now in Vogue, written by some Novice Poets as I may call them; No, I
thank Mercury and the Muses, mine are of a kind of extraordinary style, and I
can furnish you with a dozen at least ready for the Stage. I am come to this
Court, where there are excellent Wits, and I have had the honor to be esteemed
here according to my worth, and I may without vanity affirm it, that the most
humorous Judgments have acknowledged that my perfections are more than
ordinary. But I think it my greatest happiness, Sir, that I flourish in the
same Age with so noble and illustrious a Company, which may be called the
Flower of all those that ever were in Spain, in whose service I would employ
the Talent God has bestowed on me, if your self, and the rest of your
honorable Company be so pleased. What number of Plays I have promised you, all
of my own Writing, you need but call for. As to the price, you are so
reasonable, that we shall not disagree: Be pleased, Sir, to honor me so far,
as to make me acquainted with the rest of your Company, that they may give me
their sense, as to what I propose.

This Comedian was of an humor much different from many others of that
Quality, who, when a Poet, whom they know not, comes to present them with a
Comedy, slight him so far as that they will not so much as give him audience,
as if that Divine Power, which has inspired those that are in Vogue, had
confined his gifts to them, and had nothing left to bestow on others. But this
Comedian, I say, was of a very jovial and pleasant humor, and was glad of any
such occasion to divert himself. So that measuring the inside of the person by
his outside and discourse, he told him, that he did them a transcendent
honor, and that he gave him thanks in the name of the whole company. Then
turning about to his Companions, Gentlemen, said he to them, be pleased to take
notice of the renowned Bachelor Dominico Joancho, a Nobleman of Biscay and
most excellent Poet, whose productions for the Theater are beyond all
admiration, and who proffers to exhaust his precious vein for our's, having
already finished at least a dozen pieces, which he has a desire to show us.
The other Comedians, by the discourse of their Camerade, and by the ill
equipage, and worse looks of the person, easily discovered, that he and his
wits were at a little distance, which obliged them to pretend, that they were
extremely engaged to him, and so they all gave him, one after another, a very
civil salute, which he very unhandsomely returned. He who had first spoken to
him, asked him, whether he would have the patience till they had done
rehearsing, which would not be long, in regard they had gone over it three or
four times before, and had now but some particular Scenes to look over, and
then they would see some of his Pieces, if he would be pleased to communicate
them; which he promised to do. He took a chair and sat very quietly till the
Rehearsal was over. By that time they had made an end, it was so near night,
that they could not well do any thing without candles. They called for some,
and sitting all about him, they desired him to read the titles of the twelve
Comedies, which he said were ready for the Stage. The counterfeit Author, who
acted his part very pleasantly, took a Paper out of his Pocket, and read to
them, as follows.

A Catalogue of Plays written this present year, by the Batchelour Dominico
Joancho, a Biscayan Poet.
1. The Extravagant Infanta. 2. The Lucifer of Yepes. 3. Gandaya. 4. The
Creation of the World. 5. Noah's Ark. 6. The French Pox. 7. Almonds for such as
have no Teeth. 8. The scorching Summer. 9. Between two Stools the -- comes to
the ground. 10. The Pilgrimage of St. James. 11. The Good Thief on the Cross.
12. The Seignoress of Biscay.
These, says he, are the twelve Comedies I have already finished: I would not
willingly have any of them represented before the last, because the Adventure
is of my own Country, and it is a most excellent Comedy, the contrivances of it
are admirable, and I need give you no further commendation of it, than that it
has cost me abundance of oil and time, and that I bit my nails above a hundred
times at the writing of it.

The Comedians had much ado to keep their countenances, for they could hardly
forbear laughing at extravagant Titles of the Comedies, and wished they had had
more time to enjoy the conversation of the Biscain Poet. He who had spoken to
him first, giving him thanks in the name of the whole company; I am infinitely
glad, Sir, said he to him, that I have had the honor of coming to the
knowledge of you, from your own self, for till now, I must, to my shame,
acknowledge, that I had not so much as heard of your illustrious name: you will
injure your self extremely, if you do not make the Court of Spain sensible of
your excellent parts. I am therefore to entreat you, in the name of our whole
Company, that you will be pleased to honor us with that Piece of yours, which
you conceive most likely to take, though we question not but your reputation is
even beyond your own expressions of it. You know the custom of Poets, when they
are first to appear on the Stage, which is, to present it with the first Piece
gratis; for what we shall receive from you afterward, you shall be satisfied
according to our agreement, and it is possible, they may please so well, that
we shall act only yours, for one year at least; and rather than we shall be
behind-hand with you, we shall not stick to borrow money, though at ever so
great interest. It Is now late, and supper-time calls us away, which ended, we
shall have more leisure to discourse further, if you please to give me and my
Companions the meeting at my chamber. There we hope you will communicate to us
your thoughts of that Comedy, which you shall be pleased to recommend to us. If
you leave it to my choice, as it is fit you should, replied he, the Seignoress
of Biscay shall be the first I will read to you, for I have a confidence, by
that, to raise my self into the reputation of a good Author, and to acquire the
esteem of this Court. He who was the Speaker of the Company, said to him, Will
you be pleased, Sir, to give me a little satisfaction as to the Title of that
Comedy; you call it, The Seignoress, whereby methinks it should rather have
been The Lady of Biscay, that being a more usual term. You are very much in
the right, replies the feigned Poet; but I do it purposely, for the King
entitles himself only Seignor of Biscay, and not Prince, Duke, Earl, or
Marquess: besides I have another reason, why I do not call her Lady, but
Seignoress, which is, that it rhimes with Princess, and all other words of the
like termination. To this I may add, that the word is new, and you know the
times are such now, that all the world runs after Novelties, even to the very
lowest sort of people, who express a certain disgust toward things common and
trivial.

Your reasons are beyond all expectation, replies the Commedian, and therefore
I shall not trouble you much with further demands. No trouble at all, says the
counterfeit Poet, you oblige me, for though you your self may be satisfied as
to my worth, yet some others here present may be glad of such directions, as I
only am able to give them. Your most humble Servant, says the Comedian, then
for their better information who you conceive may want it, give me leave to
tell you, that I am not satisfied as to the title of one of your Plays, I mean
that which you call Noah's Ark, I cannot imagine how you can accommodate that
Piece to the Theater, nor who can be the Actors, for I see but very few can be
brought to speak in it. I must pardon your ignorance of my design, replies the
Poet, for if you knew it, you would admire the invention, which is wholly new.
I bring in as Actors in that Piece all those Creatures that are taught to
speak, as Parrats, Mag-pies, Jays, Starlings, Daws, and others, a thing never
seen before, and which, for its novelty, must needs be admired.

They could hardly forbear laughing at his former discourses, but this humor
was so pleasant, that it was impossible to hold, which obliged the Author to
ask them very seriously what they laughed at. You see, Sir, says the Speaker,
how likely this Novelty is to take with the people, since it makes us so merry,
out of a conceit, that we shall make a great advantage thereby. No doubt of it,
says the Poet. But no more, of the titles of my other Pieces, let us talk only
of that which I would have represented first. I shall hereafter, at more
leisure, satisfy the difficulties you have to propose concerning the other
titles, whereof I shall give you the explication. It shall be so, said he who
had spoken to him; to which purpose, we shall desire your company at my house
anon after supper, where we shall all be ready to entertain you. Whereupon he
took his leave, promising he would not fail to be with them.

Having made this progress in his business, he went and gave his Camerades an
account thereof, and appointed them to wait about his house where the money was.
He undertook to keep the Company in play, while they should do their work,
which they would not be long about, having all the implements requisite for men
of their profession. The Comedians, on the other side, prepared all things to
show him such a trick, as his extravagance deserved, getting some squibs and
crackers made, to frighten him, if 'twere possible, out of the little wit he
had.

His hour being come, he went to his house who had invited him, to read the
Seignoress. He who expected him had provided what he thought requisite to make
sport enough that night for the whole Company. The chief Comedian, seeing they
were all met, told them that the Room was too narrow for the whole Company, and
that they were better to appoint their meeting at the Theater, where they
should not be disturbed. The feigned Poet was glad to hear the proposition, and
seconded it, inasmuch as, the coast being clear, his Camerades might the more
easily dispatch their business. It happened according to his wishes, for the
Mistress of the house, who had heard her husband and others of the Company talk
of the extravagant Poet, and how they intended to serve him, would needs see
the sport, and lest it might be late ere they returned home, she took all the
servants, both men and maids, along with her; so that the Garrison was clearly
dismantled. They brought the Poet to the Theater with a great deal of ceremony,
and placed him at the end of a Table, on which there were two candles. Having
taken the Comedy out of his pocket, and the Company silently expecting, after
two or three grave Hems, he began to read thus.

THE SEIGNORESS OF BISCAY, A NEW COMEDY.
Written by Dominico Joancho, Bachelor of Divinity, born at Ordugna in the
Seignory of Biscay.
The Actors Names.
DON OCHOA, A young Cavalier. DON GARNICA, A young Cavalier. GOZENEGO,
Tom-Ladle, the Fool in the Play.
Hold a little, I pray, Sir, says the principal Comedian, why do you give the
Fool two names, would not one serve? No, Sir, says the Poet; for the former is
his name, as he is a Christian, or his Christian name, and the other he has in
relation to the part he acts. For as the Ladle stirs the meat which is in the
Pot, so he is the person which tumbles, and turns upside down the several parts
of the Plot, and shuffles all the contrivances and intrigues of the Comedy. You
shall find nothing but I can give you a very good reason for it, and therefore
you may spare your self the trouble of raising any further objections.
Excellent! I am satisfied, Sir, says the other, pray go on.

GRACE GELINDA, Seignoress of Biscay, a name very pertinent to signify the
Graces that are in her. GARIBAYA GAMBOINA
Her Waiting Woman. L'ORDOVY, an old Gentleman Usher belonging to the
Seignoress. ARANELBIA, Steward to the Seignoress. A SMITH'S FORGE.
Your patience, a little, Sir, says the principal Comedian, is that Forge to
speak any thing in the Play? No, Sir, says the Poet; but there is a necessity
of it in this Piece, in regard there is frequent mention made of it, as being
the most considerable revenue of our Country, that is, of her Highness the
Seignoress. Very well, very well, replies the other; but however put it not
among the Actors. That Is easily mended, says the Bachelor.

Item, THIRTEEN VESSELS, belonging to the Seignoress.
How Thirteen! says the Comedian, can they not be reduced to lesser number? No,
Sir, says the Poet, because they represent Thirteen of the most eminent
Families of Biscay, and every one, in the name of its whole House, has a Voice
in the General Assembly, to consent to the marriage of the Seignoress; and if
there were any one wanting, 'twould argue a certain contempt of an illustrious
Family. I am very punctual and exact, as to what concerns the History of
Biscay, and I would not miss an atome of it. But it will be hard for us to
represent it, says the Comedian, for we are not so many Actors in our whole
Company. Take some at hire out of some other, replies the Poet, for upon such
an account as this is you must spare for no cost. Have you any more Actors,
says the Comedian? Yes, replies the Poet.

SEVEN YOUNG MAIDS, between 15 and 20 years of age, who dance a Ball, before
their Mistress, at her enrrance into Biscay.
Well, Sir, says the Comedian, I have seen many Comedies in my time, but never
any that had such extraordinary particulars as yours. How do you imagine I
should find seven young Maids, especially so near the Court? Sir, says the
Poet, no profit comes in without charge; but you need not be so scrupulous,
they will not be searched, to try, whether they really be such or not, though
'twere more convenient they should. Nay there is yet another expedient, which
is, to have them in Perspective, or in Scenes, and artificially moved to dance
the Ball; but to do well, they should be alive. There you give us some comfort,
says the Comedian, for we may make up that number out of our Company, if those
will serve who appear not upon the Stage: but I shall not undertake they will
be such as you would have them. Now, Sir, if you please, let us have a little of
your way in carrying on the design of this Piece.

In the first Scene, said he, comes out Don Ochoa, Suitor to the Seignoress, and
Gozenego, Tom-Ladle, his man, in country clothes, with each of them a good
thick riding hood, or Capouche, and an Indian Umbrello. How, says the Comedian,
what need is there of the Parasol, or Umbrello, if they have Capouches? I see,
says the Poet, you are not much acquainted with the temperature of the climate
of Biscay. In summer, Sir, there are such furious deluges of waters, as if the
sky were broken to pieces; presently after, there comes such a scorching Sun,
as will set a man's brains a boiling in his head. I cannot disprove you, says
the Comedian; pray go on.

He then began to read the verses, but after such a ridiculous and extravagant
manner, that when he had gone over about an hundred of them, the Players
perceiving that the Piece contained many sheets, close written, and tired with
the impertinence of what they had already heard, and withal that they had
spent most part of the night so trivially, interrupted the Reciter with a kind
of a buzzing noise. That was the Cue which the feigned Bachelor expected, yet
seeming to be angry at it, he clapped both hands on the Table with such
violence, that he shook the two Candlesticks, and cried out with a loud voice,
Tacete, Tacete. But the Players and others that were present, not understanding
the Latin, the noise increased, the table was over-turn'd, and the Candles
were put out, and then all retiring from him, they set fire to the train they
had laid for the poor Poet. He found himself encompassed by a number of squibs
and crackers, and long bags full of sand like snakes, all in open hostility
against him. He was in a very sad pickle, for there was nothing but confusion
on the Theater, besides the flames of rosin which came up from beneath the
Stage, and were ready to choke him, insomuch that to cure him of all future
thoughts of Poetry, there needed only a gentle tossing in a blanket. He seemed
to take it very unkindly, that he had been brought thither, to receive such an
affront, for besides the danger his tinder Cloak and Cassock had been in of a
general conflagration, he lost the Comedy, than whichthere could not a greater
loss happen to him. The Epilogue of the Piece was, that Jaimo's companions,
while the Company was thus entertained at the Theater, had found a way into the
Comedian's house, and played the Ferrets in all the rooms, and examined the
chests and trunks that stood in their way, in one whereof they found the money
they looked for, which they cleaverly carried to Jaimo's house, where it was
very fairly divided; and in regard Jaimo's wife had been the inventress of the
Plot, she had an equal share with those who had been emploi'd in the execution
of it.

The next day, the Comedian going to take up certain stuffs for clothes, was
not a little astonished to find the chest open, and the money fled. He was for a
while at such a loss, that he knew not where he was. At last, he asked his wife
who had been in the house? whereto she could give him no account at all. He
sent people to abroad to search, and acquainted the Magistrate with what had
happened. The nearest streets to the house were visited, but to no purpose. The
poor Comedian went to relate his misfortune to the Grandee, of whom he had
received that present. But he thinking it a cheat of the Comedians, would not
believe him. He fell sick out of pure discontent, and kept his bed, and then
began to doubt it was a trick put upon him by that feigned Poet, for whom he
immediately caused a search to be made; but he could never be found, for he and
his Companions had taken a course for that. These things being represented to
the Lord, who had bestowed the money on them, he was so generous as to supply
them with the like sum.

In the mean time, the Officers were still upon duty, to see, whether,
searching for the Poet, they should meet with the Author of the Robbery. The
indisposed Comedian recovered upon the sight of the Mony's return into the
chest. Jaimo and his Companions had a consultation how they might trapan the
Comedian of that recrute, but when it was proposed to Rufina, who had always a
voice in the Conclave, 'twas immediately quashed, and she prevailed with her
Husband to leave Madrid, since they had money enough to retire elsewhere, and
drive some trade therewith. Jaimo took her advice, and so leaving Madrid, they
went into Arragon, and planted themselves at Saragossa, the Metropolis of that
Kingdom. They took a House, and kept a Silk-shop, spending some time in that
employment. What designs they were engaged in during their abode their, and
upon what account they were forced to remove thence shall be the subject of a
Second Part of this work; wherein the Reader shall find Rufina, improved in
subtilty by experience, contriving and compassing cheats much more pleasant and
more ingenious, than any she has been hitherto concerned in, with a little
assistance from her Husband Don Jaimo.

FINIS.

