A REPLY TO THE ANSWER OF THE CATHOLIQVE APOLOGY.

Or a clear vindication of the Catholics of England from all matter of fact
charged against them by their Enemies.



M. DC. LXVIII.

PREFACE TO ALL THE ROYALLISTS that suffered for HIS MAJESTY: AND To all the
rest of the Good People of ENGLAND.
My Lords and Gentlemen:
IF formerly the English Catholics by their Apology did in treat your
Intercession to our Gracious Monarch, in suspending the execution of those
severities then proclaimed: I (a member of that faithful Body) must now beseech
your Justice against the malice of a Parson, who not only strives to oppress
the Loyal, but also (by the inferences of his Discourse) would stifle hereafter
zeal, and mitigate, if he could, the fire, that resides in the breasts of all
generous Subjects. Can any thing touch men of Honor more, then after the loss
of so many Lives and Estates, insultingly to have it said, It was but your
Duty? Nay, to go yet farther, even in a barbarous falsity, that Necessity only
forced us to what we did, and that at all times you would rather far have had
our room then Company. What Preacher preached this in the days of old? Or who
told us when Cromwell lived, Be gone, you are no friends to Caesar? It was our
Duty, I confess, and a Duty which no good man can refuse his Sovereign, neither
shall we ever be shockt in the fervor of it, by the Doctrine of such a Rabby.

The reason why I now take up the Gantlet of this Goliath, is to show the
candor of our Actions, being yet purer then his words are black: which though
many could do far better then I, yet here I appear challenged into the List, as
Author of the late Apology. Author I can call my self, if plain words may
create that Title; but the Duty and Submission is the sense of the whole
Catholic Party; and for the matter of Fact, Books are the preservers of it,
which will for ever record our Innocence, in despite of such detraction and
calumny.

A Jesuit, the Minister is pleased to call me, though I had not the happiness
to be bred in their learned Schools: but the trick of this poor man plainly
appears, that thus he hopes to make Truth it self suspected, because by the
Preaching of such Pastors, the ignorant (as children consider Sarazens) have
most fond Ideas of the Society and of all Priests in general.

My Lords and Gentlemen, Before I go any farther, I think it most necessary to
tell you what moved me to write that Pamphlet; which wken you have well
weighed, you will find in the intention, perchance that Piety, which is usually
lodged in an English Heart: and that you may assure your selves of the
sincerity of my thoughts, Know, that if my Arm was too weak to weild a Sword in
the late just War, I had then a passion to wish my years greater. But though I
thus lost the Honor of laying my life at the feet of the injured Father, I had
yet the satisfaction to hazard it for the Son, even before and since his happy
Restoration. For my near Relations, they all suffered in the Common Cause,
which as it brought death to some, so to others the sale of their co^siderable
Estates, and the best Fortune that any could expect, was to be crowded into the
dreadful List for Composition. I am sure my zeal to the Royal Family has been
as forward (to my power) as the best, more then which no body certainly can do;
nor have I ever been farther Satirical against those that stand at Helm, then
by innocently saying, We Catholics are always most unfortunate. This is the
Profession I have lived in, and in the same loyal Faith will I end my days.
Doubtless then I could have no sinister design in publishing the Apology; the
good end I had, let the World consider.

My first Motive was the Law of Nature, which gives the Needy leave to call for
Mercy: nor was there at any time a Nation so cruel, that ever yet denied this
favor.

Could there be a more frightful sight, then to see the whole English World on
a sudden, point and cry, Fie on them, Fie on them? What scoffing Blasphemies
did the Seditious utter? How did Tenants begin to confront their Landlords?
Nay, (omitting several insolences of the Rabble) I knew some Justices, by
reason of private spleen to their Neighbors, seize on a Servant, threatening
his commitment, unless he made Oath what his Master daily did. Thus then in a
trice we became an Eyesore to our Friends, and a byword among the Common
Ennemies.

But now my Minister will nimbly demand, Is not this accusing the King, and
blaming the whole Parliament for their Advice and Counsel? To which I answer,
first, with the great Ambassador of Heaven, God forbid: Nor is it possible for
a man, who would hazard whatever is dear to him on Earth for the glory of his
Country, to harbor such thoughts against lawful and just Authority. Pray,
Master Parson, let me ask you, Whether Laws in all places are executed by
inferior Officers, according to the intent of the Legislator? Remember, Sir,
the infinitely wise Bill of purging Corporations, and you will find how private
revenge converted it into quite another thing. This is a Flayl, against which
perchance no wisdom can make defense; but nevertheless, it is Vinegar, and may
force a shriek from the oppressed, without offense to Government.

My Lords and Gentlemen, I do with all submission acknowledge that Counselors
(especially the Supreme) may advise their Sovereign to put Laws in force,
without giving a reason to the Public; and moreover, I do farther say, that it
was mercy that they were till then suspended: yet it is no crime, even when
they are revived, humbly to beg for favor. And to illustrate this, consider, I
beseech you, an Example.

Imagine that his Majesty being returned, an honest Cavalier was restored to
his House, which with two parts of his Lands lay round about a City, the prime
Jewel in the Royal-Diadem. Here the good man sitting now under his own vine,
daily blesses God for the happiness of the Nation; and here each moment he
conceives fresh joys, by considering how superlative his late sufferings were.
If now on a sudden both Houses (upon mature deliberation) should beseech his
Majesty to make use of old Laws, to new fortify this his most considerable
place (which consequently would destroy this Subjects Estate) no body, I think,
could wonder to see him amazed and troubled. Suppose then, to divert this
ruin, the poor man should beseech his friends to intercede, should show his
sufferings, should urge reasons that his house would be a strength to the Town,
and that the Kings Enemies have certainly some bad design by his calamity. For
all this the Prince is no way necessitated to grant his request, Because
reasons which seem strong to a Party concerned, may yet in themselves be
frivolous, when they are weighed by judgments who know far better the state of
things, then private men can be conceived to do. But yet, it were severe to
indite this man for a Libeller, or say (because he begs) that he mutinies
against Obedience and Rule.

Niniveh might call for mercy without affronting Heaven, even after sentence
was given; nor has ever the King of Kings, when he punishes, forbad his
children to cry, Remember Abraham, Remember Isaac, Remember Jacob; O Lord
remember the promises that thou have made of old.

My second Reason, was as a Subject to keep the Peace, and to the utmost of my
power to prevent all strife and division. This is an obligation which no son of
Adam can plead exemption from: for seeing all men are under sum Government or
other, and Quiet the sole end of that, everybody must use the best means he can
(so it contradict not Laws) to preserve the thing for which Magistracy it self
was established. No Creature, I am sure, can be ignorant of the distraction
then in England: for he that was in the City, fled to his Farm, frightened with
the noise of a new fire; and he that got into the Country, poasted again to
Town, to escape the Massacre, which designed whispers daily threatened.

If this disorder was amongst Protestants, what dreadful confusion must you
imagine amongst Catholics, who are but a handful comparatively to the whole,
and yet the famed Authors of these two Conspiracies! Was it unbeseeming then an
English Christian to wish a better understanding among his Countrymen, and to
desire the Royal-Party should not be disjoined, especially when an Invasion was
menaced by our Confederate Neighbors; and a Rebellion newly broke out within
the Circuit of our own Island? If remedies were needful, what Medicament could
be better applied then the gentle balm of true persuasion? By this men saw the
Tares which the Enemy sowed whilst they slept; and thus they began to reknow
their often tried friends, descended (according to Nature and Grace) from those
Ancestors, who like so many Atlas's upheld the Grandeur of our Kings, whilst
the whole World from East to West admired their Victories.

Consider then, I beseech you, (Great Patriots) in whom the Prince of darkness
reigns; whether in me that am termed a Jesuit, and would banish all discord
from among my Brethren; or in this strange Minister, who to sow Sedition, plows
with perverted Story, and then harrows with downright falsities and untruths.

How does this poor man rip up old tales of Popes, and by discovering his
passion and fancy, infer, that it is a check to the Glory of Kings, and utter
loss of Sovereignty, to be under the spiritual Jurisdiction of this Universal
Bishop? Why do not the Kings of France, Spain, Portugal and Poland see this?
How comes it to pass also, that the Emperor (who is Absolute Monarch of Hungary
and Boheme) and the other great Princes of Germany, are ignorant of a thing of
so much concernment? This I much wonder at indeed, especially since their
Countries have so swarmed with these Reformed Evangelists: But it may be they
are careless of their interest, and so is the simple Florentine, who with the
Duke of Savoy, and the rest of the Italian Regulets, want as much wit as they
do Authority and Power.

These Princes, even these very last, live, as I may say, just under his
Holiness his Nose; and yet (when they please) dispute about Temporals, not only
with Sword in hand, but are so absolute and arbitrary in their Dominions, that
England would groan to bear once in many ages, what their Subjects daily suffer.

Reflecting thus on the premises, might not I well wonder in our Apology, how
so wild a calumny could be laid to our charge, as that our Principles are
destructive to Sovereignty? Truly, I did wonder, and that not a little,
especially since our forefathers were so eminent in Religion, and yet our
Kings rather Monarchs of Europe, then of half an Isle, giving Laws wheresoever
they pleased. If some Popes have been exorbitant, it is no more our Faith to
believe their actions just, then that humane transgressions are the true
Precepts of Christianity. As some wicked me^ dealt ill with Gods Anointed; so
on the other side, who defended these Princes against pretended illegal
impositions of Rome? were they not Papists? Yes, and so fervent for that Truth,
that the next day they would take the Croisado next against any foreign
Heretics.

It Is no breach in our Religion to say, that Popes in their private
Determinations may err, much less, that they sin like men. A Pope and Council
in matters of Faith I confess Infallible; and therefore I look upon the Decrees
of Trent, as divine as those of Nice: nor were there, I am sure, more tricks
against Protestants pretended in this, then in the former against the strong
and numerous Arrians. No man abominates Prelatick insolences more then I:
Bring out then the Glorious Roll, and upon examination you will find, that our
bravest Catholic Princes have been the best sons of the Church: nor is yet a
King by our Tenets the worse Child for defending his Rights and Privileges.
Caesar must have what is Caesar's, and to God we must ^^nder what is Gods.

Shall Notions then convince Experience, when as Demonstration it self often
gives way to Practice? Let us now summon for witnesses to this great Truth, the
present Kings of our Profession; and though their thoughts tower far higher
then Eagles, they will not only deride the contrary, but unanimously proclaim,
that their people are not rebellious by reason of Ecclesiastical dependence
abroad, nor do they think themselves less absolute then that very Prince, who
cries, There ought to be no other Pope then Me.

What shall I say then to such a man, who will yet affirm our Principles
inconsistent with Obedience? To advise him to Anticyra is vain, for no Ellebore
can purge that madness, which first taking root by ignorance, has afterward
been quite transformed, through interest, into an obstinate, and selfdeceiving
wilfulness.

My Lords and Gentlemen, As malice has forced the Answerer thus ill to apply
his reading, so also it has stained his face with so deep a dye, that now he
blushes at nothing, nor regards any more whatever he says. Well might I have
pardoned him his rude upbraiding, That our sufferings were but Duties, because
it is a real Truth: yet no Subject takes pleasure in the sound, when in rancour
and despite it is used against him. I say, well might I with silence have
swallowed this, seeing afterward I was to hear him with impude^ce proclaim,
That Papists were forced to their bravery, and like a hard-hunted-Deer, we
threw our selves into the Herd, glad to be sheltered under the Royal covert.
Glad, we co^fess, as Loyal men grasp the occasion of expressing zeal; but that
we could not sit quietly at home, I flatly here deny: nay, day is not clearer
then this, that had not our Loyalty forbad, we might with triumph have been
received even into the very embraces of the Enemy.

Had this Minister perused Books any farther then their Indices against
Catholics, he would have seen, that let Rebels declare what they will,
they will soon find excuses, and publicly make use of those very things (when
it is for their advantage) against which in the beginning they openly professed.
Was not Godliness, Godliness, the cry of all the Saints? yet because dexterity
was needful, they admitted into their league H. Martin and others, who were
then as notorious for their Vices, as afterward eminent in all the
abominations of the Land.

Again, if the Papists were pursued, against Bishops there was as fierce a
Chase; and ever after, Popery and Prelacy were continually placed in the same
Parenthesis. For my part, I believe the English Episcopacie stuck more in their
stomachs then we; because Heretics hate most that Religion which is but one
remove above them, and from which they are ever justly taxt rebelliously to
have gone out. Besides, the Catholics (being of a Faith for which the People
had a prejudice) could no ways obstruct the Reformation, which they so
earnestly intended. It Is plain then, against Prelates they had as great, if not
a greater Pique: yet when it conduced to the reducing of North Wales, and
subduing of Sir John Owen, they made commander of their Forces not only a
Bishop, but an Arch- bishop also, I mean (that real Chimaera) his graceless
Grace of York.

But why do I trouble you with these probable arguments to prove the
possibility of our reception, when as the matter of fact is certain, not done
in a corner, but in the Palace of a King, and in the sight of all his Nobles?
Sir Arthur Aston, a Catholic of Quality and Experience, offered our late
Souveraign his service, and the service of many more, upon the first
preparations of War. The good Prince sincerely gave him thanks; but told him,
that by reason of their Religion, he durst not admit them into the Army: for
the Rebels (who never omitted a pretense), would make use of this, to discredit
him among the people. This Knight being refused thus, rode in all haste to
London, and made the like tender to Essex. The Earl upon the proposal consults
the Cabal, who presently advised him to accept the offer; and so a formal
Commission was given Sir Arthur. He immediately posted back to the Court, and
there showed the Commission to his Majesty; which when he saw, and together
with it the Intrigue of these Juglers, he not only gave Sir Arthur a Command,
but from that time declared all Catholics welcome, who thereupon from every
Quarter hastened to his help and succor.

The Designs which the Rebels had herein, were many: for by this they not
only hoped to get to themselves a Party well versed in War, great in Blood,
and of Estates answerable to that Blood; but also were sure at the same instant
to weaken as much the King, as they brought strength to themselves: and
besides, they farther considered, that this might add a gloss to their
proceedings abroad, because all Neighboring Princes (being Catholics) would
then probably look on their actions with a more partial eye. Scripture also,
which is the stalking-horse of all Sects, could not be wanting to them, who had
already, with a Curse ye Meroz, invited all to Rebellion. That very Example
might have been a Warrant, that the Godly and Profane may join in a
Confederation. At least 'twas evident, that the children of Israel, who went to
fight the battles of the Lord, used Josh. 6. 22.
Rahabs assistance, a Harlot of Jericho; for which service they showed favor
to all her fathers house: And why then might not the Elect (when the Cause
required it*) receive aid from us, though children of the Whore of Babylon?
Doubtless, in Conscience this advantage could not have been omitted by the
Saints, since it might have been a means toward our Conversion, as Cromwell
afterward urged, when he so passionately stickled to bring in the Jews.

My Lords and Gentlemen, Thus stood our Case, and thus are we now reviled by a
Minister, after such true and faithful Services: Yes, so Loyal have we been,
that I defy all mankind to show one that was false, unless perchance those
that renouncing their God, and shaking hands with Religion, were owned as
Converts by the people. Nay, let any man read but the Account of the Pyr. Tr.
p. 4.
Pyrenaean Treaty, printed by the Dutch and others, and there he shall see,
that Cromwell esteemed us the greatest of his enemies: for so he told the Duke
of Crequi, when he desired him (as a request of his Mistress the Queen Mother
of France) to cease his notorious persecutions against us.

Certainly, nothing can more fully prove the sincere and disinterested meaning
of the Catholics, then the Kings miraculous Escape from Worcester: for he
fell not there into the hands of men of Quality only, but among Papists of
all ranks and conditions. There were Priests, there were Tradesmen, there were
Laborers, there were old women, there were young, fully acquainted with his
misery: and though at the same time death was proclaimed to the Concealer, and
to the Discoverer a reward (able to make a poor man Emperor in his own
thoughts) yet no danger, no gain could make them betray him, whom by their
Faith they were commanded to conceal. Men of education and parts may sometimes
have by designs, even in the best of their doings; but they of low degree
(being unacquainted with the artifices of the World) declare the full reality
of their hearts, having nothing lodged there, but the religious Principles,
which from their youth they received from their Ghostly Father.

My Lords and Gentlemen, I must here conjure you not to put any forced
interpretation upon my words: for I do not now Apologize for any Extravagancies
done by our Predecessors in the beginning of the Reformation; only let me
beseech you to look on their Case at that time with the gentlest aspect that
may be. Height of temptation may perchance move pity in Magistrates, though
not pervert their Justice: and let me desire him that will judge, to lay his
hand on his own breast, and truly examine there, what he himself would do in
this condition. Suppose he were of a Religion which he thought the visible
Church from age to age delivered, which he knew his ancestors to have happily
lived under, and which he saw professed by all the Kingdoms about him: suppose
then on a sudden, by the preaching of two or three men (base in their rank, and
taxt in Moralities obyne another) a flame should break out through all Europe,
and turn topsie-turvie this venerable Building, to make way for diverse unlike
Fabrics, every on of which, each Architect affirmed, was according to Gods own
Word and Model. I ask him then in such a devastation, (which, to use Came. Brit.
P. 163. B.
Camden's own phrase, The world stood amazed, and England groaned at) what
would flesh and blood move him to? It Is an Article of my Faith, that neither
Heresy nor Turcism (because ill must not be done that good may come of it) can
be opposed by Rebellion; though many of the Reformed Divines are ( Vid. Rep. 6.
as I shall show you) of another sentiment. Yet even those that do agree with
me, will nevertheless confess, that (by reason of carnal passions) Grace must
be predominant to resist so strong a torrent. Was it not strange in the
beginning, to behold 645. Monasteries. 110. Hospitals, 90. colleges, 2374.
Chaunteries and free Chapels. L. Herb. H. 8. p. 443.
Abbeys destroyed, Bishoprics gelded, Chanteries, Hospitals and Colleges
turned to profane uses? Nay, (after a change of Liturgies and Rites) to see
people renounce their pious Vows, and out of Godliness grow more licentious and
loose. Vid. Rep. 48. sect. 5.
These and the like unexpected alterations ( it being a pitiful thing (as St H.
^. page 964. Reg. 26.
Stow says) to hear the lamentations in the Country for Religious houses)
spurred men forward to resist: for people saw the Conflagration, and none knew
in what it would determine or end. But now, Noble Countrymen, the Scene is
quite altered: for now we know the full scope of your design, now we are
inured to the gentle. Yoke of Protestant Kings, and now we are so incorporated
by our long acquaintance and joint sufferings that all humane proneness to
contend (which our Enemies called Principles of Faith) is wholly eradicated and
taken away.

Having thus showed you that our Principles are not dangerous to Kings, that
our actions have been zealous for Kings, and moreover that it is impossible we
should again fall into those misdemeanors, into which natural frailty and
misusage drove the foregoing age: I will now, with your permission, examine the
Answer of our Minister to each particular Paragraph, and by it shall still
farther let you see, as well his pernicious ill nature, as his detestable
Positions and Designs.

But, my Lords and Gentlemen, I shall beseech you, first thoroughly to peruse
the Apology it self, it being the ground of the whole Dispute: and because it
has been mangled by him into many imperfect Sections, I have thought fit to
print it here entire, to the end you might run it over with the more ease; and
that by the whole connection and dependence (which mutilation spoils) you may
the better consider the real integrity I had, in putting out that true and
submissive Vindication.



TO ALL THE ROYALLISTS that suffered for HIS MAJESTY: AND To all the rest of
the Good People of ENGLAND. The Humble APOLOGY of the ENGLISH CATHOLICS
My Lords and Gentlemen:
THe Arms which Christians can use against Lawful Powers in their Severity, are
only Prayers and Tears. Now since nothing can equal the infinity of those we
have shed, but the Cause, viz. to see our dearest Friends forsake us; we hope
it will not offend you, if (after we have a little wiped our eyes) we sigh out
our Complaints to you.

We had spoken much sooner, had we not been silent through consternation to see
you so enflamed (whom with reverence we honor) and also to show our submissive
patience, which used no slights or tricks to divert the debates of Parliament.
For no body can imagine, where so many of the great Nobility and Gentry are
concerned, but something might have been done; whenas in all ages we see things
of Public advantage by the managers dexterity nipt in the bud, even in the
very Houses themselves. Far be it from Catholics to perplex Parliaments, who
have been the Founders of their Privileges, and all Ancient Laws. Nay, Magna
Charta it self had its rise from us; which we do the less boast of, since it
was not at first obtained in so submiss and humble manner.

We sung our Nunc dimittis, when we saw our Master in his Throne, and you in
your deserved Authority and Rule: nor could any thing have ever grieved us
more, then to have our Loyalty called into Question by you, even at the
instigation of our greatest Adversaries. If we must suffer, let it be by you
alone: for that is a double death to men of Honor, to have their Enemies not
only Accusers, but their insulting Judges also. These are they, that by
beginning with us, murdered their Prince, and wounded you: And shall the same
Method continue by your approbation? We are sure you mean well, though their
design be wicked. But let it never be recorded in Story, that you forgot your
often Vows to us, in joining with them that have been the cause of so great
calamity to the Nation.

Of all Calumnies against Catholics, we have admired at none so much, as that
their Principles are said to be inconsistent with Government, and they
themselves thought ever prone to Rebellion.

My Lords and Gentlemen, Had this been a new Sect not known before, something
perchance might have been doubted: but to lay this at their doors, that have
governed the Civilized World, is the Miracle of Miracles to us.

Did Richard the First, or Edward Longshanks, suspect his Catholics that
served in Palestine, and made our Countries Fame big in the Chronicle of all
Ages? Or did they mistrust (in their dangerous absence) their Subjects at home,
because they were of this Profession? Could Edward the Third imagine those to
be Traiterous in their Doctrine, that had that care and duty for their Prince,
as to make them (by Statute) guilty of death in the highest degree, that had
the least thought of ill against the King? Be pleased that Henry the Fifth be
remembered also, who did those Wonders of which the whole World does still
resound; and certainly all History will agree in this, that 'twas Old Castle he
feared, and not those that believed the Bishop of Rome to be Head of the
Church. We will no longer trouble you with putting you in mind of any more of
our mighty Kings, who have been feared abroad, and as safe at home as any since
the Reformation of Religion. We shall only add this, that if Popery be the
enslaving of Princes, France still believes it self as absolute as Denmark or
Sweden: nor will ever the House of Austria abjure the Pope, to secure
themselves of the fidelity of their Subjects. We shall always acknowledge to
the whole World, that there have been as many brave English in this last
Century, as in any other place whatsoever. Yet since the exclusion of the
Catholic Faith, there has been that committed by those, who would be fain
called Protestants, that the wickedest Papist never dreamt of 'Twas never heard
of before, that an absolute Queen was condemned by Subjects, and those styled
her Peers; or that a King was publicly tried and executed by his own people
and servants.

My Lords and Gentlemen, We know who were the Authors of this last Abomination,
and how generously you strove against the raging Torrent; nor have we any other
ends to remember you of it, but to show that all Religions may have a corrupted
spawn, and that God has been pleased to permit such a Rebellion which our
progenitors never saw, to convince you perchance (whom for ever may he prosper)
that Popery is not the only Source of Treason.

Little did we think (when your Prayers and ours were offered up to beg a
Blessing on the Kings Affairs) ever to see that day, in which Carlos, Gifford,
Whitgrave, and the Pendrels should be punished by your desires for that
Religion, which obliged them to save their forlorn Prince; and a stigmatized
man (for his offenses against King and Church) a chief promoter of it. Nay,
less did we imagine, that by your Votes Hudlestone might be hanged, who again
secured our Sovereign; and others free in their fat possessions, that sat as
Judges, and sealed the Execution of that great Prince of happy Memory. We
confess, we are unfortunate, and you just Judges, whom with our lives we will
ever maintain to be so; nor are we ignorant the necessity of affairs made the
King and you do things, which formerly you could not so much as fancy: yet give
us leave to say we are still Loyal; nay, to desire you to believe so, and to
remember how synonymous (under the late Rebellion) was the word Papist and
Cavalier; for there was no Papist that was not deemed a Caualier, nor no
Caualier that was not called a Papist, or at least thought to be Popishly
affected.

We know, though we differ something in Religion, (the truth of which let the
last day judge) yet none can agree with your inclinations, or are fitter for
your converse then we; for as we have as much birth among us as England can
boast of, so our breeding leans your way both in Court and Camp. And therefore
had not our late Sufferings united us in that firm tie, yet our like humors
must needs have joined our hearts. If we err, pity our condition, and remember
what your great Ancestors were; and make some difference between us that have
twice converted England from Paganism, and those other Sects that can challenge
nothing but intrusion for their imposed Authority.

But't is generally said, That Papists cannot live without persecuting all
other Religions within their reach.

We confess, where the name of Protestant is unknown, the Catholic Magistrates
(believing it erroneous) do use all endeavors to keep it out: Yet in those
Countries where Liberty is given, they have far more Privileges then we under
any Reformed Government whatsoever. To be short, we will only instance France
for all, where they have public Churches, where they can make what Proselytes
they please, and where 't is not against Law to be in any Charge or Employment.
Now Holland, which permits every thing gives us it is true our Lives and
Estates, but takes away all Trust and Rule, and leaves us also in danger of
the Scout, whenever he pleases to molest our Meetings.

Because we have named France, the Massacre will perchance be urged against us.
But the World must know that was a Cabinet-Plot, condemned as wicked by
Catholic Writers there, and of other Countries also. Besides, it cannot be
thought they were murdered for being Protestants, since 'twas their powerful
Rebellion (let their Faith have been what it would) that drew them into that
illmachinated destruction.

May it not as well be said in the next Catholic Kings Reign, that the Duke of
Guise, ande Cardinal (Heads of the League) were killed for their Religion also?
Now no body is ignorant, that 't was their factious Authority, which made that
jealous Prince design their deaths, though by unwarrantable means.

If it were for Doctrine that the Hugonots suffered in France, this haughty
Monaroh would soon destroy them now, having neither Force nor Towns to resist
his Might and Puissance. They yet live free enough, being even Members of
Parliament; and may convert the Kings Brother too, if he thinks fit to be so.
Thus you may see how well Protestants live in a Popish Country under a Popish
King: Nor was Charlemaign more Catholic then this; for though he contends
sometimes with the Pope, it is not of Faith, but about Gallicane Privileges,
which perchance he may very lawfully do. Judge then, Worthy Patriots, who are
the best used, and consider our hardship here in England, where it is not only a
Fine for hearing Mass, but death to the Master for having a Priest in his
house; and so far we are from preferment, that by Law we cannot come within ten
miles of London; all which we know your great Mercy will never permit you to
exact.

It has been often urged, that our misdemeanors in Queen Elizabeth's and King
James's time, were the cause of our punishment.

We earnestly wish that the Party had had more patience under that Princess:
But pray consider (though we excuse not their faults) whether it was not a
Question harder then that of York and Lancaster (the cause of a War of such
length, and death of so many Princes) who had most right, Queen Elizabeth or
Mary Stuart. For since the whole Kingdom had crowned and sworn Allegiance to
Queen Mary, they owned her as the legitimate daughter to Henry the Eighth; and
therefore 'twas thought necessarily to follow by many, that if Mary was the
true Child, Elizabeth was the Natural, which must needs give way to the thrice
noble Queen of Scots. 'Twas for the Royal House of Scotland that they suffered
in those days, and it is for the same illustrious Family we are ready to hazard
all on any occasion. Nor can the consequence of the former procedure be but
ill, if a Henry the Eighth (whom Sir W. Rawleigh and my Lord Cherbury, two
famous Protestants, have so homely characterized) should after twenty years
co-habitation, turn away his wife, and this out of scruple of Conscience (as he
said) when as History declares, that he never spared woman in his lust, nor man
his fury.

Now for the fifth of Nove^ber, with hands lifted up to Heaven, we abominate
and detest, and from the botto^ of our hearts, say, may they fall into
irrecoverable perdition, who propagate that faith by the blood of Kings, which
is to be planted in truth and meekness only. But let it not displease (Men,
Brethren, and Fathers) if we ask whether Ulysses be no better known? or who has
forgot the Plots of Cromwell, framed in his Closet, not only to destroy many
faithful Cavaliers; but also to put a luster upon his Intelligence, as if
nothing could be done without his knowledge? Even so did the then great
Minister, who drew some few ambitious, men into this conjuration, and then
discovered it by a Miracle. This will easily appear, viz. how little the
Catholic Party understood the design, seeing there were not a score of guilty
found, though all imaginable industry was used by the Commons, Lords, and Privy
Council too. But suppose ( my Lords and Gentlemen, which never can be granted)
that all the Papists of that age were consenting, Will you be so severe then to
still punish the Children for their Fathers faults? Nay, such Children that so
unanimously joined with you in that glorious Quarrel, wherein you and we
underwent such sufferings, that needs we must have all sunk, had not our mutual
love assisted.

What have we done, that we should now deserve your Anger? Has the Indiscretion
of some few incenst you? It Is true, that is the thing Objected.

Do not you know an Enemy may easily mistake a Mass-Bell, for that which calls
to Dinner; or a Sequestrator glad to be affronted being Constable? when 'twas
the hatred to his person, and not present Office, which perchance egged a rash
man to folly. We dare with submission say, let a public Invitation be put up
against any Party whatsoever; nay, against the Reverend Bishops themselves, and
some malicious Informer or other will allege that which may be far better to
conceal. Yet all mankind by a Manifesto on the House-door are encouraged to
accuse us; Nor are they upon Oath, though your Enemies and ours take all for
granted and true.

It cannot be imagined, where there are so many men of heat and youth
(overjoyed with the happy Restoration of their Prince, and remembering the
Insolences of the former Grandees) that they should all, at all times
prudently carry themselves; for this would be more then men: And truly we
esteem it as a particular blessing, that God has not suffered many, through
vanity or frailty to fall into greater faults, there are yet as we understand
laid to our charge.

Can we choose but be dismayed (when all things fail) that extravagant Crimes
are fathered on us? It is we that must be the Authors, some say, of firing the
City, even we that have lost so vastly by it. Yet truly in this our ingenuity
is great, since we think it no Plot, though our Enemy, an Hugonot Protestant
acknowledged the fact, and was justly executed for his vain Confession. Again,
if a Merchant of the Church of England buy Knives for the business of his
Trade, this also presently is a Popish contriuance to destroy the well-affected.

We must a little complain, finding it by experience, that by reason you
discontenance us, the people rage: and again, because they rage, we are the
more forsaken by you. Assured we are that our Conversation is affable, and our
Houses so many hospitable receipts to our Neighbors. Our acquaintance
therefore we fear at no time, but it is the stranger we dread (that taking all
on hear say) zealously wounds, and then examines the business when it is too
late, or is perchance confirmed by another, that knows no more of us then he
himself.

It Is to you we must make our applications, beseeching you (as Subjects tender
of our King) to intercede for us in the execution, and weigh the Dilemma, which
doubtless he is in, either to deny so good a Parliament their request, or else
run counter to his Royal inclinations, when he punishes the weak and harmless.

Why may not we, Noble Countrymen, hope for favor from you, as well as the
French Protestants find from theirs? A greater duty then ours none could
express, we are sure. Or why should the United Provinces, and other Magistrates
(that are harsh both in mind and manners) refrain from violence against our
Religion, and your, tender breasts seem not to harbor the least compassion or
pity? These neighboring people sequestrer none for their Faith, but for
transgression against the State; Nor is the whole party involved in the crime
of a few, but every man suffers for his own and proper fault. Do you then the
like, and he that offends let him die without mercy, And think always (we
beseech you) of Cromwels injustice, who for the actions of some against his
pretended Laws, drew thousands into Decimation (even ignorant of the thing)
after they had vastlie paid for their security and quiet.

We have no study but the Glory of our Sovereign, and just liberty of the
Subjects; nor was it a mean argument of our duty, when every Catholic Lord
gave his voice for the Restoration of Bishops; by which we could pretend no
other advantage, but that 26. Votes (subsisting wholly by the Crown) were added
to the defense of Kingship, and consequently a check to all Anarchy and
confusion.

It Is morally impossible, but that we, who approve of Monarhy in the Church,
must ever be fond of it in the State also. Yet this is a misfortune we now
plainly feel, that the longer the late transgressors live, the more forgotten
are their crimes, whilst distance in time calls the faults of our Fathers to
remembrance, and buries our own Allegiance in eternal Oblivion and
forgetfulness.

My Lords and Gentlemen, Consider we beseech you, the sad condition of the
Irish Soldiers now in England, the worst of which Nation could be but
intentionallie so wicked, as the acted villainy of many English, whom your
admired Clemency pardoned. Remember how they left the Spanish service when
they heard their King was in France; and how they forsook the emploiment of
that unnatural Prince, after he had committed that never to be forgotten act of
banishing his distressed Kinsman out of his Dominions. These poor men left all
again to bring their Monarch to his home, and shall they then he forgotten by
You? Or, shall my Lord Douglas and his brave Scots be left to their shifts; who
scorned to receive Wages of those that have declared War against England?

How commonly is it said, That the Oath of renouncing their Religion is
intended for these? which will needs bring this loss to the King and you, that
either you will force all of our Faith to lay down their Arms (though by
experience, of great integrity and worth) or else, if some few you retain, they
are such whom Necessity has made to swear against Conscience, and who therefore
will certainly betray you, when a greater advantage shall be offered. By this
test then, you can have none but whom with caution you ought to shun, and thus
must you drive away those that truly would serve you; for had they the least
thought of being false, they would gladly take the advantage of gain and pay,
to deceive you.

We know your wisdom and generosity, and therefore cannot imagine such a thing.
Nor do we doubt when you show favor to these, but you will use mercy to us,
who are both Fellow Subjects, and your owen flesh and blood also. If you
forsake us, we must say, the world decays, and its final transmutation must
needs quickly follow.

Little do you think the insolences we shall suffer by Committee Men, etc.
whom chance and lot has put in to petty power. Nor will it choose but grieve
you, to see them abused (whom formerly you loved.) even by the Common Enemy of
us both. When they punish, how will they triumph and say. Take this (poor
Romanists) for your love to King ship; and again, this for your long doting on
the Royal Party; all which you shall receive from us, Commissioned by your
dearest friends, and under this cloak we will gladly vent our private spleen
and malice.

We know, My Lords and Gentlemen, that from your hearts you do deplore our
condition; yet permit us to tell you, your bravery must extend thus far, as not
to sit still with pity only, but each is to labor for the distressed, as far
as in reality his ablity will reach: some must beseech our Gracious Sovereign
for us, others must again undeceive the Good, though deluded Multitude.
Therefore all are to remember who are the prime raisers of the Storm, and how
through our sides they would wound both the KING and You; for though their
hatred to our selves is great, yet the enmity out of all measure increases,
because we have been yours (and so shall continue) even in the fiery day of
trial.

Protect us we entreat you then upon all your former Promises, or if that be
not sufficient, for the sakes of those that lost their Estates with you; many
of which are now fallen a sleep. But if this be still too weak, we must conjure
you by the sight of this Bloody Catalogue, which contains the Names of your
murdered Friends and Relations, who in the heat of Battle, perchance saved
many of your Lives, even with the joyful loss of their own.

The Catalogue of Names is at the end of the Book.

A material Advertisement to the Reader both concerning the Answerer of the
Apology, and the Method of this Reply.
READER,
ABout the middle of Novem. 1666. when the known Enemies of the Kingdom had
enflamed the minds of several honest and well-meaning people, I put out this
sincere Apology. The Reasons therein (having nothing but truth and reallity in
them) satisfied many: for every body of themselves saw there was no ground, and
most confessed they were disordered because they saw others so. 'Twas after
Christmas before I left London; and truly, I supposed that if any body could be
so maliciously impertinent, as by an Answer to cavil at so innocent a thing, he
would have done it in two months, it being but a sheet of Paper against which
he was to write; and then (being near at hand) I should have been as quick in
my Reply. Though the worthy Answerer took much more time for his solid Piece,
yet in the interval mine was egregiously confuted: Nor was ever Gonvil's plain
Testament so tore and repiec'd as this Pamphlet, by the wise and numerous
Assailants. One said, that the whole thing was harmless and reasonable; but
that Magna Charta seemed to be struck at. His fellow answered, that Magna
Charta was Magna Farta, and of it self Popish; and that all was well, had not
Queen Elizabeth been abused. To this a third answered, that Q. Elizabeth was
now no more to them then William Rufus, and all that was said was out of
Protestant History; but the only thing he blamed was, that the fifth of Nov.
(which was still a Festival) was defamed, and consequently they themselves
jeered at in their Annual observation. At him another presently laughed, and
asked, whether any people ever reverenced a Solemnity against themselves: for
his own part, he cared not whether the Papists were guilty or not, let them
look to that; therefore he was sufficiently satisfied with the Apology, had the
Catalogue been omitted of those that died in the War: for by it, it seemed, as
if the whole Royal Army were Papists, because so many Popish Officers, and men
of great Condition, were killed in that Service. To this a Neighbor said, that
he knew many more of the Party, then were mentioned, that thus fell for their
Allegiance; and that it was hard, that so cheap recompense should be denied men
for their lives: but the sole thing which he stumbled at, was the timing and
publication of it. Against whom the whole Company concluded, that if ever the
time was fit, 'twas then when the flame appeared, and that't would have been
ridiculous to Apologize, when there was no stir or clamor. Thus have I been
vindicated by my Reprehenders, and thus have I both read and seen in matters of
Religion, where the several Antagonists have solved the Popish difficulties
themselves.

After Christmas, Reader (as I said before) I not only went out of Town, but
have ever since been many score of miles distant from it, which is the cause I
saw not this Answer so soon as otherwise I should have done: at last it was
sent me by a Protestant Gentleman who had seen the Apology before it was
printed. When I had read it, I began to admire, not only at the malice of the
thing, but also at the weakness of the man, that thus needlessly took up the
Cudgels. Who the Author is, to this day I know not; nor can any man desire his
Acquaintance, unless it be to say, they have seen the Eighth Wise man* I do not
say, that he may not be a man of Wit; but nevertheless, I am sure, he is
neither of Judgment nor Principles.

For had he been a Royallist, he would have had more Gratitude and good Nature,
then to have forgotten faithful friends in a storm, and added (as he hoped)
fuel to the flame, when we were underhand bespattred by Enemies to us both. Nor
was there any drift in the Apology, but to settle a Distemper, raised without
either cause or reason.

A Presbyterian I can never think him, because they being men of depth and
prudence, know that the effects of their crying against Papists in 1640. are
too fresh in memory; nor can it be an advantage for them to harass men's
Consciences, while their own are within reach of Law.

I can also as little fancy that an Independent, or any real member of that
manyheaded and uncompacted Body, could soberly by writing wish a Persecution
for Religion, being them selves obnoxious upon all accounts; and if severity
should universally fall, they cannot imagine but that men of Birth, men of
Breeding, men of Loyalty, must needs at all times find more friends then they.
Who he is, God knows, a man of Principles (as I said) I am sure he is not, nor
do I doubt but his officiousness will at last find its reward: and since he has
called me Turk, and worse, as you shall see by and by, I suppose he will not
take it amiss, if I speak my thoughts, viz. that though he carps in a Ministers
Dialect, yet doubtless he is a Jew of the Dukes Place.

Reader, When I received this Answer, both by my Letters and Friends near me, I
was persuaded not to reply, because it had no force in it self, nor had any
applause at London. I could not upon this information but assent; but now
lately I have been awaked by a new occasion. I had some days ago sent me a
Pamphlet, called* A Discourse of the Religion of England; a simpler thing was
never yet writ, I am sure; and take this for a proof, for he says among many
hundred of his silly things, that Holland, Scotland and Geneva brought in the
Reformed Religion without Rebellion. He has been well whipped by a Protestant,
but deserves much more. For Scroop was excepted out of the Act of Oblivion, and
hanged, for excusing to Sir Richard Brown after mercy, instead of being
contrite for his crime: yet this man that owns himself a Presbyterian (which I
believe as much as that my Minister was a Cavalier) says, The c. 20. p. 40.
Non-conformists were only eager Assertors of Legal Liberties. Seven Chapters
of his Treatise are against Papists, and all taken out of the Answerer of the
Apology: therefore since I find it has weight in the opinion of one, lest more
weak Brethren should fall, I thought fit to take some pains thus to remove the
cause.

I was forced to go the insipid way of Section by Section, well knowing that
some people not finding the Solution to follow the Objection, would sooner
haesitate and doubt Insipid; I call this Method, because there is no art or
contrivance in it; nor is it possible but the best Reply in the World must be
then frigidly stiff, when the Adversary in the Paragraph has no Spirit in him.
I have not Printed the Answer verbatim, for that would be too tedious, but have
so contracted it* that I challenge the Author himself to find any thing left
out, that might have added force to the Argument. The Books I use in Citations
are all Protestant, except Davilah, impartial, as the reformed confess: for
though he is acknowledged to be a Creature and adorer of Katherine de Medices,
yet concerning her he speaks home, even in many private intrigues, which might
have been well omitted. Him only I quote about the Hugonots Rebellion; but
their actions are so villanously notorious, that any Author shall be-sufficient
for that purpose.

I must needs say, I have had no little trouble in this Composition, fearing
the Bulk would be voluminous; for by Nature I hate superfluities and always
strive to crowd my matter into the narrowest room imaginable. In this Work I
had still the disgustful vexation, how to omit, and yet be still intelligible:
For I dare affirm, had I writ all I could upon this Subject* and followed to
the utmost the disingenious digressions of the Answerer, I should have swelled
to the bigness of any Folio extant. I have nevertheless past by nothing
material; and hope this thin Octavo will be both useful and satisfactory to
you, since it contains the whole accusation in practice, charged upon the
English Catholics; I have urged nothing (as I said before) but what I prove
out of the Record of a violent Protestant, or a natural deduction from it: and
that you may upon occasion find each particular matter, here follow the
Contents themselves in order.

1. Whether Papists were necessitated farther then in Duty to fight for their
Sovereign. Pref. 2. Concerning stirs by Papists in the beginning of the
Reformation. Pref. 3. Concerning the Irish Rebellion Rep. 1. 4. Mr. Du Molins
Canonical french integrity in his allegations agains Papist's, Rep. 3. He is
endangered by his own bait. Rep. 35. 5. Whether Papists die in England for
their Conscience or for Treason? Rep. 4. 6. About the Oath of Allegiance and
dispensing with Vows. Rep. 5. 7. Whether their General Councils, Decretals and
Divines teach Papists Rebellion and deposing Kings? And in the Theory and
Practice, whether Papists or Protestants have been most in fault. Rep. 6. 8.
Whither Papist's governed the civilized world? And of their Ignorance. Rep. 7.
9. Whether Protestant Princes are more absolute then the Popish? Pref. and Rep.
9. 10. 10. About Q. Mary's Persecution, and whether she or the Reformed
Government, spilt most Blood for Religion? Rep. 11. 11. Whither Papist's caused
the war in the three Kingdoms? Rep. 13. 12. Whether Papists were connivers in
the late Troubles. Rep. 15. 13. Whether Papists twice converted England from
Paganism? Rep. 16. 14. Whether Popish or Protestant Governments are kinder to
their dissenting Subjects? Rep. 17. Postscript. 15. Concerning the French
Massacre. Rep. 18. 19. 20. 16. The Popish misdemeanors in Q. Elizabeth's Reign,
and their then Plea. Rep. 22. 17. How Protestants have used their Popish
Princes here in England. Rep. 22. 18. About the Powder Treason. Rep. 28. 19.
About Hubert the Frenchman, who was hanged for burning London. Rep. 35. 20.
Concerning the Catalogue of the Papists that died for their King, and of the
Protestants also that died in that bed of Honor. Rep. 48. 21. Of the Papist's
that leave their Religion, and why? Rep. 48. Sect. 5.
Many other things of note are here handled in several places.

The Printer to the Reader.
I Had directions to add Figures to the Apology (here before Printed entire)
which might correspond to each Answer, to the end you might know what the
Answerer strives to confute. But because this would be no little trouble to
you, to turn and return in the reading of the Book, I have therefore reprinted
the Apology, dividing it into several Sections corresponding both with the
Answer and Reply. This will be, I am sure, of no little convenience to you: and
so farewell.

THe Title which the Minister has prefixed to his Book, is The late Apology in
behalf of the Papists reprinted, and answered in behalf of the Royallists. Now,
I beseech you, Reader (having read the Apology through) what injury has any
good man done him by it? But besides, how extravagant is that beginning? for to
write against Papists in Vindication of the Royallists, is like the defending
of King Charles, by the opposing of Charles Stuart. Did not the Protestants and
Catholics make up one Body, viz. the Royal Party? I am sure, they that
distinguish them at present, hated both formerly, and would willingly divide
them now, in hopes to weaken the King, and put the whole Kingdom in new
confusions. He therefore that thus impertinently begins with wicked intentions,
can never without doubt end either well or wisely.

SECT. I. APOLOGY.
The Arms which Christians can use against Lawful Powers in their Severity, are
only Prayers and Tears. Now since nothing can equal the infinity of those we
have shed, but the Cause, viz. To see our dearest Friends forsake us; we hope
it will not offend you, if (after we have a little wiped our eyes) we sigh out
our Complaints to you.

I. ANSWER.
The minister directs his Answer to the Author of the Apology, and says thus to
the foregoing words: That in the Conspiracy of Babington against Q. Elizabeth,
such a Declaration was made about Prayers and Tears that the expression
infinity of tears is in it self improper, and the sense more applicable to Q.
Mary's days, the Irish Rebellion, or our own faboulous Purgatory. But we
Jesuits, whether ranting, or whining, cannot speak like other men.

REPLY I.
Is not this great malice, to make a parity between them who considered Q.
Elizabeth as an Usurper, and us that (in words and sufferings) acknowledge no
Prince had ever a more unquestionable Title then ours? To this I need not say
more, having in the latter end of the Preface showed, that time and accidents
have quite altered the Scene, and doubtless our obedience to the Government is
now apparently so great, that it is as probable the Heptarchy may be revived, or
the Welsh rebel (which were high folly to imagine) as that disorders or tumults
can be again occasioned by the Catholics.

Concerning the Irish Rebellion, I never so much as once mentioned it in the
Apology, believing there could not be found a man so inhumane, that would
charge a thing upon us, which for 26 years together we were all acknowledged to
be clear of, though the late Enemies of the Kingdom had made strict inquisition
about it; and every body knows they wanted not will (had there been
probability) to make us Partisans in all detestable and odious contrivances.
'Twas evident the English Catholics abhorred it, that several fought against
the Rebels, that we all decried their proceedings; nor did I ever hear any of
our Party in the least excuse the fact, though to my knowledge Protestants have
often done it.

My Lord Macquire (who being a prime Actor, knew the whole Conspiracy) at his
Execution at Tyborn was conjured as a dying man to declare if the English
Papists had any knowledge or hand in the Design: Vid. His last Speech etc. and
Printed by Authority 1644.
He took it on his death, that not a man in England knew of it but one, and he
was an Irishman, and a Protestant also.

But who is ignorant (unless wilfully opinionated) that, that which produced
this wickedness, was both a National animosity, and a particular hatred of the
Conquered to the Conqueror? Nor would less have been done; had any English
Catholic King been their Governor. Religion is no tie between Nations when
great hatreds arise, or great advantages for freedom (as they term it) offer
themselves, as we experimentally find by the Sicilian Vespers abroad, and at
home by the total Massacre in one night of the, Cib. B^it. p. 143.
Danes by the English. The Protestant Irishman you see also was so willing to
have the English out of Ireland, that he never discovered the Plot, though he
knew what was intended against his own Religion.

For his Criticism about the word infinity, it is as ridiculous as his poor
quibble about Purgatory; and for Queen Mary's days, I shall by and by speak of
them at large in a more ^ep. ^^
proper place.

SECT. 2. APOLOGY.
We had spoken much sooner, had we not been silent through consternation to see
you so inflamed (whom with reverence we Honor) and also to show our submissive
patience, which used no slights or tricks to divert the debates of Parliament.
For no body can imagine, where so many of the great Nobility and Gentry are
concerned, but some thing might have been done; when as in all ages we see
things of Public advantage by the managers dexterity nipt in the bud, even in
the very Houses themselves. Far be it from Catholics to perplex Parliaments,
who have been the Founders of their Privileges, and all Ancient Laws. Nay,
Magna Charta it self had its rise from us; Which we do the less boast of, since
it was not at first obtained in so submiss and humble a manner.

ANSWER II.
That men of the Popish Religion were the Founders of our good Laws and
Privileges of Parliament, the Minister cannot allow: for those of our
Ancestors that stood for the Nation were, he says, of his Religion, as much as
ours; but those particularly ours, that sided with the Pope.

REPLY. II.
Judge whether this man be not mad then Fox; for Fox never thought any fit
for Kalendar-Saints and Martyrs, but those that denied Popery; as Fox Feb. 12.
Roger Only, ali^ Bullingbroke, whom Fox has Canonized though condemned (as
Stow says) to di^ for Stow Hen. 6. p. 627. 628.
Necromancy. Sir Fox Ian. 7.
Roger Acton also hanged for Stow H. 5. p. 561.
Rebellion; and many score of the like Gang. Now the Minister by his Argument
will have Protestant all the Parliaments that made Magna Charta and ou^ other
Privileges, all people that acknowledged them, and all Officers that from time
to time have executed these ancient Laws: Yet these transactions were in the
darkest times of Popery; nor did the Waldenses, Albigenses, Wi^kliffians,
Lollards, etc. look on the Government then as Protestant, as you may see in Mr.
Fox hi^ voluminous Story. And since I have named this famous Author, who is
called a sound new writer in the much celebrated Practice of piety, in the
eight reason for the morality ^ Hey^. Geog. ^. 20.
of the Sabbath; Mr. Heylin also rank's him as the prime modern Ecclesiastical
Writer. I say since I have named this once famous Mr Fox. I cannot but condole
his misfortune, that instead of having his Book in Churches as formerly it was
wont, it is now thought fit only to cramp sleepers, according to Mrs. Abigails
Practice. And truly a like fate attends all the first Champions of Reformation;
for in tract of time their Principles being found by their followers impossible
to be maintained, new ones (sometimes opposite to the former) are therefore
invented, which hereafter will also fail as the others did before them.

SECT. III. APOLOGY.
We sung our Nunc. Dimittis, when we saw our Master in his Throne, and you in
your deserved Authority and Rule.

ANSWER III.
If we sang our Dimittis at the present Kings return, he says some of us
rejoiced, and sang an Exultemus at the beheading of the former.

REPLY. III.
Who would now think that a man could be so abominable as to lay such a thing
to our charge without any proof at all? Reader, this Godly Minister has done
it, and that he might show his utmost malice, he cites only in the Margent the
Answerer of Philanax, as if we were undoubtedly found guilty of the fact. But
because my Minister durst not for shame set dowd Du Moulins words, I will here
present you with his Accusation verbatim; nor will Christ himself be innocent,
if such evidence as this be sufficient.

Du Moulins v^ords in ansv. to Phil. p. 58.
When the business of the late bad times are once ripe for an History, and time
the bringer forth of truth has discovered the mysteries of Iniquity, and the
depths of Satan which have wrought so much crime and mischief, it will be found
that the late Rebellion was raised and fostered by the arts of the Court of
Rome. That Jesuits professed themselves Independents, as not depending on the
Church of England; and Fifth-Monarchy-men, that they might pull down the
English Monarchy; and that in the Committees, for the King and Church, they had
their Spies and their Agents. The Roman Priest and Confessor is known, who
when he saw the fatal stroke given to our Holy King and Martyr, flourished with
his Sword and said, Now the greatest Enemy* we have in the World is gone.

Now, Reader, let me ask you when will the business of our times be ripe for
History? or what discoveries can there be made against us, if in six and twenty
years after the beginning of the War, if in twenty years after the end of it,
and perpetration of that most accursed Murder, we have not only been owned as
Loyal Subjects, but still embraced by the Protestant Cavaliers as true
Partisans with them in all their glorious Sufferings? I am sure the Press was
free both in the Rumps and Olivers Tyranny; and if it were possible to suppose
those times had been unseasonable, why have not the grave Historians since the
Kings restoration made our late perfidiousness appear? I am sure Protestants
Bates* Elenc. mo^. p.
both Lay and Clergy, for their Treason in his Majesty's absence have been
convicted since his return, when as no Papist could ever yet be suspected for
the least defection from our Soveraing. Can this man think himself Canon of
Canterbury) and dare say, that the Priest is known who flourisht his Sword at
the fatal stroke, when as no body knows him, no not he himsef? Doubtless he
means some Hugonot Minister: for what Cavalier was ever in France, and knows
not how those Saints adored Cromwell? hating from the beginning to the end both
our King and his Party. Let the World judge of this Story concerning this
nameless Priest, by him whom he names, viz. Mr. White whose Book of Obedience
and Government he lays as a Ansv. Phil. p. 61.
blot on all of our Religion; when as this Mr. White has not only been sharply
used by the Catholics of England, but he and this very Book were openly
condemned by the Pope himself; nor durst he since show his head in any
Catholic Country. Thus may be seen the Conscience of this Monsieur who would
charge us with a crime, which at the writing he knew was false; and from this
son of Darkness has my Minister and others owned to have received their light;
and what kind of light it is, pray be pleased farther to observe.

He tells us, Ansv. Phil. p. 59.
That a year before the Kings death a select Company of English Jesuits were
sent from their whole Party to consult with the Faculty of Sorbon (who you must
know Reader, are the greatest Catholic Enemies the Society has in France)
whether they might lawfully make away the King. The Doctors answered
affirmavely to the Question, being then stated in writing; but afterward when
the Pope saw that the Kings Murder was decried by every body, he commanded tha
Jesuits to burn all the Papers about the Question; but one of them was showed
by a Papist to a Protestant. Yet for all this secrecy commanded by the Pope, Du
Moulin tells us (p. 58.) that at Roan many Jesuited persons told a Protestant
openly on the news of the Kings death, That they having often admonished the
King from time to time to remember his promise at Marriage of becoming a
Papist, were forced to take these courses for his destruction.

After this History, he says ( p. 61.) That the Friars at Dunkirk) and by the
way, there was never in that Town a House of English, Scotch, or Irish Friars)
told a Protestant Gentleman, that had a mind to pump them, That the Jesuits
would fain engross the Honor of the Kings death to themselves; but the truth
was, they had labored as effectually as the Jesuits to compass it. Then he
tells, ( page 60.) That thirty Jesuits near Diep met a stranger (a Protestant
Gentleman) on the Road and told him that they were going into England to be
Agitators in the Independent Army.

Good Protestant Reader, I am quite tired with this senceless stuff; and if you
think it false, consider what a jewel you have got from France; but if you can
deem it true, let me entreat you hereafter never to fear Jesuit or Priest; for
I am sure such prating fools can never do you harm. Besides, I wonder how it
came to pass that all the Great Cavaliers caress't the Jesuits, and always
employed them in much business during the Kings exile; neither were they then,
or the rest of the Popish Priests, less welcome to the Royallists of England,
But pardon me, I beseech you Reader, if I use so many words about a matter that
deserves so little; yet I cannot but confess* I am engaged to the French
Divine for being so notoriously malicious and foolish: nor did I ever think
that Sir Walters discovery of the Plot in 1641. of blowing up the Thames to
drown the City, could ever be paralleled; but here I now find it outdone.

Have we not seen, Good Reader, that such ridiculous Stories as these have
lately ruined the Kingdom? and can any man believe if they once come in fashion
again, they will end with Papists? No doubtless, for both Church and Court will
soon find the smart; as by experience we begin to feel.

For my own part, I should never have taken notice of Sieur du Moulin or his
Book; had not my Minister owned him, as I said, for his informer; and now I see
he has imitated him also in his method; for my worthy Answerer calls me a
Jesuit, and so the Dr. does Philanax, though I am confident he knows him to be
a Layman, and a married man also. But now, Reader, it will not be amiss to
tell you why this Mr. du Moulin is so angry with the Jesuits.

You must know, that Petra Sancta (a famous Writer in the Society) Calvinian us
verber ^ p. 4^.
taxes the Drs Father for juggling, viz. for being in France a Presbyterian, and
in England Episcopal, and so complying for gain with those Ceremonies which his
Calvinistical Brethren abominated as superstitious.

This old du Moulin (his reverend father; as the Dr. calls him) writ a Ansv. to
Philanax, page 38.
Letter forsooth, as his son says, to the Rebels at Rochel, to exhort them to
obey the King in breaking up their Assembly, which was then hatching the
Rebellion that presently after broke out; and yet (though it has been lickt and
amended, I doubt not, by the Doctor) you may find, That a Ib. p. 41.
ground of his persuasion was, because they were not strong enough to resist
the King. and besides, the Reverend Divine in that persuasion to Loyalty,
concludes, Ib. p. 44.
Notwithstanding all he had said, they ought to look after their safety;
fort'was unreasonable for them to separate their Assembly with the peril of
their persons. Of the same Loyal judgment also I find the Dr. himself; for
after all his railing against Jesuits for Sedition, he confesses the Term was
expired of the grant of the strong Places to the Hugonots; Nevertheless, he
says, they seem to Ib. p. 37.
be justified for keeping those Towns, by the reason of the first Grant, which
was to preserve them from their bitter Enemies.

This was the Doctrine, you see, of this worthy Divine, who also vindicated the
actions of the Reformed in Geneva, Holland, Germany, etc. and therefore I
wonder not at his aspersing us for our service to our King and Country. It Is
not my business to run over all his Book in order, having one of his Disciples
already to deal with; but this I must tell him and the rest of his Tribe, That
since they steal one from the other, none of their Fopperies shall go
unanswered: and this they may find in some part or other of the present
treatise.

SECT. V. APOLOGY.
Nor could any thing have ever grieved us more, then to have our Loyalty called
into Question by you, even at the instigation of our greatest Adversaries. If
we must suffer, let it be by you alone; for that is a double death to men of
Honor, to have their Enemies not only accusers, but for their insulting Judges
also.

ANSWER IV.
His Objection here is, Men of Honor have no cause to fear either single or
double Deaths; and that Catholics were never put to death in England for
Religion, but for Treason.

REPLY IV.
Is not this pretty, that no body died in England for Religion, but for
Treason? and yet many hundred of Priests have been executed for no other crime,
but being Priests. Nay, Laymen have been hanged for being converted, and
others for letting a Priest say Mass in their houses; when as to hear Mass on
Festivals every Catholic is in Conscience obliged, if he can. Besides, have
not many Catholics also suffered for believing the Pope to be Head of the
Church? By this Argument then, if the Parliament should make it Treason (as who
knows but they may?) to hold Episcopal Ordination only valid, or that the King
cannot give Orders; it might then be as well said, that they (that are executed
in pursuance of that Law) died for Treason, and not for their Religion.

But lest the Minister (that has the boldness in almost every Paragraph to deny
apparently known things) might to deceive his Acquaintance still say, I have
not proved what I assert: Not to trouble my Reader with many citations, take
this one example out of Q. E^. p. 1259.
John Stow, that downright and plain Historian. He tells us, That fourteen
Papists were at a clap executed; six only for being made Priests beyond Sea,
and remaining here; four Laymen only for being reconciled; and four more, only
for abetting or relieving the others. Now if that be sufficient for the justice
of the procedure, to say there are Laws to this purpose enacted, then most
certain it is, that the Primitive Christians were all Traitors, being banished
by the lawful Magistrate from several places where they taught, and knowing
also many particular Injunctions against their Preaching and seducing the
Emperors Subjects, as the Ethnicks were pleased to call it. Nay, the Great St.
Alban our famous Proto-Martyr was executed (as may be seen in the Martyrology)
for being (contrary to Dioclesians Laws) converted to the Faith, and abetting
or entertaining in his House the Priest Amphibalus, which Priest was his
Spiritual Instructor, according to Mr. Cambden in his famous Treatise p. 413.
of Britain.

SECT. IV. APOLOGY.
These are they that by beginning with us, Murdered their Prince, and wounded
you: And shall the same method continue by your approbation? We are sure you
mean well, though their Design be wicked. But let it never be recorded in
Story, that you forgot your often Vows to us* in joining with them that have
been the cause of so great calamity to the Nation.

ANSWER V.
He urges, that by saying the Kings Murderers began with us Catholics, we
take liberty of bestowing Characters on whom we please; so that no body must
act against us, lest they be thought to continue the Method of the Kings
Murderers. For Vows, he says, we Catholics are more sure of those of
Protestants to us, then they of ours to them, because they want a Pope to
dispense with them.

REPLY V.
Pray, Reader, upon mature consideration tell me now, whether they were not the
Kings Murderers that pursued Papists in the beginning of the War? Their design
afterward, I am sure plainly appeared; and pray God those were not of the same
Tribe, who first promoted our late troubles. Let me ask also, whether you find
not us at home and abroad as strict to our promises as any other you converse
with.

But since this Minister upbraids us with our dispensing with Vows, be pleased
to consider who has been most busy, the Romish or Protestant Pope herein. The
Papists have from the beninning refused the Oath of Allegiance as it is now
worded, but the Reformed took it in all the degrees of preferment, viz. when
graduated in the Universities, when admitted into Orders, when Justices of
Peace, when Parlimament-men; and in short, when any Dignity either in Church or
State is conferred. Yet for all the often repetition of it, half the Kingdom
were in Rebellion against the King, even directly contrary to what they had
sworn. Now on the other side, there was no Papist that declared not for the
King, though all the Party (as I said) refused the Oath, and for this refusal
severely suffered both in their Estates and Persons. Besides, if it were a
Doctrine amongst us (as the Protestants state it) that the Pope can when he
pleases absolve us from our Oaths, why should we then (do you think) refuse the
taking of this? Doubtless a Dispensation (if it could be granted) might be
procured at less charge then two thirds of our Estates, omitting all corporal
punishments. Oaths by our Tenets are not in themselves unlawful, nor can it be
out of want of zeal for our Prince that we refuse them; since it is plain, that
we all, like one man, stood by him in his great affliction and misery.

You must know, Reader, this Oath was framed by one Perkins an Apostate
Jesuit, who knowing what we could take, and what not, purposely mingled
certain truths with uncertain speculative points, to make us fall within the
Law of refusal* Twould be tedious to show all the real exceptions we have to
it, nor do any of them truly relate to our obedience to the King; for as to the
Allegiance, I would be bound to word an Oath, which no Papist shall scruple at,
and yet it shall be more strong then this. But, Reader, to give you my opinion
of Oaths (though nevertheless I am not for taking away that laudable Custom of
swearing Subjects) I think them really useless, where without them (as in
Allegiance) we are naturally bound: for honest men will be punctual in duty,
though they never swore; when as the wicked can at no time be obliged, let the
Bond be never so Sacred.

SECT. 6. APOLOGY.
Of all Calumnies against Catholics, we have admired at none so much, as that
their Principles are said to be inconsistent with Government, and they
themselves thought ever prone to Rebellion.

ANSWER VI.
On this short Paragraph he makes a wonderful long Discourse, saying, That it is
a calumny of ours to call that a calumny, which is true: for first, our
Councels; secondly, our Decretals; thirdly, our Divines teach, that the Pope
has Power to depose Kings, and to discharge Subjects of their Allegiance, which
Doctrines are inconsistent with Government. But every Papist is bound to
believe their Councels, Decretals, and Divines: Ergo, we may well be thought
prone to Rebellion.

REPLY. 6.
To answer to these things perspicuously, I shall treat of them singly.

Object. 1. That our General Councels decree this, he proves by the Lateran
Council under Innocent the III. which expressly ordains, he says, That in case
any Prince be a favourer of Heretics, after admonition given, the Pope shall
discharge his Subjects from their Allegiance, and shall give away the Kingdom
to some Catholic, that may root out these Heretics.

I grant that the sense of the words is in the Council, and that in
determinations of Faith Councels are infallible. But as for other matters, we
say not, that Councels are infallible in every point, even in matter of Fact.
Besides, Councel's ordinations are to be taken according to the prudent meaning
of the Legislators, and oftentimes bear another sense then the bare words
taken as they lie, and weighed out of due circumstances seem to signify. Nor
will this seem strange to an English University man, since they grant, that in
some matters God is not pleased that the Scripture it self should in it is
obvious sense be taken as infallible, for no body will there say, that all the
Philosophy in the Bible is unquestionable, or that the Mathematics of it is to
a Tittle just. The Molten Sea is described to be 1. K. 7. 23.
ten Cubits (in diameter) from brim to brim, and that it was round, and that a
line of thirty cubits did compass it. Now who is it (having read less then the
first six Books of Euclid) but can demonstrate that this is not altogether
exact? The Blood is not now thought by their learned Physicians to be the
Levit. 17. 14.
life of a Creature but the Vehicle. Nor do their Astronomers believe that the
Stars are less then the Sun or Moon, though in Genesis they are called the two
Genesis 1. 16.
great Lights. The solution to these Objections is easy, and in every
Sophisters mouth, viz. that the Holy Penmen writ of such matters, either
briefly (as that measure of a Circle is to this day ordinarily expressed) or
else according to the Hypothesis or Opinion then assented to by the World. But
where this Sacred Word speaks to us doctrinally, it is to be believed on pain of
Damnation: so a Council when it determines of faith, we are to reverence those
determinations as coming from the Holy Ghost.

Nevertheless it is other Constitutions, being but humain laws, are
changeable, and oftentimes admit several exceptions; nor do they alwais bring
with them such an inevitable obligation, that there is not possible way to
avoid it is bond. For Promulgation etc must precede. This plainly appears by
the Council of Trent, to the doctrine whereof all Catholics whatsoever submit
though the rest of it is Decrees bind not in France, no in any place else, where
they are yet unreceived.

But the case now in controversy needs not all this: for I suppose the
Minister will not deny, but that the Emperors of the East and West, the Kings
of England, France, Hungary, Jerusalem, Cyprus, Arragon, etc. may agree
together (if they please) to purge their Kingdoms of Heresy, and upon failure,
that the Church shall give their Dominions to another that will perform the
compact. These Princes, Reader, that I have named were Mat. Paris p. 262. If
there had been any Protistants in those days, I would not have cited this
Author.
present (by their Ambassadors) at this Council and what was there done, was by
their consent, the Albigensian Heresy beginning then to be somewhat numerous.
Nor did those Monarchs think themselves in a worse condition for this
Ordination. Moreover we never heard that any Catholic King since ever did
Protest, or exclaim against the Council; which doubtless they would have done,
had they been in any dangerby it. On the contrary we know, that Mariana (as the
Minister confesses) was condemned, for barely inclining to the opinion of thus
deposing Kings; which judgment could not have passed against him, had this been
by any Council adjudged an Article of Faith. 'Twere a mortal sin in me, and I
should presently incur all Ecclesiastical censure, if I did deny
Transubstantiation, by reason it is an Article of Faith, and so declared by
this very Lateran Council: but as for the absolute power of deposing Kings, it
is held by several as a mere opinion, and opposed by many as falls, nor will
Divines say, they are the worse Catholics for it. Certa^ly it were not
unlawful, if the Princes and States (that own themselves Christians) should now
in an Assembly agree (by reason they saw Judaism or Turcism increasing) that
every one of them must do what he could to hinder this growth, and in case any
was found favoring it, his Dominions should be given to another. This, I say,
without doubt is lawful; and though it were not made to bind our Posterity, yet
it might be hoped that the zeal of so sacred an Assembly would make Governors
hereafter diligent to weed out all Infidelity.

What therefore was here ordered, was to oblige the Kings, who by compact
acknowledged the procedure; and 'twas also imagined, that succeeding Catholic
Princes would be more careful to keep their people from error, when they should
call to mind that this was agreed to in a Council where the East and West met,
( Matt. Paris p. 262.
for the Patriarch's of Constantinople and Jerusalem were present, Antioch and
Alexandria sent deputies) and which consisted of 77. Primates, 412. Bishops,
and above 800. Abbots and Priors; besides the Ambassadors of so many Monarchs;
all which put together, makes this to be the greatest Council that ever was.
Much more could I say concerning this Council, and many other considerations
(for brevities sake) I am forced to pass by.

But Pray, Reader, before I end, let me mind you of this, That the Popes never
give away (as men call it) a Kingdom from a Prince simply Heretical, but from
one that is an Apostate, and so revolted from the Church. For we see that Hen.
8. was condemned, yet nothing was done to his Son Edw. 6. And again, though
Queen Elizabeth, (who went to Mass in Queen Mary's time, and also had actually
owned the Pope, by keeping her Ambassador in the beginning at Rome) was
deprived of Sovereignty by the Bull of Pius Quintus; yet no censure past
against King James, K. Charles the first, or this present Monarch: and the
reason is, because they always professed themselves Protestants, and never
acknowledged his Holiness as their Bishop and Pastor. Therefore Protestant
Magistrates have no reason to fear either Pope or Papists.

The Answerer having urged this Council, to vilisie it the more, tells us,
'twas Innocent the III. who there presided, that deposed our K. John, and Otho
IV.: and then runs extravaganly to a foreign thing, in hopes to make it more
disgustful, viz. that this Council which made Rebellion a duty, made
Transubstantiation an Article of Faith.

Concerning King John, I have told you before, that Popes as private Doctors
may err, nay it is not certain, that without a Council they are infallible
even in their interpretations of faith; much more therefore they are liable to
err in their actions. Neither do I canonize or approve whatsoever Popes have
done in deposing Kings. And if some Popes have transgressed, it follows not
that all have, no more then because some Princes have been Tyrants, their
Predecessors and Successors must be so too. Differences between Kings and
Popes, I consider as between Man and Wife* for in all Quarrels the right can be
but on one side; yet it happens through humane imbecility, and revenge, that
the most injured often commits some absurdity or other, by which the Peccant
party may gain a very seeming adva^tage. No brave English King needed to have
more feared Popes, then they needed to have feared their other gaping
Neighbors. This Prince, Protestant Historians conclude to be the least
deserving of all our Governors; for (passing by his Martin Hen. 2. p. 3^ Ric.
1. p.
youthful Rebellion, the Heyl. p. 89. Dan. 110
Murdering of his Nephew, his Baker.
Atheism, etc. which they record) it is he that lost our whole interest (either
by Conquest or Matches) in Heyl. page 97.
France, and discontenting all his People, never obliged any body that I heard
of, unless the Mayor and Corporation of He gave them a Svvord and Cup which
they keep still.
Lynne. This yet is no excuse to the Pope, but shows only the unhappiness of
the Nation, that it had not a more generous Prince (for Sr. Rob: Cotton Vid.
his Hen. 3. page 1.
call's him a licentious sovereign) to defend our Rights and Privileges.

Now for Transubstantiation, it is true that in this Council the word was first
made Authoritatively use of, as in the Council of Nice, the word Trinity; but
the sense and meaning of both Trinity and Transubstantiation was in the
Scripture, and held from age to age: Nay, the word Transubstantiation it self
was used by Hove^den. p. 576. Blesensis Chaplain to Hen. 2. Ep. 140.
grave Authors in Writings before.

Object. 2. Concerning the Decrees and Bulls of Popes, he says, that from
Gregory VII, they made such a trade of deposing Kings, that no weak King could
wear his Crown, but at the Popes courtesy; and that Boniface VIII. declares in
these words* We say, and define, and pronounce, that it is absolutely necessary
to salvation for every creature to be subject to the Bishop of Rome.

To this I answer, that in the next Century (or a little more) after K. John,
there were more weak Kings in England then eiher before or since, viz. Hen. 3.
Edw. 2. Ric. and yet the Popes did not offer to take away their Crowns, or ever
stirred to perplex them, though their wicked Subjects gave the Pope opportunity
enough. Nay, though Hen. 3. denied any acknowledgment upon the gift of King
John, yet the Pope assisted him against the Rebellious Barons. And for the
composition of Edward the Seconds troubles, his Holiness sent him two Dan. Ed.
^. p. 175.
Cardinals, but the Rebels would not accept of their Mediation, as knowing them
too much of the Kings Party. Besides, I told you again and again, that the
Popes Decrees and Bulls are not always held infallible: and may be opposed, as
they often have been by stiff and Religious Papists; nor will good Catholics
scruple to do it, especially about Temporal affairs. And if Popes should speak
in such a Dialect (as the Minister urges) they mean subjection in Spiritual
matters.

3. Object. Among the Divines that agree to the deposing of Kings, he mentions
some Jesuits, as Bellarmine, Suarez, Valentia, Parsons or Creswel; Mariana
also he names, though he confesses him condemned. Out of these he cites several
places to this purpose viz. As Jehojada deposed Athaliah, so may Popes deal
with Kings.

To this I say, Let the Jesuits answer for their own Doctrine, for I am sure
they are of age, and able also; neither did they ever tell me otherwise, but
that I might reject such and the like opinions, they being only the private
fancies of some of their Order. It has never been my study to pore upon
Schoolmen, nor is it worth my pains now to search Libraries, whether they have
said so or no; which truly I do very much doubt of. For my part, I cannot think
Jesuits such King-haters, because Kings would then hate them; when as on the
contrary we see all Princes caress them, and make them their Confessors. At
this time the Jesuits are in this Office to the Emperor, the Queen of England,
the King of France, the Queen Regent of Spain, the King of Poland, and as I
take it, to the now King of Portugal; for they belonged thus to the late old
King and Queen of that Kingdom: the Dukes of Bavary, Newburgh, and many other
great Princes of Germany are also their Penitents; all which considered, I must
look upon Jesuits in general to be faithfuller Subjects then Protestants
imagine; for Kings though Papists are not always fools. But, suppose Jesuits
were Villains; what is that to the Catholic Faith? must Cambridge be Babylon,
and the English Religion false, because the Members of one College (suppose
Emanuel) were thought knaves and hypocrites?

The other Divines and Canonists whom the Minister urges, are Baronius,
Bertrand; Lancelotus, Peron, Rossaeus, who say (according to his citations)
things to the same purpose about deposing of Kings.

All this put together, Reader, is the force of his Argument. The Objection
about Councels and Bulls, you see is nothing; about Divines I have already
given you a touch, but now I will handle it a little fuller. You must know (the
Soul of man being so sublime and towering) there is no profession in the world,
but that the wits of it aim to resolve all difficulties that can be proposed in
the Science. This makes Philosophers Metaphysicians, and Schoolmen run into
those seeming odd subtleties, with which their writings are crammed. In the like
manner Casuists (thinking it a disgrace not to be able to answer something to
whatever can be proposed) treat in their Books about all Cases which their
nimble fancies can start. Among many impertinent niceties and curious
Questions, this of deposing Apostatizing Princes comes to be handled; some
perchance are for it others in may be against it. Now* because some have
adjudged, That upon a notorious falling away, the Church may give to the sound
the Dominions of the infected sheep, lest the whole slock might be tainted:
immediately the Minister and other Protestants declare, that the dethroning of
Kings is the Catholic Doctrine.

I am sure this was not so absolutely agreed to by the English Protestants
themselves (at least in discourse) that there could be none found among them,
who have favored the opinion which we are said to hold: how many well-meaning
men fought against Charles the I, only because they falsely thought him a
Papist? and I my self have heard those of condition say, when the King was
abroad, that should the Pope and his crew pervert him, they would oppose his
return. There was no danger of this, because his Majesty (like his Father and
Gra^dfather) has so great a veneration for Protestantism; but yet this that I
urge was frequently spoke of and no body that reads this, but has heard such
discourses often* What has been done about Religion in this our Country, I
shall tell you Vid. ^ep. 12.
hereafter; and at present I shall show you that we Papists are not the only
Rebel-teachers, but that there are Reformists that profess this Divinity also.

Loc. Com. ^ 57.
Luther says, You complain that by our Gospel the World is become tumultous. I
answer, God be thanked; these things I would have be, and woe me miserable, if
they were not.

Epist. l 4. p. 866.
Zwinglius. If the Roman Empire, or what other Sovereignty soever, should
oppress the sincere Religion, and we negligently suffer the same, we shall be
charged with contempt no less then the oppressors themselves; whereof we have
an example in 15. Jer. where the destruction of the people is Prophesied,
because they suffered their K. Manasses, being ungodly, to be unpunisht.

In Daniel. C. 6. v. 22.
Calvin. Earthly Princes do hereave themselves of Authority when they erect
themselves against God: yea, they are unworthy to be accounted in the number of
men, therefore we must rather spit in their faces then obey them,

Passing by what Vid also ^rimst. Hist* of* France.
Beza did in France (Davila often mentions.) He writ a Book of the Power of
Magistrates, which Mr. Sutcliffe confesses, armed Subjects against their Prince.

Bancr* Dangerous Positions* p. 34.
Sundry Englishmen writ wholly of this Argument: That the Counselors, and
rather then fail, the very people were bound to reform Religion whether the
Queen would or no, though it were by putting her to death.

I shall trouble you, Reader, with no more Citations (of which our Books are
full) for I content my self with naming these of the greatest eminency: and
certainly the opinions of these Doctors may be more justly charged upon
Protestants in general, then the opinions of private Catholics upon us;
because Luther, Zwinglius, Calvin and Beza were the first Reformers: and if the
Spirit of God taught them so much truth; as they are said to preach, why should
this be more questionable then the rest? Therefore the Pope being Pharaoh, and
Popery Egypt (as Ministers daily affirm in their Pulpits) we may well say,
These are thy Gods, O Israel, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt.

These Apostles rested not in the Theory, but fell to the Practice also: for
whereas the Popes since the first rise of the Reformation, never gave away
(evenby word) but two Crowns, viz. England and France; the Reformed have
actually deposed the absolute Princes of Scotland, Denmark, Swedeland and
Geneva; have ravished also from their lawful Governors, the Low Countries,
Transylvania, and many Towns, which are now called Free. And for Rebellion and
Tumults, they have been eminent in Poland, Boheme, Hungary, France, Germany?
and in short, in all places where this Gospel has been preached. This every
Historian can tell you; nay, blind Mr. Heylin plainly saw it, therefore did all
he could (when these Countries in his Geography were to be handled) to purge
the Reformed from the Rebellion truly laid to their charge: but finding that
washing a Blackmore was labor in vain, he was forced (with his Brother
Sleidan) to fly for shelter to this abominable and prodigious Argument, Heyl.
p. 314.
viz. That Christ foretold, that Fathers should be against their sons, and
brothers against brothers for his sake; and that we find not in any Story, the
true Religion was induced, or corrupt about to be amended without War and
Bloodshed.

It is true, the lawful Protestant Church of England teaches no such Doctrine;
but this I do not much wonder at, for why should men (the King being so
absolute in Spirituals) run the risk to be undone for venting such notions,
when as their Monarchs have been so strict Professors of their Religion? The
test of this would be, if the Prince and people were different, or like to be
so in Faith and Worship. (...) what the English have done herein wh^^ this has
happened, I will show you, (...) said, Vid. ^. (...). 22.
by and by.

For my part, I look upon the English to be the most well-meaning and most
Religious people in the World; and it is that* which makes them all so violent
in what their Conscience tells them is true. This made Papists so earnest for
their Religion, which had governed England so long in glory. This made
Protestants fierce to root out what they thought Idolatry. This made
Presbyterians desire to have Prelatick Superstition reformed; and this made
Independents and their brood cry down every thing, standing stiffly (as they
imagined) for the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. I say, this great sincerity and
zeal, makes all our Countrymen so violent: which good intention, wicked people
taking advantage of, have caused so many disturbances among us; nor can
Sectaries ever be quiet, till they are convinced that some Church or other is
infallible.

Thus, Reader, have I answered to this strange Calumny against us, That our
Principles are inconsistent with Govenment; by showing that deposing of Kings
is no part of the Catholic Faith (which Catholic Princes do very well know)
and also, that in Doctrine and Practice, the Reformed have been (wheresoever
they came) far more faulty then we.

SECT. VII. APOLOGY.
My Lords and Gentlemen, Had this been a new Sect not known before, something
perchance might have been doubted; but to lay this at their doors that have
governed the civilized World, is the Miracle of Miracles to us.

ANSWER VII.
Here he says, that they that have read most, and have had the most experience,
can best cure ^s of the wonder; and that K. James (who had reason to know us)
said in the Parliament, That there were some that might be honest of the Party,
being ignora^tly seduced; but they that truly knew our Doctrines, could never
be good Subjects. Then he asks when it was that we governed the civilized
World? For he says, the Eastern, and Southern Churches never were under our
Government, nor the Western neither, but when ignorant and barbarous.

REPLY VII.
Now I plainly see the design of this Minister is (to the end his flock may
believe every thing answered) to say something to each Paragragh, let it be
never so frivolous. Who is it, Reader, that having read History is ignorant of
the great power the Bishop of Rome had over the East, as the Greek Fathers tell
us? for we read in Eusebius that Pope Victor (about anno a Eusebius lib. 5. Chapter
^4.
200.) Excomunicated the Eastern Church for not keeping Easter the Roman way.
and this Grimston also has in his account of Popes. Or who knows not of the
Appeals from Africa, when matters of moment arose, even in the most
acknowledged Primitive times? But I ask your pardon for asserting this, because
in the Primitive times, they say, the Popes themselves were Protestants. Yet
though this were so, I wonder the Minister should be so forgetful of the Great
Antichrist Boniface the III, who is baited by every Shoolboy. This arrant Pope
lived above Ann^ 604.
1000. years aago, and not only called himself Universal Bishop, but was owned
so too by Phocas the Universal Emperor as all Protestants declare. Might not
then a man modestly say, that Popery governed the civilized World, when it
governed the whole World? But I* d of willingly forgive a man this, that has
the confidence to say that we did not govern the Western World, till it grew
ignorant and barbarous. It may be he means that those Parts have been so ever
since Christ's time, otherwise (till this late Reformation) there was never any
Government on this side Greece, that denied the Popes Jurisdiction; and Greece
it self owned it in the Council of Lateran, and in Hen. 3. time also, as
Protestant p. 130.
Sir Richard Baker testifies.

Ever since Rome made het self Mistress of all Arts and Sciences, the West took
the name of the only civilized place: Therefore had he understood civility, he
would not have made so simple a cavil; and I dare say, he is the first
Protestant Writer (though they have been as bold as Hectors in their denials)
that has affirmed the Church of Rome never governed the civilized World.

But since this Minister mentions here Popish ignorance, I must desire the
Reader, if he knows any of our Profession in the Country, to tell me, whether
generally speaking, they are not esteemed more learned then their Neighbors of
the same rank and degree. I am sure they that live at London, are thought by
their Protestant Acquaintance as well bred, and as great scholars as any of
their condition with whom they usually converse. Concerning our Priests,
consult their Books, and tell me then, whether they have been out done or no:
and if any English man would know how they are abroad, let them go but to his
next Neighbors the French, and there in every Diocese, he shall find a Clergy
not only learned to admiration, but so far outgoing the Hugonot-Ministers, that
one would think they lived not in the same Clime or Region. Nay, what is yet
more, there is neither private nor public Library in this very Island, but
seven of ten of the choice Books in all Sciences were writ by Catholics.

Is not this, Good Reader, strange ignorance, for Protestants to be thus
deceived, and implicitly led on by their Pastors contrary to what they hear and
see? This, I must say, is incredible blindness, and exceeds that of the
silliest Papists, who if they are cozened, it must be in things beyond their
capacity, or by distance far remote from them. But now in England nothing is
more common, then to have wise Protestants run into this and the like fond
fancies; and at last when they can say no more, they are fain to shift it off
with this Phanatical evasion, That it is true, Papists are carnally, but not
spiritually learned.

SECT. V. APOLOGY.
Did Richard the first, or Edward Longshanks suspect his Catholics that served
in Palestine, and made our Countries Fame big in the Chronicles of all ages? or
did they mistrust (in their dangerous absence) their Subjects at home because
they were of this Profession? Could Edward the third imagine those to be
Traiterous in their Doctrine, that had that care and duty for their Prince, as
to make them (by Statute) guilty of death in the highest degree, that had the
least thought of ill against the King? Be pleased that Henry the fifth be
remembered also, who did those Wonders of which the whole World does still
resound; and certainly all History will agree in this, that 'twas Old-Castle he
feared, and not those that believed the Bishop of Rome to be Head of the Church.

ANSWER VIII.
To this he says, the Reigns of these Kings were in the dark times of
corruption; yet that Richard I. bequeathed his Pride and Lechery to the Clergy
and Monks. That Edward I. outlawed the Clergy, for obeying the Pope in not
paying Taxes. That Edward III, and Hen. V. made good Laws against the Popes
usurpation: and Becket vexed Hen. II more* then Hen. V feared Oldcastle.
Moreover, that all these Kings did not differ so much from Protestants, as the
Papists now do: and to conclude, he asks, did not the Pope force K. John to do
homage for England, wrestle with Edward the first for Scotland, and often lay
claim to Ireland?

REPLY. 8.
Certainly, Reader, the Minister is besides himself, since he can say the
English differed not so much from the Protestants then* as we do now. Has the
man railed all this while against the Tyranny of Popes, and urged those times
as the height of their Authority; and then comes to this evasion? I would fain
know, if the Clergy and Religious were since ever more in power then in those
days? was there ever more of Pilgrimages and all sorts of Devotion, which
Protestants call Superstitious? were not Schoolmen then most in their splendour?
And lastly, could any Publican Lollard, Wickliffian, or new Sect stir, but the
whole Kingdom presently detested them? Who then will ever believe a word more
he says, when he is so strangely impudent to no purpose? But these are the
worthy tricks used to keep the poor people in ignorance; and just with as* much
truth are the Fathers called defenders of the Protestant Religion: for the
Fathers styled them always Heretics that ran out of the visible Church.

For the Laws that have been made by any of our Kings if they made any against
Ecclesiastical usurpations, God reward them; and to this all Catholics will
say, Amen. Concerning K. John we have already spoke enough. And for the Popes
claim to Scotland, judge, Reader, whether any man can be fuller of falsity and
malice then this Minister, my Adversary. For here he would have the World think
(by his placing this Accusation after King John's business, and by calling it
the Popes wrestling with Edward I. for the Sovereignty of Scotland) there was
some notorious injustice done by the Sea of Rome. In short, the business was
only this, as you may find in Hollingshead, the most violent English Historian
against Papists that ever yet writ. The Scots having always an animosity
against the English, and not knowing how to resist the Victorious Arms of
Edward, who was again coming with a great Army against them, surrendered the
Kingdom, (or so pretended) to Boniface. 8. He thereupon sent to the King to
desist, because the Crown belonged to the Church. Edward immediately returned
an Answer, and so did all the Barons of England, to manifest the Kings right,
and the invalidity of the new pretense. The Pope (says Hol. p. 311.
Hollingshead) when he deliberately pondered the Kings Answer, with the Letter
from the English Barons, waxt cold in the matter, and followed it no farther.
Thus, Reader, you see how the case stood, and how Catholics are wronged by
ill men; nor is there any difference between a false aggravation, and a
downright lie. In the same manner are we used in this Accusation of Ireland;
for the Pope never meddled with Ireland but since the Reformation, and so
invaded it in the time of Queen Elizabeth, of which you shall see farther in
the Vid. Rep. 22
Section of Popish misdemeanors in her Reign.

The parity between S. Th. Becket and Oldcastle is doubtless very odd; the last
being a Rebel (with Accomplices in arms) against Stow. p. 561.
Henry the fifth: the other disputing only about Privileges, which he said
were granted to Priests. Just as if our Peers should stand upon the freedom of
their Persons, were there a design to have them imprisoned as other Subjects,
or tried by a common Jury. Besides, all Princes of Christendom then, owned
Becket for a Saint; when as no body (unless such a man as Fox) thought
Oldcastle deserved any thing but the Gallows.

SECT. IX. APOLOGY.
We will no longer trouble you with putting you in mind of any more of our
mighty Kings, who have been feared abroad, and as safe at home as any since the
Reformation of Religion. We shall only add this, that if Popery be the
enslaving of Princes, France still believes it self as absolute as Denmarck or
Sweden.

ANSWER IX.
He says, the King of France will believe what he pleases. For his Majesty well
knows the Pope gave away France formerly, fomented War against Hen. 4. and
would do the same against him, were it not for his Power and Religion.

REPLY IX.
I showed you before in the sixth Reply, that though the Reformed have actually
taken away from their lawful Governors so many Dominions, yet the Pope never
gave away but England and France which nevertheless are still under their
proper Sovereigns. Consider then, whether (since the light of the Gospel
appeared) the Protestant or Popish manner of dealing has been most destructive
to Princes: and judge if this be an Answer to my demand, which was, Whether
France acknowledging the Pope, be not as absolute as Sweden or Denmark that are
Protestants? If so, it follows then, that Popery does not enslave a King. We
are beholden to the Minister, for confessing the King of France is of the same
Religion with the Pope: for I have heard some in England say, he was a
Protestant. Thanks be to God, there is no danger of a breach between Rome and
France in matters of Faith; for (as the very Gazets told us An. 1664) when the
French Army was in Italy, The King (having owned the condemnation of Jansenius)
even then sent to the Pope to prosecute the Jansenists in France. Henry the
Eighth will be a warning to his Neighbors for revolting hereafter from the
Church; for instead of a little Ecclesiastical dependence on the Sea of Rome,
he has embroiled England in perpetual confusion about Religion; millions of
Sects daily dividing and subdividing, each of which pretend they are in the
right, and each quote Scripture for their Opinions.

And by the way, Reader, be pleased to remember, that had not this King of ours
destroyed Religious Houses, all the truly devout Sectaries at present would
have voluntarily been cloistered there, who now distract both the Kingdom and
themselves; for having no quiet place to vent that zeal which boyls within,
they become a prey to a few wicked men, that blow up their wellmeaning Piety
into disorders and sedition. Nay, many of the discontented Factious*
themselves, who now lie open to the sway and hurry of their own passions, would
have been glad of such a retreat, honorable to all, even from the Monarch to
the Pesant. Therefore I see now why Sp. page 28.
Speed a Protestant (when he made an end of his Catalogue of the destroyed
Abbeys) spoke in this manner: We have laid to your view a great part of King
Henry's ill, the waste of so much of Gods revenue, however abused, But Cambden
is yet more tart, for he Came. Brit p. ^63. A.
says That many Religious places, Monuments of our Forefathers Piety and
Devotion, to the honor of God, and Propagation of Christian faith, etc. were
in a moment profaned, Came. Brit. ^63. D.
and the Riches dispersed* which had been consecrated to God since the English
Nation first professed Christianity.

SECT. X. APOLOGY.
Nor will ever the House of Austria abjure the Pope, to secure themselves of
the fidelity of their Subjects.

ANSWER X.
To this he says, the Austrian Family being so linckt to the Pope (by
possessing Naples, Sicily, and Navar by his Gift) and their Subjects also
being Papists, it were a mad way to secure themselves by changing Religion. But
what is that, says he, to England, where since the extrusion of that trash (we
call the Catholic Faith) the King and people are no more Papists; and having
been often troubled by us, have reason by experience to fear our designs?

REPLY. V 10.
To this I reply, That the Spaniard being now in actual possession, can as well
defend these places (were he a Protestant) as Millan, Flanders, etc. which are
not the Popes gift; or as well as other Reformed Princes have done their
Countries. And for the Subjects being Papists, that is nothing, For all
subjects before Luthers time were Papists also. The Minister therefore grants
me here all that from the first I desired. For if our former Kings were
considerable abroad, and as safe at home, as since the change of Religion: If
the King of France be as absolute as Denmarck or Sweden; and if the House of
Austria cannot better secure the fidelity of their Subjects by becoming
Protestants, then by continuing Papists: I say, it must necessarily follow,
That Kings and Kingdoms by being Papists are not less absolute then if
Reformed: and by the same Consequence, their Subjects not one whit faithfuller
to their Lords by being Protestants, then if they were Papists. Tell me then,
where is the Temporal advantage of Reformation? and whether our Answerer has
not bauld long in vain; since he now by this grants me, that Kings may be
absolute, and Subjects faithful under Popery: and yet lately he affirmed, That
Popery is inconsistent with Government, by reason of Princes dependence on the
Pope in Ecclesiastical matters; and that all Papists are prone to Rebellion, by
the Determination of our Councels, Bulls and Divines.

But the Minister says, What is all this to England, where Prince and people
are Protestants? I answer, it is thus much to England, That now it is plain,
it is an error that Popery is inconsistent with Government; and it also shows
that Princes get no power (in the long-run) by reforming, but on the contrary,
perpetual disorders follow. How dangerous we have been to our Protestant
Princes, shall be discust in the Reflection on the Popish Rep. 2^. and Rep. 28
misdemeanors in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James: But how
faithful and serviceable we were to King Charles the First and Second, all
Europe has sufficiently declared in our behalves.

SECT. XI. APOLOGY.
We shall always acknowledge to the whole World, that there have been as many
brave English in this last Century, as in any other place whatsoever. Yet since
the exclusion of the Catholic Faith, there has been that committed by those,
who would be fain called Protestants, that the wickedest Papist at no time
dreamt of.

ANSWER XI.
Here he asks what may that be? for four or five of our Kings of our own
Religion have been murdered by Papists: that lately Hen. 4. of France was
killed by Ravillac; and. Hen. 3. by Friar Clement. And besides this, we have
killed by whole Townships in England, Ireland, France, and Piedmont.

REPLY 11.
What a Volume might there be here writ, if every matter mentioned were to be
fully discust? But these are the artifices of the Brethren, that when they know
not what to say, run to another thing, in hopes to puzzle an ordinary Reader,
who cannot imagine (hearing so great a buzze) but that there must be something
at least of real.

My assertion in the Apology was, That our former English Papists never did
such villainies as have been committed since the Reformation. To this he answers
nothing, but impertinently runs to the private Murders of some of our Kings.
Is this proportionable, Good Reader? Who knows not that the Murderers of Ed.
2. Ric. 2. and Hen. 6. were so conscious of their wickedness, that all was done
in the dark; nor would they ever own otherwise then that they dyed without
violence. For it was given out that the death of the first of these Princes came
by extreme Dan. Ed. 3. p. 183.
Grief. That the other Buck Ric. 3. p 150.
Starved himself, and that the last died of a Natural Buck. p 81.
sickness But the execution of the Queen of Scots was barefaced in the sight
of the World, and which was more, under the cloak of Law. My Lord of Leicester
was sensible of the dishonor that would accrue to the Nation, and therefore
sent Walsinhham An. 1585. Came. p. 41^.
a godly Divine to satisfy his conscience, that it was lawful to poison her;
but the Minister could no more convince his penitent, then the Saints could
Harrison about the clandestine Murder of the Grandchild. And doubtless the
whole intrigue against. Q. Mary gave precedent and boldness to our execrable
Parricides, openly to do their detestable villainy in a formal method and manner.

This procedure against the Queen, contrary, as 'twas imagined, to the Law of
Nations (she being both a Guest and an absolute Princess) drew an universal
odium upon the Kingdom, Hist. Mem. 2 Eliz. p. 21.
for the Reproach was entailed on the whole nation by the apparition of a
mimicall and Counterfeit justice, as Osborne call's it: nor did any Englishman,
either Papist or Protestant ever miss to be upbraided with it abroad; till the
greatness of the abomination against King Charles made them leave off a little
speaking of the first, to remember us more piquantly of the last.

Is it to excuse the two unheard of (...) that he tell; me of four or five
Kings since the Conquest made away by Papists? It may be it is that I should
again retort, that (since Hen. 8. Reign) there were but b Ed. 6. Eliz. and Iam.
and Char. ^.
four Protestestant Monarchs, and three of them were said to come to violent
deaths. But what is Ravillac's murder of Hen. 4. to us in England, more then
to Saxony, the poisoning of Edw. 6. by the Lord Robert Dudly, for so P. 444
vid. also Buck. R 3. p. 123.
Sir Richard Baker conceives he hid. I know Clement the Friar destroyed Hen 3.
so did Judas his Master; and yet neither the Disciples, nor Christian Religion
were ever thought the worse for it.

For the Murder of the Protestants in Ireland I showed you in the Rep. 1
beginning, how we detested it. Concerning the Blood spilt in France, I shall
speak at large in the Paragraph about that Rep. 18
Massacre. But I wonder the Piemo^thusiness should be unged by Royallist; for I
remember when Cro^wel made a Collectio^ for the^ in pretense, but for himself
in reality, the Cavaliers ever styled them Rebels, and said, the Duke of Savoy
was necessitated for his quiet to subdue them thus by Arms. Yet for all their
hard usage, I wish we had as much freedom as they.

Now for Queen Mary's Reign, which this man so often calls the Bloody days, I
will here speak a little, eternally to stop his mouth hereafter. First, Bish.
Goodwin, Baker, Speed, etc.
Reformed Historians agree, that the Queen her self was a marveillous good
woman, therefore it was not she, but her Bishops that were cruel. Again, every
Englishman knows, that no man can be put to death amongst us without Law;
therefore they were not the Bishops, but the Laws that were cruel: which Laws
still continue, and have been made use of since the Reformation by Q. Elez. and
K. ^ames to burn Heretics.

Yet for all these Laws there died of Protestants in the whole, but Baker Q. M.
p. 467.
277. as Baker and Speed, Q. M. p. 8^2.
other Protestant Writers record. Besides, were these 277. now alive, 200. at
least, in stead of pity, would be thrown into prison, and there rot for
Non-conformists: but all things were called Saints in the dawning of the light
even so much as Collins and his dog for Fox in his Act's, and Monuments says
that Collins being mad, and seeing a Priest hold up the Host to the people,
took a dog and held it up, as the Priest did the Host, for which he and the dog
were Anno 15^8.
burnt. Yet though this Collins be owned by Fox to be mad, never the less he
places him as a Martyr on the 10. of October. as may be seen in his Calendar.

In the next place, let me know whether a man may be executed for this Tenets
in Religion, or no? If it be lawful, why might not Papists put to death men
(who they thought deserved it) as well as Protestants? If no man ought to
suffer for his Conscience, why did Stow in the several Regin^ of these two
Princes
Edward 6. and Q. Eliz. condemn so many Heretics in their time? all which were
executed, but some few that recanted* and so saved their lives. Or why did K.
James put to death Baker ^. 1. p. 611.
Legate and Wightman, but because he religiously thought it was unfit they
should longer live to blaspheme?

Over and above these (that died for a Religion of their own making) I saw a
Roll at Doway, wherein to the year 1632. there suffered out of that one House
105. Priests; since which there died many out of the same College. Add to
these many out of the Portugal, Spanish, and Roman Seminaries, many of other
Orders, and many Laymen also, who have been executed for owning the Pope in
Spirituals, or for having a Priest say Mass in their Houses according to the
obligation of their Consciences. If these were then all numbered, I am sure,
there suffered many more Catholics (omitting the innumerable Confiscations) by
the Protestant Government, then ever there did Protestants by the Catholic.
Nay, if together with Catholics I should reckon all sorts of people that died
for their Conscience though enemies to Popery (which may be found in Fox, Stow
and others in the Reigns of Hen. 8. Ed. 6. and Queen Elizabeth) it is evident,
there has been more Blood spilt on a Religious account under our Princes that
disowned the Pope, then by the Papists from St. Augustins Conversion to Luthers
time. Judge then, if Catholics be so bloody as they are reported and thought.

SECT. XII. APOLOGY.
'Twas never heard of before, that an absolute Queen was condemned by Subjects,
and those styled her Peers; or that a King was publicly tried and executed by
his own people and servants.

ANSWER XII.
Here he says, That the Q. of Scots was beheaded under Elizabeth by the same
color of right that Wallis suffered under Edw. 1. (whom I call, he says, a
brave Prince) namely that of Sovereignty, which our Princes challenged over
Scotland: but that King James and King Charles never imputed this to Q.
Elizabeth's Religion.

Concerning King Charles's Murder, he says, that I would take it ill, a Turk
should charge the Ministers faults and his Parties upon me; but I do worse then
a Turk, in charging these men's faults upon the Protestants: for the Murderers
were neither then, nor since of the Ministers Communion. He says, King Charles
declared, he died for the Protestant Religion and Laws of the Land: that also
in his Letter to the Prince, he says, none of the Rebels were Professors or
Practicers of the Church of England, which gives no such Rules.

REPLY XII.
Nay, now I have quite geven over my Minister; for though he had no regard of
himself me thinks he might have had more respect for our King, then to parallel
his Grandmother with Wallis. You must know Reader that Edward the First by his
valor conquered Scotland, and made all the Nobles swear Fealty to him. About
Ann. 1300. (when all things were thus at quiet) up starts Wallis Dan. Ed. 1. p.
166.
a poor private Gentlemen, who though he had distressed the English a while,
yet never so much as once pretended to the Crown, either by Sword, or Birth.
Afterward he was taken by our King, and Dan. p. 168.
executed for his Insurrections. Is this man then a fit parallel with Mary
Stuart, owned not only as Queen of Scots abroad, but by Queen Elizabeth her
self also, who often sent and received Ambassadors from her, with the same
state, as was used to the King of France, or any other Potentate? What King
James and King Charles thought of the action, I know not; but I wish it had
never been done.

Concerning the other part of his Answer: First, I did never charge the Kings
Murder on any body, but those that were the Authors of it; he knows best
whether he was one of them or no: this I am sure of, he can falsify, and (to
use Harrisons words) blacken as well as the best of them, as you may see all a
long, and especially in the next Section.

Secondly, I do verily believe that King Charles died a sincere Protestant. And
lastly, I am so far from laying any crime upon the Cavalier Protestants, that I
think them as brave and as worthy Gentlemen, as any Nation bears. But this I
must say, that the English Church (though of an honest intention) is built upon
such Principles, that as long as it lasts, it will hatch a dissenting brood:
and these graceless Children, upon every advantage will be ready to Rebel. This
is then the benefit entailed by Hen. 8. Reformation; which has (as Bak p 390.
Baker confesses) so shaken the Church that it has stood indistraction ever
since.

SECT. XIII. APOLOGY.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
We know who were the Authors of this last abomination, and how generously you
strove against the raging torrent; nor have we any other ends to remember you
of it, but to show that all Religions may have a corrupted spawn; and that God
has been pleased to permit such a Rebellion, which our Progenitors never saw,
to convince you perchance (whom for ever may he prosper) that Popery is not the
only source of Treason.

ANSWER XIII.
Here he says, since we do know who were the Authors of the Abomination; he
desires us to be plain, for he thinks I have spoke more truth then every man is
aware. Cardinal Richelieu, he says, began the Rebellion in Scotland: then it
broke out in Ireland, blessed with his Holiness Letters and Nuntio. Lastly,
England we unsettled, by giving occasion of jealousies, which the Phanaticks
made use of for their purposes. Besides all this, he says, the Murder of the
King also was agreed on in the Councels of our Clergy and therefore in vain
could the Royallists resist the raging Torrent.

REPLY XIII.
Lord, what blasphemies are here! and what a heap of unsorted falsities are put
together, without any probability or proof! Because Richelieu a great Minister
of State (who intrigued in every Nation*) is supposed to have dealt with the
Presbyterians of Scotland, the Papists of England were the cause of the
Rebellion. This is rare Logic, especially every body knowing that fire and
water agreed better then those Saints and we. I wonder the Papists were not
guilty of the dangerous commotion anno 1666 in that Kingdom. But this is so
ridiculous, that I should be more abominable then he, if I made more words of
it; Nor does that great Anti-Papist H. L. in his P. ^^6
Reign of Chapter 1. scruple to write, that the Liturgy (or Common Prayer) was the
Original of the Scotch troubles.

In the next place if the flame break out in Ireland, (which Heath a Protestant
historian Heath page 36.
says can be nowhere more imputable then to the Parliament's unwarantable
proceedure against my Lord Strafford) we in England are again the cause of it;
so that if foreign Catholics, or foreign Protestants Rebel, still we must be
the Authors, that never had any correspondence with either of these Nations,
nor have to this day, as all the World sees. Well then may this man falsely
charge the Pope who is remote, when he dares say thus of us who can so easily
contradict his calumnies.

Lastly, for England, he urges we were the occasion of jealousies, and they
made the War. O ridiculous impudence! If the majority of both Houses conspire
against the King, suggest in open Debates fears of their own hatching, and at
the same time with all violence persecute Papists, yet we are to be blamed, and
causers of the Commotions. Certainly, this is like him that cursed the Lord
Chancellor, because his horse stumbled. I am sure many grave men of your Coat
(Mr. Parson) ingenuously confessed, that it was the Translation of the Bible, or
the too frequent reading of it by the ignorant (which is a consequent of the
Translation) that caused our disorders.

Consider now, Reader, this strange man: for if his malice had not exceeded all
bounds, he would have told you, That the Non-conformists took root as soon as
the Reformation: That Queen Elizabeth's prudence kept them a little down: That
in King James his Reign they grew much stronger; and that great Statesmen have
often blamed that wise Prince, because (to keep things quiet in his Reign) he
occasioned the Tide to rush in with such irresistible force in our late unhappy
times. Thus was this storm by knowing Pilots foreseen long ago.

But would not a man now think this Minister had abused us sufficiently? No, he
must yet go farther, even The Kings death was agreed to in the Councels of our
Clergy. Doubtelss he cannot mean our Priests by the word, for what did their
agreeing signify more, then if the Mayor of Quinborough and his Brethren
agreed, that the Janissaries should strangle the Grand Seignior? Had our Priests
any power in England? Were they not forced to skulk always in holes, and hanged
as often as taken? I am sure Jesuits, Seculars, and Friars were executed, no
Order escaping, al being fish that came to net. But now I remember my self, Mr.
Parson pretends to be skilled in Rhetoric, and perchance he uses a Trope of
his own making; that is, That because two Negatives make an affirmative, or a
thing contrary to themselves; therefore his four falsities in this one Section,
shall dubb an irrefragable truth opposite to each single assertion. The
Ministers meaning then it seems is this, That in stead of our being false to
the State, We have been most entirely faithful to our King and Country.

Good Reader, I must ask you pardon, for saying any thing against these vain
and groundless cavils; seeing the whole World knows, that never were men more
earnestly Loyal then we. Beware therefore of this man, for it was he, or some
of the like Principles, that (out of malice against the late King) wickedly*
divulged, That his Majesty had underhand caused the Irish Rebellion: that he
had a mind to bring in Popery, and to enslave the Nation, had sent for an
Outlandish Guard. Thus cried the English Rebels against their glorious Prince;
and thus now invents this Minister Stories, to mischief, if he can, his
innocent Fellow Subjects and Countrymen. And who can be guiltless, if
assertions without any shadow of proof shall be received against him?

SECT. XIV. APOLOGY.
Little did we think (when your Prayers and ours were offered up to beg a
blessing on the Kings Affairs (ever to see that day, in which Carlos, Gifford,
Whitgrave, and the Pendrels should be punished by your desires for that
Religion, which obliged them to save their forlorn Prince; and a stigmatized
man for his offenses against King and Church, chief promoter of it. Nay, less
did we imagine, that by your Votes Hudlestone might be hanged, who again
secured our Sovereign; and others free in their fat possessions, that sat as
Juddes, and sealed the Execution of that Great Prince of happy Memory.

ANSWER XIV.
He says, That many of my Church were not of my Party; and that if some of them
did the King eminent service in the Critical day of danger, so did the
Protestants too: therefore it is not to be ascribed to our Religion. Nor is it
reasonable to requite particular men, by having those Laws abandoned, which
secure us against as great a danger. It Is barbarity for any Christian (but
those of our Sect) to question his life that exposed it for his Prince, or to
do this in any age, except Queen Mary's; for then Sir Nich. Throgmorton was so
dealt with: But the Minister detests such times and such examples; and he knows
the King will reward deserving persons without trespassing on his Laws. Lastly,
he desires me to be favorable to the stigmatized man (whom I do not hate, he
knows, for his offenses) because the King whom he formerly displeased bears
with him: for he contributed much against the Phanaticks to his Majesty's
restoration, and would not willingly live to see the Pope turn him out again.

REPLY XIV.
What is the meaning of this distinction, That many of my Church were not of my
Party? Have we not been all of the same Party, or can there he named a Papist
that was not for the King, even in te worst of times? But, Good Mr. Parson,
have you all this while cut our throats, and do you now come with your
insignificant flatteries, that there were some eminent among us for Loyalty? I
fear not the worst you can say, and for the best I scorn it. Did I ever say
otherwise, then that the Protestants were to be honored for their wonderful
service to the King? Was not the Apology directed to them? and have I not
always declared, that his Majesty ows as much to them, as ever Prince can owe
to Subjects? Certainly, it is no lessning of their worth, because we did our
endeavors, and have been fellow sufferers with them in that Glorious Quarrel.
I never pressed in the Apology to have any particular body exempted: We only say
there, Little did we once think that the necessity of affairs would occasion
the Royal Party to advise the punishment of us all, and in the crowd those
worthy Preservers of the King at Worcester. Yet, Sir (with your permission) it
were not so unreasonable neither, as you would have it, for the service of some
few to suspend the Laws against a Party. You have read, I know, the Scripture,
and therefore may remember Mordecay's case, who by saving the Kings life, not
only preserved himself and his Nation from Ruin, but obtained also honor and
freedom for them all. But what do you drive at by Throgmortons usage? Will you
never leave perverting History, or at best betraying your own ignorance? First,
you must know, Reader, that Throgmorton by none of our Historians is mentioned
to have done any service for Queen Mary; Yet Reign Q. M. p. 1104.
Hollins head has his trial at large (which John Lilburn afterward copied out
to the life) where no evasion is omitted; and certainly it had been then a fit
time to urge merits, had he had any.

But suppose he was as eminent and faithful as Bedin field, Jerningham, etc.
Must that excuse a man from being fairly tried for Treason? This Sir Nicholas
Throgmorton (you must know) with others, was accused as a Speed, Q. M. p. 847.
Stow. Q. M. 1055.
Conspirator with Wyat, for which he had a Trial and was acquitted by his Jury.
Why, distempered Sir, it is so far from our business, that we do earnestly
desire in the Apology (upon the least offense against the State) the
Transgressour may die without mercy; and this I Will be bound Col. Carlos and the
rest of those brave men shall willingly subscribe. But will you, worthy
Countryman (that know his Majesty's thoughts so well) engage that none of the
factious shall murmr at him for rewarding those that have done well?

Now for the stigmatized, I find, Mr. Parson, you pretend to be very well
acquainted with their actions: If they have done any thing (which God knows is
little, and not to the hundredth part of their transgression) let them thank God
for the grace he has given them to do the King at length service: but I am sure
if they really meant well, they would never promote the harassing of a faithful
Party, till they found them machinating against their Prince. I have no
particular spleen to any man, yet cannot look on those men, as either of wit or
honesty, who needlessly disoblige, and who strive with violence to have
Christians persecuted for Religion; when as they themselves are the first that
rail against all mankind, if their own Consciences be touched, though it be by
the established Laws of the Nation.

SECT. XV. APOLOGY.
We confess, we are unfortunate, and you just Judges, whom with our lives we
will ever maintain to be so; nor are we ignorant the necessity of affairs made
the King and you do things, which formerly you could not so much as fancy: yet
give us leave to say we are still Loyal; nay, to desire you to believe so, and
to remember how synonymous (under the late Rebellion) was the word Papist and
Cavalier; for there was no Papist that was not deemed a Cavalier, nor no
Cavalier that was not counted a Papist, or at least thought to Popishly
affected.

ANSWER XV.
He will pass over our fawning on the Parliament, and commending our selves,
and believes us, as we did the Sectaries that called the Cavaliers Papists. He
wonders why these Royallists should be termed Popishly affected* but if the
Papists were judged Cavaliers, they afterward were ashamed of it. In Ireland
whole Armies were up against the King. In England some came in voluntarily to
serve him, but more were hunted into Garrisons; it being well known we should
bring his Majesty more hatred then service. The greatest part of us that fought
for him when his fortunes stood, fell off when he declined. Then he asks us,
where we were from that time forward, in all those weak efforts of 1647. 1656.
1659.
gasping Loyalty? We were flattering, he says, and giving sugered words to the
Rebels, as now we do to the Royallists: for we addressed our Petitions, To the
Supreme Authority of the Nation, the Commonwealth of England: that we had
generally taken, and punctually kept the engagement: We promised if we might
enjoy our Religion, we would be most faithful and useful Subjects of England.
We proved it in these words: First Moderator.
The Papists of England would be bound by their interest to live peacefully and
thankfully in the exercise of their Conscience; and becoming gainers by such
compassions, they could not so easily be distrusted, as the Prelatick Party
that were loosers. Moreover (the Minister on his own word, says) we farther
proved all this by real testimonies, which not to shame us toe much, he will
pass by in silence. Now if after all this we were deemed Cavaliers, we were
much wronged.

REPLY 15.
Good, Mr. Parson, speak truth, and you will shame no body but your self: have
you bespattered us all this while with falsities; and will you now do it
farther by your Pedantick Rhetoric? Pray, Reader, to speak moderately, is not
this man the archest wrangler that ever was? for if he dares disown a thing
which all men know, how will he then cavil, do you think, at what is known but
only to the Wise? was ever any thing so evident, as that the Rebels deemed all
Papists Cavaliers, and all Cavaliers Papists? I do not infer that therefore all
Cavaliers were Papists, only, I say, they were generally so called; nor is any
body ignorant, that the reason was, to make them more hated by the people, as
this Minister by his false glosses would at this instant serve us.

Concerning our frankness to serve the King, it is so fully treated in the
Preface, that no truth was ever more plainly made manifest. But what made this
mad man ask where we were in all those weak efforts of gaspink Loyalty? Were
not we where the rest of the Royal party were? Some of us were in London, some
with the King, some about dispatches, some in the Tower, some sold to the
Islands; and in fine, was there any Plot but the Catholics were as numerous in
it proportionably as any other Subjects? Was ever man so impudent as to deny
this? Yes, the Minister does it, and farther says, we were flattering the
Rebels which Addresses, and owning them the Supreme Power of the Nation. Reader,
lest this should be a stumbling block to the weak, I will give you some
account of the matter.

After the Rebels had trampled down Monarchy, and enslaved the whole Nation by
force; it happened that a Lay-Gentleman (with whom I have no manner of
acquaintance, but have heard him ever esteemed of much wit and integrity)
seeing the then ruling Grandees pretend by their Principles to be against all
Persecution for Conscience; thought it would not disoblige the Catholics or
any body else, if he stickled a little for a private Toleration. The Protestant
Cavaliers had many daily Congregations at London, which, the constancy and
courage of Dr. Wild, Dr. Gunning, Dr. Thriscross, etc. (with some sweet words
also) forced the Rebels to a kind of connivence at; but the Papists could not
follow the same Method: For whereas the Protestant Ministers (if the
Government had on a sudden fell to severity) knew they should be but carried
to the White Heart, or at most imprisoned for a day or two; a Popish Priest was
sure to be hanged, and all his Auditory fineable also by the known Laws of the
Land. This Gentleman therefore, to try the pulse of the Rebels, that juggled in
all their Professions, writ two Books, called the First and Second Moderators:
the thing in it self could not be discommended; but for the wording, he (I mean
the Author) is to answer for it. The Books I have not by me, but you may be
sure the Minister has quoted the worst things in them; and I question not a
little whether all be true he mentions, having already found him false, as you
see in many particulars.

I need not vindicate the Gentleman, for he can do it himself to the purpose:
My business at present only is to admire the folly of my Adversary, who hand
over head lays as a crime, the indiscretion (which is the most that can be said
of it) of a private man to all his Party. Would not this Logic then make the
whole Church of England guilty of Phanatick Principles, because Dr. Tailor writ
for liberty of Prophecy? And if our Gentleman may be thought to have showed
his Papers to some Catholics before they were published, it is every jot as
probable, the Dr. made Protestants acquainted with his Book before it was sent
to the Press. It is very severe doubtless, if the inconsiderateness of one,
should not only be fathered on us all, but urged against us, equal to the
Treason of the late Transgressors. No people on Earth can be safe at this rate:
nay, all the Protestant Cavaliers themselves (those great patterns of Loyalty)
would be involved, if such consequences were allowed. Every body knows, that
some Great men got out of Decimation by favor, and that many Gentlemen (it may
be out of prudence, knowing the end of Plots) refused to receive Letters, much
less Commissions from the King. How many Soldiers also were there that served
Cromwell at Jamaica and other Places: neither failed there a compliance in Poets
too, as in Cowly and Cleveland themselves: and for Lawyers there was no want of
them in Westminster Hall, wsensoever a Cavalier had need. The Ministry also of
the Nation had some among them that were not able to resist Temptation; for
there were not a few that took the Covenant; and Dr. Martin in his printed
Letters taxes a great One for complying with the Presbyterians abroad. But why
does my Minister lay the taking of the Engagement as a crime against us, seeing
it was generally taken through the whole Kingdom, no body being capable of Law
that had not done it? Nor did any body fail of calling the Parliament the
Supreme Authority of the Nation, if they had Lawsuits Petitions or any thing
else of that Nature. Is this a blemish to the Cavaliers in general? No, it is so
far from it, that even the most of these I mention, when occasion served, were
ever forward in the Kings concerns. But all things perchance are lawful to all
men, so they be not Catholics.

SECT. XVI. APOLOGY.
We know, though we differ something in Religion, the truth of which, let the
last day judge, yet none can agree with your inclination, or are fitter for
your converse then we; for as we have as much birth among us as England can
boast of, so our breeding leans your way both in Court and Camp. And therefore
had not our late Sufferings united us in that firm tie, yet our like humors
must needs have joined our hearts. If we err, pity our condition, and remember
what your great Ancestors were; and make some difference between us that have
twice converted England from Paganism, and those other Sects that can challenge
nothing but intrusion for their imposed Authority.

ANSWER XVI.
He says, he aggrees with me in all that is truly Catholic, and differs only
in what we have innovated: he respects our breeding, but suspects whatever
leans to foreign jurisdiction. It Is a flam that we have twice converted
England; and that sure we mean it has been twice converted by persons sent from
Rome; which we will never persuade any one to believe, that has tasted
Church History, without our Fathers chewing it for him. But supposing this
true, he asks whether we wouldt infer, that because they received good from the
Primitive Christians of that place, they must lay themselves open to receive
any ill, that my happen to them from their dangerous Successors.

REPLY XVI.
Concerning his saying, that he agrees with me in all that is truly Catholic,
I kiss his hands, for so said Jacob Behmen, and so I dare say will Mr.
Woodcock, this being the old Song of all Heretics. I have proved before, that
foreign Jurisdiction in Spirituals may well agree in all Governments; and no
Kingdoms have been more happy at home, or glorious abroad, then when the Pope
was their Spiritual Pastor.

But methinks my Gentleman might have acknowledged tha the last Conversion at
least was Popish, it being performed Ann. 596. in the time of Pope Gregory,
whom Act Mon. p. 107.
Fox calls the basest of all his Predecessors; and it was done also by Austin
a Speed, p. 347.
Monck, which very name is enough to tell a Protestant, the Missioner was
Popishly persuaded. Moreover, this Austin survived his Master Gregory, and
consequently was according to Fox ( who dreams that he lived in England 16.
years) not only obedient to Boniface the 3. (the Great Antichrist) but made
his Companion Lawrence his Stow. p. 67.
Successor, who had the like veneration for Popes, though they then styled
themselves Universal Bishops as all Protestants affirm; nor did ever
Canterbury deny the Roman Sea, till Cranmer in the time of Hen. 8.

If any man yet shall not think Austin Papist enough, let him read St. Bedes
History, or rather some Protestants about it, among which let J. Bale an
Apostate Dese. Brit. fol 35.
Friar be one, who will tell you, That Austin was sent to convert the Saxons to
a Popish Faith, and that he taught false Doctrine, and minded more the getting
oblations for Masses, then the Preaching of the Gospel. Yet Act. Mon. p. 105.
Fox, though he call St. Austin Pharisaical, says, nevertheless, that those
Missioners did Miracles before King Ethelbert.

For the Conversion under King Lucius, all Reformed Historians confess that
Pope Eleutherius sent Damianus and Fugatius (two Ministers forsooth as Heyl. p.
469.
Heylin calls them) who preached Christ to the Britains. No man can doubt then,
if these were sent from Rome, but that they taught the Faith of Rome. Now when
Austin (whom you see the Protestants already confess Popish) came to convert
the Saxons, he had conference with Dinoth the Abbot, and several of the Monks
at Bangor, who still preserved Christian Religion among the British. In all
their Dispute we find no debate but about the Customs of the Church; nor did
Austin demand of them any more, then the Stow. p. 66.
alteration in keeping of Easter, and some Ceremonies in Baptism: but had there
been any difference in Faith, and doctrine (as Speed Sp. p. 348.
says positwely there was none) Historians would not have failed to remember
that, seeing they take notice of things of l^ss moment: and besides, every body
knows how scrupulous the Church was in Doctrine, having condemned the Arrians,
Eutychians, Nestorians and the like, for some things which to ordinary and
humane capacities seemed but mere niceties.

This then proves plainly that Austin the Popish Monck (who also according to
Page 195. K. John.
Hollingshead infected us with the poison of Romish Errors.) preached no other
Doctrine then what the British had received before: but the the British,
according to Fox and others of our Protestant Authors, were the incorrupt
preservers of Gods word, having received from their King Lucius, who lived
about 180. years after Christ. Let any man therefore judge, who are most
Primative, and whether he that has the face to deny that Papists twice
converted England, would not also deny our Savior, were it as much for his
advantage as we see this to be.

SECT. XVII. APOLOGY.
But it is generally said, That Papists cannot live without persecuting all
other Religions within their reach.

We confess, where the name of Protestant is unknown, the Catholic Magistrates
(believing it erroneous) do use all endeavors to keep* it out. Yet in those
Countries where Liberty is given, they have far more Privileges then we under
any Reformed Government whatsoever. To be short, we will only instance France
for all, where they have public Churches, where they can make what Proselytes
they please, and where it is not against Law to be in any charge or Employment.
Now Holland, which permits every thing, gives us it is true our Lives and
Estates, but takes away all Trust and Rule, and leaves us also in danger of the
Scout, whenever he pleases to molest our Meetings.

ANSWER XVII.
He says, That what is generally said of Popish persecutions, is also generally
believed; and that I answer deceitfully, in mentioning those Countries only
where the name of Protestant is unknown, and no liberty given them; but omit
those where it is known, and no liberty given; as in Flanders now, and in
England when it was Catholic. I instance, he says, in France, because I could
find no other place; but I should have considered how the Edicts of the
Protestants liberty were obtained, and how they are observed. But if the Edicts
were observed, he says it is no argument, that because a Liberty not against
the Law is allowed them, it should be granted us against the Law. The Papists
in Holland, he says, lent the chief help to fling of the Spanish yoke, and
therefore deserve more then we, who would have brought it on our Country again.

REPLY XVII.
I could not imagine the Minister would have discovered so great a Truth: for
now, Reader, you see that he confesses that whatsoever is said of Papists is
generally believed. How are Papists traduced! What Stories are told of Popes!
How many things of the whole body of Papists! and all taken for Gospel, as the
adversary himself acknowledges. Thus people are possessed with a horror of Qu.
Mary's days, as if all were really true; and yet, as I have treated before,
there has been more blood Judicially spilt about Religion by those that have
excluded the Pope, then has been by Papists from the Conversion of the Nation
to its fall. What does the Minister mean by Protestants known, and no liberty
given? Italy and Spain know Protestants; nay, the Turk himself knows them, and
is obliged to the disturbances made by Luther and his fellows in Germany. For
were the Government of that Country united, an not so rent into factions with
diversities of Religions (as Sir Ed. S. p. 170
Sir Edwin Sandys observes) breeding endless jealousies, heart-burnings and
hatred, it needed no other help to affront the Great Turk, and to repulse all
his forces, to the security of Christendom. This therefore was one of the
advantages which the Reformation brought.

Certainly I spoke plain enough, and that without deceit, viz. Where the name
of Protestant is unknown, (that is, where it has not been yet planted) the
Catholic Magistrates take care to keep it out: But where their number or
rebellion has moved their natural Prince to grant them terms, in those places I
say they live with more liberty then Catholics under any Protestant
Government. Flanders, was never compelled to let the Reformed have
extraordinary privileges; Nevertheless there are many Protestants in that
Province, and particularly in the Wallon Countries: nor have they their
Ministers hanged, though these places are under the obedience of the most
Catholic King. What reason has the Minister to say I could* name no other
Country But France, where Protestants have open Churches? has he forgot Poland,
even Crakaw it self, where their Orthodox Socinian Cathechism was made? Let
him also think on Hungary, both which are Popish Kingdoms, under Popish Kings.
Nay, in Piedmont it self they have open Churches; yet a man may legally be
hanged in England, if he have but a private Chapel. Besides this, Reader,
there is much difference between Papists and Protestants, because all Countries
were possessed by us, and the Reformed had no pretense to Government, (except in
England, and in a small Province or two in Germany) but what they got by
Rebellion. Therefore, as a man that is turned out of his house by a stranger,
may expect more then the stranger being dispossessed can do from the right o^ner:
so Papists may justly expect more liberty from Protestants, then they can upon
any pretense from Papists; yet Protestants live to this day freer in Catholic
Kingdoms, then we do under them: For Protestants may have employment in Poppish
Countries, but Papists are debarred from Offices in all Countries, I except
none, that are of the Reformed Faith.

I know not what the Minister would be at, that the Low Country Papists were
the chief cause why the Spanish yoke was thrown off. It Is true, there were many
factious Catholics there at that time stirred up by the insinuation of the
Reformed, as Saints inflame honest men now adays. Yet for all this not only the
first insurrections and tumults were (according to Stap. trans. l. 3. p. 61.
Strada) acted by the Calvinists at Tournay, Lisle, and Valencien; but also in
the year 1581 (as the Eur. Mod. Spec. p. 85.
Protestant Author of Europae Modernae Speculum will tell you) by a public
Instrument they declared their King Philip to have rightfully fallen from the
Dominion of those Provinces, then united under the profession of the Reformed
Religion: neither would they ever afterward suffer the Papists to have any
share in the Government, for fear they should bring all things back again to
their true Lord an Master. But now suppose, Reader, I had not proved the Dutch
villainy by the testimony of a Writer of the Protestant Religion, I hope it is no
excuse to their Rebellion, though some Papists did by accident facilitate their
work: For if so, then the Murder of Charles the First by the Independents, and
their erecting a Government without King or Lords, were not Rebellion, because
the whole body of the Presbyterians began the play; which afterward (but 'twas
too late) they seemed to detest, and openly to exclaim against.

How the Edicts of France were obtained, you shall hear in this next Section.

SECT. XVIII. APOLOGY.
Because we have named France, the Massacre will perchance be urged against us.
But the World must know that was a Cabinet-Plot, condemned as wicked by
Catholic Writhers there, and of other Countries also. Besides, it cannot be
thought they were murdered for being Protestants, since 'twas their powerful
Rebellion (let their Faith have been what it would) that drew them in to that
ill-machinated destruction.

ANSWER XVIII.
Here he says the French Massacre was so horrid a cruelty, that Thuanus tells
us, That considering men, and having turned over the Annals of Nations, he
could find no example for it in Antiquity; that it was cloakt with shows of
Amity, and a Marriage between the Houses of Valois and Burbon; to which the
chief Protestants being invited, were after their jollity of mirth, in the dead
of night butchered in their Houses, without distinction of Sex or Age, till the
channels ran with blood, none escaping but the Bridegroom: and the Prince of
Conde, who were afterward the one poisoned, the other stabbed by men of our
Religion. He proceeds, that this which I say was condemned by Catholic
Writers, was also extolled as glorious by others of them; and that one may
guess at my meaning, and that I am of their sentiment, since first I call it a
Cabinet-Plot (a fine soft word for the Butchery of 30000. persons.) Secondly,
in answer to them that call it murder, I seem to blame it as done by halves,
in terming it an illmachinated destruction. Lastly, in saying, that it was
their Rebellion drew it on them, let their Faith have been what it would; when
indeed it was their Faith, let their Obedience have been what id would: for the
King never had better Subjects then those that were Massacred, no^ worse Rebels
then the Massacrers. Then he tells us, that the brave Coligni was the first
killed, and his head was sent to Rome, and his Body dragged about Paris; and
besides, he says, that the Duke of Guises factious Authority (as I sweetly
style it) was a black Rebellion; and to decide whether they were massacred for
Protestant Religion or Rebellion, because both himself and I may be partial, he
desires to take judges between us.

To make it appear it was not for Rebellion they were massacred, he cites K.
James, who says, I could never learn by any good and true intelligence, that in
France those of the Religion took Arms against their King. In the first Civil
War they stood only upon their Guard, etc.

To prove that they were massacred for their Religion (since I will admit no
judge but the Pope) he undertakes to show us that it was his judgment, from
Thuanus, a Catholic Writer, who tells us, The Pope having an account of the
Massacre, read the Letter in the Consistory, there decreed to go directly to
St. Marks, and solemnly give thanks for so great a blessing conferred on the
Roman Sea, and the Christian World: That soon after a Jubilee should be
published throughout the whole Christian World; and these causes were expressed
for at, viz. To give thanks to God for destroying in France the Enemies of the
Truth and of the Church: That in the evening the Guns were fired at St. Angelo,
Bonfires made, and all things performed usual in the greatest Victories of the
Church: That some days after, there was a solemn Procession to St. Louis, and
an Inscription set over the Church-door by the Cardinal of Lorrain, to
congratulate his Holiness and the College in the Kings name, for the
stupendous effects and incredible events of their Counsels given him, and of
their assistance sent, and of their twelve years wishes and prayers. Soon
after, he says, the Pope sent Cardinal Ursini to congratulate the King, to
commend and bless them that had to do in the Massacre, and to persuade the
reception of the Council of Trent, by this Argument; That the memory of the
late glorious action (to be magnified in all ages, as conducing to the Glory of
God and Dignity of the Holy Roman Church) might be sealed by the approbation of
the Holy Synod; for so it would be manifest, that the King consented to the
destruction of so many, not of hatred or revenge, but ardent desire to
propagate the Glory of God (which could not be expected while the Protestants
stood) through all the Provinces of France. The Answerer then concludes this
Paragrah with commending the Head of the Church for his judgment in cutting
throats, and not mincing the matter like me (whom he is pleased to call an
English limb of him) who durst not say what I desired, for fear of provoking
the Protestants; nor what the thing deserved, for contradicting the Pope.

REPLY XVIII.
Can Thuanus, or any man else, look upon that action with more horror then I?
Certainly no: yet, Reader, I must tell you, Thuanus is esteemed as maliciously
partial a Writer as ever undertook the writing of a History. Nay, Heylin (that
other Hanibal, that sworn enemy of Rome) says, That Heyl. p. 71.
Thuanus savours more of the party, then of the Historian. Now for his
professing to be a Catholic, it adds nothing to his Authority, because in
every Religion there are those that write out of spleen and Faction. To a
stranger abroad, Milton would go for a Protestant, because he calls himself so;
yet in his Books the true matter of Fact is so perverted by his malice, that it
becomes at last as false, as the rest of those damnable lies, with which his
Papers are stufft. But though Thuanus be thus reputed, yet this Minister will
pervert the Devil himself to do us a mischief. He has told us that the Pope
ordered a Jubilee through Christendom, to give God thanks for destroying in
France the Enemies of the Church; by which he would have the Reader believe,
that the Massacre was the cause of this Jubilee; when as Th. p. 1065.
Thuanus tells us, That the Jubilee was to thank God for the Victory at Lepanto
against the Turk, for the success of Spain against the Rebels in Belgium, and
to beseech God for the election of a Catholic King in Poland; as well as for
the business in France. But truly, I need not complain, for such Preachers of
Gods word may say any thing (so it discredit the Papists) let it be never so
improbable in it self.

For my part I can believe not, that the Pope and Consistory (who are by
Protestants reputed dexterous and subtle) would make public Procession and
Triumph for Murder in cold blood, which could bring them no farther good (for
the advantages were already obtained) but might occasion much scandal, which,
by reason it was the cause of Luthers revolt, was the more carefully to be
avoided for the future. It may be they were not sorry in their hearts: For what
men are so at the death of their Enemies? Yet we see often, that those which
have a titillation the thing being done, would nevertheless loose rather their
own lives, then give the least consent to the fact. Davila tells us in one
place of his Fifth Book, That the King and Queen Mother contrived the
destruction of the Rebels; and communicated their design only to the Duke of
Anjou, the Guises, and the Count of Rhetz, and this resolution to Massacre, we
see there was, a pretty while before Pius V. died. In another place of this
Book, I find this Pope died some three months before the execution. In another
place of this Book I find that this Pope would never consent to the marriage of
Margaret to the King of Navar, by reason of his Religion; and yet in the time
of this Marriage Chapter 9. had determined this Butchery: Therefore putting all
this together, it was plain the Pope had no hand in the wicked contrivance.
Gregory 13. who succeeded, and before whose Election this Massacre was
designed, was at last brought to dispense with the Match, it being made appear
to him how dangerous it might be in those Schismatical times, if the King
should in anger solemnize the Marriage without leave; for so this Dav. l. 5.
King had threatened the aforesaid Pius V. and daily gave more symptoms of his
resolution in the Wedding, and anger for being contradicted in it at Rome.

Reader, We have no other way to discover the errors of Historians, but by
conjectures, after we have compared times and circumstances. The reasons that I
have therefore last mentioned, assure me that the Pope had no hand in the
design: yet suppose he had been of the Plot with the King, as it is plain he was
not, I am sure that can be no excuse to the Hugonots for their former
Rebellion, and unspeakable abominations, as you shall presently see. But let
the Pope have what design he would, it is still evident ( according to the
Apology) that the King and Queen Mother (who could only perform this Murder)
were moved to this Massacre for Interest of State, and not Religion. For the
King was not such a Bigot or Pious man, upon a Spiritual account to draw such a
hazard, or at least a scandal on his own person: and for the Queen Mother (that
great intriguer) she valued Religion little; for sometimes she favored
Protestants, sometimes again persecuted them: Nay, when it was for her
advantage, she gave great and suspicious signs that she would be of the
Reformed Religion also, as may be seen in Davila in the second Book.

My Minister will not perchance be yet satisfied that I call it a Cabinet-Plot,
but says they died for their Religion, and that the King had not better
Subjects then those that were massacred. Brave Coligni being the first that
fell. Now, Reader, that you may see what kind of Subject our Minister is (and
such a one I always doubted him) I will briefly show you how these Hugonots
behaved themselves, among whom Coligni was a Principal, and who is honored
with the title of Brave, by this most Loyal Parson.

In the time of Francis the First Calvin appeared, and dedicated his
Institutions to him. The preaching, of this man pleased the changeable humor of
many French; but the Sect was kept under by the King, and especially by his Son
Hen. 2. who like wise Governors were unwilling to let an unheard of Religion
get root in their Country, well knowing that Rebellion would follow, as
afterward it happened to the purpose. Francis the 2. succeeded Hen. who was
althogether governed by the House of Guise, by reason of the great power they
had in the late Kings Reign, and more especially now, because the Queen-Consort
was the glorious Mary of Scotland, daughter to the Sister of this ambitious
Duke. The House of Burbon (being the first Princes of the Blood) were greatly
troubled they had no interest in affairs, and tried all manner of ways to get
into play. The Prince of Conde (a hotheaded man) seeing he could not ruin the
Guises by ordinary means, calls all his partiza^s together (`among whom Coligni
was the Chief) to la Ferte an Apennage of his, and there he told them, they
must take Arms to free themselves from the slavery they were in by the ruling
Party. The fiery youth were all of the Princes opinion, to begin the War
without delay: But, Brave Coligni (as the Minister calls him) replied, That
this were to ruin them all, seeing that though their pretenses were fair, yet
few of the Nation would follow them; and on the other side, all foreign
Princes were in amity with France by the late agreement of the Kings Father. If
they had a mind, he said, to do their business home, the sole way were to
pretend Religion, which in it self had an honorable appearance; and besides,
the Calvinists in France were many, hating the Guises, and wanting only a Head;
nor would the Princes of Germany or Q. Elizabeth fail to assist them on this
score, which otherwise could not be done on any account.

Thus the Brave man not only consented to Rebellion, but put them in a holy
method effectually to perform it. All the Assembly applauded the Counsel of
this Achitophel, and there-upon Andelot his Brother ( a most turbulent man) and
the Vicedame of Chartres (rich and debauch) were apponted to execute their
determinations. The manner of the Plot was this: To get a great company of
unarmed Hugonots to go to Court, and there clamor for Liberty of Conscience,
and free Temples: these poor men (they imagined) should presently be ill
treated by the Duke of Guise; whereupon the Protestant Soldiers (which for
that purpose they were to provide) would immediately come to their assistance;
and under pretense that the Hugonots were abused, they might fall on the Court,
and wholly destroy their Enemies. Besides this, 'twas reported, that in the
disorder the King and his three Brethren were to be made away, and God knows
whether this last part were not as true as the first, seeing after the death of
these Children, the House of Bourbon (Heads of the design) should succeed in
the Throne.

But now see how far the Conspiracy succeeded: The Provinces were divided to
several of the most considerable in each division, who were to make ready their
Levies against the 15. of March 1560. at Blois, a Town unfortified, where then
the Court resided. Godfry de la Bar (a Gentleman of Perigort, who had left
his Country by reason of forgery in a Lawsuit and turned Calvinist) was made
Commander in Chief; and according to their success, the Prince, Admiral, and
the rest would order affairs. The Kings Council, having at last notice of this,
carries the King without noise to Amboise, the better to secure him on a
sudden, with the present little force they had in readiness. On the day
appointed the Conspirators come, and finding the King gone, follow him to
Amboise, and assault the Castle; which being too strong to be presently
their's, they were by the Marshall of St. Andrew, and others wholly defeated
and taken. Upon this traiterous attempt, the King summons an Assembly of the
Nobles at Fountain-Bleau, where the brave Coligni grave the King a Paper, and
said, That the Protestants (hearing by his Majesty's Edict, that every Subject
might make known his Grievance in this Assembly) did present that Petition to
him; and though it were not signed, yet when his Majesty pleased, it should be
by 150000. hands. The Assembly, for all this arrogance, advised against a
Toleration; but the Hugonots encouraged by these proceedings, rose in Arms in*
several places, and filled the Court with complaints of their many insolences;
and on the other side, the Prince with his Accomplices set upon Lions. After this
the three Estates met at Orleans, where the Prince was condemned to be executed
and in this disorder the King died.

Charles the 9 was about eleven years old when he began his Reign; so that in
his minority (the faction of the Protestants being so great) the Prince was
acquitted, and liberty granted for public preaching. Then the Hugonots became
so insolent, that they massacred many people in Paris, burnt the Church of St.
Medard, rifled Monasteries, and committed many such exorbitances. The Prince
would have* seized on the Kings Person at Fountain-Bleau, but the Duke of Guise
got the King of Navar (first Prince of the Blood, and prime Commander of State)
to bring him and the Queen-Regent to Paris; which when the Prince of Conde
understood, and saw himself defeated of his design, he told brave Coligni, that
he had plunged himself so deep, that now he must drink or drown; and thereupon
attackt Orleans and took it, using all the inhumane barbarities that can be
thought of. After this (as Rebels are accustomed) a Manifesto is set out, That
he took up Arms to free the Kings Person from the slavery in which the
Catholic Lords held him. This was directed to the Parliament; who again
answered, That they wondered how it could be said, the King was prisoner, being
in his own Capital City, of which Charles of Bourbon the Princes own Brother
was Governor; where was present the King of Navar Chief Administrator of the
Kingdom, where the Parliament sat; and in fine; where all the great Officers of
the Crown resided.

But why do I go to the particulars of this notorious Rebellion? To be short,
brave Coligni's own words (a little before his death) will sufficiently declare
how great a Traitor he was; for just before the Marriage (like another
Nebuchadnezzar in his pride) he said to some of his confidents, That neither
Alexander nor Caesar could be compared to him, because Fortune was their
friend, but that he dad lost four Battles, yet by his wit, he still became more
formidable to his Enemies. If then this brave man, that began the Rebellion, as
you have heard, that lost four Battles against his Prince, that seized on so
many Towns, that dissuaded Peace so often when desired, and that did so many
infamous actions all along, shall pass and not be thought a Rebel, then I will
aver there was never Rebel since the Creation of the World. The things, Reader,
which I have here laid down, you many find dispersed in the first five Books of
Davila's History, who is an Author thought by Protestants so Authentic and so
impartial (sparing no body of what Rank or Faction soever) that among
Historians none has a clearer fame.

Having given you a short occount how these Potent Hugonots plagued these two
Kings, be pleased now to tell me, whether it was not their powerful Rebellion
(let their Religion have been what it would) that drew them into this
ill-machinated destruction. And by the way, see how simple the cavil of this
Minister is, who says, I call it ill-machinated, because it was done by halves.
The action was wicked, and a Cabinet-Plot, or else there is no such thing in
Nature: neither did it want condemning by several famous Catholics
themselves; who would doubtless have been silent, had the Pope so publicly
rejoiced at the news, as the Minister would fain have us believe.

The King in Vindication of the cruelty laid to his charge, gives these Reasons
to the World: That though every body saw how horribly the Rebels had used him,
yet it was not his design to Massacre so many Hugonots, but only to cut off
some Heads of the Party, who so highly fomented the Sedition: this made him
cause Coligni to be shot, the chief Rebel of the^ all; but the bullet only
breaking his arm, his Partisans grew to such a rage, that they threatened a
present War, and destruction to him and his; therefore he was necessitated to
what he did, viz. immediately to destroy those that had vowed his ruin. Now to
demonstrate that is was not his intention, the Kings friends farther said, That
had he intended a general Massacre from the beginning, it had been folly to The
Admiral was shot four days before the Massacre Dav. lib. 5.
shoot the Admiral so many days before the total execution, because this would
have alarmed the Party, and given occasion to many to get away as in truth not
a few did, the day before the bloody night.

Reader, I know not whether this Declaration of the King be true or not; but
this I am sure, the action was unchristian, though there were never greater
Rebels then these Hugonots: for they not only fought many Battles with their
Prince, and fortified many of his Towns against him; but besides all this,
brought foreign Forces into France, as Ruyters from Germany, and English from
us* and because all things are lawful to the Saints, they delivered up Havre de
Grace to Queen Elizabeth, by which we had a new footing in France, even we, the
professed enemies of the Nation. Nay, they began first to Dav. lib. 2.
Massacre Catholics in Paris; and also Coligni and Beza got Poltrot to
murder the Duke of Dav. lib. 3.
Guise, father to him that was Killed at Blois. This the Assassine openly
confessed at his death, being after executed for the fact. By force then, and
such tricks, tyring out their Kings, they got several Privileges and Edicts:
but God send me and my Relations to live for ever in servitude, rather then to
obtain liberty by such strange and dissalowable courses. And truly, I doubt not
(since this Minister can justify these Agreements) but he would, if the Four
Bills had passed at the Isle of Wight, vindicate the proceedinghs, and cite
those Acts with as much confidence, as if they had been obtained without Force
in time of Peace and quiet. Had King James lived in our days, and seen how the
same pretenses with those of the Hugonots, viz. Conscience, and the Liberty of
the Subject, had like to have ruined his Family, I do believe they would have
found small comfort from any Vindication of his. I do therefore openly affirm,
that if any Englishman (who has considered the villainy of our times) does still
justify Brave Coligni and his Hugonots, he has either been an apparent Rebel,
or is so in his heart, and will show his Teeth upon the first advantage that
shall be offered.

SECT. 19. APOLOGY.
May it not as well be said in the next Catholic Kings Reign, that the Duke of
Guise and the Cardinal (Heads of the League) were killed for their Religion
also? Now no body is ignorant, that 'twas their factious Authority, which made
the jealous Prince design their deaths, though by unwarrantable means.

ANSWER XIX.
He says the Guises were not killed for their Religion, for they were killed by
one of their own Religion, as much bent against Protestants as they. That
Papists hated Hen. 3. only for sparing the Blood of Protestants, and not
declaring his Protestant Heir incapable of Succession. That for these causes
the Guises by the Popes consent (who calls them the Macchabees of the Church)
entered into the Holy League, and called in the Spaniards and Savoyards to
maintain War against him, and deprive him of his Kingdom and Life. Whereupon
the jealous Prince, as I favorably call him, dealt with them, as they had done
with the Protestants. But their case, he says, was so different from the
Protestants, that he wonders I should mention it.

Then he tells us, the Pope excommunicated the King for this action, and gave
nine years Indulgence to his Subjects to fight against him, foretelling, as a
Pope might do without Astrology, that ere long he should come to a fearful end;
and this he says happened: for the Subjects earned the Indulgence, and a Friar
fulfilled the Prophecy. This action the Pope in a Speech called the work of
God, and (for its wonderfulness) compared it with the Incarnation or
Resurrection; preferring his courage before Eleazars or Iudiths, and declaring
the King (who professed he died in the Faith of the Roman Catholic Church) to
have died in the sin against the Holy Ghost. Lastly, He asks, whether it may
not be said, Papists cannot live without persecuting Protestants, when a Popish
King is stabbed and damned for not persecuting them enough.

REPLY 19.
Here is a great deal of cry, and little wool; for I have often said, the Pope
may have his frailties, as well as other men; and does not the Minister know he
is a Temporal Prince also, and in that capacity may have intrigues with his
Neighbors? What is this to our Religion, more then if the King of Spain should
make use* of the Politics too far? Again, if the Pope as our Archbishop (all
Countries being in his Province) should commit humane indiscretions, Why were
we to be more blamed for it, then Durham, Chester and Carlisle ought to be for
their Religion, because their Metropolitan Williams joined with the Rebels
against King Charles of happy Memory?

I never approved the procedure of the Guises in their League, and have always
said they were most insolent Ministers of State to Hen. 3. but when the Duke
and Cardinal were murdered at Blois by the King, their Successors learnt of
the Hugonots to run into a formal and open War. And truly, my inference, I
conceive, was pertinent concerning the Massacre of the one, and murder of the
other, though the Parson thinks it something strange. For in this Example the
Outers and the Outees (the Hugonots and Guises) were killed by their Kings. Now
since both Parties were prodigious in power, able to cope with the Prince;
'twould be as ridiculous to say, that (because the Hugonots were destroyed)
they suffered for their Faith, as that the Heads of the League were killed for
their Religion.

Davila tells us, That the Pope only refused to absolve Henry the Third,
saying, that he could not be contrite for killing a Cardinal, since he kept
another still in prison. Nor does this famous Author say any thing of giving
nine years Indulgence to his Subjects that should fight against him; and yet if
the Pope had done so, he must answer for his own actions to God Almighty, and
not all the Members of the Catholic Church.

But why does this poor Minister continually harp upon James Clement, whom the
Devil had seduced for this work? The Minister would have called me worse then a
Turk (as he has already done) if I should lay at his door the actions of Hugh
Peter's, who was as I think ordained, at least as bad as he were. Concerning the
Popes Speech, you must know, Reader, that it was a thing forged (as Tortus
says) and never heard of but at Paris, some Grandees having hopes thereby to
animate their Party, and others a design to defame the Sea of Rome: and if you
consider it, you will find the Pope had no reason to rejoice at, but much to
lament the death of this Prince. For Henry the Third was always a most firm son
of the Church, and easily brought again to whatever could be desired. But when
he was gone, an apparent Hugonot was to succeed, whom though for the present
they might think they were able to deal with, yet necessarily at best there
would be a perpetual distraction among them; and besides, wise men know, that
accidents are common in such cases; and to be sure, the least success on Henry
the Fourth's side, would have ruined the Popes interest. To his Conclusion I
have answered before sufficiently, viz. That Protestants live better under
Papist Governments, then Papists do under theirs: therefore, I say again, who
the Persecutors are, let the World judge.

SECT. 20. APOLOGY.
If it were for Doctrine that the Hugonots suffered in France, this haughty
Monarch would soon destroy them now, having neither Force nor Towns to resist
his Might and Puissance. They yet live free enough, being even Members of
Parliament, and may convert the Kings Brother too, if he thinks fit to be so.
Thus you may see how well Protestants live in a Popish Country under a Popish
King: Nor was Charlemaign more Catholic then this; for though he contends
sometimes with the Pope, it is not of Faith, but about Gallicane Privileges,
which perchance he may very lawfully do. Judge then, Worthy Patriots, who are
the best used, and consider our hardship here in England, where it is not only a
Fine for hearing Mass, but death to the Master for having a Priest in his
house; and so far we are from preferment, that by Law we cannot come within ten
miles of London; all which we know your great Mercy will never permit you to
exact.

ANSWER XX.
Here he denies the consequence, That if the Hugonots then suffered for
Doctrine, this haughty Monarch would soon destroy them now: for he says, he may
persecute and not destroy them, or destroy them, but not so soon. Nor is this
Monarch, he says, as Catholic as Charlemaign; for if he were, he would be
Patron of all Bishoprics in his Empire, make the Pope know the difference
between a Prelat and an Emperor, and not chop Logic about Gallicane
Privileges: he would also call a Council (as Charlemaign ded against
Image Worship) to separate errors from the Faith. This he says were a good way
to destroy the Hugonots, by taking away the causes of strife; but any other way
he cannot, without violation of his Laws. Then he says, we complain of
hardships we feel not, and insult over the Hugonots, who would mend their
condition with changing with us. Popish Peers, he says, sit in English
Parliaments, as well as Protestants in French. That we have as free access to
our Kings Brother, as they to theirs: and, that he knows not what we would
have, unless we would Catechize his Highness, as the Abbot did the Duke of
Gloucester. He concludes, That we complain of those Laws we never knew executed,
and which, I say, I know never will be. But the Laws, he says, were made to
guard the lives of our Princes against our Traiterous practices.

REPLY XX.
I must here again, Reader, desire your judgment, whether this consequence in
the Apology, be not as natural as can be: viz. If the Protestants suffered for
Doctrine (when by reason of their strength it was dangerous to disturb them)
then doubtless, this haughty Monarch (being as much a Papist in Faith as any of
his Ancestors) would soon destroy them now, having neither Force nor Town to
resist his might and puissance. Certainly, this is as impertinent a cavil, as
his insisting upon Charlemagn, who was Emperor as well as King of France; and
therefore had more Authority, then if he had been but a single Monarch.
Besides, I wonder he should urge him as Quarreller with the Pope, being as
great a friend as ever that Sea had. For he grave to it the Exarchate of
Ravenna, the Marca Anconitana, and the Dukedom of Spoleto, which are the
greatest part of the Church Lands in Italy. All the power the ancient Caesar's
had, I know not; if it were great, I wish they had never parted with it; but
what they have granted, I think now as truly helongs to the Pope, as any
Privileges that Towns or Royallty's can call theirs, by the Gracious
concessions of our famous Princes.

How shameless is this man, that can say, the Hugonots would mend their
condition by changing with us! and yet he cannot deny they have all the
advantages before mentioned. How prettily also (after his usual manner) does he
pervert my meaning, in saying, we have free access to his Highness; for my
Argument runs thus: That the Hugonots may convert the Kings Brother without any
prejudice to them by Law; when as it is death to a Catholic to pervert (as
they call it) the meanest of his Majesty's Subjects. But God send the King may
never find more unfaithful Servants then such; nor the Duke those that shall
wish him worse then the worthy Abbot, whom he is pleased to mention. He has a
fling also at me, because the Catholic Peers sit in the House, which is quite
besides the thing I urged. For I said, the Hugonots must needs think they live
happily, enjoying not only their Religion in public, but also being capable of
any manner of Employment, even to be chosen Members of the three Estates; nor
is there any Parliament of France, but has many of their Religion in it. On the
contrary, Catholics are born with an incapacity of Employment, like the
Villains as it were in Ancient times, who had no propriety in the Kingdom. If
some few Lords sit in their House, it is not any favor the Nobility bear to
Popery, but because they have gravely considered, that it would be wonderful
injustice to turn out a Party for difference in Religion, and permit other
dissenters to continue. Now (seeing there are so many Opinions in the World) to
turn out all, God knows upon whose Children the Lot may fall next: for the
Church of England is no Manna, to relish in every palate; and some wise men
also think, that a man may do very well, though he has little Disputes with
this his holy Mother.

Why does this Gentleman say, we never knew the Laws executed? I am sure, there
have died by these Laws at least 300 Priests, besides Laymen: and how often we
have been rackt in prison, and how infinitely our Estates have suffered for our
Consciences, no body, I think, is ignorant. But, I hope, the brave people of
England will intercede for us to his Majesty, that since he (the Messiah and
only expectation of the Nation) is come, we may not feel in his days, what we
suffered under Cromwell, even by virtue of those Acts which have been formerly
made. Nor could Osborn a Protestant (in his Memoires) choose but confess Hist.
Mem. Q. E. p. 17.
That against the poor Catholics nothing in relation to the generality
remains upon due proof sufficient to justify the severity of the Laws daily
enacted and put in execution against them.

SECT. XXI. APOLOGY.
It has been often urged, that our misdemeanors in Queen Elizabeth's and King
James's time, were the cause of our punishment.

ANSWER XXI.
Your misdemeanors? we cry you mercy, if they were no more; but that comes next
to be argued, whether they were misdemeanors or Treasons.

REPLY. XXI.
Reader, This is the subtlest Sophister that I ever met with; for (before this
distinction) I never knew but that Treasons were misdemeanors, and therefore I
think the word misdemeanour is not improper.

SECT. XXII. APOLOGY.
We earnestly wish that the Party had had more patience under that Princess:
But pray consider (though we excuse not their faults) whether it was not a
harder Question then that of Yorck and Lancaster (the cause of a War of such
length and death of so many Princes) who had most right, Queen Elizabeth or
Mary Stuart. For since the whole Kingdom had crowned and sworn Allegiance to
Queen Mary, they owned her as the legitimate daughter to Henry, the Eighth; and
therefore it was thought necessarily to follow by many, that if Mary was the
true Child, Elizabeth was the Natural, which must needs give way to the
thrice-noble Queen of Scots.

ANSWER XXII.
He says, that I wish the Catholics had had more patience under Q. Elizabeth;
but he thinks they needed none: for in the first ten years of her Reign (though
what the Papists had done in Queen Mary's time was fresh in memory) none of
them fuffered death till the Northern Rebellion, raised against her merely upon
the account of her Religion: 'twas she then that was persecuted, and had
occasion for patience, and therefore I should have wished them more Loyalty. But
it appears I account Rebellion no fault, in saying, 'twas a hard Question,
whether the right lay in Queen Elizabeth, or the Queen of Scots, because many
thought Queen Elizabeth illegitimate. Here he asks, Who thought so? Or, when
the Question arose? For, says he, First, Archbishop Heath a Papist, said in his
Speech, no body could doubt the justness of her Title. Secondly, the Kings of
France, Spain, and the Emperor offered Marriage to her, and thereby hoped to
get the Crown. Thirdly, the Queen of Scots and King James acknowledged her, and
claimed nothing but to be her Heirs and Successors. Then he tells, that Paul
the Fourth was the First that questioned her Title, because the Kingdom being a
Fee of the Papacy, she had audaciously assumed it without his leave; and
secondly, because she was illegitimate. But his Successor Pius the Fourth
would have owned her, if she would have owned him; which because she would not,
the next Pope Pius V. issued out his Bulls and deposed her, not for Bastardy,
but for being a Protestant, upon which the Northern-men and others of her
Subjects rebelled, and were every foot plotting against her. It Is true, he
says, the Queen of Scots Title was pretended; but he demands what would we have
done if that Queen had not been Catholic, or Queen Elizabeth; not thought
illegitimate? He proceeds, That Gregory the Thirteenth had occasion to consider
this, having a Bastard of his own, and another of the Emperors to provide for:
to the first of which he gave Ireland, and sent Stukely to win it for him; and
to the other England, with leave to win it for himself. But what was this to
the Q. of Scots? who (he says) might perhaps have been preferred to marry one
of them, upon condition her son James might have nothing to do with the
Succession. For when she was dead, and her right in King James, Sixtus V. not
only took no notice of him, but cursed Queen Elizabeth again, and gave her
Kingdom to Philip the Second of Spain. Pope Clement the Eighth seeing he could
do no good upon Queen Elizabeth (to take care another Heretic should not
succeed her) sent his Breves both to Clergy and Layity, forbidding them to
admit any but a Catholic to the Succession, though never so near in blood;
which was in plain words to exclude King James; so that the Popes never stuck
at the hard question. And now he asks, What our Country men did or suffered for
it? And answers himself, that they acted for the Papal interest, making use of
the House of Scotland only for a cloak, while the Title was in Queen Mary; but
when it was in King James, none of them stirred or suffered for it: yet they
were not idle, but as busy as Bees in contriving to hasten Queen Elizabeth's
death, and to put him by the Succession.

To prove this, he urges the Spanish Invasion presently after his Mothers
death, negotiated and defended by Papists: That the Jesuits procured Huntly to
rebel in Scotland: That they persuaded the Earl of Darby to set up a Title to
the Crown of England; which he revealing, was poisoned soon after, as Hesket
had threatened him: That when their single shot failed, F. Parsons gave a
broadside to the Royal House of Scotland, in a Book published under the name
of Doleman, setting up diverse Competitors; and to provide a sure Enemy, he
found a Title for the Earl of Essex (to whom he dedicated the Book) being the
most ambitious and popular man in the Nation. But the the Book, he says,
prefers the Title of the Infanta before all others. Then he concludes from this
his Discourse, in which, he says, nothing material can be denied, that it
appears, That this hard Question was not between the Parties themselves, in one
of whom, we confess, the right was. For the Pope easily resolved it, who denied
both sides of the Question, assuming the right to himself, and as concerning
the English Catholics, he says, they sided with the Pope against Queen
Elizabeth and Queen of Scots also: and lastly, that their misdemeanors were
inexcusable Treasons, if any Treasons befriended by such an Apologist can be
inexcusable.

REPLY 22.
It Is strange to me, that I must be denied the liberty, which all people else
have. No man is forbid to declare their pretensions, when he speaks of the
commotions of a Party: yet here I am accused, to think Rebellion no crime, and
to excuse their faults, because I tell you what Papists in those days said for
themselves. The Minister can call himself a Loyal Subject, and yet defend the
Hugonots, who were the most notorious and insolent Rebels that any History can
show; nor had they any other pretense for the Dav. lib. 2.
Massacres and continual ravages committed by them, but Mr. Calvin and Mr.
Beza's telling them, God said thus and thus: and therefore, unless their
respective Kings would suffer them to destroy a Religion in quiet possession
since the Reign of Clouis, they would bring Armies into the field, and fortify
Towns against their Liege-Lords, as every body knows they did, till subdued in
the time of Lewis the XIII. I think, good Mr. Parson, I am as well known in
England as your self; and am sure can find more Protestants of Quality that
shall engage for my Loyalty, the^ you can people of any sort. It Is not this
Minister, Reader, only, but others have called my narration of the matter of
fact, a questioning of Queen Elizabeth's Title: judge you by my words in the
Apology, whether it be so or no; nor could I omit in honor the Plea of the
foregoing age, their misdemeanors being every day thrown in my dish.

But suppose I had questioned her Title, there is no Treasonable intention in
it I am sure, because the Title of our King has no dependence upon that
Princess: nor was she the first of our Monarchs against whose right Posterity
has argued. No body is blamed for saying King Stephen was an usurper, or that
Edward the Fourths Title was better then that of the three preceding Henry's.
What is it then, I beseech you (were the fact proved against me) I have
committed, that Protestant Authors have not done and worse? Sr. Walter Rawley
in his Preface of the History of the world has not only something to say
against almost all the Kings of England, but Buck in his Ric. 3 has bastardized
Hen. 7 and all his offspring, and thereby invalidates their title to the
Crown either as Buck. p. 12
Yorkists or Buck. p. 44.
Lancastrians; Nor does Sp II. 4. p. 6^3.
Speed refrain from questioning the right of most of our Princes from the
Conquest till Henry the fowrth's Reign. Yet none of these have been branded
with the Character of ill Subjects. It Is he that is to be accounted wicked, who
sedititiously descants on Titles, to breed Commotions and Disorders.

The Minister says, I defend the calumny of those Catholics, in saying, 'Twas
a very hard question, whether the right to the Crown lay in Queen Elizabeth, or
in the Queen of Scots. Reader, that which I said was, That this was a harder
Question, then the Dispute of York and Lancaster, which cost so much Blood and
Treasure: and because I would know your opinion, I will state these two
Questions to you.

York had the interest of a third brother by Marriage; Lancaster that of a
fourth Brother; and these two dispute about the Crown of England which women
are capable of.

The second Question is this: Henry the eighth married his brothers wife, who
was said to be a Virgin; for Prince Arthur was but fifteen and a little more
wen he died. By this Princess K. Hen. had our Q. Mary, and after he had lived
with her 20 years, he fell in love with a handsome young Lady, whereupon he had
in short time a scruple of Conscience that it was unlawful to live longer with
his old wife, because she had beenmarried to his brother. His Conscience being
still tender, he caused the Scriptures to be searched, and found not only there
the Marriage to be void, but that the Pope himself had no power in England; and
besides, that rich Abbeys were also contrary to the word of God. Being thus
truly informed, he threw away Wife, Pope and Monks, and married the other, by
whom he had Queen Elizabeth, while his first Wife lived. 'Twas thought by many
curious wits, that there could be but one of the daughters legitimate, because
both Mothers were contemporaries, and that to Christians the Scripture permits
but one wife at a time. After the death of this King and his Son, 'twas put to
the Kingdom to decide, which of these children were lawfully begotten: both
Lords and Commons acknowledged Mary for their Queen, which was as much to say
she was born in true Wedlock. Nor did Luther himself fail to disapprove of
Queen Elizabeth's Hist Mem. Q. Eliz. p. 5.
birth.

I doubt not, but the people were informed of the cause of the Kings scrupule,
as also that this brother Arthur had never known his wife. Nay, before K. Henry
married Queen Katherine, she protested she was a Virgin and offered to be tried
by L. Herb p. 7.
Matrons. The Bishop of Ely also L. Herb p. 244.
deposed, That the Queen (whom all, even the King himself esteemed for a Saint)
had often in confession told him, she never carnally knew the Prince. Nor in
the whole examination was there any colorable pretense produced, but the
common vanity of all boys to be thought men before their time: For 'twas
affirmed, Arthur should say the next morning after Marriage, that he had been
in Spain that night. Besides this there were those, I believe, that told the
People, that though St. John forbad Herod to take his brother Philips wife,
because his said Brother was then alive, (for Josephus Ios. ^ 472.
says, Herodias parted from her husband Philip in his life time, and in
contempt of the laws married Herod) yet he never prohibited by those words a
Christian to marry his sister in-law if her Husband were dead.

The Case being thus fancied by the Papists (in the time of Queen Elizabeth)
they argued, that if Mary was the true Child, then the other was the Natural:
but Mary was owned Legitimate: And my Lord Bacon H. 7. p. 206.
says the ligitimation of Queen Mary and Elizabeth were incompatible. Ergo the
Kingdom not being Elective, Mary Stuart (the next Legal Heir) must necessarily
succeed her. Yet suppose these Papists were wrong in their conclusion, I am
sure nevertheless, I am still in the right, viz. That it is a harder Question
to resolve, whether the Marriage be Null, if a woman marries two Brothers, then
whether a third or fourth brother has the better Title to the Crown; for that
was the contest betwixt York and Lancaster.

But the Minister urges, if the Papists thought Queen Elizabeth an Usurper, why
did not they stir sooner? for there was no Rebellion, he says, in ten years:
and when after ten it broke out in the North, there was not the least mention
made of the Q. of Scots, or her Title.

I wish the Catholics had not only sat still ten years, but forty five years
also; yet to show you that this Minister will be wrong in every thing, I shall
give you a most succinct account of this business. Queen Mary of England in,
the latter part of her Reign was in Godvv Q. M. p. 336.
open war with France, and the Qu. of Scots was then Godvv Q. M. p. 336.
Wife to the Dauphin. This Hostility, and the private designs of Spain, hindered
all intrigues of the Queen of Scots friends to secure the Succession. Things
being in this condition, our Queen dies; nor did the Dauphin make any present
claim; which together with the natural coolness of Englishmen to all strangers,
especially the French, moved Archbishop Heath to what he did. About some six
months after this, the Dauphin takes upon him the Title and Arms of Camb.
1559. p. 43. Printed 1615.
England; and immediately also by the death of his Father, the Crown of France
fell to him, which gave him the name of Francis the Second. But by that time Q.
Elizabeth was too well settled to be deposed without blows; and before things
could be ordered for such an enterprise, the Hugonots lay so heavy on his
shoulders, that he was necessitated to the Came. 1560. p. 53.
Treaty at Edinburgh, by which he was to relinquish his former pretenses in
relation to England: yet before these Articles were sealed, the King himself
died, and so all things stood as they were before. The Q. of Scots being now a
widow, returns with much ado to Scotland, which was all in a flame, by the
seditious preaching of the new Reformists. As Soon as she arrived there, (Q.
Elizabeth having often sent to her to ratify the Treaty with her Husband) she
C^^d. 1561. p. 67.
after consideration returned answer, That she was content to do so, upon
condition she were by Parliament declared her Heir. This Proposition seemed not
strange to her English well-willers, because our Histories could tell them,
That Maud the Empress was necessitated to the like by King Stephen. But Queen
Elizabeth would not harken to those terms; whereupon presently Margaret Niece
to Henry the Eighth, the Earl of Lenox her husband, Arthur Pool and his
Brother, Grandchildren to George Duke of Clarence, Fortescue and others, were
apprehended, for intending to Came. beginning 1562. p. 72.
set up the Queen of Scots interest. The fact they confessed; but (as all
malefactors find something to extenuate their crimet) hey pitched upon the
weakest excuse that ever was heard of; viz That they intended not to depose
Queen Elizabeth, but to be beforehand in Arms, because Conjurers had told them
she would die that year. After this, the vigilance of Q. Elizab. was such, and
the disasters of Scotland so great, that the Catholics were forced to sit
quiet for a while. Instead of Peace with the Rebels, the Queen of Scots was
necessitated to seek for shelter in Came. 1568. p. 135.
England, where (had she been used as the Honor of the Nation required) she
would have concluded an inviolable agreement between the Queen, and those
Catholics that stood for her Title. But when this Royal Guest had once
trusted her self among her Enemies, she was both denied access to the Court,
and also refused the liberty of retiring into another Kingdom.

This inhumanity was quickly noised about the World; whereupon Pius V. sent
Came. 1568. p. 146.
Ridulph a Florentine to consult with the Catholics about the Interest of
their Queen. All Arguments were used which could possibly be thought of, to
persuade her Enemies to let her go: and when no fair means would do, Came. 1569.
p. 164.
the Rising in the North happened.

It Is true, the Declaration of those great Lords that were up, mentioned no
other motive but Religion; because this could not shock either the Queen or
People so much, as the name of the Queen of Scots would have done; for that
implied ipso facto the altering both of Religion and Government also. Who is
ignorant that that Great man our General (whose memory all ages shall for ever
honor) concealed at first what he had long determined? well knowing, that the
once naming of the King would ruin that design, which his wit so well laid,
and his conduct so happily executed. Besides this, Reader, you must know,
before this Rebellion broke out, Leonard Dacres, second Son to the Lord Dacres
of Gylsland, undertook the delivery of the Queen, being then in Darbyshire in
my Lord Shrewsburie's custody. Of this design my Came. 1^69. p. 160
Lord Northumberland was complotter; therefore 'twas plain, he being Chief in
the Northern Insurrection, intended her Title, though there was nothing of it
in his Delaration. Consider therefore how notoriously false this Minister is,
there having been Claims, Plots, and endeavors by the greatest of the Land
before the rising in the North; and when it happened, that also was on the
Queen of Scots account.

'Twere tedious, Reader, to tell you how many attempts followed this
Insurrection; for there scarce passed a day, till the death of the Queen of
Scots, but something was contrived to prevent the machinations of her unkind
Kinswoman. By all this you may see, that while Queen Elizabeth used her
distressed Guest with any kindness, the piety of that Princess (which moved her
rather to be contented with the Succession, then put England in a perpetual
broyl) caused her to command the English Catholics to lie still; whom
(according to the Ministers own confession) the prohibition of their Religion
forten years had not exasperated to Commotions. But as soon as their Queen was
imprisoned without hopes of liberty, and they left to the dictates of their own
Loyal inclinations, they never ceased either at home or abroad to solicit the
destruction of their Enemies. Consider also, I beseech you, the carriage of the
Popes, who used all fatherly and gentle means imaginable, because they saw the
Queen of Scots, whose right they deemed it was, of her self inclining (like
another Maud) to expect, till the death of her Cozen should put an end to all
pretenses. These Popes were sufficiently urged by the Duke of Guise and others;
yet upon the former considerations (being desirous of peace) they never had
practices against Queen Elizabeth, till Mary Stuart was in prison; nor ever
published the Excomcommunication, till the Queen absolutely refused her liberty,
even after the intercession of Cib. ^^^0. p. 177.
the French and Spanish Ambassadors.

But the Minister says, the Popes owned Queen Elizabeth's Title, and therefore
Papists ought not to have disputed it. It Is true he says so, and yet confesses,
that Paul the IV. (who governed the Church when she came first to the Crown)
would not acknowledge her Legitimate. But how comes the Gentleman to say, that
the other cause of his Holiness's not acknowledging her, was, because she
audaciously assumed the Crown without his leave? Does he find any such record
in our Histories? Did Queen Mary ask his consent? Did any Pope send in this
manner to Edward the Sixth? Or lastly, which of all our Kings used to entreat
his favor to be Crowned? Reader, this is a pretty capricchio of the Parson, as
it had been unusual if the Pope had made such a claim. Pius the Fourth
succeeding the said Paul (for the reasons aforesaid) showed as much prudence
and good nature as ever man did, in hope to compose things without effusion of
blood: and certainly after his death as much had been spilt, as ever was in any
Reign, had not Queen Elizabeth been the wisest woman that ever swayed Scepter.
Pius V. followed the method of his Predecessors, and would have continued it,
had not the barbarous usage of the Queen of Scots provoked him to an
Excommunication, and all hostile endeavors. His Bull, I know, speaks not of
Bastardy in plain terms; yet with our Ministers good leave, the Pope in that
very Bull calls our late Queen Mary Vi^^ Bull. Camb. 1570. p. 180.
Legitimate; which saying was as much against Q. Elizabeth, as if he had spoken
in a bolder phrase. For as I urged before, my Lord Bacon H. 7. p. 206.
says, That the Legitimations of Q. Mary and Queen Elizabeth were incompatible.

In this manner the Popes acknowledged her: and for the Marriages which were
offered her (and to very much purpose forsooth urged by the Minister) from
foreign Monarchs, it proves no more right, then that Mrs. Cleypole had been
truly our Queen, if France, Spain, or the Emperor had made love to her; and I
believe no body doubts, but Suitors would have flockt, had she been unmarried,
and sole Heir to her Father.

Though Gregory XIII. sent to invade Ireland, and Sixtus V. gave England to the
Spaniards, yet I do not see, that this can touch us Catholics in the least,
though the Minister thinks it a mighty Argument. For if the French King may
invade St. Christophers, or any part of our Dominions, without drawing the Name
of Villain on him or his people: Why may not the Pope (being a Temporal Prince)
send forces to subdue what Country he pleases? The Bishop of Munster, for his
smart endeavors against the Hollanders, was never blamed, but on the contrary
commended by us; and certainly the Pope is as absolute, and as good a man as
he. Kings, you see, may fall upon their Neigbours themselves, and without
breach of Morality, incite others to do the like; and while Popes are free
Princes, they cannot be reproached for using that liberty, without great
partiality and malice. This Minister foolishly handles all things, and you may
see his intent is only to make a noise: for it is no advantage (in our present
Dispute) to him to show, what Kingdoms Popes overrun, or give away.

That which he ought to prove was, That it is Article of Faith amongst us, to
assist the Pope in every such invasion, or Gift. That this is not so you may
plainly see; for one fifth of the Turks Army are of his Christian Subjects, and
yet none of them are ever blamed as heritiques for defending the grand
Seigniors Territories. In the next place, when was it heard that any English
Catholic was fain to do penance like an accursed person for assisting the
Queen against the Spanish Invasion? for there was no^ Papist then in England
for the Hist. Mem. Q. Eliz. p. 28.
Spaniard. Or who in Ireland in her Reign, thought himself given to the Devil,
for fighting against San Joseph, who came for the Kingdom upon his Holiness
account? For the Sanders. K. C. p. 68.
Bishop of Armath confesses, The English Papists in Ireland were faithful in
all the invasions by Spain or Pope. Now whether Pope or Spaniard intended
after Conquest to restore the Kingdom to the Queen of Scots or her Heirs, I
know not; but this I am sure of, that 'twas as probable, as that the Hollanders
(who were assisted by the Arms of some Caualiers, and the good wishes of us
all) would have given King Charles the Second possession of England, had they
got it from the Rump.

If Clement the Eighth earnestly strove that Queen Elizabeth's Successors
should be Catholics, I suppose no body can blame him for it; but I would fain
have it showed me, that King James's admission to the Crown (a Protestant from
his Childhood) was opposed by the Catholics of this Kingdom. If they stickled
not after his Mothers death for him as they did for her, this answer is
sufficient, That he was not used like her, nor did he (for fear of prejudicing
his future admittance) ever desire any body to stir in his behalf.

I suppose, Reader, you wonder why I should challenge any man to show me how
the English Catholics opposed King James his Succession, when as this Minister
tells us out of Cambden, That the Papists negotiated the Spanish Invasion; That
afterward they persuaded the Earl of Darby to pretend to the Crown; That
Doleman alias Parsons writ in the behalf of the Infanta's Title; and to
conclude his Accusation, de declares, That the Catholics of Scotland (Huntly
and others) raised a powerful Rebellion against this Prince.

First, Concerning the Invasion, the Minister says more then the Author himself
whom he quotes; Ca^bd. 1588. p. 476.
for Cambden only says, that some English Fugitives did promote it; and who
knows not that Fugitives in all ages, and in all Religions, machinate against
those whom they call their Oppressors? and on the other side, who is ignorant,
that many Papists, more considerable far then a few fugitive Priests (for most
of the chiefest were so) assisted the Kingdom in that War, and in all its other
contests abroad?

Secondly, If some of these Fugitives did persuade my Lord of Darby, it was, I
say again, done like Fugitives, nor had they ever the consent of the
Catholics for it. It was certainly a very rediculous Plot in them to make a
Protestant Nobleman (that had so poor a Title) their Sovereign; and if it were
really designed, It must, I am sure, have been performed by the Protestants
themselves; for the Papists had no power, not being able so much as to set up
the Qu. of Scots, who had so plausible a right, though they wanted not the
assistance of the Pope, Spaniard and all the Guisard Faction. And by the way
this Earl was not poisoned ( as the Minister would have it) for Stow has a
Diary and the Particulars of his sickness and says St. 2. Eliz. p. 1275.
The causes of all his deseases were thought by Physicians, partly a surfeit,
and partly distempering himself with vehement exercise 4. days together in
Easter week.

Thirdly, For Dolemans Book, who writ it, God knows, Parsons denied it at his
death; and I believe he was not the Author, because in some of his works he
speaks so much to the advantage of Epist. to his Convers. of England.
K. James. Moreover, he was a man of far more wit then to write so foolish a
thing: for was not that man strangely simple, that would dedicate his Book to
my L. of Essex (as the Minister would have it, to prick forward an ambitious
man) and yet the whole matter of the Treatise is to prefer the Infanta's Title
before all persons whatsoever. But Reader, if this kind of arguing be lawful,
that the errors of some unknown men, must be laid to a whole Party, how
miserable would the Protestants themselves be, when we come to try them by the
same Touchstone! I will not stoop to so mean and insignificant a Topic, but
tell you what Protestants still alive can testify, viz That in the latter end
of the Queens Reing, My Lord of Hertfords Title was often cried up to Tumult in
the streets: Nor had that a slight impression (he being esteemed next to the
Stuarts in blood) on many a wellmeaning man, because the English have a
reluctance at first to the thoughts of a stranger. Nay some Hist. Mem. p. 105.
Members of Parliament (after his admission said openly in the House, That no
people endued with Natural desire of Preservation would admit a Prince of a
beggarly Nation to Reign over them, how just soever his claim were, for fear of
loosing their propriety, as dear as life it self, and as vigorously to be
defended. By this therefore, Reader, may be seen the rancour of the Reformed
against the Kings coming in, since they durst say such things even after his
reception: and had not the last Earl of Pembrook wisely pocketted up Ramsey's
switching at Newmarket (when the people cried, Let us breakfast with the Scots
here, and dine with the rest at London) 'twas feared that day would have been
as fatal to the King as the fifth of November might have proved. Papists
therefore it seems were not his only Enemies.

Concerning Huntly's Rebellion, I am sure the man is doubly mad in mentioning
it, for first (according to Ann. 1^89.
Cambden whom he cites) The rising was to help the Spaniards against Queen
Elizabeth, who had put to death their Queen: nor was there ever a formed
insurrectio^ so gently punished by a King; which argues they had no malice
against him. Nay, his Majesty is pleased to say in his Epist to the Read
Basilicon Doron, That the Puritans had put out many Libellous Invectives
against all Christian Princes, and that no body answered them, but the Papists;
by which he said the scandal was doubled; for they were the Reformed who
calumniated, and the Catholics were the only Vindicators. Secondly, If the
Rebellion (suppose it as bad as may be) of these Lords of another Country, of
another age, must touch us the present Catholics of England, what a blow would
this be to the Reformed Religion, should I repeat the Scots unparalled
actions against their Queen; The protecting of Bothwel (who would have
destroyed King James) by the Camb. 1581. and 1592.
English: And lastly, (omitting the continual slavery he was in) the downright
Conspiracy of the Sa^ders K I am. 1599. p. 225. and 342.
Gowries against his life!

Having thus gone through the Paragraph, I must come to the nicest Question of
all; and nice, I may call it, because it is conjectural only. The proposal by
the Minister is this: Whether if the Queen of Scots had been a Protestant, we
should have stickled for her? and if Queen Elizabeth had not been thought
illegitimate, whether nevertheless we had not rebelled against her? To the
first, I say, viz. We had sided with the Q. of Scots, had she been Protestant.
To the second, No, That the Papists would not have opposed Queen Elizabeth, had
they thought her legitimate: and of the Ministers own assertions, I will make
this plainly appear. For if according to him, the Papists would have set up two
Protestants (the Lords Darby and Essex) who in reality had no right, then I
say, it is certain they would willingly have embraced the Title of the Stuarts,
that carried so fair a show. To the second, I answer, That they would never
have opposed Queen Elizabeth had she been thought Legitimate: For if (as the
Minister urged in the beginning) they obeyed her whom they thought an Usurper
for ten years, though she had utterly destroyed their Religion, it is then more
then probable, had her Title been good in their opinion, they had submitted,
let her Faith have been what it would. These doubts being thus resolved by the
very Gentleman that proposed them (who cares not, if he can wound us for the
present, into what contradictions at last he runs himself) I may, I hope [since
he has showed me the example) propose a Query also; and I shall thank him, if
out of my Reply he gives the Solution.

I will not urge my Question so far as to suppose the Queen of Scots had been a
Protestant, but my demand shall be singly this, Whether the Reformed in those
days would have quietly obeyed Queen Elizabeth, had she stood up for the
Catholic Religion? Reader, because the Parson is not ready to give his
determination, I will tell you my opinion, which is, that I think they would
not, and doubtless this co^jecture is not rash, when we consider what has been
done here, and recorded by our Protestant Historians themselves. Have we not
seen that (for the safety of Religion) Edward the Sixth gave away by the advice
of his Council the Kingdom to Jane Gray? and what Bees could be so busy as
Cranmer and Ridley, with many thousands more, to set up (against their lawful
Queen Mary) that poor Lady, who had not right enough by blood, and much less if
she depended wholly upon the Will, for that was void from the beginning,
according to the known Laws of the Land? How many treasonable Books were
written against this Queen after she came to the Crown, by Mr. Goodman and
others, asserting, That she ought to be put to death as a Tyrant, Monster and
cruel Beast? Will Thomas also conspired to murder her; and when he was to be
hanged for his Treason, he said, he died for his Stow. Q. M. p. 1056.
Country. By all which may be gathered (the Duke of Suffolk also with many
more protestants being ready, and Wiat actually in an open and dangerous
rebellion,) how dangerous it was then in England for a Prince to be a Papist;
though to that day there had never sat but one through Protestant upon the
Throne, and he a Child about sixteen when he died.

But now I must descend to a far more tragical example, even to the death of
the so often mentioned Qu. of Scots, who lost her life barely upon the account
of her Religion. It Is true Queen Elizabeth considered her own safety, but the
fury of the Nobility and people, (without whose incitement she durst not have
been beheaded) was purely for fear she might have survived Queen Elizabeth, and
being then the undoubted Successor, might have changed Religion as the former
Queen Mary had done before. If I should urge this barely upon my own word, I
might be mistrusted; therefore what I say shall be out of Cambden, who was not
only a Protestant, but the acknowledged true Annalist of those times. He will
tell you, that after Babingtons Conspiracy, in the consultation what should be
done with the Royal Prisoner, some were for holding her in safe custody, but
others ( out of care of Came. 1586. p. 413.
Religion) would have her tried and exexecuted. In pursuance then of this
advice, she was condemned, and the next Parliament the House petitioned for the
execution of her Sentence. The first reason in their supplicate was, for the
preservation of the true Came. 1586. p. 432,
Religion of Christ; and after they had told Queen Elizabeth also of her own
danger, they harpt again upon the former string, desiring her to remember Gods
fearful judgments upon Saul and Ahab, for their sparing Benhadad and Agag, two
wicked and profane Idolaters. In fine, when the fatal day came, though they
were so very severe as to deny her (being a Guest, and a free Princess) what
all Ambassadors have, viz. a Priest to assist her at her death, she was again
recomforted, when she knew by the Earl of Kent, that she died for her Faith:
for he told her, that her life would be the destruction of their Came. 1587. p.
455.
Religion.

Reader, I must now here end, and cannot but ask this Question, If the Reformed
have for defense of their Religion effected the death of their Queen, or at
least undoubted Heir; and if they have set up Jane Gray, that had no title,
because their lawful Prince was Catholic; who have been I would fain know in
England more faulty in this case, they or we? Pray what advantage has this
Minister got by loading us with crimes, of which we are innocent? And if, as he
urges in the beginning, we obeyed Q. Elizabeth ten years without stir, it then
shows that Papists can be obedient to a Prince of another Religion, though they
doubt their right; whenas the former Protestants would do any thing rather then
permit a Catholic to govern, let the Title be never so just. Judge now, Reader
whether it be not superlative injustice to incense the World against us, as if
our Religion taught nothing but blood, and theirs all gentleness imaginable. I
must invoke both Angels and Men to consider our wrong, who are termed
traiterous in our Principles, even to this day. We in our own persons have
showed all the duty that men can fancy, and for our Ancestors you have seen
what their Plea is; if it be bad, they have justly suffered; if other wise, let
them then feel your anger, who would deceive you thus with lies; and remember
that it is not possible a Religion which governed England with glory so many
years, can teach a Doctrine destructive to Princes, or infuse Maxims that will
breed commotions among the people.

SECT. XXIII. APOLOGY.
'Twas for the Royal House of Scotland that they suffered in those days, and
it is for the same illustrious Family we are ready to hazard all on any occasion.

ANSWER XXII.
Sir, We have found you notoriously false in that which you affirm: Pray God
you prove true in that which you promise.

SECT. XXIV. APOLOGY.
Nor can the consequence of the former procedure be but ill, if a Henry the
Eighth (whom Sir Walter Rawleigh and my Lord Cherbury, two famous Protestants,
have so homely characterized) should after twenty years co-habitation, turn
away his wife, and this out of scruple of Conscience (as he said) when as
History declares, that he never spared woman in his lust, nor man in his fury.

ANSWER XXIV.
This Character, he says, agrees better with some Heads of the Church, then
with King Henry the Eighth, of whom better Historians (naming Thuanus) say
better things: but if he were such a Monster, 'twas for want of a better
Religion, for he was of ours, except in the point of Supremacy; and therefore I
have no reason to flurt at him, except having undertaken to color Treasons, I
think it is something toward it to bespatter Kings. I use, he says, the same
Art in the next Paragraph to excuse the Powder Treason, calling it a
misdemeanour, the fifth of November, a Conjuration, all soft words, but deal
hardly with the great Minister of State, whom I make the Author of it, as if
the State had conspired against the Traitors, not the Traitors against the
State. Then he tells the old Story of the Gunpowder-Plot, and how discovered by
my Lord Mounte^gles Letter, and also how the Jesuits Baldwin, Hammond. Tesmond
and Gerrard were named by the Conspirators as privy with them.

The Narration is in any Book that treats of King James, and well known by
every body: therefore for brevities sake, I have omitted it here.

REP. to ANSW. XXIV.
Reader, If the Character do agree better with many heads of our Church, then,
I say, in Gods name let it be given them. But I much admire how Thuanus comes
to be esteemed a better historian in English affairs then Sir Walter Raleigh,
or my Lord Cherbury, whom we poor Englishmen think very excellent. But why do
I trouble you wi^^ the extravagancies of this strange man, w^^ when he finds
(as he fancies) a present expedient, cares not though he be forced to deny it
again in the next page. What I have said of Henry the Eighth, these two famous
men have said it, and a Vide Pref. to the Hist of the World.
thousand times worse, though they were Protestants, and the first of them the
great admirer of his Mrs. the daughter of this very Prince. Nay (omitting the
unexpressable foul Language of the Reformed at home and abroad, especially of
Luther himself) the Bishop of H. ^. p. 142.
Hereford (a Member of the Church of England) calls him, unsatiable glutted
with one, and out of variety seeking to enjoy another. I shall speak no more to
this, nor any thing separately to the next four Paragraphs, for they all
concern the Powder Treason. You shall see what he says to each of them, and
then my Answer shall follow in one entire discourse.

SECT. XXV. APOLOGY.
Now for the fifth of November, with hands lifted up to Heaven, we abominate
and detest.

ANSWER XXV.
Here he asks, Whether it be the Festival, (...) the Treason we abominate and
detest. If the (...), he says, he will believe us without lifting (...) our
hands. If the Treason, he asks why we do not call it so; which while we cannot
afford to do, lifting up our hands will never perswad (...) we abominate and
detest it.

SECT. XXVI. APOLOGY.
And from the bottom of our hearts, say, that may they fall into irrecoverable
perdition, who propagate that faith by the blood of Kings, which is to be
planted in truth and meekness only.

ANSWER XXVI.
He says, I should be cautious of throwing such Curses, for fear of hitting our
Father the Pope; as the Philosopher told the son of a common-woman, that threw
stones among a multitude.

SECT. XXVII. APOLOGY.
But let it not displease you ( Men Brethren, and Fathers) if we ask whether
Ulisses be no better known? or who has forgot the Plots of Cromwell, framed in
his Closet, not only to destroy many faithful Cavaliers, but also to ^ut a
luster upon his Intelligence, as if nothing could be done without his
knowledge? Even so did the then great Minister, who drew some few ambitious men
into this conjuration, and then discovered it by a Miracle.

ANSWER XXVII.
Here he calls me Apostle and Poet, full of Gravity, and Fiction. Then he says,
I would make the World believe they were drawn into this Plot by Cecil; yet am
so wise as not to offer to prove it, but would steal it in by the example of
Cromwell. Again, he says (admitting this for true) they were Traitors
nevertheless in doing what they did, had there been no Cecil in the World: and
therefore the excuse only implies, they had not wit to invent it, though they
wanted not malice to execute it; for according to my illustration, as the
Cavaliers whom Cromwell drew in, had their Loyalty abused, and were nevertheless
faithful still; so the Powder-Traytors (whom Cecil drew in) had their
disloyalty out witted, and were nevertheless Traitors still: For it is clear, by
being drawn in, both parties were sufficiently disposed for it. What I lay upon
Cecil, he says is a groundless and an impudent Fiction, which I am properly the
author of for no body ever spoke it before but in railery. He asks by what
Tradition or Revelation I received it sixty years after the fact, when as
neither K. James, nor Bellarmine, nor the Apologists of that age knew any thing
of it. He desires to know who were Cecils setters, that would be hanged, that
his art might not be suspected, for none were saved; and Garnet said, he would
give all the World to clear his name and Conscience of the Treason. These are
strong presumptions for the Negative of Cecils having no hand in the Plot: but
he says, there is only my bare word for the affirmative; which if it be enough,
^ere is a never-failing Topic to write Apologies for any Villainy, viz. that
the then great Ministers of State drew them in. In Queen Elizabeth's days we had
a higher game to fly at, to wit, her Title to the Crown; but durst not make so
bold with King James, otherwise we had not stoopt to a Minister of State. He
says farther, that I strive to diminish the Plot, by calling the Plotters
Desperadoes, who could not be called so by reason of Poverty, because their
Estates were great; nor by reason of discontents; for there was not a man, as
King James said, that could pretend a cause of grief. If the cause was, because
they had not all they desired, it is so far from excusing them, that it gives
occasion to suspect me. I ought, he says, to call the Discovery a Miracle,
because King James named it so, and especially since Bellarmine acknowledged it
so: but it is no wonder, that I, who will not call the Plot, Treason, will not
allow the Discovery to be a Miracle.

SECT. XXVIII. APOLOGY.
This will easily appear, viz. how little the Catholic Party understood the
design, seeing there were not a score of guitlty found, though all imaginable
industry was used by the Commons, Lords, and Privy-Councel too.

ANSWER XXVIII.
He says, few understood the very design, for 'twas not safe to tell it many;
but Papists generally knew there was a design, and prayed for the success of
it. Though but a score were in the Plot, yet fourscore appeared in Rebellion;
nor is it probable so small a number could think to do much by surprising
Princess Elizabeth, unless they expected other assistance. But Treason, he
says, is hated by all, when unsuccessful.

REPLY to ANSW. XXVIII.
'Twas never in my heart (and so will all that know me testify) to think that
the Conspirators in this Treason were not Traitors in the highest degree, or
that any punishment could equal the blackness of their offense. In the Apology
I am sure there are no words that can be rackt to this; for my intent there was
only to show in short that the Catholic body was innocent, knowing nothing of
the entreprize: That the Plot (for which these were executed) was made, or at
least fomented by the Policy of a great Statesman. And lastly, though the
design had been suggested by Papists alone, and unanimously approved by all,
yet we that live now are guilty of no sin, and therefore 'twere severe to be
punished for it.

That the Catholic Body had no hand in the Treason, most plainly appears by
the quality of the Actors, and by the number of them. I know there were four or
five Gentlemen of Ancient blood engaged; but I look upon that as no wonder: for
out of the first twenty Catholics accidentally met I Will lay a considerable
wager to find as great Families as any were there, unless that of the Percies:
yet this Percy was a man of no fortune, nor am I certain (though I well know my
Lord Northumberlands Relations) whether really he was a kinsman, or only for
names sake called his Cozen.

A Plot is looked upon as general, when a good number of the Chief of a Party
are intrigued in the design. The Catholic Noblemen were then not only as
considerable as any, but also the considerablest of the Nation: for at that
time there being no Duke, but the late King, the first Marquess, the first
Earl, the first Viscount, and the first Baron were of our Profession; and I
believe 'twill be granted, that the Lords Winchester, Arundel, Mentacute, and
Abergavenny, (and so proportionably the rest of the Papal Nobility) had Estates
able to be Partisans, if they thought fit, in any conjuration. Now none of
these Noblemen, nay, not one of all the Peers, nor any more of the Gentry then
the Traitors, whom I will by and by mention, had a hand in the design:
therefore to call this, as the Minister and others do, an universal Popish
Plot, is in it self a contradiction, or at least a riddle beyond my capacity to
unfold.

For the number of these Gunpowder Traitors, they were but thirteen Laymen in
all: whereof four, viz. Catesby, Percy, and the two Wrights were killed in the
apprehending. Back. p. 593.
Tresham died in the Tower. And eight suffered, as Faun, Keys, Ba^e^, Grant,
Rookwood, the two Winters, and Digby; and 't is evident there were no more of
the Co^spiracy, seeing that in all their examinations no Gentleman was
discovered; which could not happ^ out of design to save their friends, because
several secret particulars they Vid. their printed Confessions.
revealed; and Baldwin, Hammond, Tesmond, and Gerard, being Jesuits, were (as
the Minister says) found Actors in the Plot. If then the Malefactors did accuse
their Confessors, (as our Adversarys calls them) certainly they would never
have spared others, had there been any more guilty.

Besides this of their accusing nobody, the Commons, Lords, and Privy Council
were so vigilant, that they left no stone unturned to find the depth of the
Plot: and to show how nice they were in all manner of suspicions, the Lords
Baker. p. 595.
Sturton and Mordant, two Catholics, were fined, only because absent from the
House that day; by which it is plain they were so far from finding positive
proof, that there was not the least glimpse of any thing, otherwise they would
never have descended to so slight a possibility; for there is not a day wherein
the Parliament sits, but there may be found more Catholics out of the House,
then were then. Nay, the circumspection was so great, that my Baker. p 565.
Lord Northumberland a protestant was imprisoned for many years, as thought
perchance to know somewhat, because being Captain, he had admitted Percy into
the Band of Pensioners. Thus, Reader, you see how impossible it is, that the
Catholic Party were involved here in; and for the fourscore that appeared with
them in Rebellion, they were only Servants and Horse-boys, who (as K I am p.
37^.
Sanderson says) were watched hourly, for fear of quitting their Masters: and
this also King. I. p. 920
Speed confirms, affirming, that these were ever ready to steal from the
Conspirators; and that more care was in keeping them, then trust reposed either
in their faith or defense. Nor can any thing make this truth more evident, then
that none but the thirteen aforefaid suffered either for the Plot or rising.

Concerning the Plot it self, Reader, those that set it a working were the
discoveres of it: for you must know it was a piece of wit in Queen Elizabeth's
days, to draw men into such devices; nor were any more excellent in the Art
then Burleigh and Walsingham, to the first of whom, this Cecil mentioned by the
Minister, was son, and successor to the other in the very Secretariship. Making
and ^omenting Plots was then, I say, in fashion; for when Gifford discovered to
Walsingham that Babington had a desing in the behalf of the Q. of Scots, the
Secretary writ to Sir A. Pawlet her keeper, to let some of his Servants be Came.
1586. p. 408.
corrupted; and thereupon the Brewer was considered as the fittest man; by
which means the Queen receiving and sending Letters, Walsingham had the perusal
of them: and thus when many were drawn in (as most loose people may, if
Statesmen lay gins) they were all at last taken and hanged. The same trap
caught the Queen also; for they first kept her in prison to make her earnest
for liberty; then opened her, as you see, a way for correspondency at home and
abroad to procure her freedom; and because of this she was condemned to die,
there being a Law a year before on purpose prepared against her, on hopes of
such and the like Camb 1586. p. 419. so the Queen (...).
Conspirations. But this Statute had been too weak, as Lawyers well know, to
put a free Princess to death, had she not been a Papist, and not otherwise to
be hindered from the Crown after the decease of Queen Elizabeth. Such a trick as
this for our destruction was again invented by the Statesman, who bore as every
body kn^w a particular hatred to all of our Profession; and this increased to
see the new King not only to receive into his Council Henry Earl of Will. King
^. page 3.
Northampton, a^ eminent Catholic, but also to hear his Majesty speak to the
two Houses a little against Persecution of Will. King ^. p. 19.
Papists, when as there had been nothing within those Walls but invectives
against them for above forty years together.

What could now destroy our hopes with this gracious Prince, but a seming Plot
against his Life and Line? Nor was it any hard thing for a Secretary to know
turbule^t and ambitious spirits, who perchance had had designs in the reign of
Queen Elizabeth. It Is not possible to discover the whole tra^saction of a great
Minister that died in prosperity: but it is argument enough to assert this, that
if a Person (a famed Professor in Mem. K. I. p. 37. and ^8.
tricks, hating and envying us, as I said before) contrived a most material
part, he co^trived also the rest: and certainly (with some few considerations
upon it) this miraculous Letter which discovered the Gunpowder-Plot, will
discover our Statesman to be the Author of it. The Baker K. I. p. ^93.
Letter is thus.

My Lords.
Out of the love I bear some of your friends, I have a care of your
preservation, therefore I could wish you (as you tender your life) to forbear
the attendance at this Parliament, for God and man have concurred to punish the
wickedness of this time. Think not slightly of this advertisement; for though
there be no appearance of any stir, yet I say, they shall receive a terrible
blow this Parliament, and yet they shall not see who hurt them. This Counsel
(...) not to be contemned, because it may do you good, and can do you no harm:
for the danger is past as soon as you have burnt the Letter, and I hope you
will make good use of it.


Reader, I doubt not, but you have often heard in the Pulpit, as well as from
the Ministers relation, how the Papists placed 36. barrels of Powder under the
Parliament House, and that Faux with his dark-lanthorn was to set them on fire,
and so at one clap blow up King, Lords and all. This you know was discovered by
the Letter aforesaid, sent to my Lord Monteagle, and by it the whole design was
found out the night The search was made the Night before the session* ^^^. 879.
before the Parliament sat; for great Adventures do always come to light just
as they are to be executed. Now, Reader, let me entreat you seriously to
consider, and tell me whether it could be a Popish Plotter that writ this
Letter. For is it possible that any man's hold be so distracted (after they had
brought their Plot to that perfection, had so solemnly sworn, even Speed p. 917,
by the Trinity and Sacrament, never to disclose it directly or indirectly, by
word or Circumstance, and resolved also to blow up all the Catholic Lords and
the rest of their friends in both houses) I say all this Considered, is it
possible that a man should be so distracted as to write a Letter, that had
more in it of disclosing some Plot, then the bare saving of a friend. 'Twas
reported that Percy writ it; but no body ever found there were such superlative
endearments between those two, or between any other of the Conspirators and
Monteagle, as that they could stumble at this Noblemans destruction, and yet
dispense with killing so many of their own Religion, and Relations; for Speed
p. 916.
Speed says, Father, Brother, Friend, Ally, Papist, etc. were to have been
blown up by these Traitors. But suppose that little intimacies between my Lord
and Percy ( Will. K. I. p. 31
as Wilson says these were) had produced so mighty a concern for his life,
whereas my Lord Northumberland (Percies Patron and only support) was to be
sacrificed without pity; I say, suppose this, what need was there to write,
That God and man would punish the Parliament, and this by a blow, and that they
should not know who hurt them, and a hundred suspicious things to no purpose?
If it were out of a desire (being an extraordinary friend) to keep this
Nobleman from the House that day, the Epistle-sender should have written in his
own name and Character. That out of love to his preservation, he desired him to
forbear the Parliament that day, because some were resolved to kill him: that
as yet being under Oath, he could not tell him the particulars, but that
shortly his promise would be void, and then he should know all things from him
by word of mouth. Such a Letter as this would have certainly kept my Lord at
home, when as the other must confound him and every body else, coming from an
unknown person: nor could any thing in the world (in the opinion of any fool)
more naturally have endangered a discovery then such needless circumstances,
and notice also given so long before the execution. For, Reader, you must know,
that the Letter was sent to Mounteagle Sand. King I. p. 323.
ten days before the fifth of November; which no real Plotter would have done,
since my Lord might have bee^ better keep't at home, by advising him the night
before. Nay, this long warning was so far from an appearance of advantage, that
on the contrary it was quite opposite to all* the designs of a Conspirator; for
'twas certain, either it would make my Lord carelessly contemn the admonition,
since it came from an idle fellow in the street; or else if he were
apprehensive, he would necessarily show it to friends, by which (as I said)
there might be no little hazard to have all found out. Now on the other side,
this interval was benecifial to a Machivilian, because he knew 'twould not only
be more grateful to the Privy-Councel to have time to consider on difficulties,
but also foresaw, if the King and Lords (through surprise or otherwise) should
not hit on the Plot, he must be forced to start hints (the execution being so
near at hand) which might easily have made him suspected for contriver; and how
ungrateful sulch a wickedness would have been to an upright Prince, he him self
could not but well imagine.

Thus, Reader, you see the intention of the Letter was to have the thing
discovered, and thus could he ruin his Enemies, and make his own vigilance
appear; for without such and the like remembrances, the wit of great Ministers
is soon forgotten both by their Prince and People. Nor did Cecil miss of
another reward also, for (as K. I. p. 32^.
Sanderson says) he was made Earl for his service in this business.

That which I assert here, does not lessen the quickness of the Kings judgment;
for his insight as much appears, whether the Letter were writ by a Statesman or
a Conspirator. Neither does this strike at the Festival enacted, because the
Parliament finding by the prisoners taken there was such a Plot, could not but
thank God, that their traiterous intention was discovered. And truly, if a
score of wicked Christians had conspired against Nero himself, I would not gain
say the remembrance of the delivery, in what Country soever it were observed.
All that I here show is, that the Catholic Party had no hand in the Treason,
there being but thirteen Laymen in all, as you see plainly proved; and these
very thirteen were doubtless drawn in by their mortal Enemy; for the Letter
came by his contrivance, being (as Osborn b ^ Mem. K. l. p. 36.
confesses) a neat devise of the Treasurer's, nor was he ignorant from time to
time of all their actions.

He that lived in our times has seen the Reign-of Queen Elizabeth reacted. For
in those twelve years, from 1646. to 1658. you may remembrer the established
Religion of the Nation altered; an absolute Sovereign executed with formalities
and pretenses of Law, The French fond of our amity; the Spaniard beaten; and
lastly, the zealous youth drawn into Plots with all ease imaginable. His
Majesty had those about him that had learnt this Art in their old Mistress's
Service; and this the all-knowing King at last found out; for 'twas impossible
that ever he would have been favorable to the Catholics again, had he not in
length of time, been assured thad they were innocent of all machinations
against him. Reader, he was a constant Protestant, and yet so Will. K. I. in
several places. p. 196. etc.
kind to us the last half of his Reign (of which Wilson complains) that neither
the Spanish Match, nor any other worldly hopes could have obtained this, had he
not been convinced we never had a design of destroying him and His. Nay, the
King in his own Declaration about it, says, That the generality of his
Catholic Subjects did abhor such a detestable Conspiracy, no less then him
self.

Having thus replied to his Answer in the four last Paragraphs, there rests now
a little to be said to some short jerks of his, which he loocks upon as witty
and home.

First, he is troubled that I call the Powder Treason, Misdemeanor, Fifth of
November, Conjuration, all of them being soft words. To this I say, I am very
sorry I have offended him, and in my next Apology (if that will content him)
I Will speak in the longest sentence of the Common Prayer about the matter: but
my past error grew from this, because significant brevity is aimed at by most;
and therefore when we speak of, or to the King, we say Sir, or your Majesty,
and not at every word, Charles the Second by the Grace of God, King of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. so in handling this
affair I use those short words that express the whole matter to the full; for I
think Treason is a Misdemeanor; when more then one are in it, it is a
Conjuration; and the Fifth of November, is the common phrase of the Kingdom.

2.ly He says, that K James's Male-Line were to have been all destroyed. Now K.
I. p. 59^. Speed says the same p. 918.
Baker says, That the late King then D. of York was only to have been suprized
by Percy. But the matter is not material; and I cite these Protestant Authors,
only to show that the malice of the Minister will make him err in every thing.

Thirdly, He thinks that my comparing of Cromwels drawing in the Cavaliers with
this of Cecils, is very odd, and unequal: For the Cavaliers, he says, were
cheated into a lawful Action, but the Powder-Traytors were outwitted into
Treason. To this, I say, that my comparison was never intended (as you may see
if you look into the Apology) to make an equality of Justice or Honor in their
sufferings; but to remember you how easy it is for Trapanners to draw people
into Plots, and from thence to the Gallows.

Fourthly, Concerning his desire to know who was Cecils setter to decoy in the
rest; I answer, I cannot tell: Nor should we ever have known who was Cromwels
Instrument, had not Sir S. Morland most Loyally discovered him. There were
three or four the Minister names discovered by the Conspirators, who knew of
the Plot, and afterward died obscurely abroad. Even so died Gifford the Priest
( Walsingham's -- setter) never visibly rewarded, who corrupted the Brewer, and
so drew the Queen of Scots into the trap that ruined her, as has been already
mentioned.

Fifthly, Because he is angry with the word Desperadoes, I have altered it in
this Edition, and put in lieu Ambitious men. I am sure the word in it self is
proper enough, for most were poor; and King James in his Proclamation against
Percy Vid. Procl. Non. 7.
call's them men for the most part of desperate estates. But had they been
never so rich, or in esteem, it would well have fitted with them also; for my
Lord of Essex and Marshal Byron were really Desperadoes, and yet wanted
nothing, had they known their own happiness.

Lastly, He says, few knew the manner, but most knew there was a design on
foot, and prayed for the success of it. Suppose, Reader, this were true, that a
design was recommended to the prayers of the Catholics, what were they guilty
of by it? for at that time the Chief of them were soliciting at Court to get
some little ease after their long misery; and therefore the rest might well
think their prayers were fit to be desired. But all this is a fiction.

Thus, Reader, I have now left nothing unanswered that he has urged: and thus
you see the Reasons I have to believe the Plot it self a Trick; and besides,
it is plain the Body of the Catholics had no hand, or inclination to the thing,
which the wi^e K. James at last (as I said) well knew, and therefore was
graciously pleased to let the beams of his mercy shine again upon them.

SECT. XXIX. APOLOGY.
But suppose ( my Lords and Gentlemen, which never can be granted) that all the
Papists of that age were consenting; Will you be so severe then to still punish
the Children for their Fathers faults? Nay, such Children that so unanimously
joined with you in that glorious Quarrel, wherein you and we underwe^t such
sufferings, that needs we must have all sunk, had not our mutual love assisted.

ANSWER XXIX.
He says, suppose falsely, to avoid truth; for who says all Papists then were
consenting, or who can deny there be some in this age of the same Principles
with those Traitors? and though we be not punished for our Predecessors actions,
yet we ought to be restrained, that we may not do like them. Though I would, he
says, shuffle men of these Principles (by the word unanimously) among those
that served the King, yet those good Servants are not so many, but the others
may be easily distinguished. Concerning those that only suffered with the
Royallists, the Minister thanks them for their love, but not for their
assistance; for the Protestant Cavaliers could not sink lower, but some of us
floated like cork, and others swam upon the bladders of dispensation; and
therefore as they received no help from our swimming, so they apprehend no
assurance of us by our sufferings.

REP. to ANSW. XXIX.
Pray, Reader, what is in this Answer that confutes the Apology? for what man
of our Party did not faithfully serve the King to his power? and who of us in
his Majesty's absence had not estimation among the rest of the Cavaliers,
according to his rank and quality? was there any Party in England more deprest
then we? Were not Priests of all Orders hanged? were not others imprisoned
during life? Had not we three times more Estates sold then any people else? and
were not the Laws put in force, so that to those that had something, two parts
of it were also swept away? Cromwell by is Maxims kept us poor, because we
should not be service able to the King; and now our Gracious Monarch being
returned, this Godly Minister thinks fit to advise our restraint, as he calls
it (which in plain English is to desire we should beused as that Tyrant used
us) for fear we should do like our predecessors, i. e. assist his Majesty; for
I am sure all of them did so, and many confirmed that duty with their Blood.
Can therefore be on Earth greater wickedness then this, not only to be
forgetful in prosperity, but thus with calumny to asperse those, who were
faithful fellow sufferers with the Royal Party in the height of all their
misfortunes? Reader, the hopes of this pitiless man is, that rigor and despair
may stagger us in our Loyalty: but herin I defy him: for nothing can move them
to contend, whom conscience and Love have obliged to be obedient.

SECT. XXX. APOLOGY.
What have we done, that we should now deserve your Anger? Has the Indiscretion
of some few incenst you? It Is true, that is the thing Objected.

ANSWER XXX.
Sir, our anger is only a necessary care, that what you call your
indiscretions, may not grow up to be such, as you lately called your
misdemeanors.

SECT. XXXI. APOLOGY.
Do not you know an Enemy may easily mistake a Mass-Bell, for that which calls
to Dinner?

ANSWER XXXI.
We know he may upon a Fast Day, for then you use to ring your Vesper-Bell
before Dinner. And how can a simple Heretic tell, whether it call you to pray,
or to eat Fish? But we do not know, that ever any of you was brought into
trouble about that Question.

SECT. XXXII. APOLOGY.
Or a Sequestrator be glad to be affronted being Constable? when 'twas the
hatred to his person, and not present Office, which perchance egged a rash man
to folly.

ANSWER XXXII.
Possibly he may be glad of it. For 'twas the Jesuitical distinction between
Person and Office, that first helped him to be a Sequestrator; and now he sees
the distinction come in play, he may hope to have his place again.

REPLY to ANS. XXXII.
Reader, you see he will divide a Paragraph, and answer to each division (as he
has done in these three last) though it be gibbrish, and nothing to purpose.
The ringing of a Mass-Bell in Lancashire, the affronting a Constable, and some
other such things, were Accusations brought to London against us. But how
impudent is the Minister, to say, we were never in trouble, as he knows, for
this? when as every body knows what a do there has been ever since these
complaints were alleged by the known Enemies of the Kingdom.

SECT. XXXIII. APOLOGY.
We dare with submission say, let a public Invitation be put up against any
Party what soever; nay, against the Reverend Bishops them selves, and some
malicious informer or other will allege that, which may be far better to
conceal. Yet all mankind by a Manifesto on the House-door are encouraged to
accuse us. Nor are they upon Oath, though your Enemies and ours take all for
granted and true.

ANSWER XXXIII.
He says, here is an ambush for Bishops to have them esteemed Popish, because I
reverence them; and obnoxious in such matters, as I say, it may be better far
to conceal. But he knows my kindness, and defies my malice. They are Donna
Olympia's Bishops need concealment; but the Bishops of England are of another
make and hold not their credit at any ones courtesy. He farther says, what
could the Parliament do less, then invite the People to bring in their
grievances to the place of Redress? and 'twas great hardship, he says, that the
House of Commons did not give Oaths to the Accusers, which no House of Commons
ever did upon any occasion.

REPLY. XXIII.
If my respects to the Prelates of England have offended this Minister, I am
sorry for it. We and the whole World know how zealous they are for Monarchy,
and therefore I wish they had no greater Enemies then Papists: But if there be
an ambush laid for them, Judge, Reader, whether we or the Cobbler of Gloucester
have done it. It Is an usual phrase among Catholics when they show the
wickedness of Liars, to say they are so abominable that they will not stick to
calumniate the Church it self; therefore I think kind expressions ought to have
had a better requital. For Donna Olympia's Bishops, I suppose those of our
Kingdom take them selves to be of the same make; for hers received their Orders
from Rome, and from the same Fountain, as I have read, the Church of England
pretends to derive all Ordination whatsoever. The Minister needed not to have
told me, that the Commons cannot administer Oaths, for I know the Orders of
that House better then his Worship. I was not troubled that no Oath was given;
but seeing that no Oath could be given, 'twas hard me thought, that the whole
Town should take all things as unquestionable truths, though the Accusers were
(as I said) professed enemies to us, and lately to the very Kingdom also. But
now, I thank God, men understand themselves much better: for Lies can never
long endure.

SECT. XXXIV. APOLOGY.
It cannot be imagined, where there is so many men of heat and youth (overjoyed
with the happy Restoration of their Prince, and remembering the Insolences of
the former Grandees) that they should all, at all times prudently carry
themselves; for this would be to be more then men: And truly we esteem it as a
particular blessing, that God has not suffered many, through vanity or frailty
to fall into greater faults, then are yet as we understand laid to our charge.

ANSWER XXIV.
He says, If a Jesuit keep the reckoning* the King will ever be in our debt:
for our old Treasons were upon the account of his Family, and our late
insolences upon the score of his Restoration. Then he asks, whether I would
seriously persuade men, that at six years distance we were still transported
with that blessing. There were, he says, fresher causes of jollity suspected by
many who saw our joy, while the fire raged in London, and two potent Enemies
hovered on our Coasts.

REPLY to ANSW. XXXIV.
Many Accusations, Reader, were of two or three yaers standing and more, and no
one thing amounted to a real Public nuissance: let a man then consider this
soberly, and he will find it no little wonder, that so many Catholics of all
Ranks, Sexes, Ages, and humors should for above six years together never so
far indulge to their Passions, as to commit a fault fit to trouble Parliament
with, though from all Countries the violentest of their Enemies came to offer
up their complaints against them. For my part I do greatly admire at it, and
must acknowledge a particular Providence assisting; nor can I but thank the
Publisher of the Accusations, who maliciously intending us harm, has done us
all the right imaginable.

SECT. XXV. APOLOGY.
Can we choose but be dismayed (when all things fail) that extravagant Crimes
are fathered on us? It is we that must be the Authors, some say, of firing the
City, even we that have lost so vastly by it. Yet truly in this our ingenuity
is great, since we think it no Plot, though our Enemy, an Hugonot Protestant
acknowledged the fact, and was justly executed for his vain Confession. Again,
if a Merchant of the Church of England buy Knives for the business of his
Trade, this also presently is a Popish contrivance to destroy the well-affected.

ANSWER XXXV.
He says, Though we lost vastly by he fire of London, yet we may still be
suspected by any body that considers Garnets determinations* viz. that the
innocent and guilty may be destroyed, so it be to a farther good. The loss it
seems (he says) goes not to my heart, when I can be so pleasant to call Hubert
my enemy, and a Hugonot Protestant, it is true after that Hubert had been at
confession with Father Harvey, he said he was a Protestant; but (it being
beyond his instructions) he denied he was a Hugonot, which he might well do,
because he said* he thought confession to a Priest necessary to salvation, and
also repeated an Ave Mary which he said, was his usual Prayer. It Is evident
therefore that he was no Hugonot, nor Protestant* nor enemy to Papists upon the
account of Religion.

REPLY to ANSW. XXXV.
Concerning this Hubert a Frenchman that pretended to burn the City, you must
know, He was son to a Protestant, a Protestant himself in France, had been of
the French Church in England; to the Committee, and to the Judge at the Bar, he
professed then he was a Protestant, and died so at the Gallows. Certainly it was
no Argument he was no Protestant, because he (as the Minister says) esteemed of
Confession; for I know many Protestants that have used it, some Divines have
writ in behalf of it, and I remember Dr. Will was mightily for it, whem he
governed his flock in Fleerstreet. An Ave Mary is Scripture, and whosoever
reads the Salatation of the Angel and St. Elizab. does at that time actually
say one, Besides, if no body is a Protestant that holds peculiar opinions, then
I must conclude there are very few Protestants in the World: for Protestants in
Religion agree only in Negatives, that is, they generally deny the Pope,
Purgatory, etc. but when they come to Positives, they jar, and then divide, and
subdivide (as we by experience see) into a million of Sects and Factions.

Reader, before I go farther, I must tell you who this Harvey is: by Nation he
is a Low-Countryman, but admitted among the English Jesuits, as many Aliens
are. He is an ancient; quiet, and pious man; it is lately I knew him, but found
him to be of a very Angelical conversation. Many Priests being from time to
time imprisoned, brought him acquainted with Newgate, where sometimes he
assisted those that went to die. This I call high charity in any man of any
Sect, to take pains to make another of that Religion, which his Conscience
tells him is most agreeable to God. Nor is there any humane interest or Policy
in thus assisting Malefactors, for they are poor of themselves, and sure to
die the next executionday. By this occasion Mr. Harvey met with the French
Hugonot [the pretended firer of London) with whom he had discourse about
Religion; and after he had instructed him in the Catholic Doctrine, he went
to administer the Communion to the Company; and then demanding of them, whether
they received according to the Roman Catholic faith, Hubert said, He had
nothing to do with Roman, and therefore the Sacrament was refused him; nor did
Mr. Harvey ever se him after. This is the truth of the Story. But, pray, what
is the Frenchman to us, had he been Papist? though (as it happened) he lived
and died otherwise. For my part, I believe there are few Frenchmen now in
London, but would be glad to see it afire again, either for an opportunity to
steal, or for the advantage of their Prince, were he at War with us; the like
would the English wish at Paris, I dare say.

Consider therefore, Reader* I beseech you, my Answerer; and though it is at no
time my humor to give foul language, yet I must say, I challenge all England
to find out one that shall excel him in ill. He has accused us for the Murder
of King Charles; the cause of the English, Irish, and Scottish War; the
triumphing at ourmis fortunes at Sea; the rejoicing for the Enemies being upon
our Coast; and then lastly the burning of London it self: yet all this urged
without any manner of proof, no not so much as the least probability.

Is one detraction against one only man a sin, and punishable at the
Judgment Seat of God hereafter; and shall so various aspersions against so many
of the best account in England pass for a toy? I am sure, it is my belief, to
think they shall die eternally (if they repent not) who defamed and did wrong
even to those that crucified Christ. If then a woe be pronounced against such,
what will become of them that asperse his Members? and therefore if this
Minister be a Christian be must know that without satis-factio^ there is no
forgiveness. Nay, the effects of his crimes have risen to this, to encourage
other men to do the like; for not long after, there was published (as I just now
mentioned) a libell called the Committee of Parliaments enquiry about the
firing the City; and at last the wickedness of the Author laid it at the doors
of the King, Duke, General, L. Craven, Chief Justice, and others of the
chiefest account in the Nation.

All that he said against Papists, was in truth to justify them; for no better
Accusation could be found, then that several Frenchmen were busy about the
fire: that a supposed Jesuit with a Bishop-sattin Suit (over which was a
frock) came and firied a House (the fire it self being, as the Libeller
confesses, within six doors of it) and when he was apprehended, he spoke Latin
without any necessity. Then he tells, that one Carpenter (who is an Apostate
Priest) spoke for the Pope; and that one or tws poor women were solicited to
be Papists, and told, Now was the time, for if they neglected this opportunity
they should not be regarded hereafter. Nay, when nothing could be found against
Papists, the Author cites Verses (only found as he confesses in
Westminster-Hal) to threaten Protestants into Popery. And another Paper (writ
by a Papist, as he says, newly turned Protestant, and found in a Pew by a
Templer) in which he desired all Protestants to pursue Papists, for they had a
design to cut their throats. This is the effect of the Pamphlet, which I would
have every body read, for nothing can be a greater Vindication to us, then such
inconsiderable and senceless Lies.

And truly, when I consider these with the Stories against Papists in the
Answer to Philanax, and how both are exactly made in the same mode and figure,
I should not doubt but that Sieur du Moulin was the Author, were not the Libel
so severe against his Countrymen the French. And pray Reader, consider here the
Justice of God, who is a God of retaliation always: for as the Dr. strove to
incite the people by his malicious falsities, which have not the least
probability of truth, and which would involve all the Loyal Catholics of
England with one or two guilty men, if there had been any such; so now there
are spread such a number of Lies about our danger from the French, that people
are ready to stone all they meet; and should the rabble run into a sudden fury
(as God knows but they may) Mr. du Moulin and his Family may perchance also go
sharers with his Countrymen; for his being a free Denizon would be thought a
weak Argument by the outrageous and overheated multitude.

Concerning the Fire it self, Reader, I could never, as I said, think it a
design, notwithstanding a Protestant Hugonot confessed the fact; and my reason
was, because no body in his Senses would be so foolish with deliberation to
venture his life, when 'twas not only odds he should be found out, but the fire
would be stopped before it came to the third house. How often have we seen it in
the narrow places of London? how often in the ill-building of Kings-street? how
often in the Paper-houses of Charing Cross, the Strand? etc. and yet for all
this (whether it happened by night or by day) it was quenched without any
remarkable spoil. Besides, it is impossible, if either Protestants, Papists,
Presbyterians, or Phanatiques had effected so great a work but we should have
seen some prosecution of their design, as either to be in Arms, or inviting in
our forreing Enemies, or at leastwise raising tumults in the hurry. But on the
contrary, there has not been since any preparation for a rising in England;
nay, which is more, for all that thirteen thousand Families were to seek new
habitations, and all the rest of the Town disordered, yet there was not the
least riot, though the accident it self might have occasioned a sedition,
without being animated by Conspirators. In short, after a strict enquiry by the
Parliament of England (that Supreme Court) of the occasion of this dismal fire,
'twas concluded to be the hand of God alone: and therefore I shall never think
otherwise of it, though Hubert the Hugonot acknowledged himself the Author, and
Vid* Trigg's Almanac fo 1666. and repeated in that of 1668.
Trig a Protestant brag's that he foretold it in his Almanac printed almost a
whole year before.

Now because the Minister has mentioned Garnet, I shall desire you, Reader, to
peruse his How. p. 882.
last words and confession, as you shall find them in How, who continued Stows
History. He acknowledged his foul offense in concealing the Treason; was sorry
for it, asking God forgiveness for the same, beseeching a blessing for the King
and his Issue; and then exhorted all Catholics never to attempt Rebellion,
Treason or violent practices against his Majesty, for all such courses were
utterly against the Catholic Faith. If then, Reader, a Jesuit known to be
learned, and therefore not ignorant of the Doctrine of our Religion; if also a
Jesuit on the point of death, and so necessitated to speak truth, has
publicly owned (as a Protestant records) that Rebellion is incompatible with
Catholic Doctrine; to affirm this still to be our Principle, is certainly a
very high injustice: and if the practice of some few shall yet be urged against
me as a Proof, then I must affirm, that the Church of England teaches Theft,
because so many of their Members are monthly hanged for it at Tyborn.

Reader, from hence to the end I shall still continue my first method of
setting down the Ministers Answer to every Section of the Apology; but I shall
seldom Reply, because the poorness of the matter carries a co^futation in it
self, and therefore it would be a needless trouble both to you and me, if I
should say something to each Paragraph.

SECT. XXXVI. APOLOGY.
We must a little complain, finding it by experience, that by reason you
discountenance us, the people rage: and again, because they rage, we are the
more forsaken by you. Assured we are, that our Conversation is affable, and our
Houses so many hospitable receipts to our Neighbors. Our acquaintance
therefore we fear at no time, but it is the stranger we dread (that taking all
on hearsay) zealously* wounds, and then examines the business when it is too
late, or is perchance confirmed by another, that knows no more of us then he
himself. It Is to you we must make our applications, beseeching you (as subjects
tender of our King) to intercede for us in the execution, and weight the
Dilemma, which doubtless he is in, either to deny so good a Parliament their
request, or else run counter to his Royal inclinations, when he punishes the
weak and harmless.

ANSWER XXXVI.
He says, he desires only to be safe; and against our dangerous Principles,
neither our affability nor hospitality can defend them: for the Irish never
treated Protestants better then the year a fore they cut their Throats. The
best means of security is the execution of the Laws, by which those (that
renounce their disloyal Principles) will be distinguished, and the disloyal and
seditious only kept weak.

REPLY XXXVI.
I have sufficiently treated the Irish Rebellion in the first Reply; neither
have I bin wanting to show you, that a Protestant Author, viz. Vid. Rep. 13.
Heath, lays the cause of it on the English Long-Parliament, which occasioned
so many mischeifes, and by their wicked beginings against that good Prince
encouraged the designs of the rest of his seditious subjects: Nor had the
Scots themselves bin then wanting (by their actual levying war against their
King, and corresponding with his foreign Enemies) to prick forward (seeing they
were successful) all those who studied commotions and disorders. Judge then
whither they were the Papists of England, or the Reformed in both Kingdoms of
Great Britain that farthered the Irish Rebellion. But now that the Irish never
treated Protestants better then the year before they curt their throats, is a
foolish invention of this shameless Minister, and nonsense in it self; Nor
was it practicable, unless the English had (like the Israelites in Egypt) bin
sojournours at will, and had nothing to do with the Government. For would it
not be a mad expression to say that the Hugonots of France better treated this
year the Papists there, then they had done before; or that the Roundheads
treated the Cavaliers more kindly then they had done since the Kings
Restoration. But this is un Coup d'esprit, a piece of wit of the Worthy
Minister, and truly so great a one that I admire it, and should do it much
more, were it not so common.

SECT. XXXVII. APOLOGY.
Why may not we, Noble Countrymen, hope for favor from you, as well as the
French Protestants find from theirs? A greater duty then ours none could
express, we are sure. Or why should the United Provinces, and other Magistrates
(that are harsh both in mind and manners) refrain from violence against our
Religion, and your tender breasts seem not to harbor the least compassion or
pity? These neighboring people sequester none for their Faith, but for
transgression against the State; Nor is the whole party involved in the crime
of a few, but every man suffers for his own and proper fault. Do you then the
like, and he that offends let him die without mercy. And think always (we
beseech you) of Cromwels injustice, who for the actions of some against his
pretended Laws, drew thousands into Decimation (even ignorant of the thing)
after they had vastlie paid for their security and quiet.

ANSWER XXXVII.
He says, he has answered our instances of French Protestants, and Dutch
Papists. When we governed the civilized World, he says, we hanged and burnt men
for no cause but Faith; which proves Protestant Barbarity, better then Popish
civility: yet these were little for their credit, unless they could say, that
none of us suffered but by the known and necessary Laws of the Kingdom. It Is
necessary to maintain the Kings Authority, and Peace of the Nation; and if we
call Religion any thing contrary to these, whether ought they to alter their
Laws, or we our Religion? He says, as Inquisitors bedress one with Pictures of
Devils, that is to be burnt for an Heretic, so I put Cromwell on any thing I
would render odious, but they are weak, that see not the difference between
Cromwels Edicts, that ruined men for Loyalty, and Laws that restrained them
from Treason and Rebellion.

REPLY. XXXVII.
How childishly rediculous is this Ministers Allegation, That none of us
suffered but by known Laws? What does he mean? Did we ever (when we governed
England) put any to death but by the known Laws established many hundred years
before the Malefactors were born, and which are still on foot, and used to this
day by Protestants against Heretics? But fully to reply to this Answer, I
cannot better do it, then by beseeching you to read over this short Section of
the Apology again, and then tell me, whether any request can be more reasonable
and Christian; or whether this way of involving the whole in the crimes of a
few, be not exactly the Procedure of Cromwell.

SECT. XXXVIII. APOLOGY.
We have no study but the Glory of our Soveraingn, and just liberty of the
Subjects.

ANSWER XXXVIII.
Sir, If we may judge by your works, there is nothing less studied in your
College.

SECT. XXXVIIII. APOLOGY.
Nor was it a mean argument of our duty, when every Catholic Lord gave his
voice for the Restoration of Bishops; by which we could pretend no other
advantage, but that 26. Votes (subsisting wholly by the Crown) were added to
the defense of Kingship, and consequently a check to Anarchy and confusion.

ANSWER XXXVIIII.
This is no argument of your Duty, for sure you are it no Lord. Nor is it
likely, that these Lords followed your direction in the doing of this Duty.

REPLY to ANS. XXXIX.
Good Mr. Parson, it is more then you know but that I am a Lord; yet whether I
am or no, the Catholic Lords and I are of the same Loyal Principles, and what
they did, any other Catholic would have done had he been Member of their House.

SECT. XL. APOLOGY.
It Is morally impossible but that we who approve of Monarchy in the Church,
must ever be fond of it in the State also.

ANSWER XL.
If you mean this of Papists in general, that which you mean morally
impossible, is experimentally true. For in Venice, Genoa, Lucca, and other
Popish Cantons of Switzerland, they very well approve of Monarchy in the
Church, yet they are not fond of it in State also. But if you mean this of the
Jesuitical Party, then it may be true, in this sense, that you would have the
Pope to be sole Monarch, both in Spirituals and Temporals.

REP. to ANSW. XL.
I think I have been as lately at Lucca, Genoa, and Venice, and know the places
as well as the Minister. 'Twas not therefore my meaning, that there were no
Popish States, but that generally Popery tends to Monarchy; and on the
contraty, Calvinism (from which the Church of England differs only in Bishops)
leans altogether to a Democratical Government. Heretofore ( in the Civil Wars
of our Country) there was never the least mention of a Commonwealth; but still
the Rebels would have a King, and rather then fail, one of another Kingdom. I
beseech God, that the present Principles have no other tendency but to
Monarchy; for, Reader, you must know that Principles may blindly lead men to a
thing, which not only their judgments, but their inclinations loath: as for
example, the Reformed both in judgment and inclination desire unity; but their
Principles in spite of all endeavors will draw them (as we see by a hundred
years experience) into perpetual confusion and discord.

SECT. XXXXI. APOLOGY.
Yet this is a mis fortune we now plainly feel, that the longer the late
transgressors live, the more forgotten are their crimes whilst distance in time
calls the faults of our Fathers to remembrance, and buries our own allegiance
in eternal Oblivion and forgetfulness.

ANSWER XXXXI.
We can now allow you to complain, and commend your selves without measure;
having proved already, that you do it without cause.

SECT. XXXXII. APOLOGY.
My Lords and Gentlemen, Consider we beseech you, the sad condition of the
Irish Soldiers now in England, the worst of which Nation could be but
intentionallie so wicked, as the acted villainy of many English, whom your
admired Clemency pardoned. Remember how they left the Spanish service when
they heard their King was in France; and kow they forsook the emploiment of
that unnatural Prince, after he had committed that never to be forgotten act of
banishing his distressed Kinsman out of his Dominions. These poor men left all
again to bring their Monarch to his home, and shall they then be forgotten by
You? Or shall my Lord Douglas and his brave Scots be left to their shifts, who
scorned to receive Wages of those that have declared War against England?

ANSWER XXXXII.
He says, That to swell our Bill of Merits, I take in the Irish and Scottish
Soldiers, as if they were a part of English Catholics, and as if I were the
first that thought of them. God forbid, he says, they should not be considered;
and he is neither good Christian, no, nor good Subject, that would not
contribute his proportion to it. But, he says, I have a drift in mentioning the
Irish, for I mingle them with the worst of that Nation, namely, with those
infamous Butchers, that cut the throats of at least an hundred thousand
Protestants. It was so black an action, that I knew not how to mention it, in
its proper place, viz. after the French massacre, because I had not wherewith
to color it; but being still conscious it was a blot on our cause, I thought
fit to place it here, that these brave men might mend the hue of the action. He
says further, I deal as ill with the English Royallists, by affirming they
pardoned many English, whose acted villainies were so wicked, that the worst of
the Irish could be but intentionally so wicked.

REPLY to ANSW. XXXXII.
Pray, Reader, consider the wicked folly of this man, for here he denies us a
part in the good actions of the Irish; and yet all along he has laid their ill
actions at our door; nay, in this very Paragraph he twits us with it, when he
says, I was conscious it was a blot on our cause: but I will pass by this as
usual, and go on.

Truly, Reader, the case of the Irish in Arms, touched me as near as my own
concerns; and pray see the strange Hypocrisy also of this Minister, that says
God forbid these poor Soldiers should not be considered, and that he is
neither good Christian, nor Subject, that would not contribute to it; and yet
in the same exhortation, endeavors all he can to have the Laws executed, which
must needs force these forlorn men either to beg or steal. By this we may find
what his contribution is, and therefore God deliver all honest men from such a
merciless creature: and was ever man so abominable (knowing many of the Kings
Judges were pardoned) to reproach my assertion, that the worst of this Nation
be but intentionally so wicked as the acted villainy of many English, whom the
clemency of the Parliament pardoned? Is not this in plain terms, to say, that
the business of Ireland was greater then the Rebellion of England, and horrid
Murder of our Gracious King, which has drawn an eternal disgrace upon the
whole Nation in general? If this man, who uses the word US at every turn,
(ranking himself thereby among the Royallists) be a Royallist, then I Will
hereafter say, that Bradshaw was one also.

SECT. XXXXIII. APOLOGY.
How commonly is it said, That the Oath of renouncing their Religion is
intended for these? which will needs bring this loss to the King, and you, that
either you will force all of our Faith to lay down their Arms (though by
experience, of great integrity and worth) or else, if some few you retain, they
are such whom Necessity has made to swear against Conscience, and therefore
will certainly betray you, when a greater advantage shall be offered. By this
test then, you can have none but whom with caution you ought to shun, and thus
must you drive away those that truly would serve you; for had they the least
thought of being false, they would gladly take the advantage of gain and pay,
to deceive you.

ANSWER XLIII.
He asks me, who are said to intend this Oath, if it be those that have no
Authority, it is frivolous; if such as have Authority, it is false; and he
farther says, that he verily believes, 'twas never said, thought, nor wished by
any one that loved either the King or Peace of the Nation.

REP. to ANS. XLIII.
The Minister is here just as he uses to be; for many were upon this account
disbanded before he put out his Answer; and since, all the rest of the
Catholics have been cashiered, as 'twas expected by every body when he writ.

SECT. XLIV. APOLOGY.
We know your wisdom and generosity, and therefore cannot imagine such a thing.
Nor do we doubt when you show favor to these, but you will use mercy to us,
who are both Fellow Subjects, and your own flesh and blood also. If you forsake
us, we must say, the world decays, and its final transmutation must needs
quickly follow.

ANSWER XLIV.
Here you imagine for the Soldiers and imagine for your self: and as if you
really thought your self in danger, you beg for mercy of the Royallists, in
such words as your Predecessor the first Moderator used to the Rebels. Only for
the last strain, we do not know that any one hit upon it before; nor do
believe, that any one will ever use it again.

SECT. XLV. APOLOGY.
Little do you think the insolences we shall suffer by Committee Men, etc.
whom chance and lot has put into petty power. Nor will it choose but grieve you,
to see them abused (whom formerly you loved) even by the Common Enemy of us
both.

ANSWER XLV.
It seems Committee Men are entrusted with his Majesty's Authority; or none
must use it against Papists, for fear of being accounted Committee Men. It is
time to have done, when we are come to the dregs of your Rhetoric.

SECT. XLVI. APOLOGY.
When they punish, how will they triumph and say, Take this (poor Romanists)
for your love to Kingship; and again this, For your long doting on the Royal
Party; all which you shall receive from us, Commissioned by your dearest
friends, and under this Cloak we will glady vent our private spleen and malice.

ANSWER XXXXVI.
Sir, though you set your self to speak Tragically, this does rather seem a
piece of Drollery. But you have your design either way; for no man can read it,
but he must either laugh, or shake his Head.

SECT. XXXXVII. APOLOGY.
We know, My Lords and Gentlemen, that from your hearts you do deplore our
condition; yet permit us to tell you, your bravery must extend thus far, as not
to sit still with pity only, but each is to labor for the distressed, as far
as in reality his ability will reach: some must beseech our Gracious Sovereign
for us, others must again undeceive the Good, though deluded Multitude.
Therefore all are to remember who are the prime raisers of the Storm, and how
through our sides they would wound both the KING and You; for though their
hatred to our selves is great, yet the enmity out of all measure increases,
because we have been yours (and so shall continue) even in the fiery day of
trial.

Protect us we entreat you then upon all your former Promises; or if that be
not sufficient, for the sakes of those that lost their Estates with you; many
of which are now fallen asleep. But if this be still to weak, we must conjure
you by the sight of this Bloody Catalogue, which contains the Names of your
murdered Friends and Relations, who in the heat of Battle, perchance saved
many of your Lives, even with the joyful loss of their own.

ANSWER XLVII.
In answer to this last, he has nothing to say, but that the Rebels harrassed
the Papists, to make the King odious, and enrich themselves. That we were
necessitated to what we did either for Subsistence or Protection, but the
Protestants had no such necessity. Concerning the Estates we lost; the sum of
his answer is, That after the Rebels had devoured ours, they fell upon the
Protestants with more color, and nevertheless appetite.

REPLY to ANSW. XLVII.
For our necessity (other then our Duty) to engage for his Majesty, I have
answered it at large in the Preface. For the loss of our Estates, I say here is
an excelent encouragement for Subjects, according to this man's Doctrine. But I
see by the whole manner of his writing, that he is some inconsiderable man,
whose name would be as little known if prefixed, as it is now being concealed;
and therefore there is no wonder if what he writ be inconsiderable also.

Concerning the Catalogue of those brave Catholics that laid their lives down
for their King, the Minister says thus.

ANSWER XLVIII.
That he can reckon a far greater number of Protestants then I can pretend to
do Papists. Secondly, that I have omitted many in my List, which he could name;
but this he thinks was out of design, that I might more excusably reckon some
names, which I ought to have omitted, viz. My Lord of Carnarvan, who he says in
his extremities refused a Priest, and ordered the Chaplain of his Regiment to
pray with him.

REPLY to ANSW. XLVIII.
For my Lord Carnarvan, Reader, you must know, he was a Ward taken by my Lord
Pembroke from his Catholic Mother, and then married to his Daughter. In the
Army my Lord never marched without a Priest; when he was wounded to death, he
sent for his Brother in law the Lord Herbert, late M. of Worster, and desired
him to go tell the King, That he could do no more then die in his Quarrel; and
if he would grant him but this request, he would think his Majesty sufficiently
recompensed him for his life. His petition was, That his Mother might have the
breeding up of his Son; and the end of this he said was, That the Child might
be educated in the Catholic Religion. After this he received all the rites of
the Roman Church, and died in the arms of a Priest now alive, that belonged to
many of my Lords Relations. Concerning my Catalogue in general, you must know,
Reader, I have been often chid at London for omitting so many considerable
Catholics; but this I could not help, for the Catalogue was collected by Mr.
Blunt (as I take it) who is to be much commended for his pains. When I printed
the Apology, I was in such have that I had not time to examine it nicely among
my friends: I am now, Reader, also a great way from London, and therefore am
forced to print it again without amendme^ts; all that I can do at present is,
to desire a leaf or two of white paper be added, in which we may write down (as
we shall from time to time be informed) the names of those Heroic men, that
died in defense of their King and Country.

I wonder very much that this Minister is not ashamed to urge such a foolish
thing, viz. That more Protestants dyed in this War then of our Religion. This
no body doubts of, and may well be, seeing we are not the hundredth part of the
Nation, and yet by my imperfect List it appears, that there were killed 190.
Catholics of Quality; when as ( by the List called the Royal-Martyr, and
printed by Thomas Newcomb 1660.) there died in the War but 212. Protestants,
the rest there named being Papists, as you may see, if you compare their names
with my Catologue. Let the Word then judge, whether we ought not to have some
compassion showed us, and not to be thus calumniated by every impertinent
Scribler.

Reader, those that follow are the Ministers exhortations, which are so like
the Pedantry of his pulpit, that they alone without the rest would have assured
me of the Authors calling. That you may see what they are, I have divided them
into eight several Advices or Desires, for so he is pleased to call them.

First Sect. He desires us to be content with our condition, and not under
value the Liberty we now enjoy, if it exceed what was granted our Fathers. To
this I say, Reader, that we are contented with any favor; yet 'twould be no
arrogance if we require more them our Fathers had, because it seems the
Minister counts them all Traitors, when as we (as all the World knows) have
shown the utmost duty that Subjects can do.

Second Sect. Not to proclaim about the World for the paring of our nayls that
we are persecuted. To this I will give a larger Answer in the Postscript; and
will only say here, that I defy any man, to show me in Christendom a Party
that bears their misfortunes with more submission then we.

Third Sect. To abhor them that wish disturbances or Invasions to settle
Popery. To this I say, I think that nothing can make it more manifest that we
do abhor such men, then to see that all catholics detested the French, eve^
then when we were forsaken by our friends, and they (as most thought) upon the
point of landing.

Fourth Sect. To keep our Religion to our selves, and not expect such harvests
as we had in the late confusions. I say, Truly we are like to keep it to our
selves, for it is too severe to be embraced by Worldlings: and if care be not
taken, the same times will come again; for I am sure, crying against Papists
was then the former Prologue; and though the aim of wicked people be still the
same, I hope the Epilogue will be far different.

Fifth Sect. Not to abuse the weakness of dying persons, nor convert the
condemned Prisoners with drink, or by hopes of an easier way of salvation. To
this I answer, The Minister ought not to call the condition of dying persons
weak, because he and his brethren have always found them strong; for I think no
man ever heard that a Catholic was converted by them at his death; and all
have been able to resist that in their Agony, to which worldly ends made some
in their healths yield. But now, if Catholics have reconciled dying persons,
it must be wholly attributed to the truth of their Doctrine, for then all hopes
of life being taken away, men will hearken to that reason, which during health
(through temporal advantages) they earnestly opposed: Nay, few of these, if
they recover, start back, but on the contrary persevere. I say, these
Conversions must needs proceed from the conviction of the Truth, and not from
hopes of any easier way of salvation, because the Protestant way is far easier,
and naturally more suitable to the inclinatio^s of dying men; For an ordinary
trust in the merits of Christ, and an ordinary contrition (usual to all people
that are said not to die ill) will, according to the Reformed Hypothesis, carry
a man presently to Heaven: when as this, in the opinion of any Catholics, and
of the Agonising party himself, will bring him at farthest but to Purgatory.
The entrance into Heaven is not so easy a passage with us; for it must be
obtained with long Mortifications, conflicts, and labors, far greater then
those of Hercules; or else in men of ill lives, by some unexpressible energy at
the last gasp, like that of the Thief on the Cross. Vain therefore is the
imagination of Protestants, for we have no other means to convert men, but, as
I said, the force of truth on their Consciences, which truth in that state they
can discern (as men fallen into misery, do oftentimes the vanities of the
World) when as in strength of body (through humane designs) like the adder,
they stop their ears, let the Charmer charm never so sweetly. Many advantages
more (were it not time ho have done with the Minister) could I show, that the
Protestants have naturally over Catholics, in converting of dying people, but
they never converted one (as I heard of) yet he confesses many have been by us.

Besides this, I beseech you, Reader, to look upon the lives of those that
leave the Protestant Religion to come to us, and then show me any one of them,
that lives worse then he did before. Some perchance there b^ (and those almost
as rare as black swans themselves) that mend not the depravity of their first
manners, though none, as I said, fall to worse: but for the rest, they
apparently cast off the old man, and show the wonderful fruits of Grace by
their holy life and conversation. On the other side, good Protestant Reader,
name me that man amongst you, who left the Catholic Church, and fell not
immediately into all licentiousness and vice; call but to mind Gage, Carry,
Rookwood, Carpenter, Macedo the late converted Portugeze, or any other whom you
please, and see, if they had one unclean spirit in them when they were Papists,
whether seven Devils, each worse then the former, afterward entered not into
them.

Truly, this is no wonder, because they, forsook their Religion for liberty,
and followed the pattern of Luther their first Master and Teacher. For, he
while he was a Monk punished his body with watching and fasting, as Catal. Doct*
p. 180.
S. Voyon a Protestant co^fesses. But afterward he lived otherwise, as another
^. Mot de Eccl. p. 221.
Protestant affirms: for he says, That when Protestants would indulge their
appetite, they would not be ashamed to use these words; Let us live Luther-
like to day.

Sixth Sect. Not to hinder the course of Justice on Criminals because they are
Papists. To this I say, I understand not what he means; but if any Papist has
solicited for another of his Religion which was to die, I think it is not
unlawful: No man of any Religion being denied to use their endeavors to save
their Friends and Relations, that fall by chance into these misfortunes. But
herein we shall obey his advice, for (unless it be by some unphappy duells) the
Catholics come seldom within the the reach of Criminal Laws.

Seventh Sect. That Priests disguize not themselves like Hectors, and poison
Clubs and Coffee houses with Phanatick discourses. To this I answer, that if
Phanaticism be the discourse of a Priest, I doubt this Minister is one also;
for never did Jacob Behmen, Stifler, or any of the Fraternity write more
malicious, self contradicting things then he; or that have in them more
inferences of confusion and disorder. In the next place, if Priests disguize
themselves, I think it is not their faults; and if the Minister will get them
liberty to wear their habit, I will be bound they shall never go more in
Mascarade. Besides, being thus known by every body, we then shall plainly see,
who they be that at Taverns and Meeting-places corrupt the Youth. And truly,
Reader, I am very morally certain, that this Answerer is a haunter of them, for
the old Proverb tells us who calls Whore first.

Eighth Sect. That Priests and Jesuits fill not the World with Pamphlets,
Philanaxes, Exhortations, Apologies, etc. which ser^^ (^e says) only to ferme^t
men's passions, and not to convince their Reasons. If we come into the fair
field of Controversy, we shall not be declined; and the Minister thinks his
party not indebted to us upon that account. Good Mr. Parson, you very well know
that the Philanaxes, Exhortations, Apologies, etc. were writ by Lay-m^n, and
therefore you might have spared this last advice, since 'twas as needless as
the rest of your false and malicious writing.

And by the way remember how you have perverted and falsely commented on a
Loyal man's learned work, this very Exhortation which you mention. His words,
Reader, are these: As for the Roman Pastors indirect power over Kings in ordine
ad Spiritualia, by which the Sea Apostolical in some rare Cases has (at the
request of all Christians) proceeded to censure, and deprive Kings (a thing so
much talked of, and so little understood by the Reformed Divines) I leave that
Question to be decided by the two Supreme Powers when occasion shall be for it'
which may not happen to the end of the World: It being a very rare Case, in
which it were not better that such matters were wholly left till the day of
Judgment. Now the sum of this is, as the Minister says, that if the Pope should
deprive our King, this Catholic would not meddle between them. When as his
true meaning was, That this case between Popes and Kings will happen seldom,
if ever; and should it happen, he will not as to the right (or, via juris)
determine the nice pretensions of each party; yet this does not argue, but that
he would side, as to action (or, via facti) with his Prince against any person
whatsoever. And thus we daily see the French do, who swear they cannot tell
whether the Law called Salique be forged; or whether in Justice the now
Male-Line, or the English (because descended from the Heirs general) ought to
have the Kingdom; but still they declare, they will fight for their present
Monarch against all Mankind. This, I say, is the sense of the Author of the
Exhortation, and this I dare engage he shall subscribe to.

Now concerning Philanax, how poorly it is answered, I believe the Minister
would be ashamed to confess: and yet (how poorly soever) he has made use of it;
Nay of the most contemptible and groundless follies in the whole Book. I am
sure, the man needed not to have challenged us into the fair field of
Controversy, having there-in been more then Combatants, ever since the
breaking out of Luther. Nor can there be any Argument of more generous bravery
then this, That though our Priests in England have been hunted from hole to
hole, their Papers often seized, some in the midst of their works hanged, no
Library, no Press, and if to day well settled, perchance forced on the morrow
to fly; yet for all these disavantages (which no Protestant feels) they never
omitted to write things of use, or to answer all sorts of Books, that durst
appear against our Religion or manners. Fear not therefore, good Minister, that
either Clergy or Laity will be behindhand with you in this affair; and I think
Dr. Pierce will tell you he found it to some purpose from both Nor shall you,
Sir, whilst I live (be ready again, as soon as you please) want an humble
Servant to show you your many willful errors and mistakes.

THE POSTSCRIPT.
My Lords and Gentlemen:
YOu have now had a short view of the malice of the Answerer, and of our
condition; nor have I troubled you with points of Divinity, it being out of my
Road, and more particulary belonging to them, who are called to be Guides, and
make it their Profession to study Controversy. The search into History and
Annals of Nations is the fit employement of men of Quality; for by it (having a
view of all that is past) we presently find what profits your Country, and how
good men (by false representations) may pass for abominable, even in the
thoughts of sober people. In this sort who have ever suffered more then we? for
often the best of our Fellow Subjects (having drawn in with their first milk,
an ill opinion of our manners) have continued in the same sentiment, till by
long experience they plainly found the contrary.

How opposite is Popery noised to the Grandeur of Kings! and yet we see, That
Vid. Pref.
Kings were never greater than then. What exclamations are there to this day
against us for our stirs in the beginning of Reformation! though it is evident
it proceeded not from precepts of Faith, but from a natural Pref.
impulse to oppose Novelties. Nay, the efforts of our Ancestors for the Royal
Rep. (...).
House of Scotland are laid to our charge as High Treason; but the putting up
of Rep. 22.
Jane Gray for the Protestant Interest was justice, even by the preaching of
Dr. Ridley. And moreover, though but thirteen Papists were drawn into the Rep.
2^.
powder Treason, by the dexterity of our Enemies, yet we all (even the Children
of many of the great Catholics that were to have been destroyed by the
Traitors) are still held guilty of this Original sin. After our proneness to
Rebellion (in which how little we are faulty, and how Rep. 6.
much others have been, let the World judge) there is no Principle possesses the
imagination of Englishmen so fully, as that we delight in Blood, and that
persecuting of men is a part of our Doctrine. What cries therefore have been
against they days of Queen Mary, as if her cruelty were unparalleled! when as
I have made it appear, that more Catholics have died by Rep. 12.
Protestants, then of them by us; and that since the exclusion of the Pope,
there has been a greater quantity of Blood iudicially spilt amongst us, then
from the Conversion of England to the Reign of Henry the Eighth. The Massacre
of France is proved (you see) to have bee^ no Rep* 1^.
effect of Religion, but an indirect endeavor to suppress Rebellion. Nor are
we ^ Rep. 1.
in England (abominating the fact) more guilty of the Irish Cruelties, then is
the Protestant Faith for what was done at Amboyna.

For my own part, I not only detest Blood, but find all Catholics do; for if
in many Countries (where the Prince and people, as I showed you before, are
Catholics) the Protestants have not only open Churches, but also public
employments, and in no place this is granted by the Reformed to Papists; then
must it needs follow, that we are much kinder to you, then you to us, even in
the matters of Religion. Besides this, Catholics are so tender, that the
Inquisition it self is permitted in no Kingdom where Heresy is numerous: nor
ought we to be blamed, if (in a Country wholly obedient to the Church) we
strive to keep out all other Sects and opinions.

This cannot be jniustice, because to all Mankind we grant the same liberty.
Who is it, that morally blames the Moors of Afric (being of one Profession)
for keeping out even the Gospel it self? Or who is it, that says the Swedes ar
inhumane, because none except L^therans shall live among them? God alone is to
judge hereafter of men's neglecting means. In England therefore, where all fell
not from Popery, there is not the same just motive for punishment; and
certainly it is severity in the highest degree, to prosecute us with fire and
sword, as if we were an upstart people, that brought in a strange Religion, not
finding it here before. Ethelbert the first English King that professed
Christianity (and converted also by a Monk) never persecuted his Pagan
Subjects, because their Religion was in possession: and yet no consideration is
thought fit for Papists, though our most fundamental Laws have established this
Faith; and the maintenance of it sworn unto (since the Conquest) by at least
twenty of our Monarchs.

Catholics consider Sectaries, as Magistrates do Rebels: for where they are
but very few, they may percha^ce all suffer according to the establishtt Laws
of a Nation, but if they grow numerous, pity causes us now to punish nobody
with death, but the^ prayers, the^ preaching, then Books etc. are the fittest
Arms to destroy the^. This makes us severe in Spain and Italy, and this
merciful in France, Germany, etc. yet here in our Country, there are
Sanguinarie Laws against Laymen, and our Priests have been handled with more
severity then James Naylor, or any of his Disciples. What adva^tage will
Persecution bring, but to make us glory that we suffer for Christ? nor has it
ever yet lessned our number. No good therefore, I am sure, can come to
Protestants by it much harm perchance may; since it will stir up Catholic
Governors to use the like severity to dissenting Subjects, who otherwise might
live in greater tranquillity and ease. It Is not we that proclaim our
persecution (as this Minister taxes us) in foreign parts, but the Agents of
Princes, who comment as they please on things, and fill Europe with noise, that
the English of all people are most ungrateful, being earnest to have that done
against their tried friends, which Cromwell was almost ashamed to do, though we
were his profes't and sworn Enemies.

I shall never omit to render my thanks to Almighty God, that I know not one
who staggers the least in duty for all this our reproach and suffering: Who is
it that now loves the Dutch one whit the more? or who is it that contemns not a
Frenchman whilst he is an Enemy to England? Nor did ever any Party in this Isle
( That deemed it self oppressed by Laws) before fail of favoring those, that
were in hostility with the Kingdom. The Presbyterians in Scotland were up
actually in 1666.
Arms when two the powerfullest Nations of Europe, assisted also with Denmark
made the last War upon us. And for the Independants, all who were in pay in
Holland, openly abjured their Country, and many of them headed by Doleman, did
us the mischief at Chattam: for foreign Nations must never hope to foil the
English, without the additional courage of English.

Just contrary to this has been the procedure of Catholics; for not only the
Scottish Papists with their Commander my Lord Douglas left France upon the
breach, but valiantly also fought with the loss of many of their lives, when
those Traitors (as I said at Chattham) assisted the Dutch last summer. I need
not repeat how zealous the Popish Guards were in all these three years Wars,
every body being an eyewitness of it; and for the Papists abroad, I am sure
they have been so earnest for the Honor of the Nation, that at Paris, Flandres,
Rome, Liege, etc. they were still detecting the Dutch forgeries, and
proclaiming our Victories to all People. Nay the Holla^ders were ever so
sensible of the fervor of the English Catholics in behalf of their Country,
that when De Wit was soliciting for a Guard, he caused it to be published in
the Gazzets of Amsterdam, that he was in danger of his life, for that two of
our Jesuits had undertaken to kill him. Consider therefore (Loyal Sirs) our
services: and though in themselves they are but Duties, yet Duties may
sometimes merit a reward, at least for the inciting of others.

Nothing assuredly can ever settle more our Country in peace, then the free
liberty of Religion: and if the tenderness of the Kings heart (as all the world
knows him merciful) should move him to hear the cry of his late Enemies, and
grant them the enjoyment of their Consciences; certainly no body could think it
strange, if he gave the same freedom to us his friends, who never yet deserted
him or his Father in their greatest misfortunes and sufferings. Nay, moreover,
if there be still pity left amongst mankind, upon that score also ( had Papists
no other Plea) we might more justly pretend to Indulgence then any
Nonconformist whatsoever For none of the Sects can in reality allege more,
then that the Protestant manner of worship is nauseous, and of no edification
to them: my Reason is, because we see ^t least the Rich in all Countries go
often to Church, and yet are owned still members by the Party. Now such a
Conformity is diametrically opposite to the Conscience of a Catholic, and any
such Communion is a deadly sin. We are not here to Dispute, whether Papists are
not too scrupulous: for this Argument may be used against any one of a contrary
Judgment. But supposing such and such things are the points of a Religion, and
favor desired in the suspension of Laws; I say, Mercy is fitter for them, that
according to the profession of their Faith, cannot comply without sinning, then
for those that do it without such offense: and truly, I am not so disingenious
as to believe, that were this Conformity in their own Opinion a sin, that so
many persons of all Orders amongst the Presbiterians and Independents would
have gone to Church, or that their respective Congregations would have still
received them as theirs.

This favor I crave, I wish for all people as well as for my self: for I
cannot be so partial as to think my Conscience ought not to be forced, and yet
that my Neighbor may dispense with the scruples he finds in his. Punishment
never lessens the Resolutio^s of Christians, but always heightens Zeal, and
draws sometimes wellmeaning men into those Leagued Factions, which ease and
favor would assuredly have prevented.

What thoughts can men have when they find not themselves oppressed, but the
public interest of their Country? It follows not also, that Toleration
prejudices the established Religion of a Nation; for experimentally we see, the
Calvinists of France never had fewer Proselytes then when they were securest
from Massacres, and the like. Whilst the House of Valois was in being, which
used the great rigor they speak of, their History declares how numerous they
grew; but since those of Burbon were Kings, who touched neither Life nor Estate
(only took away Garrisons, the Nests of Rebellion) I never found they much
vaunted in their Conversions and increase.

My Lords and Gentlemen, Religion is God Almightie's own Cause, and (for
manifestation of the Elect) Heresies are permitted. It Is he only (and that at
the last day also) that shall satisfactorily convince us all, who is in the
right: Persecution therefore may easily disioint a Kingdom, but can never
destroy this Hydra when she is fully roused.

But now before I end, I must here declare, if any other ill men (such as this
Minister and his Momentous friend who writ the Discourse of the Religion of
England) hope by Persecution of Papists, to make us the less passionate for the
Government when their Plots are ripe, they cozen themselves, and reckon without
their Host: for the Travellers-Cloak ( which is our tried Allegiance to lawful
Power) can never be blown up by a Wind. And if Papists were so fleeting, as for
affliction to renounce a duty, which they hold be the Command of God; why
should they, do you think, suffer for Conscience, since by going to Church, or
taking Oaths, they may, when they please, enjoy the ample Privileges of their
Birthright? Take this therefore for a certain Maxim, That be who is faithful
to God, can never be unfaithful to his Country: and I am sure in all kinds of
disorders about Religion here at home, the Reformed in each of their respective
Sects have been far more faulty then we; if we consider (as I said) what was
done against Quee^ Mary, the usage of the Quee^ of scots, or the late
unparalled Rebellion: neither for these many years have the Papists been
struck at, but that the Bishops and Church of England felt also the blow: and
how much Episcopacy is adva^tageous to Monarchy, none can be now ignorant. Who
therefore, My Lords and Gentlemen, will be so little pitied as you, if you
should be twice deceived after the same method and manner?

But to conclude, no Kingdom (I dare say) looses-so much as ours by their cry
against Catholics: for it is very certainly true, were not this a Bar (and he
who doubts it, will soon be convinced, let him step but beyond Sea) that the
Spanish Provinces in the Netherla^ds (and for a small matter with their Kings
consent, as his case lately stood) would joyfully put themselves under the
gentle yoke of our easy Government: nor are they in Normandy shie to say, that
had not Papists been so harrassed with us, they would not have slipped so many
late oportunities of returning to their Lawful Duke and Sovereign.

FINIS.
REader,
I hope this Impressio^ will be better the^ the last, which was very falsely
printed; For the Printer not only Italicated where he should not, and omitted
it where he should, but also left out some words, and changed others, as if
there had been a private correspondency, between my Adversary and him; for
so, I le assure you, I am informed. The only alteration, I make, is putting
the Citations out of the Margent into the body of the treatise, for I found
that it distracted, or at least much interupted the Reader in often running
from one place to another, especially if what I quoted were long. I have also
added to the list more Catholics of quality, that lost their lives for the
King. The names I received from some Ladies of their Relations, who are now
become Religious at Paris. I have placed them by themselves after all, to put
the Readers in mind, that they forgett not to insert also those whom hereafter
they shall have notice of; and had I time to send to friends, I doubt not but
the increase would be considerable.

A CATOLOGUE OF THOSE CATHOLICS THAT DIED AND SVFFERED FOR THEIR LOYALTY.
THe Earl of Carnarvan, slain at Newbury first Battle. Lord Viscount Dunbar at
Scarborough, and two of his sons much wounded. Knights.
Sir John Smith, Banneret (who rescued the Kings Standard from the Rebels at
Edg^il) slain at Alresford in Hampshire. Sir John Cansfield, wounded at
Neubury, of which he died a lingering death. Sir Hen. Gage (Governor of Oxford)
slain at Collumbridge, 11. Jan. 1644. Sir J. Digby wounded at Taunton, and died
at Bridgewater. Sir P. Brown wounded at Naseby, died at Nortbampton. Sir Nich.
Fortescue, Knight of Malta, slain in Lancashire. Sir Troylus Turbervil,
Captain-Lieut. of the Kings Lifeguard, slain upon his Majesty's marching from
Newark to Oxford. Sir J. Preston, wounded at Furnace, of which he died a
lingering death. Sir Arthur Aston (Gouvernour of Red^ling) slain at Tredaugh in
cold blood. Sir Thomas Tildesly, slain at Wiggan. Sir Henry Slingsby beheaded
on Towerhill.
Colonels.
Col. Th. Howard (son of the Lord William Howard) slain at Peirsbridge. Col.
Tho. Howard (son of Sir Francis) at Atherton-Moor: The gaining which Battle was
principally ascribed to his Valor. Col. Tho. Morgan of Weston in Warwicksh.
slain at Newb. first battle: he raised a Regiment of Horse for the King at his
own charge, and his Estate was given to Mr. Pyms son. Col. Cuthbert Conniers,
at Malpass. Col. Tho. Dalton of Thurnham, mortally wounded at Newbury second
battle, and died at Marlborough. Col. Francis Hungate, slain at Chester. Col.
Poor (Governor of Berkley-Castle) near Lidney. Col. Will. Ewre (son to the
late Lord Ewre) at Marston-Moor. Col. Ra. Pudsey, at Marston-Moor. Col. Cuthert
Clifton, slain at Manchester. Col. Cassey Bental, at Stow in the Wolds. Col.
Trollop, slain at Wiggan. Col. William Bains at Malpass. Col. William Walton,
at Tredagh. Col. Rich. Manning, at Alresford.
Lieut. Colonels.
Lieut. Col. Thomas Markham of Allerton, slain near Gainsborough. L. Col.
Lancelot Holtby, at Branceford. L. Col. Haggerston at Preston. L. Col. Pavier,
at Linc. L. Col. Jordan Metham, at Pontefract. L. Col John Godfrey. at
Tewksbury. L. Col. George Preston, at Bradford. L. Col. Will. Houghton, at
Newbury. Lieut. Col. Phil. Howard, slain at Chester. L. Col. Middleton, at
Hopton-Heath. L. Col. Michael Constable, there also. L. Col. Sayr, at Nasby. L.
Col. Scot, at Alresford* L. Col. Thomas Salvin, at Alresford L. Col. Richard
Brown, at Alresford L. Col. Goodridge wounded at Alresford and died at Oxford.
L. Col. Congrave, slain at Dean in Gloucest.
Serjeant-Majors.
Major Cusand, slain at the taking of Basing in cold blood. Major Rich. Harborn
wounded at Malpass, died at Kendal. Major T. Vavasor, slain at Marston-Moor.
Mayor Panton, wounded at Cover, died at Highmeadow. Major Hudleston, slain at
York. Maj. Thomas Ewre, at Newbury 1. Major Lawrence Clifton, at Shelfordhouse.
Mayor Thomas Heskith, at Malpass. Maj. William Leak, at Newbury 1. Maj. Rively,
wounded at Naseby, died prisoner at London. Maj. Richard Sherburn, at London.
Maj. Holmby, at Henly. Major Rich. Norwood, slain before Taunton.
Captains.
Captain Marmaduke Constable, Standardb^^rer to L. Genesis Lindsey, slain at
Edgehill. Capt. Will. Laborn, and Cap. Mat. Anderton, at Sheriff-hutton in
Yorkshire. Capt. Joseph Constable, at Newbury. Captain Wiburn, slain at Basing
in oold blood. Capt. Burgh, slain at Cover. Capt. Thurston Anderton, wounded at
Newbury, died at Oxford. Cap. Haggarston (eldest son of Sir Thomas) in
Lancashire. Cap. Anthony Rigby, at Bazing-house. Capt. Richard Bradford, at
Bazing-house. Capt. Kenelm Digby (eldest son of Sir Kenelm Digby) raised a
Troop of Horse at his own charge, and was slain at St. Neotes. Capt. Ratcliff
Houghton, at Preston. Capt. Rob. Molineux of the Wood in Lancashire, slain at
Newbury 1. Capt. Charl. Thimelby, at Worcester. Capt. Robert Townsend, at
Edgehill. Captain Matthew Ratcliff, near Henly. Capt. Richard Wolsole, at
Newbury. Capt. Anthony Awd. Capt. Thomas Cole, at Newark. Capt. Partison, at
Wiggan. Capt. Maximil. Nelson, at Marston-moor. Capt. Fran. Godfrey, slain at
Sherburn. Capt. Tho. Meynel, at Pontefract. Capt. John Clifton, at
Shelford-house. Capt Abraham Lance. Capt. Robert Lance, at Rowton in Chesh.
Capt. Anth. Hamerton, near Manchester. Capt. Will. Symcots, Capt. Lieut. to the
Lord Piercy, slain at Newberry 1. Capt. Tho Singleton, at Newberry 1. Captain
Francis Errington of Denton in Northumberland, at Rotheran. Captain George
Singleton, at Rotheran. Capt. Mich. Fitzakerly at Liverpool. Capt. Daniel
Thorold, at Nasby. Capt. Franc. Clifton, at Newberry 1. Capt. John Lance, at
Islip. Capt. George Cassey, at Hereford. Capt. Langdale, at Greekhovel in
Wales. Capt. Carver, in Monmouthshire. Capt. John Lingen, Ledbury. Capt.
Samways, at Newberry 2. Captain John Plumton, slain at York. Capt. Pet. Forcer,
at York. Capt. Thomas Whittingha^, at Newberry. Capt. Winkley, at Leverpool.
Capt. Thomas Anderton, at Leverpool. Capt. Rich. Walmsly, at Ormschurch. Capt.
John Swinglehurst, and Capt. John Butler, at Marston-moor. Capt. George Holden,
at Usk. Capt. Richard Latham, at Litchfield. Capt. Tho. Charnock, at
Litchfield. Capt. Rob. Dent, at Newcastle. Capt. Thomas Heskith, and Capt. John
Knipe, at Bindle. Capt. Thomas Eccleston* at Bindle. Capt. John Hothersal,
Capt. Nic. Anderton, at Gre^noo-Cattle. Capt. Anthony Girlington, Lancaster.
Capt. Francis Rou^, in Dean-Forrest. Capt. Randolph Wallinger, at Cover. Capt.
Christoph. Wray, slain at Bradford. Capt. Will. Rookwood, at Alresford. Capt.
Rob. Rookwood, at Oxford. Capt. Hoskins, slain at Lidney in cold blood. Capt.
Phil. Darey, at Lidney Capt. Will. Jones, at Ragland. Capt. Henry Wells, wounded
at Newberry 2. died in prison at London. Capt. Richardson, slain before
Taunton. Captain Tho. Madden, slain in Woodstreet by the Fanatics, Jan. 1660.
Inferior Officers.
Lieut. Will. Butler, slain at Newberry. Lieut. Rich. Osbalston, at Leeds.
Lieut. George Hothersal, at Leverpool. Lieutenant William Girlington, at
Leverpool. Lieutenant John Kulcheth, at Worral. Lieut. William Singleton, at
Marston. Lieut. Peter Boardman, at Bradford. Lieutenant Short, slain near
Gloucester. Lieut. Rich. Bradford, at Blechington. Lieutenant James Bradford, at
Blechington. Lieut. Tho. Kinsman at Lincoln. Lieutenant John Birch, at
^irmicham. Lieutenant Staley, at Rushall-Hall. Cornet William Culchereth, at
Newberry. Cor. Deinton, at Cardiff. Cor. Robert Lance, in Cheshire. Cor. Edward
Walker, at Burton. Cor. Miles Lochard, at Gooderidge.
Gentlemen-Volontairs.
Mr. Edward Talbot (brother to the now Earl of Shrewsbury) slain at
Marston-moor. Mr. Char. Townly, and Mr. Charles Sherburn, there also. Mr.
Nicolas Timelby, at Bristow. Mr. Pool of Worral, at Bristow. Mr. John Tipper,
at Ne^^am. Mr. Christopher Blount, at Edg^alston. Mr. Theodore Mouse, at
Langpo^^. Mr. Gerard Salvin, at Langpo^^. Mr. Francis Darcy, at Langpo^^. Mr.
Wiburn. at Basing. Mr. Robert Bowls. at Basing. Mr. Will. Stoner. at Basing.
Mr. Price of Washingly in Northamptonsh. slain at Lincoln in cold blood. Mr.
Cuthbert Ratcliff, slain at Newcastle. Mr. Thomas Latham, at Newarck. Mr.
Andrew Giffard, at Hampton. Mr. ^ew is Blount, at Manchaster. Mr. Carry, and M
Ge^nings, at Shelfordhouse. Mr. James Anderton, in Wales. Mr. Thomas Roper, at
Gootheridge. Mr. Stephen Pudsey, in Hold^rness. Mr. Francis Pavier, at Marston.
Mr. James Banton, at Cover. Tho. Pendrel, at Stow. Mr. Boniface Kemp, and Mr.
^^lde^ons Hesket, slain near York in cold blood. Mr. Mich. Wharton, at
Scarborough. Mr. Errington, at Chester. Tho. West by Doctor of Physic, at
Presto^. Mr. Peter Davis, at D^nbigh. Mr. Edward Davis, at Chester. Mr. Bret,
at Chester. Mr. Roger Wood, at Chester. Mr. Henry Lawson, at Melton. Mr. Tho.
Craithorn the elder, at Uphaven. Mr. Henry Johnson, at Uphaven. Three so^^ of
Mr. Kitby of Rancliff. John Witham. at Preston Will. S^lby. at Preston

John 15. 13. Greater love then this no. man has, then that one lay down his
life for his friend.

Major General Will. Web. so wounded at Newberry by Case-shot, that he lives a
dying life.

The Names of such Catholics, whose Estates (both Real and Personal) were
sold, in persuance of an Act made by the Rump, July 16. 1651. for their
pretended Delinquency: that is, for adhering to their King.
IOh. Lord Marquess of Winchester, who so valiantly defended Basing-house.
Henry Lord Marquess of Worcester, who has been at least 300000. l. looser by
the War. Francis Lord Cottington. Lord John Sommerset. Marmaduke L. Langdale,
and his son. Sir John Winter, who so stoutly defended Lidney-house Sir Thomas
Tildesly himself slain, and his Estate sold. Sir Hen. Slingsby, beheaded at
Towerhill, and his Estate sold. Sir Piercy Herbert, now Lord Powys. Sir Francis
Howard. Sir Henry Bedingfield. Sir Arthur Aston, Governor of Reading* Sir Tho.
Haggerston. Rog. Bodenham, Esquire;. Charles Townly, Esquire;. Row land Air, Esquire;.
Peter Pudsey, Esquire;. John Giffard, Esquire;.
Other Catholics, whose Estates were sold by an Additional Rump-Act, made Aug.
4. 1652.
HEnry Lord Viscount Dunbar and his so^* Sir Will. Vavasor. Sir Edw. Ratcliff.
Thomas Clifton, Esquire;. Peter Gifford of ^hillington, Esquire;. Walter Fowler of St.
Thomas Esquire;. Thomas Brook of Madely, Esquire;. Francis Biddulph of Biddulph, Esquire;.
William Middleton of Stocton, Esquire;. Nicholas Errington, Esquire;. Lance Errington
Esquire;. Henry Errington, Esquire;. John Jones of Dingestow, Esquire;. John Weston, Esquire;.
Phil. Hungate, Esquire;. Rob. Dolman, Gent. Rich. Masley, Gent. Geo. Smith, Gent.
Ralph Pudsey, Gent.
More Catholics, whose Estates were sold by another Rump-Act, made November. 18.
1652.
HEnry Lord Arundel of Wardor, who raised a Regiment of Horse for the King, and
whose Castle of Wardor was so galla^tly defended against Edward Hungerford.
Henry Lord Marley and Monteagle. William Lord Ewre. William Lord Powis, who
kept long his castle of Powis against the enemy, and afterward taken in it;
and thereupon was kept a great while prisoner at Stafford, and died in durance
at London. Lord Charles Somerset. Sir Walter Blount, long a prisoner in the
Tower. Sir Edw. Widdrington, who raised a Regiment of Horse. Sir Richard
Tichburn. Sir Charles Blount (slain also by one of his own Captains*) Sir J.
Clavering died a prisoner at Land. Sir John Cansfield. Sir John Timelby of
Ernam. Sir Philip Constable. Sir Edward Plumpton. Sir Nicholas Thornton, who
raised a Troop of Horse at his own charge. Hugh Anderton of Exton, Esquire;. Thomas
Langtree of Langtree, Esquire;. Will. Hoghton, Esquire;. William Hesketh, Esquire;. William
Latham, Esquire;. Tho. Singleton, Esquire;. John Westby, Esquire;. Sir Edward Charlton.
William Sheldon of Beely, Esquire;. William Gage of Bently, Esquire;. Tho. Clavering,
Esquire;. John Plumpton, Esquire;. Marm. Holby, Esquire;. Hen. Englefield, Esquire;. Robert
Wigmore, Esquire;. Rob. Cramblington, Esquire;. Will. Sherburn, Esquire;. John Constable,
Esquire;. Richard Latham, Esquire;. William Bawd, Esquire;. James Anderton of Birchley,
Esquire;. Thomas Singleton, Esquire;. John Talbot Esquire;. Nich. Fitzakerly, Esquire;. John
Piercy, Esquire;. Thomas Acton of Burton, Esquire; Tho. Gillibrand, Esquire;. Tho.
Grimshaw, Esquire;. Ralph Rishton, and Will. Floyer. Gentl. Richard Chorley of
Chorley. James Anderton of Cleyton, Esquire;. Will* Anderton of Anderton, Esquire; With
many others. Mr. Edmund Church of Essex, was one of the first whose personal
Estate was plundered, and his real sequestered, which so continued (without any
allowa^ce to his wife and children) from 1642. till 1649. when he died
prisoner. Mr. John Barlow of Pembrookshire, his whole Estate (being at least
1500. l. per an.) was given to Col Horton, and Cap. Nicolas, without any
allowance of any fifths, or other sustenance for his wife and many children.
Here follow the new added names of those, that were slain in his Maiestie's
service.
Sr. Timothy Tetherston killed at Chester. Cap. Thomas Paston slain at York.
Cap. Henry Butler slain at Brinle. Mr. Richard Seborne slain at Ragland. Mr.
William Alsley slain at Wiggan.
FINIS.
Printed with permission an. 1668.

