A Catalogue of BOOKS of the Newest Fashion, to be Sold by AVCTION at the
WHIGGS Coffee-House, at the Sign of the Jackanapes in Prating-Alley, near the
Deanery of St. Paul's.
1. ECcebolius Anglicus: The Oxford (...), or the Duty of conforming to all
Times and Circumstances of prevailing Wickedness and Injustice, and the
unlawfulness of the contrary, by Hum -- y H^^y, an humble Assertor of that
Doctrine, dedicated to his Master St --. 2. Mercurius Deformatus: Or the
Picture of Mercury with a Calf's Head on and no Brains in it; by that
Contemptible Witling the Weekly Observator: Dedicated to the learned and worthy
Dr. Well -- d. 3. Lues Germanica: The Dutch-Pox in Folio. A Modern Treatise,
holding forth a surer way of clapping our Consciences, than a Land Fire-ship
can our Cod-pieces. 4. St fortuna velit fies; de, etc. Gravel-lane to Day, D --
n of P -- l's to Morrow, and Gravel-lane again, as moody Fortune or Spouse
pleases: By Smock-peckt Sh -- k. 5. Quos Jupiter vult perdere, etc. England
first made a Bedlam by Priests of Latitude, and then an Aceldama by the Dutch
Pilgrims in Sohoe; published as a Specimen of the Blessings we may rationally
expect from a general Comprehension of all Religions, as well as of a general
Naturalization of all Nations. 6. Non magna loquimur sed, etc. By the pious
Author and religious Practiser of the Letter to the dying Lord Russ -- l,
addressed chiefly to his Arch-Brother and quondam Pupil Dr. Sh --, as an
Antidote against Shame and Remorse; with a Use of Instruction, that those
things you cannot get fairly rid of by Argument or Banter, you must learn
solidly to outface. 7. Clodius accusat maechos: Or three Discourses against
Tom Fir -- n, and a fourth against Hell Torments; the first Tract extorted from
the Author by the importunate Clamours of those who hate Heretics in
Masquerade, as the Author himself tells you, least you should think he drew his
P^n in the defense of Christianity voluntarily; the second published as a brief
Summary of his Creed, by way of communicatory Letter: Dedicated to his
Sub-Intruders. 8. H^u quantum nobis profuit, etc. A Treatise showing that
Hypocrisy's the best Religion, by him that has gained 6000 l. per An. by it;
these three last by the same Hand. 9. Dux foemina facti: Conquest the best
Title to Body and Confcience, by Dr. Sh -- k's Wife, dedicated to her Humble
Servant her Husband; wherein these two Points are proved at large: First, That
no Man is a good Husband who will no^ sacrifice his Conscience to the
importunity of a Wife: And Secondly, That ^he Doctor was visi^ly under her
Power, and therefore he was forced to submit, and might do so according to his
Hypoth sis of Force, which dissolves all Obligation, especially since the
Female Usurpation had been for a l^ng time, and thoroughly settled. 10. Dum
vitium fugiunt stulti. etc. An infallible Cure for the Cramp in the great Toe,
by cuting both Legs off, the Operation performed by the Asso^iated
Conventioners of 88, and approved by some of the Taskmasters of last Session:
Together with Apologies for the same, by those two Foxes John -- n and Bur --
t, each of which, though their Heads stand different ways, has the Firebrand of
Rebellion in his Tail. 11. Parturiunt montes nafcetur, etc. An exact List of
all the Countries, Cities, Towns, Fortresses, Castles, Laden Vessels, Cannon,
Prisoners, Baggage, etc. taken from the French since the Commencement of the
last War; by Johannes Pudendus a Speaker of Shorthand: Dedicated to the
invisible, invulnerable, and thrice puissant Protector of these three once
flourishing Kingdoms. 12. Manus manum fricat: Or a King maker deserves to be a
Wages-taker; by a Club of those confiding Kn -- s that sold their Country last
Session; dedicated to their Play Master; wherein they gratefully own they have
taken his Money, but withal tell him they have not been behind-hand, but for
every hundred Pounds they have received from him they have given him ten
thousand. 13. E quovis ligno non fit Mercurius: Clearly demonstrating that
you will sooner make a sweet Punch Bowl of a wooden Close-Stool, than an Orthodox
Bishop of an old stinking Phanatick; humbly offered to the Crack-brain'd
Frantic Window-breaker of Cripplegate, a lively and living Testimony of the
Truth of that Treatise. 14. Semper idem: Or a Covenanter in 47, an Engager in
52, a Negative and etc. Oath-man in 57, a Surplice Renouncer in 61, a
Conformist and Covenant-Renouncer in 64, a Rebel in 88, a scandalous Intruder
in 90, and a Judas always; by R -- d K -- r, and several others: Dedicated to
undipt John, and are to be sold at the Windmill in Turn-coat-Alley, where are
Alcorans or Bibles, Common Prayer or Mass-Books, Geneva Cloaks or Gowns and
Cassocks, Miters or Turbants of all sorts and sizes, for the use of the
persevering Confessors aforesaid. 15. Que genus and flexum variant, etc. Or a
Prophesy of the six Grand Intruders; proving them to be Heteroclites and
Heterodox, from the Rudiments of Grammar and Christianity. 16. Nos patriae
fines, etc. Room for Sooterkins, or the neighbourly kindness of a general
Naturalization; showing that since Foreigners have naturalized and adopted all
our Money, it is but reasonable that we should adopt and naturalize some of
their Men; because we have nothing left now to oblige them with but our Terra
firma, and since it is not possible to transport our Mountains to them, we
should bring them to our Mountains. 17. Graeculus esuriens, etc. A Catalogue of
Refugees turned Witches, in hopes of the Honors and Revenues of English
Bishoprics; By Gil -- t Bu -- t Founder of that Order: Dedicated to Mounsieur
Alix, already a Treasurer of one Cathedral, and a forward putter for the
Government of another. 18. Exorcista: Or England dispossessed of a Low Country
Devil, by the High Dutch Conjurer of the Savoy. 19. Ecclesi liberata. The
Established Church preserved by damning her Doctrines to steal her Pelf; By
Brother I -- n of the Char -- r-House: presented for a New-Years-Gift to Sister
Sym -- n, wherein is learnedly proved, that Possive Obedience without a
Parsonage and Prebendary, and Pater-nosters without Pence, are unedifying
Tenants, and that no Church is worth the saving that will not allow Tent and
Eggs to one's Breakfast. 20. Proximus sum egomet mihi: Near is my King, but
nearer is my Skin; By that renowned Vindicator of the Church, the Martyr Dr.
Pel -- g: Dedicated to M. G. Ludlow, as a thankful Return to his last obliging
Letter on that Subject; containing the Reasons of Jeshurun's kicking and the
Dr's deserting. Printed for Aminadab Rebellis, and are to be fold at the Sign
of the Jack-Pudding in Tailors Court near West -- r. 21. Asperius nihil est
humili, etc. A New-invented Mathematical Instrument, by the help of which one
may discover, that the higher a Jackanapes climbs, the more he shows his Arse:
Published for a Warning to Dr. Birch's Fathers that never were Sons, that they
may take effectual Care to double line their Breeches, because there is an old
Saying, that Fools will be peeping. 22. Octavus Sapientum: Or Bog-witicisms
improved for the Diversion of both Sexes; being some small Gleanings from the
plentiful Stock of the Worshipful Sir Sal -- l Lov -- l R -- r L -- o. 23.
Asiaus ad Lyram: An Argument in Law, proving that killing of Horses is
downright Murder: Published as a Caution to prevent the Effusion of Christian
Blood: By the same Ingenious Author. 24. In dubits tutior pars: Or the broad
Way to save a Man's Bacon and damn his Soul. 25. Junius Brutus Redivivus, The
Loyal Converter of the 30th of Jan. into a Day of Preparation for the
Sacrament; to be received only by such who make it the first Article of their
Religion, That the murdering or driving away Lawful Kings is not only lawful
but Saintlike performed on the last Anniversary, By W -- ms of the Poultry. 26.
Filius ante diem: A Vindication of Disobedience and Parricide, proving that
Children owe no Duty to Parents, unless so long as they did not understand it;
but when they come to Years of Discretion, they may and ought to maintain their
Liberty of Disobedience, even to the destruction of their Parents, if they but
suspect that they will labor to prevent such Undutifulness: Dedicated to a
very dutiful Lady at the great House near Ch -- ng-Cross; by the Plyer at St.
Andrew's Holborn. 27. Semel insanivimus omnes: Or a Treatise showing that he is
no good Philosopher, that has not committed one Folly: But at the same time
showing, that he is an Ass and a Knave that pursues it when he sees the Cheat:
Published by a Club of relenting Abdicators, and by them Dedicated to the
several Counties, Cities, Towns Corporate and Buroughs they represent. 28.
Unguentum Opthalmicum, Sovereign Eyebright to remove the Mists from the
Peoples Eyes, that they may see their Condition and reward their Riders:
Addressed to the unfeigned lovers of England of what Condition or Persuasion
soever. 29. Nolumus hunc regnare. An Epitome of all the learned Reasons given
by our Intruders and present Riders, against returning to our Senses and
restoring the King; with an Appendix of sear of Punishment and Disgrace:
Dedicated to half a dozen Hen peck'd London-Divines. 30. Nunquam sera est ad
bonos, etc. Or the Resurrection of Allegiance and Discipline from the Grave of
Rebellion and Schism, by the oppressed and abused Sons of the old true Church
of England: Published to the Confusion of those Sons of Latitude and Belial,
that make Heaven Pimp to their Interest. 31. Ex nihilo nihil fit: Or a
Dissertation of the No Power of a no Parliament, making a no King, that will
always be doing us no good, by leaving us no Parliaments without Perjury and
Pensioners, no Church without Knaves and Intruders, no Trade without Hazard and
Losses, no Credit at Home or Abroad, no Honor nor Conscience, no Blood in our
Veins, nor Money in our Pockets, none but Holland-Frogs and Caterpillars in the
Nation, and nothing but Repentance at the last.
Cases of Conscience and Queries.
1. WHether a Pensioner be not ten times worse than a Lapland. Wizard, since
the latter only sells his own Soul to the Devil, but the Pensioner sells other
Men's Souls, Bodies and all? 2. Whether a Coachman may not drive post to the D
-- l by profaning the Lord's Day, notwithstanding the License of the House? 3.
Whether the remaining four of the unrepealed Commandments ought not to be
cashiered next Session? 4. Whether the Members were asleep in St. Margarets or
St. Stephens, when they voted Dr. Birch a Saint in one place, and a Malignant
in the other? 5. Whether the Fifth Commandment be part of the Coronation Oath
since our Governors observe it so strictly? 6. Whether Protestant Tyranny
ben't better than Popish Tyranny by 6000000 per Annum? 7. Whether Popish Knives
and Grid-Irons have done us half so much mischief as Dutch Declarations and
English Pensioners? 8. Whether it is not a Cordial to an Englishman's Stomach,
to hear a nasty Dutchman swear that they have given us a King to wipe their
State-holder's Backside? 9. Whether it is better to have some Religion, all
Peace, and moderate Taxes, or no Peace, no Religion, and all Taxes? 10. Whether
when the Roguy Graver fixed old Noll's Head on W -- m's Shoulders, the Figure
were not all of a piece? 11. Whether 600000 l. were not too small a Gratuity to
our dear Saviors the Dutch, and whether we had not better openly give them
all, than let them take it underhand, and laugh at us into the Bargain? 12.
Whether our Governors do not act wisely in sacrificing our Seamen and starving
their Wives, since they design shortly we shall have no Ships? 13. Whether i^
was not a true Blander in him that took the Pope's Picture for that of K. W.
since he interpreted the two Keys to be those of our Coffers and Consciences?
14. Whether Julian or Sherlock deserve the Whetstone, since Julian has been
always true to a false Principle, and Sherlock Traitor and f^lfe to a ^rue one?
15. Whether S -- ben't the m^st excusable Instrument in our present Slavery,
since Treason and Rebellion in him are Original Sin? 16. Whether Cumb -- d and
Ten -- n ever confuted ten Hobbists by their B^wling and Printing? and whether
they have not m^de ten thousand by their practice? 17. Whether Julian, the
House, or the Hangman have made the best Second Treble to Gilbert's Pastoral?
18. Whether Father Sim -- n has been rebapt^z'd, sinc he publicly renounced
Christianity in Peter -- gh Carhedral? 19. Whether the S^otch-Conferences, and
the Friendly Debate are not damnably ashamed of their Rascally Authors? 20.
Whether the Pilgrim's Progress or the Parable of the Pilgrim had the better
Tinker to their Author, since they both set up for a pair of Church Menders?
21. Whether Richard of Kidder minister had not much more Episcopacy and
Uniformity in him than our Saint Richard Kidder? 22. Whether the Latin reason
of Auri sacra sames, or the English of the (...), Mare's the better Horse, did
operate most in making Sherlock a Changling? 23. Whether Bedlam ever produced
any thing half so lewd and frantic as Cresner's Lampoons upon the Apocalypse?
24. Whether the old Wel^h Seer may not with the help of a small Looking-glass
see an old crazy-crown'd Infidel since he pawned his Creed in 88, that Lewis
the Grand and Old Nick should be Chamber-Fellows in the other World before the
end of 92? 25. Whether J. C. or J. Y. have not all the reason imaginable to
admit Ranters, Sweet-Singers, Muggletonians, Jews, Turks and Infidels to be
Churchmembers, since their own Hearts tell them they are as good Christians as
themselyes? 26. Whether in the next Edition of his Shame, the renowned Author
of the Contempt of the Clergy ought not to add one other lamentable reason,
besides those of Ignorance and Poverty, viz. Time-serving; together with his
own Phizz in the Fr^ntispiece? 27. Whether Dame Britannia were not less
culpable in being forced to endure a Thirteen Years Rape from Oliver and the
Rump, than by living a Five Years Adulteress now by Consent?
FINIS.

