The CASE Relating to the BILL for Preventing Multiplicity of Vexatious Suits,
and for Ascertaining a certain ancient Customary Tyth in the County of Derby.
according to the Tenor of certain Decrees in Chancery grounded on diverse Trials
all Common Law
Jun. 8 Ric. 2d; 9 Feb. 7. Hen. 4. 24 Feb. 5 Hen. 6. 23 Mar. 15 Edw. 4. etc.

Derbyshire, did undoubtedly at first arise, since the Mines there were
anciently in the King's own Hands. And it is most equitable for the Miners to
pay a Tyth of their Lead Oar, because they (or any Subject of England) have the
Privilege to dig and turn up any Man's Ground, in searching for Lead Oar there,
whereby vast quantities both of Pasture, Meadow, and Arable Land, are turned
into heaps, and made Barren, which would otherwise yield a good Tyth in another
kind.

Lot and Cope) payable to the King or his Farmer, and this they have Entered
and Recorded in the Ancient Articles of their Liberties and Customs, as a
necessary Condition of some of their Privileges, as may be seen by two
Inquisitions, concerning the Liberties and Customs of the Lead-Mines in
Derbyshire, taken by special Commission, or Quo Warranto, from the Crown, upon
the Oaths of 24 Jurors, or the Body of the Mine (as they are called) the one
Inquis. Sept. 20. 3 Edw. 6th, Article 4. the other May 3d, in 3 and 4 Phil. and
Mary, Article 6. both taken at Wirksworth.

Derbyshire, whose Names, including their Wives, Servants and Children, are
Subscribed to a Petition which was presented to the Parliament in the Reign of
Cha. I. do all of them acknowledge the payment of this Tyth to the Church, and
pleaded in that their Petition, that for paying this Tyth (and the Duty of Lot
and Cope to the King) they ought to be discharged of some other Payments and
Impositions which Q. Eliz first of all, and after her K. Ja. I. and Chapter I. had
successively and gradually laid upon Lead (to the value of 48 s. per Fudder of
Tun) from which Impositions they were and are at this day discharged, upon that
their Petition.

S^ar-Chambers, and Council Board have been made in favor of the Proprietors
of this Tyth and for settling and recovering their Right when it has been
denied. Only the Plaintiffs in those Suits having multitudes of Adversaries,
and some of them Rich, were put to vast Expenses and Charges in those Suits
(one of them only expending above 1500 l. in recovering his 3d part of this
Tyth in three Parishes) which being wholly insupportable to four or five poor
Parsons and Proprietors of Tyth (who only (in all the County of Derby) are now
denied this Duty, although their Predecessors, not only at the time of those
great Suits, but for many Years since, even till very lately, did receive and
quietly enjoy the said Tyth. They therefore solicit this Bill in Parliament, to
prevent such Vexatious Suits, and to enforce the Execution, and to make the
Benefit of those Decrees as general and extensive to the whole County of Derby
(where Lead-Oar is got and dug) as the Issues, Verdicts, and Evidences given
at the Common-Pleas-Bar were, on which those Decrees were Founded.

Derbyshire, pay First Fruits and Yearly Tenths to the King expressly, for their
Tyth of Lead-Oar, as appears in all or most of their Endowments upon Record, in
the First Fruits Office. And they are Rated as high in public Taxes, as when
their Predecessors received this Duty.

Lastly, A Bill was once offered in Parliament, against Tyth-Oar, but was
rejected, upon Reasons given by the Ministers and Proprietors of Tyth, wherein
they made appear their Right, from many ancient Deeds, Accounts, Leases and
other Records in the Reigns of Ed. II. Ed. III. Ric. II. Hen. VI. Ed. IV. Hen.
VII. Hen. VIII. Ed. VI. And the present Suitors for this Bill, can show diverse
Accounts, Leases and Compositions and Receipts of this Tyth by their
Predecesors.

Appendix.
The Petitioners Right to his Tyth appearing by this Case and Decree to be so
plain and evident, that it seems Recoverable at Law: It may be asked, why we
trouble the Parliament with it.
To which we Humbly Answer: I. BEcause notwithstanding the clearness of our
Title in Law, yet the Litigiousness of our Opponents has kept us out of
Possession for above Twenty Five Years; by which means we cannot now have those
general Issues upon which this Tyth was formerly Established (as may be seen in
the Decree) nor yet those Living Witnesses, and Evidence Viva Voce which our
Predecessors had upon their particular and local Issues. II. Because by
witholding so considerable a part of our Maintenance, we are totally disabled
to follow so many tedious and chargeable Suits at Law, as by the sad experience
of some of our Predecessors, we certainly know the opponents of this Tyth will
put us upon: It not being to be supposed, that a Clergyman whose Benefice is
but 50, 60, or 70 Pounds per Annum, should expend 600 or 800 Pounds (as some of
our Predecessors who had great temporal Estates, besides their Benefices, have
done) in vindicating this Right of his Church in which he has yet no Estate of
Inheritance, nor perhaps, much probability of seeing the Suit ended during his
Life. III. Our Right and Title (as appears by the Decree) having been fully
tried and cleared in all the Courts of Law and Equity upon general Issues for
the whole County, and those directed by special Order of the Privy-Counsel, on
purpose to avoid multiplicity of Suits: We humbly conceive it need not be sent
back again to the Law upon Local and particular Issues, which are only a late
Invention and Design of some Persons Cunning in the Law, to defeat the intent
of those former general Issues and the Verdicts given upon 'em, and to multiply
as many Suits as there are Parishes, Places, or Proprietors who claim this
Tyth. IV. If we were able to follow so many several Suits at Law, and should
prevail in 'em all; yet would not this secure us or our Successors in the quiet
possession of this Tyth, without an Establishment of the general Right for the
whole County of Darby; because the multitude of our Opponents are on all
occasions ready to renew their Suits, to seize the Tyth to themselves for
Maintenance of Suit against the Parson, and upon the Death, Change, or Poverty
of any Incumbent, to deny former Decrees, and take advantage of the Clemency of
our Predecessors in not always exacting a constant Tenth, thereby to destroy or
avoid our Right upon strict Local and particular Issues at Common Law. V. The
Opponents of this Duty having formerly followed this Cause through all the
Courts of Law and Equity, and before the Privy-Councel, and being Cast and
Condemned in all, did themselves bring this Matter into the Parliament, where
the general Right to this Tyth (being acknowledged on all sides to be one and
the same in all Parishes within the County of Darby) was upon solemn
Examination and Debate so far approved in Parliament, as to reject and cast out
a Bill brought against this Tyth; which gives us hopes, that as the Honorable
House did once receive and debate the Reasons of a Bill brought against us; so
they will not now reject the Consideration of a Bill brought for the quiet
Establishment of Us in the possession of that Right which has been by them so
far approved. But especially the poor Clergy-Petitioners who only (of almost
all others) are now denied and kept out of this Tyth; do therefore humbly apply
themselves for Relief to the two most Honorable Houses of Parliament, as the
Common Patrons of their injured and despoiled Churches, which for the Reasons
aforesaid, cannot Relieve themselves by any other way.


The CASE Relating to the BILL for Preventing Vexations Suits, and Ascertaining
(...) certain Customary TY^H in the County of DERBY.


