THE TRUTH and EXCELLENCE OF THE Christian Religion, WITH THE CORRUPTIONS and
ADDITIONS OF THE ROMISH CHURCH: A Discourse, Wherein the Pre-eminence of
Christianity is demonstrated above the Religion of Jews or Heathens; and the
Contradiction of Popery to its main Articles: And that Religion proved in many
Instances to be a mixture of Heathenish Superstitions, and Jewish Ceremonies.

With a short Vindication of Christian Loyalty: And a brief Historical Account
of Romish Treasons and Usurpations, since the Reformation.

By a hearty Professor of Reformed Catholic Christianity.

Published for the Benefit of those that have not leisure to read larger
Volumes.

LONDON: Printed for John Gellibrand at the Golden Ball in St Paul's
Churchyard. 1685.

To the Honorable Sir Thomas Roberts, Knight and Baronet of Glassenbury in
Kent.
SIR,
HAVING been for some time no uncompassionate observer of the strangely
unnatural hea^s, and angry Unchristian jars of Protestants one with another; I
was willing to divert my thoughts from so melancholy a Scene, and direct my
Zeal against those more dangerous Enemies of our Peace, Popery and Irreligion.
I was willing to call off my Native Countrymen from biting and devouring one
another, to unite against those potent Adversaries, which are coming in upon
us, through those wide Breaches our Divisions have made. And methinks, if men
would but give themselves leave to consider how their hot Disputes about
Trifles, expose their Religion to the seorn of the Hectoring Atheists, and
Derision of the bold Incendiaries of Rome; they would be less eager about
Circumstances and Modes of Worship, and more industrious in an unanimous
Defense of the common Principles of Christianity.

I know many excellent Worthies have labored before me in this Argument, and
adorned their Discourses with all the Beauites of Wit, Learning, and Eloquence;
but yet, because Irreligion gains new Proselytes, and Rome swells big with
greater hopes of once more introducing its blind Superstitions into our Land, I
have adventured at the same time, to vindicate the excellency of Christianity
against the Infidel, and arm my Contrymen against the bold Corruptions of
Rome; and tho I am not able to bear the Helmet of Saul, and his weighty Coat of
Mail be too heavy for my Shoulders; tho I pretend not to such strong Lines, and
nervous Arguments, as have been produced by the great Defenders of the
Christian and Protestant Faith in our Age; Yet I know not, but a Sling and a
Stone, even in the hand of a Stripling, may, by Divine Assistance in some
measure prevent the increase of our Enemies, and confirm the staggering among
us, in the profession, and practice of our Reformed Religion.

And when once I had resolved to expose these Papers to the Censure of the
World; I at the same time resolved to make this public acknowledgment of the
endearing Obligations you, Sir, have laid upon me. I must acknowledge the
Present is too mean for so great a Person; and it is a Disparagement to so
worthy a Name to prefix it before so inconsiderable a Piece; but your good
Nature is such, that I hope your Affection will bribe your Judgment; and what
your Reason disallows, your undeserved respect to the Author will not condemn.

I know, Sir, the usual Flattery of Dedicatory Epistles; but know as well, that
you hate the fawning of mean Parasites; and had rather be good, than* be
magnified as such in the World; and tho I might expatiate in your due Praises,
yet I will not so far trespass upon your Humility (that great Ornament of your
Nature, as well as Religion) but rather turn my Panegyricks into Prayers, That
greatness and real goodness may be in you conjoined, and the Nobility of your
Birth may be equaled by the noble Endowments of your mind. Go on, Sir, in your
hearty Zeal for God and Religion; and let your great Example prevent the boasts
of the bold Hectors of this Age, That they have Prosely^ed all the Gentry of
the Land. Let your Dependents and Neighbors be awed into Seriousness by your
strictly holy life; and allure men into the practice of Religion, by your
sincere compliance with the amiable Virtues it recommends. Let not the Infidel
be able to say, That Religion is only fit for the Cells of melancholy Souls,
and the retirements of the poor despised Men in Black, who make it their Trade
and Profession; but continue, Sir, a glorious instance, How well Religion
becomes the most noble Souls; and that Virtue is the best accomplishment, and
the highest badg of Honor. Continue, Sir, in your becoming-Zeal against Papal
Corruptions, which so naturally tend to Debauchery and Irreligion. And if this
Discourse may be any way useful for so excellent a purpose, I shall have great
reason to bless God, for directing me to such a Subject, Who am

Honorable Sir, Your Obliged, Humble, Affectionate Servant, S. C.

ACTS XVII. 6. These that have turned the world upside down, are come hither
also.
A Just Vindication of the Christian Religion from the impious Slanders of its
professed Enemies, and covert practices of its pretended Friends* has in all
Ages of the Church, been a very necessary work. For tho our Religion be
sufficiently attested, and God has given convincing Evidences that it came
from him; tho the excellency, and intrinsic worth of the Precepts, recommend
it to the Approbation of all mankind. Tho the Doctrines it delivers are highly
agreeable to the wisest Apprehensions of men, no way unbecoming a God to speak,
or men to hear. Tho no Religion in the World was ever so admirably sitted to
advance the interest of particular persons, or promote the advantage of public
Societies; yet has it been vilely misrepresented by its Adversaries, and the
malice of Earth and Hell has been busied in inventing lying Accusations, to
prevent its settlement and Propagation.

The blessed Author of it, was accused as a Blasphemer and Impostor, tho he
came upon the most admirable design; of promoting the happiness of mankind, and
laid down such excellent Rules, as would certainly have filled the World with
the blessings of a flourishing Peace, and lasting Prosperity; yet was he
traduced as a Troubler of the World, and Seducer of the People: and tho he
deserved to be honored with the most profound respect, and recompensed with
the best rewards; yet had he no other Crown than one of Thorns; and no other
Throne than a Cross. And the same Spirit that murdered their Lord, did appear
also against his Disciples and Followers. Wherever they went to Preach the
Word of the Kingdom, they were still persecuted with the bold lies, and
virulent slanders of their enraged Adversaries. The Magistrates were excited to
secure the public Peace, against these pretended Disturbers of it. And thus
they boldly cry out in the Text, These that have turned the world upside down,
are come hither also.

For the better understanding which words, it will be necessary, briefly to
reflect upon the Context.

Paul and Silas, having traveled v. 1.
through many parts of Asia, publishing the Gospel; in this Chapter, are come
to Thessalonica, where was a Synagogue of the Jews, and a mixture of Heathen
Greeks, and those v. 2.
called devout, i. e. Proselytes of the Gate, that disowned the Follies and
Superstitions of the vulgar Heathen, worshipped one God, and complied with the
seven Precepts of the Sons of Noah. St. Paul gives the preference to his own
Nation, and according to his usual custom in other places, goes into the Jewish
Synagogue, and for three successive v. 3.
Sabbaths, reasoned with them, and proves by their Law, That Jesus must be the
expected Missiah. And his v. 4*
Arguments were so covincing, that he gained some converts among the Jews, and
proselyted a numerous company of Religious Greeks. But those v. 5.
who remained obstinate in their infidelity, being filled with rage, gathered
together a Rabble of the baser sort, and tumultuously throng to the house of
Jason, whose Guest St. Paul was, and would forcibly have dragged the Apostles
before the Civil Magistrate; but they having prudently declined their fury,
Jason with some other Converts is haled before the Rulers of the City, and
accused as an Harbourer v. 6.
of Traitors, or at least Disturbers of the public Peace. For they cry out*

These that have turned the world upside down, are come hither also: Whom Jason
has received.

These) they speak concerning the Apostles, these whom Jason has received.

That have turned the world upside down. The Greek word is, as I remember, used
but once more in the New Testament, and there it is rendered to trouble, Gal. 5.
12. I wish they were even cut off which trouble you, i. e. unsettle your minds,
and seek to pervert you by teaching that new Doctrine of Circumcision, and
keeping the Ceremonial part of Moses's Law. The word properly signifies to
Disorder, Disquiet, and raise Confusion. So that the Accusation against the
Apostles, may be understood either more Generally, or Particularly.

1. More Generally; So the Accusation may be, These that have disturbed the
World, by bringing in a new Religion, that have overturned the Ancient
Religions; and brought in new Doctrines, directly opposite to the former; as if
they should have said, They propagate new Principles, destructive of the
Ancient Religion of us Jews, and customary rites of you Gentiles; they have in
every place argued against that Law, which we are assured came down from
Heaven; and laugh at that Worship which you account most sacred and venerable.
They have not only created disturbance by this means, in other Cities; but with
the same design, are come hither also; and therefore your duty to your Gods,
obliges you to silence and restrain them; they indeed have escaped our hands,
but we have brought these before you, who have given entertainment to their
Persons in their Houses, and their Doctrines in their hearts.

2. More Particularly, The Apostles may be here accused as disturbing the
World, by teaching Doctrines of Rebellion and Sedition. Indeed as they brought
in a new Religion, they might be accounted Authors of Sedition, because all
Innovations were looked upon as tending to unsettle the Peace of the State; but
the more particular crime, of which they may here accuse them, seems to be the
immediate tendency of some of their Doctrines to Rebellion, and this is
countenanced by the 7th verse; These all do contrary to the decrees of Caesar,
saying there is another King, one Jesus; we may therefore suppose the charge of
the Jews, to be managed after such a manner as this. These that are the Pests
of Societies, and highly disaffected to the established Government, Friends of
Anarchy, and Enemies to Caesar; that maintain rebellious Principles, and sow
Sedition wherever they come; that have cast off all sense of Allegiance, and
teach others to renounce their Subjection to their Emperor; that will not obey
the Laws themselves, and persuade others to refuse their Obedience also, and
preach up Subjection to another King, one Jesus; these, as they have disturbed
the Government in other Cities, so here also have they spread their Infection.
These are the men, these are their Principles; and whether they are worthy of
restraint, judge ye.

Thus do the malicious Jews, misrepresent the Doctrines of these Messengers of
Peace; and Innocence it self was not a sufficient Guard against the Persecution
of their envenomed Tongues. And, oh that I might say, concerning the whole
Christian World at this day, that such an Accusation would be Slanderous
against them, as well as the Apostles; but alas! the Groans and Sighs of
England, as well as other Lands, gives too sad occasion to cry out, These that
have turned the world upside down, have come hither also.

I shall speak to the words in both these senses* seeing they will well bear
it, and are exactly suited to my design. In order to a more methodical
Progress, I shall speak to four Generals.

1. Whether the Apostles did introduce a new Religion, different from what was
before entertained in the World? and whether they had the Divine Commission to
do so? For if they could produce the Warrant of God for what they did* they
could not justly be blamed or accused. 2. Whether the Apostles Doctrine tended
to Rebellion? 3. Whether any professed Christians at this day, are justly
liable to this charge in both senses? 4. I shall deduce such Inferences as
naturally result from the whole Discourse.
1. Whether the Apostles did introduce a new Religion, and had a Commission
from God to do so?

To this I answer affirmatively; Christ did institute, and his Apostles did
publish a more perfect platform of Religion than was before existent in the
World; but not without sufficient discoveries of Gods Approbation. In this
sense, they did turn the World upside down; taught Doctrines contrary to the
universally received Opinions of the Gentiles, and darling Traditions and
Practise^ of the Jews. The Christian Religion did silence the Pagan Oracles
where it prevailed, and caused the Heathen Dagons to fall down before it; the
carnal Ceremonies of the Jews were disused, and Moses was not able to stand
before him, whom they called a Magician.

The Brutish rites of the Heathens were abolished at the appearance of
Christianity; and the Light of the Gospel dispersed the Shadows of the Law, and
took off the vail from Moses. The Impurities of the Heathen, and Imperfection
of the Jewish Worship, did render a more perfect Revelation of the Divine will
very necessary; and this was the Province undertaken by our Savior and his
Apostles.

1. The Christian Religion has given a more complete discovery of the Nature
of God, and the manner how he will be Worshipped

The Conceptions of the Heathens, concerning the Nature of God, were very gross
and confused; and the Wisemen of Athens and Rome, were at continual jars and
disagreement about his Attributes; and they entertained very lame and
imperfect, and some blasphemous and unworthy Notions of him. They did indeed
generally acknowledge there could be but one Supreme and Sovereign God; and of
him, Varro tells us, they made no Images and Pictures at Rome, till 170 Years
after the Building of that City; but afterward they carved him out in Wood and
Stone, and still worshipped inferior Deities with the same external reverence
they paid to their Jupiter. To th^se they dedicated Temples, consecrated
Altars, burnt large portions of Incense, and adored with the same outward
expressions of Devotion; and thus they debased his Infinite Power, as if he
needed a rabble of petty pigmy Deities to rule the World. To him the common
people (being influenced by the tales of the wanton Poets) Ascribed the most
enormous Vices, the Murders and Adulteries, Sodomies and Rapes, which are
related of ' Jupiter of Crete, were applied by them to him whom they called
Supreme. And tho many Philosophers entertained more refind Notions, yet they
dared not contradict the vulgar Follies, without incurring the Odium of the
Rabble, and joined in the same Rites and vile Ceremonies, and observed the same
Customs with them. Indeed among the common people reason was debased below
common sense; the idle Fables of their iustful Poets, were readily received.
Orvids Metamorphosis, and Homers Iliads, and the Divine Theology of the great
Virgil, were their Systems of Divinity. The vilest of men, who deserved public
Punishment on Earth, were adored as Gods in Heaven; and those whose memories
ought to be loathed and detested, were reverenced with Divine Adoration; in
some places they worshipped bruit Beasts, Cows and Dogs were deifi'd, Serpents
and Crocodiles were devoutly adored, Apes and Monkeys received their submissive
Prostrations; so that it was very questionable, which were more ridiculous, the
gods or their worshippers. The Sun, Moon, and Stars, Rivers and Elements, the
Fruits of their Trees, Flowers in their Gardens, Herbs in their Fields, and the
vilest inanimate things in nature, were the objects of their religious worship;
they paid a Divine Veneration to the Diseases of their Bodies, the Passions of
their Minds, and the Accidents of their Lives.

Nay, further, the cursed Fiends of Hell were treated with awful Reverence; and
the sworn Enemies to mankind had Temples and Altars consecrated to their
honor; thus vile were the Gods they adored, and the Rites wherewith they
worshipped them, were equally abominable. What were the Mysteries of their
Religion, but mixtures of the most extravagant folly and filthiness? Their
Eleusinia, Sacra, Floralia, and Bacchanal Solemnities, were composed of Antic
tricks, and such pieces of uncleanness as cannot be spoken without a blush, nor
thought of without polluting the mind with immodest Idea's. What more
Fantastic, than their Auguries by the flight of Birds, Presages by the smoke
of Incense, Fat of Sacrifices, Intrails of Beasts, and all the other Charms and
Sorceries in their Worship? these were the Notions the Gentiles entertained of
God; this was the Worship they paid unto him; but the Christian Religion
overturned the whole Fabric of their Worship, demolished their Altars,
silenced their Oracles, brake down their Images, and showed them the Folly and
Superstition, of which they had been so long guilty.

A Religion that gives us the best and most complete Character of the Divine
Attributes; and represents him as a Being insinitely perfect, in whom all the
scattered excellencies of the creatures are concentered, without any of their
Imperfections. A Religion that declares the Greatness of his Majesty, the
Infinity of his Power, the unsearchableness of his Wisdom, the Invariability of
his Truth, the Purity of his Nature, and Boundlesness of his Goodness. A
Religion which gives us the most lovely Description of his Nature, and
naturally tends to work in us the most awful reverence and lowly humility,
silial fear and dependent confidence, the most ardent Love, and unspotted
Purity, chearsul Obedience to every Command, and ready Submission to every
Providence. A Religion, whose Mysteries are grave and serious, becoming the
Solemnities of Divine Worship, without any mixtures of folly and profaneness.
A Religion which declares Gods severe Indignation against Sin, and love to
virtue and goodness, and strictly charges us to imitate the Divine Purity, and
thus become partakers of a Divine Nature. And now no wonder that such a
discovery as this, was a terrible Alarm to that World that lay in wickedness.
No wonder that they who could enjoy their Lusts without control, and plead the
example of their gods, in justification of their crimes; were so hotly enraged
against such as gave them a quite contrary discovery of the Divine Nature. The
light of the Gospel was hateful to them, who were unwilling to be roused from
their pleasing Slumbers, and had rather have continued in their delusions. Thus
were the Apostles disturbers of the Heathen World by rectifying their gross
Apprehensions concerning the Nature of God, and calling them from Worshipping
they knew not what, to the Service of the only living and true God.

The Jews indeed had clearer discoveries of Gods Nature; to them were committed
his Oracles; and in Judah was his name known; But they had not such clear and
satisfying light, as we enjoy under the Gospel; they saw his back - parts only,
but we behold his Face. To them he was discovered through a darkning veil, but
to us through a more perspicuous Glass. His confining the special Testimonies
of his Love, to such a narrow spot of Ground as Judea, did seem to represent
him less amiable and diffusive in his goodness, than WE have reason to
apprehend him. His so rigidly insisting on ceremonial Services, and positive
Institutions, and connivence at many Breaches of moral Duties, such as
Polygamy, Divorces upon light occasions, and the Laws of Retaliation and
Revenge, did tend to beget a less awful sense of his Holiness and Purity than
is due unto him. In the Christian Religion; the Divine Wisdom is displayed in
more lively Colors; the Divine Goodness is written in more legible Characters;
his hatred to Sin, his love to Piety, is more perspicuously discovered. Never
was there so lovely a Manifestation of all his Attributes, as in the Redemption
of the World by our Savior; the vastly extended Heavens, and all the beauteous
splendid Lights that thence dart down their Influences on the World, and all
the Flourishes of Divine Power and Wisdom, which may be seen upon the Earth,
and all the admirable Acts of Providence, whereby God has startled his
Enemies, or saved his People; afford not such exalted discoveries of the Divine
Wisdom, and Omnipotence, as is legible in the Incarnation, Life and Death of
our Savior. The deluge of the old World, the Flames of Sodom, the Plagues of
Egypt, and all the Tremendous Judgments recorded in the Old Testament, were not
so sensible a Declaration of Gods Indignation against Sin, as the anguish and
direful Agonies of the Lord Jesus. The miracles of Mercy extended to Noah, and
Abraham, and Joseph, and David, and all the other Worthies of Israel, give us
not such elevated transporting Apprehensions of the depths of Divine Love, as
may be drawn from the consideration of that great My stery of Godliness, God
manifested in the Flesh. All the Declarations of Divine Perfections, that ever
were vouchsafed to the World, come infinitely short of these gracious
discoveries in the Gospel.

Besides the manner whereby the Jews Worshipped God (tho he in that Infant state
of the Church, for wise reasons was pleased to institute it) yet was it too
gross and carnal, and not enough suited to his spiritual nature; it consisted in
gay Shows, and pompous Solemnities; in the Circumcision of the Flesh, Smoke of
Sacrifices, Steams of Incense, Purgations from ceremonial Uncleanness,
Distinctions of Days, and Habits, and Meats; things that had no Intrinsic
Goodness or worth to commend them. They had indeed a spiritual signification,
but the veil of Ceremonies was so thick, and their Affections so carnal that
very few dived into their Typical meaning; but Christianity teaches a Worship
more admirably adapted to the Nature of God, and reason of man. The law came by
Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ, Joh. 1. 17. Grace in
opposition to the legal severities; and Truth in opposition to their Types and
Shadows. God is a spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and truth, Joh. 4.
24. not with carnal Ceremonies, but spiritual Affections; not with typical
Shadows, but true and sincere Devotions. The Rites of this Religion are but few
in number, and therefore far less painful and laborious: Eucharistical and
Commemorative of what is past, and therefore more apt for the instilling Piety,
than those typical Ordinances whose signification was more dark and obscure. In
this sense it is acknowledged the Apostles did disturb the World.

2. The Apostles taught the only satisfying method of man's Reconciliation with
his Maker.

This was a thing that very much puzzled the considering part of mankind; and
their Opinions were very different concerning it; the light of Nature taught
them that they were Gods subjects, and that an entire subjection to him was
their Duty; they knew that Sin was an affront to his Majesty, and injury to all
his Attributes; and the stings of Conscience forcd thom to confess, that they
^liad been very foulty in their Obedience, and incurred the just Displeasure of
Heaven; and yet by Gods forbearance; they discerned his readiness to be
reconciled. His continuing forfeited Benefits discoveu'd, that he was not
willing to punish them according to their Demerits.

But how this Clemency and Mildness could be consistent with his Holiness, this
very much perplexed them. How he could preserve the rights of his Justice, and
yet give such large Demonstrations of his Goodness, this they could not
apprehend. Some therefore fashioned a God altogether like themselves, and made
the Poetic Fables the Rule of their Faith; the Tales of the Rapes, Adulteries,
and secret amors of their reputed Deities, confirmed them in their Sins, and
thought that to Sacrifice their Lives to Bacchus, or dye the Martyrs of Venus,
would be anv least no way displeasing to Heaven. Others conceived, that God
took no notice, of smaller faults, and was not much incensed at any crimes that
brought no notable detriment to the Commonwealth. Others invented numerous
expiatory Sacrifices, and multiplied superstitious Inventions, hoping by these
little things to appease the anger of God. For tho, perhaps, the way of
Sacrificing was instituted by God, and conveyed throughout the World by
Tradition from Noah; yet they unreasonably rested in the Sacrifice it self,
never imagined it merely typical, but vainly presumed the Blood of Lambs would
wash away their crimes; tho they were utterly destitute of their Innocence. In
cases of extreme distress, and to secure them from public threatened Judgments,
they presented their Gods with humane burnt Offerings, as if one Sin might be
expiated by another of a deeper dye; but some were dissatisfied with this
method also, and agreed that the Supreme God delights rather in the Oblations
of a pure mind, than in costly Incense, or burnt Offerings.

Others therefore, especially the proud Philosophers, were so little sensible
of their Obligation to God, that they thought their good works would recompense
for the sins they committed, and their shadows of virtue overballance their
offenses. Others had some apprehensions of the necessity of a Mediator, and
therefore to Angels and Deifi'd men (who had been public Benefactors to their
Country while they lived) they addressed themselves, and bribed them with
Divine honors, to intercede with God on their behalf. This was a Doctrine
generally entertained at Athens, in the Apostles time. In this Chapter we find,
that when Saint Paul preached Jesus and the Resurrection, they say, he seems
to be a setter forth of strange Gods or Demons; this was the title they gave to
their Mediators. These several methods were contrived by the Heathens, to
reconcile God to man; but still they were very fluctuating and dubious in their
Opinions; and their guilty fears made them tremble, lest after all their
thoughtful pains they should have mistaken the right method, and God should be
still unreconcil'd.

The Jews indeed had many Sacrifices that were Originally designed to typifie
and prefigure the Death of our Lord Redeemer; and the high Priests entering into
the Holy of Holies once a year, represented his Intercession; but these shadows
were so obscure, and their eyes so dim, that very few understood their
spiritual signification. They generally looked for a glorious Messiah, that
should Translate the Empire from Rome to Jerusalem; tread upon the Necks of
their Enemies, and reign over the whole Earth with an outward magnificence
greater than that of Solomon. The Disciples themselves labored under the same
mistake, and never dreamed of the necessity of such an Ignominious Death as our
Savior suffered. Hence when he was telling them what Sufferings he must
undergo, St. Peter How of thoughtfulness, Page 64.
very gravely rebukes him, saying, Master favor thy self, this shall not be
unto thee: it was not merely his concern for his Master, but what would become
of his own designs and hopes, that drew forth those Expressions. Christ had
promised him the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven which he knowing to be the
insignia of great Authority in Princes Courts, interpreted it of some secular
Greatness in the Kingdom of the Messiah. And this made him so solicitous, when
our Lord spoke of Suffering and Death; and for this reason our Savior calls
him Satan, the name of the Usurping God of this World; who had yet too much
Power over him, Matthew. 16. 22, 23. So also Zebedees Children desired one to sit
at his right hand, and the other at his left, as Persons next in Dignity to
him, in that earthly Kingdom they expected; and when his Death came, they then
began to despair, saying, we hoped that this had been he which should have
redeemed Israel, Lu. 24. 21. Thus we see the Disciples themselves, little
expecting this way of Redemption reveald in the Gospel.

The 'Jews indeed, especially the Pharisees, had generally very high thoughts
of their own worth, and external Privileges, as being Abraham's Seed, and Gods
peculiar inheritance; believed their good works meritorious, accounted an
external Obedience to the Law, as much as was required, and saw little or no
use of repentance; the righteous Persons Luke 15. 7.
needing no repentance, seems to be spoken with some Reflection on their proud
conceits. If at any time they did break the Law, they hoped to be saved from
punishment, by the Opus operatum of a Sacrifice; and were so unreasonably vain,
as to think that the Blood of Bulls and Goats would wash away their Sin. Hence
the Apostle is forced so laboriously to prove, that all men being Sinners,
there is no other way to be reconciled to God, than by the method laid down in
the Gospel, in the Epistle to the Romans; and that the Sacrifices under the
Law, were only available as Typical of the great Propitiation of our Lord
Redeemer; in the Epistle to the Hebrews. Thus absurd and dangerous notions,
did the Jews and Heathens entertain concerning the way to recover the Divine
favor; and Christianity did in this sense also disturb the World, by beating
down their proud conceits, and clearly discovering the vileness of their sins,
by declaring that we are all Rebels against the King of Heaven; that he is so
infinitely Pure and Holy, and we have rendered our selves so base and unworthy,
that all our Services will be no way available without an expiatory Sacrifice;
and that, the most precious that Heaven or Earth could afford, even the Blood
of his own beloved Son; and that he will not listen to a Prayer from our guilty
mouths, except it be hallowed and presented to him by the hands of this
spotless and only-prevailing Mediator. The Christian Religion has brought to
light that Mystery hid from Ages, God incarnate. And what was puzling and
obscure before, to the most inquisitive Philosopher, is clearly unfolded in
this Institution. Now we need no more be held in Bondage and doubtful suspense,
but may assure our selves. That if we obey the Lord Jesus as our King, depend
upon him as our Priest, and sincerely follow the rules of Life he has laid
down as our Prophet; in one word, if we heartily comply with the terms of the
new Covenant sealed in his Blood, we shall obtain the pardon of our sins, the
favor of God, and the rewards of eternity.

3. The Apostles prescribed the most perfect and certain rules of Life.

The Heathens were only directed by the dim light of Nature; and tho they might
have spelt out the principal parts of their Duty, by viewing the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, and the other works of God: Tho many excellent Lessons of Morality are
laid down by some inquisitive Philosophers; Yet they were so much biased by
their vicious Inclinations, that they generally rejected them; the power of
their Corruption was so great, and the encouragements to support Religion, so
weak and uncertain, that few were influenced by the most substantial precepts
of any of their Philosophers.

The Duties of Piety toward God were commonly neglected. For while some
questioned his Being, others his Providence; While some confined him to the
Heavens, others thought that at most he only minded the great concerns of
Kingdoms and Republics below: While some doubted his love to mankind, and
represented him as an austere Tyrannical Being; and others limited his Power,
and thought him unable to rectify the evil Dispositions of our Nature: While
some disputed his Holiness, and fashioned to themselves an impure Deity; and
others denied his Justice, and laughed at the Punishments of another World, as
Bugbears, and Scare-crows, and painted Fires^: ^ While these Notions, and many
more of the like tendency, were so generally entertained; how could it be
possible, they should pay that reverence and awful fear, that love and
gratitude unto him, that he deserves? Nor were they less defective in the great
Duties of Morality, and common Honesty: They embraced opinions that directly
thwarted all the Duties of the Second Table, and their Actions were too
consistent with their Principles. Revenge was the character of a generous Soul:
and to pass by an injury, was the sign of a cowardly Spirit. Self-murder was
commended as an act of Heroical bravery, and made the common practice of the
highest pretenders to Wisdom. Adultery, Incest, and the crying sin of Sodom,
were allowed by their gods, practiced in their Temples, and approved by many of
their Philosophers. Rapine and Theft was encouraged by the Spartans and
Egyptians, as the matter of their Glory not of their shame. In a word, Religion
was generally accounted a politic contrivance to keep the World in aw: and
Virtue and Vice were esteemed as bare names, and no otherwise regarded, than as
Commanded or Prohibited by their respective Kings and Governors. Indeed some
Philosophers did give them better Instructions; but they themselves were
generally either very dubious, or swai'd so much by Custom, Education,
Interest, and their own habitual Lusts, that they led not much better lives
than other men; as if their Precepts were intended only for Speculation, and
the entertainment of their mind, and no way for practice, and the improvement
of the Life. And at the first appearance of Christianity, the World was arrived
at an unusual height of Debauchery. The Court of Rome had lost all its former
Virtue and Integrity, and was wholly drowned in Luxury and Wantonness.
Epicurus's Philosophy was in greatest Reputation, and men Studied nothing so
much as how to improve their brutish Pleasures, to the utmost extravagance of
enjoyment; and other Nations followed the manners of their Conquerors, and
imitated the then Mistress of the World, and were encouraged by their
Governors, who generally raised their Fortunes by their eminency in villainy
and wickedness.

The Jews had a more complete discovery of Gods Will. The Decalogue contains in
it a brief summary of the Law of Nature; but because of the hardness of their
hearts, God connived at some practices, not so agreeable to his Will. Thus
Poligamy was winked at, and Divorces upon flight occasions permitted; the Laws
of revenge were established: And so many ritual Observations enjoined, that
they were too mindful of them, and too neglectful of the weightier matters of
the Law. They were very mindful of external Ceremonies, but forgot the practice
of inward Virtue and Religion; they were afraid to soil themselves with
imaginary ceremonial Pollutions; but wholly insensible of deeper moral
defilements. They circumcised their Flesh, but not their Hearts; and Sacrificed
their Beasts, but not their brutish Lusts. They used all possible diligence to
cleanse themselves from the Leprosy of their Bodies, but took no care of the
more dangerous spots on their Souls. They religiously abstained from the meats
sorbidden in their Law; but made no conscience of shunning the sinful
Pollutions, that were more to be avoided. And especially, in our Saviors time,
their Religion was dwindled away, and nothing but a lifeless shadow left. For
one powerful Party among them, the Sadducees, had taken away the belief of that
great Bulwark of Religion, without which it is hardly possible to subsist, The
immortality of the Soul, and a future State. Another Sect, the Herodians, were
Court-Flatterers, and State-Politicians, who made it an act of their Religion
to comply with the humors of their Prince Those who pretended most to Sanctity
and Piety, the Pharisees, had found an easy Religion, which they fancied would
please God and themselves too, consisting mostly in trifles and shadows, and
very defective in the grear Duties of Religion; they had put corrupt glosses on
the Law of Moses; and because the Magistrate could only punish the outward act,
they fondly presumed God as indulgent, and never imagined that their vain
thoughts, or idle words, would be imputed to them as their sins. They were
indeed very careful to have a saint-like outside, tho devilish Lusts dwelt
within; and hoped to be justified and saved, tho their hearts were never
purified, or amended. All their Religion lay in the Observations of some
Traditions and Customs handed down from their forefathers. The Duties of Piety
were supplied only by Ceremonious Services and Rites: they were abominably
guilty of Deceit and Injustice, Cozenage, and Overreaching one another; and
neglected the Rules of Justice and common Honesty among men; they knew no such
thing as a Spirit of Divine unbounded Charity; but were of very rugged, sour
Dispositions; they were swollen big with an high conceit of themselves, and
looked with contempt and disdain on the rest of mankind: their Charity was
contracted within the consines of Judea; and they would not so much as eat with
an uncircumsised Gentile or Samaritan, nor pay them the common Offices of
Civilty. In a word, their righteousness was so lamed, and woefully imperfect,
that our Savior tells us it could qualify no man for Heaven, Matt. 5. 20.

Thus did the whole World lie in wickedness, and therefore no wonder that the
strictness of the Christian Doctrine was so disturbing to those* who were
unwilling to be freed from their pleasing mistakes.

A Doctrine, that requires we should inwardly reverence and adore* the Divine
Majesty, and express our Adoration by solemn Prayers, and Praises, and acts of
Devotion. A Doctrine, that requires a flaming Love, an humble Dependence, an
awful Fear, and careful imitation of every imitable Perfection; That we should
give him the Supremacy of our Affections, without any corrival or competitor;
That we should Worship him only in such a manner, as is agreeable to the
Dignity of his Nature, and Revelation of his Will; That we should never use his
Name in a profane irreverent manner, but always with that becomingawe, that is
due to so Sovereign a Majesty; That we should sanctify that time he has set a
part for his Service, and then Worship him with sincere devout Affections; That
we should be Pure, and Chaste, and Sober, and Temperate, and Humble; tame our
Flesh, subdue our Lusts, be moderate in our pursuit of worldly Enjoyments,
contemn the World, entertain a mean Opinion of our selves, and all things here
below: Sacrifice our secular Interests, and even life it self, for the sake of
God and a good Conscience; and always behave our selves as the Citizens of
Heaven: That we should love our Neighbor as our selves, and not be so
narrow-soul'd, as to contain our Affections in smaller bounds than those of the
Universe: That we should follow Peace with all men, forgive our Enemies, pray
for our Persecutors, and be kind and obliging to all with whom we converse:
That we should subdue all angry Resentments, and quench all revengeful desires,
and carefully abstain from every thing that is injurious to our Neighbor; and
do to others as we should reasonably desire they should do to us, were we in
their circumstances. That we should in order to these ends, repent of our Sins,
believe in the Lord Jesus, and depend upon the aids of Divine Grace, to enable
us to purify our thoughts and words, and purge our actions, and ^it us for
Heaven. These are the chief heads of the Christian Doctrine. These are the
excellent Rules which our Savior commanded by his word and blessed example.
These were the Precepts that startled the World, and inflamed the hearts of
guilty Sinners with such hatred and malice against the Apostles. This was the
chief cause of their enmity against the Preachers of this new Faith, even
because they would have reclaimed them from their vicious courses, and invited
to the utmost heights of holiness; because they endeavored to pull down the
Devils throne, and establish the Empire of Christ; to root up those Weeds and
Briars that had overrun the Garden of God; and plant those Seeds of Grace that
might bring forth fruit unto righteousness. Their design was to work in the
hearts of men, an holy conformity to the Divine Nature; and because the
Philosophy of the Heathens, and Law of Moses, was not so clear and perfect, as
was necessary to bring men to happiness; therefore did God send his Son to give
this last and most perfect Revelation of his Will; which for clearness, and
certainty, and perfection, far exceeds all the Volumes of Morality compiled by
Heathens, and even that Law which was given from Heaven to the Jews.

In these particulars, it is confessed, the Apostles did turn the world upside
down; but they were so far from deserving a reproof, that for this very Cause
the highest veneration of them, (as the most noble Benefactors to mankind,) is
their due. The error of the men of Lystra, who took them for gods in the shape
of men, Acts 14. 11. was much more excusable than the dangerous mistake of
these who accused them for disturbing a vicious World: For they testi^ied God's
approbation to their Doctrines wherever they came.

1: By their intrinsic Worth and Excellence; they maintained none of the
absurd Articles of the Gentile Faith, and imposed none of the burthensom
Ceremonies of the Jewish Worship; but their Doctrines were all suited to the
Reasons of men, and commended themselves to their approbation by their
intrinsic Excellence. To go over the former particulars:

1. Their conceptions of God, and the manner how he will be Worshipped. Reason
tells us, that he who gave to all their Beings and Perfections, must be himself
infinitely perfect: Must enjoy all excellencies in himself in an eminent
degree, and be divested of every Imperfection. The works of Nature declare that
he must be Infinite in Power, who created the vast Fabric of Heaven and Earth;
incomprehensible in Wisdom, who ordered every thing with such admirable harmony
and agreement; and boundless in his Goodness, who gave such comely Perfections
to every creature, and made them so useful and serviceable one to another; the
whole World is a Map to represent these several excellencles, and every
Creature a Herald to proclaim these glorious Perfections, his works of
Providence discover his Justice, whereby he Thunders against obstinate Sinners;
his Holiness, whereby he shows his delight in the sincerely Obedient; and his
Truth, whereby he makes good his Promises and Threatenings. Indeed the Nature of
God is Mysterious, and the Doctrine of the Trinity is Incomprehensible to
humane Reason; but yet it is not repugnant to it. The Unity of the three
Persons of the Godhead, transcends indeed our conceptions, but reason connot
prove it to be an impossibility, or to include a contradiction; for although among
creatures one nature is still joined with one subsistence; yet the Divine
Nature being not of the same condition with created substances, it can never be
proved impossible that three Divine Persons should subsist in one Nature: the
manner indeed is incomprehensible to reason; and it is not to be expected that
a finite creature should be able fully to comprehend an infinite being.

In a word, The Christian Religion gives us the most exalted lovely
apprehensions of the Divine Nature, without any of those jarring notions which
the Heathens entertained; and tho there be some mysteries in our Faith, yet
they tend only to exalt God, and debase Man; and it is our duty to believe what
God says of himself, and to fall down and worship what we cannot comprehend.

But further, the manner of worshipping God prescribed by the Apostles, is
highly suitable to his Majesty, and becoming his Spiritual Nature; not with the
follies and extravagancies of the Heathens, nor pompous and gaudy Ceremonies of
the Jews; but with a modest magnificence, and comely simplicity; with prayer
and praise, and singing and other solemn exercises of Devotion; with a reverent
celebration of its mysteries, without I dolatry or Superstition on the one
hand, and without contempt of a Being so worthy of the most humble adoration,
on the other. This is the method of Devotion in the Christian Church; much more
comely and decent, and agreeable to the Nature of God, and Reasons of Men, than
the butchery of Sacrifices, and numerous gay solemnities among the Jews, which
except they, had prefigured the great undertakings of the Messiah, would never
have been enjoined; Much more then the ridiculous charms, and impure rites of
the Heathen Worship, which the wisest among them were ashamed of, and only
joined therein ut legibus jussa non ut diis grata, as commanded by their laws,
not as pleasing to their Gods.

2. Their Doctrine concerning man's reconciliation with God by the Lord Jesus,
tho it was above the sphere of reason to invent, yet when once revealed;
appears highly satisfactory to reason; for when man had wilfully broke the
Divine Law, and exposed himself to the threatened punishments of infinite
justice; God, that he might signalize his mercy, and fill the hearts and mouths
of Men and Angels with the most ardent love, and admiring Hallelujahs, was
pleased to dispense with his threatening, and show himself ready to be
reconciled. Now what imaginable way can we think of, more agreeable to reason,
whereby man may be restored to the divine favor? shall he merely pardon
sinners? this clemency would be but weakness and foolish pity: for it would
argue, either that he wanted Power to effect what he threatened; or was
defective in Wisdom, as if he thought his law unadvisedly made, and foresaw not
the inconveniences it would occasion: Or, that he was not infinite in Holiness,
who could so easily be reconciled to sinful rebels. Besides, this would weaken
his Government over Angels and Men, and encourage them to sin for the future in
hopes of the same mercy and compassion.

Thus we see how unreasonable it is to imagine God should merely pardon
sinners* It was necessary therefore that some satisfaction should be made; and
except this be proportionable to the offense, the same inconveniences will
still follow: the repute of the Law will not be kept up; God will still labor
under the dishonorable reflections of Levity, Impotence, and Impurity; and Men
will be encouraged to sin for the future, with hopes of an easy remedy. This
burden was too weighty for the shoulders of any creature: such is the Malignity
of sin, and so: great a dishonor to the Divine Male sty, that it is impossible
the services and sufferings of a mere creature should compensate for the
affront. It was necessary that God. should satisfy. Himfelf; and because those
satisfactions do most secure the ends of satisfaction, which come as near the
threatened penalty as may be, 't was necessary he should become man, live a life
of misery, and dye an accurfed death, and endure such agonies and torments of
Body and Soul, as might represent more livelyly to the sons of men, what their
sins had deserved, and come as near the penalty as the dignity and innocence of
his Nature would permit. Thus Gods hatred of sin is most clearly displayed; and
men are mos^ effectually deterred from continuance in any iniquity. Thus the
Divine Wisdom, and Power, and Holiness, and Mercy, shine in their brightest
luster, and conspire together in a most admirable harmony and agreement; and
that men might still be more apprehensive of their own vileness, God, not
withstanding all the wonders of his love, testifies his hatred to our sins by
refusing to admit any immediate applications to him; and resolving to accept of
no services, nor hear any prayers that are not perfumed by the intercession of
his beloved Son. This is the admirable Gospel-method of propitiating the Divine
Favor, which we indeed dared not once to have thought of; till God had
revealed it: but now it is made known, appears to be only satisfactory to
reason. What the Sacrifices, and Offerings, and other contrived methods of
satisfaction among the Jews and Gentiles, were too weak to effect; this, this
is done by the great Sacrisice of our Lord Redeemer.

3. Their precepts and rules of Life were all reasonable and advantageous to
our interest; conducive to the health of our bodies, the, tranquillity of our
minds, the peace of our consciences, the sweetning of our tempers, the exalting
our natures, the improvement of our estates, the advancement of our reputation,
and the comfort of our lives. By the practice of them, we shall consult our
private interest, obtain the good will and respect of men, and promote the
public benefit of all. We shall act worthy of our selves, and becoming our
reason; obtain the Divine Favor, and resemble the Divine Nature. What more
comely and decent than a profound admiration of him, who is so Glorious and
excellent in himself! An: ardent love of him who is so kind and beneficial to
us! An awful reverence of him who is so Powerful, Holy, Wise, and Just! and a
cheerful obedience to all his Laws, who is our Sovereign and our Father, our
Friend and best Benefactor! What more reasonable than prayer to him, who is
able to supply our wants? and praise and thanksgiving to the same God, who
gives all the comforts of this life, and from whom we expect the rewards of a
better? What more just, and fit, and conducible to our interest, than that we
should be upright in our dealings with our neighbor, veracious in our words,
faithful in our trusts, sincere in our contracts, innocent and inoffensive in
our whole behavior, avoiding every thing that may be to his prejudice; and
using all means to oblige him, and further his welfare? What more reasonable
than that we should be civil and courteous and good natured to all, and be
ready to perform friendly offices to such as beg or need our assistance? What
more reasonable than to be peaceable and orderly in our stations, observant and
respectsul to Superiors, meek and gentle to our inferiors, kind and familiar
with our equals, modest and lowly, ingenuous and compliant in all our
behavior? There are secret charms in such a conversation as this, which cannot
but command the love and esteem of all men. What more reasonable than that
reason should have its due prerogative within us? Not depressed by a
domineering appetite, deluded by an enticing world, or seduced by a deceitful
Devil? That we should have a mean opinion of our selves suitable to our
condition of weakness and dependence, sin and folly; that we be so moderate in
the use of the innocent comforts of this life, as no way to impair our health,
corrupt our minds, stain our reputations, prejudice our peace, endamage our
estates, or our lives. What more reasonable than a generous contempt of these
mean and fading enjoyments, and an elevation of our thoughts and affections to
that Heaven, where are objects more worthy our immortal Souls, and only
satisfactory to that Heavenly offspring within us? What more reasonable than
to be sorry for our past ofsences, and resolve amendment? he that retains a
love to his sin, and resolves to persist in his rebellion, deserves to die for
his crimes, and to have no benefit by an offered pardon. What more reasonable
than to believe in the Lord Jesus? and seeing he has been so compassionate
over us, to trust in his Merits, obey his Laws, and comply with the terms of
his Covenant?

These are the precepts our Religion boasts of, as her Crown and Glory. These
are the substantial Rules we have reason to glory in; so admirably fitted to
the Glory of God, and the good of mankind; so friendly to human society, and
advantageous to the interest of every man in the world.

Let the Heathens now cease their boasts of the wife Laws of Lycurgus, Solon,
or Numa; for whatever was excellent in them, is more clearly laid down in the
Laws of Christ, without any mixture of their impersections. Let the Jews cease
their triumphs in the Law of Moses; for behold a greater than Moses is here.
Thus it appears, that the Christian Doctrine by its intrinsic worth discovered
its Divine Original, and by its ^e^ring the image of Gods Holiness, Wisdom and
Goodness, manifested from whence it proceeded.

2. By the external testimonies God gave of his approbation.

1. By prophesies. God had frequently foretold that he designed to abolish that
legal worship he had set up, and give a more complete revelation of his will,
more agreeable to his own Spiritual Nature, and the reasons of men. That he
would enlarge the bounds of his dominion; remove that ceremonial worship which
could only be practiced in Judea; and that spiritual incense, and a pure
offering should be offered up in every place; and the gentiles Mal. 1. 11.
should call upon him; That he would raise up a Prophet like unto Moses (who
therefore must be a Law give^, and Mediator of a Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
new Covenant, as Moses was) and that he should have Words, new Revelations put
into his Mouth; to him the People were obliged to hearken with Attention and
Obedience. That God would make a new Covenant with the Jer. 31. 31.
house of Israel, different from that made in Egypt. And would write his Laws,
not upon Tables of Stone, but in their hearts, i. e. he would give them such
Institutions as are easily discoverable by the light of nature; so that there
would not be so much need of teaching every man his Neighbor, but every man
shall easily understand his Duty. That the Aaronical Priesthood Psalm. 110. 4.
should be abolished, and that of Melchisedeck be established, which should
endure for ever. That a new Heaven, and a new Earth should be created, a
Worship more agreeable to Heaven, and advantageous to Earth. That the Ark of
the Covenant should be no more visited; and God would gather Jer. 3. 16. Isa.
66. 18, 21.
all Nations unto him, and out of them choose to himself Priests and Levites.
That the Desired of all Nations should come, and erect a spiritual Universal
Kingdom in the hearts of Hag. 2. 7.
men, to give them more perfect Laws, and reduce them to fuller Knowledge, and
better Obedience. Thus was it Prophesied of old, that the Jewish Ceremonial
Religion should be abolished, and a more perfect Revelation substituted in its
place. It is indeed said of some of the Jewish Ceremonies, Bates. Of the
Christian Religion. page 78.
that they were to continue for ever, but that was only to distinguish them
from some temporary Injunctions, that were of force only while they were in the
Wilderness, or when they were Inhabitants of Canaan; but were to be practiced
in all places, till by a new signification of the Divine Will, they were
forbidden. And it is observable, that in the Jewish Law, the word [ for ever]
does oftentimes, only import a continuance to the Jubilee; so that these
rituals were to continue till the coming of the Messiah, the great Jubilee of
the World. Thus has God declared his Abrogation of the Jewish Worship, and by
his Providence has further disobliged us from the Observance of it; nay
disabled the most obstinate Adherents to it, from performing the chief Rites of
their Religion. He has demolished their Temple, confounded their Tribes, and
forced them to wander for Sixteen hundred years without a Priest or Sacrifice,
Ephod or Teraphim. God has abolished the Jewish Worship, which he once
allowed; and the Doctrine of the Apostles was only that complete Revelation of
the Divine Will, which was foretold by the Prophets of the Lord; and therefore
these Jews had no reason to quarrel at the Apostles, as turners of the World
upside down.

2. By Miracles, Tho the intrinsic Excellence of these Doctrines, and their
being a completion of those Prophecies which were long before published to the
Jews, were sufficient Evidence of Gods Approbation; Yet because the Jewish
Religion was confirmed by Miracles, and that dull People was hardly to be
convinced any other way, because a Religion so contrary to the secular
Interests, ancient Customs, inveterate Prejudices, and corrupt Inclinations of
the Heathens, could hardly expect much more success than the Precepts of their
sober Philosophers, except the Power of God were displaid in some eminent
surprising manner. That men might be therefore rendered utterly inexcusable in
their unbelief, our Savior by many miraculous works declared, that the hand of
God was with him. He outdid Moses; before he displaced him, and showed the
pre-eminence of his Doctrine, by his more wonderful works. He was born of an
immaculate Virgin, and honored by a miraculous Star. He was proclaimed the
true Messiah, by the Gratulations of Angels; and Worshipped in his Cradle by
the Wisemen of the East; the Holy Ghost descended on him at his Baptism, and a
voice from Heaven (such as perhaps had never been heard since the delivery of
the Law) declared that he came as an extraordinary Agent from God. I know the
Jews make their boasts of many Voices from Heaven, which they call Bathcol,
after the days of Malachi; but we may well account them Forgeries, or
Diabolical Illusions; for it is utterly unimaginable, That when Divine
Vengeance had taken away vision and prophecy, and all other immediate
revelations, he should give this plain discovery of his will. The new Law of
Christ, was therefore attested by the same way of evidence, with the old Law of
Moses; Thus also at his transfiguration, the samevoice in the Luke. 17. 5.
presence of Moses and Elias, comes from God with the addition of, Hear him; as
if he should say, You have obeyed my servants Moses and Elias, the instruments
I chiesly used in establishing the old Law; but now hear and obey my Son, and
that full and complete Law he shall promulge. This great attestation, if there
were no other, would confirm the truth of Christianity. But to go on; Angels
Minister'd to him in his temptations; and he fasted even above the possibility
of Nature; all sorts of diseases fled before him, and he cured more plagues
than Moses brought upon Egypt; Fevers, Palsy, Leprosy, Distractions, were
healed by no Medicinal Applications, but merely by a touch of his Hand, or word
of his Mouth. He laid his Commands on the stormy winds, and they were obedient;
and stilled the rage of a tempestuous Sea. He satisfied the hunger of thousands
with almost nothing, and multiplied five Loaves and two Fishes to content a
numerous multitude. He spoke such words as gave ears to the deaf; and loosend
the tongue of the dumb to proclaim his divine commission The touch of his
Garment stopped a flux of blood; and [ I will, be thou clean] chased away a
leprous defilement. Talitha Cumi, restored the Rulers Daughter to life; and the
touch of a Bier converted the sorrows of a funeral into mirth and gladness.
Lazarus come forth, recovered that dead that was almost putrifi'd in the grave;
and, O woman great is thy faith, be it unto thee as thou will, Cured the
Canaanitish woman's daughter that was possessed, and at a great distance from
him. The Devils were forced to slay with halte from the bodies of men, and
tremblingly, acknowledge him to be the Son of God. Clay and Spittle, apt to
strengthen blindness, rather than take it away, gave sight to him that was born
blind; and by the most preternatural means, he wrought the most wonderful
works. He foretold his own death, with all its tragical circumstances, and
predicted his own Resurrection. The descent of the Holy Ghost, the Persecution
of his Disciples, the Destruction of the Jews, and the propagation of
Christianity, were all related by him; long before their accomplishment. The
Earth was cast into trembling Convulsions, the Rocks were rent, the Sun was
Eclipsed, contrary to all the rules of Astronomy; and insensible Nature was
cast Into an Universal agony, as if it were endued with knowledge, at his
Funeral.

At the time appointed, he arose again, and numerous departed Saints with him.
He conversed with men for forty days on Earth, and was seen by 500 at once; at
last he ascended into Heaven before a great multitude of admiring spectators;
and did not vanish away on a sudden, but went up with all the solemnity and
leisure of a triumph; from thence he dispensed his gifts to his Apostles;
inspired a mean company of illiterate Fishermen with a spirit of prophecy and
revelation, and gave them power of speaking in many of those languages which
the curse of Babel brought upon the world. They performed all sorts of miracles
by the bare use of his Name; and did such mighty works as amazed all
spectators. He turned a Wolf into a Lamb; and the bare words of [ Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me], changed a furious persecutor into a zealous convert.
These things were not done in a corner, but openly before the Jews and
Gentiles. In Jude^ where the best worship of God was establiish'd, and
diabolical impostures most abhorred. In Jerusalem, the Metroplis of that Nation.
In their Synagogues, and public assemblies, before his most inveterate and
obstinate adversaries; and yet none of these could deny the matter of fact, but
out of envy and ill will, imputed them to Magic, and the assistance of the
Devil. But alas! the nature of these works, so good and beneficial to man kind,
and their design and tendency to pull down that dominion the Devil had so long
usurped, and plant that holiness in the hearts of Men, which is so contrary to
his Nature; clearly testify, that such an accusation could proceed from nothing
but devilish envy and malice.

These were the credentials that Christ brought with him from Heaven.

These were the convincing Arguments that he was sent from God.

These were the demonstrations which over power'd the reasons of men, dispelled
that thick darkness which had so long overspread the Earth, and so soon filled
the world with the light and knowledge of the Gospel; and therefore these Jews
ought not so clamorously to have accused the Apostles, but with joy and
admiration to have flocked together, saying, These Teachers sent from God, that
have reformed the world, are come hither also.

II. Quest. Whether the Apostles disturbed the world, by teaching Doctrines of
Rebellion? For the sense may be, These that raise mutinies in every place,
overturn Cesars Authority, and Preach up Allegiance to another King, one Jesus,
are come hither also.

Here my business is to prove, That Christianity does not destroy, but
establish and confirm that Duty which the Law of Nature challenges from
Subjects to their Prince. Indeed the Jews were (of all men) most unjust in this
accusation. For the great reason of their malice against Jesus, was, because
where as they expected a Messiah that should break the Roman Yoke, and deliver
them from the Tyranny and oppression of Caesar; That should Redeem them from
their Vassalage to an uncircumsised Emperor; and reign as a victorious Monarch
over the world: He disappointed their proud expectations, came in a mean and
humble manner; proclaimed himself the true Messiah; and yet declared that his
Message was peace and not war; and that his Kingdom was Spiritual, and not of
this world. If he would have ascended the Throne of David, and warred against
the principalities and powers on Earth, instead of those of Hell: If instead of
raising up Lazarus and some meaner persons, he would have restored to life
their Sampsons and Joshuas, and mighty men of valor; If instead of teaching
them the way to be saved from eternal Misery, he would have instructed them how
to be freed from Earthly Bondage; and instead of bringing them news of the
Kingdom of Heaven, he would have brought the more welcome tidings of that
Kingdom on Earth they expected: Then they would have gladIy received him as the
promised Messiah, the Son of God. But seeing he employed his power another way,
they misrepresent his Doctrine, slander his Person, Persecute him to death as
an enemy to Caesar; and accuse his followers as disloyal persons, and Authors of
Rebellion. But that the Christian Religion is no sriend to disloyalty, a very
little search will quickly determine; for obedience to Magistrates is very much
urged, and Rebellion severely reprehended in the Gospel. The great design of
Christ's coming into the world, was peace; To reconcile God to man, and men to
one another. To subdue our passions, and calm our discontents. To pull down our
pride, and abate our selfishness. To polish the roughness of our natures, and
take away all those impediments which would hinder our paying a due observance
to superiors. None of his Doctrines did ever infringe the Magistrates Power;
but he persuaded men to be subject, not only for wrath and fear of punishment,
but out of a principle of conscience and duty. Tho he was Universal King of the
whole Creation, yet his Kingdom was no way destructive of the just rights of
Caesar. Tho he challenged Subjection to him from all his followers, yet he
pressed both by precept and example a due subjection to their Emperor also. The
same mouth that commands to pay unto God the things that are Gods, requires us
Mark. 12. 17.
also, to pay unto Caesar the things that are Cesar's. He works a Miracle to pay
the tribute-penny, which was either a tax imposed by the Romans, or rather
required by the Sanhedrim, for the use of the Temple. Either way he declares
his subjection to the Civil or Ecclesiastical Government. He commands his
Disciples to pray for their persecutors, not to curse and damn them; and gives
them leave to fly from their rage, but not to oppose and resist it. He hid
himself from the People, when they would have made him a King: and checked his
Disciples when they vainly contested about priority, in that Earthly Kingdom
they fondly expected. He Rebuked Peter's forward zeal for his Master, when he
cut off Malchus's Ear; and to prevent the Slanders of his Enemies, miraculously
cured the injured person. Tho he could have commanded twelve Legions of Angels
to his rescue, yet he chose rather to employ them in messages of peace: and tho
with those Majestic words of [ I am he] He could have struck the Soldiers
dead, as well as down to the earth: yet did he meekly submit without any
resistance; he went as a Sheep to the Slaughter, and as a Lamb he was dumb and
opened not his mouth. Tho his adversaries bare manifest false-witness against
him, yet was he meek and compassionate, and the sharpness of his pain extorted
no passionate exclamations against the injury they had done him. But on the
contrary, he forgot not his own precepts, but breathed out that admirable
prayer for them, Father forgive them, they know not what they do. And his
Disciples did exactly imitate their Lord. And tho they lived among his enemies
and their own, and met with injuries enough to have inflamed their Spirits; yet
they give us the same lessons of peaceable subjection to the higher powers.
Saint Paul. that is here accused, commands the Romans (tho living under Nero an
Heathen, a Tyrant, a Persecutor, and one of the most infamous Monsters in
Nature) To be subject to the higher powers, and render fear, honor, tribute,
custom to them. Nor was this submission only constrained through Romans 13.
the necessity of those times, wherein they had not power to resist, For, says
he, we must needs be subject not only for wrath; but for conscience sake; and
be that resists, shall receive to himself damnation? And because perhaps some
seeds of Rebellion might begin in those early days to be sowed by some
Heretics, the Apostle exhorts Titus, to put his converts Tit. 3. 1.
in mind of their duty of subjection to principalities and powers. The same
doctrine is urged by Saint Peter, Submit to every ordinance of man for the Lord
sake. Indeed the Christian Religion is the best security to governors, of the
obedience of their subjects. A disloyal Christian is a perfect contradiction.
He can be no true friend to Christ his supreme King, who rebels against his
deputies and vicegerents. True undissembled Loyalty is the very complexion of a
Christian; and the best Christians are always the most, I had almost said the
only Loyal Subjects. The Apostles therefore did not deny but enforce subjection
to Magistrates. Indeed where the commands of God and their Prince interfer'd,
in this case they resolved to be faithful to God, and dared to do what he
commanded, rho Caesar forbid it. They did not deify their Emperor, but paid him
all that reverence that was due to a Crowned Head. They accounted Princes Gods
Subjects, and thought Rebellion against him a greater crime, than against the
highest Monarch. In this case they appealed to their adversaries themselves
whether Acts 4. 19.
reason was not on their side, courageously saying, whether it be right in the
sight of God to hearken to you rather than God, judge ye.

But tho they could not actually obey the unjust Command of their Magistrates,
yet then they made no violent resistance, but passively submitted to the
exacted punishment. As they professed a lowly Subjection to Christ their King
in Heaven, so they paid a respectful Obedience to his Lieutenants and
Representatives on Earth. They testified their Loyalty to Christ, by the
respect they gave to the Commands of his Deputies. These Jews therefore had no
reason to accuse the Apostles, as encouragers of Rebellion; and in either of
these senses the Apostles were not blameable turners of the World upside down.
They were wholly innocent in this latter sense, and de^serv'd Commendation for
disturbing the World in the former sense; and would to God the whole Christian
World at this day might be as easily defended, as Christ' and his Holy
Apostles. And this leads me to the saddest part of my Subject.

III. Quest. Whether any professed Christians at this day, are guilty of
turning the World upside down?

Ans. A very little inquiry will present to our consideration a potent Faction,
that proudly Usurps the name of the Catholic Church, whose Principles and
Practices do clearly overturn the whole design of Christianity, and are
pernicious to Governors; who have sheltred Heathenish Superstitions in
Christian Temples, after the Power of God had chased them away; and dug up some
Limbs of the Ceremonial Law out of the Grave, after Divine Wisdom had rung her
Knell, and proclaimed her Funeral. I know what an invidious task it is, to
accuse a whole Body of men; and certainly, he that has any Love to God, or his
Redeemer, cannot account it a delightful office, to satisfy his own Reason, or
convince the Judgments of others, That his God is blasphemed, and his Savior
dishonored, by an huge party of men, who pretend to be of his Holy Religion.
But because this Infection is of a spreading nature, and the growth of Popery
is too common, and too just a complaint; and the Bigots of that Church are
continually using all the artifices of Cunning, and Insinuation, and Treachery,
to delude the easy multitude, and once more Introduce their blind Religion
into our Nation: I cannot think it an unseasonable work, but a piece of charity
to the Souls of men, to give a just Character of that Religion, which if God
had not, and did not still mercifully interpose, would have again over spread
this Land, as well as other Nations.

I shall therefore pursue my former method, and inquire,

Quest. 1. Whether they have introduced new Doctrines, different from what the
Apostles taught? and what warrant they can produce for doing so?

Ans. He that runs over the former particulars, may soon be satisfied, that
they have restored absurd Gentile Idolatry, and superannuated Jewish
Ceremonies, and woefully corrupted Christianity in those great Articles wherein
I have showed its pre-eminence to consist.

1. They have introduced new Doctrines concerning God, and the manner how he
will be Worshipped. This will be evident if we reflect upon these four
particulars following.

1. Their Representing and Worshipping God by Images. 2. Their Adoration of
Saints and Angels. 3. Their Adoration of the Host. 4. The manner of their
Worship too exactly symbolizes with that of Jews and Heathens.
1. Their Representing and Worshipping God by Images. Those who are acquainted
with any thing of the Romish Worship, know how in their Churches, nay, in their
Psalters, Mass-books, and Manuals of Devotion the incomprehensible Trinity is
pictured: sometimes like an old Man, with a long gray Beard, and a ray of light
over his head, with a Crucifix between his Knees, or a Child in his Arms, and a
Dove with spread Wings under his Beard. Sometimes like a Monster, with three
Faces in a Knot. Now, how abominably foolish and impious are such
Representations as these? What ridiculous entertainment does this afford to the
Socinian? And how does it expose this sacred Mystery, to his Derision and
Contempt? How naturally does this tend to debase the Divine Majesty, as if the
Infinite Lord of Angels and Men, bore any resemblance to his imperfect
Creatures; and the incomprehensible Majesty of Heaven and Earth, were like such
Worms and Dust as we? If any man should reverence a Worm, or a Toad, as the
Image of his Prince, would not such a man's honorary respect be interpreted as
an high affront? And is it not an infinitely greater Indignity to Worship the
Divine Majesty in the shape of the most glorious of any of his Creatures? There
is very great danger, lest the ignorant Vulgar should fancy God like the Images
he is represented by; and they naturally tend at least, to debase our
conceptions of his incomprehensible nature. His Immensity cannot be represented
by a piece of Wood; nor his Infinity by a finite Idol. Images are apt to
suggest too low Thoughts, and mean Apprehensions of his Nature, and therefore
are not to be used. If it be pleaded, That such Representations may be
instrumental to raise our Thoughts, and excite dovout Affections within us.
Alas! he that has not raised Apprehensions of the Divine Majesty and
Greatness, from the consideration of his own glorious works, must expect little
benefit by the imperfect Art and Invention of man. Let them therefore call
Images Laymen's books; till they show us Gods License and Imprimatur for them,
we shall esteem them as Surreptitious Pamphlets, offensive to the King of
Heaven. If it be again pleaded, That God (by his appearances to Abraham and the
Patriarchs, in the form of a man, and his being represented as an old man to
Daniel, and the Holy Ghost's descent in the form of a Dove) has authorized
such Representations. I answer; The appearances to the Patriarchs were of the
second Person in the Trinity, as Anticipations of his Incarnation, and were no
Representations of his Nature, but only signs that he was then, and there
present. As to that in Dan. 7. 9. concerning the Ancient of days, that was only
represented to the inward sense of Daniel in a Vision, and was only a Symbol of
Gods fitness to Judge the World: White, to denote the purity of his Nature;
Ancient of days, to represent his eternity; and white hair, to shadow out his
Wisdom and Prudence. As to that of Matthew. 3. 16. Dr. Hammond's Exposition takes
off all necessity of answer, according to him, the Expression ( like a Dove)
has reference not to any assumed likeness, Hammond in Matthew. 3. 16.
but to the manner of the descent, that he came down upon him, as Doves use to
do, when they light upon any thing, hovering and overshadowing it. Thus we
know, the Holy Ghost descended on the Virgin Mary, Luke 1. 35. For St. Luke
indeed adds, in a bodily shape; but that may be rendered with a bodily
appearance; so that perhaps the Holy Ghost might appear in no outward Figure,
but only appear to be present, by the appearance of Angels; and it is not
unlikely it might be in a bright shining Cloud, as at the transfiguration of
our Savior, Matthew. 17. 5. it is said, A bright shining cloud overshadow'd
them, descending as Doves use to do. For the full confirmation of this, I must
refer to the place. But if the general Exposition be allowed, That the Holy
Ghost did appear in such a symbolical Figure; this was only to represent the
Innocence of our Savior, and the purity and peaceableness of that Religion he
was then beginning to teach the World: No representation of his Nature. Nor can
God be worshipped under any corporal Figure, without palpable Idolatry. For, as
soon may deliberate Murder and Adultery be reconciled to the 6th and 7th, as
this can to the 2d. Commandment. And our Romish Doctors are very conscious of
this, and therefore have very fairly expunged it out of their Catechisms and
Manuals, and split the tenth into two, to keep up the number. They had reason
to fear, lest the Laity not having such Metaphysical heads as themselves (if
they had left it standing) should have been deterred from so gainful a sin. For
thou shall not make a Graven Image, would quickly make their Temples desolate;
and, thou shall not bow down to the likeness of any thing in Heaven or Earth,
would open the eyes of their deluded Proselytes, if they were but permitted to
read them. Words so fully Emphatical and Comprehensive, that all worship of
Images could hardly have been condemned in more large and significant terms.
And Moses, who best knew the meaning of the Lawgiver, has given a clear
comment upon this Command, Deuteronomy. 4. 15, 16. Take ye therefore good heed unto
your selves, for you saw no manner of similitude when the Lord appeared unto
you in Horeb; lest ye corrupt your selves, and worship Graven Images. If the
Heathen Idolatry were only forbidden, of what inconsequent arguing, would Moses
here be guilty? Take heed lest ye worship the Images of false gods, for ye
never saw any Representation of the true God. But if all Worship of Images be
here forbidden, then the Argument is very pertinent and forcible. Take heed how
ye Worship God in any outward Representation; for if such a thing were pleasing
to him, he would not have left it to your choice, to do it in what form you
pleased, but would have appeared in such a likeness as best pleased himself.

Besides, the golden Calf, which the Israelites worshipped as a resemblance of
God, was a breach of this Commandment, and is called an Idol, Acts 7. 41. For
that the Israelites did make this as a resemblance of the true God, is Exodus
32.
clear from the Story. Aaron says, these be thy Gods, O Israel, that brought
thee out of the Land of Egypt; and Proclaims a Feast to Jehovah; for either we
must suppose the Israelites to be so stupidly sottish as to suppose this Calf
to be really that God that brought them out of Egypt before it was made; or if
we cannot find in our hearts to believe them so absurd; we must believe they
fell back to the Egyptian Idolatry, or worshipped the true God under this
representation. That it was not a resemblance of the Egyptian Gods, is evident
from hence, that he is called Jehovah, and is represented as the God that
brought them out of Egypt; for could they once imagine that the Egyptian Gods
had destroyed their own most zealous worshippers, and wrought such wonders for
them who abhorred their worship, and would give them no adoration? is it not
much more rational to suppose, that the Israelites expected some symbol of the
Divine Presence going before them? as they might expound that promise, Exodus
23. 20. And ( Moses being See more of this in Stillingsleets Defense of the
Idolatry of R. C. Page 747
absent for 40 Days) they doubting whether ever they should see him more,
devise with themselves what token to have of Gods presence with them; and the
most part being swayed by their Education in Egypt, where they worshipped their
chief god Osyris in the form of a Bull, compel Aaron to make a Golden Calf. And
if this be in them accounted Idolatry, must not the same title be given to our
Romish worshippers of Graven Images? Of the same sin was Micah guilty, in Judge.
17. who, to ease himself of the trouble of traveling so often to Sbiloh to
worship there, made a molten and graven image as a representation of the Lord
Jehovah; builds a Chapel in his house, and hires a Levite to be his Priest,
and in this rejoices exceedingly, now know I, says he, that the Lord will do me
good, seeing I have a Levite to my Priest, Judge. 17. 13. Of the same nature was
that great sin of Jeroboam, for which he is branded with so black a Character
in Scripture; he made two Calves in Dan and Bethel, as a representation of God.
It Is plain he designed not to draw the Israelites from the Worshipping God, but
from going up to Jerusalem to Worship; lest their converse with the Two Loyal
Tribes should revive their principles of Loyalty also, and reduce them to their
subjection to their Lawful Sovereign; and therefore his successors were looked
upon as worshippers of Jehovah. Thus Jehu was zealous for the Lord 2 King. 10.
16.
Jehovah, though he departed not from this sin of Jerobcam. Thus it appears,
how plainly God has forbidden all worship of him by images. And that this Law
was not only positive and temporary, but unalter^bly obliging all men, appears
from the reason of the Law. The unsuitableness of an image to the Divine
Nature, Isa. 40. 18, 25. The Prophet rhere after a stately and majestic
description of the Divine Greatness, concludes with this inference; To whom
then will ye liken God? Or what likeness will ye compare unto him? As if he
should say, Seeing God is so immensly Glorious a being, your own reasons may
convince you of the folly of making any representations of him. John 4. 24. God
is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and truth. That is, as some
interpret the words, not in the Image of a Dove, as the Samaritans Worshipped
him on Mount Gerizim; nor with the Typical Sliadows of the Jewish Law. St. Paul
when arguing with the Athenians, bends his discourse against their Worshipping
the Sovereign God in the likeness of silyer, or gold, or stone, Acts 17. 29.
and in Romans 1. 23 He disputes against the wiser Philosophers, and accuses them,
that when they knew God to be an Immensly Glorious being, they fashioned him
like a man; and Worshipped him by Images; and the accusation will equally
concern our present Romish pretenders to Wisdom. The same apologies the wise
men of Athens and Rome made, to excuse their Heathenish Idolatry, are adapted
by the Popish Schools, to justify their worshipping Images. Plutarch, and
Celsus, and Julian, and Maximus Tyrius, and many others, tell us, they looked
upon Images only as helps to remembrance, and means of exciting their
devotions; nay, the worshippers of the Sun and Moon and Stars, might better
apologize for themselves; For these natural Images are great Monuments of the
Divine Wisdom, and Power, and Goodness; but the present artificial ones,
express only the Gravers skill and imperfect cunning. Nay further, the very
same pleas might be used by the Priests of Egypt, to justify their most
ridiculous follies. Leeks and Onions may as well draw forth my penitential
tears; deified Apes and Monkeys may as well be the objects of my adoration, as
the Monstrous Pictures of the Trinity in their Temples. But how contradictory
soever this practice be to Scripture, Images may. well agree to that Church,
which retains little more than the feign image and shadow of a Religion.

2. Their Adoration of Saints and Angels, and giving them the same Worship the
Heathens gave to their Demons, or inferior Deities.

By Demons, the Heathens understood an inferior sort of deified powers, as
middle Beings between the Sovereign God, and mortal men; and because they
thought the higher God too pure and sublime to meddle with Earthly affairs,
they placed these as Mediators to prefent the prayers of Men to God, and convey
the benefits of God to Men; thus Plato and Hesiod, and others that describe
them. To this opinion the Apostle seems to allude, in 1 Cor. 8. 5. 6. As there
be Gods many, and Lords many: yet to us there is but one God the Father, and
one Lord Jesus Christ, i. e. Tho the Heathens Worshipped many Supreme See this
confirmed in Mede's Apostasy of the later times.
Gods, and inferior powers, as Presidents and Mediators in Earthly things; yet
we Christians acknowledge but one sovereign Deity, and one Mediator, who
presents our Prayers to the Father, and brings us back the rewards of our
Devotion from Heaven. These the Heathens divided into two sorts, such as were
too pure to inform a body, and such as were the souls of deceased benefactors
To these they erected Temples and Altars, made Images and Shrines, and gave
them all external expressions of Religious adoration The latter sort were
called Baaline, or Belim because the first that was thus Canonized was King
Belus at Babylon, by Ninus his Son; and well may the Holy Ghost call that
Church Babylon, which has revived that Idolatry which was first set up in that
City. For is not the worship of Saints and Angels exactly parallel to this? Are
not they exalted into the same place, and the same services directed to them?
Are not Temples dedicated to their honor? Images set up, and shrines
consecrated, before which their Votaries may pray unto them? Are not they
worshipped with solemn invocations, and alloutward signs of the lowest
reverence? How do the ignorant Vulgar prostrate themselves before their
Statues? Wash their feet with tears, and wipe them with their hair? And if the
Image chance but to nod or smile, how do they go away rejoicing, as if they had
met with their good Genius, or some Angel had saluted them from Heaven? I need
not here tell what a number of Saints they have Canonized, and how they have
symboliz'd with the Heathen, in assigning them their particular offices; how
they have Saints for every particular Nation and Country, Trade and Calling;
for every state and condition, for every disease of the body, and all the
accidents of humane life. I need not tell how they worship some who probably
had never any other being than in their own imagination; How notoriously wicked
persons have been Canonized; how Rebellion and Treason has been accounted
worthy an Apotheosis; and very few have received that honor for their Religion
and Loyalty. I need not tell what notorious blasphemies are contained in their
Prayers, especially to the Virgin Mary; how she is exalted to the Throne of
God, and called the Mother of Grace, the Fountain of Salvation, the Queen of
Heaven, and the Mother of the Holy Trinity. How Bonaventure has Printed the
Psalter of the Blessed Virgin, being nothing else but the Psalms of David,
wherein whatever is spoken concerning God or Christ, either by way of Prayer,
or of Praise, is applied to her. These things are publicly known, and cannot
be contradicted.

And we may well challenge the Heathen World, to present us with more daring
usurpations on the Divine Prerogative; the same arguments which prove the
Pagans Idolaters for their worship of Demons, will equally prove the Romanists
such, who have exactly written after their Copy, and transcribed (that I say
not exceeded) their iniquities; the same pleas which Julian and Celus, and the
other defenders of the Pagan Worship used, are made by these pretenders to
Christianity; and the same answers which Tertullian, and Arnobius, and the
other primitive Fathers gave, may be very well re torted by us upon them, as
will appear to any one that will but consult Dr. Stillingsleet in his defense
of the Idolatry of the Romish Church. But to go no surther than Scripture; Did
not our Savior repel the Devils temptation with, Thou shall worship the Lord
thy God, and him only shall thou serve? And shall a far less consideration,
than the Kingdoms of the Earth, prevail with us to fall down before Creatures,
and pay them a Religious Adoration? How smartly does St. Paul Argue against all
Worshipping of Angels, without any of those distinctions which our Voluminous
Schoolmen have invented? Col. 2. 18. Let no man beguile you of your reward, in
a voli ntary humility, and worshipping of angels, intruding into those things
which he has not seen. It seems by his discourse there were some Heretics
crept into the Church, who out of a pretense of their unworthiness to make
immediate addresses to the invisible God, sued to the Angels his Courtiers and
Favorites to plead their Cause. This Heresy continued a long time in Pisidia
and Phrygia, where Oratories and Chapels were built to Michael, and the
Angels, which was at last forbidden in one of the Canons of the Council of
Laodicea. I know Cardinal Perron has a very witty and singular evasion of this
Text; That by the worship which was given by Angels, is meant the Mosaical Law;
and he Translates the words, Let no man tempt you to become prosyeltes of the
Jews. But why should the Apostle use such dark expressions, if this were the
meaning? and what pretenses of humility did they use, who persuaded to comply
with the Law of Moses? Or how did they intrude into things they had not seen?
Whereas, if the words be understood properly, these words have a very good
connection; these Heretics pretended humility to be the occasion of their
worship; and were puffed up with a conceit of their knowledge of all the Orders
and Offices of Angels; nor can we imagine they worship them as Supreme Gods,
but only as Gods by participation, and Advocates with the Father, as the Church
of Rome also calls them; and therefore is equally concerned in this
prohibition. Besides, did not the Angel correct St. John, when out of a sudden
transport, he was about to give him that reverence which bordered too near upon
what the jealous God has reserved to himself: with a see thou do it not, I am
thy fellow. Rev. 19. 10 servant; worship God; And shall we be fearless of the
same Idolatry? The distinction of Latria and Dulia will by no means salve the
matter; for why could not the Angel have applied it as well as the Angelical
Doctor can? Or why could not this inspired Apostle have pleaded that he gave
him only an inferior subordinate worship, as well as the most illuminated
Schoolman?

It Is of these Idolaters the Apostle seems to speak in 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2. Now the
spirit says expressly, (perhaps in Dan. 11. 36, 37, 38.) That in the latter
times some shall revolt from the faith. Revolt by Idolatry, which is eminently
called by that Title; Giving heed to seducing Spirits, i. e. attending to
erroneous Doctrines, Doctrines of Devils or Demons. Not of which they are the
Authors, but the objects; Doctrines concerning Demons, i. e. inferior Deities;
Speaking lies in hypocrisy; or (as the Greek runs) through the hypocrisy of
liars, i. e. Through the Deceit of Iying persons, who should seign miracles,
and invent fabulous stories to support this worship. The event has so exactly
answered the Apostles description; Monks (the admirers of single life, being
the first Authors of Saint-Worship, which they brought in by lying-Legends, and
Fictitious Miracles; that if this prophecy does not particularly concern them,
they are very unhappy to come so near the description.

3. Their adoration of the Host, upon pretense of Transubstantiation. This is
another part of Romish Worship, not to be paralIell'd for absurdity throughout
the whole Gentile world; For to fancy that every ignorant Priest can with Five
words speaking; change a piece of Bread into God; and by virtue of such a
strong fancy, to give it Divine Worship, is an instance of such egregious
folly, as exposes Christianity to the scorn of infidels, and hardens them in
their unbelief; a Doctrine that would make a Monster of our blessed Redeemer,
and give him 10000 bodies at once. A Doctrine, that subjects our Savior to the
will of every Priest, and daily renews his humiliation; A Doctrine, that makes
the Covenant of Grace much more severe than the Law of Innocence, while it
threatens damnation to all that will not disbelieve the agreeing senses of the
whole world of Animals; A Doctrine that destroys the very Foundations of human
Converse, and tends to the most unreasonable Skepticism imaginable. For if our
Senses are deceived in so plain an instance, how know we but that we may be all
very Phantasms, and a bundle of Accidents without any substance? A Doctrine,
that has a natural tendency to Infidelity, and is the ready road to the most
damnable unbelief. For the miraculous Works of our Savior, were the great
convincing Evidences of the truth of Christianity. What we have seen and heard
(as one speaks) was the Apostles Logic, and an appeal to Miracles, the surest
Demonstraion of the Spirit. So that if our Senses deceive us in this instance,
our Religion it self may be false. The Resurrection of Christ, and all his
wonderful Works, might, for ought we know, be Impostures and Deceits. Thus we
see how naturally the Papist lends his Assistance to the Atheist and
Unbeliever. A Doctrine, that calls God himself a Deceiver; for he plainly tells
us, by the most certain kind of Demonstration (to our Senses) That here is
bread; when if this be true, there is really none at all.

In a word, A Doctrine so full of unreasonable Contradictions, that had not an
infallible Council cursed all deniers of it, I am persuaded it would have long
ago been renounced. A Doctrine contradictory to Sense, inconsistent with
Reason, and overthrown by express words of Scripture. For St. Paul expressly
calls it Bread after Consecration, 1 Cor. 10. 15, 16. 11. 26, 27. A Doctrine
bottomed only upon one Metaphorical Expression. This is my Body; Which, how it
can prove this prodigious Transmucation, is not very easy to imagine; for did
not Christ's natural Body speak this, while sitting at the Table? And could his
Disciples apprehend, they eat the same Body, or that the substance of the bread
was vanished, and only the Accidents remaining? Did they so hardly believe his
Resurrection, and would they without one question about it, digest this miracle
far more amazing? Does he not say, Do this in remembrance of me? And if the
Popish Comment were true, would it be sense, to say, Eat me in remembrance of
me? Are not the terms Metaphorical in one part of the Sacrament? This Cup is
the N^w Testament in my Blood. And why should this, rather than the other, be
taken according to the literal meaning? Besides, the same word is used
concerning the Passover, to which the Eucharist succeeds: And the Jews had no
term more proper to express ( signify) by, than this word ( is) It is the
Lords passover, Exodus 12. 11. i. e. a Memorial and Signification of the Lords
passing over the houses of the Israelites, when he destroyed the firstborn of
Egypt; and why should not the same Sense be given of this Sacrament of the new
Covenant? It is a Memorial of that Body of Christ which was once Offered for
our Sins. Thus we see, how unreasonable the Roman Exposition of this Text is;
and yet they cannot pretend any clearer proof of this great absurdity; but it
is the great design of this Church, to conquer those three mischievous Enemies,
Sense, Reason, and Scripture; and when they have once done that, they may
impose what they will upon those reasonable Beasts their followers. Sense, they
continually represent as subject to many Illusions, and unfit to be trusted to,
in any weighty matters. Reason, they Tragically exclaim against, as a dangerous
Weapon; and the mortified Father Cressy somewhere tells us, That it is the Wit
and Judgment of Catholics, to renounce their own Judgment, and depose their
own Wit. Scripture, setting aside the Authority of their Church, is of no more
Validity with them, than Aesops Fables, or Mahomets Alchoran. And tho they
pretend the unanimous consent of the Fathers to their Doctrines; yet, because
the Testimonies of Irenaeus, Justin Martyr, Theodoret, Pope Galasius, are so
plain against them, they pretend, that the Fathers being obscure, the present
Church must be the Judge of their meaning; but if we join issue here also, and
agree to be judged by the majority of Votes in the Christian World, then they
very charitably damn all the World but themselves, and assume the proud title
of Catholic and Universal; so that the result of all is this; If we will not
upon their bare Affirmation, swallow this heap of Contradictions, we must
infallibly fall under the Council of Lateran's Anathema, and be ipso facto
excommunicate.

But it is better to bear their curses here, than by our sinful compliance with
their grossest Idolatry, to endanger our Salvation for ever. For if there be no
Transubstantiation, of what tremendous Idolatry are they guilty, who pay Divine
Honor to a piece of Bread, and give that Adoration to a Waser-cake, which is
due to God alone? who outdo the grossest Idolatry of the Heathens, and justify
the most ridiculous Superstitions of the Infidel world? They only believed that
some invisible Deity, incorporated it self in the Creature they worshipped, but
never imagined that the whole substance was changed into God. A Metamorphosis
more strange, than the most poetical Invention could ever contrive; nor can
they save themselves harmless, by pretending they believe the Bread to be God,
and therefore if they err, it is the fault of their Judgments, not of their
Wills: For when men will maintain such an Error in spite of their own Sense,
and Reason, and Scripture, and the plain Doctrine of the Ancient Church, they
are certainly guilty of not only material, but wilful formal Idolatry. But
supposing this Doctrine sometimes; yet so many contingencies happens, that it
is impossible to know whether this particular Bread be Transubstantiated or
not. For if the Priest have not a right Intention, and be not duly ordained,
the Miracle will not follow; so that it is confessed by Bellarmine, that no man
can have any other than a conjectural certainty, that he receives the Body of
Christ, because it depends upon the Priests intention, which no man can know.
And now can it consist with our duty (as Bishop Tailors speak) certainly
Disswas. page 149.
to give Divine Worship to that thing, which we cannot certianly know to have a
Divine Being? But further, if we should suppose (by virtue of a strong faith,
such as is able to swallow Mountains) that this miracle were always performed,
yet will not this justify our Adoration For we are not bound externally to
Worship See this Argument largely prosecuted in Funeral of the Mass, Chap. 5.
God. wherever he is; but only where he displays some Beams of his Glory.
Therefore our Savior teaches us to say, Our Father which art in Heaven; Why
not in Earth, Air or Sea? God is in all these; but Heaven is the Throne of his
Glory; and therefore, thither we are to direct our Eyes and Devotions. Upon
this account, supposing Christ's humanity really present, he is but as a Prince
in disguise, and has none of his Robes of Majesty, and therefore expects not
our religious Adoration; all that is adorable in Christ, is in the water of
Baptism; there is his Godhead, Divine Person, and Attributes; and yet there we
do not Worship him, and therefore are not obliged to do it in the Eucharist,
supposing his Humanity really present. For if his Godhead (which is of it self
adorable) be not worshipped, where there are no Beams of Glory; much less is
his Manhood to be Worshipped (which is not of it self adorable) where there are
no glorious appearances of it. Those therefore, who adore the Host, at best,
Worship God without a command; but are really grosser Idolaters than the most
Barbarous Heathens.

4. The manner of the Romish Worship too exactly symbolizes with the ridiculous
Superstitions of the Heathens, and forbidden Ceremonies of the Jews; and is
unsuitable to the Divine Nature. The Heathens used many ridiculous Ceremonies,
and antic Rites, numerous Spells and Charms in their Worship; and R^me-Papal
has equaled, if not exceeded them in her fond Superstitions. Here I might
^ell of their Christening Bells, and touching ^eads, and charming Water, Salt
and Spittle for casting out Devils; their hallowing Medals, Swords, and Agnus
Deis, for a security from temporal and spiritual Evils. Their strange Actions
in their Exorcisms and Conjurations; indeed their very Worship being in an
unknown Language, looks like a Charm or Spell. I might mention their muttering
over little unintelligible Prayers, numbering them by their Beads; and vain
Repetitions, too like the Tautologies of the Heathens, condemned by our
Savior. I might further instance in their imposed Penances, some trifling and
ridiculous, others severe and formidable. Their pilgrimages, walking barefoot,
wearing Hair shirts, whipping and slashing themselves, like the Priests of
Baal, and the Worshippers of the other Sanguinary Heathen Deities. In their
ordinary Worship of the Mass, the Priest turns himself five times about at the
Alter, to denote the five Apparitions of Christ; on the day of his
Resurrection, turns to the right hand, to signify, that he has a Stopfords
Parallel, page 261.
right Intention for himself and the people. He uses diverse strange Bowings and
Postures. Sometimes with his hands close shut, and at other times spread
abroad. Sometimes he cries aloud, and at other times mutters over some things
to himself. Sometimes he makes as if he slept with his Eyes close shut; then
starts up, and goes on with numerous mimical Actions, fitter for a Stage Play,
than the House of God. In the Sacrament of Baptism, the Child must be first
blown upon, to drive away the Devil; Then hallowed Salt is put in his Mouth,
that he may be seasoned with Wisdom. His Breast and Shoulders are anointed with
holy Oil, that he may be kept from evil Suggestion, and strengthened to bear
the Lords burden. His Mouth, Eyes, Ears, Nostrils, Breast, and Forehead, are
signed with the sign of the Cross, that all may thereby be defended. A white
Garment is put upon him, to betoken his Regeneration. A Veil on his head, in
token that he is Crowned with a Royal Diadem. A burning Wax-candle in his hand,
to fulfill that saying of our Savior, Let your light so shine before men, etc.
And the Priests holy Spittle (for the very Excrements of such a sacred Person
must needs be holy) must be stroak'd on his Ears and Nostrils, that the one may
be opened to hear the word, and the other to discern between Good and Evil; and
after all, follow the words of institution. A bare Relation of these things is
a sufficient Confutation; and the consideration of them, forced those honest
Expressions from Polidore Virgil, He that observes these things, says he, and
is De Invent. lib. 5. cap. 1.
but modestly scrupulous, will say, He questions whether we imitate the
Religion of the Ancient Heathens, or their Superstitions. These numerous
mystical Rites, are perfectly opposite to the Religion of our Savior, and tend
to bring in a dry Skelleton of bodily Actions, instead of the Spiritual Worship
of the Gospel. Nay, have they not galled the Necks of their Disciples with that
heavy Yoke of Jewish Ceremonies, which the Apostle would not impose on the
Gentile Convers? Is not superannuated Judaism restored, and the high Priest
translated from Jerusalem to Rome? Are not their Pilgrimages and Jubilees,
burning Lamps at noonday, and perfumes of Incense, distinction of Days, and
Meats, and Rules about Fasting and Abstinence, a perfect imitation of the Jews?
These has the Infallible man at Rome revived, as if he would correct the
Divine Wisdom that abolished them; or at least, as if the Church were now in
its Dotage, and again were to be ruled like a Child or Infant. But we have not
so learned Christ. We are to remember, as Bishop Tailor speaks, That Figures
and Shadows were for the Old Testament, but light and manifestation Ductor Dub.
lib. 3. c. 4. rul. 20. s. 8.
for the New. The Egyptians did indeed teach Religion by Hierogliphical
Symbols; and the Schools of plato and Pythagoras, by Numbers and Figures; but
we who walk in the light of the Gospel, have an easier way of teaching the
People; and are not to return to the Elements and Rituals of Jews and Pagan
Schools. This manner of teaching by symbolical Actions is too low, too
suspicious, too Dangerous, to be mingled with Divine Liturgies, and unbefitting
the gravity and spirituality of our Religion. Thus far he. Thus we see how they
have overturned the first design of Christianity. Obscured the Light of the
Gospel, and instead of that complete Character of the Nature of God, and the
manner of his Worship, laid down in Scripture, have by their Idolatry and
Superstition, given us unworthy Notions of his Attributes, and brought in that
blindness and thick darkness which was mercifully chased away by the Sunshine
of the Gospel.

2. They have invaded Christ's Mediatory Office. The Christian Religion
discovers the only means of reconciling sinful Creatures, by the Incarnation,
Death, and Sufferings of the Lord Jesus, who in pursuance of the great design
of bringing us to Heaven; is invested with the Offices of King, Priest, and
Prophet of his Church; all which the Papacy has invaded.

1. They have invaded Christ's Kingly Office. By this, it is his Prerogative to
give Laws to his Church, and Christians are bound to pay him the Subjection and
entire Obedience of their Hearts and Lives.

If any therefore shall pretend a power of dispensing with his Laws, and
untying their Obligation, of making new Articles of Faith, and condemning
things plainly commanded by him. If any shall pretend without sufficient Proof,
a Vicarious delegated Commission from him, and usurp the place of the Universal
Lawgiver of the World: These must be acknowledged to be invaders of his Regal
Office; and in how many Instances the Church of Rome has been thus bold, and
Jaringly guilty, is too well known. How many new Articles have they obtruded on
our belief, since the Canon of Scripture was sealed? And how does their Faith
increase and decrease like the Moon? Tho the Apostle pronounces an Anathema
against the highest pretended Saint or Angel, that should Preach any other
Doctrine than what he had delivered to the Galatians, Gal. 1. 8. Yet the
Conventicle of Trent, those professed Angels and Guardians of the Church, have
level d their curses against all that will fear the threatenings of the
Apostle, and will not receive their supplemental and corrupt Traditions with
the same reverence and pious Affection that they do the Holy Scriptures. I need
not tell how they have claimed a power of dissolving the Obligation of the most
Solemn Oaths and Covenants, and of allowing Marriages in forbidden degrees. How
they have made Fornication a lesser Sin in a Clergymen, than Marriage; tho the
one be the Ordinance of God, and never prohibited to any company of men; and
the other forbidden by the very Law of Nature. I need not tell how the Pope
has usurped the Office of Universal Bishop, and Vicar of Christ; tho Pope
Gregory severely reflected upon John of Constantinople for affecting such a
Titile, and called it the badg of Antichrist. I need not tell how they have
added five other Sacraments, to those two instituted by our Savior; what a
number of Church Officers they have instituted, unknown in Scripture, and the
purest Ages of the Church: Nor how they have Lorded it over the Consciences of
men, by rigorously imposing numerous burdensome Ceremonies, which change the
spiritual Worship of the Gospel, and alter its very Nature. It Is confessed that
Governors have a Power of imposing indifferent things; and whatever tends to
the more orderly and decent Administration of the Worship of God, may be the
object of their command. But when these are either vain and useless, or
indecent in their number; when they are imposed as parts of Worship, and
necessary to Salvation: When they obscure the Worship of God, and are more like
the shadows of the Law, than becoming the light of the Gospel; such Impositions
are Acts of Tyranny and Usurpation. I shall conclude this head, with the
mention of one more bold, tho acknowledged Invasion of the Regal Office of
Christ, and that is, their half Communions.

They have snatched away the Cup in the Eucharist from the People, and engrossed
it to the Clergy. This was established as an Article of the Romish Faith, at
the Council of Constance, and afterwads confirmed at Trent. The chief
remarkable Causes are these, Seeing that in diverse parts of the World, there be
some, who rashly presume to say, That Christian People ought to receive the
Eucharist under both kinds; this present Holy General Council, being desirous
to provide for the safety of the faithful, does decree, That tho Jesus Christ
did Administer the venerable Sacrament in both kinds, and tho in the primitive
Church, the faithful did so receive it; yet notwithstanding, this custom ought
to be kept, i. e. that the Priest that says Mass, shall communicate under both
species of Bread and Wine, but the Lay people under that of Bread only^ and
they that say the contrary, let them be expelled as Heretics, and grievously
punished by the Bishop and his Officials. How horrible a Canon is this, and
what a notorious Usurpation of Christ's Prerogative? They accuse of Rashness,
Error, and Heresy, all who dare (by their own Confession) imitate Christ and
his Apostles, and the Primitive Church; for this only reason, some have been
burnt at a Stake, and it was an occasion of cruel Wars and Bloodshed in
Germany. They indeed pretend this to be an indifferent circumstance, to be
continued, or removed at the Churches pleasure. But why should this be more
indifferent than the Bread? Has not Christ more expressly commanded the
drinking the one, than receiving the other? Drink ye all of it, says he, as if
he foresaw and designed to prevent this great Corruption. And to argue, ad
hominem, our Savior tells us, Joh. 6. 53. Except ye drink the blood of the Son
of man, ye have no life in you. These words, if understood of the Eucharist, as
the Romanists pretend, prove the absolute Universal necessity of communicating
under both kinds. So that, either this great prop of Transubstantiation must be
deserted, or their half Communion condemned.

2. They have invaded Christ's Priestly Office. By this he has fully satisfied
Divine Justice, by giving himself a complete Sacrifice for our Offenses, and
procured for us the pardon of Sin, the Graces of the Spirit, and eternal
Happiness, upon Condition of sincere Obedience to his Laws; and now is entered
into Heaven, and is by virtue of this Sacrifice our powerful Intercessor at the
Right hand of God. This Office also, is shamefully invaded by those of the
Romish Church; and that in these following instances.

1. By their proud doctrine of Merit. Tho the Scriptures fully declare, that by
grace we are saved, and eternal life is the free gift of God: tho our reasons
may convince us, that a Creature (how innocent soever) can deserve nothing at
his Creators hands; tho a little reflection upon our selves, will discover many
spots in our fairest virtues, many blemishes in our best duties, many
imperfections in our most religious exercise, many sinful mixtures in our most
unpolluted actions, and great defects in our best obedience: yet do these men
boast of their good works, and account them not only spotless, but meritorious
too: but if all this zeal for good works (as one well observes) were designed
to advance an holy life, the nobleness of the design might a little excuse the
fault: but alas! those works which they most extol, are either pieces of
will worship, that tend only to advance the Secular interest of their Church,
as Pilgrimages, building Abbys, enriching Monasteries, etc. or else are such
actions as we think to be daring sins; as murdering Heretics, and persons
coldly affected to the Catholic Cause. Thus it is storied concerning Cardinal
Richelieu, that great Politician of France, that when he lay upon his
deathbed* his Consessor came to him to perform the last offices of charity,
and urged him to a full confession of all his sins; the Cardinal mentioned only
some little petty crimes, and told him those were all he could recollect; at
which the Confessor started, saying, Surely this sickness has robbed your Grace
of your memory: for we who have been placed in a lower sphere, have observed
many actions of a far deeper Dye: and then mentioned many Murders committed by
his procurement. Oh (says the Cardinal) those persons were disaffected to the
Catholic Interest, and these are my good deeds with which I intend to present
my Savior. A story that needs no other invective than the bare relation. But I
would not willingly accuse all, while some only are liable to this charge. For
many Romish Doctors mean no more by merit, than that obligation God has by
promise laid upon himself, to reward our good works. And this I think none that
understand the Nature of the Divine Promises can gainsay. These men we accuse
only for the use of a proud improper term; tho once used by the ancient Fathers
in an innocent sense. 2. By their Doctrine of penance and Purgatory. Whereas
the Scripture tells us, that Christ has pai'd down a complete Ransom for our
sins, and it is through his Blood alone we can expect a freedom from the
punishments we have deserved; yet this Church has Coind new distinctions
between the temporary and eternal punishments of sin; as if tho the latter be
removed by the Blood of Christ, the former must be satissi'd for by our selves
either in this Life or in Purgatory. To this end they have given the Priests a
commission to enjoin penances for sin as satisfactions to Divine Justice, and
preventive of surther punishment. Penances so Ludicrous and Trifling, that it
is a sign of great infatuation in any that can believe by such cheap and easy
performances, to appease the anger of an offended Deity. Penances consisting of
little observances; such as numbering their Prayers by their Beads, saying so
many Avemaries at some priviledg'd Altars: in abstaining from Flesh for so many
days, in whipping their bodies, in wearing hair-shirts, and the cords of the
particular Orders, and numerous other little pieces of solly and superstition.
By these means do they take off sinners from their grateful love and duty to
the Redeemer, and earnest believing-applications to the Lord Jesus, who is
appointed by the Father, as the sole Mediator of his Church, and through whom
alone we can expect deliverance from punishments, whether temporal or eternal.
Of the same nature is their Doctrine of Purgatory; a state of torments in the
other world, equal in degree, tho not in continuance to those of Hell: wherein
those souls must sry who have not satisfied for their sins here, till their
friends give money to the Priest to pray them thence. By this means the
interests of the Clergy are advanced, and the grandeur of that Church promoted.
This has enriched their Abbeys, adorned their Chapels, filled their Coffers,
and made good provision for all the begging Orders among them. For while they
scared the people with such a terrible Doctrine, and yet pretended a power of
Praying them thence; who would not give liberally to those who were able to
deliver them from such extremity of torment? A Doctrine which the honester of
their Doctors acknowledge, is not to be found in cripture; and these who pretend
to prove it thence, have brought such lame and farfetch'd pro^^s as are as
easily refuted as mentioned; the only Text that can with the least probability
be stretched to this sense, is that of 1 Cor. 3. 15. He himself shall be saved,
yet so as by fire: But this is but a proverbical speech, and by the context the
meaning plainly appears to be, that he who holding the essentials of
Christianity shall corrupt it by additions of other disagreeing Doctrines, is
in a very hazardous condition; and tho his salvation is possible, yet it is but
as a man's, whose house is on fire about his ears, extremely dubious and very
uncertain; which how applicable to the Romanists, has been excellently showed
by others, and will further appear by this discourse. But were there such a
place as this, what a derogation is it to the blood and prerogative of Christ,
to think that money can procure a Release from thence? The Psalmist, I am sure,
tells us that they who trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the
multitude of their riches: none of them can redeem his brother, or pay to God a
Ransom for him. Psalm. 49. 6. 7. But this is but Old-Testament-Divinity, and
Purgatory has been built since that time; or rather the infallible Head of the
Church will not be guided by the Laws of the Bible.

For tho St. Peter would not sell the gifts of the Spirit for Money, yet a fair
purchase of eternal Life may be bought of his Successor, if God would as
willingly consent as he. And we may invert St. Peter's words, and apply them to
the Romanists, 1 Pet. 1. 18. They are bought with corruptable things, and
redeemed by silver and gold, from the imaginary flames of Purgatory, tho not
from that vain conversation received by tradition from their Fathers. But we
have not so learned Christ. Scripture mentions but two places, Heaven and Hell;
if we lead Pious and Holy lives, we may receive death with a joyful welcome,
and need not allay our comforts by the fears of an after-reckoning in another
world. And tho we may have been guilty of many venial sins in a Gospelsense,
through infirmity, surprise, and sudden temptation, or of any more mortal ones
of a deeper die; yet upon our sincere repentance, the Blood of Christ, (without
the fire of Purgatory) will cleanse us from all these, and present us pure and
spotless to the Father. But if we die in an impenitent state, we shall be
presently doomed to endless remediless torments, and all the wealth of the
Indies will never procure us a deliverance thence: I might further mention
their practice of selling Indulgences for money, which happily occasioned the
reformation by Luther. By this they they have made easy composition for sins,
and the Taxa Cameroe Apostolicoe, a book publicly printed amongst them, sets
down at what easy rates an absolution may be obtained for the most unnatural
vices. Now what a direct tendency has this to make men set light by their
sins, tread under foot the blood of the Son of God, and account the death and
sufferings of the Lord Jesus perfectly unnecessary?

3. By their doctrine of the sacrifice of the Mass, as a formal expiation of
the living and dead. Tho the Apostle to the Hebrews makes the great excellence
of Christ's sacrifice above those of the Levitical Law, to consist in this, That
it was so full and complete, that it needs no repetition; Heb. 10. 12, 14. Yet
the Romanists have made it a great part of their Religion to offer him every
day in the Mass, as a propitiatory proper sacrifice, and thus make his former
sacrifice on the cross incomplete and imperfect, or rather wholly unnecessary;
for Christ instituted the Sacrament before his passion; and if he then offered
up himself as a propitiation for our sins, what need was there at all of his
bloody death and passion. It is acknowledged that the Eucharist may be called a
sacrifice in the same improper sense, as our prayers, and alms-deeds, and
repentances are called so in Scripture; and if they will call it a
commemorative sacrifice, as it is a memorial of Christ's once perfect offering
up himself on the crose; Or even a Propitiatory sacrifice, as it is a means of
propitiating the Divine favor, and seals and exhibits to us the real benefits
purchased by his death; we need not quarrel about words if this be their only
sense And indeed as Bishop Andrews somewhere speaks, take away
Transubstantiation, and the conceit of Purgatory, and this wordy controversy
would quickly be ended.

4. By their formal Invocation of Saints. The Scripture teaches us, that there
is but one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus; and that none
might pretend there may be other Mediators of intercession, tho not of
Redemption, the Apostle has prevented that distinction, 1 Timothy 2. 1. -- 4
compared; where the Apostle urges us to pray for all men, because all of
whatsoever Nation or Condition in the world are interested in Christ's
intercession. He is the only Mediator that prevailingly intercedes for us in
Heaven. To make creatures the objects of our formal invocation, what is it but
to make them competitors with Christ, and share in his prerogative? We may as
well ascribe redemption to others, as intercession. Besides, what a
disparagement is it to his Love that when he has given us the largest
assurances of his kindness, and ready acceptances of our prayers, and
graciously promised that if we put our considence in him, he will be our
Advocate, and we shall have a gracious answer from Heaven: Nay when God the
Father has declared, that whatever we ask in the Name of the Lord Jesus shall
be granted: I say, how do we disparage his love by begging others to plead our
Cause? Can we imagine? that the servants of God can do more for us, than his
beloved Son? Or the blessed Virgin, than the Lord Jesus? He that looks into the
Roman Rituals, indeed may be tempted to think so, where ten Avemaries are
prescribed to one Paternoster: and they have pictured Christ as frowning upon
sinners, and driving them away from him; but the Virgin Mary inviting them with
her smiles, and lending a willing ear to their Devotions. But he that looks
into Scripture, there finds nothing of this nature. We are never directed to
put our confidence in man; but curses denounced against those that do so. The
Saints in Heaven, are there never made the objects of our Prayers; and it was
always thought by the Primitive Church, a good Argument against the Arriant,
that Christ is God, because we are directed to address our selves to him
Whether the Saints Pray for us or no in Heaven, is not the question; and while
we understand not the extent of their knowledge, it will remain a doubt, Luke
15. 7. Those who rejoice at the conversion of a sinner, may perhaps as far as
they know our condition, pray for their militant fellowmembers: Rev. 6. 9, 10.
And those who so passionately desire that vengeance may be executed on the
Churches enemies, may reasonably be thought as earnest for the salvation of
their friends. But this their intercession is not (as the Romanists pretend)
like the Lord Jesus's, by presenting their merits in our behalf; nor has God
given them power to pardon our sins, heal our diseases, supply our wants, or
save our Souls; and yet for such things as these, are prayers directed to them;
nor is there any warrant from hence for us to make them our Mediators, and pray
unto them. For tho they may know such things concerning us, whereby their own
happiness and comfort may be increased: yet that they should understand all the
particular grievances and concernments of our lives, hear our prayers, or know
our hearts, is not to be imagined. And when we use the same gestures of
external adoration to them, that we do to our Savior, we thereby make them
copartners with him in the same honor, and rivals to him in his dignity.

3. They have invaded Christ's Prophetical office. By this, he has revealed the
whole will of God unto us: and that we might not be deceived by the subtilties
of seducers, Commissioned his inspired Apostles to commit his precepts to
writing in the Holy Scripture, that this might be our standing rule. According
to this we are bound to walk; and whatever Doctrines or practices are not
agreeable to it, must be disowned. This Office is also invaded by the Roman
Church, and most eminently by these following ways.

1. By hiding the Scripture from the common people, and to justify this
practice, accusing it of obscurity. It Is well known how they have forbid the
Scriptures to be Read in the vulgar language, and by terrible curses and
Anathema's have scared their Lay-proselytes from this admirable guide to
happiness. How have they locked up this bread of life, and engrossed this
facred Manna to themselves! How have they enclosed this well of Salvation, and
churlishly refused their Laity so much as a taste of the purer streams, except
they will take in the mud and filth, and their own impure mixtures also. Their
people must be content with the crumbs which the Clergy are pleased to let
fall: and be satisfied with only a glimmering of that light which would clearly
direct them to the paths of Life. The Scriptures, like the rising Sun, would
quickly dispel the darkness of error, and their former ignorance: and therefore
the proud Prelates resolve to stop this Giant in his race, and hinder him from
scattering his Beams in the World: But alas, what an high affront and daring in
dignity is this, to the great Prophet of the Church? That when he descended
from his Fathers Bosom for this very end, that he might discover the mind and
will of God unto us; took such unwearied pains to publish his Doctrine;
strengthend it by such amazing Miracles; and inspired his Apostles, that they
might commit to writing this his last Testament and admirable Legacy: I say,
what ^ Monstrous piece of Ingratitude is it, to hide it from the sight of those
to whom it is consigned by our Lord? And that by them who pretend to be the
Guardians of it, and the Executors of their departed Savior? Such an Action
might be more excusable in Julian or Dioclesian; but for the Vicar of Christ to
be Guilty of it, is a crime sufficient to forfeit his Title, and tempts us to
believe him Antichrist. Was the Scripture first Preached, and afterward
written in a Language capable of being Universally understood? And is there not
as much necessity it should be so continued? Did God command the Jews to be
frequent in the Meditation of the Law? To lodge it in their thoughts, to make it
their daily companion, and the subject of their constant entertainment? And
has Deuteronomy. 11. 18, 19, 20.
he any where forbidden the use of the Gospel? To delight in the Law of the
Lord, and to Meditate therein day and night, was once the Character Psalm. 1. 1,
2.
of a Blessed Man. And is the scene so much changed, that now it is become the
black mark of a damnable Heretic? The Prophets permitted the People to judge by
the Scriptures, which were true, and which were counterfeit messengers from
Heaven, crying out, to the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no Isa. 8. 20.
light in them! And must we acknowledge these men for the Pillars of Truth, and
the Lights of the World, without being allowed the same liberty? When our
Savior was asked by that young man, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal
life? Our Lord answers him; what says the Law? How Read thou? And shall
ignorance be now accounted the surest Road to Heaven? Search the Scripture, was
his precept, but is the prohibition of the Romish Church. Timothy and the
Bereans were indeed commended by St. Luke and St. Paul, as noble persons for
their diligence in the Scriptures: But if they had lived in the days of our
Modern Saints, this would have been thought a crime deserving the lash of the
inquisition. An Anathema would have been their spiritual reward, and fire and
faggot their civil recompense. Certainly such a practice as this, had need be
backed with good Apologies, or else they will never be able to justify so great
an abuse of the Lord Jesus. But how weak are their pleas! and how insignificant
the excuses they make! Is it because the People may wrest the Scripture to
their perdition, that they are forbidden their use? Alas! because some may
abuse it, must all therefore be deprived of it? because some may make Scripture
the support of their errors, must it not therefore be the foundation of truth?
Because some dogs have trampled on the Bread of Life, Must the Children
therefore be withheld from their Spiritual Food? Because Heretics have taken
too large draughts of the new Wine of the Gospel, must all therefore be denied
to taste of it? Because some know not the worth of these Pearls, must those
therefore who know how to value them, be hindered from their possession? By the
same reason the Scriptures should not be permitted in the Learned Languages;
for Learned Men have been generally the first broachers of Heresy, and are most
capable of perverting the Holy Writings. Is it because Scripture is so obscure,
that if the common people did enjoy it, they could not understand it? It Is
acknowledged, there are mysteries in our Religion, and God has for wise ends
left some things more dark and obscure, to awaken our industry, abate our
Pride, and show the most Learned, his ignorance and infancy in knowledge; and
create in us all, earnest longings after that Happy state, where all the
Riddles shall be unfolded, and the mysteries clearly revealed. But there is so
much perspicuously laid down, as is necessary to Salvation; and every man that
Reads it, and sincerely endeavors to understand it, shall with the help of
Divine Grace, arrive at so much Knowledge, as if improved into practice, will
bring him to Heaven. The great end why the Scripture was written, was, that we
might have a constant Monitor of our duty, and guide 2 Timothy 3. 16.
to happiness; now if the Scripture were so obscure that it answered not this
end, this would reflect upon the Divine Wisdom, as if he had chosen an
insufficient means, and were defeated in his methods and expectations. And it
would equally reflect upon his goodness, as if he envied his creatures
happiness, if after our sincere and humble endeavors, we could not understand
the things that are necessary to our Salvation. The essentials are clearly
revealed; tho there be some obscure passages, yet the Divine Goodness has left
them, not that we should be debarred from Reading, but to prevent our loathing
and contempt: and the darkest phrases are incomparably more intelligible than
the cloudy obscurities of their admired Authors. The pious nonsense of Mother
Juliana, and the sanctified gibberish of their mystical Divines, are infinitely
less perspicuous than the Prophecies of Daniel, or mysteries of the
Revelations. And yet those which reflect on Christianity, as if it consisted
only in Enthusiastic heats and raprures, are allowed, while the Scripture
which gives so lovely a description of the Christian Religion must be shut up
from the sight of the multitude. But whatever slender pretenses may be used to
delude perverse Heretics, we have good ground to think, that the true cause of
this Restraint, is the same which our Savior mentions, Joh. 3. 19. They love
darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil. Should the Scriptures
be read by all, their Proselytes would be few, and their Altars would no longer
smoke; the Grandeur of the Church must be abated, the infallible Chair would
totter, and Rome would be no longer the Mistress of the Earth.

2. Their pretense of Infallibility, and the Scriptures dependence on the
Authority of their Church. This is another Invasion on Christ's Prophetical
Office. For if Infallibility be lodged in either Pope or Council (for they are
not agreed where it is placed) then tho Christ has never so clearly explained
his mind, they may make what Expositions of his words they please, and obtrude
them on our belief. Their great Champion Bellarmine asserts, That if the
infallible Head should condemn Virtue for Vice, and commend Vice as Virtue; we
are bound to believe Vice as morally good, and Virtue evil, but if this be
Gospel, our great Master has deceived us, and we have been led by our Savior
into an Error. Then if that impure Cardinal, that writ a Book in praise of the
scarlet Sin of Sodom, had been exalted to the Papal-chair, and from thence
proclaimed that unnatural Vice to be morally good, we should have been bound to
believe it. And tho some pretend that such a Supposition is not to be made,
because the Spirit of truth will guide the unerring Head into all truth; yet,
sad experience has taught us, that the broadest Impieties have been canonized,
and miscal'd Virtue and Justice at Rome. Besides, what possible reason is
there, they should be secured from Error more than from Sin? How can it be
imagined that that Holy Spirit, which is grieved with impurity, and will not
dwell in the Habitations of uncleanness, did infallibly assist those Monsters
for Villainy, which are acknowledged by Baronius and Platina to have worn the
Triple Crown in the ninth and tenth Centuries?

Surely if such a gift as this was ever given to the Guides of the Church; How
obscure soever the Scripture be in other things, it will be highly necessary it
should plainly lay down this important Doctrine. But alas! How impertinent are
the Proofs they bring! They are either such as will equally prove the Civil
Magistrates, and Judges in Westminster Hall infallible: Such is that, Deuteronomy. 17.
10, 11, 12. Where Judges are appointed to decide matters of Difference between
man and man, to whose Decisions the People are bound to agree, that their
Strifes might not be endless, or such as are restrained to the Apostles
themselves. Such is that, Mat. 16. 19. I will give thee the keys of the kingdom
of heaven, and whatsoever thou bindest on earth, shall be bound in heaven; and
whatsoever thou loosest on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. The plain meaning
of which words seems to be only this. I will give thee the the privilege of
first opening Vide Lightfoot, in locum.
the Gospel (frequently called the Kingdom of Heaven) and whatsoever parts of
Moses's Law thou bindest to the Observation of, or take off the Obligation,
(for so the Phrases of binding and loosing are generally used in the Jewish
Writers) shall be observed and forborne. God will ratify and confirm what thou
establishest. Accordingly we know St. Peter did first Preach the Gospel to the
Jews, in Acts 2. and to the Gentiles, Acts 10. And this privilege of binding
and loosing was peculiar to him and the other Apostles. Lastly, Their proofs
are such as agree to every particular Church, and faithful Christian. Thus that
of Matt. 18. 17. Speaks only of a Jurisdiction in every Church for quieting
differences among the Members of it. And that other of Matt. 16. 18. The gates
of hell shall not prevail against the Church. For by the Gates of Hell may be
either understood the crafts and policies of Hell (Councils using to sit in the
Gates of Cities) shall not totally prevail; There shall be a body of Christians
in the World, or the Translation should be mended, and the words read (the
Gates of the Grave, or the invisible State) Death, which is frequently called
among the Greeks by that name, shall not gain Victory over the Church, over the
particular Persons of which it consists; tho they dye, yet Christ will rescue
them by a glorious Resurrection. Death shall not have Dominion over them, nor
over the Church; notwithstanding its many Enemies; it shall not perish totally
or irrecoverably. These are the best proofs of their Infallibility, I can find
in the Scripture; and while they are so easily and naturally applicable to a
different sense, I cannot think a Doctrine so obscurely delivered in the
Christian Rule, to be any Articles of the Christian Faith. Besides, what use do
they make of this gift they pretend to? Have they obliged the World by an
infallible Comment on all the difficult places in Scripture, and put a final
end to all controversies among themselves? On the contrary, have not some Popes
professed their no skill in Divinity, and infallible Councils contradicted each
other? Are not there violent disputes between the Franscicans and Dominicans,
Jansenists and Jesuits, French and Italian Clergy? Surely the Pope must be very
regardless of the Peace of the Church, who will not give an infallible
discovery of the truth. And if ever God did give this gift, since the Apostles
days, he may have long since justly taken it away, because they have hid their
Talent, and made no use of it. And now I have weakened this pretense, the other
of the Scriptures dependence on the Authority of their Church falls of it self;
for if their Church be not infallible, why should I believe the Scriptures to
be Gods Word, merely because they say so, any more than Mahomets Alchoran? It Is
true, the Testimony of their Church, jointly with all other Christians in the
World, and the Confession of Jews and Heathens, handed down to us by the most
unquestionable historical Tradition, is a great Confirmation, that these were
the Books indicted by the Apostles, that they were confirmed by various
Miracles, and are not corrupted in any material Articles; but we believe their
Divine Authority, not because* the Church says so, but because of those Seals
which God has affixed to them. We have convincing Arguments enough, of the
Scriptures Divinity, and need not go to Rome, to know what they mean Christ
has fully proved, that his Message is from God, by the excellence of his
Doctrines, the accomplishment of Prophecies, and numerous miraculous Works; and
we will not forsake these firm foundations of our Faith, and be so unreasonably
credulous, as to believe the same things merely upon the Affirmation of a
company of the worst sorts of Christians in the World. Thus have they
dangerously invaded the Offices of Christ. I proceed to

3. They have corrupted the excellent Rules of an holy Life contained in the
Gospel. The great design of the Christian Religion is, to purify and amend the
World, and reduce it to its primitive Innocence* And I wish there were less
occasion to think, that the design of these men is to Debauch the World, and
show that it is possible to be more corrupt than the very Heathens themselves;
for have not they by their nice distictions, rendered a holy Life a very
needless thing, and overturned the very foundations of Virtue and Morality?
Repentance, that first Introduction to an holy Life, consisting in such a
hearty Sorrow for every Sin, as influences the practice, and disposes us to
forsake them, they have made utterly unnecessary. For while they distinguish
Sins into Mortal and Venial, and impose very easy Penances for those of the
most purple dye: Is not this the way to tempt their Proselytes to a continuance
in their Sins, and keep them from that severe hatred of them, and those firm
Resolutions of forsaking them, they ought to take up? Besides, they maintain
that a slight Attrition, and imperfect Sorrow for Sin, merely from the
consideration of some temporal inconvenience, if joined with the Sacrament of
Penance, is sufficient to fit a man for Heaven, so that it is a very needless
thing to hate or forsake our evil ways; This is desin'd by their Council of
Trent, and generally maintained by their most famous Casuists. And Morinus
tells us, as I find him quoted by Dr. Stillingfleet, Preface to Answer to
several Treatises.
That the excellence of the Evangelical Precepts above the Legal, chiefly
consists in this, That by them we are freed from the heavy yoke of Contrition
and Love to God. A Speech that would better become a Turk or Heathen, than a
Christian. Thus we see they have hindered the first entrance into an holy Life,
and made the Gate to Heaven wider, and the passage much more easy than our
Savior or his Apostles. And if we run over all the parts of our Duty, we may
find too plain a Contradiction among their Casuists. If we examine the Duties
of Piety toward God; How necessarily must they have low and irreverent
thoughts of his imcomprehensible Majesty, who behold such scandalous Pictures
of him in their Churches, and see the same Devotions and Gestures of Adoration
used to those who were once, perhaps, equally sinful Creatures with themselves?
How have they encouraged an abuse of his sacred Name, by their Doctrine of
Equivocation; and profaned his Holy Day, by allowing the remains of that time,
that is not spent at Mass, to be employed in idle Sports, and foolish Mirth?
How have they destroyed that trust we ought to place on God alone, by teaching
men to rely on Creatures*; and damped well-grounded hopes of Heaven, by
unreasonable fears of Purgatory? How have they taken off all necessity of Faith
in Christ, by their Doctrine of implicit Faith; and while they teach the
salvability of Heathens, will not allow that any Christian can be saved, who is
not a Subject to the Pope? and thus a belief in him, is more necessary than in
the Lord Jesus. I might give many instances out of their Casuists, how they
make it unnecessary to love God above once a year; and if they say their
Prayers, no matter whether they attend to them or no. The Duties of Justice and
common Honesty, are as perfectly overthrown by the nice Distinctions of Rome.
Their maintaining it lawful to exercise Revenge, and Kill him that has injured
us in Honor, Goods, or Reputation, is certainly no way owned by our Savior,
who commands us to love our Enemies, and do good to them that hate us; by no
means to avenge our selves, but to overcome evil with good. That Latitude of
uncleanness, and immodesty allowed in their Books, is but a very bad Comment
upon that Text. He that looks upon a Woman, to Lust after her, has committed
Adultry already with her in his heart. Neither were they ever encouraged by
him, who said, Thou shall not for swear thy self, to falsify their Oaths, or
violate their Faith with Heretics. The great pattern of meekness and
compassion, that checked his Disciples fiery zeal against the Samaritans with,
Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of; Never encouraged their envenomed
rage against Dissenters from them; Never encouraged their Gibbets, Stakes, or
Inquisition. Nor did he command that all should be tortured with the most
bloody* Cruelty, who are so obstinately sullen, as to refuse to stoop to a
Wafer-Cake, and believe their own senses before his Holiness. They have turned
Nupitals into Massacres, and at the conclusion of Wedding-Feasts have not
transubstantiated, but exchanged Wine for Blood. They have treacherously
murdered thousands of Innocents, and blasphemously sung praises to God, as if
he were the Author of those Villainies which are highly-displeasing to him, and
abominably odious in his sight.

The Gospel teaches us to maintain the most diffusive unbounded Charity toward
all the world; but they have consigned their love within the Walls of Rome. And
like the Pharisees of old, will allow no Salvation to any other Christians,
that will not submit to the usurpations of their High Priest and Sanhedrim. The
Christian Religion is designed to abate our pride, and cure our selfishness:
But the great design of these men, is to aggrandize their Church, and promote
the Secular interests of the Clergy. Heavenly-mindedness and self-denial is
every where urged in the Gospel: But that the great corruptions for which we
accuse the Church of Rome, do plainly aim at a worldly interest, may easily
appear by an induction of the particulars I have already discoursed of. And tho
there are many Cloistered Votaries among them, that make great boasts of their
mortification, who pretend to bid adien to the world, and all its flattering
vanities, who pretend to spend their whole time in devotion, and dressing their
Souls for Heaven: yet all this may be a juggle and cheat to blind the world;
Pharisaical, and not Evangelical. And if we might be allowed to search their
Cells and Abbeys, we might perhaps find they have been more careful to lay up
Treasures on Earth, than Heaven* true Mortification is chiefly inward, but
theirs is mostly in externals. Their Religion lies no deeper than their skins;
and tho the Apostle tells us, that this bodily exercise profits little; yet
they make it the very sum of their self-denial. Thus have they Evacuated the
great duties of our Religion. And tho I cannot say that all these are Doctrines
defined by their Councils, and in that sense to be subscribed to by all that
Communion; Yet they are publicly Printed by their Casuists; and the order of
Jesuits, who most propagate them, are most encouraged. And while a denier of
Transubstantiation shall be Sacrificed to the Flames, these debauchers of the
World, enjoy the best Ecclesiastical Promotions. I might have enlarged in
further instances; but he that desires more, may read enough to turn his
stomach in Tailors Disswasive from Popery, the Practical Divinity of the
Papists; to omit the Mystery of Jesuitism, and the Jesuits Morals. He that
Reads those collections out of their own Authors, will find, that the Pious and
Judicious Dr. Tillotson did not go beyond the bounds of his wonted moderation,
when he used these seemingly harsh expressions

Sermon on 5th Nov. -78.
I speak it with grief (says he) and shame, because the credit of our common
Christianity is some way concerned in it; That Panaetius, and Antipater, and
Diogenes the Stoic; Tully, and Plutarch, and Seneca, were much honester and
more Christian Casuists than the Jesuits, or the generality of the Casuists of
any other Order that I know of in the Church of Rome.

Thus have I applied the first sense of these words to these men: and I think
sufficiently proved, That they have overturned the whole design of the Gospel.
I proceed therefore to inquire, Whether they can produce any divine commission
for these great alterations they have made. Are their Doctrines reasonable? or
have they any intrinsic excellence to commend them? The Doctrines of the
Apostles were highly reasonable, and their worth and excellence attracted every
unprejudiced person. But theirs are plainly absurd and irrational; such as
none but the wilfully blind and resolvedly obstinate can believe. For is it
reasonable to worship the incomprehensible God, by Images of Wood and Stone?
and to give the same veneration to Creatures, that we do to the Lord of Angels
and Men? Is it reasonable to adore a Wafer-cake, or imagine that the charming
words of a Priest, can fetch down the Body of Christ from Heaven, and convey
away the Bread in an instant? Is it reasonable to believe, that Christ's Body
may be in a thousand places at once? that it may be divided, not into parts,
but wholes, and crowded into every crumb of the consecrated Wafer? Is it
reasonable to believe these and a 1000 more fulsome contradictions which that
hard word Transubstantiation implies? Is it reasonable to worship a spiritual
Being, with gay ceremonies, and all the little pieces of soppery used in their
worship? Is it reasonable to believe, that God should be so fond of the City of
Rome that the Bishop thereof, tho never so notorious for ignorance and villainy,
shall become infallible? Is it reasonable to believe, that Absolution can
change Attrition into effectual Repentance, and the Omnipotent Words of a
Priest conjure a man to Heaven in an instant? But the world knows how the
Jesuit Veronius has implicitly confessed Reason not to be on their side, who
presented the world with a new method more promising than ordinary to convince
Heretics, and that was, to call for express words of Scripture, and absolutely
deny whatever reason said against any of the Articles of their new Belief. And
now since their Doctrines are thus confessedly unreasonable, we may be assured
they came not from Heaven, or the God of Reason.

2. Are their Doctrines warranted by any Prophecies concerning them? The
Apostles completed those Prophecies that had been long before made. God had
foretold his abolishing the Ceremonial Law, and establishing a perfect
standing-rule for Jews and Gentiles. But does he any where foretell, That after
the expiration of so many Years, Judaism and Paganism should be mixed together
by his appointment? On the contrary, the Gospel is called an everlasting
Gospel; and at the closing of the Canon of Scripture, a Rev. 22. 18.
terrible curse is denounced against those who should dare to make any
additions to Scripture. There are some Prophecies indeed in Scripture, which
seem to concern them. St. John and St. Paul have spoken many things concerning
Antichrist and the Man of Sin, which many think are clearly applicable to the
Roman Church. But I know she will say concerning these, as Ahab of Micaiah; I
hate these men, for they Prophecy not good, but evil concerning me.

3. Can they attest the truth of their Doctrine by Miracles? Here I know they
will make their boasts? There is not a Saint among them, but is famous for
incredible wonders. The Apostles were but puny Miracle-workers, in comparison
of their Modern Saints. And the great St. Francis, St. Bridget, St. Catharine,
and St. Thomas of Canterbury, far exceeded St. Peter, or St. James, or St.
John, or any of the other Disciples. Who can question the lawfulness of
Worshipping the Virgin Mary, when he hears, that the Angels brought wood and
stone cross the Sea to Loretto, and built her a Chapel there? Who can forbear
falling prostrate, and crying, St. Thomas help me, when those very words from
the mouth of a Sparrow, struck a cruel Sparrow hawk dead, that had almost
fastened upon her as his prey? Have not the wild beasts of the wood fallen down
before the Host, when casually let fall, and the very Asses cast themselves
into a worshipping posture? And is it not mighty strange, that men will still
trust their own senses, and remain Heretics after such wonderful evidence? I
might instance in manyother pretty tales out of their Legends; but they are so
ridiculous and extravagant, as plainly speak out their forgery: and the wiser
among them are forced to confess them Pious Frauds, and Godly Cheats. Our
Savior and his Apostles did their mighty works openly in the sight of their
greatest enemies. But these are all transacted in corners, before friends, and
those that have already entertained their doctrines. And surely there must be
some Legerdemain in the business, that so many Miracles should be done in Italy
and Spain, and none in England. But the true reason why they can do no mighty
works in our Country, is because of our unbelief. Protestants would soon
discover their cheats; and they were once so baffled in that intended miracle
of the Boy of Bilson (a known story) that they have hardly ventured the
exposing themselves since. Their Miracles, when they are not plain forgeries,
are either the curing of melancholy sumes, or Hysterical-Distempers, which
frequently create fancies in persons, as if they were possessed: of which
instances have been given by Protestants (particularly, as I remember, by Mr.
Baxter) who have cured such, and might have gained the name of Miracle-workers
as well as they. Or if any of their Indian Apostles, as Xavier, and had a true
miraculous power, it was to confirm the truth of Christianity to the Heathens;
and not their additional corruptions. Finally, if God do permit them to do some
strange unaccountable actions, to confirm their errors, it is but as a trial to
our faith, to see whether we will forsake the true Doctrine confirmed by
greater miracles, when we are fore-arm'd against such aslaults, by being told,
that Antichrist shall come with lying wonders: and we need not fear the sin
against the Holy Ghost, if we say, that by Beelzebub do these men cast out
Devils. But I had almost forgot one great Miracle, which is daily performed:
and that is Transubstantiation; But those who believe this, must live by faith,
or rather unreasonable credulity, and not by sight. And the greatest Miracle of
all is, That men who are Wise and Rational enough in common matters, should
swallow such an heap of Contradictions. And thus have I made good the Charge
against the Romish Church in the first Sense; and tho much more might have been
said; yet this fully proves that they have corrupted Christianity with their
impure mixtures, and covered the excellent Foundations of our Faith, with the
Hay and Stubble of their own Inventions. And thus I proceed to make good the
Charge against them in the second Sense.

2. Whether they have desturb'd the World by Principles of Religion. This has
been so common a Theme of late years', that I need not spend much time in
proving it. The Miter is by them exalted above the Crown; and Peter's pretended
Successor is so far from Preaching up his Doctrine of Subjection to the Civil
Powers, that he requires Kings and Emperors to stoop to him. I need not
laboriously prove this, by Quotations out of their Authors. If the Decrees of
their Councils, the Bulls of their Popes, the Determinations of their
Canon Law, the Assertions of not only Jesuits (those known Enemies to Monarchy)
but of the most approved Doctors of all Orders among them, may be taken to be
the Sense of their Church, the Learned Bp. of Lincoln, has lately Collected
them together; and thereby fully confirmed the Title of his Book, That Popish
Principles are destructive to Protestant Princes. There we may find such
dangerous Assertions as these, That Emperors and Kings are the Popes Subjects;
That they may be deposed by him for Schism, Heresy, Laziness, or
unprofitableness; and that he is the sole Judge of the Crime and Condemnation.
That Statutes made by Laymen bind not the Clergy. That the Pope is the Vicar of
God, and every creature is subject to him. That he that prefers the King before
the Priest, prefers the Creature before the Creator. In a word, He has given
such convincing Demonstration, That King-killing Doctrines are authorized at
Rome, that we may justly wonder at the daring-Impudence of the late
Tyburn-Saint, who pretended that none but Mariana ever published such
Doctrines. But what truth can be so plain, which the Confidence of a Jesuit
dare not deny? Neither have these been the idle Speculations of the Schools, or
the entertainment of the Cells and Cloisters; but have been practically
maintained many hundred Years, and the History of the Church for some Centuries
is nothing else but a Tragical and Bloody Comment on this Doctrine. It Is hardly
possible to mention one King (since Rome's rise to her greatness) that has
been but coldly affected to the Catholic Cause, who has not been scared by
the Thunders of the Pope, and Rebellions of his Subjects.

I might instance in the Fredericks, and Henry's of Germany, who were harassed
with continual Civil Wars and Confusion; in the two Henry's of France, one
whereof ( Henry the third) was Murdered by Jaque Clement, and the act commended
in a set Oration, by Pope Sixtus quintus, and that execrable Murder compared to
the Incarnation and Resurrection of our Lord; and the Virtue and Courage of the
Friar, to that of Judith and Eleazer. The other ( Henry the 4th) was as
barbariously Assassinated by Ravilliac. But I shall confine my self to our own
Land, and briefly show how these men have turned our English World upside down.
Here I might instance in King Henry the 2d, and King John, who were both scared
by the Popes Thunderbolts into mean Submissions, below the Dignity of Crowned
heads, and the latter at last poisoned by a fawning Monk. But I shall only
mention their villainous Practices, since the beginning of the Reformation; When
King Henry the 8th first renounced the Popes Supremacy, Pope Paul the 3d Curses
and Damns that King, and his Parliament, Cites them to appear before him in
sixty Days; and upon their refusal, ratifies this Excommunication; Prohibits
them any Christian Burial, and declares them eternally Damned; deprives that
King of all his Dignities, and commands his Subjects to take up Arms, and
compel him to Repeal the Law he had made. When Queen Elizabeth came to the
Crown, it is well known, how Pope Pius the 5th deposed her; and the Northern
Rebellion, and many secret Plots by Poison, Gunpowder, etc. are to be read in
our Chronicles; but when these designs proved unsuccesful, Pope Sixtus quintus,
Publishes a Croisade against her, and persuades King Philip to War against her,
and crowns his Fleet with the Title of the Invincible Armado; but the immediate
hand of Heaven dispersed their Ships by Tempest, and thus confuted their proud
conceits, and gave a Demonstration to the World, that infallibility dwelt not
at Rome; which made the Spanish Admiral swear, he thought Jesus Christ was
turned Lutheran; but the Spanish King said more soberly, He sent his Navy to
fight against men, and not against God, to whose immediate Providence he
attributed that Defeat. After That Queen's Death, they used many Artifices to
prevent King James his coming to the Crown. Pope Clement the 8th sent two
Breivs into England, one to the Clergy, and another to the Laity, not to suffer
any but a Catholic, tho never so near in Blood, to Succeed; and Father Parsons
writ a Book to invalidate his Title, tho they had before Proclaimed Mary Queen
of Scots, the lawful Heir to the Kingdom. But when these attempts met not with
their desired Success, they entered into that black unheardof Conspiracy of the
Powder Treason; and tho now they pretend this was only a Plot of Cecil's, to
render them odious; yet we have full Confirmation of their Guilt, and may be
assured the Pope would have resented the welcome News of this Islands
Reduction, tho by so bloody a means, to the Romish See, with as much joy as he
since did the hopes of rooting out this Northern Heresy, when he wept for joy.
And the 5th of November would have been as great a Festival in their Calender,
as now it is in ours. Nor were they less restless in their designs against King
Charles the I. It Is well known how they designed to Murder that King, which was
discovered to Sir William Boswel at the Hague. They fomented our differences,
inflamed the Spirits of men, and (acting their parts in several Disguises) were
the great Authors of our Civil Broils and Confusions. When that King was
Imprisoned by his unnatural Subjects, it is now published to the World See this
and more instances in Dumoulins Answer to Phil. Ang.
, how a consult of Priests and Jesuits met at London, and in a Letter to the
Drs. of the Sorbon at Paris, sent this Question, viz. Whether considering the
present posture of Affairs, it were for the interest of the Catholic Cause to
cut off that King, who remained obstinate in his Heresy? It was answered in
the affirmitive, and resolved at Rome by the Pope and his Council, That it was
not only Lawful, but Expedient. It cannot be denied, that too many professed
Protestants did engage in that barbarous Villainy; but they had sucked these
poisonous Principles, not from any Protestant Confessions of Faith, but Romish
Canons and Decrees. Protestants disown such Principles; it is therefore an
unreasonable thing to accuse the whole Party, because of some Delinquents. But
such Practices are authorized and encouraged by Popish Councils, as agreeable
to their Religion. We may be assured, the Ax that cut off our Sovereigns head,
was whetted among the Romish Philistines; and whatever spurious Protestants
joined in that, or in any Treasons of the like nature since that time, they
were so far Papist, and belong not to us, but them. 'Twill but be needless
labor to mention their secret Conspiracies under our present Sovereign; the
World has been so fully informed about them. And I hope there is as little
necessity of proving, that such Practices are disowned by the Christian
Religion. For, must we pay unto Caesar, the things that are Cesars? And is
Rebellion and Treason, the Tribute we owe him? Must every Soul be subject to
the higher Powers? And are Plots and Conspiracies the best Testimonies of our
Allegiance? Are Consecrated Knives and Daggers, any of our Gospel-Artillery?
and these Instruments of Death, our Weapons of Righteousness? Surely that
Religion that thus practically own Rebellions, is far different from what it
was in the Apostles days, and it will be no Slander for us to say, These are
the men that have turned the world upside down. I now proceed to consider,

IV. What useful Inferences may be gathered from our past Discourse?

1. Hence we may see the excellence of the Protestant Religion. The Scripture
is the sole Rule of our Faith and Manners; pure and uncorrupted Christianity
reformed from the abusive Additions of the Romish Church, is our Religion. We
profess to own nothing as part of it, but what is (as to the essentials)
summarily contained in the Baptismal Covenant, and more explicitly in the
Creed, Lords Prayer, and ten Commandments, and (as to the Integrals) in the Old
and New Testament.

So that whatever is said in the former part of this Discourse, to prove the
excellence of the Christian Institution, does equally confirm the excellence of
the Protestant Faith, which is the very same with naked Christianity. We
believe the imcomprehensibility and spirituality of Gods Nature, and dare not
entertain any Images of him, no not in our very Imaginations. Angels we
Reverence as nobler and more excellent Beings than our selves; but dare not pay
them that Adoration which the Jealous God will not give to another. The Virgin
Mary we account blessed among Women, but dare not exalt her into the Throne of
her Son, nor blasphemously ascribe Divine Prerogatives to her. The Holy Saints
departed, we respectfully remember, and desire to imitate them as they followed
Christ; but dare not pray unto them, as if they were Omniscient; nor give those
Services to them, which are appropriated to God and the Lord Jesus. The Holy
Sacrament we joyfully Celebrate, as a Seal of our Saviors tender Affection*
But dare not Worship the Bread, but eat it in remembrance of him. We Worship
God with the most comely outward Postures, and especially with sincere and
spiritual Affection; but have no occasion for the foolish Charms of the
Heathens, or burdensome Rites of the Jews. Our Lord Jesus we acknowledge as our
only Universal King and Sovereign; and whoever shall boldly alter his Laws, or
invade his Prerogative, shall be rejected by us as an Usurper. He is our only
High Priest and Intercessor; and let other men talk at what vain rates they
will, we are better acquainted with our own Infirmities, than to plead any
merit of our own. Through his Blood alone we hope for Salvation; and let others
trust in the merits of Saints, the Omnipotent virtue of Medals and Relics, and
priviledg'd Altars, and such like hallowed Baubles: We will depend on nothing
but his meritorious Sacrifice; lest, when it is too late, we meet with a
shameful disappointment, and pass out of this World, not into a temporary
Purgatory, but an eternal Hell. Christ's Prophetical Office we own, and resolve
to adjust our lives according to the Laws of the Gospel. We teach the People to
Study the Scripture daily, and to examine all our Doctrines by the Touchstone
of the Word. We acknowledge our selves to be fallible men, and should very
gladly return to the bosom of that Church that is really endued with a Spirit
of Infallibility; but desire better proofs, than those vain and idle ones we
have hitherto heard of. The Holy Laws of the Gospel are our standing-Rule; and
tho others vainly distinguish away their Duty, we will keep close to these
commands. Piety, Justice, and Charity, in their fullest extent, we own to be
our unquestionable Duty, without those corrupting Glosses and Restrictions
which some have invented. True uniform self-denial, is acknowledged as
absolutely necessary, and we place it not in uncommanded Austerities; but in
mortifying our Lusts, and subduing whatever opposes the Glory of God, or our
own Salvation. True undissembled Loyalty we acknowledged as our* Duty: Religion
and Loyalty go hand in hand in our Constitutions; these are our Principles; and
oh, that our Practices were universally like them. If we did but universally
live up to the excellent Principles we maintain, our Examples would be
convincing, give such a lovely Description of our Religion, as would attract
the Eyes, and convert the hearts of the Romanists, and more succesfully serve
the Protestant interest, than all the Arguments in our Books. This leads to,

2. Let our lives be agreeable to the Rules of our Religion. Let every one that
pretends to Reformed Christianity, live a reformed Life. Let not Religion only
mend our heads, but our hearts too; and not only rectify the errors and
mistakes of our Minds, but also the miscarriages and offenses of our Lives. For
a professed Protestant to lead a vicious life, is much more unbecoming and
dangerous, than for those who hope to be saved at an easier rate, and own a
more loose Religion. Tho we do know our Duty, except we practice it, we cannot
be happy. Let me entreat you therefore, if you have any concern for your
selves, and your own interest; if you would not be accounted perjured Persons,
take heed how you contradict your Baptismal Vows, and many repeated Engagements
to forsake the World, and Flesh, and Devil. If you would not lie under the
Imputation of the most dangerous hypocrisy or unbelief, forbear those Sins
which are displeasing to God, and forbidden by your Religion. Not to believe
the Christian, or (which is the same) the Protestant Religion, after such full
Confirmation, is certainly very unreasonable; but to beheve it to be true, and
yet to live as if it were false, is the greatest Contradiction and Repugnancy
imaginable. Do not you profess to believe, That without h liness, no man shall
see the Lord; and yet will you venture to continue in a sinful course? Do you
believe that every wilful Sinner shall be doomed to Hell, and all the Prayers
and Tears of the holiest men on Earth, can never fetch them thence; and yet
will you continue in a state of resolved impenitence? If you would not
therefore that the Articles of your Faith should be so many Articles of
Accusation against you at the great day, let your knowledge be improved into a
Religious practice, and not only tend to aggravate your future misery. Further,
if you have any concern for the Religion you profess, and would not it should
be scandalized as an encouragement to wickedness; Now break off your Sins by
Repentance and Amendment of Life; by our impure lives, we take the most
effectual course in the World to bring our Religion it self into disgrace; and
do more prejudice to the Protestant Interest, than we can possibly advance it
by our Arguments. I could therefore almost wish, That men would either disown
their Sins, or their Profession; openly renounce their Religion, or strictly
comply with its commands; and if they will not be so generous as to follow its
Directions, they would at least be so honest, as to quit their claim, rather
than still to retain it, only the more effectually to disgrace the Religion
they profess. Let those that know no better, allow themselves in sin and
wickedness; but let us that disown their principles, abhor, their lives too.
Our God will not indulge us in wickedness; nor can we expect any dispensation
from Heaven for our debaucheries and profaneness; nay, further, if we would
not provoke God to leave us, and suffer our subtle enemies to establish their
impure Doctrines, let us not imitate them in sin: For if we become followers of
their example, God may in just judgment make them Lords of our Faith also. In a
word, (to conclude with the expressions of an excellent person) we have the
best and holiest, the wisest and most reasonable Religion in the World: but
then we are in the worst condition of all mankind, if the best Religion in the
World do not make us good.

3. Let us not by our divisions let in our common enemy. Our sends and
animosities, and intemperate heats among our selves, are the ready way to bring
in Popery into our Land. By our Divisions we weaken our own Interest, employ
our pains and abilities in quarrelling about trifles, and disable our selves in
a great measure from preventing the growth and increase of the Romish Religion.
By our Divisions we expose our selves to the United Power of our Common
Adversaries; and like the unhappy Jews of old, we are squabling among our
selves, while the Romans are ready to enter in upon us at those wide breaches
we have made for them. By our Divisions, we become accessory to our own ruin;
and have great reason to fear, lest we do that with our own hands, which all
the Policies of Rome have not hitherto been able to effect. By our Divisions we
may provoke God to suffer our enemies to prevail; and by fiery trials to
scourge us into Love and Unity. Then we shall too late repent of our violence
and bitterness: And when we sadly look back, and reflect how happy once we
might have been, this will be no mean aggravation of our misery. And when we
remember we brought our afflictions upon our selves, we shall have cause to
say, with sad hearts; and tears in our eyes: Oh that we had known the things
that belong to our Peace. Let us now therefore be entreated to lay aside
prejudice and passion, and have greater regard to the common good, than the
interest of any particular Party. Let us more impartially weigh the differences
among our selves, and resolve that nothing but sin shall hinder* a full
agreement; And by mutual compliances it is no impossible thing to be reconciled:
But if that be too great a blessing for such a sinful People, and there must be
differences among us, Oh that we could once learn to differ in judgment,
without any alienation of affections. That we could once learn, that the
Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, consists not in such little things as are
the matters of our difference; But in Righteteouness and Peace, and Joy in the
Holy Ghost. And he that leads an holy Life, shall be accepted by God, tho he
worship not him after our particular mode, and prehaps be guilty of some
mistakes. Are not our differences much of the same nature with those St. Paul
mentions, Romans 14. And why should not his directions be carefully observed? Why
should we aggravate every little difference, or heighten every small mistake,
or censoriously condemn one another as Hypocrites, because (tho we agree in all
the substantials of Religion) we cannot be all of a mind, in some particular
forms, and modes, and ceremonies? Are not we all fallible creatures? and shall
we be angry at our brethren for that which is the common condition of Men? May
not the error be on our own side as well as our Brothers? And is this becoming
a Christian, or an ingenuous man, to condemn another for that wherein perhaps I
may be guilty my self? We cannot gratify the Papists more, than by these
unhappy disputes. Let us therefore by the friendship we bear to the Protestant
Interest, by the concern we have for our Religion, and just hatred we bear to
the Romish Faith, be persuaded, either wholly to lay aside, or at least to be
more moderate and calm in our differences. Let us labor after Healing, Uniting
Spirits; employ our zeal about the great Duties of Religion; strive which shall
be the best Christians and the best Subjects; and leave the Disputes about
lesser things, to those who know not how better to employ their time: Then we
need not fear the attempts of our enemies: And as God has hitherto, so we may
hope he will still be our great defender. But (as one says very well) till we
are as zealous against the Antichrists in our own breasts, as Pride, Anger,
Malice, and Bitterness, as against him that sits in the Roman Chair, and learn
heartily to love one another, we have little reason to hope with Agag, that the
bitterness of Death is past: but have too much cause to dread the Romish Yoke.

4. Let us never Apostatize to the Romish Religion. A Religion which perfectly
overturns Christianity, and absolutely overthrows all Civil Government. A
Religion which destroys our duty to our Heavenly, and dissolves our obligation
to our Earthly Sovereign. A Religion that takes away that fear of God which
Christianity obliges us to; and denies that honor to the King which the Law of
Nature and the Light of Revelation binds upon us. If we would perform a more
reasonable service than Heathens offer, let us not return to the sorceries and
charms of Rome. If we have any respect to the Commands of God, or dread Divine
threatenings, let us not deny him that Spiritual Worship he requires, nor fall
down before Graven Images; Except we can be content with a Catechism without
the Second Commandment; a Sacrament without the Cup; and a Bible which we
cannot understand. Except we will Worship we know not what; Pray unto those
that cannot hear us; and trust in those that cannot help us. Except we can be
content with a Faith without knowledge; a Hope without foundation; and a
Charity that damns all the World but our selves: Till we can be persuaded, That
there may be Devotion without understanding; Repentance without amendment; and
Salvation without any labor or great industry to obtain it: Till we can be
satisfied in these and all the other particulars I have mentioned, we cannot be
through Papists. And if these things are not prejudice enough against that
Church, it is a sign we little understand what Religion means. Let us therefore
seriously reflect on these particulars, that our abhorrence of Popery may not
merely be, because we were educated in the Protestant Faith, and it is a
fashionable thing to rail against the Church of Rome; but it may be established
upon firm and stable principles, such as may endure a storm and fiery trial,
which (God knows) whether we may not be visited with. That we may never run
such hazards of our Salvation, as we shall incur if we Apostatize to that
Church. For how far the depths of Gods mercy may reach, and his sovereign
goodness may save a Natural Born Papist, I know not; how far their ignorance
and prejudice may excuse them, is not for me to dispute: But this I will say,
If any who have been educated in the Protestant Faith, and well understood the
Grounds of that Religion, shall turn Papist, he must have a great measure of
charity who can think such an one in any near probability of Salvation. Let us
therefore hold fast our Religion, and strictly comply with its excellent
commands; let our professions be sincere, and our lives obedient; then, tho our
enemies do plot our ruin, the God of Heaven will appear on our side; and his
never-slumbring Providence defeat their designs. Tho these who have turned the
world upside down should come hither, yet their policies shall not prevail; But
only give fresh occasion to us to glorify God the Author of our Deliverance.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by John Gellibrand, at the Golden Ball in St.
Paul's Church Yard.
Folio.
BOnetti Sepulchretum sive Anatomia Practica, 2 Vol. -- Mercurius competalitius
sive index Medico-Practicus. -- Medicina Septentrionalis Collatitia. Baudrandi
Geographia Ordina litterarum disposita, 2 Vol.
Quarto.
Z^diacus Medico-Gallicus, 3 Vol. and pro 3 Annis. Binchii Mellificium
Theologicum. Theses Salmurienses, 2 Vol. -- Sedanenses, 2 Vol.
Octavo.
Sir John Temples Irish Rebellion. Sir Willian Temples Observations on the
united Netherlands. -- Miscellanea. Plutarch's Morals, Translated from the
Greek by several hands, in 3 Vol. Bishp. Wilkins, of Prayer and Preaching, 2
Vol. -- Sermons, and Beauty of Providence. -- World in the Moon, and Earth a
Planet. -- Mathematical Magic. Dr. Fords Exposition upon the Church Catechism.
Dr. Jacomb's Personal and Domestic Dedication.
Duodecimo.
Herles Wisdoms Tripos. Garbut, on the Resurrection. Virgil, cum notis
Minellii. Florus cum notis Minellii. Tentamen Medicum de Varioris.
Old Mr. Dods sayings in one large Sheet.


