Errata.
PAge 33. l. 24. Charge that defeated. read. Charge; defeated. p 35. l. 16.
understood. r I understood. p. 62. l. 16. use. r. used. p. 64. l. 10. places.
r. place. p. 97. l. 21. after, that. r after that, p. 99. l 9. remembered. r.
remember. p. 100. l. 3. force^s. r. forces. p. 106. l. 10. note. r. a note. p.
124. l. 24. forceable. r. foordable. p. 115. l. 13. speak. r. spoke.

THE MEMOIR'S OF JAMES Lord AVDLEY Earl of CASTLEHAVEN, HIS Engagement and
Carriage IN The WARS OF IRELAND, From the Year 1642 to the Year 1651.

Written by himself.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1680.

TO THE KING.
SIR,
I Lay at your Majesty's feet these my Memoir's: and if your time may permit
that you will read them, they are contracted in so little a Volume the more to
invite you to it.

I am persuaded that your Majesty will find amongst them, some thing new,
though many years past. The Style is plain and simple; otherwise it could not
be mine. But the Truth may make amends. For I pass them on my Word not to
contain a Lie, or mistake, to my Knowledge.

Your Majesty's most faithful Subject and dutiful Servant, Castlehaven Audley.

To the Reader.
I Being one day in S. Paul's Churchyard, amongst the Stationers, some Books
fell into my hands lately set forth: Histories of the Rebellion begun in
Ireland, in the year 1641. with the Wars and transactions that followed on that
occasion; and finding my self in many places cited, acting as a confederate
Catholic, which in plain English is as a Rebel: I thought fit to publish
something, setting forth my own story (not to excuse the Rebellion, for all the
water of the Sea cannot wash it off that Nation, it having been begun most
bloodily on the English in that Kingdom, in a time of settled peace, without the
least occasion given) but what I write, is chiefly to draw from the world some
compassion, my case being singular, as I hope the Memoires will make out. I
take God to witness, I never bad the least hint of the Rebellion, till being
one night at Supper with my Lord of Kery, at his House in that County; his
Lordship being a Privy-Counsellor, showed me a Letter which he then received
from the Justices, setting forth the attempt on the Castle of Dublin, and the
Rebellion in the North, from whence sprung that unjustifiable War, in which I
was unfortunately engaged: But on my repentance, purused by my actings to bring
on the first Cessations, and the Peace of 46. I had many testimonies from the
late King of Blessed memory, and his Lieutenant, the now Duke of Ormond, that
my faults were forgiven me. Since I have always purused my duty in faithfully
serving the King; and after his death, his Majesty that now reigns: for which,
though most unworthy, I have received many marks of his favors; and since his
happy Restoration, (for my better security) has given me his gracious Pardon;
by virtue of which, I have sat in the Parliament of Ireland, as being a Peer
of that Kingdom.

Now to gratify the Reader for the trouble given by these Memoires, and to
induce him to a favorable construction, I shall (God willing) e're long, by
the help of a Friend, annex to this little Book, an Appendix representing in
short the state of Ireland from the year of the World 1756. to the year of
Christ, 1652. where among other things, he shall find the true original causes
of the late Rebellion thoroughly discovered.

Castle-Haven, Audley.

James Lord Audley Earl of Castlehaven HIS MEMOIR'S.
SECT. I.
The occasion and Motives of his engaging in those Wars. His being in Ireland,
in his way to France, when the Rebellion brake out. His Service proffered to
the Lords Justices, but rejected. His retirement to his Country House,
Indictment of Treason, and Commitment to Sheriff Woodcocks at Dublin. Sir John
Read put to the Torture of the Rack. The memory of the Earl of Strafford's
Death. The Kings answer at York to Colonel Mervin Tuchet. His escape out of
Dublin, and flight to Kilkenny. The Model of Government, and Oath of
Association.

WHat induced me to write these Memoires, is to answer a wonder, that
reasonably may be made: how I being a Peer of England, and an Englishman both
by Birth and Descent on all sides, should engage my self amongst the Irish in
their Wars: not speaking a word of their Language, and having little in their
Kingdom. I say then, that I never designed it, but fell into those Troubles by
chance, and much against my will. The Story thus. I was newly come from my
Travels abroad: where my Genius leading me to see whatever was to be seen in
Armies, I went of purpose to the Siege of Turain in Italy. After my return, I
attended the King at Berwick, till the first Pacification with the Scots. And
then, hearing that the Prince Cardinal Governor of the Spanish Netherlands was
preparing to March toward the relief of Arras besieged at that time by the
French: I passed over again to Flanders and Artois; and saw an end of that
expedition, and Arras yielded to the Besiegers. In short, my Inclinations were
to War, and so intended to make it my Trade, by putting my self into the
Service of some Foreign Prince.

To this effect, having settled my Affairs in England, I made as I thought a
step into Ireland, to do the like there. But it proved a longer stay. The
occasion take out of the ensuing Letter to me from my Brother Colonel Mervin
Tuchet.

HEaring your Lordship is writing a Narrative of your concerns in Ireland
during the late War, and how you came to be engaged: I having been at that time
with you, may possibly mind you of some Passages, more in my knowledge than
yours. When the Rebellion broke forth in the North, you were in Mounster: and
on the News, you immediately repaired to Dublin, to the Lords Justices, Sir
William Parsons, and Sir John Burlace: where you acquainted them, with your
willingness, to serve the King against the Rebels, as your Ancestors had
formerly done in Ireland, on like occasions. To which they replied, your
Religion was an Obstacle. There being then a Parliament in that Kingdom
sitting, you were resolved to see the Event, sending me to your House at
Madingstown, in the County of Kildare, to secure and defend it, in case there
were any Rising in those parts. Upon my coming, I found many poor English
stripped: whom I took into the House and relieved, defending them in the best
manner I could. Some time after, the Parliament being dissolved, you desired of
the Justices a Pass to go for England. But they refusing, you acquainted them
that your Estate there, was not in a condition to maintain you in Dublin; and
desired that you might be supplied with some money, for your subsistence, until
such time, that you could apply your self, to the Parliament in England for a
Pass to bring you over; which they denied. You pressed them then to direct you,
what course you should steer. To which they replied: Go home and make fair
Weather. You took this Advice, and being come; my Lord of Antrim and my Lady
Duchess of Buckingham, soon followed; and you were very well pleased with so
good Company to spend your Provisions. But in a short time, the Irish came and
drove away great part of your stock, to a village near. It being night, you
desired me to take your Servants and endeavor the recovery. Which I did,
bringing with me two or three of the chiefest Conductors of this Rabble. This
enraged the Irish so much, as you conceived I was not safe there: and therefore
sent me to Dublin, to attend the Justices Orders, and assure them of your
readiness to return on a Call, they sending a Convoy. Which they promised to
do, as occasion required. When I went from you, you thought it necessary, that
I should take with me, all the poor English that were saved; and to let them go
with the Carts, which were laden with Wool for Dublin; leaving only one of
them, who was a Sadler, then my Lord of Antrims servant. In the passage near
Rath-Cool, the Rebels fell upon them, and barbarously killed some, and wounded
others: my self and one more escaping by the goodness of our Horses. But a
Servant of mine governing the Carts, and being an Englishman, they took. And
whilst they were preparing to hang him, Sir John Dungans Eldest Son, Watt
Dungan came forth of his Fathers house with a Party, and rescued him with the
rest of those that were left alive, and brought them safe to Dublin, where I
was gotten. The Sadler that I had left in my Lord of Antrims Service, some time
after met me, complaining, that coming for Dublin he had been taken by the
Rebels, by means of a Boy that served your Lordship: and if I would not give
him forty Shillings, being he was damnified (in so much) he would complain. I
told him, that the Boy he mentioned was no Servant of yours; but kept out of
Charity, and to whip the Dogs out of doors: being blind of an Eye, and lame of
a Leg. He replied, that although he were blind and lame, he had a Note from my
Lord of Antrim, to have him apprehended by those that were neither blind, nor
lame, which he gave to them, who took him Prisoner, and carried him to the
Garrison of Leixlipp, kept by the Rebels. I bad him do what he pleased: for I
would not give him one Farthing.

The next I heard of it, was that he had complained; and that your Lordship was
Indicted of high Treason. Upon which I made my addresses to the Lords Justices
again, to let them know, that they had not kept their Words with me, in
suffering this Clandestine proceeding against my Brother; but however, I would
go and fetch you: and to that purpose desired them to let me have a party of
Horse. But that they refused. I then came down to you with some of my Friends,
and acquainted you with what had past. You answered, that you knew nothing of
it, and went immediately with me to Dublin; where you addressed your self to my
Lord of Ormond, as I did my self in your behalf to the Lord Justices and
Council, to acquaint them that you were come. They replied, that they could say
nothing to it, till you appeared before them. Which you did the next day; and
then they Ordered you to come the day following. At which time without calling
you in, they committed you to Mr. Woodcocks House, one of the Sheriffs of
Dublin. Now I seeing this rigorous usage toward you, and being refused a Pass
for my self to go for England, made a shift to get away in a small boat, and go
directly to the King at York, and Petition him that you might be sent for over
to be Tried here by your Peers. But his Majesty's answer was, that he had left
all the Affairs of Ireland to the Parliament. Upon which I went to London, and
Petitioned the Parliament to the same effect. Their answer was, that they could
do nothing without the King; of which I gave you an account by Letter. This was
the last Correspondence I had with you, being after that continually serving
his Majesty in England. But the King coming from Newark to Oxford, he sent me
with Dispatches to my Lord Lieutenant, and Ordered me to go to you, and use my
endeavors to persuade you to hasten a Peace. You received the Commission as
very agreeable, saying that from the beginning of the War you had always
labored for a Peace, and that you hoped it would soon be done. Before I
returned, I saw it proclaimed: and it goes by the name of the Peace of 46.

London the 17th. of May. 1680.

Now that you have seen what my Brother writes of the occasion of my longer
stay in Ireland, so much contrary to the design of my going thither: I will
hence forth in my own Method go on with the Story of my own adventures in that
Kingdom. But to this end I must once more place myself in Madenstown; whether,
as you see in my Brothers Letter, I was first retired by advice of the Lords
Justices. I continued there some five or six Months after in peace and
quietness; and, for the greatest part of the time, in so noble and excellent
company as that of the Duchess of Buckingham, and the Lord Marquess of Antrim
her Husband, who did me that very great honor.

In the mean while Parties were sent out by the Justices from Dublin, and the
Towns adjacent, to kill and destroy the Rebels, and the like was done through
all parts of the Kingdom. But the Officers and Soldiers did not take care
enough to distinguish between Rebels and Subjects; but killed in many places
promiscuously. On which partly, and partly on other provocations that
preceeded, and some too that followed, the whole Nation, finding themselves
concerned took to Arms for their own defense, and particularly the Lords of the
Pale did so: who yet at the same time, desired the Justices to send their
Petition to the King. Which was refused. And, for their farther discouragement,
Sir John Read, his Majesty's Sworn Servant (a stranger to the Country,
un-engag'd, and an eyewitness of their proceedings, then upon his journey to
England) prevailed with by them to carry their Remonstrance to his Majesty the
late King of ever Blessed Memory, and to beg his pardon for what they had done,
coming to Dublin, and not concealing his Message, was put to the Rack for his
good will. The said Lords having Tried this, and other ways, to acquaint the
King with their Grievances, and all failing, an open War broke forth generally
throughout the Kingdom, and very unfortunately for me. One Encounter happened
in the sight of my House, between my Lord of Ormond commanding the English, and
my Lord Richard Vicount of Mount-Garret the Irish. The latter was defeated.
This Encounter goes, by the name of the Battle of Kill-Rush, and was fought the
15 th. of April. 1642.

My Lord of Ormond after this being to Pass with his Army just by my Door, some
of his people being of my acquaintance came Galloping before, assuring that my
Lord of Ormond would be with me in half an hour. On which, my Lady Duchess,
and my self be-stirred our selves, and having two or three Cooks, a good Barns
Door, and plenty of Wine, we patcht up a Dinner ready to be set on the Table at
my Lords coming in.

But some that came with him, turned this another way, magnifying the
entertainment beyond what it was, and Publishing through the Army, that it was
a mighty Feast for my Lord of Mount-Garrett and the Rebels; and this through
the English Quarters past for Current. I believe it was much the Cause of that
underhand villainous proceeding against me, mentioned in my Brothers Letter. My
Lady Duchess and my Lord of Antrim soon left me going into their own Country
in the North. For a while I Tided it out alone, till my Brother fetched me to
Dublin. You have seen by my Brothers Letter how I was Imprisoned, and no hopes
of any relief from either the King, or Parliament sitting in England. So that
after twenty Weeks that I had remained in Prison, I was ordered to be removed
to the Castle of Dublin. Which Startled me, and brought to my thoughts the
proceedings against the Earl of Strafford, who confiding in his Innocence lost
his head. I concluded then, that Innocence was a scurvy Plea in an angry time.
Besides I looked upon the Justices and most of the Council to be of the
Parliaments persuasion. Wherefore I resolved to attempt an Escape, and save my
self in the Irish Quarters. Which I did in this manner.

After the Battle of Killrush there was one George Lidwidge an Irishman and
Trooper left wounded in my house; who being recovered, in acknowledgment of
Kindnesses received, often visited me in Prison. I found so much Fidelity in
the man toward me, that I trusted him with my design; desiring his assistance:
which he promised. I then, giving him Money, ordered him to buy me three Horses
for my self and two Servants, with Sadles and Pistols: which he did. And the
next night just as the Maid was to shut the Door, it being dark, I slipped into
the Street: leaving my two men in the house, and appointing them where they
should find me in the Morning. About Nine of the Clock they came out of the
house, bidding the Maid make no noise, pretending that I was not well, and had
not rested that Night. They coming to me, the Guards of the Town withdrawn, and
the Pattroles come in, were sent before with the Son of the Trooper to the
place, where our Horses stood, to have them ready: the Trooper and my self soon
following, but I as his Man carrying a Saddle under my Arm. To be short, we
Mounted all on Horseback; Marched as Troopers carelessly out of the Town; and
took our way by Temple-Oage toward the Mountains of Wicklow. Where being come,
I cared little for the Justices. But before Dinner my Escape was discovered by
the people of the House; and on Notice given to the Justices, I was pursued by
a Party of Horse taking their way to my house at Madingstown. In the Night they
invested it: but not finding me, after having possessed themselves of what I had
within, and without, they killed many of my Servants, and Burnt the House. I
kept on my way toward Kilkenny, as much through the Fast Country as I could,
till I arrived.

Where I found the Town very full, and many of my acquaintance: all preparing
for their Natural defense; seeing no distinction made; or safety, but in Arms.
To this end they had chosen amongst themselves, out of the most eminent Persons
a Council, and gave it the Title of the Supreme Council of the Confederate
Catholics of Ireland: and formed an Oath of Association by which all were
bound to obey them. They had made Four Generals of the Four Provinces: Preston
of Leinster, Barry of Mounster, Owen-roe O Neal of Vlster, and one Burk of
Conaught: and being to give Commissions they caused a Seal to be made, which
was the Seal of the Council. I was sent for to this Council to tell my Story,
which I did. And then being asked, what I intended to do: I answered, To get
into France, and so to England. Upon which they told me their condition, and
what they were doing for their preservation; persuading me to stay with them,
being I was beloved in the Country, had three Sisters Married amongst them, was
persecuted on the same score they were, and ruined so, that we had no more to
lose but our Lives. I took two or three days to think of this Proposition;
examining the Model of Government, they had prepared against the meeting of the
General Assembly, and most particularly their Oath of Association. Which Oath I
judged to be very reasonable, as the Case stood, it being as here follows.

The Oath of Association.
I A, B. Do Profess, Swear and Protest, before God, and his Saints, and his
Angels, that I will, during my life, bear true Faith and Allegiance to my
Sovereign Lord Charles by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, and to his Heirs and Lawful Successors: and that I will to my power,
during my life, defend, uphold, and maintain, all his and their just
Prerogatives, Estates and Rights, the Power and Privilege of the Parliament of
this Realm, the Fundamental Laws of Ireland, the free Exercise of the
Roman Catholic Faith, and Religion, throughout this Land, and the Lives, Just
Liberties, Possessions, Estates, and Rights of all those that have taken, or
shall take this Oath, and perform the Contents thereof: and that I will obey
and ratify, all the Orders and Decrees made, and to be made, by the Supreme
Council, of the Confederate Catholics of this Kingdom, concerning the said
Public Cause: and that I will not seek directly or indirectly, any Pardon or
Protection, for any Act done, or to be done touching this general Cause,
without the Consent of the Major part of the said Council: and that I will not
directly or indirectly do any Act or Acts, that shall prejudice the said Cause;
but will to the hazard of my Life, and Estate, Assist, Prosecute, and Maintain
the same.

Moreover I do farther Swear, that I will not accept of, or submit unto, any
Peace, made or to be made, with the said Confederate Catholics, without the
consent and approbation of the General Assembly of the said Confederate
Catholics. And, for the preservation and strengthening of the Association, and
union of the Kingdom, that upon any Peace, or accommodation to be made, or
concluded with the said Confederate Catholics, as aforesaid, I will, to the
utmost of my Power insist upon and maintain, the ensuing Propositions, until a
Peace as aforesaid be made, and the matters to be agreed upon, in the Articles
of Peace, be Established and secured by Parliament.

So help me God, and his holy Gospel.
SECT. II.
He takes the Oath, and Employment. Chief heads of the Model of Government.
Burras, Fore-Faukland, Byrrh, and Ballinikille yield to Preston: who not long
after was twice defeated. Castlehaven begins his Command with an action of
Charity. And then he forces Crawford from the Siege of Balli-Brittas: takes
Ballinunry, Clogrenen, and Ballilenan; and withal defeats the succor.

ON the whole matter I returned to this Council, thanked them for their good
Opinion of me, and engaged my self to run a Fortune with them. Whether Anger
and Revenge did not incline me to it as much as any other consideration, I
cannot resolve. This I well remember, that I considered how I had been used,
and seen my house burning as I passed by: besides, that I was a light man, with
no Charge, and not any hopes of redress from the King, who was then engaged in
an Intestine War. Now being thus a Confederate, and having taken the Oath, they
made me one of the Council, and General of the Horse under Preston.

The Assembly met the 24. of Oct. 1642. It differed nothing from a Parliament,
other then that the Lords and Commons sat together, and not in two Houses.
This you see was a force put upon us; and we hoped in time, the storm being
passed, to return to our old Government under the King. We had many learned in
the Law amongst us, whom we encouraged to keep us, as near the old Government
as might be, holding to the Ancient Laws of the Land.

That Assembly without delay approved all the Council had done, and settled a
Model of Government. viz. that at the end of every General Assembly, the
Supreme Council should be confirmed or changed as they thought fit. That it
should consist of 25. six out of each Province, three of the six still
resident. The 25 th was my self with no Relation to any Province, but to the
Kingdom in general. Every Province had a Provincial Assembly, which met on
Occasions: and each County had Commissioners for Applotting money within
themselves, as it came to their shares on the general Applotment of the
Province. Many other things there were, as to Government. If a Letter came to
them written in Irish, it would be wondered at; and hardly could one be found
to read it. We were not in case to bring to Justice those that begun the
Rebellion. But I never saw any of them esteemed or advanced. The General
Assembly being put off, the Generals fell to their work: and my General took in
Burras, Fort-Faukland, and Birrh in the Kings County, where I was with him.

And I had the good Fortune to begin my first commanding in the Wars with an
Action of Charity. For going to see this Garrison of Birrh before it marched
out, I came into a great room, where many people of Quality were both men and
women. They with many Tears so soon as they saw me, fell on their Knees,
desiring me to save their lives. I was astonished at their posture and
Petition: and, desiring them to rise, asked what the matter was? They answered,
that from the first day of the Wars, there had been continual action and much
blood shed between them and their Irish Neighbors, and little Quarter on
either side. And that therefore understanding that I was an English man, some
knowing me, they desired that I would take them into my Protection. I doubted
that there was too much reason for their fears, considering they were to March
two or three days, through the Woods of Iregan and waste Countries, before they
came to Athy their next friends Garrison. I went immediately to the General,
and desired that I might command their Convoy: which he granted. Then culling
out two hundred Horse and three hundred Foot, in whom I had most Confidence, I
Marched and delivered them with their Baggage safe. They were at least eight
hundred Men, Women and Children. I was with this General the 18 th. of March
42. when he was beaten at Ross by the Marquess of Ormond; and by Colonel Monk,
since Duke of Albermarle, at Timochoe in the Queens County the 5 th. of October.
42. Yet afterward he besieging Ballynckill in the same County, I ventured once
more with him. Where he having Intelligence that Major General Crawford was
besieging Ballybritas, a Castle belonging to the Vicount Clanmaleer, he sent me
with a Party of fifteen hundred Horse and Foot, to endeavor the succouring of
that place: which I did. Crawford drawing off, in passing the River of the
Barrow in a skirmish had his Thigh broken with a Musquett-shot. I returned as
Ballynekill was rendered; and conveyed that Garrison too, as I had done the
other of Byrrh.

After this I remained at Kilkenny with the Supreme Council; and Preston went
into the lower parts of the Province with the Army. Of whose absence the
Enemies Garrisons in the County of Catherloe, and Queens County taking
advantage, Alarmed the County of Kilkenny even to the Gates of the City. I was
then by the Council commanded to go against them. And therefore having gotten
together about 2000 men with some Cannon, I Marched to Ballenunry in the County
of Catherloe, and took it, as also Clogrenan. Where the County of Wexford
Regiment Mutined; but were reduced, and some examples made, served well for the
future. I Marched thence into the Queens County, and Besieged Ballilenan
Commanded by the Grimes's a Valiant People, with a strong Garrison. But a great
breach being made, their Succor came by the way of Athy. I was not well at
this Alarm, but laid upon my Bed in my Tent. However I made no great matter of
it, knowing the Succor could not be considerable. But my Old Lord Richard
Vicount of Mountgarret being abroad, sent me advice that they were coming on in
great have, and stronger than I thought, both in Horse, and Foot, and were then
near the end of the Tougher: which is a great way cut through a Bog, and I
believe in length at least half a Mile. Now I had a great Guard of Horse and
Foot at my end of the Tougher, with a Line thrown up before them. So I judged
the danger not great. However I got on Horseback, taking with me 400 Horse:
and coming to my Guard, I saw some of the Enemy on the Tougher in their March.
Whereupon I bad my Horse and Guards follow me, and March toward them; thinking
to have fought them upon the Tougher. But they retired, and formed on a plain
two Musket Shot off. I having passed the Tougher, prepared to Charge. But they
Drew off again, and did not stand me till they had gotten through a Gap in a
Ditch with water to the Belly. Being past they lined the Ditch with
Musketeers, drawing up their Horse and Foot close by to defend this Gap. Sir
Walter Butler with his Squadron, begun the Fight; but being Wounded in the
Ditch with a Pike through his Thigh, his men sell off; and a second Squadron
Charged and did the like. But the Enemy seeing more Squadrons coming on, in the
smoke took their advantage to run away: which we could not see, till the smoke
was over. Then we followed, and could not Engage them till they recovered Athy,
which was near. I guessed them to be about three hundred Horse, and seven or
eight hundred Foot. Their Succor thus beaten in their view, the besieged
Garrison yielded on condition to March out with their Arms. The small Garrisons
in those Parts made no resistance. I was much favored in these my first
undertakings, by having been in my youth a great Hunter in those parts of Deer,
Wolves, and Foxes. So that there was no passage in Bog or Mountain, or Ford in
a River that I did not know. This little beginning gave me some Reputation and
as near as I could what I wanted in experience was supplied by diligence and
good Intelligence.

SECT. III.
He Defeats Sir Charles Vavasor in Mounster. By occasion of a Trumpet sent from
Ormond he moves the Council for Peace. Commanded with three thousand men
against Monk, he takes Dullarstown, Tully, Laccach, and many other Castles in
the County of Kildare, and in Leix. Submits to the Cessation.

MY Lord of Inchiquin was all this while Master of the Field in Mounster;
having won some Battles, beaten the Irish in all parts, and in a manner subdued
that Province, four or five Towns excepted. And with these he was going now to
work, beginning with Kilmallock in the County of Limbrick, and sitting down
before it with an Army of seven Thousand men. This Alarmed the General Assembly
then sitting at Kilkenny: but most particularly those of that Province.
Whereupon, after many Consults among themselves, they concluded at last to ask
succor of the General Assembly; though they saw but little hopes of any in
that exigency: for Preston was far off with the Army. Wherefore opening
themselves more clearly, than perhaps they would have otherwise done, they
laid claim to me, as having my Earldom and Estate in their Province, though I
was an Officer of Leimster. Alleging farther that their General was old and
Unfortunate: and that if I had the Command all would join in the defense of
their Country, and take new Courage. I was present at this proposition; and,
though I had ambition and vanity enough, did heartily oppose it, having no
prospect of any Success. But my Lord of Muskry, being my great friend, and of
that Province, desired the Assembly to command me by virtue of the Oath of
Association. Which they did; and then there could be no more reply. It being
thus ordered: and, which was pursuant to it, that my Commission under the Great
Seal of the Confederates to Command in Chief for that expedition, should be
immediately dispatched: I was asked, what Troops were near at hand? I answered,
that I knew of none, but of my own Lifeguard of Horse. It Is true I had
observed many straggling Horse in the Town; but they would not be brought
together without Money. Some Money was then given out, and by Ten of the Clock
next morning I had gotten together Eighty Horse, and put them under the Command
of Garrett Talbot Brother to Sir Robert Talbot. These with my Lifeguard
Commanded by Captain Fits Gerrald, commonly called Garrat Garrah, made in all
one hundred and twenty Horse. With these I Marched, accompanied with my Lord of
Muskry, since made Earl of Clancarty, and some others of the Province. On the
Frontier of it I met about a hundred and twenty Horse more, most Gentlemen, and
formed into a Squadron. But at Cashel I was received by the General of the
Province Barry, the Lieutenant General Purcel, and some other Officers with
seven hundred Foot.

That night I had Intelligence, that the Lord of Inchiquin had raised his
Siege, and Marched with four or five Thousand men into the County of Kerry. But
had sent Sir Charles Vavasor with sixteen or seventeen hundred men, to take in
Clohlea, a Castle then belonging to the Condons. I Marched immediately toward
him, and before night Encamped within three Miles of him; the Mountain only
between us. My Brother Richard Butler, Brother to the Duke of Ormond, was sent
out the same night to discover the Enemy. In the Morning word was brought that
the Castle was taken, and the Garrison after Quarter given put to the Sword,
and my Brother Engaged. I lost no time, but Marched in all have with my Horse
to his Succor: which joined with his, made up two hundred and forty, or two
hundred and fifty at the most. The Foot marched also. But the old General came
on so slowly that I had defeated the Enemy before he came within two Miles.

The manner thus. Sir Charles Vavasor, though he had taken the Castle, remained
still in his Camp, till seeing me on the Top of the Mountain above him, come to
succor mine that were skirmishing, he drew to Arms; but being amongst Hedges
and Ditches, and the Castle between us, I could not come at him, till he
marched toward Castle Lions: where in a large plain he formed. But I, going by
the advantage of a great valley, came into the plain unseen, almost as soon as
he. And, having ordered three or four Squadrons of Boys on Horseback to
possess the ground from whence I came, I lost no time in the Charge; that
Defeated his Horse; who to save themselves broke in on the Foot. Their Cannons
were useless, being past the Black-water. This, with Gods blessing, and a great
shower of rain, gave me the victory with little or no loss. Sir Charles that
Commanded, with several other Officers remained Prisoners; their Cannon and
Baggage taken; all their Foot defeated; but their Horse for the most part
escaped. This happened on a Sunday, the 4 th of June 1643. about twelve a Clock
at Noon.

Now having left the best advice I could for the improving this advantage, I
took leave of the General with others of the Province: and returning to
Kilkenny gave the Assembly an account of what had passed, in order to their
Commands.

Soon after, the Assembly being broke up, and a Supreme Council chosen to
Govern in their absence, I retired to Kilkash my Brother Butlers house to rest
my self. The Council went to Ross: and whilst they were there, a Trumpet
brought them a Letter from the Marquess of Ormond, setting forth his being
appointed by the King to hear our grievances, and to Treat for an
accommodation. The particulars of the Letter I knew not; but the Trumpet was
quickly dispatched with some slight Answer. Which coming to my knowledge, I
repaired to Kilkenny, whether the Council was returned. And on Information
finding what I had heard to be true, I sent for Sir Robert Talbot, Sir Richard
Barnwel, Colonel Walter Bagnal, and such others as were in the Town being well
affected and leading men of the Assembly, though not of the Council. Now being
in my Lodging, I acquainted them with what understood: and, that if they would
stick to me, I would endeavor to give it a turn. We all agreed on the way:
which was, To go to the Council then sitting, take notice of the Kings Offer,
and their Return, and to mind them, that the Consideration, and resolutions
concerning Peace and War, the General Assembly, reserved to themselves only:
and therefore to require that they would send immediately a Trumpet of their
own, with a Letter to the Marquess of Ormond, giving him to understand, they
had Issued Summons for a General Assembly, in order to acknowledge the Kings
gracious savor in naming him his Commissioner to hear our Aggrievances and
redress them. This we put in execution, and gained our point without much
resistance.

The Marquess of Ormond being thus brought into a Treaty, the Consederate
Commissioners met at Seginstown near the Nasse as his Excellency had appointed,
in order to a Cessation of Arms. At which time all Parties labored to get into
Possession of what they could. Colonel Monk after made Duke of Albermarle
Marched into the County of Wicklow to take in the Harvest, and Possess some
Castles. I being then Commanded by the Council to go against him, and having
Rendevouz'd my Troops consisting of about three Thousand Horse and Foot, at
Ballynekil in the County of Caterloe, Notice was brought me that Colonel Monk
was Marched away in all have, to the Assistance of the Lord Moor, then facing
Owen-Roe Oneal near Portlester. I finding my self now to have nothing to do,
thought it worth the while to endeavor taking in Dulerstown, Tully, Lacagh,
and all other Castles in the County of Kildare, between the Rivers of the
Barrow and Liffe. Which I did, leaving Garrisons in them. This done I repast
the Barrow at Minster-Evin, Marched into Leix, and took threee or four small
places. But as I was going on, had advice from the Commissioners at Seginstown,
that they had on the 15 th September. 1643 concluded a Cessation of Arms with the
Marquess of Ormond. To which I submitted.

SECT. IV.
Scots of Ulster obey not the Cessation. Owen O Neal in the Assembly at
Waterford. Castlehaven chosen General of the Northern expedition (which should
have consisted of 11000) against Monro's Army of 17000. His apprehensions
thereupon. Before this Campagn opened, he is sent to reduce Castle-Carroe and
Castlebar in Connaught; and does so. Rendevous at Granard. Scots design to
surprise him there, frustrated: and so his to surprise them at Toinregaoh.
Horse fight here. He Camps at Charlemont, and Monro hard by at Ardmagh; neither
able to force the other. Owen O Neal performs nothing promised. Stratagem; safe
Retreat, and putting the Army (consisting of above 8000) into Winter Quarters.

BUt General Monro sometime before being arrived in Vlster, from Scotland with
ten Thousand new Scots: and having Sir Robert Steward joined to him with five
or six Thousand of the old Scots Natives of that Province; as also some English
under the Command of Sir Audley Mervin, Sir Theophilus Jones and others; would
not submit to this Cessation. They forced General O Neal, to so great straits,
having sometime before Defeated him, in the Encounter where Con-O Neal was
killed with many others, that in the beginning of Winter, leaving his Troops
and Crejaghts to shift the best they could, he came to the General Assembly,
held at Waterford. Where he set forth the lamentable Condition of his people,
desiring the Assistance of the other three Provinces: and in the name of his
Province, undertaking to join to their Forces four Thousand Foot and four
hundred Horse: but withal declaring, that otherwise he with his Forces and
Creiaghts should be obliged to save themselves in the other Provinces: and so
get subsistence as well as they could. This last point of Owen O Neals Speech,
besides their persuasion that the Scots would not fail soon to follow him and
visit them, made the Assembly come to a quick Conclusion, and agree to send six
Thousand Foot and six hundred Horse out of the other three Provinces. So that
the Army was to consist of ten Thousand Foot and one Thousand Horse. But it
coming to the Question who should be General of this Army, they went to the
Election after this manner. The Assembly sitting, those they thoughtfit to come
in competition, they caused their names, one under an other, to be written
down, and from each a long Line drawn. Then at the Table where the Clerk sat,
every Member of the General Assembly, one after another with a Pen puts a Dash,
on the Line of him that he would have to be General. And to the end that none
should mark more than once, four or five were Chosen out of the Assembly, two
of which were Bishops, to overlook this marking, being on their Oath. Now,
contrary to Owen O Neals exspectation, who had designed this Generalship for
himself by which he would be Generalissimo, I was chosen. Which he took
extremely much to heart; as I have reason to believe. However he carried it
fairly; and came to Congratulate me; giving withal great Assurances of his
performance and readiness to serve me. Next day a Commission was sent me, with
orders to prepare all things for this expedition; which I did. But the farther
I looked into the matter, the worse I liked it. For I considered that I was now
to make War in a Country where I had never been: and in a Country too where we
had not so much as one Town; but the Enemy had many.

That by all Intelligence they could draw into the Field sixteen or seventeen
Thousand men. That if Owen O Neal should perform, and deal fairly with me: yet
all I was to expect did not exceed ten Thousand Foot, and a Thousand Horse.
That having no Towns in the Province, we should be forced to bring all our
Provisions from the other Provinces where I had my Magazines. That I must
depend upon O Neal for Intelligence. For by such lights I always Guided my self
in my former small undertakings. But that which most of all troubled me, was
that I did not see how I could avoid a Battle, if the Enemy had a mind to it:
being I was to make an Ossensive War. I had also this other consideration to
discourage me, That although our Parties had commonly the better; yet our
Armies had commonly the worst. This was experimented in several Battles. And
the reason was clear and obvious. Most of all the great Towns in the Kingdom
were the Enemies and Garisoned; and of the few Towns we had, there was but one,
to wit Kilkenny, that would receive a Garrison. So that at our coming out of
every Field as the Enemy returned into their Garrisons, where they were with
their Officers and kept in Discipline; ours were dispersed all the Kingdom
over, into little Villages and odd houses; never seeing an Officer till the
next Campaign. And therefore they came to their Rendevous in the beginning of
every field like new men half changed; and for the Horse, so haggled out in
riding up and down to see their friends, that they seemed hardly able to draw
their Legs after them; and both Horse and Foot with rusty Arms and not fixed.
But how plainly soever I saw my ill condition, I must through as well as I
could; yet withal resolving to avoid a Battle by all means, and seek to make my
War by Parties, and Surprises, where new men are as good as old. Now having
more then time before the Campaign, I was commanded by the Supreme Council to
March into Connaught to reduce some of our own Party, which had set up for
themselves in the County of Mayoe, and had possessed Castle Carroe, and Castle
Bar; the former Commanded by one Burk; the latter by the Lord of Mayoe. I
took with me two Thousand men, and past the Shanon at Fort-faukland; the
Marquess of Clanrichard permitting me to pass through his Country. These
Castles made little resistance. After they had yielded, I sent my Party, under
the Command of Sir James Dillon, into the County of Roscommon, to reduce the
Armsbyes and some others that held Garrisons and would not submit to the
Cessation. When he had done his work, which he was not long about, he returned
into Leinster, and lodged the Troops as he was ordered.

In the mean while, I had gone to Kilkenny, and set my self to the great Work;
still having some mistrust of Owen O Neal's performance. Wherefore I desired
the Council, to grant me four hundred Horse and Dragoons more, in case I could
raise them without Charge: which I did.

The first Rendevous that I made in order to this Field, was 1644 about
Midsummer, in the County of Longford, at a place called Granard where I had
appointed three Thousand Horse and Foot with two or three Fieldpieces:
intending there to have expected the coming up of the whole Army, which might
be four or five days; for O Neal was near Encamped at Portlester, and the rest
were Marching as ordered. By my spies, that met me at this Rendevous, and came
in have, all agreed that they had left the Enemy near a certain Mountain
threescore Miles of; that they were seventeen Thousand strong, with one and
twenty days Provision in Oaten Meal, which they carried on their own, and
little Horses backs; no Cannon or other Baggage; and were ready to March. I
thought my self pretty secure for that Night; but at twelve of the Clock, one
from Cavan assured me that he had left the whole Army there: and that their
Horse and Dragoons would be with me in the morning. On this advice, I packt off
as fast as I could, and gained Port-Lester, ordering the rest of the Army to
come thither: and at the instant Commanded a Colonel with five or six hundred
Foot and a hundred Horse to defend the Bridge of Fienagh. It was of stone, and
a Castle on our End. I sent with him Shovels, Pickaxes, and Spades, with plenty
of Ammunition. The Enemy, according to my Intelligence, came at Sunrising into
the Camp I had left, and showed themselves the next day before that Bridge. My
unfortunate Colonel, sent over his Horse to Skirmish; and when they were far
enough out, on a sudden the Enemy mingled with them. Which was the cause that
our Foot could do nothing; but through fear to kill their own, left Bridge,
Castle, and all free for the Enemy. However this availed them little. For
finding me well Posted, though O Neal was of another opinion, their Provisions
shrunk, and being at least twelve days March from their own Country, they staid
not to give me farther trouble, but hastened homewards.

Now then I was at leisure to call on General O Neal for his four Thousand Foot
and four hundred Horse; being resolved to follow the Enemy, and try my Fortune
in Vlster, as I was designed to do. He excused himself by Reason of the
continual Alarms in his Country, that he could not at present make good his
Word; but withal assuring me again, that so soon as I came into the Province I
should have no reason to complain. Having this assurance, I Marched on with my
six Thousand Foot and a Thousand Horse and Dragoons: and O Neal joined to me
about two hundred Horse and three or four hundred Foot; his Creiaghts Marching
with us, being all the Irish with their Cattle of that Province. When he had
drawn me on as far as Toinregoah, I had intelligence that the Enemy had
revictualled themselves, and were returning to encounter me. Whereupon I pressed
O Neal very hard to make good his Word. Who plainly told me that he could not
do it; alleging that his people were all amongst the Creiaghts, and every one
looking to save what he had. In this sad condition, I blamed my own Weakness in
being persuaded with fair Promises, to come so far into an Enemies Country;
however I was resolved to see the Enemy, then Encamped at Drummore Jueagh. And
therefore taking such Guides as O Neal would give me, and leaving the Command
of the Camp to him, in the evening I Marched with my Thousand Horse and
Dragoons, and fifteen hundred Commanded Foot. These I left on a Pass about
three Miles from my Camp, to make good my retreat; intending to fall with my
Horse into their Horse-Quarter. But, whether Wittingly or Willingly in my
Guides, it was Sunrising when I came within two Miles of their Horse-Quarter.
And yet still though I had lost my design, I would see the Enemy. And to this
end, perceiving some of their Horse at Grass, I, being drawn under a Hill near
a little River, where there was a Stone Bridge, sent a Party to take those
Horses; which they did, and brought them to me. But their Guard of Horse being
near, after my Horse were come back, seized the Bridge and defended it. I sent
men to beat them off; but it would not do. Then I sent another Party; the same
still. Whilst this was a disputing, I perceived a hundred Foot coming over a
great plain. Then I Galloped down my self with some Officers, and more Horse.
So passing the Bridge, I had the cutting often that hundred Foot, without
resistance. A Party of mine pursued the Horse that ran from the Bridge; but
before they overtook them they were met with another which routed them. And
others of mine put them also to the run. Before this Fight ended, most of the
Horse on both sides were Engaged. The Enemy at last drew off: and so did I to
my Army.

Being returned to my Camp, I acquainted O Neal with what had past, and how the
Enemies Army were advancing according to my intelligence. Whereupon he advised
me to retire to Charlemount, a Fort where he had a Garrison. I followed his
advice, and found it a very good Post, there being a large plain joined to it,
on the one side runs the black Water, and near the Fort a Bridge over it; the
rest surrounded with Bogs and Moorish Ground. My Horse lay Encamped at Benborb,
on the other side the River. At the same time that I came into this place,
Monro with his Army arrived at Armagh about two or three Miles distant, and
there Encamped fortifying himself. Thus neither of us being able to Engage the
other, we lay in pretty good Correspondence: and the small War we had was
chiefly in cutting off of Convoys. My Provisions came much harder to me than
his to him: and O Neal began to be very weary of sometimes assisting me with
Cows. So that after two Months, I resolved the endeavoring to gain my own
Country: seeing no hopes of any forces from O Neal. Which to Effect, for I did
not desire fighting, I caused a Tougher or great way to be cut through the Bog,
near the Fort, leading to Toinregaoh by which their Provisions came. This way
being finished, I knowing their days took my time, to pass most of my Horse, and
some Foot, showing them beyond the Tougher, as if that night I intended
straight for Toinregaoh. Monro having this Intelligence posted away, a great
Party of Horse and Foot to secure his Convoy. But the night being come I
turned, and in stead of Marching toward Toinregaoh, past over the Bridge with
the whole Army: leaving my Cannon and Baggage in the Fort, with a strong
Garrison, plenty of Ammunition, and all the Provision I could possibly scrape to
put in. That night I Marched, and all the next day, taking a great round before
I could have my own Country on my back; which having obtained, in the County of
Cavan I faced toward the Enemy, about five or six Miles from them. Which Monro
knowing, and finding that I lay easier for my Provisions then he did, raised
his Camp and Marched to his own Country. It being now late in the year; I, thus
Free of him, sent a Party of Horse and Foot to bring off my Cannon, and what I
left in the Fort; and so Marched to Fienaegh, where I met Commissioners from
the Supreme Council to receive the Army, and lodge them on the three Provinces,
together with fifteen hundred Vlster men which on my Order came to me out of
Conought, being of no Army but endeavoring to live by strong hand; which I
could not admit. Thus ended the Vlster expedition, like to be so fatal to the
Confederate Catholics of Ireland, through the sailing or something else of
General Owen Roe O Neal. But after all, the three Provinces had no reason to
complain of this Campaign. For this Army they sent, kept them from being
troubled either with Scots, or Vlster People, that year.

SECT. V.
Views the Siege of Duncannon, how laid, and that strong place taken by General
Preston. Is sent with an Army to Mounster against Inchiquin, of late declared
for the Parliament. Dean Boyle's message. Capper-Quin and Michaelstown taken.
Skirmish of Horse near the Black-water. Mallow, Donerail and Liscarrol yield.
Miltown and Conycastle taken by a storm of 3000 Garsoons, mere servant Boys
that belonged to the Army. A Flood hinders the relieving of Ballimartir. Yet he
surprises Rostellan and several Officers in it: and then forces Castle-Lions
and Lismore to Surrender. Marches straight to Cork. Blind scustle there by
night. Returns to Tallow, and thence goes to Youghhal. In that way all the
little Castles submit. An unexspected mutinous Accident at one of them. What
done at Youghal. The Snow falling, he retires to Capper-Quin, and so ends this
Campaign.

HAving thus left the Army with Commissioners, on Muster, more than eight
Thousand strong, (for I had been recruited with several Companies) I took my
way to Kilkenny, ill pleased that the Treaty of Peace trained so long: and
designed not to stir from the Council till I saw it concluded. But coming
there, I found the Supreme Council in great Consternation. For Duncannon that
Commanded the harbor of Waterford, was declared for the Parliament: as also my
Lord of Inchiquin Commanding in Mounster, who before, had not only submitted to
the Cessation, but carried with him a considerable number of his Troops into
England to serve the King. Now taking there some disgust, as it is said, because
the Presidency of Mounster was given to the Earl of Portland, he returns, and
declares for the Parliament, Commanding by their Commission as President of
Mounster. Those of Waterford now pressed the taking in of Duncannon: making
great offers to the Council of large assistance. Preston is named for this
work, and sent with three or four Thousand men, Miners, and a good Train of
Artillery; it being within his Province. And I having the curiosity to see it,
left the Council, and followed him. I will relate the particulars of this
Siege, because the only in form that I saw in Ireland. He made not any line of
Circumvallation, fearing no succor that could come on the Land-side: but began
his approaches with two Attacks: and being come near the place, joined them
with a line of Communication: and then ran them on divided to the two ends of
the Curtain. Those within made a good defense, and lost nothing in six weeks,
only the Besiegers had made a lodging in the Ditch. At this time two or three
Parliament Frigates arrived, with succor of Men, Ammunition, and Provisions;
coming to Anchor within less then Cannonshot of the Fort. But before they could
man out their Boats; so horrible a Storm arose, that in eight or ten days none
could come on shore. Whereupon those within, being in despair, and pressed with
some essential want, yielded.

All this while my Lord of Inchiquin overran Mounster, and coming to Cashel,
the people retired to the Rock, where the Cathedral Church stands, and thought
to defend it. But 'twas carried by Storm, the Soldiers giving no Quarter. So
that within and without the Church, there was a great Massacre, and amongst
others more than twenty Priests and Religious men killed.

Toward the Spring the Council ordered me to go against him; and to begin the
Field as early as I could. The Enemy in this Province had always been
victorious, beating the Confederates in every Place; never having received
Check, but in the mentioned Encounter at Cloghleah. So that every Gentleman's
House, or Castle was Garisoned, and kept the Country in awe. To begin this
Field then, I made my first rendevous at Clonmel, and the Army Encamped near
it. Thither Dean Boil, now Lord Chancellor of Ireland, and then Married to my
Lord of Inchiquins Sister came, and there he found me. His business was to
persuade me, to spare Donerail, and other Houses, and Castles, not Tenable. I
answered, that I desired it, as much as he; though hitherto they had annoyed
the Country equally, as if they had been strong. I told him in short, I had
order to take all I could: and such as I thought not fit to Garrison, to
destroy. Yet, if he pleased to cause the Garrisons to be drawn out, and by
Letters from the Owners, to put them into my hands, I would appoint some few
men into them, with Commanders in whom I most confided, and make it my Business
to preserve them, by interceeding to the Council. The Dean and I parted very
good Friends. But whether he could or no, prevail with my Lord of Inchiquin or
the Owners, I know not. I am sure, I heard no more from him.

Soon after, that is, about the 5. of Ap. 1645. I Marched toward Capper-Quin,
my Army consisting of about five Thousand Foot, a Thousand Horse, and twelve
Brass pieces of Cannon, some of twenty four, and others of eighteen pound
Bullet. Viewing the place, I soon perceived where they mistook that Besieged it
formerly, and after much time spent with great loss of men, were enforced to
quit it. There being a Town and a Castle that Commanded it, they Attacked the
Town; and I, on the contrary, the Castle; which yielded, the Town could not
resist. Drommane fell likewise into my hands. Whilst I was ordering these
places, I wrote a Letter to the Commander of Lismore, a house of my Lord of
Corks, I think one Major Poor. I endeavored to persuade him to put that place
into my hands, that it might be preserved: for let the Garrison be what he
pleased; it could not resist. I gave him many reasons why I desired the
preservation of that place, as if it were my own. But he answered that his
Honor was above all: that he would hold out to the last: and doubted not of
timely Succor. So I left Mr. Poor, and Marched to Michaelstown; which after
some shot of Cannon, was rendered. Then, having Intelligence that six or seven
hundred Horse were come over the Black-water, Marching toward me, and at that
time Drawn up, on a Hill in the great plains of Roches Country: I Marched the
Army toward them, not knowing whether my Lord of Inchiquin might not be near
with his Army. But these Horse, when we were well in sight, retired. Whereupon
Lieutenant General Purcel with several other Officers and Gentlemen of the
Country) who had been viewing them at near hand, came Galloping to me, and
saying that the Enemy were running away, pressed me earnestly to let him have my
Horse, for they had them so sure that they could not escape. I making
difficulty, they said it was, because I knew not the Country. But I saw so much
that yielding to their desire I should be left exposed in a great Champion
Country, with an Army of Foot and Cannon, without Horse. Yet after all (which I
count certainly among other my Follies) I suffered my self to be persuaded:
they Marched away in great have: I followed slowly; and coming to the
Black-water, near the Ford of Fermoy, drew my Foot and Cannon into an old Danes
Work; Ireland being full of them. Having staid there pretty long, and hearing
no News of my Horse, I began to be uneasy. But remembering that I had a Guard
of Horse on some Beeves, that were for the Provision of the Army, I sent for
them. And at the same time, unexpected, came Garrot Garrow with my old
Lifeguard of Horse to me out of Leinster. These and those making in all a
hundred, I presently took with me, to see what became of the Troops sent with
Purcel. But first I ordered fifteen hundred Foot to stand in a readiness. Then
finding by the Track, that my Horse had passed the Ford, and taken their way
toward Castle-Lions: I followed. Being come near the Top of the Hill above the
Ford, I left these few Horse I had with me drawn up; and with some Officers
went my self to the height to discover. Thence I saw all the Enemy formed in a
great plain, with a shrub wood before them: and my Horse in have, Marching
through to Charge, having with them a hundred Commanded Foot. But the Enemy
seeing the Squadrons broken, as they came on the plain, gave them no time, but
Charged and Defeated them. On sight of this disorder, and the Enemy pursuing,
when they came near me, I advanced, Crying out to my own men, that they should
Rally behind me. The Enemy, seeing these Fresh Horse, and not knowing but the
Army might be near, pursued no farther, but drew up. The fifteen hundred
Commanded Foot that I had sent for, soon came to me. On sight of which the
Enemy retiring to Castle Lions, I followed; but could not engage them, it
beginning to be dark. Hence I Marched to Malloe and took it, but with some shot
of Cannon, and left a Garrison in it. Donerail and Liscarrel made no resistance.
But Miltown, a better place and a good Garrison, stood out. So that I thought it
would cost some trouble. But whilst the Batteries were preparing, 2 or 3000
Boys belonging to the Army that use to form themselves into Battallions, having
gotten Crows of Iron, Pickaxes, and other Instruments, a little before Sunset
fell on the place, intending as I think, only to have taken the Cows and Sheep
within a Court, which was walled. But Success carried them farther, and they
took the Castle by strong hand. So all that side of the Black-water being
cleared, I sent the Army for some days into Quarters of refreshment: and I went
my self to Kilmallock, and other places where my Magazines were. In the mean
time my Lord of Inchiquin, having taken Rosstellan, besieged Ballymarter, a
Castle belonging to his Uncle, Edmund Fitz Gerrald Senescal of Imokelle. My
Army being come together, I Marched to succor it. But there being a Flood in
the Black-water, I was hindered for two days. So that when I came in sight of
the place, I found it taken, and burning, and the Enemy retreating, some to
Cork, others to Youghal.

Having thus lost my design of Succouring the place, and that, which I wished
most, Engaging the Enemy: I staid Encamped near this burnt Castle two or three
days: thinking what to do. At length I got intelligence, that Colonel Henry
Obryan Brother to the Lord of Inchiquin, and Lieutenant Colonel Courtney, with
several other Officers, were come by Boat to Rostellan to make merry: and that,
the Tide fallen, their Boats were a ground, and so would continue till
High Water. On the certainty of this I lost no time, but sent immediately a
Party to seize the Boats, lying more than Musket Shot from the Castle;
following as fast as I could with the Army: which being come up, I presently
fell to the work, planting my Guns: the Batteries made by my Lord of Inchiquin
not being destroyed. In the morning the places yielded on discretion. Hence I
Marched to Castle Lions: which after some battering yielded. I took my March
then toward Lismore. But Cony-Castle lying on a Pass in my way, and sending,
on Summons, a desiance, I Encamped before it: thinking to plant my Guns that
Night. But the Boys eased me of the Trouble, and took it before it was dark by
Storm, as they did the former. I wrote again to the Governor of Lismore, to
put that place into my hands, that I might turn the Army another way; having as
much kindness for the owner as he could have. But, not prevailing, I invested
it. And, having ordered the Batteries, left Lieutenant General Purcel to
Command, and try if he could have better Success with that place now, than
formerly he had had, when he Besieged it; and so rode to Kilkenny, as not
willing to be present at the destruction of a House, where I had formerly
received very many Civilities. At my return, being five or six days after, I
found the place yielded, and the Garrison Marching out. After which, being
Encamped at Tallow, Intelligence was brought that Colonel Mac William Ridgeway,
was gone from Cork into the County of Limbrick with a great Party of Horse and
some Foot. I Marched immediately with all my Horse, and fifteen hundred Foot,
straight for Cork. Coming near, I left the Foot to make good my Retreat. About
an hour in the night I arrived near the Gates; and put my self on the way to
Malloe; by which Mac William was to return: and gently Marching, met some of
the Enemy. They being charged made no resistance: but the night being extremely
dark, scattered. So, little execution could be done upon them; though some were
killed, and others taken. In this blind Scuffel Captain James Brown, Brother to
Sir Valentine Brown, a brave Gentleman, was slain. By the Prisoners we found
that their Commander Mac William Ridgeway had been killed that day, shot out of
a Castle in Roches Country. Which way they had taken to return with the Body,
we could not find. We marched a little forwards; but it being so dark that
nothing could be done, I returned with my Party to Tallow, and Marched the Army
toward Youghal. All Castles on the way submitted on easy Terms. I will only
take notice of one, because of the accident; though I have forgotten the name
of the place. I remember it was a Castle that yielded early in the morning
without resistance. Now presently after the yielding of it, the Weather being
very fair, I went a Hunting; leaving Colonel Henesey to see the Quarter made
good; which was to March with their Arms, bag and baggage. But the Soldiers
having been used to taking of places by strong hand, and so enriching
themselves by Plunder, would have done the like by this, though it had
Conditions. To prevent any such matter, the Colonel and several Officers went
into the Castle, joining with the Garrison in its defense. But the Foot
nevertheless fell on: and great shooting there was on all sides. Which I
hearing returned in have, thinking my Lord of Inchiquin had attempted
something. The Soldiers seeing me come sooner than they expected, ran all into
the Woods adjoining. When I came to the Castle, and Colonel Henesey had related
the matter, I made the Garrison March out, according to their Conditions. Then I
began to enquire after my Mutineers, causing the Trumpets to sound, and Drums
to beat, for drawing all to their Arms. Some time it was before these
Gentlemen, could be gotten together. Being now in order of a Battle both Horse
and Foot, I went from Battallion to Battallion telling them their Fault: and
what the consequence might have been: and concluded that they all merited
Death. Which they acknowledging, I added, that some Justice must be done: and
asked them, whether they were contented for examples sake to deliver two out of
each Battallion, as it should fall amongst them by Lots. They agreed. But when
they came to be Shot, I thought the number too great, and made them throw again
for two only; which Suffered. Being come before Youghal, I Encamped loosly,
thinking to distress the place: and toward the Sea near Crokers works, I sent
Major General Butler with fifteen hundred men, and some small pieces to hinder
Succor that might come by Sea. Whilst this was doing, I in a night with a
Party and two pieces of Cannon, past the Black Water at Temple Michael: and
before day had my two Guns planted, at the Ferry point over against Youghal,
and within less than Musquetshot of two Parliament Frigates. At the second shot
one blew up. But the Town, endeavoring to requite my Kindness, in a morning
fell on Major General Butler, and took one of his Guns. Soon after this came a
Fleet of Boats, and bigger Vessels sent by my Lord of Inchiqnin from Cork, with
supplies of Men and Provision, and succosred the Town. On which I Marched off,
and Tris^led out the remain of the Campaign in destroying the Harvest. Only a
Party of my men attempted to plunder the Great Island near Barries Court. But
being ill guided in Passing, and the Sea Coming in sooner than they counted,
their design failed. Besides there were of the Enemy that opposed their coming
on the firm Land. Captain Turlough Obryan was killed by a loose shot, out of a
Castle in the Island. Now it being the latter end of November the Snow falling,
I retired to Capper-Quin. And Commissioners being come to lay out Winter
Quarters for the Army: I left it and repaired to Kilkenny. Thus ended my
Mounster expedition, and the last that I served under the Confederate
Catholics. Whose Kindness and Confidence in me, I shall never forget, but
acknowledge it where ever I am.

SECT. VI.
The Peace of 46. Proclaimed. Lord Lieutenant comes to Kilkenny. That Peace
opposed at Waterford, Limmerick, etc. Lord Castlehaven sent to the Nuncio; but
in vain. He advises the Lord Lieutenant to March back to Dublin with all speed:
waits on his Excellency all along: and carries the Sword before him through
that City. The Nuncio Marckes with two Armies to Besiege it; but comes short of
his expectation. Lord Lieutenant Treats and concludes with the Parliament
Commissioners. Castlehaven goes for France. Lord Lieutenant's admirable
steddiness, and most loyal constancy. He departs for England, and thence a
little after to Paris. Glamorgan's Peace discovered, but not allowed by Him.
The breach of the 46 Peace how fatal.

SInce the Cessation there was always a Treaty of Peace held on with the
Marquess of Ormond Lord Lieutenant, and, after many Obstructions, at length
concluded; since called the Peace of 46. Which being Proclaimed both at Dublin
and Kilkenny, his Excellency came to this Town, accompanied with many Noble men
and others, with twelve hundred Foot, and two hundred Horse The Supreme Council
received him with all due respect, and surrendered their Government to him. But
this Sunshine lasted not long. The News was brought, that those of Limbrick
had rejected the Peace, declaring for the Popes Nuncio: and had stoned the King
at Arms, going to Proclaim it. Clonmel shut their Gates on the same Score.
General Owen Roe O Neal, being proud by a late Victory he had gained over the
Scots in Vlster, declared also for the Popes Nuncio. Preston General of
Leinster, being at Birrh in the Kings County, looked very cloudily; yet had
Correspondence with my Lord Lieutenant; but withal excusing his atendance on
pretense of some Indisposition.

The Popes Nuncio Joannes Baptista Rinuccini Archbishop and Prince of Fermo,
being at Waterford in the head of a great Congregation of Archbishops, Bishops,
and other Clergy men Secular and Regular: and having by his Excommunications
thus broken us: the Lord Lieutenant by the advice of the Commissioners of
Trust, sent me to try if I could persuade him to let the Peace go on. But all
I could do was in vain; he declaring his Resolution to oppose it to the utmost.
For all this my Lord Lieutenant continued his design of going into Mounster,
and I think to Limbrick, and Marched with all his Party. But coming to Carrick
a house of his own, Word was brought him there, that Mac Thomas had declared
for the Nuncio, and was drawn up near Clonmel with three or four hundred Horse.
I was sent to him by his Excellency, as thinking my Interest might have gained
something on him, because he had served most of the Wars under my Command. When
I came and delivered him my Message, he answered me, that he was engaged with
the Nuncio, according to his Conscience, and would not quit him. I acquainted
his Excellency with this answer, and that I saw no hopes of reclaiming this
man. Yet my Lord Lieutenant would go on, and took his March toward Cashel; Mac
Thomas Marching for the most part in sight of us. Coming near the Town, and
making halt, his Excellency received Notice, I think, from my Lord Dillon,
residing at Athlone, that O Neal was Marching against him with all the force he
could make. Whereupon my Lord was pleased to call me to him: and telling me his
intelligence asked my opinion what was to be done. I gave it quickly, that he
should immediately March back the shortest way, and endeavor to gain Laughlin
Bridge. He followed my advice. And, passing near Kilkenny, sent his brother Sir
George Hambleton and my self, to let the Magistrates of that City know what
Intelligence he had from all hands. However if they pleased, he would come to
them, with the Party he had, and venture his Fortune with them. They received
the Message with all kindness and duty: and answered, that if he pleased to
come to them, they would serve him with their Lives; though they did believe,
it would be the loss of him and them together. On our report his Excellency
kept on his March for the gaining of Laughlin: where there was a Bridge that
crossed the River of the Barrow, and a Fort at the end, on the County of
Catherloe side, Commanded by Colonel Walter Bagnal. Having gained this point,
we lost no time in our March to Dublin. Where, coming near, I think the whole
people of the City came forth to meet his Excellency, with as much joy as ever
man was received; having for several days judged him and his Party lost. Coming
near the Subburbs, his Excellency honored me with carrying the Sword before
him through the City, and into the Castle. I can give no reason for it (besides
his own goodness) other than that, I had been always a promoter of the Peace,
and the only of the Confederate Catholics, that came with him, and never left
him in these his Adventures. The Nuncio now thought all his own: committing to
several Prisons such of the late Supreme Council and others as he called of
Ormonds Party. And having gotten his Forces together, Marched them in one Army
though they took, for their better convenience in their March, two different
ways toward Dublin, O Neal and Preston as Generals Commanding under him. They
were noised so numerous and powerful, that in good earnest the people, Officers
and Soldiers did not know what to make of it, and showed apprehension enough.
His Excellency perceiving this, as it was too plain, called for me: and we
discoursed the whole matter. I took the boldness to give my Opinion. Which was,
That this Army of the Nuncio could no longer subsist in any place then as they
found Provision, where they came. That neither of his Generals ever had any
Magazines during the War. That they undertook this matter, in Confidence of the
plenty they should find in his Quarters. That I thought it was a thing of too
great hazard to oppose them in the Field; and yet if they were not stopped,
they would come on, and at least live upon him till they had eaten all. Lastly,
that on consideration of the whole, I thought it best to prevent their coming
too near. Which could not be done any other way then by destroying the
Quarters. His Excellency was of the same Opinion: and therefore sent Orders
immediately, to all people within eight Miles of the Town, to bring in whatever
they had: giving them three or four days for it. And what was found abroad
after the time prefixed, Parties were ordered to burn and destroy; particularly
Forage and Mills: for now all the Harvest was in. This was all effected,
before the Nuncio and his Army were come to Kilcullin-Bridge. And yet how
disappointed soever they were they advanced as far as Leixlip and Newcastle:
both which places, lying within three Miles distance one of an other, and six
from Dublin, they made their Headquarters: Preston at Leixlip, and Owen O Neal
at Newcastle: the Nuncio with his Council remaining at Seginstown, some six
Miles farther off. But not being able to live long by the Air: for from their
own Countries they expected not much: and the continual rains and prodigious
swelling of the River Liffy, hindering that little that was coming to them (for
all the Bridges over it were broken and great jealousies (even more than the
ordinary old ones) arising 'twixt the two Generals, and 'twixt the Nuncio also
and Preston: they returned several ways, in greater have than they came.

The Quarters being destroyed; and Athlone betrayed to the Nuncio by Dillon, a
Friar; and the Harbor of Dublin blockt up by Parliament Men of War: my advice
was asked by his Excellence in this extremity, with which of his Enemies he
should Treat? I answered, that I was confident he had resolved that before,
there being no question in the case. For giving up to the Parliament, when the
King should have England he would have Ireland with it; but to the Nuncio and
his Party, it might prove far other ways, and the two Kingdoms remain separate.

What weight this discourse had, I know not. But immediately my Lord Lieutenant
engaged himself in a Treaty with the Parliament.

During which Treaty, his Excellency was forced to March into the County of
Westmeath, and other parts to feed his people. Where we were not much at our
ease. For by Owen O Neal we were kept in continual Alarm.

Now all being agreed for the delivery of the places under his Command to the
Parliament, I took my leave of his Excellency resolving to go for France:
though with much grief of heart to leave this Noble Lord, who had shown so much
Loyalty, Justness and steddiness in his proceedings during these Transactions;
even from the meeting at Seginstown, to the Conclusion of the Peace, made with
the Confederates; and now again to the giving up of his Government to the
Parliament. For which I doubt not but he shall remain in Story, as he deserves,
a Fixed-star, by the light of which others may walk in his steps.

But alas! whilst this Noble Lord was acting above board with the
Confederates, there was another Game playing under him and in the dark between
the Earl of Glamorgan, and those of the Nuncio's party. This Earl I know did
pretend large Commissions from the King. But of his Treating a Peace, it was so
secret that I never knew it (though I was at that time of the Suprcam Council)
till that after the Archbishop of Tuam was killed, the Peace made with him was
known at Dublin; it being found in the Archbishops Pocket; and the benefit of
it earnestly pretended by the Nuntio and his Party, but as resolutely refused
and rejected by my Lord Lieutenant. This Peace goes by the name of Glamorgans
Peace. However the Nuntio having this color, improves it: and by his
Emissaries of the Clergy insinuates to the People, his threats of
excommunicating those that should accept of Ormonds Peace, as they called it.
This broke and divided the Catholics extremely. Which the Nuncio perceiving,
followed it with a Thundering Excommunication to that effect.

Now let the failour of this Peace lie at whose door it will, it is no rashness
to say, That Story mentions not any one thing that had so fatal a consequence.
For if this Peace had gone on, the King had presently been supplied with great
forces from Ireland, both of English and Irish: and so probably might have been
prevented, the ensuing mischiefs that shortly after happened both to him and
all his Loyal Subjects throughout his Dominions.

But the Irish had a more particular ill Fate than the rest by this breach of
Faith. For albeit they, discovering their Error, did, not long after, mightily
endeavor to make amends the best they could by a second and very solemn
Agreement; which their Commissioners signed, and themselves confirmed and
Sealed it with the blood of more than twenty Thousand of their best men, who
lost their lives to maintain it: refusing in the mean while all offers of
Peace, and that even to the very last, from the Parliament: yet since his
Majesty's happy Restoration, their Estates are, by the Acts of Settlement,
given away; some very few excepted. As if all the Confederate Catholics of
Ireland had been as guilty as those who begun the Rebellion of the North: or as
those that were the only Authors of breaking the Peace of 46.

SECT. VII.
Private Treaties 'twixt Inchiquin and Taaf. Agents sent to Paris from the
Confederates. Ormond returned, and the Peace of 48. concluded. By it
Castlehaven made General of the Horse. With 5000 Foot and a 1000 Horse he
regains Mary-Borough, Athy, and all Leix from Owen O Neals people. Lord
Lieutenant Marches to Dublin. Some difference happened in point of Command,
makes Castlehaven withdraw. The uproar at Kilkenny suppressed by him.

THe Marquess of Ormond, having performed Agreements with the Parliament, left
Ireland: and, after some time spent in England, went to France. At St. Germains
he attended the Queen, and Prince of Wales. It was not long before my Lord of
Inchiquin, having some discontent given him by the Parliament, entered into
secret Treaties with the Lord Taaf, (since made Earl of Carlingford) and other
General or Principal Leaders amongst the Irish: who, since the rejection of the
Peace, having lost two great Battles, the one at Dungan's-Hill, (alias Linch's
Knock) under General Preston, the other at Knock na Noss under my Lord Taaf
(albeit this Nobleman had never been either of Owen O Neal's Party, or the
Nuncio's; and then had fought against the Parliament) considering also they had
lost in both those Battles eight Thousand men at least, killed down right,
besides Prisoners: and looking on these great losses of their side, as heavy
judgments of Heaven to punish the late unparalled breach of Public Faith;
begun to be as weary of the Nuncio, as my Lord of Inchiquin was of the
Parliament. Wherefore they concluded to contrive the Marquess of Ormond's
return: and, when he was come, to declare for the King. To this end Agents are
sent from the Confederates to France, viz. the Marquess of Antrim, the Lord
Viscount Muskry, and Jeffrey Brown Esquire; Upon their offers, the Queen and Prince
of Wales dispatched my Lord Lieutenant to Ireland. Accordingly he shipped at
Haver-de-Grace in a States Man of War, and Landed at Cork: my self and many
others attending him. My Lord of Inchiquin was then with the Army in the Field,
but soon came to him; I went before to Kilkenny. Where without delay, but not
before his Excellency also was come thither, a new Treaty was set on Foot,
between him and the Irish; an Assembly of them sitting at that time in the
Town. After many disputes and reasonings (which is not my business to relate) a
Peace was concluded, called since the Peace of Forty eight. What Agreement
there was between my Lord Lieutenant and my Lord of Inchiquin I know not. But
am sure, that my Lord of Inchiquin demanded of my Lord Lieutenant all Mounster,
for the recruiting and strengthening his Army: and had it. By which the Irish
standing Regiments of that Province came to little or nothing.

But to introduce my own Story, I am to tell you, That in the Peace of Forty
six there was an Article by which it was left to the Confederate Catholics to
name certain persons, for General Officers, to whom my Lord Lieutenant was to
give Commissions. Now I having served them long, as has been seen by the Story;
and the same Article being confirmed in this Peace: they named me, as they had
done in the former, to be General of the Horse of the Kingdom of Ireland. Which
his Excellency approved, and accordingly gave me a Commission, and soon after
sent me into the Queens County with five Thousand Foot, a Thousand Horse and
some Cannon to reduce the Fort of Lease, (otherwise called Mary-Borough) Athy
and other Garrisons, possessed by O Neals people. These Troops, for the most part,
were Commanded by Sir Tho. Armstrong, Colonel Treswel, and other English
Officers: men that had always followed my Lord Lieutenants fortune: and had
been recruited and reinforced out of their Winter Quarters, as Kilkenny and
some Counties about.

With them having well executed my Order, without any considerable resistance,
I Marched to Laughlin-Bridge, and Encamped, giving an account to his Excellency
what had passed: and that I would there expect his farther Orders. But 'twas
not many days, before my Lord Lieutenant, the Lord of Inchiquin, Lieutenant
General of the Army, the Lord Taaf Master of the Ordnance, Mr. Daniel O Neal
Governor of his Excellencies Guards of Horse, with other Generals, and the
whole Army of my Lord Inchiquin, and some Irish Regiments joined us. So with a
goodly Train of Artillery, we passed the River Barrow, and that night Encamped
in the County of Catherloe. Where something passed in point of Command, that
gave me ground to judge my self wronged. Besides I was harassed by my Marches
and Labors in the Queens County. In consideration of which, his Excellency, at
my request, gave me leave to retire, for the refreshing my self: and his
Excellency Marched on and invested Dublin.

But, being returned to Kilkenny, I found the City in an uprore. The occasion,
and issue of it, take as follows. One Father Caron, at that time Commissary
General of the Recollects all over Ireland, being in Kilkenny, to reform the
abuses of some of his Order there, was by the Commissioners of Trust desired to
remove one Brenan, and six or seven more, out of the Monastery of that Town,
and send them elsewhere to be kept under Discipline. The reason of this desire
was, That those men, were notoriously known to be still most violent sticklers
for the ways of the Nuncio: and that they made it their business to incense the
people anew against the Peace; alienate them from the Government; and draw them
wholly to Owen O Neal, who yet stood out against all agreement with the King.

To satisfy so just a demand of the Commissioners, Father Caron appoints a day
for Brenan and his Associates to depart Kilkenny, and go to the several other
Convents, which he had appointed for them. And because he found by their
Answers, they were resolved not to obey him: the Commissioners of Trust, upon
notice thereof, more effectually resolve to force their obedience to his
Commands, by sending them away conducted by Guards, but yet Guards of Roman
Catholic Soldiers, to the Convents appointed them by him, who was their
undoubted Spiritual Superior.

Of this resolution of the Commissioners of Trust, Brenan and his refractory
brethren having timely notice: and seeing very well there was no sense for them
against this flail, but by that of some extraordinary means: and then
reflecting on their interest, as Natives in the Town; for three or four of them
were so, as one, by name Rooth, was Brother to the Mayor: besides, considing
mightily in the common people, whom they had already possessed with many lies:
but above all persuading themselves, that no Catholic durst attempt to violate
the Sanctity of their Habit, or privilege of their profession, by laying
violent hands upon them; and Protestants there were none in Town at that time;
which they knew very well: what do they conclude at last? even very Religiously
to raise a most dangerous Tumult: and that by the most damnable malicious lie
that could be forged.

When the day appointed was come, they by themselves and their Emissaries,
inform the heads of the rabble abroad, and thoroughly possess them, That the
Commissary and Father Peter Walsh, with some five or six more of their Company,
men that had always stood up for the Kings Government, had privately introduced
a number of the Baron of Inchiquins Protestant Irish Soldiers into their
Convent, and there clothed, in the Habit of that Order, all of them like
Friars; of purpose to seize at night those few Religious men that remained
unalterable in their obedience to the Apostolic See: and for that cause, and
unknown to any, at such a time of darkness and silence, either to drown them in
the River Neoir that runs by their Garden; or wasting them over it by Boat, to
lead them to a more cruel Death elsewhere, in some unknown place.

This lie enslam'd so the meaner sort in the Town and Suburbs (pretty well,
before it, prepared by many other inventions) that upon a sudden vast numbers
of them force their way into the Monastery, cursing and exclaiming against
those that would turn away their Friends. And then, arming themselves with what
ever came next to hand; and with all fury imaginable attacking a little Castle,
whereinto the Commissary with his company had withdrawn, they force this too.
Nor could Lieutenant General Bellew and Captain Dillon hold out long. These two
Gentlemen, so soon as they saw the door of the Castle flying open, rushed in
among the first, and with their Swords drawn placed themselves on the narrow
stairs that lead up to the Garret; whether the Commissary and his Associates
were now gotten. But the odds was too great, and their two Swords were too
short and weak, against so many more spits and poles. So they also being beat
from their Post; the Commissary, and Fathers with him had no retreat, but to
the Battlement, through the Garret window. The shutter of this window was
pretty thick and of Oak: and for that reason fastened by them, as well as they
could, in the outside toward themselves. Which they had scarce done, when the
Assailants, gotten up to the Garret, with stones and rafters pelt at this last
defense.

And now the Fathers, utterly despairing of life, lay themselves on their
knees, praying to God, and shrieving one an other. Only Father Walsh put
himself in another posture. Which was, Standing at a corner of the Battlement,
and Speaking and Preaching thence as from a Pulpit to the people: not only
discovering their great Error, and representing the horror of what was a
doing; but upbraiding them also with the greatest ingratitude imaginable
toward himself. And then asking them (for it began to be dusky) did not they
know him, that lived so many years among them? Or were they ignorant, it was he
that was chiefly sought for to be murdered? And yet did not they remember, it
was he alone that with the hazard of his own life, but two years before, did
save them all? Their Mayor and Aldermen from being hanged at their Gates by
Owen Roe O Neal? Their whole City from being Sacked by his then victorious
exasperated Army? And their Castle from either receiving in an Vlster Garrison;
or being seized upon a few days after, by the Nuncio himself in person?

To this utmost extremity were these Besieged Fathers brought, only one single
Window leaf, a board that was not above an inch thick, and it a forcing too,
parting them and Death: when I had the good Fortune to rescue them. For, just
in that nick of time, I came to Town, accompanied with two or three Trumpets,
about a dozen Horse, with five or six Gentlemen (of which Sir George Hamilton
was one) and some Footmen. And, being informed of the matter, I Galloped
presently with those of my Company to the place; had a charge sounded; and fell
in among the Rabble, firing of Pistols, and crying Kill, kill, kill. The
multitude hearing the Trumpets, and seeing the fire (for 'twas now grown dusky)
and knowing my voice, found themselves surpised, and thought themselves
betrayed; as knowing the Army to be far off in their March to Dublin; and
therefore immemediately routed and run away; though they had brought those in
the Castle so low; that (to speak within compass) they could not hold out half
a quarter of an hour. These Fathers being thus relieved, after four hours
defense; I inquired who Governed this Siege: and found it to be seven or eight
Friars in a house by, the chiefest of them the forementioned Brenan, and Rooth.
I called for them down. And whilst I was speaking, came to my assistance the
Town Major, one Archer, with a hundred Musketeers, and presently followed the
Mayor and Aldermen. Whom after I had ratled soundly for suffering this
disorder, I Commanded to lay hold of these Friars and carry them Prisoners to
the Castle. At which they staggering, and this Brenan a sturdy Friar, saying he
would fain see what man durst, Toutch his Habit: I laying hold on him said,
Lies the Enchantment there? And after this the Mayor, Town Major, and all the
rest carried them away Prisoners to the Castle, as I had appointed.

SECT. VIII.
He returns to the Army. Inchiquin Marches to Mounster with 1100 Horse from the
Siege of Dublin. That Siege raised. Cromwell landed at Dublin, takes Drogheda by
Storm. The Lord Lieutenant forms a good Army in the County of Kilkenny.
Inchiquin worsted at Glascarrig. Castlehaven relieves Wexford: which after is
betrayed by Stafford. Castlehaven relieves Duncannon: and the Siege of it
raised. Cromwell takes Ross, and thence Marches to the County of Cork, where all
the Towns open to him. Tickle's Treacherous undertaking. Castlehaven made
Commander in Chief of Leinster. He Storms Athy. Gowran betrayed to Cromwell. The
Plague raging at Kilkenny, Cromwell Besieges and takes it by composition.
Castlehaven's Orders not obeyed; he goes to my Lord Lieutenant in the County of
Clare.

NOw after a while that I had diverted my self a Hunting, I repaired to
Limbrick: and there lay; causing by fair and foul means all people both in that
City and County, to bring in what remained, due to the King of their
Aplotments. Having got ten Thousand pound together, I delivered it to Sir
George Hambleton Treasurer of the Army. My Lord Lieutenant now wrote to the
Commissioners of Trust sitting at Kilkenny to let me know, that I should come
to the Army, and that all difficulties concerning Command should be removed to
my Satisfaction. I obeyed, and Sir George and my self with our ten Thousand
pound went to the Army; which we found in their March, removing from the Phoenix
side of Dublin to Rath Mines, where they Encamped.

But my Lord of Inchiquin, soon after acquainted his Excellency with some
Letters he had received from his Officers in Mounster, that Cromwell was to land
there. Which if so, all his Towns would revolt, if not prevented by his speedy
repair thither, with some or all his Army. In Order to this, my Lord of
Inchiquin desired his Excellency's Consent that he might March away with eleven
hundred Horse: and his Excellency imparted all to me. At which I was infinitely
surprised, alleging the whole Army too weak for the work in hand. I remember
my Lord Lieutenants Answer. But it is not my business to speak more of this
Subject, having been always kept a stranger to the undertaking of this Siege.
It Is enough for me to tell you here, that my Lord of Inchiquin with eleven
hundred Horse Marched away: and you may imagine many more. Soon after this,
happened the Defeat before Dublin.

And, not long after, that, Cromwell with his Army Landed there; Marched to
Tredath; and took it with all the Towns in those parts. My Lord Lieutenant, not
being able to stand before him, retired with what Troops he had to the County
of Kilkenny. Where my Lord of Inchiquin came to him, and in a short time they
formed a good Army. For, besides my Lord of Inchiquins Forces, many Vlster
Regiments of Foot joined them: Owen O Neal having by this time, though too late
for himself and the King's service, come in upon Articles, which he signed upon
his Deathbed, after he had been rejected by the Parliament.

Cromwell being retired to Dublin refreshed his Army; sitted himself for a new
undertaking; and took his March by the Sea side through the County of Wicklowe
to Besiege Wexford. My Lord of Inchiquin was sent to oppose him. They met on
the Strand in the County of Wexford toward Glascarrig: fought; and my Lord was
Worsted.

My Lord Lieutenant being with his Army come to Ross, and fearing a want of men
within Wexford; I, knowing the Town and Country about it, offered to attempt
the Relief. My Lord accepted my good Will, and ordered me as many Regiments of
Vlster Foot, as made fifteen hundred men. The Colonels were my Lord of Eveah,
and one Mac Coffre, also I think another, and appointed two hundred Horse to
escort us. I took a great compass and came before day to the Ferry, near Sir
Thomas Esmond's house called Ballin-Treman, who as I remembered was with me.
Then leaving the Horse for my return, I Passed that Arm of the Sea in Boats:
and having delivered the Foot to Sir Edmund Butler the Governor; I took the
same way homewards as I came.

The Town thus Manned was Impregnable, as to Cromwell by force. Yet he took it
by the advantage of a Castle that was betrayed unto him by the Governor, one
James Stafford. This Castle, was strong, and stood about two or three hundred
Paces from the Wall. The Communication with the Town could not be Cut. So that
the Danger was least there, if Treachery had not been in the Case. But the
Castle being betrayed, it Mastered all that part of the Wall. So Cromwell's
Force^s entered, and made almost as great a Slaughter as at Drogheda.

My Lord Lieutenant then with his Army, retired over the River of Ross, and
encamped on the County of Kilkenny side. From whence his Excellency sent me
into the County of Waterford to Passage, over against Bally-hack, to look after
the relieving of Duncannon, Besieged by some of Cromwels people; I think Ireton
Commanded. And for all there were Parliament Ships before it, I ventured one
morning with a Boat, and got into the place, to the Governor a brave
Gentleman, one Colonel Wogane, whom my Lord sometime before had sent to
Command: and with him, besides the Irish Garrison, about a hundred English
Officers, who had served the King in the Wars of England. He from the highest
part of the Rampart, showed me how the Enemy lay. After I had well considered
all, I offered to send him that night by Sea, eighty Horse Sadled and with
Pistols, if he would mount them with so many of his English Officers, and
before day, with them and some Foot, make a sharp Sally. He liked it extremely,
but doubted my part, for putting in the Horse, it being about three miles by
Sea. I bad him leave that to me.

Having thus concluded, I took my Boat, returned, and set my self to my
Business. The Tide serving at the beginning of the night, and having provided
Boats, I Commanded eighty choice Horse to come to the Sea side. Where, making
the Horsemen alight, I caused the Horses to be Boated, sending some to hold
them. They entered the Place, and all was executed as designed; great Slaughter
made, and the Cannons seized. For the Confusion amongst the Enemy was great, by
reason that they judged it, the falling in of an Army from abroad, hearing and
seeing horses, and knowing none to be in the Fort. Our people retiring before
day, the Enemy raised the Siege in the morning, and Marched off.

His Excellency shortly after this, made me Governor of Waterford: whither I
went, with a Thousand men. But the Town would not admit them entrance. On which
I, after several days dispute, being in despair, Marched away in the night.

All this while the Armies were not idle. For Cromwell, after the rendition of
Wexford, came to Ross: making a breach, took it: passed the River there:
Marched through the County of Kilkenny to Carick: and passing the River of the
Shower into the County of Waterford, Marched on into the County of Cork; where
all my Lord of Inchiquins Towns opend their Gates to him.

The particular actings between the Armies, I must leave to those that know
better; for I was seldom with them, but employed up and down, as you see. The
persons principally entrusted by my Lord Lieutenant for the Government of the
Army, were my Lord of Inchiquin and my Lord Taaf, till the Spring following.

Then Cromwell began to move again, having drawn his Forces together: and had
gained one Captain Tickle to secure him a Gate or two of Kilkenny, when he
should think sit. The Plague strangely raged now in this City: as it had done
for a long time in all our Towns. And Cromwell, having left his Garrisons in the
County of Cork, in good Order, was advanced into the County of Tipperary, in
his way to the Siege of Kilkenny. I, having nothing to do, went one morning
early a Fox-Hunting, as I was accustomed all the Winter. My Lord Lieutenant
joining me in my way, said, he would see what we did. Being a little farther
out of Town, he began to tell me how he had discovered this Treachery of
Tickle; Cromwels approach; and his design to Besiege this place. After some
discourse it was not long, before my Lord came to the point, and told me that
it was resolved in Council that he should immediately repair into the County of
Clare, and from thence and the adjacent Countries endeavor theraising an Army
to attend the Motions of Cromwell: and that, in his absence, he should appoint
me Commander in chief of the Province of Leinster.

Any man may judge how I was pleased, with this honor. But my obedience,
though I thought my self lost by it, obliged me to a Submission. So I cast my
self at my Lords Feet to dispose of me as he pleased. The Commission with all
necessary Orders dispatched, his Excellency with his Generals and Commissioners
of Trust left Kilkenny, and went straight to the County of Clare.

I lost no time, and bestirred my self, making Major James Walsh Governor of
the Castle, and Sir Walter Butler of the City. I did all I could to furnish it
with Men, Provision, and Ammunition of all sorts: then Marched out my self
leaving the Garrisons strong, about two hundred Horse and a Thousand Foot.

Cromwell now having left Cashel, and being on his March to Callen, I went to
Catherlow, hoping to have met there such Troops from all parts of the Province
as I had ordered. But those Quartered in the lower Divident under the Command
of the Lord Dillon, entirely failed, being about the number of two Thousand
five hundred Foot, and six or seven hundred Horse: and in their stead I
received a Letter from his Lordship, as if he were sending them in great have.
But they never came, though I repeated often my Orders.

These, and other Troops not appearing, I knew not well what to do. For I had
only with me 800 Foot of the Province, and an Vlster Regiment of twelve hundred
more. Sir Thomas Armstrong Commissary General of the Horse, a brave Commander,
was my chief Counselor. His Regiment, with my Lord Lieutenants Commanded by
Colonel Treswel, and some other Troops, made up near a Thousand Horse.

At this time an Irish man was brought unto me, taken by some of my Guards;
who, being to be examined, desired to speak with me alone. Which being granted;
he produced a piece of yellow Wax, in form almost round; which he was to
swallow on occasion. Within it there was Note from Huson to Cromwell, intimating
that he with his Forces were on their March from Dublin toward him; but
desired his Orders in respect that I lay in his way. Having Copied the Note, I
roul'd it in the Wax, as I had it. And the fellow having assured me of his
return with Cromwels answer I trusted him, and suffered him to go on his way.
The second or third day he came to me, and delivered me another piece of Wax,
as the former, with Cromwell's Order to Huson enclosed; which I kept. However
Huson held on his March, and passed the River Barow eight or ten Miles below me.

Now though I was not of strength to meddle with his Army, I made some
advantage of my Intelligence, and Marched to Athy a Town with a Bridge eight
Miles above on the same River; where Huson had a Magazine, with seven hundred
men in Garrison: and, coming before it about an hour before Sunset, I took it
by Storm, with all the Garrison Prisoners at discretion. But the place not being
tenable, I slighted it: and not knowing what to do with my Prisoners, I made a
Present of them to Cromwell; desiring him by Letter, that he would do the like
with me, as any of mine should fall into his power.

But he little valued my Civility. For in a very few days after he Besieged
Gowran, where Colonel Hammond Commanded: and the Soldiers Mutining and giving
up the place with their Officers, he caused this Governor Hamond and some other
English Officers to be shot to Death. Which being done, and all other places in
the County of Kilkenny cleared by him, he salls to work and Besieges Kilkenny
it self. Whereupon I took my March to Baliraget within 7 Miles of him. But
finding my self too much exposed there, I Marched into Ossory, and made my head
Quarter at Castletown, a place belonging to Mr. Fits Patrick. Whence I sent
again to the Lord Dillon to come unto me with all the Force he had. He gave me
still fair promises (as before) but never came. I then with the advice of Sir
Thomas Armstrong and Colonel Treswel, resolved with my Party to enter Kilkenny.
Which was easy to be done; the side where the River runs being open, but when
I came to our Rendevous, my Vlster Regiment appeared not, but were Marched away
to their own Country; alleging they came to Fight against men, but not
against God. Their meaning was because of the Plague.

This Design being thus broken, and a great breach made in the Wall near the
Castle, which had been assaulted two or three times, and no hopes ever to be
Succored; I sent Orders to the Governors to make Conditions when they thought
fit, and both to join at the same time, though the Castle might hold out two or
three days longer than the Town.

Cromwell being thus Master of Kilkenny, I retired into the Kings County. Where,
understanding that Carloe Castle was Besieged, I appointed a Rendevous;
intending to attempt the Succor. But coming to the place, I found not half my
Foot. The rest were Marched into Mounster, I know not by what order.

Now finding my self thus used: and reflecting on several other hardships put
upon me since the Peace of 48 in despair of success, I left Leinster, and went
to my Lord Lieutenant in the County of Clare. Where I rendered him an account,
how I had been failed, to the end he might do as he thought fit.

SECT. IX.
Made Commander in Chief of Mounster, and Limbrick receiving him, Ireton raises
his Siege that night. Transports 2000 men by Boats into Kerry. Persuades
Clanrickard to accept of the Government. Sends Orders to the several Provinces;
which are not obeyed. Passes with 1000 Horse through Limbrick to the Silver
Mines: and how this design failed. Hinders the General Assembly from Agreeing
with the Parliament. Relieves Tecrochan; and Fox hanged. Ireton sitting down
again before Limmerick; he defends the Pass at Killaloe. Sent for to Galway,
hinders the agreement with the Duke of Lorrain. Returned to Killaloe receives
Letters from Ireton, and answers them; but is betrayed at Bryan's Bridge by
Captain Kelly, and at Killaloe by Colonel Fennel. Athlone given up, and Galway
besieged, he is sent from Clanrickard to the King. The Kings Answer, and Orders
to Clanrickard. On which Castlehaven takes Service under the Prince of Conde.
Reflections.

I Had not been long there attending his Excellency, before Ireton sat down
before Limbrick, on the County of Limbrick side, leaving Tomond's side open.
His Excellency repaired thither: and, being come near the end of the Bridge,
sent to the Mayor, to let him know that he was there, with some Troops, and
ready to enter with them for the defense of the place. The Mayor having
consulted his Brethren, made excuse as if they had no need of relief. Several
Messages pass to and fro, till at length his Excellency losing all patience,
declared unto them that if they would not receive and obey him, he would leave
the Kingdom. All would not do. And so, turning aside, he called me to him, and
told me that he was in good earnest, and would be gone: but Commanded me to
stay, and keep up a Bussel as long as I could; it being the Kings Service. I
was very unwilling to remain behind, seeing he took with him my Lord of
Inchiquin, my Lord Taaf, Colonel Daniel O Neal, and other his friends. But the
sound of the Kings Service so Charmed me, that I abandoned my own Judgment, and
submitted to what his Excellency should Order. He then gave me a Commission to
be Commander in chief of the Province of Mounster, and the County of Clare;
having before that of Leinster. Thus qualified, together with my being General
of the Horse of the Kingdom, his Excellency gave me Possession of his Troops
there standing in their Arms, together with his Lifeguard to serve me as they
had done him; and, as I counted, they were in all about two Thousand Foot, and
a Thousand Horse. His Excellency for my better encouragement assured me, that
he would leave a Commission for my Lord of Clanrickard, to be Lord Deputy.

Now my Lord being gone, and not suffering me to accompany him more than a
Mile, I went into the Town addressing to the Mayor and Aldermen. I told them
how I was left, and asked them whether they were pleased with it, and would
obey me? They took no long time to consult, but submitted themselves to my
pleasure. On which I immediately visited their Walls: and at the same time took
a view of the Enemy: whom I judged to be very loose and exposed, if vigorously
assaulted. On which, I resolved, in the first of the night, to draw my Troops
into the Town, and a little before day to make a sharp Sally. On what
Intelligence, I know not, but Ireton raised his Siege, and marched off in the
night. This done, I returned my Troops to their Quarters and remained my self
in the Town, till I had sent my Orders to all Officers, commanding in the
several Provinces, and particularly to my Lord of Muskry then in Kerry,
ordering him to make himself so strong as he could, and that I would soon be
with him to increase his Forces. Which I performed, passing the Shanon about
twelve miles below Limbrick, with two thousand men. And though the River was
full of Parliament Ships and two miles over, yet I had not the least loss. It Is
true I took the night, and landing in Kerry near Drombeg, I marched till I came
to my Lord of Muskry at Tralie. Having acquainted him with what had past, and
ordered what I would have done, particularly in raising of Forces, I left my
men with him, and returned to Iniss, my Residence in the County of Clare.

Where being come, and a little refreshed, I went to Portumne to visit the
Marquess of Clanrickard, and came there before Dinner. He bad me very Welcome.
After Dinner, I desired to retire my self for an hour or two. He brought me to
my Chamber, and asked, Whether it would not be troublesome that he took a Pipe
of Tobacco by me; I said, no, but the contrary; yet, showed my self melancholy.
He did what he could to divert it: but I pretended withal not to be very well,
and spoke to a Servant of his that stood at the Door, to bring me a Glass of
Sack: My Lord was much pleased with that, and called for a Bottle.

Now, my Point was to get him to take the Government, by accepting the
Commission left by my Lord Lieutenant: yet I speak nothing of it, hoping he
would begin; which he did. The passages on this subject are too long to relate
here. But before we parted, I got him to send to the Commissioners of Trust,
(these were men named by the Confederates, and agreed to by my Lord of Ormond
to see the performance of the Articles of Peace) then sitting at Loghreah,
requiring them to send him his Commission: for he would take upon him the
Government. And to lose no time, I gave him the best account I could of the
Forces in the Kingdom, as well Friends as Foes. For he during the War had been
no more than a Spectator, beloved and respected of all, and might have so
continued, had not his great Loyalty drawn him to take up this Commission:
which was little less than to Sacrifice himself and his, only to give the King
time to try his fortune with Cromwell: their Armies being near Sterling in
Scotland, Encamped near together, as the Kings Letters to us imported, brought
by Deane King, an Express newly come. We agreed at this meeting, that his
Lordship should immediately raise a thousand Horse as an addition to the
Standing Forces of Conaught, and that I should march with my thousand Horse,
out of the County of Clare to the Silver Mines in the County of Tipperary,
passing through Limbrick in the night, and be at such a day and hour at the
Rendevous, and there I should meet fifteen hundred Foot, that he would send
with a good Officer. His Part was little more than crossing the Shanon at his
door, and marching four or five miles; no Enemy in those Parts.

I complied punctually with my Order, and the Mayor of Limbrick, as I marched
through the City, on demand gave me a hundred Foot. The Alarm of my March was
soon given to Sir Hardress Waller, or my Lord Brochil, or both, lying near
Kilmallock with great Forces. They pursued me; and I coming to our appointed
Rendevous, no news there was of the fifteen hundred Foot. Having lost this
Anchor, I was put to my Wits ends. But not having much time to think, the Enemy
coming on, I resolved to thrust into the next Fastness, and save my self as
well as I could. But there was a Castle of the O-Machers that stood in the way,
possessed by the Enemy. And there being no other passage, I sent to the adjacent
Villages, and got together Crows of Iron, Pickaxes, and what else that could be
found necessary; and making my Horsemen to alight, I fell a Storming the
Castle. Which with the Assistance of the Limbrick Foot, in three or four hours
time was yielded. I left my hundred men in this place to secure the Pass. Now
being pretty safe, I lodged that night at my ease, where Colonel Fitz Patrick
came to me, who had for some time kept in those Fastnesses with a good Party of
Foot and some Horse. My men being well refreshed, I took the plain Country
near Burras: and after entering the Woods at the foot of the Mountain Sleau
Bleauma, I met Sir Walter Dungan then Commissary General of the Horse, as was
Ordered. He brought with him only three hundred Horse; but I finding my self
still pursued with Horse and Foot, besides what were gathering round on all
sides, I took leave of Sir Walter, ordering him to return from whence he came,
and to stop all Forces that I had sent for, as well from Vlster as Leinster. So
I with my thousand Horse marched into Conaught, passing by the Bridge of
Athlone. Being there, I posted to Loghreah, where my Lord Deputy was, with a
General Assembly sitting in his House. I, coming into his Chamber, found with
him about a dozen principal men of the Assembly deputed to him; setting forth
the desperate Estate of the Nation, with the impossibility much farther to hold
out. Besides, that there were now come to the Town, Mr. John Grace, and Mr.
John Bryan Commissioners from the Parliament, or their Commander in Chief,
offering greater Conditions than was reasonably to be expected, as the case
stood. Whilst this Address was making, my Lord was glad to see me come in, and
ordered them to repeat what they had said. I seemed much scandalized at the ill
timing of their Proposals: and therefore presently declared my dislike to it.
Then by my Lords permission, weary and dirty, as I was, I went down into the
Assembly, as a Peer being a Member, and expressed my detestation of what they had
in hand: demonstrating, that if those fifteen hundred men, commanded by one
Colonel Burk had not failed, I had probably now been Master of the Field:
besides, that the noise of a Treaty might destroy all what could be hoped for
of good from the Kings Endeavors against Cromwell; that His Majesty, as his own
Letters spoke, both to my Lord Deputy and my self, made no doubt, if he could
gain forty eight hours march before Cromwell toward England, his business was
done, because all were ready there to join in assisting him. And, that he
therefore, conjured us not to hearken to any Treaty with the Enemy. Then I set
forth the state of the Forces of the Kingdom on all sides, and concluded very
severely against the two Parliament Commissioners. So that they hastily packt
out of Town, and the Assembly let the matter fall.

Reynolds now besieged Tecrohan in Mead; and my Lord Deputy came to Tyrrels
Pace about twelve miles from it, with two thousand Foot and seven hundred
Horse. A Council of War being held, I proposed, that our Horse should alarm the
Enemy, whilst the Foot attempted to succor the Place, taking their March
through the Bogs. 'Twas alleged by all impossible to be done. For coming near
the place, there were two necks of Land that did almost meet: and that between
them there was a great Way or Tougher, with a large Ditch of Water on each
side, which must be ccossed: and that in all likely hood the Enemy would plant
their Guns on the firm Land, at both ends of this Tougher, and bring the
strength of their Army to defend that Passage; there being no other way, seeing
we had not force to attempt them on the firm Land. I heard all this, and knew
it well; yet, did not agree to the Impossibility of entering the place. Then
addressing my self to the Deputy, I begged pardon if I guessed at the thoughts
of the Officers present; which was, that I being General of the Horse might
well advance this Undertaking: For, I was to be with the Horse, and so to have
no share in this Danger. But to show them the contrary, I desired his
Excellency to give me the Command of this party of Foot; which he did: and
himself to march with the Horse to alarm the Enemy on another side. It being
thus determined, I entered the Bog (which was eight miles long) with my two
thousand Foot, and his Excellency took his March as was agreed. Coming in sight
of this Tougher, I found the Enemy expecting as we had supposed, for they saw
me Marching from the first entering into the Bog. I then put my men into the
best Order I could in three Divisions: two to attempt passing the Tougher, the
third to stand still, faceing two or three Battallions, that were drawn on my
right hand; fearing they would fall on my Flank or Rear. I Marched on with my
two Divisions. Coming within Shot, they raked me with their Cannon, and great
Volleys of small Shot. But I advanced still, and my men fought it on the
Tougher with handy blows, making those that Defended it, retire to their Horse
which stood drawn up at each end of the Tougher or firm Land. Seeing this go so
well, I looked back, and saw my third Division, which was to stand still,
coming after me. I ran to it, crying to the Officer that Commanded, to attack
the Battallions which he was commanded to look after: on this, he turned to his
men, and spoke something in Irish that I do not know, and Marched two or three
hundred Paces, in such a fashion, that I could not tell whether he intended
Fighting or Running away. But coming to the Point where he must declare, he
plainly run away, and all his Party followed him. which when the two Divisions,
that had passed the Tougher saw, they Marched on into the Place: and I was left
alone, only some Gentlemen with me; and by the favor of the night, for now it
began to be dark, I got off: and by the next morning returned to Terrils Pace,
where I had left my Lord Deputy: who had all the Story before my coming, and
sending out took this Captain that had caused this Disorder; who, by a Council
of War being condemned, was shot to Death. His name was Fox.

After this Ireton was not idle, knowing our weakness too well, and that I did
only keep up a Bussel, till the King and Cromwell had decided their Quarrel. He
therefore again sat down before Limbrick, with a powerful Army, on the County
of Limbrick side. I, with what Force could be drawn together, Marched to
Killalow, and there Encamped. He kept a Guard on his side the River, as I did
against him at Bryans-Bridge, and Castle Conel. We lay in this manner a long
time: he attempting nothing either on the Town, or River, which was not yet for
deable in any place.

My Lord Deputy, being at Galway, sent me a Letter in all have to come to him.
On my Arrival he told me, that the Abbot of St. Katherine was in the Harbor,
and in his Company many Officers with a quantity of Arms, Ammunition, and other
Materials for War. That they were sent by the Duke of Lorrain, who pretended by
some agreement to be Protector Royal of the Kingdom of Ireland, with Power over
all our Forces, and Places. And that he was to continue that Title and Dominion
till after the War ended, he were reimburst all his Expenses; and his Damages
satisfied. I was much startled at this News. For though I strugled to keep up a
Bussel, I never intended to buy it so dear as to give Footing, or color of
Pretense or Title to any Foreign Prince. And having heard my Lord all out, I
took the boldness to ask him, how far he was concerned in this matter. He
protested before God, and upon his Honor, that he never gave Commission for
any such Treaty: and, as to the thing he knew no more than what he had told me,
other then that the General Assembly then sitting in the Town, were in great
joy for this Succor, and pressed him earnestly for the reception. But I found
him entirely against it.

Being thus satisfied, I desired him to leave the matter to me, and let me deal
with the Assembly. Immediately therefore I went and found them on the Debate.
To which in my time I spoke, and with much Detestation of the thing, declared
all Traitors that were for receiving this succor on those terms: and that I
would not sit more to hear of this Stuff, but return to my Forces, knowing what
I had to do. My Lord Deputy was much pleased with this round Discourse: and
publicly approved it. So the Abbot with what he had returned from whence he
came.

At my return (which was without delay) to Killalow, I found all quiet. And,
whether Ireton had Information of this Passage, I know not; but by a Trumpet I
received from him a long Letter, four sides of Paper close written in a small
hand. The drift was, to set forth the justness of the Parliaments proceedings;
their great Power; how short a time I could subsist; what ill Company I was
with, and threw what dirt he could on the King I served, but concluded with
great value of my person; pitying my Condition, and offering me, that if I
would retire and live in England privately, I should not only enjoy my Estate,
but remain in safety with the esteem and favor of the Parliament. I
immediately showed this Letter, to Father Peter Walsh, my then Ghostly Father,
whom I had always found faithful to the King, and a lover of his Country. With
his advice, by the same Trumpet, I answered all his Points: and rejected his
proposition concerning my own person: desiring him withal to send no more
Trumpets with such Errands, if perhaps he would not have the Messenger ill
Treated. From this time there was an end of all Messages and Letters between us.

Now Ireton remained still and quiet, without any action or attempt, expecting
the coming of Sir Charles Coot on my back, or the fall of the River. Both came
together, and besides that, a third unlucky accident. For now some days I had
kept Guards toward Conaught, when Ireton, by Treachery of the Officer one
Captain Kelly, made himself Master of Bryans-Bridge. It Is called so, though
there be no Bridge. Whilst I was hastening with some Troops to oppose, having
left the defense of the Pass at Killalow to Colonel Fennel, he cowardly or
Treacherously quitted it, and with all his Party fled into Limbrick. Where,
upon the rendition of the Town, which was not long after, Ireton with more than
his ordinary justice, hanged him. Some say he was carried to Cork, and that it
was done there. He pleaded for his Defense, not only this Service, but how he
had betrayed me before Toughal. But his Judges would not hear him on his Merit,
but bid him clear himself of the Murders laid to his charge.

Now receiving Letters from my Lord Deputy, of Sir Charles Coots approach; I
hastened to him with what Troops I had left, viz. about three hundred Horse,
and found him drawn into Loghreah with his Forces, not being able to keep the
Field against Coot, who was twice his number. The Enemy did not think fit to
attempt him, and were gone by, before my coming. About this time Athlone gave
up to them: and so did Limbrick to Ireton some few Months after. In the mean
while my Lord Deputy and my self, with what Troops we had, retired toward
Jerchonnoght, under the Covert of the River that runs by Galway: and so shifted
up and down, till Sir Charles Coot came before the Town on Loghreahs side, and
had taken a Castle a little above on the River. Then we retired into Galway.
Where we had not long been, before we heard of the Kings Defeat at Worcester.

A man now would think, that this Noble Lord had discharged his part. Yet his
Zeal carried him farther. He dispatched me for France to the King, by the way
of Iniss-bofin for the River of Galway was full of Parliament Ships) with
orders to set out the ill state of his Majesty's Affairs in that Kingdom. And
that nevertheless to serve his Majesty, he intended after Galway should be
lost, to make a Mountain War, and give the Enemy trouble for some time; if his
Majesty would but send him five hundred Barrels of Powder, with Match and
Bullets proportionable, and some Arms, and appointed me to return with them to
Iniss-bofin, a fit place for our Magazine: it being a large Island, lying of
Jerchonnoght three Miles into the Sea; in which we had a strong Garrison. It Is
surrounded with Rocks: and has but one entrance; where there is a pretty good
Harbor for Frigates and small Men of War. I here Shipped my self, and landed at
Breast, ordering the Frigate that brought me to expect my orders. The Captain
was Antonio Vandersipp of Brugis. We had a sharp fight with an English Ship
that we met in the way, but foul weather parted us. No great hurt was done,
other than that the Bishop of Down was Killed in the Cabin, it is thought by
the Wind of the Bullet or Fear, for he had not the least sign of any hurt, and
lived near a quarter of an hour.

Being Landed, I took post for St. Germains, where I found the King,
QueenMother and my Lord of Ormond. I delivered my Letters of Credit, and in a
day or two had my Audience. They seemed to take it to heart, and Consulted
Cardinal Mazerine, and the chief Ministers. But the truth of it is, that the
King of France's Affairs were at that time so much in disorder, by reason of
the Civil War, that nothing could be done. Having this Answer, the King gave me
a Letter to my Lord Deputy, acknowledging his good Service: ordering him that
he should make the best conditions for himself and Party that he could: and
expect a better season. Having thus discharged my Commission, I dismissed my
Frigate: and with the Kings permission, engaged my self in the Service of the
Prince of Conde; who was then joined with the Spaniard. But first, I sent by a
safe hand his Majesty's Letter away to my good Lord of Clanrickard. Of whom I
have said so much already, that I need add nothing but my own esteem for his
worthy Memory as a pattern of Loyalty. Between my leaving him, and his laying
down Arms, I can give no account; but have heard that he was driven to great
extremity.

SECT. X.
Some few Reflections more of Castlehaven on himself. And the last of all is an
acknowledgment of a most extraordinary favor of God to him.

ANd so I have done my Story. And you find by these Memoir's, that no man could
arrive to greater Trust and Credit than I had amongst the Irish; though the War
till the Peace of Forty Six was almost National. And then they made me what
they could, by naming me to remain General of the Horse of the Kingdom, in the
Kings Service. Which was a Right left to them by that Peace.

It remains now, that I give those few Reflections more upon my self, which may
let the Reader know, to what, next God's blessing, I impute that esteem and
fortune I had among the Confederate Catholics of Ireland.

In my beginning I was a great Partyman. But considering my self and Soldiers
but young beginners, I meddled with nothing that was not almost sure:
remembering that young Hawks must be entered on weak game.

Having Marshal-law, it was certain Death to take from any of our Friends the
worth of a Hen. But withal I had care that my Soldiers should not want.

If any thing happened of that kind, I sent out a Party with a sure Officer, to
bring in so many Beefs: and at his return to tell me where he took 'em. Then I
issued my Order to the Commissioners, to applot on the County or Barony, from
whence the cattle came, their value, and immediately to satisfy the Owners;
which was always allowed out of their Contributions. This I held constantly
during the War.

An other of my Rules, no less punctually observed, was, That if by accident
any want fell out to be in the Army, I kept no Table, and eat no better than
the Soldiers did. Though otherwise, I did generally keep a good Table: and my
Officers were welcome to me.

I never took the worth of a crown for my self, either from Countryman,
Officer, or Soldier; but lived still upon my bare Pay. Though the Council never
stinted me; but left me at liberty to take besides, what I should think fit out
of the Treasure, that commonly Marched along with the Army, and was disposed of
by my Orders.

I was a good Providore, and had my Magazines well furnished, and seated as I
was to make the War. For men eat every day, but Fight seldom.

My Soldiers I called my Children: and really had a Fatherly love and care for
them. And they by their duty, bravery, and affection, made me a full return.

I punished severely; which made my Orders to be well observed: and rewarded
bountifully, according to my power.

If an Officer, or Soldier, had done a brave Action: I treated the Officer some
days at my Table: and took all occasions by talking to improve his glory; and
seldom either Officer, or Soldier went without advancement, or other reward.

I made it my business always to March and Encamp so, as not to be engaged to
Fight: without an enemy would come on great disadvantage.

My Intelligence and Spies cost me very dear. But I had good.

Whenever I Fought, or had a mind to Fight; coming in view of the Enemy, and
being in order of Battle, I rode to all the Battallions and Squadrons, to
observe their looks. And then, with a cheerful countenance, acquainting them
them truly with what I knew of the Enemy, and our Condition, I told them my own
opinion for Fighting: and, if they liked it, I would go on; otherwise, not.
This I did to engage them in judgment, as well as duty.

I made it my business to get my Troops good Winter Quarters. But, during the
Field, I was very strict in my Musters. And ever and anon, being not in danger
of an Enemy, I made the Battallions and Squadrons March by Companies: that I
might know their number just. For a General will be cozened if he brings his
men to Fight on sworn Relations.

I suffered no Officer to take from a Soldier the worth of a penny. I do not
remember, that, during the time I served the Consederate Catholics, they ever
gave me any Instructions what I should do; but left all to my self. Which made
their business go the better.

I shall now conclude these Reflections, with the greatest Reflection of all,
which is on my infinite obligation to Almighty God; who has so protected me,
that to this hour, neither in those Wars of Ireland, or any other that I have
been in since, either Army, or Party of Army, great, or small, was ever beaten
so by an Enemy, as to lose their ground to the end of the Fight, where I
Commanded in Chief.

FINIS.

