IMPRIMATVR,

Tho. Tomkyns R. Rmo. in Christo Patri ac Domino, Domino Gilberto, divina
Providentia, Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi a sacris domesticis.

THE CHEMICAL GALENIST: A TREATISE, WHEREIN The Practice of the Ancients is
reconciled to the new Discoveries in the Theory of Physic;

Showing, That many of their Rules, Methods, and Medicines, are useful for the
Curing of Diseases in this Age, and in the Northern parts of the World.

In which are some Reflections upon a Book, Entitled, MEDELA MEDICINAE.

By George Castle, Dr. of Physic, lately Fellow of All Souls College in Oxon.

Navim agere ignarus navis timet, abrotanum aegro
Non audet nisi qui didicit dare; quod medicorum est
Promittunt Medici: tractant fabrilia fabri.
Horat. l. 2. Epist. 1. London, Printed by Sarah Griffin for Henry Twyford in
Vine Court, middle Temple, and Timothy Twyford at Inner Temple Gate. 1667.

TO My Honored and Learned FRIEND, Dr. THOMAS MILLINGION, Fellow of ALL-SOVLS
College IN OXON.
SIR,
THese Papers (some sheets of which, I two years since took the freedom to show
you) had, within some few Weeks after your sight of them, waited upon you in
this dress into which now the Printer has put them, if the Plague had not
disappointed my intentions, which, coming to the Town where I lived, forced me
from my House and Studies, having not (I confess) courage enough, to expose my
self and Family to the mercy of so dismal a Disease, against which, flight is
the only infallible preservative.

My occasions since have been so many and pressing, that I have had little
leisure to collect my scattered Papers, and therefore, I must entreat your
pardon, as well for the slow performance of my promise, as for whatever else
you shall meet with in the Treatise, which may stand in need of it.

My design is, to show, that though the Physiology and Pathology of Physic,
ought to be modelled according to the new Discoveries in Anatomy, and the
Democritical and Chemical Principles, yet that many of the Rules, Methods, and
Medicines, which more immediately respect the useful and practical part, are
still to be retained, and that they are rather more reconcilable to the
Modern, than they were to the Ancient Hypotheses.

For, the practical part of Physic being grounded upon Experience, does not so
much depend upon the notional, that, this being overthrown, the other must
necessarily fall to the ground. The fancies and reasonings of Philosophers and
Physicians were built upon the practice, and signify not much more to the
Fundamentals of the Art of Physic, than pinnacles to the body and foundation
of a Building, which (though they be blown down) may stand unshaken.

Much of the Therapeutick part of Physic is like Dialls and Almanacks, which
agree as well with that of Copernicus, as Ptolemy's Hypothesis. For as the
Ancients made a true use of the light and heat of the Sun, in distinguishing
and measuring Times and Seasons, and managing of their Husbandry, though
probably they erred in their Notion of his motion round the Earth; so did
Physicians no less, happily, employ Apollo's Art in the curing of Diseases,
though they were ignorant of the true motion of the Blood, and of (the Sun of
the Microcosm) the Heart.

It is (I know) objected, To what end have been all these new Discoveries in
Physic; and to what purpose is a farther Inquiry, if the practice be not
altered by them? But to this Objection it may be easily answered, that though
many of the Rules, Methods, and Medicines of the Ancients be still in force, and
must be made use of in the curing of Diseases; yet, when we consider, that in
this Art, there must be much left to the judgment and discretion of the
Physician, as to understanding of the Disease, the Complications, and the
applying of the Methods, and Remedies seasonably to men's particular
Constitutions, it will appear, that an Artist (who proceeds from true
principles) is as much to be preferred before a bare practitioner, as a good
Architect before a common Bricklayer, or Mason, who, though by his practice, he
has learnt to build a Wall, or a stack of Chimneys, will be necessarily at a
loss in designing a great and regular Fabric.

It is (I confess) an absurd temper to be so morose, so addicted to authority
and antiquity, as to shut our eyes, lest they should discern a new Truth, and
rather disbelieve our own Senses than the Writings of Hippocrates and Galen.
But, on the other hand, the humor is no less ridiculous, to put on the same
levity in matters of Philosophy and Physic, as we do in Clothes, to like
nothing which is not of a new fashion, to have a greater esteem for Error and
Nonsense in a modish Garb, than Truth and Wisdom in an old-fashioned Dress.
Though we see farther than the Ancients did, we must acknowledge, that we stand
upon their Shoulders; and, if we will be ingenuous, that we are the Dwarfs and
they the Giants.

We need not (I think) in our age, apprehend any danger to Physic from an
over-fondness of Antiquity. The growing evil is the other Extreme, a fancy of
rejecting the wisdom of the Ancients, for the follies and whimsies of some
fantastical Pseudo-chymists, which is, like the Americans, to barter Gold and
Silver, for Beads and Glass.

Sir, Our Nation is of late grown as fond of Enthusiasts in Physic, as they
were of those in Divinity; and Ignorance (amongst some men) is become as
necessary a qualification for the practice of Physic, as it used to be for
Preaching. I cannot believe, that the delight which the Vulgar (ray, and some
Wise men) take in being cheated by Mountebanks, proceeds from any principle in
Nature, which inclines them to it. But rather think it to be caused from
Impostours being more industrious in deluding the World, than the true Artists
in undeceiving it.

There has of late been one of them wondrous busy in possessing the rabble (to
whose capacity his Discourse is suited) against the learned Physicians of the
College of London, and all others, who have been bred up, and taken degrees in
Universities. He puts them into his own Bears skin, and then baits them. He
would make the World believe, that they are a company of narrow streight-lac'd
men, who only confine themselves to Books, and never study Nature, and that
they stifle and suppress all occasions of improving their Art. I do not wonder,
that they meet with so ill usage at his hands, whose business and profession it
has been for above twenty years, to libel almost all sacred and honorable
persons of this Nation. I have in this Treatise, endeavored to vindicate them
from his false aspersions, by showing them to have been Authors of the New
Improvements and Discoveries in Physic, and the great Promoters of
Experimental Philosophy. By the way, I have thought it not improper, to make
some reflections upon the Book of this bold and impertinent invader of Physic,
and plausible vender of very popular nonsense.

The truth is, both Mercurius Politicus, the Author of Medela, and his Book,
are so inconsiderable, that they deserve not to be treated with any respect,
especially, since himself so inhumanly tramples upon the ashes of the Ancients,
at that wild rate flings dirt upon the learned Society of Physicians in the
World, and libels the Universities, not only in his Book, but in his
pretensions to have had his Education in them.

Yet, my design is not so much to concern my self in the man, or his scurrilous
expressions, as to take occasion from those material points in Physic, which
he has very idly and extravagantly stated, to treat of them more closely and
pertinently, according to the best and truest grounds of Philosophy and Physic.

Sir, I have so far presumed upon your friendship, as not only to trouble you
with the reading but countenancing of this Treatise. If it be not suitable to
the advantages which I might very well have received from a long acquaintance
with you (your converse being as diffusive of Knowledge, as it is of Kindness.)
Pray believe that I have minded more the being just to my Promise than careful
of my Credit. Sir, I am

Westmin. Martii. 10. 1666. Your most obliged friend, and humble Servant,
George Castle.

ERRATA.
PAge 14. line 24. insert to. p. 22. l. 7. for impart read invent, p. 35. l.
10. for lixivat r. lixiviat. p. 38. l. 2. for stomocace, r. stomacace. p. 46.
l. 2. leave out, Dead of the Consumption. p. 72. l. 23. for worlp r. world. p.
73. l. 8. for often escue r. often rescue. p. 79. l. 24. for canprobaolybe r.
can probably be. p. 89. l. 12. insert should. p. 100. l. 12. leave out they. p.
104. l. 6. for Disease r. Diseases. p. 115. l. 24. for evaporate r. evaporates.
p. 133. l. 1. for Cane r. Cave. p. 43. l. 30. leave out is. p. 44. l. 27. for
procatactick r. procotarctick. leave out the second its ibid. p. 160. l. ^5.
for and r. in. p. 169. l. 9. insert he. p. 172. l. 29. for Manichaearum r.
Manichaeorum. p. 175. l. 19. for this r. his.

For other faults which have passed the Press, I desire the Reader's courteous
Correction.

THE Chemical Galenist.
CHAP. I.
THat there have been made of late very considerable discoveries in Physic;
That the Art is yet farther improvable; and, That the Galenick Hypothesis is
insufficient to give a satisfactory account of the Phenomenon of Health, and
Diseases, are no more news to this Age, than that America is found out; that
some parts of the world are yet unknown; and, that the ancient Maps were
imperfect: neither is this less questioned by G^ographers, than the other by
Philosophers and Physicians, Wherefore in my opinion, the Author of Medela,
ought to have been more civil to those sound Authors, (of whom, to compile a
Book, he does every where, more than borrow;) than to make them speak to no
purpose in his writings, who do always, to so much, in their own: For, he
might with no less extravagancy have inferred from Columbus his Discoveries in
the great World; That it would be for the Interest of all Kingdoms, and
Commonwealths, to furnish every pretender to Navigation (though never so
ignorant) with Ships, Men, and Money, in hopes he may find out new Countries;
than, from the famous Harvy's, or learned Willis's, in the lesser World, That
it is for the benefit of Mankind, that the Lives and Purses of men should lie
exposed to the cheat of ignorant Pretenders to Physic; upon presumption, that
they may find out new Regions, new Floods and Channels in the Microcosm. But,
to persuade the World, that he, and his Brethren, the Mountebanks, are the
only Men, from whom Physic is to expect a farther improvement; he endeavors
to render all those Physicians, who have more learning and modesty, than
himself, as men wholly enslaved to narrow Principles, and jejune Notions; and
altogether confined to a beaten, and trite Road in Philosophy and Physic as
being enemies to all advancement of Knowledge: Which is a falsehood so
notorious, and obvious to be confuted, that I need only to examine, Who have
been the Authors of the waste improvement of Physic (which M. N. himself
acknowledges to have been in twenty years so heightened, M. del. Med. p. 215.
that never any Science or Art in the World had such an advance, and alteration
in so short a time) I use his own words; and it will appear, that the World is
indebted to the true Artists, rational Physicians, learned men; and not to the
Medicastrorum Empiricorum Medicantiumque (...), the dregs and scum of mankind,
Joha^. Rodolph. Cam^r^r. Memor. Med. Centur. 1. Po 37.
as Camerarius calls them, to whom I will refer the Reader for a farther
account of those precious Sons of Art; as desiring my self to be so civil to
the Author of Medela, as not to give a Catalogue of that goodly pack of his
Brotherhood.

To show, that the improvement which Physic has received in this latter Age,
ought to be ascribed to the learned Physicians, and men bred up in Universities
and Colleges, I need go no further for Instances, than in our own Nation; and
the rather, because (I believe) that Forrainers themselves will confess us to
have far outdone the whole World in this matter: witness the Writings of the
renowned Harvey; the learned Doctors, Glisson, Ent, Highmore, Wharton, and the
present Ornament both of his University and Nation, Dr. Willis. For,
notwithstanding that M. N. and some other touchy-Heads, Medel. Med. p. 17.
(as he calls them) like his have pryed into one point, viz. Whether in the
Practice of Physic, there need be the hundredth part of ado about the Anatomy;
especially seeing, that when the body is out of order by Diseases, the Blood
and Humors have other vagaries than in their usual Channels: By his good
favor, the great advantages which have accrued, both to the Theory and
Practice of Physic, in these late years, must necessarily be acknowledged to
have proceeded from the discoveries which have been made in Anatomy; and that
Dogs, Pigs, and Monkeys, have contributed more to the advancement of Physic,
than M. N. and his Fraternity ever did, or are like to do: Though it must be
confessed, his endeavors have not been wanting to be a Benefactor to the
Chirurgions Hall; and possibly, being conscious that he might be more
serviceable to Physic dead than alive, there was a time when he bid as fair
for the Knife as any man. Vid A Rope for Pol.
It is, I say, from the accurate inspections into Bodies, in which, of late,
Physicians have been wonderfully curious and industrious, that Physic has
attained to that wonderful height: For, since the Circulation of the blood has
been found out by Doctor Harvey, that being laid as a new foundation, the whole
Fabric has been built from the very ground.

The Parts of the Body, as to their Figure, Site, Relations, Vessels, Texture,
Magnitude, Connection, and Correspondencies, have been accurately examined, and
their uses admirably assigned. The blood, the nutricious, and nervous juyces
have been by Dr. Willis, as to their Principles, Motions, Stagnations,
Coagulations, Dissolutions, Exaltations, Praecipitations, and all Alterations,
which are incident to Liquors, diligently considered; and from thence (more
plainly and mechanically, than from the Seminalities, and fretting and fuming
of the Archaeus, according to the Chemists; or indeed the indisposition or
distemperature of the solid parts, according to the Galenists) have the causes
of Diseases been deduced, and excellently explained.

It is not, I think, to be questioned, that a man is as Mechanically made as a
Watch, or any other Automaton; and that his motions, (the regularity of which
we call Health) are performed by Springs, Wheels, and Engines, not much
differing, (except as to the curiousness of their Work) from those pieces of
Clock-work, which are to be seen at every Puppet-play. He, who has heard of
Drebels Organ, which was set a going by the Sunbeams, or Memnon's-Statue; or
but seen the subtle Workmanship of one Mark, an Englishman, who, (as the
learned Muffet reports,) made for a Flea a chain of Gold of a fingers length,
Muffet Insect. Theat. c. 28.
with a lock and key to it; which was so finely and exquisitely wrought, that
the small animal with much ease drew it after him; and yet with the lock, key,
and, chain, did not exceed the weight of a grain: He, I say who considers these
works of Art, and compares with them the subtle contrivances of Nature, will
certainly rest better satisfied in the Mechanical account of the operations,
and diseases of an Animal, than in the Ens Pagoicum, Sen. de Con. and Dissen.
Chym. cum Galen.
Cagastricum, Illiastrum, Archaeus Re^lleum, Chironeum, Evestrum, Yleck,
Trarames, Turban, Leffas, Srannar, Perenda, Zend^, and a thousand such
conjuring unintelligible words of the Chemists; and will plainly see, that
Anatomy is of no less use in the Curation of diseases, than is the
understanding of the springs and Wheels of a Watch, to the man, who undertakes
to mend it; and probably this speculation will make a considering man think it
as possible, with a preparation of Antimony, or Mercury, or any Universal
Medicine, to mend a Clock when it is at fault, as with it to cure all the
diseases belonging to the Body of Man: That the body ought to be Mechanically
considered, not only as to its actions, but also in relation to its Diseases;
is, I think, the Opinion of every sound Philosopher. Des Carts, in his
Treatise of the Passions, gives an account of what it is, wherein a dead Man
differs from a living.

Let us consider, Des Cart de pa^sion. p^rt. 1 Art. c. 6.
(says he) that Death never happens through default of the Soul but only
through the corruption of one or other of the principal parts of our Body. And
let us judge, that the Body of a living man does differ from that of one dead,
only as much as a Clock, or any other Automaton, when it is in good order, and
has within it the Corporal Principle of its motions, for whose use it was
framed, and all other things, which are requisite to its action; from the same
clock or Engine, when it is broken, and the principle of its motions ceases to
act.

The truth of this is abundantly evident to every man's Senses: The shape and
fabric of the Heart and Valves, the waterworks of the Kidneys, the admirable
workman-ship of the Brain and Nerves, and the Artificial Structure of all other
parts do evidently demonstrate the Mechanism of man's Body, and the usefulness,
and necessity of Knowledge in Anatomy, both for the preserving of it in its due
frame, and likewise for the setting it in good order, when it is out of it.
Fits of the Mother, Epilepsies, Apoplexies, Madness, and sundry other diseases
of the Brain and Nervous Parts have usually by ignorant People, been asctibed
to Witchcraft and possession of the Devil. And yet the causes of these
astonishing distempers, may, without much difficulty be understood from an
Anatomical consideration of the Brain and Nerves: The whole structure of which
has been examined with so much industry and sagacity, by the incomparable Dr.
Willis, in his excellent book De Cerebro; in which, the wonderful Make of the
Brain, the turnings and windings of the Vessels and Receptacles; the commerce
by the Nerves, with remote parts; the Chemical production of the Animal
Spirits; and many more rarities of Nature, are so clearly delivered:) that now
a skilful Anatomist may, without vanity, undertake to give a rational Account
of those very strange Distempers and Affections of man's Body; which have
formerly not only amazed the Vulgar, but caused the Roman Senate to break up
their Assemblies, and adjourn their Consultations: Wherefore the Author of
Medela, should, in my opinion, have been more wary in discovering his gross
Ignorance, in this so material a Point, which is the Foundation and
Cornerstone of Physic; and, without which, nothing solid can be established.
And, as for the Reason, why his Touchy-head imagines Anatomy to be of little
use in Physic, Because, forsooth, when the Body is out of order by diseases,
the blood and humors have other Vagaries, than in their usual Channels: I do
freely confess, I do as little understand his Vagaries, as, I believe, he does
the true Motion of the blood, and other juyces.

As for Chymistrie, and his new Medicines and Secrets, wrought out of the fire,
to which M. N. so much pretends; though I am a very great friend to that Art,
and acknowledge, that Physic is indebted to it for many neat and effectual
Remedies; yet I cannot be of that opinion, that by it all Philosophy, Anatomy,
and Method, are to be justled out of the Schools, and the Dispersatories out of
the Shops.

For doubtless, the advantages which came from Chemistry to Medicine, were very
slender and inconsiderable, till it fell into the hands of Rational Learned
Men; who by adapting it to the Atomical Philosophy have made excellent use of
the Analyzing o^ Bodies, in giving an account of the Appearances of Nature;
and, by using Chemical Remedies with good Method, have found a more speedy and
pleasant way o^curing Diseases, than probably was know^ to the Ancients. But it
does not in the leas^ follow from hence, that presently all the Medicines of
the Shops are to be flun^ away, which having been known, and tried by long
experience, (the Mother of all Knowledge,) upon which the Materia Medica is
wholly grounded, are not so lightly to be set-by.

For that judicious Author, Sennert. de con. and dissen. Chymic. cum. Gal Cap.
18.
Sennertus, tells us in his sober Treatise, De Consens. and dissens. Chym. cum
Gal. that Chemists do often too curiously waste both their time and their money,
in preparing those Medicines which Nature has rightly prepared to our hands; as
if Conserves of Roses, and many other, as also Condites and Powders, and
Compounds made of these, were not used in Diseases with great success, and
often with more safety and convenience, than Oils, or Spirits. Which (says he)
I do not speak to the end that Chemical Remedies should be altogether rejected;
which, in their place, deserve their due praise, and oftentimes have a
prerogative before others: But to show that Medicines either whole, or the
common way prepared, are not all venomous, and therefore to be despised; but
that they are of good use in their proper place. And he asks the Chemists,
Whether they do not season the meat which they eat themselves, and give their
Patients, with Spices only powdered, and not with the Essences and distilled
Oils of them. And a little farther in the same Chapter, he tells us, that some
Medicines have their virtues diffused through the whole body, and that they
lose them if there be made a separation of parts; and, What need is there of
using Essences, when a Glyster will do the business? Of the same opinion is
that great inquirer into Nature, Mr. Boil, in his Skeptical Chemist. Mr. B ill
S^^ C^^m. p. 337. and 33^.
There are, (says that learned Gentleman) diverse Concretes, whose faculties
reside in some one or other of those differing substances, that Chemists call
their Sulphures, Salts and Mercuries, and consequently may be best obtained by
Analyzing the Concrete, whereby the designed Principles may be had severed, or
fre^ from the rest; so there are other wherein the noblest properties lodge not
in the Salt, or Sulphur, or Mercury, but depend immediately upon the form, or,
(if you will) result from the determinate structure of the whole Concrete; and
consequently they who go about to extract the virtue out of such bodies, by
exposing them to the violence of fire, do exceedingly mistake, and take the way
to destroy what they would obtain. And he quotes the confession of Barthius, in
his Notes upon Beguinus, Valde absurdum est ex omnibus rebus extracta facere,
salia, quintas essentias; praesertim ex substantiis per se plane vel
subtilibus, vel homogeneis, quales sunt Uniones, Corallia, Moschus, Ambra, etc.
Consonant whereunto (continues Mr. Boil) he also tells us (and vouches the
famous Platerus, for having heartily given the same Advertisement to his
Auditors) that some things have greater virtues, and are better suited to our
humane nature when unprepared, than when they have passed the Chemists fire; as
we see in Pepper, of which some grains swallowed, perform more toward the
relief of a distempered stomach, than a great quantity of the oil of the same
Spice. ^nnertus, in the Chapter which I last quo^d, speaks to the same purpose;
Viresque ^as integras, quales a Natura obtinent, reti^ant, nec ignis vi ac
resolutione quicquam ^niserint; and propterea morbos saepe tollant, ^i chymicis
medicamentis tolli non possunt: ^cut Heurnius refert, se colicos dolores
pla^sse saepe decocto anisi, quos oleo ejusdem destil^to tollere non potuerit.
Id quod etiam in ali^^ accidit. Thus enim integrum curat vul^ra, quae oleo
ejusdem non curantur. Animad. Jo. Zwelfer. p. 782.
Zwel^r, in his Animadversions upon the Augu^n Dispensatory, preferrs the
Powders ^f Pearl, Coral, Hartshorn, and the like, ^r before the Magisteries:
Nay, he says, ^inc and reliqua Magisteria ex Coralliis and ^nsimilibus gemmis
parvi pendo, immo peni^s rejicio. And certainly, there is very ^ood reason why
the bare Powders should ^e of much more virtue than the Ma^steries; for these
being made by an ^timate union of the fluid Salts of the Men^ruum, with the
particles of the body disolved by it, (by which the Menstruum is ^eft insipid,)
those Powders being already ^log'd and saturated with Salts, are ren^ered
thereby unapt to sweeten the acid ^uyces of the stomach; and those which are
mingled with the blood, or to restore an^ refresh the decayed and languishing
fe^ments of the Bowels, upon which score^ these Medicines are usually
administered b^ men who understand their way of Operation. For the same reason
it is, that Powders of Pearl, or Coral, will ferment, an^ boil with spirit of
Vitriol, but the Mag^steries will not. Nor is an over-fondne^ of all things
which do smell of the Furnace^ the cause only why many good Medicine are
deprived of their virtues, and rendere^ ineffectual: But too often likewise of
the ruin and murder of many sick persons, wh^ not being Physicians themselves,
and so n^ able to judge of the ability of the person to whom they commit their
health; a^ often cheated out of their lives, by the i^pudent assertions of
ignorant pretenders (...) Secrets, and Chemical Inventions: In comparison of
which, they despise the who^ Art and Method of administering Physic^ Paracelsus
is taxed by the learned Crato, (...) his Epistle Theodorus Zwingerus, (and y^
that judicious man was no enemy to Chemistry:) Jo C at. Epist.
In multis Rebus-pub. and Aul^ cum nominis mei quadam jactura, Chymi^
Medicamenta sum tutatus, nihil ante 40. a^ nos oleorum distillatorum, nullum
extractu^ nullus succus in pharmacopoliis est repert^ A me autem pharmacopaei
and medici, beneficio ^ei, successu medicationis edocti sunt, ut nunc ^bique ea
parent and iis utantur. Insaniam ^ero Paracelsi (qui summos in Art Magi^ros,
immo ipsam artem medicam propter sua ^cana ut appellat, contemnit and novam
nobis furnis medicinam fabricat, atque discentes bonis Autoribus ad fornaces
ablegat, omnem ^enique seculi nostri excellentiam dejicere stu^et, ut sua
medicamenta extollat) nunquam ^obavi.

And in another Epistle to Thomas Era^s, he tells him what the Emperor's
opini^n was of this Celsus Paracelsus (as M. N. ^arnedly quotes the quibble).

Imperatorem quem a maledicentia, and fal^tate alienissimum esse sciunt omnes
boni, ^aracelsum mendacissimum and impudentissi^um impostorem, qui cum doctis
hominibus ^unquam conversari voluerit, nominasse. The requent miscarriages
which he was guilty ^f; his often bringing slight Distempers, by ^he
application of his Remedies, into dange^ous and mortal Diseases, Sen. de co^.
and diss^n. Chym. cun Gal.
as the Particulars ^re quoted by Sennertus; and then his own ^ickness and
death, which (though he promi^ed almost Immortality to other men) he ^ould not
defer beyond 47 years; nor in the ^ean time with his so much admired skill, ^ee
himself from Contractions and Convulfions, do sufficiently evince, That it is
easie^ for the Chemists, to abound with large Promises, than real Performances.

The unfaithfulness and affected obscurity of their Writings, M^. Boil Scept.
Chym. praef.
is justly reprehended by Mr. Boil, in his Preface to his Sceptica^ Chemist.
These things I add (says he) because a person any thing versed in the Writings
of the Chemists, cannot but discern, by their obscure, ambiguous, and almost
aenigmatical way of expressing what they pretend to teach; that they have no
mind to be understood at all, bu^ by the Sons of Art (as they call them) nor be
understood even by those, without difficult and hazardous trials. And, as the
obscurity of what some Writers deliver, makes it very difficult to be
understood; so the unfaithfulness of too many others, makes it unfit to be
relied on. For though unwillingly, yet must I for the Truths sake, and the
Readers, warn him, Not to be forward to believe Chemical Experiments, when they
are set down only by way of Prescription, and not of Relation. The candid
acknowledgment and warning of this learned Chemist, gives (...) sufficient
Caution to all Sober men, to be wary how they Dote, either upon Notions they
understand not, or Prescriptions which cannot safely be relied upon
(considering Credulity is in no Art of so dangerous consequence, as in Physic)
so much as to reject all Maxims and Remedies in Physic, established by the
long and infallible experience of the World; for those which are recommended,
either by the Inadvertency, or wilful mistake of an undiscerning, or deceitful
Writer. And if this Circumspection ought to be used, even as to the best
Chemical Writers; how much more to Pseudo-chymists, against whom Mr. Mr. Boil
Sc pt. Chym. P^f.
Boil (though it be far from his temper) cannot forbear a just Severity, and,
somewhat more than ordinarily, sharpens his Pen. I am far (says he) from being
an Enemy to the Chemists Art, though I am no Friend to many that disgrace it by
professing it, ( M. N. take notice of that) and persuade them to believe me,
when I declare, That I distinguish betwixt those Chemists that are either
Cheats or but Laborants, and the true Ad^pti.

For my part, I am resolved to be as favorable as it is possible, to M. N. and
his Brethren the Mountebanks, and allow, That a person wholly ignorant of the
Art of Physic, may be possessed of good Remedies, and that a Cure has
sometimes ensued upon the casual application of them. Bu^ notwithstanding this
accidental Success, there can constantly be expected no better performances in
Physic from this man's unskilful administration, than in Limning from a hand
altogether rude, though armed with the Pencils and Colors of Vandike. For,
granting that by chance a Cure may happen (as the foam of a Horse was once
admirably expressed by the casual dash of a Pencil) yet can that be no more
relied upon, than a Duel for the cure of an Aposteme; or the rude embraces of a
Lion, to fright away an Ague. To this purpose, Beguinus gives Advice, and makes
it his Request, That Physicians would not acquaint Mountebanks with his
preparation of Turpeth Mineral. Beguin. Tyr. Chym. l. 2: c. 18.
Suaderem autem (says he) ut tonsores and balneatores nobilissimi hujus
Medicaminis praeparatio Philosophica plane lateret, ab usu hujus ut illegitimo
se abstinerent. Quot enim quaeso ejusmodi homines Mercurio hoc praecipitato,
non Hermetice praeparato, praecipitarunt?

And he quotes the Opinion of that great Chemist Libanius, whose words I will
the rather transcribe, because they very fully declare the Sense, which as well
the Chemists, as the Galenists have, of that fatal Liberty in the Profession of
Physic, which M. N. so hotly and extravagantly pleads for. Illud cavendum
(says Libanius) ne audaculi imperiti in medicando, id adhibeant quod est
medicorum circumspectissimorum exercitatissimorumque: Veluti si essentia ex
sublimato and regulo fiat, si flos ex antimonio, si laudanum ex opio, tu qui
imperitus es methodi medendi and impudens, nec tibi facile nec aliis horum
permit usum, cum temeritate; ut ut s mel atque iterum forte possis, plus
tamen deinceps peccare possis. Nam nobiles Medicinae in manu temerarii hominis,
sunt ut culter, vel fax ardens, in manu pueri aut dementis.

And questionless, as there is more danger that a Child may do mischief with a
Knife of Steel, rather than with one of Bone; the hazard which Men run of their
Lives in taking Chemical Remedies at the hands of Empericks, is so much the
greater, by how much the preparations which they use, are of more force and
virtue.

That Physic may be administered with security to the Patient, it is not only
requisite that the Physician understand the Nature and Force of the Remedy; but
likewise the Constitution and Strength of the Patient, and the Nature and
Motion of the Disease. As to the Nature and Force of Remedies, Experience is
the only true and unerring Mistress, upon whose Credit we can certainly rely,
for the knowledge of the Properties, Effects and Operations of all Medicines in
the World upon the Humane Body. Remedies at first were either found out by
Chance, or learnt from wild Beasts; who, by the kind Instinct of their
Mother-Nature, resorted to them for help, when they were afflicted with
Maladies. Thus the virtue of the Dictamnus of C^eet, to draw shafts and
splinters out of Wounds, was learnt from the Goats of Creet, according to
Virgil, Plutarch, and Pliny.

Dictamnum genetrix, Virg. Aea.
Cretea carpit ab Ida,
Puberibus caulem foliis, and fore comantem
Purpureo: non illa feris incognita capris
Gramina, cum tergo volucres h^sere sagittae.
With her white hand She crops from Cretan I Would, M^. George S^adys T n. Cr^ete.

The Fresh-leav'd Stalk with flower in Purple died:
A Sovereign herb, well known to fearful Deer,
Whose trembling sides the winged Arrows bear.
The Egyptian Ibes was the Inventer of Glysters; a Bird not much unlike the
Stork, and a great Enemy to Serpents; who, filling his Beak with Salt Water,
and spouting it up into his Guts when he was hardbound, taught the World the
convenience of provoking a Stool that way: The Swallows, by applying Celandine
to the Eyes of their Young and by it procuring to them sight, discovered it
first to the use of Men: I might instance in many more particulars, but these
are sufficient. I will grant, that some Remedies have been sound out by
Analogy, from the enquiries of the Smell and Taste; and others possibly, by
resolution of Bodies into their principles. But even these could not be relied
upon, till established by Experience: For if the virtues of many Simples depend
upon the particular texture and disposition of the small Particles (as I have
before proved they do) they will confess very little of their Natures and
Properties to the Chemist, though he torture them ever so much with Fire, and
other Dissolvents. And even in those Bodies; whose Faculties reside in their
Salts or Sulphurs, their Specific virtue (if they diner at all, as most
Chym^sts and Physicians intimate by their Prescriptions that they do) cannot be
known, by obtaining the Principle wherein it is lodged. Mr. Mr. Boil S^p C in.
p. 251.
Boil quotes Helmont, For assigning a virtue of curt^g the Epilepsie, to the
vola il Salt of man's Blood, which is not to be allowed to the volatile Salt of
Urine; and he seems to promise an Account of the same virtue in the Salt of
common Amber as to children, but not grown persons. I do not urge this, to
discourage any person from enquiring into the Nature of Simples (which
certainly is a laudable Industry) but to show, That it is not so easy, as the
Author of Medela would make it, to impart Remedies, they being not in the least
matter of fancy; and that such Medicines which have been established by the
long experience of the enquiring and judicious part of the World, by whole
Colleges and Universities, who have made it the business of their Life, to
inform themselves and others; are not easily to be laid aside, for those which
have been invented by some ignorant Man, nay, possibly, a knowing one; till
they by undergoing the same test of Experience, are allowed by that to be more
effectual, and less inconvenient in all Cases whatsoever. Histories are full of
the frequent Tragedies which have been acted by Mountebanks, in administering
Medicines, whose Nature and Power they understood not. About Two years since,
having visited my honored, learned Friend, Dr. Cox, Physician in Ordinary to
His Majesty, he acquainted me, That he had been lately called to a Citizen of
London, who, upon taking a Vomit from an Emperick, and a Hypercatharsis ensuing
upon it, fell into dismal Convulsions; in which, in despite of the most proper
Remedies, he dyed. I do not wonder, that these sad Effects do often follow,
upon the taking of Physic from ignorant Men: For the Universal Medicin of the
Empericks being usually some or other ill preparation of Antimony in substance,
if it chance not to pass upwards or downwards, but stick in the Coats of the
Stomach, or be entangled in some tough viscous Matter, it being the Nature of
that Mineral to communicate a vomiting quality, after it has impregnated
several Infusions; no wonder, if lying in the Stomach, it continually imparts
to the juyces, which flow thither out of the mass of blood, for a menstruum to
dissolve the Meat, and to those Liquors which are taken in by the mouth, an
emetick virtue, till the Patient, at length, has vomited up his Soul. Upon this
Score, I do not find, that many Physicians are very forward in using Mercurius
Vitae, especially in Pills or a solid Form; which though I have used, and seen
used with good Success; yet, I judge it, given in Substance, not so safe: and
nothing more effectual, than the Infusion of that excellent good preparation of
Antimony, Crocus Metallorum; which (though it be to be met with in the Road of
Dispensatories) with M. N's good leave, is no contemptible Medicin. How much,
in Medicines, Experience is to be valued, and how like a Toleration of
Assassinates it will look, to allow a Liberty to every Quack to make
Experiments upon Men's bodies, will farther appear, if we consider, That the
mixing of Things harmless in themselves, may sometimes produce a Poison. Thus
out of Vitriol, Salt, Mercury, and Niter, is made Sublimate; of Vitriol, Niter,
and Alum, Aqua Fortis; which, though made of innocent Ingredients, are
Mixtures most destructive to the Body of Man. And, I know not why in other
Mixtures the same thing may not come to pass, which may never be considered by
a bold and unwary Experimenter of Medicines; nor known, but at the price of a
Murder.

In the next place, There is an absolute Necessity, that he who will venture to
give Physic, be able to judge of the Strength and Constitution of the Sick
person whom he undertakes, if he expects with Safety and Success to manage the
matter. Plutarch in a Dialogue, introduces Phaedrius and Socrates discoursing
to this purpose.

Socrat: If any one should tell me, Truly I know how to apply these things to
the Body, with which I can (when I please) make it hot or cold, vomit and
purge, and cause other Evacuations; upon the understanding of which, I profess
my self a Physician, and affirm, That any man instructed with this Knowledge,
may be one. What Answer do you think a Sober man would return to him?

Phaedr: Truly none at all, but ask him, Whether he likewise understood, to
whom, and when, and in what proportion every one of these Medicines are to be
given? of which if he be ignorant, the man must certainly be mad; who upon the
Score, either of Gleanings from Authors, or for having been present at the
Cures of some Physician, and understands nothing of the Art, thinks he is
presently become a Physician. Many excellent, and in the hands of Artists, most
safe Medicines, have suffered in their Credit, by falling into the hands of such
persons, who either by overdosing, or not suiting them to the Temper, Age and
Sex of their Patients, have with them killed, instead of curing. Sennert. de
Con. and Dissent. Chym. cum Gal. c. 13.
Sennertus tells us, That he knew Two Children killed by Two Old Women, with
Oil of Amber. One of the Children being scarce Ten days old, after the Woman
had given it some drops of Oil of Amber, broke out all over the Body, as if
scalding water had been poured upon it, and presently dyed. The other, more
adult, having taken the same Oil, dyed vomiting and scouring.

That very safe and effectual Remedy, Mercurius dulcis, so often celebrated in
Riverius, under the name of Calomelanos (a name put upon it by Sir Theodore
Mayern, from one Faire-black his man, who used to prepare it, as I find it in
his Letter to my Father) has, in the giving of it to some Bodies and
Constitutions, been accompanied with very ill Accidents. Sennertus tells of a
Learned Physician (a Friend of his) who had often given Mercurius dulcis to his
Patients with very good Success, Sennert. de Con. and Dissent. Chym. com Gal.
c. 18.
and yet was in danger to have dyed by the taking of it himself. And I have
observed, That this Medicin does best agree with those, whose Stomachs abound
with Crudities, as Children; and not so well with those persons, whose Stomachs
and Blood abounds with fluid Salts, and are troubled with acidity, and
sharpness of their Liquors. For Mercurius dulcis being made of sublimate
Corrosive, and Quicksilver, by the subliming of which together, the sharp edges
of the Corrosive Salts are blunted and abated; and so the Medicin sweetened, and
made harmless; there is danger that in the stomach which abounds with
Vitriolick Salts (for some I have seen, whose Vomits will gnaw Iron) the
dulcified Mercury. may again be reduced to be Corrosive.

In the last place, That a Disease must be known, before it can be cured, is so
generally received a Maxim, that it is become Proverbial with the Vulgar, That
the knowledge of the Disease, is half the Cure. What skill in Anatomy and
Philosophy is required to the knowledge of Diseases, I have already Discoursed;
to which, if I shall add the Doctrines of Pulses, Urines, and all other
Semeioticks, it will not appear so easy a thing, to understand the several
Distempers of the Body of Man, that it may be presumed, that every Old Woman or
Jugler can cure them.

The time and motion of a Disease, are of so great moment in the giving of
Physic, that the very same Remedy which saved a man's Life to day, may in the
same Disease, at a different time, kill another to morrow. Physicians have
taken great pains in distinguishing the times of Diseases, and proportioning
Rules and Remedies to them. The Learned Dr. Willis, W^llis de Feb. c. 10.
in his Book De Febribus, tells us, of what grand Importance the consulting of
the Pulse and Urine is in putrid continual Fevers; and clearly Demonstrates,
That the Administration of Vomits, Purgers, Sweaters, Cordials, or Narcoticks,
without observance of due Directions taken from them, is of so dangerous
Consequence, as that any of these Medicines unseasonably given, will cause or
hasten the death of the Patient. Willis de Feb. c. 11.
In the 11 Chapter, the Doctor is very careful to set down what is to be done
in the several times of the Disease; That in the Augment, both Purgers and
Sweaters (which make too great a disturbance in the blood) are as dang^rous and
destructive, as blasts of wind are to a House, whose Rafters are all in a
flame; and in the State, the motion of Nature is to be watched, nothing is
unadvisedly to be attempted; Blood-letting, and strong Purgations are
altogether forbidden. No^ is there only a necessity of consulting a Learned
Physician in Diseases which are Acute, but even in those which are Chronical;
nay, inasmuch as Agues, in which Empirical Remedies carry the Vogue. Can any
Cure certainly be effected, except the very Tools of the Mountebanks be managed
by a judicious hand? For in Tertians, Plasters to the Wrists, Breast, and
other parts, seldom stop the Fit, except Purging or Vomiting; or (if it be
required) Bleeding has first with judgment been used, as Dr. Willis observes,
and I have found most true by daily experience. Willis de Feb. c. 4.
Quotidians and Quartans require much more skill in the management of them,
there being several more intentions to be driven at than in Tertians, which
require a rational Artist to apprehend and prosecute. I might run through all
the Diseases in man's Body, and quote all the Cautions in Ludovicus Septalius,
and others, to be used in the Cure of them, to farther evince, That Learning
and Art are much more requisite to the preserving and restoring of Health, than
affected Ignorance, and impudent Pretensions to Secrets and Revelations which
are not at all in Nature. But having proved at large, That the Learned
Physicians, have been the only Improvers of the Art of Physic; That the great
Improvements in Physic, have been upon the Score of the Discoveries in
Anatomy; That skill in Anatomy, is most necessary to the understanding and cure
of Diseases; That Chemistry has been rendered serviceable to Physic, only by
the rational Physician and Philosopher; That Medicines are often spoiled by
Chemical preparations; That Chemical Medicines, by the confession of the best
Chemists, are to be used with method, and are dangerous in the hands of
unskilful men; That the Books of Chemists cannot be relied upon, because they
are obscure, and unfaithful; That the bragging of Pseude-Chymists, can much
less be credited; That it is not easy for them to experiment Medicines, nor
invent new ones; That Physic cannot be administered, without the evident
destruction of men's Lives, except the Physician understand the Nature and Force
of the Remedy; the Constitution and Strength of the Patient; the Nature and
Motion of the Disease. Having, I say, proved these particulars, I have answered
all the grounds upon which M. N. pleads for a Liberty in the profession of
Physic; and moreover Demonstrated, That that Liberty tends as little to the
good of Mankind, as a Pestilence, War, or what is most destructive, to the
Safety and Being of Humane Nature.

CHAP. II.
IN his second Chapter, M.N. pretends to prove, That there is so great an
alteration in the Diseases of this present time, from what they were in former,
as to make void and useless the whole Art of Physic delivered down to us from
the Ancients: But I do not question to make it appear, That the difference in
Diseases both in relation to time and place, is not so great as he would make
it; nor so considerable, but that a rational Physician may make very good use
of their Methods, Rules, and Medicines, in the Time and Country wherein we live.

I do not at all question, that Diseases here in England, are something
different from those of the same kind in Greece, Italy, France, and Spain; and
that they may in some particulars vary from the Descriptions left us by the
Ancients, by reason that the Countries wherein they lived, and made their
Observations, have a very different influence upon the Bodies and Constitutions
of the Inhabitants of those parts, from what ours have upon us. But, that the
Variety is to be ascribed to the alteration in time, rather than the difference
of Climate and Diet, I very much doubt. I think it no very absurd thing to
believe, That Diseases here in England observed the same motions, and afflicted
men with the same Symptoms which now they do, even in the time of Hippocrates,
or Galen; only allowing, that some Chronical Distempers may be somewhat altered
by the change of ou^ way of living, and Diet; which being now more delicate,
soft, and luxurious, must be confessed to render our Bodies more obnoxious to
Infirmities, than the wholesome plainness of our rough Ancestors. But as to
Epidemical Diseases, I suppose that then, as now, they differed almost every
Year according to the variety of the weather, and temperature of the seasons;
and according to the impressions which the excess of the qualities of the
several Years made upon the blood, no less in their times, than ours, their
Epidemical Fevers were accompanied with odd and new Symptoms. I know well, the
French Disease is since come in upon us from America; but, that there is no
body now free from a spice of it, and that it bears a great share in all
Distempers, I have so much respect for my Country, and Mankind, as to think,
That no man but M. N. will assert, who (I suppose) measures every man's body by
his own; and like an Icterical man, sees all Objects yellow, because his own
eyes are of that color.

As to his instance in Agues, which, he says, give the greatest bafflle to
Physicians; I suppose those baffled persons, to be men of his Rank, and Ability
in Physic. For I have found it by sundry Experiments to be most true, That a
Tertian may be cured as easily and constantly as any other Disease, if a right
method be observed, before the blood be too much depraved by ill Diet, or
unseasonable Physic.

The Author of Medela could not have pitched upon a Disease more unluckily for
himself, there being no Distemper which suits more exactly with the
descriptions of the ancient Physicians, than this. As for the authority of
Sennertus in this point, though he himself be plain, M. N. either through
Ignorance, or want of Sincerity, has falsely rendered him; for, in that place,
where he says, Plurimae Febres, quae hic aegros infestant, omnes notas febrium
a Graecis and Arabibus descriptas non obtinent; it is manifest that the
Particle hic, does not relate to time, but place, and that Febres is not to be
Translated Agues, but Fevers in general; for it immediately follows, Sen^ert.
pr. l. 3. p 5 S^ct. 2. c. 4.
Sunt autem Febres eae varii generis; quandoque enim sunt lentae and continuae.
quandoque intermittentes. Sennertus in this place, discourses concerning the
Fevers of Scorbutical persons, and the degenerating of Fevers sometimes into
the Scurvy, in that part of Germany wherein he lived: But his Design is not in
the least to prove (as any man may find who will consult him) That Diseases of
late in general, (and much less Agues in particular) have been wholly altered
from their former Nature, and are grown incurable by those methods by which
they formerly were mastered. As to Blood-letting, which M. N. so much condemns
in the Ancients, and will not admit of in putrid Fevers; I must tell him, he
will make foul work with his Patients, if he be so sparing of his Launcet: For
it is known to all the World, and confirmed by the experience and practice of
both ancient and modern Physicians, That in putrid Fevers, Phlebotomy is one
of the greatest and most effectual Remedies, without which, the practice of
Physic in Fevers, cannot but be most lame and imperfect; and as to his
Objection against A^icen, for commanding Bleeding when the Urine is thick and
red, I know, in many cases, it is to be justified; but it must be ordered by a
more judicious Physician than M. N. who does not at all distinguish between the
times of a Disease, nor (for any thing I can perceive) know a water highly
tinctured by a dissolution of abundance of the Sulphur which is fired in the
Fever, from the water of one who is Scorbutical, which often, without a
Fever, acquires a color intensely red, from a large quantity of lixivat Salt.
I doubt, Bleeding was untimely administered to those whom he observed to grow so
much worse after it, either in the state, or declining of the Disease, or when
the mass of blood was low and poor, and the body cachectical; in which cases,
Galenists themselves forbid Bleeding. If he consult the Learned Doctor Willis,
he will find him tell him, Willis de Feb. c. 11.
That at the beginning of a continual putrid Fever, care is to be taken, that
the Fever be immediately extinguished, that a stop should be given to the
farther inflaming of the fired parts of the Sulphur. To which end,
Blood-letting is in the first place most conducible; for by this means the
Blood is eventilated, and the Sulphurous Particles which were got into a body,
and ready to burst into a flame, are dispersed, as when a new Hay-reek is
preserved from burning, which is just ready to be on fire, by flinging the Hay
abroad, and laying it open to the Air.

And in intermittent Fevers, he tells us, That by bleeding, Willis de F^b. c.
4.
the blood is cooled, and reduced to its natural temper; and he instances in a
young man of a choleric Constitution, in a Tertian, whom, being not able to
bear Vomiting, he cured by Bleeding. But of this Subject enough at present,
since I intend in another place to handle it more fully.

But now, Risum teneatis, amici? Enter M. N. upon the Stage, Out-quacking Scoto
Mantuano in Ben. Johnson; and that he may recommend himself to the shrivel'd
Sallad-eating Artizans, accosts them with this most elegant piece of
Mountebankry, which (though I suppose it be to be met with, set out for the
better advantage with Teeth and Scarlet, at the corner of every street) I will
take the pains to Transcribe out of his learned Writings.

Forasmuch as abundance of People grow sickly, and languish under the
appearance, it may be, of a Consumption, a Gowt, a Dropsy, an Ague, a slow
Fever, and sometimes an acute one; Sore-eyes, Green Sickness, and indeed of
all manner of Diseases; which (when the other ordinary means have been long
used in vain) have at length been relieved by an orderly use of such
antivenereous Remedies as I have on purpose invented; the Nature whereof, is to
fight against Humors both great and small, in old or young, which have been any
way touched with the venereal tincture, either through their own default, or by
Sigillation of th^se seminal Principles which contribute toward the Being of
Mankind in the Act of Generation. -- Et a tergo nondum finitus Orestes. And at
this rate he goes on, in commendation of his Secrets, in comparison of which,
No Indian Drug must ere be famed
Tobacco, Sassafras, not named; Ben. John's. Fox.

Nor yet of Guaicum one Small Stick Sir,
Nor Raymund Lullies great Elixir.


But I will have done with his Buffoneries, and pass to discourse more
seriously of the Scurvy; which Disease (without being guilty of a Heresy in
Physic) I am very apt to believe to have been as ancient in Britany, and other
Northern Maritim Countries, as the very first Inhabitants; and that ever since
men were mortal, and subject to Diseases, the Climate and temperature of the
Air in these Countries, did dispose the blood and humors of those who breathed
it to that Dyscrasie, or ill temper which we now call the Scurvy; and so
rendered it a malady Endemial to the people.

That this Disease is the same with the Stomocace and Scelotyrbe of Pliny,
seems very evident; for that Author tells us, That (...) cure of that Distemper
was performed (...) called Britannica, which they of (...), where the Romans
were encamped, showed to the Soldiers; and, that this Britannica was
Scurvy Grass, and named either from the Britains teaching the Germans the use
of it, or from the quantity which grew in Brittany, is most probable. For Mr.
Caenbd. Brit. Kent.
Cambden in his Britannia, observes it to grow very plentifully in the Marshes
of Kent, and affirms, That it was the opinion of Physicians, that that was the
Brittannica of Pliny.

Sennertus is positively of the Opinion, That the Stomacace, S^nnert. pr. l 3.
p. 5. S^ct. 2.
and Scelotyrbe of Pliny, are the very Scurvy; for that even in the same place
where Caesar then encamped, that Disease is now very frequent, and most easily
contracted and propagated; and he doubts very much whether Pliny did rightly
assign the cause of those Symptoms which afflicted the Roman Soldiers in their
Mouths and Legs, to be the drinking of the water, since that now in Germany
there is no Fountain known to be endued with such a power or property; and that
Pliny himself writes, That they did not presently, but after two Years, fall
into this Disease; which more probably was caused by their ill Diet, and the
natural disposition and contagion of the place, with which the Romans being
altogether unacquainted, knew not what else to assign for the cause of this
Distemper, except the drinking of the water; the impurity of which, I confess,
might possibly concur in corrupting of the Blood, and producing the Scurvy.

That the Scurvy was anciently Endemial to the more Northern parts of the
World, and consequently of no new upstart Original, may be farther argued from
the very nature and formality of that Disease, and the common general cause
which produces it. That the Scurvy consists in the Bloods being degenerated
from its spirituous Balsamic, and volatilized condition, into a salt, sharp,
and austere Liquor, wherein the volatile Spirits are either evapotated, or
deprest; and the gross Salts either being disjoined from the rest of the
Principles, run together, and are said to be in the state of Fluidity, or
continuing only their Combination with the earthy parts of the Blood, render it
wholly fixed and unactive; in which states it becomes either sharp and eager,
like Vinegar, or dead and flat, S^nnert. (...) l. 3 ^. 5 S^ct. 2. c. 2
like decayed Drinks; is the Opinion of Sennertus, and Dr. Willis de Feb. c. 1.
Willis, those Learned Authors.

And indeed I do not find that any Hypothesis gives so satisfactory an account
of the Phenomenon and Symptoms of that Disease, as this by them assigned; for
if we run through the affections of the animal, the vital, and the natural
Faculties, from whence Eugalenus, and other Writers have drawn all their
Di^gnosticks, we shall find, they may be all very naturally derived from the
Saline Dyscrasie of the mass of Blood, whereby it is rendered unfit to separate
the heterogeneous Particles both of the alimentary juice, which is perpetually
supplied from the stomach, and of the Air drawn in by the Lungs; which, though
it furnish the Blood with a Nitre most necessary to life, yet oftentimes it
comes impregnated with Atoms very destructive to the Being of Man; which if
they be not seasonably exterminated, and separated by the active and volatile
spirits of the Blood, in time easily corrupt, and destroy the temper and
mixture of that Liquor. Hence disorderly Fermentations, Obstructions,
Spontaneous Weariness, Difficulties of Breathing, Varieties of Pains, Defects
in Motion, Palpitations, Giddiness, Paralytical Affects, Spots, Scurfs, and
many more Distempers reckoned up in Eugalenus, and other Writers; which of
necessity must afflict the body of man, when the blood is once become unfit to
maintain a regular flame in the heart, and duly to supply the nervous parts
with a soft juice, and well rectified animal spirit. Wherefore I make little
question, but that even in the time when Julius Caesar invaded this Island; a
man, who had been long sick of a Quartan, or tedious Fever, especially toward
the Seacoasts, must in time have grown Scorbutical: For in long sickness, the
volatile Salt of the blood is much wasted, as appears from Mr. Boyle's
Observation in his Essay of the Unsuccessfulness of Experiments, That Chemists
assure him, Mr. Boyle's Ph. Essays.
(who have occasion to distill it in great quantity) that they find a notable
Disparity betwixt Vrines; that of healthy and young men abounding much more
with volatile Salt, than that of sickly, and aged persons. And though in Spain,
Italy, and other warm Countries, men do not, after tedious Fevers and Quartans
(notwithstanding the volatile Salt of their blood must be allowed to be
confiderably wasted) usually fall into the Scurvy; yet the Air in these
Northern parts of the World, G^ss^nd. Epicur. Philos. Metcor.
abounding with fixed Salt (to which Gassendus ascribes the freezing, and
^ongealing virtue of the Wind) is apt to dispose, and alter the blood into the
same temper, if it be not furnished with a sufficient quantity of volatile Salt
to maintain its own Liquor from too much fixation, and to subdue and volatilize
those Salts of the Ambient Air, which the Lungs perpetually draws in,
andmingles with the mass of blood.

For, that Respiration is necessary to life, not upon the score of cooling the
blood and Heart (since then Fishes might live in water, which is colder without
Air, which yet many of them cannot do) but for the drawing in of Nitre to keep
afoot the fermentation of the Heart, Ent. Apol. pro Circ. p. 98.
is the Opinion of the Learned Doctor Ent, and other sound Philosophers. And
Fernelius is inclinable to that Opinion, Fernel. de Calore innat. p. 4. c. 2.
where he says, Si nulla in nobis esset tenuis and spirituosa substantia, vix
ulla profecto nos ad inspirandum necessitas impelleret. Now if this be true (as
is most probable) I suppose the Air in the Countries which are infested with
the Scurvy, to afford a Nitre to the blood less pure and volatile, and more
infected with adventitious Salts, than that which is breathed in Countries free
from that Distemper. That there is this difference in Nitres, Mr. Boil
observes; Mr. Boyle's Phi. Essays.
and that the Saltpeter of East India is much to be preferred before that of
Europe; and that Barbary Niter, before it is refined, abounds very much with an
adventitious Salt, which tastes much like Sea Salt. From which difference of
Niters in the Air, I conclude, That the firing of the blood in the Heart, and
the fermentation of it afterward in the Vessels, may be so diversified, as to
cause all the Symptoms observable in the Scurvy. It is farther to be Noted,
That the chief Specificks used in the cure of this Disease, are such, which
perform their effect by the volatile Salt with which they abound, and with which
they impregnate the flat and languishing blood; such are generally all things
which strike the Tongue and Nose with a quick, smart, and brisk taste and
smell; which though they for the present give relief, and change the habit of
the body to the better, yet do they seldom make so perfect a cure, but that
upon the intermission of the use of them, the Air, by its ill Impressions,
reduces in short time the blood to the Scorbutic, or Saline Dyscrasie, from
which it is no longer able to defend its self, than it is inspired with the
nimble, and volatile Salts of those anti-Scorbutick Remedies. The general cause
then of this Endemial Disease the Scurvy, being the constitution of the Air is
peculiar to the Northern parts of the World, and there appearing no reason why
we should believe that to be altered for the worse in our times, from what it
was in former; I shall be apt to conclude, That it always had the same effects
upon the bodies of those men who breathed it, and that anciently, as well as in
our times, it produced the Scurvy in those Bodies; which through Errors in
Diet, want of Exercise, or antecedent Diseases, it found disposed to receive it.

As to the increase of it of late in the Bills of Mortality (as that ingenious
person Mr. Grant has observed) I suppose, since the Scurvy has been familiarly
taken notice of, and discoursed by the Physicians, (which has not been long)
the name has from them been derived down to the Nursekeepers and Searchers; and
is grown so common in their mouths, that Diseases which either they understand
not, or have a mind to conceal, are now often given in under the name of the
Scurvy.

The Rickets is, I think, very rightly supposed by the Learned Doctor Glisson,
to be a Disease wholly new, and to have had for one of its chief, its
procatactick Causes, the Peace, Security, and Plenty which the Nobility and
Gentry of this Nation had long enjoyed, immediately before the first breaking
forth of it: Glisson. de Rachid. p^. 241.
From whence they had addicted themselves to a more soft, delicate, and
debauched way of living; and by that means, contracted a constitution of body
more effeminate, flabby, and unfirm, than their Ancestors; who, by continual
Toils, Wars, Dangers, and other Manly Exercises, not only preserved their own
strength of body, and generosity of mind, but also derived it entire to their
Children. But I do not find, that it is observed by any able Physician, That
the face and appearance of it, is in the least altered from that in which it
discovered its self at its first eruption; neither is it entered into any
stricter complication with the Pox and Scurvy, than formerly. Glisson. de
Rachid. c. 20.
These being Diseases (as Doctor Glisson himself tells us) very little akin,
and only by accident sometimes meeting in the same body. For the increase of
the Consumption in the Bills of Mortality, Mr. Grant himself gives so
sufficient a Reason, that we need go no farther to enquire the cause of it, nor
to ascribe it to the alteration in the nature of that Disease, since he
affirms, That almost all who dye of the French Disease, are put into the Bills
of Mortality, under the name of Consumption. For upon enquiry, he says, he
found, That all mentioned to dye of the French Pox, were returned by the Clerk
of St. Giles 's, and St. Martins in the Fields, dead of the Consumption; from
whence he concludes, Grant. Bills Mortal. c. 3.
That only hated persons, and such whose very Noses were eaten off, were
reported by the Searchers to have dyed of this Malady.

The Stopping of the Stomach, I can imagine to be nothing else but the Disease
which Physicians call Asthma, or Dyspnaea, because I find not the least mention
of this very frequent Malady in the Weekly Bills; and that I observe there is
nothing more usual with the Vulgar in their complaints to Physicians, than to
assign those Distempers to their stomachs, which properly belong to their Lungs.

The Rising of the Lights, is (I think) truly enough believed by M. N. to be,
that frequent Symptom, which is vulgarly called Suffocatio uterina, or (...).
And I am not of Opinion, that that Suffocation is only the proper affect of
Women, and that solely it is caused from the disturbance of the Womb: For I
have seen some men very much troubled with a rising up in their Throats, and
especially in Hypocondriacal Distempers, no less apprehensive of being choked,
than Hysterical Woe-

It is worth the taking notice of in this place, that the Author of Medela, who
everywhere else inveighs so bitterly against the Aristotelean and Galenick
Philosophy, when he pretends to give some account of the reasons and causes of
these Symptoms, for want of truer apprehensions of his own, shelters himself
under the very weakest, and most exploded part of that Philosophy. And flies to
the pitiful and jejune notions of Vapors raised in the Lower-belly, especially
about the Spleen in the stomach, and about the Midrif, and in the Cavity of the
Omentum, which must needs, whilst they continue there, hinder the free motion
of the Midrif. And, a little farther (that there may be no scruple left of his
Ignorance in Anatomy) he acquaints us with the playing of the Scorbutic
malignant Vapors through the Veins and Arteries to the Lungs, and by
communication thence to the heart: Which Opinion is so contrary to the Doctrine
of Circulation, that there is scarce a Butcher who is not able better to inform
him; and he may learn at every Shambles (for it is not fit he should profane a
Theater) that not one drop of blood enters the Lungs, before it has passed the
right Ventricle of the heart.

And now, by reason this is a Subject very well worthy of a more accurate
Disquisition, and the Account which M. N. has pretended to give, seems very
lame and unsatisfactory, I will beg leave to digress, and offer some
apprehensions which I have concerning the Hysterical Passion, and other
Distempers, which seem to come very near it, and agree in many of the Symptoms
and Accidents.

A Digression concerning the Hysterical Passion.
THough the Disease called Hysterica Passio, be by almost all Authors treated
of as only peculiar to Women, and proceeding only from the distemperature of
the Womb; yet (as I have before observed) it may, upon grounds drawn from
Reason and Experience, be very truly affirmed, That Men also are liable to most
of the Symptoms of it, and that even in Women they are often caused when the
Womb is not in the least concerned in the guilt. And the reason, why this Sex
is more frequently than that other, afflicted with this Malady, may very well
be ascribed to their more delicate constitution, and soft texture of their
nervous parts, whereby they become more liable to convulsive motions; and upon
the vellicating and twitching of any one part endued with exquisite sense, to
have Convulsions communicated to the whole nervous System from whence the whole
frame of the Body is put into disorder; as we see Clocks and Watches, whose
Springs and Wheels are contrived with too subtle and nice workmanship, are
oftener in fault, than those of more plain work.

For the better understanding of the Nature of this Disease, and of the Causes
from whence all the Symptoms do flow, it will not be improper to give those
Descriptions of it which are delivered by Authors, and of the Accidents which
in some particular persons have occurred to my own observation. The Paroxysms,
or Fits of this Disease, in some move regularly, and return at certain
set-times; in others, are uncertain, and wandering. Some persons they invade in
an instant; in others, they give notice and warning by certain signs, which
forerun the Fit, and are a Prologue to the Tragedy. As a dullness of Spirits,
Laziness, Faintness, Paleness of Face, Sadness of Countenance. The Parties
press their Belly with their hands, and perceive something to rise up, to their
apprehensions as big as a Cannon-Bullet; their Legs fail them, and tremble;
they find something rise up to their Throat, ready to choke them. Then they
grow drowsy, lose their understanding; some laugh, others weep; some, do both:
Besides, they find a gnawing pain at the mouth of their Stomach, a loathing of
Meat, a pain and Swelling of their Belly, a rumbling in their Sides under the
Ribs. They have a weak Pulse, a trembling at the Heart, a pain in the Head, a
redness in their Lips, Face and Eyes; which are sometimes distorted, sometimes
so fast shut, that they can hardly be opened: And being now high in the Fit,
they are ready to be strangled, are deprived of Voice, Sense, and Motion,
except such as is Convulsive; some cry out with a despairing Voice, and
presently fall down for dead; their Pulse is then very weak, and sometimes none
to be felt. When the Fit is going off, their Cheeks redden, they recover their
Senses; their Eyes, with a very dull and heavy Aspect, are opened; and at
length, fetching deep sighs, and sometimes pouring forth showers of tears, they
come to themselves. This is the Picture of that dismal Disease which most
frequently afflicts poor miserable Women (though Men are not exempted from it.)
In some, all or most of these Symptoms meet; in others, only the strangling, or
danger of being choked, with some other Accidents, are observable. But
generally, the Fits are so terrible, and amazing to them, who consider not the
reasons of these affections, that by the Vulgar, the persons subject to them,
are believed to be bewitched, or possessed by the Devil.

The ancient Physicians do with one consent deliver, That Seed, and menstruous
Blood, corrupted in the Womb, and Genital Parts, do send forth malignant
Vapors, which with violence carry up the Womb against the Diaphragm, and Organs
of (...) spiration, and thereby suddenly stop the motion of the Heart and
Lungs; and from this impetuous motion of the Womb, they suppose to be caused
that sense of a Globe rising upward in the Belly. But they who have so much
insight in Anatomy, as to know, That the Womb is immoveably fixed to its place
by Ligaments, and that in Virgins it is usually not much bigger than a Walnut;
and do consider, that in Women with Child, the Womb presses upon the very
stomach, and yet never causes these Accidents: And, that oftentimes in Dropsies
of the Womb, that part is extended to a vast bigness, and is full of putrid
Humors; and yet none of these Suffocations, or other Accidents, are caused.
They (I say) who consider this, cannot allow, that these stupendous Symptoms
can be produced by that cause.

The Learned Doctor Highmore in his Exercitation upon the Hysterical Passion,
having examined all the Hypotheses invented either by the ancient or modern
Physicians, Highm. de Passion. and Hysterica.
to solve the Phenomenon of this Distemper, and finding them all very
insufficient to give a satisfactory Account, delivers most ingenuously his own
Opinion, and supposes all the Symptoms to be caused by an overstuffing of the
Ventricles of the Heart, and Vessels of the Lungs, with thin, servous, and
fermenting blood; which does so distend, and fill them, that the Lungs are
thereby rendered unfit to comply with the motion of the Diaphragm, and Chest,
and the Heart disabled to discharge its self by its Pulses, of the burden which
oppresses it, though it attempts to rescue its self by more frequent
pulsations: and from hence necessarily to follow, first, A difficulty of
Breathing, and then a Suffocation; which that Nature may avoid, she calls to
her Succor, the Animal Faculty, which (lest she perish together with the Vital)
pours forth the whole force and strength of her spirits, though in so much
disorder, that by their confused Sallies, those irregular motions are caused in
the Body which men call Convulsive. This is the account (according to my best
apprehension of his meaning) of the descriptive Definition which that excellent
person gives of this Disease. And I am so much of his Opinion, as to believe,
That very often a Dyscrasie, or Distemper of the Blood, and probably of the
Serum or Whey of it, is one cause of this Distemper. But I beg his pardon, if I
am apt to believe, That even then, when these Fits are caused from a Serous
Dyscrasie in the Blood, they are rather to be attributed to the Impurities and
sharp Salts which are either cast off upon the Brain, and from thence
distributed through the Nerves into remote parts of the Body; or else upon some
of the Bowels, where those pungent juices pricking and vellicating the
extremities of the Nerves, cause the original and whole system to participate
of their disorders; than to the Bloods stuffing and distending the Vessels of
the Lungs, and Heart. For besides, that there are many Women Cachectical and
Hydropical, whose Vessels are filled with little else but waterish Blood and
Whey, who are notwithstanding very free from Fits of the Mother; It is often
observed, that Women of a ruddy Complexion, who have a brisk and lively heat in
their Blood, and that rich with spirits, which purges its self every Month in
its constant periods, are oftten miserably afflicted with Hysterical Paroxysms:
For they are not seldom such as have an excellent good appetite, and digest
their meat well; whose Lungs are not flabby, weak, or disposed to a
Consumption; and whose Blood, when it is let out of their Veins, and settled, is
observed to be thick, and full of Fibers; all which are Qualifications quite
contrary to those which are required by Dr. Highmore's Hypothesis, (if I
mistake him not) to render a person liable to Hysterical Passions.

Moreover (in my Opinion) crude and waterish Blood is altogether unfit to be
set so impetuously on fire, as to cause so extravagant a Fermentation in the
Ventricles of the Heart, that by overstretching the Lungs, they should be
unable to disburden themselves of the Blood. For we find, that Cachectical and
Hydropical persons, and Maids in the Green Sickness, are troubled with a
shortness of Breath upon Exercise, and walking up steep Places or Stairs, which
undoubtedly is caused, for that the Blood of such persons being thin and
waterish, and wanting its due proportion of the sulphurous and inflammable
part, does not afford a sufficient quantity of vital Oil to the Lamp of the
Heart; and therefore when upon exercise and motion, there is a greater quantity
of Blood than ordinarily sent into the Heart, that being not well rarefied, and
fired in the right Ventricle, passes not so swiftly through the Lungs to
theleft, as it ought, to make room for that which is to succeed; so that at the
same time the Lungs and Heart are overburdened, upon which a difficulty of
Breathing, and a beating and throbbing at the Heart must necessarily ensue.
Besides, in Fevers, where the Blood is most of all rarefied, and fermented
(except the matter of the Disease be cast upon the Brain) Hysterical Symptoms
do not constantly happen; and yet the sulphurious part of the Blood fired, is
much more apt to fill and distend the Chambers of the Heart, and Vessels of the
Lungs, than the Whey.

It is farther observable, That Women, who have their Courses too frequently,
and vent by the Womb overgreat quantities of Blood, are often troubled with
Hysterical Fits; and some even after so large Haemorrhages, that there has been
more Reason to believe, they had not Blood enough left to maintain the
Circulation, than to suspect the Lungs and Heart could be oppressed with it.
Riverius has an Observation of a Maid, River. Ob cent. 1. ob. 94.
who (having her menstruous Flux in so violent a manner, that in the space of
two hours she voided four or five Pints of Blood) fell into so terrible a Fit
of the Mother, that she lay without speech as one dead, and yet had her eyes
open, and showed with her hand that she was strangled.

These, and other Reasons, seem to argue, That the Animal Constitution (I use
Dr. Glysson's word) is primarily affected in this Disease, Glisson. de R^chid.
p. 19.
and the heart and lungs only secondarily, and by consent; and that the
disorders of the vital parts, as well as the rest of Hysterical Symptons, are
merely convulsive motions. Consonant to this, Dr. Willis in his most admirable
Treatise of the Brain and Nerves, gives an excellent account how the Lungs come
to be affected in Hysterical and Hypochondriacal Paroxysms, in these words.

Si quando nervos pneumonicos a causa morbifica affectiones Spasmodicae
afflixerint, ita ut motibus inordinatis convulsi arterias and venas quas
amplectuntur, perperam constringant aut huc illuc contrahant; propterea Sanguis
aut pulmonibus nimis exulans eos flaccescere ac in se concidere facit, adeo ut
aerem copiose attrahentes, ipsum haud facile reddant; vel quod crebrius usu
venit, Sanguis intra pulmones detentus, ibidemque stagnans eos infercit ac diu
rigidos tenet, ut aerem inspirare nequeant. Vtriusque generis Symptomata in
affectibus Hystericis, and quibusdam Hypochondriacis passim contingunt. Quinimo
interdum ipsa Bronchia pari nervorum Spasmo convelluntur, ac in motu suo
praepediuntur, quo minus debito modo aerem inspirent, exspirentque prout in
paroxysmis Asthmaticis cernitur cujusmodi affectus saepenumero a nervorum vitio
sine insita quavis pulmonum dyserasia producuntur. Willis Nervorum Descrip. c.
24.
In the same Chapter he acquaints us, how the affections and motions of the
Heart are produced by the influence of the Animal Spirits, through the
intercostal and eighth pare of Nerves; and that the tremblings and disorderly
vibrations of the Heart, which evidently differ from its pulsifick motions, are
caused from the violent Succussions and Convulsions of the Pericardium.

To evince the necessity of the influx of the Animal Spirits to maintain the
motion of the Heart, he tells us, That he had often made this Experiment in
Dogs when they were alive. Having opened the Skin about the Neck, he tied both
the Trunks of the Par Vagum with very strict Ligatures; upon which, the Dog
seemed to be stunned, lost wholly his voice, and fell into Convulsions about the
Hypochondria, with a great trembling at his heart. But these presently ceasing,
he lay as if he were just a dying, without any life or vigor in his
countenance, scarce being able to move any part, and refusing all meat that was
offered him. Notwithstanding, he dyed not in several days till he was quite
starved, though the Nerves were both cut asunder. The Heart receiving by the
recurrent and intercostal Nerves, a sufficient, though weak supply of Spirits
to maintain a faint motion, and a Circulation enough to keep the Dog alive.

Having hitherto proved, That the Animal Constitution is primarily affected in
the Hysterical Passion, it will follow, that theremay be assigned as many
causes of this Distemper, as we can imagine able either notably to vellicate
the Extremities of the Nervs, and affect them so strongly, as to draw into
consent the whole System, or else to put the Animal Spirits in the Brain into
so great a confusion and disorder, as to disturb their constant and regular
irradiation and influx into the bowels, and other parts of the body: Or,
whatever causes are apt to render the nervous Juice, which is the Vehicle of
the Spirits, sharp and pungent, and apt to irritate and provoke the Fibers in
its passage.

The Ancients reckon the Seed retained in the genital parts in too great a
quantity, as one of the principal causes of these affections; and that we may
the better understand how that is able to put the Animal Spirits and Nerves
into disorderly motions, it will not be impertinent to consider the nature of
it. The Seed or Geniture seems to consist of Salt Sulphur, and a great quantity
of Spirit; for these active principles are only able to perform that wonderful
work of Generation, in that secret shop of Nature the Womb. It may be proved by
sundry Experiments, That a nitro-sulphureous spirit is the Author of all
Generations, as well in Vegetables, as Animals. The Account which that
eminently learned person D. Ent gives of the production of things, in his
Apology for the Circulation against Parisanus, is very much to this purpose.
Eat. Apol.
Terra and Aqua (says he) materies sunt rerum naturalium, in quibus seu uteris
diversa rerum gignendarum semina, sive spiritus, delitescunt, quorum virtutes
in salibus potissimum nidulantur. Per calorem solis humores tenues variis
salibus impraegnati ascendunt, aeremque nostratem constituunt, denuoque in
elementa unde evecta erant relabuntur: Quinetiam interdum majore copia roris
forma decidunt, cujus opera Terra and Aqua spontaneos suos foetus producunt.
Indicium hujus rei est, quod si aqua calida terram perfuderis (namque eo modo
sal omnis educitur) nihil postea in ea nascitur, neque vermiculi, neque
lapilli, nec gramen, imo nec semina quidem ei commissa, licet soli haec terra
exponatur, and aqua stillatitia irroretur: nihil inquam inde progignitur, donec
per aliquod temporis spatium sub dio posita, novo rore, sive sale vivifico
impraegnetur. Hic ros super arborum frondes incidens varia insectorum genera
producit. Hic in mediano plantarum cortice potissimum stabulatur, per quem
plantae vivunt, unde debito tempore frondes, flores, and fructus producuntur,
ac propterea illo ipso in pertinacibus viscerum obstructionibus reserandis
utimur. In quo si Brosseus recte computum iniit vigecuplo plus hujus salis,
quam in ulla alia arboris part reperitur. Imo sunt qui affirmant ab ipsis
plantarum salibus terrae commissis easdem denuo plantas repullulare. Hinc
constat, idem etiam animalibus contingere, hominumque semen de natura salis
participare quod probatur his rationibus.

1. Semen diutius retentum, and copia adauctum titillationem excitat: id autem
sali contingere in prurigine videre est.

2. Semen in humido liquescit quod sali proprium est.

3. Acidum olet.

4. Hinc fit ut nimio coitu capilli qui tali sale abundant defluant: and Ossa
eo impraegnata in lue Venerea afficiantur.

The Sum of what this learned person asserts, is, That nitro-sulphureous
Spirits, or Salts, are, as it were, the Soul of the World, and the Authors and
Causes of all Productions and Generations. These Seeds, Spirits or vivifick
Salts, are certainly much more exactly elaborated and exalted in Animals, than
Vegetables, and in those which are more perfect than in the less; for that
there are Instruments and Organs purposely ordained and contrived by Nature,
which are to give a perfection to the Seminalities of Men, and other Creatures,
which are endued with a regular shape, proportionable to the nobleness and
exactness of the Fabric, which they are to design and build, when they are
employed for the continuance of the kind in the act of Generation. Willis
D^script. Nerv.
Therefore, as Dr. Willis does very well demonstrate, The Arteries do after the
same manner instill into the Testicles a genital juice for the making of Seed,
as they do into the Brain an animal Liquor for the production of Spirits, which
in the Veins and Arteries (contrived for that cause with infinite turnings and
windings) is made more subtle and volatile, and the Parts are in their passages
exactly mixed; the more gross and terrestrial are separated, and at length the
refined and exalted Liquor is sent into the inward substance and body of the
Stones, where being farther elaborated and mingled with the volatile Salt (the
innate ferment of those parts) it becomes Seed. It is farther to be considered,
That when the Ferment implanted in the genital parts, comes to be sufficiently
ripened, and by a long digestion has arrived to its perfection, Men and Women
attain to that state and maturity which we call in Latin Pubertas. At that time
the genital parts grow hot, and being filled with seminal Spirits, discharge
themselves continually of some part of them, by the veins into the mass of
blood, from whence the nervous Juice and Spirits become tinctured and
impregnated with the seminal Ferments; so that about that time the blood grows
high and luxuriant, and in Women being hardly contained within its own limits,
is emptied every Month by a periodical turgescency. There is at this time a
great alteration wrought in the manners and behavior; and the rank, acid
scents, vented by the Emunctories of the Nerves, do declare, That the Juice
which passes in them, is inspired with the geniture. Now if for want of
seasonable Evacuation by Coition, this genital spirit does not only too much
abound in the blood, but also, in its frequent Returns by the Arteries to the
Testicles, is overdigested, and too highly elaborated (which is called by
Physicians contracting a malignant quality) it renders the spirits upon all
slight occasions (especially in Women, whose Nerves and Brains are weak) liable
to sudden and impetuous Fermentations; so that upon the Orgasms of these unruly
Seminalities, and a forcible disunion of the saline part from the sulphurous,
those Explosions and Convulsions are caused in the Abdomen, and other parts;
This Notion I acknowledge to Dr. Willis.
which are so violent for the most part, and impetuous, that they cannot well
be imagined to be produced by any other cause, than such as must at least equal
the force of Gunpowder.

And we find how apt these spirits are to take fire in the blood, and nervous
juice, by the causes which in Women, liable to the Fits, induce a Paroxysm. For
passions of the mind, violent exercise, sweet smells or any slight cause,
whereby the blood and spirits are chafed, presently brings on a Fit: that the
abounding of the seminal spirits in the body, may be one cause of the Fits of
the Mother (and certainly it is the most violent) is confirmed by the
observation of Riolan, who affirms, That upon the Dissection of Hysterical
Virgins, he has found their Testicles bigger than his Fist, filled with seminal
matter.

But certainly, as the Seed is one cause of this Disease, so is it oftentimes
produced from other causes, and oftentimes when the genital parts are not in
fault. Nay, it is often obvious to be observed, That a defect in the uterine
Ferment, as in Cachectical Green Sickness Maids, has occasioned them to be much
afflicted with Hysterical Passions. For the blood in such Women, for want of
the seminal tincture which ought at a due time to enliven and inspire it,
remains crude and slimy, and does not as it ought, cleanse its self by its
menstrual Purgations, by which means many Impurities are cast upon the Brain,
with which the nervous juice becomes to be much vitiated, and to prove an
improper Vehicle for the spirits; and by exciting preternatural Fermentations
in the nervous parts to cause Hysterical Paroxysms, which happen for the most
part periodically, and at set-times, when the body expects its lunary benefits;
for at such times the nervous juice, as well as the Blood, being saturated with
Feculencies, endeavors by fermentation to depurate it self; by which, the
Animal Spirits are put into disorder, and the nerves drawn into convulsive
motions.

These two, The Seed and Menstruous blood retained, are the only causes of
Hysterical fits, which are assigned, by almost all Authors, except Riverius,
who adds, that other humors likewise retained in the womb and genital parts
have likewise their shares in producing those Symptoms: which he concludes from
observing, That many Old-Women, who are neither troubled with Seed or
menstruous blood, are oftten very obnoxious to these distempers. To which, he
adds a Notion of his own, which, he says, is of very great moment, and seems
very agreeable to this Hypothesis, That Hysterical Passions are not only
excited by vapors, raised from the forementioned substances. But the very
humors, which find no vent by the passages of the womb (which is a kind of
Sink to the body) through a suppression of the Menses, Riv. pr. l. 15 c. 6.
or the Whites, are sent back to the upper parts, and infect them with an ill
quality, which they have contracted by too long a stay in the vessels of the
womb by a contagion from the Seed and menstruous blood.

To these Causes, which are delivered by Writers, may all such be added as
Authors of this Distemper, which are apt, by vellicating the extremities of
the nervs, to cause Convulsions. Such are sharp juices in the womb, spleen, and
other bowels, schirrous tumors, not only in the womb, but in the stomach,
mesentery breast, and other parts. The same accidents will wounds in the nerves
produce; and in Women subject to Fits; even gentle Vomits which work by causing
a convulsive motion in the stomach) will put them into Hysterical Paroxysms, as
I observed lately in a Lady my patient, to whom being above fifty years of age,
upon very urgent indications I gave only iii's of infusion of Crocus
metallorum, and because I knew her to be Hystericall, and had formerly observed
in others Paroxysmes induced by Vomits, before she took it, I ordered an
Hysterical plaster to her Navel. The Vomit wrought very gently with her, but
as soon as the working was over, after her last Vomit she fell into a Fit of
the Muther.

It might be expected, that I should now give an account of every particular
Symptom, which belongs to this disease, but not, designing to make an exact
Treatise of it in this place, I must recommend to the Reader, the consideration
of these causes, which I have mentioned, or any other which he can imagine
powerful enough to make disorders in the animal Spirits, and convulsions in the
nervous parts, and as for the particular consents, and correspondencies of one
part with another, how distempers begun in one part manifest themselves in
another far remote. I referr him to Dr. Willis his most learned Treatise of the
Brain and Nerves, and to the Schemes which he will there meet with. For without
such an Anatomical consideration of those parts, it is impossible to receive
any tolerable satisfaction, concerning the affections of them. And I will
only in this place, give him an account of the most notorious Symptom, the
rising of the Muther (from which all the rest receive their denomination) in
Dr. Willis his own words: Plerique abdominis, plexns praesertim vero insimus
and affinis ejus mesenterii maximus in passionibus Hystericis vulgo dictis,
saepenumero afficiuntur. Willis. Nervor. descrip. c. 27.
Porro illud Symptoma in Paroxismis ejusmodi valde frequens, nempe quo velut
globus ab imo ventre efferri ac circa umbilicum impetuose exilire percipitur,
ut perinde uteri ascensus perhibeatur. Dico id nihil aliud esse quam immanes
horum plexuum spasmos. Saepe quidem in foeminis, and interdum etiam in viris
novi cum affectio convulsiva in aderet primo molem in hypogastrio ^ssurgere
visam, dein circa medium abdomen intumescentiam ita immanem successisse, ut
viri fortis manibus, ut ut validissime intentis haud comprimi aut inhiberi
potuerit. Proculdubio admirandi hujus affectus causa est quod intra paris
intercostalis nervos Spiritus animales influi, quoties (...), sive motus
Convulsivos ineunt, primo (uti plerumque assolet) circa nervi extremitates,
nempe in plexu abdominis infimo effervescere ac velet explodi inciptant, quae
illorum affectio, cum sursum perreptans, ad plexum M^senterii maximum deferatur
adeo ut Spiritus ejus incolae pari inordiatione corripiantur nihil mirum est,
ista medii abdominis intuumescentia, ac velut materiae cujusdam nitrosulphureae
explosio, cietur.

In this and the place before quoted out of him, we see that Dr. Willis (whose
sense M. N. (that he may honor himself by quoting of him) every where either
ignorantly or wilfully mistakes) ascribes. Hysterical hypochondoriacal, and
asthmatical, risings and stoppings to Convulsions of the nerves and not to
vicious and malignant vapors raised in the lower belly especially about the
spleen in the stomach, M^d. M^d. p 49. and 50.
and about the Midriffe and in the cavity of the Omentum. Nor to the Playing of
the Scorbutic malignant vapors up through the veins, and arteries to the
lungs, and by communication to the heart, which account may be well enough
tolerated in Sennertus, but is by no means to be endured in M. N. who pretends
so much to the new discoveries in Physic, and undertakes to demolish and
overthrow all the old Writers. And yet aggrees with them in their grossest
mistakes.

And now having clearly proved that the Diseases of this present age are not so
much changed and of another nature, as to render the old way of Physic
useless. I will next proceed to examine whither the causes assigned by M. N.
are sufficient to produce that great alteration both in Nature and art, which
he imagines to be made.

CHAP. III.
THE Causes of the alteration of Diseases from their ancient state and
condition, the Author of Medela assigns to be the Pox and Scurvey, which by
carnal contact, by ill cures, by accidental contagion, by haereditary
propagation and by lactation, he supposes, so to have overspread the whole face
of Mankind as that by them there is introduced an universal alteration and
depravation of Nature, from whence he would infer, that the rules Methods and
Medicines, which were used by the Ancients, in the curing of their diseases are
become altogether useless in ours.

As to carnal contact, haereditary propagation, and lactation. I very readily
grant that the Pox and scurvy may by those ways be communicated from the
diseased persons to the sound. But as to accidental Contagion, as he calls it)
upon which point lies the main stress of his Arguments for the universality of
those diseases) by which they, like the Plague, infect at a distance, and by
steams and emanations, taint the whole stock of Mankind, it is a mere whim of
his own, and so far from being a solid truth, that it is point blank contrary
to the daily experiecne of the world and the authority and observations of the
most learned and faithful Writers, and the very Nature and Essence of those
diseases.

When M. N. comes to handle the point of the propagation of the Pox and Scurvy
by ill cures; it is pleasant to observe, that he does not only fling dirt upon
the learned Physicians, for letting blood and using the purgers of the Shops;
but (that he may ingross all the sinners of the Town) he likewise falls foul
upon his own Fraternity, the men of his own Rank and Ability in Physic the
poor Quacks and Mountebanks; who pretend to the Cure of the Venereal disease,
and to make room for his own very injuriously tears down their bills from the
Posts.

On my word he will make no ill trade of it, if he can persuade the whole
Nation, that they have the French Pox, and then that nobody but himself can
cure it. But, passing by his immodest and uncleanly discourse, as not designing
to make my self acceptable to Stews, and Brothel-houses, I will fall upon the
other more important and less offensive disquisition concerning Phlebotomy.

And as to that he tells us he could (forsooth) willingly write a Treatise,
(and a learned one it would be) touching the mischiefs done by bleeding in
these Northern parts of the world in most Diseases, as well as Agues and
Fevours, because of the mixture of the Scorbut, and his main reason is,
because, that if it be true (since the liver is turned out of the Office of
Sanguification) Sanguis sanguificat blood makes blood of the chyle, and does it
ad modum tincturae. etc. Now I will grant to him that the liver is very justly
discharged of the office of sanguification, as I will anon more largely prove,
and that in some sense the blood may be said to make blood, and yet upon this
score is it impossible for that great remedy of blood letting established by
the Experience and Authority of the whole learned worlp in the least to grow
out of esteem.

First then I will tell hm, what Dr. Harvey says upon this point. H^rv. de
Genesis An. Ex. 51.
But while I affirm (says that Oracle) the soul to reside first and
principally in the blood. I would not have any man hastily to conclude from
hence, that all blood letting is dangerous or hurtful, or believe, with the
vulgar, that as much blood, so much life is taken away, because Holy Writ
places the life in the blood. For daily experience shows that letting Blood is
a safe cure for several diseases, and the chiefest of universal remedies;
because the default or superfluity of the blood is the Seminary of most
distempers; and a seasonable Evacuation of it, does oftenescue men from most
desperate maladies and even death it self: for look how much blood is according
to Art taken away, so many years are added to the age. Nature her self was our
tutor here, whom Physicians transcribe. For she of her own accord does many
times vanquish the most mortal infirmities by a plentiful and critical
evacuation either by the nose, haemorrhoids, or by menstruous purgations. And
therefore Young-people, who feed high, and live idely, unless about the
eighteenth or twentieth year of their age (at which time the stock of Blood
increases, together with the Bulk of their bodies) be disburdned of the load
and oppression of their blood, either by a spontaneous release at the nose, or
inferior parts, or by breathing a vein, they are dangerously set upon by
Fevours, Small pox, Headaches, and other more grievous Didistempers, and
Symptoms. Alluding to which, the Farriers do begin almost all cures of beasts
with letting blood. This is the opinion of that great Secretary of Nature. Nor
is it only his sense, but the best Authors do affirm, and Riverius for one,
that in the diseasecalled the Rheumatism (which seldom is without a high
tincture of the Scorbute) blood must be taken away for ten or twelve days
together, Riv. Prax. Med. l. 16. c. 3.
every day till the pain vanishes, and the strength seems to fail, which does
not by loss of blood in this disease. And in this case I can appeal to my own
experience: For, being called to a person of Quality in August, 1665. in
Gloucestershire (in council with that Judicious, and Learned Physician Dr.
Filding of Gloucester) who then lay miserably tormented with a Rheumatism,
being free from pain in no part of his Body, not having the use of any of his
Limbs, though he where a Person, who these many years has been highly
Scorbutical, we drew from him at least the quantity of 70 of blood, before we
could free him from pain, and restore him to his health.

Platerus makes mention of a Mad-woman, Plat. Obs. l. 1. p. 80.
who was cured by being let blood in several Veins, seventy times in one Week.
I might run through all other diseases, and show the necessity of bleeding,
which may happen in most of them: but because M. N's. main Argument, is founded
upon Sanguification, I will endeavor to explain, how the Chyle is turned into
Blood, and in what parts of the body chiefly this work is effected: So that by
discovering the true way of Sanguification, his Argument may appear to be ill
grounded.

That the Liver is not the Shop, wherein the Blood is made, is evident to any
man who will examine the generation of Animals; for, Harv. de Genesis Ex 18. p. 63.
Ex. 50. p. 153. Ex. 59. p. 207.
he shall perceive the Heart beat, and Blood perfectly colored, before there
appear any rudiments of the Liver; so that the Liver is made after the Blood,
and, as it were, sticks upon little slender threads; and the Parenchyma of it,
evidently grows out of the mouths of the Arteries, through which matter is
supplied to the formation of it; so that the Parenchyma of it seems to be
nothing else, but congealed blood. Again, the Chyle never goes to the Liver,
but empties it self into the Subclavial Veins, and goes straight away to the
right Ventricle of the Heart.

Now, the use and business of the Liver, Glisson Anat. Hep. c. 41.
is without doubt, that which is assigned by the eminently learned D. Glisson,
that it is made to receive the blood, which runs to it by the Porta, to
separate the Choler from it, and then being freed from that, to deliver it to
the Cava. The very Make and Structure of that Bowel, argues as much: as also
the distribution of the Vessels to every part of the Parenchyma: for the Porta
equally dispenses the blood into all parts of it, and the small Capillary
threads of the Porus Biliarius, are every where dispersed, and ready to receive
the choler, which is brought along mingled with the blood into every part. And
in like manner, the small branches of the Vena Cava, are every where interwoven
and at hand, to carry away the blood, when cleansed and freed from the bilious
part of it. Now the choler is separated from the blood by a certain kind of
Percolation. For, the blood issuing out from the Porta, into the Parenchyma or
fleshy parts of the Liver, finds that substance full of pores or little spaces
of diverse shapes and figures, and proportionable to the shape, sise, and
figuration of the Particles or Atoms of blood and choler, whereof those which
are suitable to the shape of the parts of choler, open into the small pipes of
the Porus biliarius; those which are answerable to the shape of the Atoms of
blood, convey it into the little mouths of the Cava. These pores or little
holes easily let pass those parts of matter which are correspondent to their
shape, but refuse all of another Figure, as we see water will dissolve common
salt, and imbibe it so long, till all the spaces which agree with the shape of
it, be filled, and then will receive no more; but yet afterward will receive
sugar or salts of another Figure, so long, till they have filled the spaces
suitable to their shape.

The separation of choler in the Liver may not unfitly be explained, by that
which is made in Sieves, whereof some are made only to sever Chaff and dust,
some for Fetches, some for Barley, others for Oats; which, according to the
shape of the holes let pass or refuse, this or the other Grain.

Having thus explained the Anatomy of the Liver, I will proceed to discourse of
the Nature of Blood it self, and the principal Engine which is employed in the
making of it; and to that end, let me trace the passage of the Chyle, that we
may the better find when and where it is turned to blood. It is well known to
every man, who has but in any measure inquired into Physic and Anatomy, Willis
Descript. Nerv.
that as soon as the meat is dissolved by the menstruum of the stomach, it is
pressed down into the guts, and out of them all the way almost to the very
Anus, the thinner and finer part is forced into the Lacteals, out of which it
is delivered into the common Channel of the chyle, and being mingled with a
whey, which comes out of the Lymphaticks, it enters the Subclavials, out of
which it runs mingled with the blood into the great Trunk of the Vena Cava. Out
of which, passing into the right Ventricle of the heart, by the motion of that
Engine, through the Pulmonary Arteries, it is flung into the Lungs; out of
which, having there separated some phlegmatic, or crude excrements, and being
impregnated with the nitre of the air, which is drawn in by respiration (and
being in the Lungs, as with a Churn, or Chocolate-mill, more exactly mingled
with the blood) it hastens by the Pulmonary Vein, to the left Ventricle of the
heart, out of which by the Aorta, it is sent to all the parts of the body.

Thus far the Chyle may be easily traced, and truly, I know not why it may not,
having passed the last deflagration in the heart, be justly called Blood. I
will not in this place bring the distinction of the Schools upon the Stage,
which distinguishes that Liquor which runs in the Veins and Arteries into Three
humors, and Blood, as being now out of doors with all ingenious men, and being
no otherwise to be applied than as some portion of that Liquor has more often,
other more seldom, or hardly yet at all, passed through the heart, and there
been fired. But I, in general, term all those juices, Blood, which run in the
Veins and Arteries, and have the form, color, and consistence, of that liquor
which is vulgarly called so, though it consists (as certainly all blood does)
of parts very heterogeneous: and I think the Chyle it self, which comes very
white and dilute into the Subclavials, when it has undergone the fermentation
in the left Ventricle of the heart, may without impropriety be justly termed
blood. For, though I do acknowledge, that this juice, before it arrive to
perfection, does undergo several fermentations, and separations in diverse parts
of the body: as, for example, in the Liver, the choler is separated in the
Kidneys, the whey in the habit of the body several excrements are refused,
which can probably be no other wise blown off than by transpiration. And though
a fermentation in the Spleen, Testicles, Uterus, and other parts, be requisite
to give a vigor, life, and height to the blood: yet I take the Heart to be the
chief Shop, where it is first made, and where it receives it is life, motion,
and tincture.

In the heart (as to our purpose) three things are chiefly to be considered. 1.
The Ventricles or Chambers of it: 2. The Parenchyma or Walls: and 3. The
Mechanic Spirits, (as Severinus Danus calls them) which lodge and reside in
the inscrutable recesses of the Parenchyma. These Spirits may be justly called
the Artificers, or Laborers of blood and life: to these we owe all Action,
Heat, Motion, Color, and what not: These, first working in the punctum saliens
or vesicula pulsans, with a wonderful skill and unexpressable art draw the
lines and proportions of an animal, shape, all the Springs, wheels, pullies,
and whatever Engine is necessary for life; and after they have drawn the whole
Fabric in the small with an innate prudence, and indefatigable industry, they
extend every line to the due Proportion, and build up the Fabric according to
the designed dimensions, and afterward are no less careful in keeping the body
in continual Repair, than they were at first in Building of it.

In the next place, the Ventricles or Chambers of the heart, being enclosed
with their Parenchyma, as with strong Walls, do at the very first sight, from
their mechanical Structure, sufficiently appear to us, to be made for
Laboratories for the Blood. Hogeland well observes, Hog. p. 81.
That upon the Bloods rushing into the Heart, the like boiling and rarefaction
is caused, as when Spirit of Nitre is poured upon butter of Antimony. Des
Carts, and the best Philosophers and Physicians are much of the same Opinion.
This Fermentation seems to be caused by the Mechanical Spirits, or Seminal
Salts; or, if you please, Ferment of the Heart, which ferments with the active
principles of the Blood and Chyle, and produces heat, flame, motion, and a
change of color, the ordinary effects of Fermentation, as it is well known to
Chemists.

In the act of Generation, the Seed, or resolved Salt being cast by the Male
into the Womb, in the Conception frames the Heart; and by the heat either of
incubation, or the cherishing warmth of the Womb, is excited, and gently falls
a fermenting; and at length, boiling more violently, breaks into a flame, which
is perpetually kept a foot by a new supply of Chyle, the old stock of Blood
after some Deflagrations being left poor and unfit to maintain the Fire. That
the Chyle in this Deflagration receives its Tincture, or Scarlet-die, is more
than probable. Ent. Apol. p. 141.
The Learned Doctor Ent, deduces the variety of Colors from the diversity of
Seminal Salts, and certainly with very good Reason: For, since Color is
nothing else, than a certain perception of a motion or stroke of Light
reflected from the Surface of a Body, and striking upon the tunica retinae of
the Eye; and, that the Superficies of every Body is made up of numberless
Particles of matter, variously disposed among themselves, it follows, That if
upon the Fermentation of Bodies, the site and position of parts be so changed
and transposed, that they return not again to the same order wherein they were
first placed, the Superficies must be altered, and then the reflection, as also
the stroke of light must be different; and, except it prove diaphanous, the
Body must appear of a new color.

Thus we see Water much agitated at Mills, and Chataracts looks white. The blew
tincture of Violets having some drops of Spirit of Vitriol poured on it, turns
Purple; and, immediately by adding some few drops of Spirit of Hartshorn, the
Purple color is turned into Green. Doctor Willis, Willis de Ferment. cap. 11.
and other Learned Authors, have many pleasant instances of the alteration of
colors, by mingling Liquors, which ferment with one and the other. That the
Chyle is turned red in the Heart, after this manner, I am very apt to believe;
and that the innate Salt or Ferment of the Heart by fermenting with the Chyle,
which abounds with volatile Salt and Sulphur, produces this admirable tincture.

I have observed, as yet, but two ways of producing a red color in Bodies,
either by the action of heat upon them, or else by the addition of Salts; by
heat, white and pale colors are often changed into red, and that especially in
Bodies which are not very fluid, and which admit of only a slow and leisurely
Fermentation. Thus Quinces by long boiling, contract a Redness; Fruit by baking
in an Oven, grows Redder, than Raw; and Bricks, by Heat, acquire a red color.
Nay, the Learned Doctor Glisson affirms, That in the hot Months of Summer,
Glisson. Anat. Hep.
Blood is often found in those Animals whom we account bloodless, as Oysters,
and the like, by reason of the heat which excites the fermenting Sal^s which
lay entangled, and, as it were, asleep, in the more slimy and unactive parts of
those Animals; and, possibly, the reason why Snails, and such other Creatures,
are not endued with Blood, is, because the Ferment of their Heart lies idle all
the Winter.

The other way of producing a red color, is by addition of a salt Menstruum.
Dr. Ent.
Thus Juleps are colored red with Spirit o^ Vitriol, Infusions of Senna with
Oil of Tartar: And Berigardus tells us, He had a Chemical liquor, into which,
if he put but a little piece of a certain Salt, Berig. Cinc. Un. p. 9.
the Liquor would turn from being white and cold, to be so red and hot, that he
could not endure to hold the Bottle. After the same manner, the milky juice of
the Chyle is most probably turned into Blood; for meeting with the Salt, or
Ferment of the Heart, it is turned from white to red, and boils no less than
the Chemists Liquor.

Having thus endeavored to explain the manner of Sanguification, and having
deduced it chiefly from the firing of the Chyle in the Heart, I do not find,
but that upon this Hypothesis (agreeable to the experience of the World) even
in many Scorbutic Affects, Phlebotomy may be most necessary; but especially
(as in some persons) where the Scorbutic Ferment is (as I may call it) a Stum
to the Blood, as I have found it in many, especially in a Woman in Berkshire
above 50 years of Age, who, every Fortnight, or three Weeks, has her Courses in
so violent and large a manner, that except the Flux be by seasonable bleeding
often moderated, she is continually in danger of bleeding to death. Nay, even
in other cases of the Scurvy, where by the adustness and sharpness of the
Blood, the Chyle is perpetually corrupted and depraved; by seasonable bleeding,
the Blood is ventilated and enabled (there being more room for the mass to
ferment in) to cast off many of its faeculent Salts, by Urine, and
Transpiration; and the Chyle (the vicious fermentation of Scorbutic Salts,
being, by breathing a vein, somewhat allayed) comes more sincere, and less
perverted to the heart.

I come in the next place to his Exceptions against Purgation in the Scurvy,
M^^. Md. P. 88.
By the Pills, Electuaries, Powders and Infusions, reputed Classical and
Authentic; which (he tells us) work by offensive irritation of Nature; rather
than an amicable Cl^se with her. What his amicable Close with Nature is, I
understand not except he has explained himself in his cleanly Discourse of the
French Disease. But as to Purgation, any man who shall seriously consider how
Medicines purgative perform their effects, shall find all those, which are
properly called so, work either by a vellication of the Fibers of the Guts and
Bowels; or by exciting a Fermentation in the Blood, or both ways. Those which
work by irritating of the Fibers, cause the Guts to thrust down their
Excrements, and by contracting themselves to expel ^em forth of the Body.
Those Purgatives which by the Lactials (and, possibly, by the ends of the
Meseraicks) pierce into the mass of Blood, work their effect by fermenting the
juyces of the Body, and stimulating the fibrous parts, in the most inward
recesses of the Bowels, by which often the Morbifick matter is exterminated
into the Guts, as Barm in the fermentation of Liquors is separated, and forced
out of the Barrel. Now as the Medicines differ in their Natures, so, I suppose,
may a different Fermentation be excited in the Blood, and likewise a different
Excrement or Barm be vented, and wrought off; upon which, I suppose, the whole
business of elective Purgation to depend; and, whatever his Specificks be,
which he so much magnifies, they must necessarily perform their business by one
or other of these ways, except (without Canting) he can demonstrate a more
reasonable.

In his Discourse of Contagion, and of the Infection, of the French Disease and
Scurvy, at a distance, the Author of Medela (as everywhere else) discovers as
much want of Civility as Philosophy, and treats the learned Fernelius, and the
most acute and judicious Philosopher Sennertus, with ^ more respect than he
does the College of London, and Universities; and after he has made bold with
several pieces of this Learned Author to patch up a Chapter, he gives him the
Lie, tells him, That he is gross, P. 128.130.
and that it matters not what his, or other Physicians fancy is, touching a
particular Disease. And all this is, because that these Learned men do not,
contrary to their observation and experience, allow those Diseases to be
communicable at a distance, and without corporal contact; in which, though
their own experience and observation be of abundantly more weight, than his ill
digested ratiocinations; yet will it not be impertinent to show, that though
these Diseases are very deservedly accounted Contagious, or Infectious; and
that Contagion is caused by the insinuating of the Emanations of small bodies
from the morbifick matter into the Blood and Juyces of the persons infected,
and that from all Bodies do continually flow streams of Atoms; yet does it not
in the least follow, that whatever infects or poisons by immediate Contact,
will also work the same effect at a distance. Thus we see the poison of a mad
Dog insects not by the Effluvia from his Body; but either by bite, the touch of
the some, or his blood. The Tarantula communicates venom by his bite, the
Scorpion by the sting, and the like may be said of almost all poisons; nay,
some require, as in Bees, Wasps, Hornets, and the like that the venom be
conveyed by the sting through the very skin into the blood, without which it
may be questioned, whether barely thrown upon the skin, it would produce the
effects of poison: And we evidently find, that these Creatures poison not by
any effluxes from them; but when the venom is closely applied to the Body, and
by Contact communicated to the Blood.

Consonant to this, is an instance in an Epistle of Crato to Thomas Jordanus,
Crat. Epist. Med. l. 2.
of a kind of Plague in Moravia, which only infected those persons who were
bled with Cupping-glasses, and that it seized upon them in that place where the
skin was scarrified, and the Cupping-glass fastened, and that way the venom got
into the whole mass of Blood, and insinuated it self into the nervous parts.
And discoursing of the reason of this Disease, he makes mention of a relation
of the Emperor Ferdinand, concerning a poison used in Spain, made of the juice
of White Hellebore, with which the Huntsmen of Spain use to poison their
Arrows, and with them kill Deer, and other wild Beasts. In the beginning of
Summer, says the Author, they who prepare this poison, press out the juice
from the whole Plant, expose it to the heat of the Sun till it be prepared, and
then pour it into a Bulls-horn, in which they keep it; but they are exceedingly
careful, that it come not near any place wh^re there is the smell of Quinces,
for then presently it loses all its virtue of poisoning. This poison may
without harm be tasted by the Tongue, but if the least drop of it be
communicated to the Blood, it proves most pernicious. And he adds, That if any
one be but pricked with a Needle infected with this juice, he would dye within
a very few hours; and that the Deer wounded with the Arrows dipped in this
poison, first seem to be in a maze, and lose their sight, then run round; then
fall down, and dye within half an hour at the farthest. But that which seems
strange, is, that the flesh of the Deer thus killed, should be eaten without
any kind of harm, and that only the part where the wound was made, was flung
away. He adds farther, That an Ass, whose back was galled with carrying
Burdens, having a Deer laid cross his back, which was killed with one of these
Arrows, some of the blood from the wound by chance dropping upon the place
which was galled, fell down dead before he brought the Deer to the journies
end. He tells us likewise, That the Emperor Rudolphus the Second, having shot a
Deer with one of those Arrows in one of his Horns, which ran away, as though he
ayled nothing, did, notwithstanding, some hours after, as he-came from Hunting,
find him dead.

From this, and the like Instances, I suppose it may be very reasonably argued,
That from the Doctrine of Atoms, it does not necessarily follow, that whatever
Venom or Disease will infect the Blood, by a gross and corporeal Contact or
Attrition, will likewise perform the same effects at a distance, by subtle
Effluxes, or Emanations of small Bodies or Atoms. For though we see in the
Plague, and some other malignant Diseases, that the Venom, like Lightning,
quickly pierces the Pores, and insinuates it self into the mass of Blood, and
that often at a considerable distance from the Body, out of which are sent
those deadly and pernicious steams: yet we find this mentioned Spanish poison,
though of more deadly and quick force to the destruction of life, when once
mingled with the Blood, does not as much as penetrate the Pores of the Skin
(possibly, by reason of the disproportion of Figures of the Atoms) nor, (though
tasted by the Tongue, a part very sensible of all impressions) communicate to
the Nerves or Veins any venomous or mortal Ferment.

Now to apply this something nearer to the American Disease, and the Scurvy,
(which M. N. has most bountifully bestowed upon all Mankind:) Though it be
sufficient, that the most curious, and diligent observers of those Diseases,
have unanimously agreed, that they are only contracted by gross and corporeal
Contact; yet, I think something may be argued from the History and Cure of the
Pox, and Nature of the Scurvy, which may serve to rescue Mankind from the
apprehensions of being universally tainted.

As to the Pox, or American Disease; the Original and Growth, as also what
Observations the World had then made of it, is very well delivered in the
History of Guicciardin, Guicc. l. 2.
Methinks it cannot be out of purpose (says his Translator) to leave to Memory
and Tradition in what sort began the Disease which the Frenchmen call, the
Evil of Naples, and the Italians name the Botch, or, more commonly, the Disease
of France. It happened as an Infection to the Frenchmen, whilst they were at
Naples; and by them, in their return from that War, was dispersed and spread
through all Italy. This Disease, either altogether new, or at least unknown to
that Age in our Hemisphere, otherwise than in the most extreme and furthest
parts, was for certain Years so horrible, that it well deserves mention as a
most grievous Calamity: For it appeared always either in vile Botches, or
Buttons, which oftentimes proved Ulcers incurable; or else they tormented the
whole Body with Pain and Aches in the Joints and Sinews: And the Physicians
having no experience in Maladies of that Nature, and therefore ignorant in the
Remedies proper and natural, applied oftentimes Cures directly resisting, and
contrary; which inflamed the Infection to greater Rage, even to the killing of
many bodies of all Ages and Sexes; and many became deformed with them, and
subject to almost Torments perpetual; yea, the most part, such as seemed to be
delivered of them, returned eftso^ns in short time to the same misery. But
after the course of many Years, (either the influence above being appeased,
which bred them so horrible, and raging; or by long experience, their proper
Remedies and Cures being found out) the Disease began to be less malicious,
changing it self into diverse kinds of Maladies, differing from the first
Calamity; whereof truly the Regions and People of our Times might justly
complain, if it happened unto them without their proper disorder; seeing it is
well approved by all those that have diligently studied and observed the
Properties of that Evil, that either never, or very rarely, it happens to any,
otherwise than by Contagious Whoredom. The French think it reasonable to
acquit them of the Ignominy, for that it is known since, that such a Disease
was transported out of Spain to Naples, and yet not proper or natural to that
Nation; but brought thither from the Isles, which (in those Seasons) began to
be known to our Regions by the Navigation of Christopher Columbus a Genoway; in
which Isles (by the favor of Nature) are Remedies ready to cure that Ill, by
drinking only of the juice of a wood, (most singular for many other worthy
Properties) which gr^wing plentifully in those places, is a Remedy, no less
easy, than absolute, and assured to the Inhabitants there.

By this Account of Guicciardin, it is evident, That by the most exact
Observers of that Disease, both in its birth, increase, and spreading in Italy,
'twas found by experience, that it was either never, or rarely, any other way
contracted, than by Whoredom, and Coition with infected persons.

And indeed, that the venom of the Venereous Disease, is founded in a dull,
heavy, and unactive matter, and not in a Ferment of so swift a motion, as to
infect at a distance, appears very much from the way of its Cure; for whereas
the Plague, which swiftly infects, is (before it has too much poisoned and
corrupted the Blood and Juyces) by Sudorificks, easily expelled at the ends of
the Arteries. The Venereous Disease on the other side, is of so sluggish parts,
that there is no separating of the Morbifick matter from the mass of Blood, and
nervous Liquor, without dreining the Body of almost all its Juyces, either by
Sweating, or Salivation. I have observed in the Cure of some persons tainted
with this Disease, That as long as they have indulged to themselves the
drinking of Beer, though in a small quantity, no great benefit has ensued upon
the most effectual Remedies; but when once they have strictly confined
themselves to the use of appropriate Dyet-drinks, in the course of their other
Remedies, in the space of three or four days, all ill Accidents have vanished.
It is not therefore likely, that a Disease which sticks so stubbornly in the
Blood and Juyces of the Body, should fly as swift, as light, all over the
World, and leave not so much as a poor Thrasher or Milk-maid free from its
Contagion.

In the next place, The Nature or Formality of the Scurvy, consisting in the
Bloods being overcharged with fixed or fluid Salts, renders that Disease very
unfit to be communicated at a distance. For whatever Disease acts upon, or
infects a Body at a distance, must be of active, nimble and subtle parts,
easily flying out of the Pores of one Body, and with the like facility
insinuating themselves into the mouths of another Body's veins; and of so
swift motion, that the Contagious Corpuscles, when they are rambling in the
Atmosphere, shall receive little or no alteration, either in their motions,
from the occursion of other Bodies; or in their Figure, from the attrition or
beating of other Particles of matter which they meet in their way (for upon
these affections of matter, all virtues and operations of one Body upon another
do depend.)

Now the essence of the Scurvy being radicated in a fixation of the Salts of
the Blood, it seems very improbable, That such fixed Bodies, which cannot by
the force of fire be carried up to the top of an Alembick, should be proper
Messengers to communicate Infection at a distance. Besides, Saline Particles
being too gross to be put into those violent motions which are required in
infectious Ferments, though they may by Sweat, or insensible Transpiration,
issue out of the diseased Body; yet if they Travel far in the Air, they will
either in their way combine with other Particles of matter, and so lose their
Properties (as we see the Salts of a Menstruum unite themselves to Powder of
Coral, and other testaceous Bodies) or else in their Journey by the meeting and
justling with other Atoms, have their motions and figures so altered, that they
would wholly lose their former operations and virtues.

Now from the Instances which I have given of sundry poisonous Bodies, which,
(though they must be allowed to be of a very active venom, and constantly to
send forth streams, or Effluvia of Atoms) do, notwithstanding, never poison at
a distance. And of some which infect not by immediate Contact with the Skin,
and never but where they are mingled with the Blood; from the Account which
Guicciardin gives of the Observations which the World made of the French Pox,
in its Original and Growth; And from the Arguments drawn from the Cure of that
Disease: As also from the Nature and Formality of the Scurvy, it very clearly
appears, That Fernelius and Sennertus are in the right, when (though they allow
the Pox and Scurvy to be Contagious Diseases) they deny them to infect (like
the Plague) at a distance. And that M. N. who upon supposition of the
accidental Contagion or Infection at a distance of these Maladies, would infer
an alteration of the Nature of all Diseases from their ancient state and
condition, and consequently render useless and void the Rules, Methods, and
Medicines of the Ancients; has not with any good Arguments proved the Point,
which he has with much Confidence undertaken.

CHAP. IV.
THat the Scurvy and French Malady may be complicated with other Diseases, is
not (I suppose) denied by any able Physician. But (by M. N's leave) it does not
from thence necessarily follow, That the Nature and Essence of all Diseases
abstractly considered, is wholly altered. For Diseases in Bodies free from
those Distempers (as many Thousands there are untainted) are still the same
that they were formerly; and where a Dropsy or Gowt, or any other Distemper,
meets with a Pocky Body, the ancient Discase by the Combination is not altered
from its former condition, though there be an addition of a new Malady. For his
supposition of the Pox and Scurvy, Med. Med. p. 156.
being Contagious at a distance, and that by the continued Succession,
Multiplication, and Concentration of many millions of Contagious Ferments,
which have been floating and flying up and down, they must needs be
Coessentially tinctured, and Combined with the very Blood, Humors, Spirits,
and, by consequence, universally complicated more or less with all manner of
D^seases, is (as I have demonstrated in the foregoing Chapter) a fancy so
extravagant, that it is not reconcilable either to Experience or Reason.

As to his Quotation out of Sennertus, it makes nothing for him: that Author in
that place, saying no more than what every Physician agrees with him in; to
wit, That Fevers complicated with the Pox, are more difficultly cured, than
Simple ones; which is no more then what holds true as to all other Diseases,
where there is a Complication, though the Pox do not make one. For certainly
many Diseases in one Body are not so easily encountered as one, and oftentimes
the Indications contradicting one the other, the same Methods and Medicines
which are proper for the quelling and extinguishing one of the Distempers, do
at the same time strengthen and increase the other.

The Authority of his Friend Helmont, (who affirms, That from a Complication of
the Pestilence with the French Ferment, the Plague is now more frequent than in
former Ages; that it seizes us upon the least occasion, cruelly pursues, and
more easily spreads it self, because of its being associated with this new
venom or poison) does not much weigh with me in this Point, as to which I can
oppose History and Experience against him. For I do not find, but that the
Records of former Ages, deliver Descriptions of as frequent, dreadful, and
depopulating Plagues, as any have happened in our times. Let him consult Kircher,
De Peste (his admired Author) and he will find at the latter end of his Book, a
long Catalogue of Plagues which infested the World before ever the French
Disease came out of America; and that they then, as now they usually afflicted
Armies, and Camps, in which malignant Epidemical Diseases are usually bred; not
by any pocky Ferment, but by the Necessities, ill Diet, and Nastiness, which
usually accompany the number, and motions of those vast Bodies.

For instance, After the Destruction of Troy, upon the occasion of that War,
there sprang up a Plague which overran all Greece. That there was a great
Plague which destroyed Xerxes his Army, when he raised it to fall into Greece,
appears out of Herodotus, and by the Letters sent from the Governor of the
Hellespont to Hippocrates. The Plague of Athens (which, as described by
Thucydides, and Lucretius, seems to have been a more dismal Pestilence, than
has ever happened since to any one People) is said to have arisen upon the War
between the Athenians and Lacedaemonians. Again, Livy describes a horrible
Plague which destroyed the Roman Army when Marcellus besieged Syracuse. And it
is Recorded, that Anno Domini, 252. there was so universal a Pestilence, that
no Province in the World was free from the same. These Instances sufficiently
consute Helmont, whom I will dismiss with Mr. Boyle's Censure of him in his
Preface introductory to his Skeptical Chemist; of whose Ratiocinations (says
that Learned Gentleman) not only some seem very extravagant, but even the rest
are not wont to be as considerable as his Experiments.

In the next place, M. N. tells us, Me. Med. p. 166.
That the French Spirit, called Lues Venerea, haunts not only the inward parts
of Men, but the outward also; appearing in the form of Ulcers, hard Bumps in
the Flesh, inflamed Tumors, purulent Apostemes; as also renders Wounds hard to
be cured, insomuch, that the best Chirurgions do complain, with admiration,
That of late, even the slighter Wounds will hardly yield to the usual Remedies,
so that there is need of a new foundation for Surgery, as well as Physic.
And the better to prove this, he acquaints us, That in the Year 1661. he
himself had a hot fiery Impetigo, which ran through his Beard round like a Red
Half Moon, from one Ear to the other; and after all manner of Unguents, Waters,
Lot^ons, etc. used for Twelve Months in vain, he devised a Scorbutic Liquor,
and infused in it a Mercurial Powder; which only by wetting the part therewith
slightly with the top of his Finger twice a day, took it instantly away.

But to what purpose is this Story of the Beard and Ears, since it proves
nothing, but that the French Malady was got very near his Nose, and that his
Ears (which he has so often forfeited) are still upon his Head?

I know well, that Bodies infected with the French Disease, do usually break
out in Bumps, Ulcers, Sores and Apostemes, which do not yield to ordinary
Remedies, and only to such as do specifically respect the poison of that
Distemper. But the question in Dispute, is, Whether all sound Bodies which
never have contracted any Venereal venom by gross and corporeal Contact, are
notwithstanding so infected by the wandering Steams or Atoms of the Pox, that as
much as a Cut-finger, or Brokenpate, cannot now adays be cured, without the
assistance of Antivenereal Remedies; and, as to this Point, M. N. has not in
the least proved it, or, by his Beard, showed himself to be a Philosopher.

I come now to the Scurvy, which I willingly grant may be often complicated
with other Diseases; and indeed it must be confessed, that most Fevers which
invade English Bodies toward the declination, when the deflagration of the
Blood is over, and the Mass is left impoverished of its Spirit, and richer
part, do leave the Blood in almost a necessary tendency and disposition to the
Scurvy: And therefore judicious Physicians very usually, after the Crisis is
over, have recourse to Antiscorbutical Remedies, as the Salts of Plants, the
acid Spirits of Minerals, Preparations of Steel, Juices and Extracts of
Vegetables, and the like; by which, the languishing Ferments of the Bowels are
revived, and the Spirits of the Blood quickened, and restored; and the mixture
of the Chyle with the old stock of Blood, the better and more orderly
performed. But to make the Pocky and Scorbutic Ferment in all Diseases, as
general a Refuge and Sanctuary for Ignorance, as the Devil, and Occult
qualities, among the vulgar renderers of causes, is very unworthy of a
Philosopher, and will at length so much debauch that most significant term of
Ferment, that it will bring it into discredit with enquiring men, who cannot
permit themselves to be satisfied with words, except something be represented
by them. For in good earnest, I do not see how M. N. has better explained the
Nature of the Disease, which he has treated of by the word Ferment, and other
terms insignificant, as he uses them; than if he had fled to the Asylum
Ignorantiae, Occult qualities. For there is not one question you can ask him in
Physic concerning the cause of any Disease or Symptom, but he is presently
ready to answer, That it flows from a Combination with a Pocky and Scorbutic
Ferment; A very compendious way indeed, of being a Philosopher; but no whit
more satisfactory in Physic, than, Bellarmine, Thou lie; in answering all
the difficulties and objections in Divinity.

CHAP. V.
THe Third Point from whence M.N. inferrs, That all Diseases are altered from
their ancient state and condition, is (forsooth) Vermination, or breeding of
Worms; and he pretends, That in these days they are more frequently appearing
in all manner of Fevers, and other Diseases, than in former time; and his
Reason is, Because by the intermixture of the Pocky and Scorbutic Ferments,
Humors are more vitiated, and a more poisonous, putredinous disposition or
corruption is introduced into men's Bodies, than was wont to be in elder time.
But that this is no new thing, that it is not more frequent in Diseases than
formerly, or happens upon any score of the Pox or Scurvy, the Authority of the
Ancients, the enquiry into the reason of the production of those Animals, and
the observation of their Generation throughout all the Families of Nature, will
evidently discover.

First then, as to the Authority of the Ancients, Hippocrates, Galen, and other
Writers, do not only treat of three sorts of Worms which are usually generated
in the Guts, but they have likewise some cases of Worms, which in these days
rarely have occurred to observation. For Example, Hippocrates treats of Worms
being generated in Children whilst they are in the Womb, which is seldom taken
notice of by Modern Writers.

Plutarch gives an Account of a young man at Athens, Plut. 8. Symp.
who voided Worms mingled with his Seed.

Alsaravius in his Chapter of the Cough, Alsarav. Cap. de Tussi.
treats of Animals generated in the Lungs, as one cause of it. And, without
doubt, they may often be the cause of the Consumption, and Ulcers of that part,
though I have not met with any Modern Writer who takes notice of it, except the
Learned Muffet, who quotes a Story out of Hieronymus Gabucinus, of a Lady, Who
spit up a Lump of Phlegm in the middle of which there was a Worm. The same
thing happened, not long since, to a learned Friend of mine, who affirmed to me,
That having an untoward Cough, he began to be very suspicious of his Lungs, and
(being himself a Physician) to use those Remedies which he judged most fitting.
And one day observing diligently his Spittle, he observed a Red Spot to move in
the midst of a Clot of it; which, when he had disengaged from the slimy Phlegm
which encompassed it, he discovered to be a long Red Worm with many Feet: After
this, he Coughed up another of the same kind, and then grew very well, and has
since continued free from his Cough.

There was a Disease of Worms amongst the Ancients (though in their Times and
Countries, the Scurvy and Pox were not stirring) which is seldom to be met with
in our Age; it was called by the Grecians, Drancucula, and by the Arabians, the
Vena Civilis, or Medena. I have met only with two Modern Authors who treat of
it. Muffet Insect. l. 2. c. 20.
The one is Muffet, who writes, That in India, and the Countries beyond Egypt,
a certain kind of Worms is bred in the Arms and Legs, and other musculous parts
af the Body, which are endued with motion, and commonly called Dracontia. The
other is, Petrus Monavius, in a Letter to Hieronymus Mercurialis, in the Fifth
Book of Crato's Epistles set out by Scholzius, who relates, That there was a
Disease in the place where he lived very frequent amongst Children, which, in
their Language, they call Mittiser. The Children afflicted with it, pined and
wasted away without any manifest cause. The way of curing them, was by rubbing
the Back all over with the Crumbs, or Pith of Wheaten Bread, or the Flower of it
tempered with Honey; and then the heads of some things like Worms, here and
there appeared, which being cut off with a Razor, the Children presently grew
well, and recovered. Some (says he) will have this Tabes to be the same with
the Drancucula of the Grecians, or the Vena Civilis, or Medena of the Arabians;
but, if I am not mistaken (he continues) it comes nearer to the Disease in
Kine, or the Worms bred under the Skin, which Nicolaus Florentinus makes
mention of.

Aristotle in his History of Animals, Aristot. 5. Histor. Animal. c. 32.
makes mention of a small Animal generated under the Skin, which he calls
(...), which is the same with those little Creatures which are called Syrones,
(...), quia tractim sub cute repunt: they are a sort of Mites, which the
English call Wheale-Worms, like to those which are bred in Cheese, and old Wax,
which like Moles, dig their way under the Skin, and cause a very troublesome and
importunate itching. They are sometimes (as Muffet observes) bred under the
Coats of the Eye; and, he says, some Women were very skilful in picking them
out with a Needle: And that John Arden, a learned English Surgeon, has
written, That the Eyes are certainly cured, by washing them with sublimated
Wine.

This very ancient Disease observed by Aristotle, happened in a very great height
(in Muffets own time) to the Lady Penruddock, Muffet Insect. l. 2. c. 24.
Who being very apprehensive of a Consumption of her Lungs, fell to the
Drinking of Goats Milk in very large quantities, by which means, her whole Body
became miserably afflicted with swarms of Mites, insomuch, that she (having for
some time lived (without any manner of sleep) in a most restless and painful
condition, being intolerably tormented in her Eyes, Lips, Gums, Soles of her
Feet, Head, Nose, and every other part of her Body; her Disease growing upon
her, and her misery increasing, and all her flesh being, as it were, devoured
by these Creatures, in spite of all Remedies, which were in vain used by the
Physicians) at length ended her miserable life. The same Author adds, That it
was very observable, that by how much the more often, and diligently, the Mites
were dug out of her Skin with her Women's Needles, the increase of their
swarms was so much the greater; and that when they had devoured her flesh, they
appeared of a more considerable bigness than at first.

I have observed in Berkshire, in the Months of July and August, a little
Animal no bigger than the Mite in a Cheese, of an Orange-Tawny Color, which
very much vexes the Skin with a troublesome itching, the Countrey-people call it
a Harvest-Louse: when it first begins to dig its way into the Skin (which is
perceived by the itching of the part) it is easily picked out with a Needle;
but if upon the first itching the part be rubbed, the little Animal shelters it
self deep under the Skin, and by undermining the place, and digging or eating
its way, causes an itching, and immediately a Pimple to rise. I suppose, that
this Creature (though it be like the (...) of Aristotle, or the Syrones) is not
the same, because I observe, that if it be dug out with a Needle, no Blister
at all is raised; and therefore rather think, that this Animal is generated in
the Air, or Corn at that time of the Year; whereas it is observed, that the
Syrones, and the tineae are bred out of putrified Serum collected in a Pimple;
and that they are sustained and fed by the same, and that this being dried
away, they suddenly dye.

From these observations of Plutarch, Alsaravius, and Aristotle, of the
Production of Insects in men's Bodies; it is most evident, That the intermixture
of the Pocky and Scorbutic Ferments, have nothing to do in the generating of
Worms, since in Ages and Places when and where those Distempers were never
known, as frequent and strange cases of Worms, as any which have happened in our
times, have been observed. The truth of this will farther appear, if we
consider, that not only in humane, but likewise in all sorts of other Bodies,
and in all kinds of Creatures, which are not in the least subject to any
alterations from the force and infection of those Diseases, the like
generations of Animals do continually happen. For not only in Animals and
Vegetables (every one of which breeds its peculiar Insect) but in Metals,
Stones, Fire and Snow, Worms are engendered. Muffet affirms upon his own
knowledge, and the authority of Pennius, Muffet. Insect. c. 18. l. 2.
That though nothing be bitterer than Gall, or Agarick, nothing salter than the
Sea, nothing sowrer than Vinegar, nothing hotter than Fire, or colder than
Snow, yet it is most certain, That Worms are bred out of all these.

As to Insects, being bred in other Animals besides Man, every Farrier,
Huntsman, Shepherd, Faulconer, and Butcher, can furnish us with innumerable
Observations.

I will instance in some few which I have met with in Authors.

Doctor Wharton in his Book De Glandulis, Dr. Wharton de Gland. c. 23. Muffet
Insect. c. 30.
and before him, Muffet observes, That under the Horns of Does, Sheep, and
Goats, there is a mucous kind of matter like a Gelly, out of which in April a
great many Worms are produced, which coming away by the Nostrils and Palate, are
turned into a flesh Fly. Sheep which dye of the Rott, have in their Livers
Worms like Box Leaves.

Platerus tells us, Plat. ob. l. 3. p. 616.
That upon Dissection of a Youth, he found his Guts full of long Worms, and
those Worms full of lesser ones.

It is observed; that the long sort of Beetles have all of them a long Worm in
their Belly, near three times as long as themselves.

Bartholinus in the second Century of his Epistles, the 56 Epistle, gives an
account of the Dissection of a Dog, which had in the inside of his Oesophagus,
several hard Swellings, out of which, when they were opened, crept a great
number of Worms; in the inside of the Oesophagus, were very many little Holes
belonging to each Swelling, through which (says he) it is very probable, that
the Worms used to go down into the stomach, and return back again.

Not only in almost all sorts of Animals, but in Metals and Stones (as I have
before intimated) Insects may be generated. Muffet observes, That Millers, who
pick their grinding stones to make them ruffer, when they are grown too smooth
with grinding, do often find Worms in the stones: And he tells us, that
Platerus himself told him, that he found a live Toad in the Center of a huge
stone, which he divided asunder with a Saw; and (he says) the same thing
happened in the Quarry of one Mr. W. Cave in Liecestershire. Neque sane video
(says that learned Author) cur magis in animalibus lapides, quam in lapidibus
animalia nasci queant: atque ut nobis metallicos spiritus sacile tribuo, ita
illis animales concedere (salva virtutis ^ge) non timeo. Habent enim illi
invisibiles, and tacitos meatus, nervos, venas, and sinus: quibus alienum
humorem, aliena semina, and peregrinos spiritus vel attrahunt, vel saltem vi
illatos admittunt.

And indeed no wonder, since animarum plena sunt omnia, since the whole
Creation is full of life and soul, if in all bodies whatsoever, which undergo
either a quick or slow fermentation, Worms, Insects, r Animals be continually
produced. But in humane bodies, whose Juices and Blood are subject to
disorderly and morbifick fermentations, upon dissolution of the Crasis, and
Temperature of those Liquors, a generation of Infects must of necessity
frequently ensue. For although whilst a man is in health, and a due temperament
of the vital, animal, and natural Constitutions is maintained, by the power of
the Spirits all heterogeneous Seeds are either kept under, and suppressed; or
else, as offensive guests, presently exterminated out of the Body; when once by
Diseases the Spirits are abated, and the right tone and temper of the parts,
and mixture of the Juices is debauched, those extraneous Ferments which were
before kept in subjection, rebel; and (being as it were at their own dispose,
and uncontrolled) effect those generations which are most suitable to the nature
of their Seminalities.

From this cause it proceeds, That oftentimes putrid and malignant Fevers are
accompanied with Worms, which are more commonly the Effects, than Causes of
^ose Distempers; and are not produced by any intermixture of a Pocky and
Scorbutic Ferment; but from the Salts or Seminalities of those Infects, which
in the disorder and confusion of the Body in Fevers, are set at liberty. For
those subtle and active parts of matter getting loose (during the intestine
motion, or hurly burly of the Particles of the Blood and Liquors) from other
Concretions to which they were united, immediately seize upon some or other of
the more gross parts, then form Organs for motion, and presently become
Animals. From this Reason it is, That Children at the time of breeding their
Teeth (which puts them into a feverish Distemper) are most commonly troubled
with Worms, as Hippocrates observes in his Aphorisms, who speaking of the time
of Childrens breeding Teeth, and the Diseases which they are then subject to,
says thus, Ipsis vero grandiusculis, tonsillarum inflammationes, Tileman in
Hippoc. Aph.
vertebrae in occipitio introrsum luxationes, asthmata, calculi, lumbrici
rotundi, ascarides, etc. And indeed not only in the Body of man, but in almost
all other Bodies in the World upon Fermentations, new Productions and
Generations of Animals do usually happen. The learned Doctor Ent, in his
Apology for the Circulation, observes, That small Flies are produced by that
acid spirit of Moscatel Wine (which from them has its denomination) which
evaporate in the first Ebullition. And the same Author affirms, That if a man
put a small quantity of Vitriol into Wine or Water, he shall presently produce
a great number of Worms. And, to this purpose, he gives an excellent account of
the generation of Insects.

Insecta omnia, says he, (licet non semper) mutuantur ab aliis: Dr. Ent. Apol.
pro Circ. p. 247.
idque vel a plantis arescentibus, ut culices; vel e Succis fermentatis, ut
muscae espiritu vini; vel e rore ut erucae; and alia aliter; unus tamen horum
generationis modus est. Spiritus nempe acidus, subtilis, volatilis, qui a leni
calore vivificatur and pro subjecti natura (quae in sale ejus fixo potissimum
nidulatur) varia quoque animantia producit. Hic Spiritus concentratur, sive
unum in locum colligitur, in iis quae cord praedita sunt: In Erucis autem,
vermibus, aliisque, Spiritus ille per universum corpus diffunditur, and tota
cor sunt.

Here we see this learned Philosopher and Physician, does not ascribe the
generation of Worms, to the Pocky and Scorbutic Ferments; but to Salts, from
the difference of which it often comes to pass, that not only common Worms, but
Insects of different species, and even Serpents have been produced in almost
every part of humane Bodies; and though one would imagine, that the Bladder of
Gall, by the bitterness of the Juice which it contains, which is very forcible
to destroy Worms; and the Spleen, by the sharpness of its Liquor, should be
exempted from being liable to produce those Creatures: yet even in these parts,
great numbers of Worms have been found. Muffet tells us of a Disease, which at
one time was very frequent in Germany and Hungary, which the Polonians called
Stowny Roback, and the Germans Hauptwurm; it seized them with a violent
Hemicrania, insomuch, that they fell into a madness or frenzy; and when they
were dead upon Dissection of the Brain, they found a Worm in it. The Physicians
cured this Disease with Garlic in Spirit of Wine, which certainly cured all
who took it inwardly, but the rest inevitably perished. The same Author tells
us, of a Student in Cambridge, who vented a Worm by Urine, which had a great
many Feet; and that Pennius observed a great many Insects in the Hypostasis of
the Urine of a person laboring of an Apostem of the Kidneys. He tells us
likewise, that at Francfort he saw Worms like Ascarides, come out of a Woman's
womb.

Anno Domini 1663. I was called to a Family, in which, one after another, six
or seven persons fell sick of a malignant Fever; it was of a dull, sluggish
motion, and continued upon them whom it seized a Month, or Five weeks, before
they recovered. One remarkable Accident which accompanied it, was a continual
Cough; by which the persons affected did continually both day and night, bring
up an incredible quantity of ill-coloured and very bad scented phlegm, of which
the Nurse-keeper bringing me one day a Porringer full, showed me in it a twist
as it were of Horsehairs, each, at least, half as long as my finger; we
observed every one of them to be animated, and endued with a brisk and lively
motion. It will not seem strange to any man, that these rare Productions of
sundry species of Worms should happen in men's Bodies, if we consider, That in
our Meats, Drinks, and Air, the Salts or Seminalities of sundry Insects may be
conveyed into, and mingled with our Blood, which are kept under by the dominion
of the Spirits, and never are permitted to exercise their own natural
Operations, till in Diseases, and Disorders of the Body, they come to be set at
liberty. Now the causes and reasons of the generation of Insects, as well in
humane, as other Bodies, being as ancient as the Creation it self (in which the
Seeds of Worms, as well as Vegetables, received their power of multiplying)
there appears no reason why Worms should in these times be more frequently
appearing in Fevers, and other Diseases, than in former; or that any alteration
should by vermination be brought into the nature of Diseases.

Now, as to the Experiments of Kircher, though I will not question the faith of
that Author in delivering them, yet I do not doubt, but in former Ages, by the
help of a good Microscope, the same Observations might have been made.

And though I will allow, that in times of Pestilence, by the indisposition of
the Air, and the rambling of pernicious steams flowing from infected Bodies,
more plentiful swarms and numerous productions of insects in the Air and other
Bodies, may ensue than in other more healthful seasons; yet I must beg leave of
Kircher to apprehend some difficulties in assenting to his Hypothesis, since
the manner of infection from the plague, may be more easily made out from the
figure and motion of Atoms, than by those swarms of living creatures,
perpetually vented from the infected Body, which, if they poison the sound
Body, by turning its Blood and Juices into the like pernicious Vermin, I see no
reason, why they should not fill the whole Air with their fatal progeny, and
impregnating the Winds with their Venomous Colonies, permit no man to be safe,
though removed at a considerable distance from the places which are infected:
Whereas, it is found true by constant Experience, (except by some common cause,
which has corrupted the whole air, the plague be produced) The pestilence
insects not at a far distance, but only within a narrow Sphere. It is very
possible, that not only the Blood of men in Fevers, but also that of healthy
persons, may sometimes be observed to be full of Mites or Worms, as well as
Milk and Vinegar, and yet no malignant Distemper, much less the plague be
produced by them. For we find, that these Liquors, though almost constituted of
innumerable little Animals, are not in the least adverse to the nature of man:
and, on the contrary, the best and sharpest Vinegar (which most abounds with
Worms) to be an excellent Antidote and preservative against the plague. Neither
will M. N. (I must tell him) be er'e the nearer, as to the curation of
Diseases, from this Notion of Kir^her; For even those Remedies, which will
destroy great Worms in the Stomach and Bowels, are, perhaps, apt to produce
little Mites in the Blood; as, in the Experiments quoted out of Dr. Ent, the
Spirit of Moscatel produces Flies; and Vitriol, which is an admirable resister
of all putrefaction, in Water or Wine, produces Worms.

As to the Cure of malignant Fevers, though I know well that in them Worms are
often produced in the Bowels and other parts, from the putrefaction of the
Aliment, and corruption of the Ferments of the parts, yet they are not seldom
free from those accidents; and when they happen, Nature and Physicians have so
ordered the matter, that generally most Medicines, which are Alexipharmical are
likewise proper against the Worms. Riverius, River. Obs. 91.
in his Observations, recommends it as a thing worthy of especial notice, That
Bezoar is of admirable virtue against Worms, and, in another place, highly
commends Scordium. The virtues of Treacle, Mithridate, Diascordium, Hartshorn,
Coral, Pearls, Trochisks of Vipers, the acid juices of Minerals and Vegetables,
the Compound waters of the Shops, as, Aqua Scordii Composita, Theriacal,
frigida Saxon: and many other Remedies used both by the Galenists and Chemists,
are sufficiently known to be of admirable Virtue and Use in both cases: So that
the very same Remedies, which are of force against the malignity of the
Disease, are also very prevalent in destroying Worms.

As to the Plague (as I have before intimated) the account which the Learned
Gassendus gives of it, seems to me abundantly more satisfactory, than what
Kircher pretends to, by his animated Effluxes.

Videtur inprimis (says that Learned Author) halitus pestilens idem posse
proportione praestare in aere quod Coagulum in lacte. Gassend. c. de Calore
Subterraneo.
Ut enim dum Corpuscula coaguli per lactis Substantiam diffusa excurrunt, ita
situm partium illius commutant ut ex fluido fixum consistensque reddant (eo
modo, quo si confusam, fluxamque congeriem tessularum exquisite aequalium,
perflans Ventus sic emoveret, ut facies faciebus exquisite coadunaret). Sic
Corpuscula halitus pestilentis insinuata in aerem intelligi possunt ea ratione
invertere commutareque ejus situm ut ex salubri insaluber evadat, and qui prius
egregie naturae animalis accommodabatur, incommodus illi summopere fiat; Neque
mirum sit, si, qui prius animalis Corpus fovebat, continebatque in suo statu;
illius parts deinceps conturbet, and immutare coactet. Deinde videri quoque
pote^ halitus idem, sive in aere, sive in animalis corpore, quod flamma,
ignisve praestare. Ut enim dum flamma aeri admota in quem Naphtha halitum
pinguem, corpusculis-ve igneis turgentem circumfuderit, ipsum sui similem
facit, creatve in eo flammam quatenus corpuscula ignis subeuntia in halitum,
quae sunt in eo sui similia hoc est ignea Corpuscula, ex ipsa halitus textura,
quam discutiunt, extricant, iisque similes suos motus reddunt: Sic dum halitus
pestilens aeri, Corporive animalis admonetur, intelligi potest subeuntia ^ejus
corpuscula ita emovere illa, quae in ipsis sui similia reperiunt, ut ea in
texturam novam segregent, and motus suis similes, exitiales utpote, induant.
Nempe ut nemo diceret esse in illo aere circum Naphtham fuso, neque etiam in
ligno, corpuscula ulla calorifica, quatenus propter conditionem ejus naturae ad
quam spectant, indicium caloris nullum exhibent; sic nemo etiam diceret, esse
in aere viso puro, animalive habito sano, venenata ulla, pestiserave
corpuscula; quae esse tamen omnino valiant utcunque ob eam Contexturam quam
attinent, se minime prodant. Possemus id uberius ex Gangrenae effectu,
aliisque, multis, declarare.

And indeed the Hypothesis which explains the way of the working of the
pestilent Infection upon the Air and Blood of sound persons, by the comparison
of the Runnet's coagulating and fixing Milk (which is a very fluid Body) into
Cheese (which is a very firm and fixed one) agrees very well to solve the
Phenomenon of that Disease; for it is more than probable, that the Plague kills
by coagulating the Blood, and rendering it unfit for Circulation; for the Spots
or Tokens seem to be nothing else but quarred flakes of it, which being thrust
out at the ends of the Arteries, there stick, can no more enter into the mouths
of the Veins, than Milk, when it is turned (...) Cheese, can pass through a
Streiner.

The Definition which M. N. gives us i^ this Chapter, of the cause of Diseases,
me thinks, is very pretty, where he tells us, That the cause of all Diseases,
Me. Med. p. 199.
is a certa^^ Putrefaction secretly lurking among the hidd^^ Recesses of the
Humors. This Definition, (...) dare swear for him, is his own, though he has
the face to fasten it upon the Unanimous Consent of Physicians. For by its
being most unintelligible Fustian, I know it to be of the same Wofe and Thread,
with the rest of Medela.

CHAP. VI.
I Have in the foregoing Chapters proved at large, that the Scurvy was a
Disease, anciently Endemial to the Northern parts of the World: I have allowed
a notable disparity to be between the Blood of the Inhabitants of the Regions,
subject to this Disease, and that of those Persons, who breathed the Air where
the Ancients lived, and made their Observations upon Diseases: Yet is not the
difference so considerable, but that a rational Physician, may make admirable
use of much of their Method and Medicines, in the curing of Diseases in these
Climates, and, even in such cases, where the Scurvy bears a considerable share
in the complication. And, as to Vermination, I have demonstrated, that Worms
are more often the Effects than Causes of Diseases; that their productions in
humane, and other natural Bodies, was no less frequent and observable in former
times, than ours; and that from them, so great a change in all Diseases, as to
make void all the Practice and Medicines of the Ancients can by no means be
inferred: It is confessed, that the French Pox, is of late come in upon us from
America, but M. N. has not in the least proved, that it has so tainted and
infected the Stock and Nature of mankind, as to render all Diseases incident to
humane Bodies uncurable, by the Ways, Methods, and Medicines, which the
faithful experiences of former Ages have recommended to us as effectual. Some
Maxims of Physic are (by M. N's. favor) as Eternal, as those of the Spanish
Monarchy. Though (by the way) he has unluckily quoted Balzac for this
expression, since it is very obvious to tell him, That Maxims of Monarchy and
Physic, have been equally sacred to him: and that there was a time, when he
treated Monarchs with less civil Language, than that is, which now he bestows
upon the Princes of the Art of Physic; and he must give me leave to mind that
he might as rationally infer from that monstrous and new Disease of the late
Rebellion (which was by his virulent Pamphlets diffused amongst the people,
like the Plagu^ by the infected rags of greedy and malicious Nurse-keepers)
that all Maxims in Policy and Government, are become insignificant and
unnecessary, as to conclude, from the breaking out of the American Disease,
that the old way of Physic in respect of Method and Medicines, is insufficient
and useless.

For many Maxims in Medicine, are founded upon the long and constant
Observations and Experience of the World, and so adapted to the very Nature and
Constitution of Man, that in all places and times, they must of necessity be of
admirable use. For indeed, many Rules of this Art, are not grounded upon any
Hypothesis contrived by man's brain, but are themselves the very foundations,
which will (though possibly Philosophers have raised upon them an ill
contrived, and incommodious Structure) remain, (when the Superstructure is
demolished) stable and unshaken. And, though it must be confessed, that the
Physiology and Pathology of the Ancients, are very insufficient to satisfy an
inquiring man concerning the true causes of Diseases and their Symptoms, yet
much of the Method certainly is not grounded upon them, but was long in use
before those notions of Causes were invented.

The learned Dr. Willis de Feb.
Willis speaks much to this purpose, in his Preface before his Book de
Febribus. He tells us, that in the cure of Fevers, some indications anciently
received, do in this age stand firm, and ought to be observed to the worlds
end; and that they are not founded upon the precepts of Schools, but upon
Experience, the Mistress and Teacher of the Art of Physic. And that, though
the Hypotheses of the Ancients were erroneous, that did not hinder the practice
of Physic, which was first established by induction from Observations, from
going on successefully: And thence he concludes, that much less shall a Theory
built upon true grounds be pernicious to the sick, or cause practitioners to
leave that track, which Time and Experience has recommended to them as safe.
And it cannot be denied, continues he, that bare Empericism, without the
assistance of Method and Reason, does signify very little; nay, that it does
most commonly do a world of mischief, considering, that the very same Diseases,
are not at all times and in all places to be encountered with the same Remedies:
but he that has so joined both together, that Reason shall not give Laws to
Nature and Experience, nor these corrupt Reason, seems to be a most absolute
and complete Physician. Now, if it be true (as this excellent Philosopher and
Physician affirms) that much of the method, and many of the precepts of Physic
do, and will always continue firm and useful, because they are not established
upon fantastical Notion's (such as are the Author's of Medela) but upon
unerring Experience: no less will those Medicines, which the constant trial of
the World has recommended as effectual, remain serviceable to Physicians,
before such as are imagined by the touchy head of M. N. or any other whimsical
Inventer of Secrets and Remedies. For I have already proved at large in the
first Chapter, that the Materia Medica is wholly founded upon Experience. That
Medicines were at the first found out Crebro singularium tentamine, by a
frequent Trial of each Medicine upon sundry persons. I have there showed how
dangerous it is for ignorant Quacks, to Experiment Medicines (especially such
as are hazardous) upon the Bodies of men.

I am, for my part, of the same opinion with Varandaeus, who told the ingenious
and learned Doctor Primrose, Primr. Popular. Err. l. 1. c. 12.
that those Remedies are the best which are no Secrets, but best known, as
being confirmed by more certain Experience. I confess (says that eminent
Physician) that all the virtues of Simples are not yet perfectly known; as yet
many lie hid. If therefore any man has found out by Experience, the virtue of
some simple Medicament not yet known, that increase of Art is to be commended,
and deserves to be called a Secret; as he that first found out the Vomiting
virtue of Antimony; He that invented the compounding, and found out the
efficacy of Gunpowder; he that first brought Jalap into use, had Secrets
greatly to be commended: such as these if any man have, he is worthy of
commendation, and I think, no other secrets are to be admitted.

But I think it is very evident, that these Discoveries are not the products of
Invention but Chance, and upon this score mankind is possibly more indebted to
Nature, for discreetly concealing the way of making gold than if she had made
it as common and easy to the Chemists, as she has the Art of making Cheese and
Butter to the Country Housewives, for in the prosecution of that, she has
casually intiched the world with many accidental Experiments, both in
Philosophy and Physic, much more considerable and beneficial to men, than if
she had taught us, like Midas, to turn all things which we touched into Gold.
If I mistake not, Doctor Harvey does somewhere tell us, that he never dissected
a Body in his life for the examination of some part, or tracing some Vessel
which he proposed to himself, but in the operation, some new thing was
unexpectedly offered to him, which was usually more considerable than the
matter which he designed. I am apt to believe, that we are not only in a great
measure beholding to Chance and Experience, for the Knowledge of the Virtues of
Simples, but that even in Compound Medicines, there have often virtues and
qualities resulted from the Mixture, which were never foreseen nor designed by
the Artist who put the ingredients together, but discovered by Experience.

We see, that as to those very ancient Medicines, Mithridate, Treacle, and
Diascordium, which are Compounds esteemed sacred for their Virtues, as well by
the Chemists as Galenists, it is much more easy to prove the truth of their
efficacy, than to give the true reason of their Composition.

I would fain know of M. N. how he could have been certain that Antimonium
Diaphoreticum should not Vomit, or Mercurius Dulcis not have retained in it the
corrosive faculty of Sublimate, had not Experience cleared their innocencies,
neither can he promise, that the action of fire, or a Menstruum upon those
Bodies shall not produce Concretes out of Antimony or Mercury, as highly
venomous as these mentioned preparations are safe and benign. We see that
Tobacco, which by all sorts of men is indifferently taken, without almost any
sensible mischief, affords a Spirit one of the most sudden and potent poisons
in the world; which, possibly, was at first discovered at the expense of a man's
life, by some bold and venturous Chemist. It is Experience, and not Reason,
that has taught the West-Indians that they may safely make their Bread of the
Root of Casave, Bont. Med. Indor. p. 211.
though the expressed juice of it (as Bontius tells us) be an arrant poison.

Therefore, though M. N. brag of his invented Medicines, and tell us, that
doubtless he is a very wicked man, which will administer any Medicine, which
he knows not whether it be safe or no; and a very ignorant one, that is not
able to judge certainly, if he invent a new Medicin, whether it be fit or no;
or who dares not adventure it first upon his own Body, yet shall presume to
give it to another: I must plainly tell him, that it is very hard for an
ignorant practiser of his own invented Medicines, not to be very wicked. And
for his part (if he be not foully abused by the opinion of the World) I think
there is no less danger in trusting to his Integrity than Skill. But indeed,
he is a Gentleman very worthy upon whose Body (as the mortal force of Charous
Cane in Italy, Sands Trav.
is tried upon Malefactors and Dogs) dangerous and pernicious Medicines
(especially his own) should be experimented.

-- Nec lex est justior ulla
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.
And therefore I advise him (if he will needs be dabling in Physic) to content
himself with his Collections from Farriers and Herdsmen, and his good Aunt (to
whom he ows most of his skill) the cunning Woman of Burford.

CHAP. VII.
I Am not so religiously sworn to the Philosophy of Aristotle and Galen, as to
take upon me the defense of Elements, Qualities, Temperaments, and Humots.

Yet since the grave Sennertus gives advice, De Con. and Dissen. Chym. cum Gal.
That words, and terms, imposed by the first Inventers of the Art of Physic,
and established by the Use, Consent, and Approbation of all both Chemists and
Galenists, ought to be retained, and not unadvisedly laid aside; I will
endeavor to show, That Heat, Cold, Moistness, Dryness, may be most pertinently
reckoned amongst the Causes of Diseases; and the terms of Temperaments, and
Humors, may be not incommodiously retained, even to explicate the most refined
Notions in the reformed Theory of Physic.

For though I do agree with Hippocrates, That acid, bitter, sharp, and salt,
and, possibly, a Thousand more different Medifications of matter, are to be
reputed, as well as those vulgarly called, Sennert. de Con. and Dissen. Chym.
cum Gal. c. 16.
the four first Qualities, amongst morbifick Causes: Yet I cannot but assent to
the learned Sennertus, who tells us, That the Chemists do ill, wholly to reject
the first Qualities from being Causes of Diseases. For we find by experience,
that as soon as a preternatural Distemper, either hot, cold, moist, or day, is
induced upon any part; the action of the part is presently hindered neither is
it able to perform its duty and office, till the natural temper be restored;
which is commonly known to happen every day to the stomach: And he quotes
Galen, for instancing, That some by sitting too long upon a cold stone, or by
staying too long in cold water, have had the Muscle of the Anus resolved: And
he makes mention of another, Who in a cold and moist season, by wearing too
long his wet Coat, fell into a Palsy of his hand, the Nerves which come from
the spinal marrow to the hand, being thereby too much cooled and moistened: No
body is ignorant, how prejudicial it is to a man to drink largely of cold water
when he is hot. And since, according to Hippocrates, the Cure indicates the
Disease, the same mentioned Author bids consult Galen, what great things may be
done by Baths of water in Hectic Distempers. And he farther adds, that the
advice of Scaliger to Cardan, may very well be made use of to them who resist
both Sense and Experience, who upon Cardan's asserting, That Cold was only a
Privation; to convince him, advised him, to leave off his Clothes, and go
Bare-leg'd, and Bareheaded in the extremity of Winter. Travelers do often, to
their Cost, find of what force Cold is, when they lose their Noses, Ears, Feet,
and Hands, mortified by the violence of its congealing power. Farthermore,
every days Experience informs us, what changes and alterations are made upon
our Bodies, as to Epidemical diseases, by the hot, cold, moist, or dry
Constitutions of the Seasons and Years. And I cannot but wonder, that the
Chemists should exclude the four first Qualities from having any causality in
diseases; when in their own operations they observe a notable disparity between
the effects of a dry, and moist heat: and they employ heat, as the common
instrument of almost all their operations. But whilst I assert the Essiciency
of the first qualities, in the causing of diseases in the humane Body; I would
not be understood, to mean by the word Quality, a Being or Entity distinct from
matter or Body: But that I apprehend by hot, cold, moist, and dry, the parts of
matter, or Atoms so figured, and moved, as to produce those Effects which we
call heating, cooling, moistning, and drying. For Example, We use to have an
apprehension or notion of heat, from the relation it has to the sense, or as it
is the efficient cause of that acute passion, or sensation, which we feel in
our skin, or any other organ of touch, whilst we are burnt or heated. But this
being too particular an effect of heat, only as it works upon an Animal; we
ought therefore to consider it from its more general, and comprehensive
effects, upon which this which is more special does depend; which is to enter
into the Pores of a Body, to penetrate through the parts of it; and to force,
or rend them asunder from one another, and so to dissolve the union and
continuity of the Body. This cannot be understood to be done by a bare naked
quality, but by certain Atoms which are endued with such a motion, figure, and
fize, as are fit to penetrate, discuss, dissolve, and perform all those effects
which we usually attribute to heat. On the other side, since we find cold the
most opposite thing in the World to heat, if it be the property of heat to
dissolve, discuss, and tear asunder, it is then the property of cold to
congeal, fasten, and close together; and those Atoms, which by their shape and
figures are fit and proper for those effects, may, with very good Reason, be
called Atoms of cold; and Bodies made up of such Particles, cold Bodies. Thus
the Air (which is the common Receptacle of heat and cold) upon the blowing of
North-winds, is usually filled with such Atoms, as bind, and congeal the Earth,
and Water; and in the body of man, both by mingling with the blood, and closing
the pores, or breathing holes of his body, oftentimes produce considerable
disorders. As for humidity, or moistness, it seems to be nothing else but a
kind of fluidness; and Liquors are commonly said to be moist, inasmuch as when
they are poured upon hard and compact bodies, some small parts of them are left
behind, either sticking in the little Cavities of the Surface, and then the
body is said to be wet; or else have insinuated themselves into the most inward
pores and recesses of the hard body, which then we commonly say is moistened.
And, on the contrary, dryness is nothing else but a kind of firmness, inasmuch
as a dry body is upon that score the more firm for being void of all moisture.

And now I cannot see why these four first Qualities (as they are termed)
should be excluded from having a share in the number of the causes of Diseases,
since they are notably active (especially the three first) modifications of
matter; and not only apt to excite various motions, and cause, as well new
Combinations, as dissolutions of bodies in the great World; but also powerfully
to alter the Microcosm, and produce fundry different Symptoms, in relation to
the motions and harmony of the humane Engine.

In the next place, though it be utterly untrue, that there are in the Vessels
four distinct humors; but whatsoever is contained in the Arteries and Veins, is
either the stale deflagrated blood, or the alimentary juice fresh come into the
Vessels; or else the Serum or Whey returned by the Lymphaticks, or else some
Particles of Nitre, and other bodies received in by the Lungs and Mouths of the
veins from the Ambient. And though the blood differ in several persons only as
to the abundance, or defect of natural heat; yet are men not improperly said to
be of a melancholic, choleric, or some other temperament; inasmuch, as by how
much the more vigorous or remiss the natural heat is in their bowels and
entrals, by so much the more weakly or powerfully concoctions are performed,
and consequently the blood apt to be overcharged either with stale, and adust,
or else crude, and phlegmatic Excrements: In which respect, the person either
way disposed, is not improperly said to be of a phlegmatic, or choleric
temper; and if the adust, or raw Excrements, be not rightly and duly separated
out of the mass, by the effervenscy of the blood, I see no reason why I may not
say, that a man abounds with a melancholic, choleric, or phlegmatic humor;
and if so, the Notions about Pharmacy, aiming at an evacuation, or else
alteration of these humors, are not framed amiss, nor (whatever M. N. argues to
the contrary) without very good reason. For, I suppose, it alters not much the
case as to practice, whether a man suppose that there is too great a redundancy
of one of the humors in the blood, or whether (which is the right Notion) he
apprehend the blood depraved, either with phlegmatic and raw juyces, or the
bilious Excrement consisting of Salt and Sulphur, or the melancholic, in which
the Caput mortuum, or earthy part, is most predominant. For either of these
Notions will direct us (when the blood is unable to fine its self) to assist it
with those alteratives which time and experience has recommended to us as
proper in those cases, and those Purgers which have been long observed more
particularly to make a separation, either of the pituitous, choleric, or
melancholic parts of the blood. For, though it be irrational to think, that
Purgers do with a certain knowledge, or choice, lay hold of one humor rather
than another; yet is that distinction of Purgers into Chologoga, Phlegmagoga,
Melanagoga, and Hydragoga, of very good use, and founded upon observation and
experience; inasmuch as these several Purgers by causing very different
Fermentations, and variously agitating the Particles of the Blood, may, with
very good reason, cause different separations; and so one Purger to evacuate
that sort of Excrement, Barm or Lee, which another cannot.

And in this matter I do not find, that the Improvements which have been made
in the Theory of Physic, have much altered the Practice; for the indication
for Purging was not founded upon the Notion of the four Humors, but upon long
observation, that when Distempers discovered themselves by such and such signs,
the body was to be emptied, and, by frequent trials, one Purger (as especially
Hellebor in Melancholy) was found more essectual than another. The same may be
said of altering Medicines; for Example, to instance in Hepaticks, as Cichory,
Gentian, Wormwood, Century, Steel, Agrimony, and the like; which are with
admirable success used in Cachexies, Dropsies, and other Diseases, caused from
imperfect Sanguification, though it be now agreed upon by general consent (upon
the Dissection of Hydropical persons, that part being often found little
concerned) that the Liver has primarily little or nothing to do in those
Distempers, and is only secondarily affected, as being, (as I have shown) very
justly excluded from the office of Sanguification. And yet we see, that
Hepaticks are still used in the same Distempers by the best, both Chemists and
Galenists, though the ancient Hypothesis be flung out of doors.

As for M. N's denying the Spleen to be the Receptacle of Melancholy, and
assigning it this use, That it is an Elaborator of the noblest juice, viz. the
arterial blood, by reason of that grand intertexture of Arteries, by which it
holds a near communication with the vital parts of the body; for which, he
quotes Bartholinus, Walaeus, and Highmore: I dare assure him, he does those
worthy Authors great injury; and that neither in them, nor any good Author, who
understands the Circulation of the blood, he ever met with any such opinion,
That the Spleen, by the Arteries, can hold a near communication with the vital
parts of the body; neither do those Authors which he quotes, deny the Spleen to
be the Receptacle of Melancholy. And I would very fain learn of this excellent
Anatomist, how the arterial blood in the Spleen should hold a near
communication with the vital parts of the body by the Arteries, since it is
evident, that the blood is brought thither by the Splenick branch of the
Caeliac Artery, and conveyed thence to the vital parts, not by the Arteries,
but Veins. As for the opinion of Walaeus, and Bartholinus, Barthol. Anat. c. 16.
he has grossly scandalized them both; for Bartholinus in the 16 Chapter of his
Anatomy, numbering up all the opinions which he met with concerning the use of
the Spleen, says thus, Ultima sententia eaque verissima est Joh. Walaei. Putat
autem verosimile, sanguinem ulterius perficiendum, a cordis calore dissolvi,
and ubi is a cord adigeretur per arterias Caeliacas in lienem, non totam illam
massam retineri a liene; sed, ut vesica fellis tantum bilem, ita lienem partem
sanguinis acidam capere, quam possis melancholiam appellare, non aliter ac
distillatione Chymica segregari a rebus Spiritum acidum videmus: Illum acidum
humorem perfici a liene a quo lien nigricans and acidus sentitur. Hunc acidum
humorem permisceri postea sanguini in vasis, and Chylo in ventriculo, and eos
reddere tenuiores: quare obstructo liene crassos in corpore humores coacervari,
non quod crassi humores a liene non trahantur, quos nec in eo naturaliter licet
invenire, sed quod lien attenuantem illum acidum nequeat sanguini Chylo
recommunicare.

Nor has this man of Confidence with less Disingenuity, or Ignorance, fastened
his absurd fancy upon the learned Dr. Highmore, whose opinion I will deliver
in his own words, as it is to be met with in his Anatomical disquisition of the
body of man. Illorum parts agam, Highm. Anat. l. 1. p. 3. c. 3.
qui Splenem cum Galeno succum melancholicum attrahere, eumque a sanguine
separare autumant. And he goes on a little farther, Arteriae Splenicae a
Caeliaca ortae sanguinis partem melancholicam, postquam ultimam in cord
concoctionem subivit, ad lienem deferunt, ac in substantiam ejus infundunt
(sicuti emulgentes Serosum in Renes ducunt) quam lien fermentat ac separat.
These are the opinions of Bartholinus and Highmore, as I have faithfully quoted
in their own words, whose sense either he understands not, or fraudulently
perverts.

A Digression concerning the use of the Spleen, and Hypochondriacal distempers.
FOr the better understanding of the use and office of the Spleen, it is
requisite to examine the shape, make, and mechanical contrivance of it, that
(as by taking a Watch asunder, we are informed for what end and purpose every
Spring, Pin, and Wheel was made) we may the more certainly discover what the
design of Nature was in framing that Bowel; by tracing the Arteries, Veins and
Nerves which constitute it; and considering the quantity, color, site, figure,
and other appearances which offer themselves to our view. And first, as to the
bigness of it, that is very different according to the variety of men's bodies.
They, generally, who have large Veins, have likewise great Spleens. The lesser
(except it be much too small) is far better than the bigger. The figure of it
is most commonly oblong. The color in Embrios, and young Children, red; in
those who are more mature and adult, inclinable to a blackness. The substance
of it consists of black, gross blood congealed amongst the Fibers. It is
furnished with three sorts of Vessels: First, It receives a large branch from
the Caeliac Artery which disperses its self into innumerable small Twigs
amongst the Fibers. In the second place, It has a vein with sprouts into it
from the Perta, which is all spent and lost in the substance of it, except only
two arms, the vas breve, which goes away to the stomach; and the other the
Haemorrhoidal vein, which runs away to the Anus. The coat of the vein which
enters the Spleen (as was first observed (as I take it) by the learend Dr.
Glisson, in the Spleen of an Ox) the farther it goes, grows thinner and
thinner, till at length it vanishes, and nothing of it appears; and all the way
it runs, it is (as it were) boared full of some lesser, some larger holes,
which receive into them the blood returning out of the Parenchyma; and these
holes, after the manner of veins, branch themselves into the Parenchyma. In the
veins, there are evidently to be seen Valves, which stop and hinder all passage
and commerce from the Porta by the Splenick branch to the Spleen; only there
may be plainly observed an Anastomosis between the upper branches of the vein
and Artery.

In the third place, the Spleen is furnished with Nerves from the Sixth Pare
(according to the Ancients, or Eighth, according to Dr. Willis) which, with
their numerous Threads and Fibers, weave themselves into a kind of Net, upon
which the Parenchyma sticks, leaving everywhere multitude of little holes,
which are not unfitly resembled by those in a Sponge, or Pumy-stone, into which
the small Arteries running every where dispersed amongst the Threads of the
Nerves, empty themselves of the blood; which having passed through, and washed
the whole substance of the Spleen, is again drunk up, and carried away by the
veins.

From this description of the Spleen, it seems most probable, That all this Art
and Workmanship was bestowed upon it by Nature, that she might make it a part
of some eminent and necessary use, and not design it for the sink or drein of
the body, or an idle and unprofitable bowel. For indeed it is not her custom to
be at expense of so much skill and pains, to so little, or no purpose; for it
cannot be imagined, that she intended it for the separation of Excrements and
filth, since there is not any excretory vessel or passage to be found which
belongs to it.

Nor is their opinion more likely, who suppose the Spleen to be as a Bath or
Stove to heat and warm the stomach with its blood, since neither its fibrous
constitution seems proper for such a use; nor its situation, since in most
Creatures only one end of it lies near the stomach. Besides, that it is now
taken for granted, That concoction in the stomach is performed by an acid
menstruum, rather than heat, and therefore can stand in little need of the
assistance of the heat of the Spleen; especially, since we find, that Fish, and
other cold Creatures, dissolve their meat easily, and quickly; and yet upon the
opening of them alive, we find no more sensible heat in their stomachs than in
other parts of their bodies. Agreeable to this, I have observed in the stomachs
of Mice some parts of a Tallow Candle dissolved in the bottom of the stomach by
the menstruum, when the rest that lay up toward the upper orifice, was not at
all melted by the heat.

The use then for which (from the Make and fabric of this bowel) it seems to
be framed by Nature, is this.

That the blood brought hither by the Coeliac Arteries, passing through many
turnings and windings, and (as it were) percolating through the Parenchyma,
does leave behind it (as Salt Water streined through Earth) some salt and
earthy parts, which after they have undergone some alteration by their mutual
action one upon another, by their attrition, and justling in their passage
through the several Cells, Cavities, and Pores of the Parenchyma, are by the
fresh blood which perpetually flows thither by continual Circulation, carried
back through the veins into the mass of blood, in which they serve for a most
useful and effectual Ferment. Thus we see the Chemists separate the acid Spirit
from Liquors, and in the Liver the sulphurious or bilious part of the blood is
separated into the vessels of Gall.

Now, for the clearer apprehension of the manner and way how the Ferment of the
Spleen works upon the blood, and other juyces, it will not be improper in this
place to take notice of those ordinary and familiar Ferments which the Bakers
and Brewers every day offer to our consideration.

The learned Dr. Willis, in his most excellent Treatise, De Fermentatione,
tells us, That there are two sorts of Ferments.

One, an Absolute, of which all the Particles are wonderfully active, and
endued with vigorous, and brisk motions; and therefore being mingled with any
thing which is to be fermented, they seize upon the Particles of that body, of
what kind soever they be; and though they were sluggish and unactive before,
hurrie them along with them in their own motions. Thus Barm, Eggs, and the
like, do almost in all bodies, with which they can be mingled, cause a
Fermentation.

The other, is a Respective Ferment which consists most commonly of Particles
of one kind, which will only ferment with Particles of another particular kind
and nature, when they chance to meet. Thus fluid Salts ferment with fixed or
alcalisate Salts, as we find, when sharp Liquors are poured upon Coral,
Hartshorn, Shells, Steel; and when Spirit of Vitriol, and Salt of Tartar are
mingled together, a great Ebullition does ensue; such a Ferment as this is most
probably communicated from the Spleen to the blood and juyces. Now, though it
must be confessed, that the saline and terrestrial parts which constitute the
Splenick Ferment, were actually in the blood before ever that they came to the
Spleen; yet were they before that so entangled and engaged with the other
Principles, the watery and earthy Particles of the blood, that they could not
then excite those Fermentations which depended upon their proper figures, and
genuine motions.

But in the percolation of the blood through the porous Parenchyma of the
Spleen, the combination of the Principles which constitute that Liquor is in a
manner dissolved, and the saline and terrestrial parts are disjoined from the
Phlegm and Sulphur, to which they were before very closely united; which being
free, and in a manner at their own disposal; nor any ways dulled and blunted
by the adhesion of those other Principles, and thus digested (carried through
the veins into the mass of blood) perform those effects in it which are suitable
to their natures; which whilst they remained in combination with the other
Principles, they could not possibly produce. For then being by reason of their
newly acquired Figures not easily miscible with the rest of the blood, they
excite an intestine motion of all the little Particles of it; and by that
means, deliver the more spirituous and fine parts from being too much oppressed
and choked up by the more sluggish and gross; and, in short, work that in the
blood which is performed by a little Leven in a huge Tub of Dough. For as a
little piece of Dough kept so long till it be stale and sour, ferments the
whole mass, and makes it light and rare, which would otherwise have been close
and heavy; so by the mixture of this acid Ferment of the Spleen, the whole
blood is rarefied, made more lively and brisk, and fit to circulate, for the
better supply of the Natural, Vital, and Animal Constitutions.

That the Blood is after this manner fermented by the leven of the Spleen, is
farther argued from the Diseases, which from the obstructions and schirrousness
of this Bowel, are wont to ensue; such are Cachexies, Dropsies, and the like
Dyscrasies of the Blood, which necessarily happen upon defect of the Spleenick
ferment. And it is not unworthy of observation, that Medicines made of the
Spleens of Animals, are recommended to us by Practitioners as proper and
effectual for the cure of these Diseases. The Decoction of an Oxes Spleen is
commended by many Authors; and the Spleen of a Hog, is, by Wallaeus, said to be
very proper in Crudities and imperfect Digestion of the stomach.

And it may well be supposed that the Saline Particles of the Spleen, taken in
by the mouth, and with the Chyle carried into the Veins and Arteries, have the
same operation upon the Blood and Bodies of Animals with the Leven of the
Spleen, when that Bowel is in good order and performs its duty. For that Salts
are the most proper Bodies to ferment the Blood, is known by every days
Experience to Physicians, who, in Chronical Diseases, perform the most
considerable alterations upon the Blood, and open the most obstinate
obstructions of the Bowels, by the assistance of the fixed Salts of Vegetables
and Minerals. Upon this score the Barks of Trees are so much in use, because
they contain in them a far greater quantity of fixed Salt than the Bodies; And
we see, that in Dropsies, Chachexies, Obstructions, and the like Diseases,
which will not yield to vulgar Medicines, the learned practitioners betake
themselves to Medicines of Tartar, Steel, and Vitriol, as a certain Refuge in
the greatest Extremities; and it cannot be imagined, how these Medicines should
perform such certain and admirable effects, but that by fermenting the Blood
with their Saline Particles, they supply the defect of the natural ferment.

For as long as this is vigorous, and the passages are open from the Spleen
into the mass of Blood, the Splenick leven by continually maintaining an
intestine motion of the small Particles of the Blood, preserves that Liquor in
its due mixture and consistence, so that the grosser and finer Particles, being
exactly mingled one with another, and the Spirits free and at liberty, the
Blood is rendered fit to circulate through the most straight and narrow
passages, and not apt to curdle and stagnate in the Vessels. And by this means,
Crudities are concocted, Obstructions opened, tough and slimy humors
attenuated, and the Blood defecated of all its Excrements and Impurities, by
the vents and emunctories of the Body. By this means, not only the Juyces which
run in the Veins and Arteries are rich, pure, and spirituous, but likewise from
these, a soft, subtle, and well rectified Spirit and Liquor is communicated to
the Brain, and distributed into the Nerves for the use of the Animal Function,
and exercise of Sense and Motion in all the Instruments and Organs designed by
Nature for those uses.

Furthermore, it is very probable, that the Splenick Ferment does by the
Arteries, out of the mass of Blood, supply the stomach and Bowels, which serve
for the concoction of Aliment, with a Menstruum (not unlike those Liquors, with
which the Chemists dissolve Metals and other Bodies) for the dissolution of
meat and reducing it to Chyle. For we cannot with Reason, assign that work to
Heat, since the most intense fire cannot by roasting, baking, boiling, or any
other way of applying of that Element, reduce bread, flesh, and other meats in
many days, into a substance so fluid and thin, as the Stomach can in a very
few hours.

Now as the Spleen (whilst it dispenses a sincere and rightly elaborated
ferment) is a Bowel of great use and importance, for the preservation of the
blood and Spirits in their due temper and motion; so does it often cause very
considerable disorders and extravagancies in the Economy of the Body, when it
degenerates from its natural constitution, and infects the Humors and Spirits
with an impure and ill digested Leven. For, that the Blood may duly and orderly
ferment and circulate, it is most requisite, that the intestine motion of the
little Particles which constitute it, be neither too furious and tumultuous,
nor too heavy and sluggish. And for this reason is it, (as I suppose) that the
fixed Salt is separated from the Blood in the Spleen, and again returned, and
mingled with the Mass by the Veins. For indeed, fixed Salt consisting of parts
which are endued with some kind of Acrimony, and yet being not too severely
acid, seem to be Bodies most proper to maintain a leisurely and orderly
Ebullition. But if the ferment once grow too sharp, and acid, and acquire
parts, apt to provoke, irritate, and prick the sensible parts of the Body, and
the fixed Salts become to be fluid, it presently fects the whole stream of the
Blood, puts it into violent and disorderly motions, vellicates the nervous
parts, fixes the Spirits, puts all the humors into a hurly burly, and makes
them apt to congeal and stagnate. For when this Ferment is rightly made, it
consists of Salt, with the addition of a moderate quantity of earth, by the
mutual Conjunction of which fixed Salt is produced but, if by any means there
be a separation made of the Saline part from the earthy, then are the Salts
said to be in the state of fluidity, because they run together into a Liquor,
as Spirit of Salt, Spirit of Vitriol, and the like. Thus, when the Ferment of
the Spleen becomes fluid, it acquires the fierce sharpness of Vinegar, or
Spirit of Vitriol. This is the fault of it in Hypocondriacal Persons. For, in
men who labor of those Distempers, all the fixed Salts of the Blood which
circulate through the Spleen, are there made fluid, till at length they come to
prevail over the other principles of the Blood, and turn the whole stock of it
into a Liquor as sharp as Vinegar, or Spirit of Vitriol, by which means, all
the Spirits are depressed and kept under. The sour Belches and Vomits of
Hypocondriacal Persons, which oftentimes are no less sharp than Spirit of
Vitriol, are a very sufficient argument of the sharpness of their Juices, which
prick and tear their stomachs, bowels, and nervous parts with continual pains
and torments; and sometimes with their Corroding acidity flea their Tongues,
Throats, and Lips.

And the violent and irregular motions, and boylings of the blood, do very
evidendently convince, that the Constitution of that Liquor in Hypochondriacal
Persons is become sharp and eager; For we find it most true from sundry
expriments that such tumultuous Ebullitions are caused from the mixture of
fluid Salts with fixed: and in Liquors, which are void of fluid Salts, we meet
with no such fermentations; or where they are but in small quantity mingled,
the fermentation is less, and more leisurely and nothing so tumultuous.

In Quicklime, and Juices which abound with acid Salt, as soon as the fluid
and fixed meet with one another, presently a noise, heat and boiling do ensue.
Thus we see Salt of Wormwood, Scurvy Grass, or the like; Coral, Pearl,
Oyster-shells, and other testacious bodies; when Spirit of Vitriol, Sulphur,
juice of Lemons, Berberies, Oranges, or any acid liquor is poured upon them,
presently fall a boiling and hissing.

Many more Instances of this kind may be given, but because they are obvious to
every man who is in the least versed in Chemical operations, I will pass them
by, and farther endeavor to prove from the way of cure of Hypochondriacal
Distempers, by the Medicines most approved, and famed by the best and most
learned Authors, That the cause of those affections, consists in a sharp and
eager Distemper of the Blood and Juyces.

The Remedies which in this case are most commended, are such as consist of
Steel, Tartar, Vitriol, fixed Salts, and all testacious bodies, as likewise
diuretical Remedies, which abounding with fixed Salts, do very much precipitate
the blood. For we find by Experience, That these Medicines do sweeten all sharp
Liquors, and abate their Pungency; for the Acrimony of Salts is not blunted by
Sulphurious, but Saline bodies; by reason that fixed Salts by an intimate and
close union to the fluid, do obtund their points and edges, as a thick piece of
Steel exactly fitted to the blade of a Knife, will abate the cutting or
dividing power of the edge. Thus the corroding sharpness of Spirit of Virriol
is taken away by Salt of Tartar or Wormwood. Habet (says Fonseca) Sal Tartari
magnam vim domandi humores melancholicos and atros: nam trahit ad se
proprietate quadam accetositates, and si aceti fortissimi lb iiii cum i.
Tartari vini destilletur per ignem, aqua sine ulla aciditate exibit. And truly
it is very probable, that the reason why Melancholy persons find so much
benefit from Medicines of Tartar, is, that by sweetning of the blood and juyces
after the same manner as that dulcifies Vinegar, the Tartar frees the body from
those inconveniences which are caused by their Pungency and Acrimony.

From this Hypothesis, an account may very rationally be given, why Medicines of
Steel are used with very good success, as well in Cachectical, and Hydropical
Distempers, in which usually the Splenick Ferment is deficient; as in
Hypochondriacal, and Scorbutical Diseases, in which that Leven is too
plentifully abounding, and too highly exalted. For the vitriolick Salt of Steel
(in which much of the force and virtue of that Mineral resides) is very
properly substituted to supply the defect of a Ferment to the blood; and
likewise the same Salt (when the blood is become sharp and eager, and overcome
by too large a quantity of fluid, and acid Salt) does (as Salt of Tartar works
upon Spirit of Vitriol, or Vinegar) abate its Acrimony, and sweeten the whole
mass.

It may now be time that I should more particularly explain the manner, how the
blood and humors of the body, by passing through the Spleen, do from that soft,
sweet, and balsamic constitution (which naturally is in sound and healthy
persons) degenerate into a Liquor altogether harsh, sharp and unpleasant to the
nervous parts of the body. And for the better understanding of the way how this
alteration is effected, it is very necessary to look back to that description,
which I have in the beginning of this Discourse given, of the Make and Fabric
of the Spleen. To wit, That the Spleen consists of a great many Arteries, not
so many Veins; and of a multitude of fibrous Threads, upon which the Parenchyma,
like Clots of blood, does everywhere stick fast, leaving little spaces, or
pores, here and there interspersed between the parts of it throughout the whole
substance of that Bowel.

I suppose then, the little spaces or vacuities in the Parenchyma of the
Spleen, to be of such a figure and size as is unproportionable to the shape of
the saline Particles of the Blood, as long as any Sulphur or Phlegm sticks to
them; and therefore they are not admitted to pass along with the rest of the
Blood, out of the Arteries into the Veins; but detained so long in the little
Cells or Cavities of the Spleen, till by the frequent Circulations of the
Blood, and the Collision, and justling of the Salts against the more solid
parts of the Parenchyma, they become free from the Phlegm and Sulphut which was
joined to them; from which other Principles as soon as they are disengaged,
they do very readily and easily pass along with the Blood which is circulated
through the Spleen, as being then very suitable to the figures of the Pores or
Passages; to which, as long as they were united to those other Principles, they
were not in the least agreeable. The fixed Salts thus prepared in the Spleen,
and passing from thence by the veins into the mass of Blood, serve to
impregnate and ferment the Liquors of the body, and to preserve them in their
due mixture and motions.

As long as the small Passages in the Spleen remain free and open, and that the
substance or Parenchyma of it is not grown so hard and earthy, as to alter the
natural position and shape of the Pores, or little Spaces in it; the supply of
a well prepared Ferment to the Blood, is duly and regularly performed. But if
either from a natural melancholy constitution, or errors in dyer, the substance
of the Spleen be rendered too compact, solid, and earthy, and the Pores or
Spaces are altered from their natural Figure and Magnitude.

The saline Particles in their Percolation through the Spleen, are so worn and
grinded, that they are not only separated from the Sulphur and Phlegm (which is
necessary for the making of a fit Ferment) but likewise forcibly disjoined from
the earthy Principle (without which they cannot remain fixed, but presently
become fluid) And then, instead of a Ferment, which should maintain in the
Blood and Humors an orderly and moderate Ebullition, asharp, eager, and pungent
Liquor is sent into the Blood, which puts it into irregular and tumultuous
Fermentations, and puts the whole frame of the body into disorder.

That this is the fault of the Spleen in Hypochondriacal persons, seems to me
the more probable, for that it is observed, That sar guin and phlegmatic
Complexions are very rarely troubled with distempers of this nature; and that
even they who are naturally of a melancholy temperament, fall not into them
before they arrive at a ripeness of Age, when the Blood begins to be adust, and
the Spleen to grow earthy and black; whereas in those who are very young, it is
of a lively red color.

It is worthy observation, That this fault or disease of the Spleen, is seldom,
or never, perfectly cured; and therefore the best Medicines do only by sweetning
the Blood, so long allay the Symptoms and Disorders of it, till the mass
becomes again infected with acidities from the Spleen; and therefore persons
who have been once troubled with Hypochondriacal distempers, do usually
periodically relapse into them.

From hence, it will be no very hard matter, to give an account of the causes
of the particular Symptoms and Accidents which accompany the Hypochondriacal
distemper. They concern either the Natural, Vital, or Animal Faculties.

As to the Natural, the appetite to meat, is often (by reason of the sharpness
of the Ferment in the stom^ck) too extravagant; and yet the meat is ill
digested, and much of it turned sometimes into a sour water; at other, into
tough slime, by reason that the extraordinary sharpness of the Ferment makes it
unproportionable and unfit to dissolve the Aliment; for, that this may happen
upon such a score, the observation of the Chemists does sufficiently evince,
who find, Berigard. Circ. Pisan.
Menstruum nimis acidum metallum suum non solvere. From the same cause, they
who labor of this distemper, are troubled with continual spitting, loathing,
and sometimes vomiting; the stomach being provoked, and convell'd by the
gnawing acidity of its Menstruum. They are usually hardbound in their bodies,
and seldom go to stool; partly, by reason that the Passages from the Gall are
obstructed (one use of Choler being to irritate the Guts, and cause them to
thrust out their Excrements) and partly, for that the Pancreas (as Riverius
observes) is usually affected in this distemper, and does not furnish the Guts
with a Ferment. For it is very probable, that by Wirsungius his passage, a
Liquor is sent into the Guts, which mingling with the Bile, serves there to
ferment the Aliment.

The faeces in such persons are most commonly very black, by reason of the
vitriolick acidity, which mingled with the Salts of the meat, produces that
color, as we see Ink is made by the mixture of the Salts of Galls and Vitriol.

Their Urine is generally very highly colored, like a strong Lie; for that
much of the Salt being not sufficiently volatilised, and breathed out through
the Pores, is sent down in the Serum through the urinary Passages. When the
Urine comes away thin and white, it is for the most part, the certain
forerunner of a Fit; for that either the saline parts are carried up to the
head, and flung upon the Nerves; or because the fixed and fluid Salts meeting
together, encounter and ferment with one another; and coagulating together, are
not dissolved in the Whey of the Blood; and so that runs through the Kidneys
clear, and without any tincture from the Salts.

As to the Vital Faculty, they find often about their breast, a great
oppression, straitness, and difficulty of breathing, and sometimes fall into
Asthmatical Paroxysms: Moreover, they complain of a trembling and palpitation
of the heart, of a great weight and oppression at it, so that they every minute
apprehend they are a dying. All which Symptoms proceed partly from the
sharpness of the nervous juice which grates and vellicates the Nerves, and is
apt to stagnate in them; and partly, from the Blood, which is not well and
regularly fired in the heart.

In relation to the Animal Faculty, there are very few Symptoms in this Disease
which do not owe their original, either to the brain, or the nervous parts, or
else to the nervous juice. From hence proceed acute and wandering pains, about
the Mediastin, and Shoulders, and sometimes such as imitate the colic and
nephritick Passions. From hence are often Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Palsies,
Giddiness, Watchings, unquiet Sleeps, and many other Symptoms, which are caused
from the disorder of the Animal Faculty.

Now, the head and nervous parts are two several ways affected from the
distemper of the Spleen.

1. From the Blood made sour andcager by the Spleen, a Liquor is distributed
to the brain and nervous parts, infected with the same harsh and ungrateful
quality, which perpetually grates, and provokes those tender and sensible parts:

2. The second way, by which the brain is affected from the Spleen, is, when
the extremities of the Nerves, which are distributed throughout that part, are
pricked, twitched, and vellicated, by sharp juyces which are lodged in that
Bowel; from whence Convulsions are communicated to the brain, and nervous
System; by which means, the Spirits are put into disorder and confusion in
their very fountain and original; and being tumultuously darted into the
branches of the Nerves, do sometimes in one part, sometimes in another, cause
violent and convulsive motions.

There is a story in Tulpius, of a man, whose Spleen was filled with so sharp
and pungent a Liquor, that if the part were only pressed by the hand, his
Brain, and whole nervous System were presently drawn into consent. Lien in eo
(says that Author) a turgido atrae bilis fermento jam tumidus diffudit illico
ex se vapores cerebro tam inimicos, ut juvenis protinus concideret in
gravissimos morbi comitialis insultus. Nam pressa vel solo digito regione
lienis, contrahebantur illico omnes nervi, and sequebatur confestim miserabilis
totius corporis concussio.

It is now high time to return to M. N. and to tell him, That he very
unreasonably vents his Gall upon the Physicians, for treating of bilious or
choleric Complexions and Diseases. For, though according to Helmont and
Sylvius, Bile may be very useful in some parts of the body; yet in respect of
others, it may be an Excrement; and though it may serve for a useful Ferment in
the Guts, yet too great a quantity of it in the Blood, may cause a Disease, and
indicate an Evacuation.

Consonant to this, is what Dr. Willis says in his Book De Feb. Willis de Feb.
c. 1.
Quando pars Sulphurea evehi^^r, ac in cruore nimis luxuriat, ejus Crasin a
dehito statu pervertit, ut exinde Sanguis vel depr^^^atus, seu biliosior factus
Succum alibil^m non rite coquat, vel in tatum accensus, aestus atque ardores,
quales in (...) continua oriuntar, concepiat. And this (...) Person in the same
Treatise tells us, That the reason why Vomits do often cure intern^rtent
Fevers, ^oillis ^^ Feb. c. 3
is, because they pump up the Choler out of the Bladder and Vessels of Gall;
and by emplying of them, make room for the bilious Humor, or the Particles of
adust Salt and Sulphur, which are too plentifully mingled with the Blood, to be
separated into those Receptacles.

And now, as to Chemistry (to which the Author of Medela so much pretends) I
must, with some Compassion, take notice, That he has burnt his Fingers as
unhapp^ly in the Furnaces, as he before cut them with the Dissecting Knives.
For, after all his bragging of his Secrets, of being one of the Adepti, and his
Sagacity in penetrating Helmont, he has (poor man) most unluckily confessed
himself to be grossly ignorant of the very Principles of Chemistry, in
affirming, That the Sulphur is lighter, Med. p. 272.
and more Ethereal, than the Spirit. If the Gentleman would have vouchsafed to
have consulted Dr. Willis, whom he quotes every where, when he mistakes him for
his advantage, would have learnt from him, That Spiritus sunt substantia maxim
subtilis, Willis de Feb. c. 2.
aetherea, and divinioris aurae particula; and that Sulphur est principium
consistentiae paulo crassioris quam Spiritus, post ipsum maxim activum. Cum
enim soluta mixti compage Spiritus primo erumpunt, particulae Sulphureae statim
subsequi nituntur.

Here Dr. Willis tells him, That the Spirit is the most light and subtle
Substance, that the Sulphur is a grosser Principle; and I dare challenge him,
to produce any good Chemical Author, who ever affirmed, Sulphur to be lighter,
and more Ethereal, than Spirit; and if he do, I will assure him, That I will
disbelieve what now, by this instance, I am confirmed in, and received from a
very good hand: To wit, That after he had published his Medela Medicinae, he
was discovered by some Physicians (into whose Company, to see a Course in
Chemistry, he had slightly crept) not to understand so much of that Art, as
amounted to the making of flower of brimstone. A very fit person to undertake
the demolishing the old, and the laying of new Fundamentals in the profession
of Physic.

CHAP. VIII.
I Have in the foregoing Chapters proved, that many of the Methods, Medicines,
and Terms of the Ancients, are to be retained, and that many of their Notions
about Pharmacy, will as well suit with the Modern, as they did with Ancient
suppositions. The business of this Chapter is, to show, that the particulars
offered by M. N. in his eighth Chapter, do not either at all, or else no more
than the Notions by him rejected conduce to the practice of Physic.

And first, he offers it to our consideration, that Diseases, like Pompions and
Turnips do grow from their peculiar Seeds; and that the distemperatures which
we find in our Bodies, are but the blossoms, fruits, and products of them; and
that they, like Animals, engender and propagate their kinds. This opinion is
taken from Paracelsus, and Severinus Danus, and concerning the Origination of
these Seminalities, they Phanatickly talk after this manner: They tell us, That
though at the first Creation, when by the Divine impression, all Seeds of
things received the power of generating and multiplying, they were pure,
entire, and perfect, and free from corruption and death; Yet after the fall of
Adam, by a Curse of the Creator, new tinctures were added to those pure Seeds,
by which mixture the Beauty of the whole Creation was deformed, and the pure
Seeds of things were invested with new and pernicious Habits and Properties;
and that these impure Seeds, received from the same Divine impression and word,
from which the purer and more perfect did, powers and faculties of multiplying
and transplanting.

This is the sum of what Paracelsus and Severines deliver, concerning the Seeds
of Diseases, and out of them, the rest of Chemists who treat of them, have
borrowed their notions. But the Opinion seems so Fantastical and Extravagant
to all sober Chemists, that they have wholly rejected it as a whimsy, and have
with much more reason, deduced the causes of Diseases, from the Exorbitancies
and Combination either of three, or five Chemical Principles.

Sennertus particularly has showed, Sennert. de Con. and Dissen. Chym. cum Gal.
c. 16.
the absurdity and impiety of this Opinion. In eo vero parum a delirio abest
Manichaearum Severinus quod post hominis lapsum primis illis Seminibus puris
maledictione divina novas tincturas supervenisse scribit, quarum Commixtione
pura illa semina corrupta and inquinata sint, eaque semina voce, divina aeque
ac alia semina vim sese multiplicandi accepisse. In qua opinione, multa absurda
imo impia sunt. Primo, Deum auterem and Creatorem mali, morborum, and mortis
faciunt; Eumque aliquod malum Substantiale creasse statuunt, quod impium.
Deinde, duplicem faciunt Creationem: priorem quae benedictione, and sex dierum
spatio perficitur: alteram jam diebus sex elapsis, post hominis lapsum, qua
maledictione Dei rerum puris seminibus and radicibus, radices malae, vel
tincturae morborum and mortis autores concreatae and additae sunt. Cum tamen
Literae Sacrae express testentur, Deum die septimo quie visse ab omni opere
and nihil amplius creasse. Et, maledictio Die tantum poenam indicavit, non vero
naturam pravam induxit.

The next point which M. N. would have considered, as of great importance to
the practice of Physic, is, to increase the number of Concoctions and
Digestions of Aliment, which the Ancients have assigned to be but three.

And indeed, if we consider the grand dissolution, alteration, and apposition
of the nourishment, the division of the Ancients will be found sufficiently
comprehensive; For the great and remarkable alterations of the Aliment, are the
dissolving it into Chyle, the changing of that Chyle into Blood, and the
apposition of the nutritious Particles of the Blood, to augment and nourish the
Bulk. But if we reckon the separations and impregnations made in all parts of
the Body, the generation of Spirits, the particular nutrition of each distinct
Similar part, for Digestions and Concoctions of Aliment, (which, I think, is
much too nice), I know not why there may not be assigned a hundred, or more.

But, by the way, how many soever there be, M. N. might very well have spared
some of his kinds of Concoction. For through his ignorance of the Lacteals, he
readily assents to a Concoction made in the Veins of the Mesentery; and in
this, he says, the old Stagers and Helmont agree. From hence it may be well
observed, that M. N. for want of insight into the true grounds of Physic, most
commonly very easily swallows down the grossest Errors of the Ancients, and
usually picks a quarrel with them in matters where no fault is to be found.
But, to mend the matter, he tells us, that the third Concoction is farther
elaborated in the common Receptacle invented by Pecquet. Now, (to let it pass
that matters of Anatomy are not properly said to be the Objects of Invention,
but Discovery) it is very shreudly to be suspected, that he knows nothing of
that passage but by hearsay; for if he had been conversant in dissections, he
would have known, that the Chyle in that Receptacle differs not from that in
the Lacteals; and that the swift passage of it through that Channel into the
Subclavials, together with the formation of that Vessel, do sufficiently argue,
that it receives not any alteration there, worthy the name of a Concoction, all
that is imaginable, being the mixture of the Serum which returns from the
Lymphaticks, through the Communis ductus into the Blood.

As to this third particular, concerning Ferments, though I allow that term to
be of excellent use, for that it has been of late employed by learned men, to
convey to the understanding an easy and familiar apprehension of the operations
of nature, by referring it to the common and obvious arts of Brewing and
Baking. Yet till the nature and operations of the Ferments of every part come
to be more particularly explained, and more intelligibly discoursed of, than
they are by M. N. I do not see that his Prattling about Ferments, will better
conduce to the Practice of Physic, than Quality, Power, Virtue, Property, and
the like terms of the Galenists.

The fourth Particular which M. N. offers, as of grand concern in the Practice
of Physic, is the Notion of Helmont, who, (as he says) makes a Disease, a real
substantial thing, inherent in that which he calls the Archaeus, or vital
Spirit. In which description of a Disease, he abundantly convinces us of his
want of Logic, by saying, That one real substantial thing, or body, inheres in
another: Since the term Inhesion is only proper to express the Aristotelian
Notion of the union of an accident with a substance; and so one material
substance cannot be conceived to inhere in another, without allowing a
penetration of bodies.

And now he comes in the fifth place, to describe what this Bugbear the
Archaeus is, and tells us, That it is a thing very delicate to be conceived,
that it is Medium quid inter vitam and corpus, and veluti auro nit^ns
splendensque. And, why not as well Medium quid inter corpus and mortem? Indeed
M.N. must have a very delicate understanding, if he can make sense of this
description; for I think the Nature of the Archaeus is every jot as
intelligibly explained in these Verses, which were made in imitation of the
mysterious and aenigmatical expressions of the Chemists. Ignis in igne fuit,
sed non fuit ignis in igne:
Lux sine luce fuit, non sine luce fuit.
All that any sober man can conceive of the Archaeus, or Spirit, is, That it is
the most fine, volatile, and ethereal part of the blood, contained in the
Arteries, Veins, and Nerves; and I grant, that the Dyscrasie of the blood,
their Vehicle, is the cause of many Diseases. But this is a very different
thing from the words of M. N. and, I suppose too, from his Notion of the
Archaeus; which is either unintelligible by any rational man, or else must be
the very same which the Ancients had of the Vital, Animal, or Natural Spirits;
and therefore, upon either account, is very vainly offered, as a new particular
of great moment and weight, for the meliorating the Practice of Physic.

As to his Quotations out of Fernelius and Heurnius, those Authors speak no
more, than what is said by Hippocrates and Galen, and all their Followers, That
the Spirits, the impetum facientia, are the immediate instruments of the Soul;
that by them, all motions, sensations, and operations in human bodies are
performed.

Wherefore the learned Sennertus (though he allow Paracelsus, and his
Disciples, to impose new words upon new things) justly blames them, For
introducing new, improper, insignificant, and barbarous terms, upon notions and
things anciently received; Sennert. de Con. and Dissen. Chym. cum Gal. c. 5.
and rejecting such, as by long use and custom, had been rendered proper,
familiar, and intelligible. And he asks Parac^lsus, What necessity there was to
bring into use the word Archaeus? since that upon diligent examination, that
signifies nothing more than the Faculty, and natural Virtue, or the natural
Spirit, the Servant of the natural Faculty, do in the Schools of the
Philosophers and Physicians. And he adds, That neither Paracelsus, or
Severinus, are such great persons, that we must presently for their fancy or
humor, reject those familiar terms which have always been used by the learned
World; and in their stead, without reason, admit of the Paracelsian Gibberish.
And certainly, if we consider the nature of the Spirits aright, we shall find,
that nothing more than what is signified by them, can be meant (if that term
signify at all) by the Archaeus of the Chemists. For, the vital Spirit is
nothing else, but the more fine, more sublimed, and subtilifed part of tho
Blood, by which the Fermentation, and internal motion of the Particles of that
Liquor is maintained; and that in its circular motion preserved from
Coagulations, and Stagnations; and (when the body remains in the state of
health) a separation is continually made of all immiscible, and heterogeneous
bodies, which are either taken in with the Aliment, or else come into the blood
from the Ambient. The animal Spirit, is nothing else but the same vital more
volatilised, and refined in the brain, and from thence distributed together
with the nervous juice through the Nerves, to perform the offices of Sense and
Motion. The natural, I take to be some of the animal Spirits, which take up
their residence in the extreme Fibers of the parts, and there remain, and are
continually refreshed and recruited, by an influence from the brain; and these
the Schools call the innate Spirit, Faculty, or Virtue of a part. Either one of
these, or all, must be meant by the Archaeus of the Chemists, or else that term
be altogether insignificant Vox and praeterea nihil: And whether it be
considered as an idle word, or a new term, to express an old Notion; it cannot
but be absurd, to offer it as a particular considerable in order to the
Practice of Physic, in the place of the old Fundamentals, which he pretends to
have demolished.

CHAP. IX.
IN his Ninth Chapter, M. N. proceeds to an examination of diverse old
Doctrines, which more immediately relate to the Practice of Physic; and first,
he cashiers the Doctrine about Critical days, which he calls as childish a
conceit, as ever was owned by any Long-beards, called the Children of Men. But
I shall plainly prove, That this Doctrine is not so easily to be blown away,
being of so absolute necessity to the true management of Fevers, that except a
diligent heed be had to the Critical motions of those Diseases, the best and
most proper Remedies prove as dangerous to the sick, as a drawn Sword in the
hands of a blind man, who lays about him at random, and knows not upon whom, or
where the edge will light. For, though the Ancients possibly might be ignorant
of the true causes of the Critical motions of Diseases, that did no more hinder
them from making true observations upon them, than the disagreement of
Philosophers concerning the reasons of the Fluxes, and Refluxes of the Sea,
does cause Mariners to be ignorant of what Tides will carry them into and out
of several Harbors.

And, though it must be confessed, that in these Northern Countries wherein we
live, Fevers are neither so constantly, nor so orderly terminated by Critical
Evacuations, as punctually to agree with the descriptions of Hippocrates and
Galen; by reason that in this colder Climate (which is perpetually liable to
alterations from the Air) the Blood when it is fired into a Fever, does not
burn with so equal and constant a flame; and therefore cannot observe so
exactly the times and periods of its burning, and consuming the sulphurous or
combustible part. And for that the Blood of most Persons being tainted with the
Scurvy, cannot so easily concoct, and at once separate the adust Recrements;
but that they are often, instead of being Critically evacuated, translated upon
the brain, and nervous parts.

Yet is not the Credit of those grave Authors, by every impertinent Man, to be
called into question, concerning the truth of the observations which they made
upon the motions, and burning of Fevers, in the Countries wherein they lived,
and practiced Physic; since they have been always reputed by the most Learned,
of unsuspected Faith and integrity in delivering matters of fact, which fell
under their own notice.

And indeed, if we consider the true causes of critical Evacuations, we cannot
question, but that, in continual putri'd Fevers, in those parts of the World,
in which, neither the coldness of the Air, nor the Scorbutic distemper made
the difference) Nature was as precise in observing her periods, as she uses to
be with us in Quotidians, Tertians, and Quartans.

For indeed, a Crisis in a continual Fever, is the very same with a Paroxysm
in an Intermittent, as Doctor Willis very well observes: Willis de Feb. c. 9.
for (says he) as in an Intermittent, when the mass of blood is overcharged,
with the Particles of the depraved Alimentary juice, which can by no means be
subdued and assimilated, that falls aworking and by its fermentation, depurates
its self and sends out by the pores of the skin the heterogenious matter; so,
in a continual Fever from the burning of the Blood and Alimentary juice much
adust matter is mingled with the Blood, which, (when it amounts to so great a
quantity as to oppress that active Liquor) Nature, as soon as there is the
least respite from burning, by degrees subdues, then separates, and at last
endeavors to exterminate out of the Body the morbifick matter.

Wherefore, as the fits of Intermittent Fevers invade at set times, and at the
distance of a certain number of hours; so critical motions, observe either the
fourth or seventh day, by reason, that in such a space of time, the fired Blood
has done burning, and being overcharged with adust matter, or ashes, Nature, by
the offensive irritation of it, is provoked to a Crisis. And (continues that
learned Author) if the matter can be easily separated from the Blood, and that
the pores of the skin be sufficiently free and open, the adust matter is
together with the serous part of the Blood, thrust out of the Body by sweat;
and this is much the best way of Crisis: for if it succeed aright, very often
at once, in one single conflict, it puts an end to the Disease, without any
danger of a Relapse.

The Crisis next best to this, is that which is performed by an Haemorrhage.
For the adust matter moving about with the Blood, is (if it cannot be vented by
sweat) transferred upon one part or other, as far distant as may be from the
heart, and not seldom violently hurried up to the head, from whence (if the
passages be open into the Nostrils) the morbifick matter, bursts forth,
together with the Blood: but if it finds no passage, it remains fixed upon the
Brain, and there ensues a Frenzy Delirium, or some other dangerous Distemper
of that part. There are likewise other ways of a Crisis, by which nature
endeavors to expel the febril matter, not entirely all at once, but by
degrees, and by sundry attempts, some part at one time, and some at another,
sometimes by Urine, sometimes by Vomit, or Stool, by Spots, Pimples, Botches,
and the like; but what way soever she takes, it is requisite (if we expect any
happy event) that the burning of the Blood be over, that the adust matter be
concocted and rendered fit to be separated.

He goes on and tells us, that the state of the Disease is of one kind and
Simple, and always after the same manner, but with a very different variety of
Symptoms, and with a tendency to Events which are very diverse. But,
notwithstanding this, it is requisite, that a prudent Physician be able to pass
his prognostic in what time the Disease will come to the state, and what issue
it may be like to have.

If the Fever from the beginning be vehement, and of a sudden fires the whole
mass of blood; if with fierce Symptoms, it constantly and equally continue
burning, without any remission, most commonly within four days there will have
been so great a deflagration of the blood, that the adust matter, which is to
provoke the Crisis, will arrive at its due fullness and turgescency. But if the
beginning be more mild and slow, and the burning of the blood often
interrupted, the Fever will not come to its height before the seventh day. But
if the beginning be yet more sluggish and remiss, the state of the Disease uses
not to happen before the Eleventh or Fourteenth day.

Now although a perfect Crists happen not sometimes before the Fourteenth,
Seventeenth, or perhaps the Twentieth day, because before that time, all the
requisite conditions to the perfect judgment of the Disease do not concur; yet
in the mean time, some slight skirmishes happen, by which the adust matter
growing to a fullness, is by degrees something emptied, till Nature can be in a
condition to attempt the discussing of the whole. But forasmuch as during the
burning of the blood, continually within the space of four days, great store of
adust matter is increased within the Vessels, Nature (except she be by some
accident disturbed) is every fourth day provoked by the fullness of the matter,
to free her self from her burden.

Wherefore most commonly on the Fourth, Seventh, Eleventh, and Fourteenth days,
not from the influence of the Planets, but from a necessity in Nature, some
Critical motions use to happen.

This account of Critical days, and the reasons of them, I have taken out of
Dr. Willis his Book, De Febribus; and the rather, that I may do him right in
relation to his judgment of the Doctrine of Critical days, since M. N. by
quoting three or four words out of him, without taking any notice of the rest
of his Discourse, would fain slighly insinuate, that this learned man is of his
opinion; but he has not only sufficiently declared himself to the contrary, in
the places by me already quoted, but elsewhere in his Pharmaceutick directions.

And now, let any man judge, whether the Doctrine of Critical days be to be
cashiered, as of no use in Physic; when certainly the poor Patient, who in a
Fever commits himself to a Physician ignorant of the times and motions of the
Disease, runs the same hazard with a ship exposed to the Ocean without a Pilot,
which is by the same Sails; which well managed, would have carried it into a
safe Harbor, driven upon a Rock, and hastened to its Ruin. For though it be
granted, That Fevers are oftentimes extinguished in the beginning, by
seasonable bleeding, vomiting, or gentle purging, as occasion shall require;
yet, by M. N's favor, will they not always yield to these Methods much less to
^^s Charms, though he vainly brag, That without bleeding, and yet allowing of
Wine, he will either extinguish a Fever by the Seventh day, or be able to
pronounce what will become of the Patient. The latter of which I do not
question bu^^^e may do, since by his method he may determine of him as
certainly as King James did of the Southsayer, who had prophesied of His death;
when the King proved the better Prophet, by foretelling the day whereon the
Wizard should be hanged; M. N's Medicines being no less fallible than the Halter.

In the next place, M. N. picks a quarrel with the Ancients about their
Doctrine of Pulses, Me. Med. p. 330.
which, he says, let us regulate as well as we can, it is fit he should tell the
World, there is little certainty of judgment to be made by them of a Patients
case.

Now since he is resolved to cavil with the Ancients, for leaving to us too
elaborate and acurate a Doctrine of the Pulse, he must give me leave to tell
him, That if they Treat too nicely of the matter, he handles it much too
loosely and slovenly. For certainly there is no Physician who has been
accustomed to handle the Pulse of sick men, and has not his fingers constantly
benumbed; but has discerned in the beating of the Arteries, not only the
absolute, but likewise the respective differences of Motions or Pulses.

And as a vehement, and a weak; a great, and a little; a swift, and a slow; a
frequent, and a rare; a hard, and a soft; are by M. N. acknowledged to be
established upon very good grounds: So, whosoever is frequent in handling the
wrists of sick and dying men, will find that there is very good reason to admit
the other differences; especially such as arise in respect of equality and
inequality, in respect of order, and in respect of Rythm or proportion; for the
reasons of these, as well as the simple motions, are not hard to be understood
from the true consideration of the motion of the heart and blood, and are to be
met with, accomodated to that Hypothesis in the Writings of the learned Dr.
Highmore, from whose account it is very clear, That the Pulsus (...),
deficientes, intermittentes, High. Corp. Human. Disquis. l. 1. p. 2. c. 8.
intercurrentes, caprizantes, dicroti, undosi, vermiculares, formicantes,
tremuli, serrati, are not (as M. N. calls them) Quirks, and Quillets, and hard
words; but really different motions of the Heart and Blood; and, he tells us,
that In morituris semper aut unus aut singuli reperiuntur.

If any one be pleased with Extravagancies and Whimsies concerning the Pulse,
he may find enough of them in Paracelsus, who gives this wild account of the
Pulse.

Pulsus, Paracels. l. de Pestilent. Tract. 1.
est mensura temperaturae in corpore secundum preprietatem Sex locorum quae
Planetae occupant; duo in pedibus attribuuntur Saturno and Jovi, duo in collo
veneri and Marti, duo in temporibus Lunae and Mercurio; Pulsus Solis est in
sinistro latere sub cord; Hinc sequitur, si Pulsus celerius movetur quam fieri
debebat, pati septem membra principalia, Cor cerebrum, hepar, fell, renes, unde
and Pulsus irritetur sive ad iram concitetur. Si vero aliquod principale
membrum a morbo vincatur, Pulsus debiliter movetur, quod aer, sive Spiritus
vitae eo loci obstructus est: And he has farther in another place, Tom. 2. p.
743.
Pulsum manner usque ad mortem, imo aliquando quadrantem horae post mortem.

Concerning this opinion of Paracelsus, the impartial Sennertus delivers his.
What, I pray, says he, can be more absurd, and argue a greater ignorance of
humane body, Sennert. de Con. and Dissen. Chym. cum Gal. c. 18.
than for Paracelsus to write, That the Gall, the Reins, the Liver, have
peculiar Pulses; and to ascri^e to the Pulse the passion of Anger? For if we
examine the Original of the Arteries, and the use and intent of the Pulse, we
shall find, that every alteration in that, immediately comes from the Heart.

As to the Directions which are to be drawn from consideration of the Pulse in
Diseases, they are of so much importance to a Physician in a Fever, as the
Card, and Needle, to a Pilot in a storm; no hand of a Watch or Clock, does more
exactly signify the motions of their inward Springs and Wheels, than the Pulse
does the alterations made in the great Engine of Life, the Heart. Framb. Can.
and Consult. Med. p. 25.
The Pulse is (says Frambesarius) Fidelis nuntius cordis ex quo certissima
vitae ac mortis petuntur indicia, Pulsus magnus and vehemens est virium index
in quibus sanitatis restituendae spes ponitur. Sed Pulsus parvus and languidus
facultatis vitalis imbecillitatem indicat, unde mortis metus. Inaequalitas
Pulsus semper damnatur si perseveret intermissio juvenibus periculosissima
repentinam quippe ill is mortem minatur nisi ex artertarum obstructione, and
oppressione f^at, minus pueris, minime senibus.

The Pulse, says Dr. Willis (whom M. N. confesses to be no Defender of the
unjustifiable Doctrines of the Ancients) is consulted like a Weather-glass,
appointed by Nature to measure the degrees of the Heat, which in a Fever is
caused by the Bloods being set on fire; if that be intense, and causes a great
Ebullition in the Blood, the Artery (as long as the Spirits continue vigorous)
beats vehemently and swiftly; but when they begin to be spent, the strength of
the Pulse abates, which is supplied by the swiftness, and the Pulse becomes
small and swift. If the Fever be more mild, Willis de Feb. c. 10.
and the Heat less tumultuous, the Pulse does less recede from its natural
temper; and during the whole course of the Disease, a moderation in that, does
signify a Truce between Nature and the Distemper.

Nor does the Pulse only give intelligence of the forces of the Fever, as of an
Enemy; but it acquaints us with the strength of Nature, and its ability to make
resistance. As long as there is a good Pulse, all is safe, and there is all
reason to hope well; but an ill condition of this, is a very ill Omen, and puts
the sick person past hopes; so that without a frequent and diligent examination
of the Pulse, the Physician will neither be able truly to pass his Prognostic,
nor safely to administer Physic. Nay, the Pulse is of so great importance in
Fevers, that if it on a sudden alter for the worse (though all other Symptoms
promise well) it is a dismal forerunner of death; and upon the other hand, if
that continue good, though all other Symptoms threaten ill, we have reason to
hope for a Recovery: He goes on, and shows, that without taking advice of the
Pulse, neither Purgers, nor Vomits, nor Sweatters, Cardiacks, or Narcoticks can
be administered without very great hazard.

I know very well, that what M. N. objects is true, that the Passions, the
presence of the Physician, and many other accidents, will make a confiderable
alteration in the Pulse; but to infer from hence, that no more credit is to be
given to them by a Physician, M^. Med. p. 33.
than by a Wise man to a Gypsy, who crosses his hand to tell his Forune, is as
absurd, as to conclude, from the variation of the Needle, that it is of no use
in Navigation, or to affirm, that Watches are not useful to measure Time,
because accidental causes, as moist weather, walking or riding with them in the
Pocket, or the like, may in some sort retard, or accelerate their motions. The
Methodists have been so careful, that in their Institutions, when they treat of
the Pulse, they acquaint us with what accidents may make an alteration in them.
Therefore Sennertus, and other writers of Institutions, advise, that the
Physician do not, as soon as he comes to the Patient, presently feel his pulse,
but stay till the motions which the presence of the Physician has raised in his
affections be over, and that then, when he is sedate and quiet, and free from
passion, he examine the pulse; and then neither, not presently when he has been
stirred, but after the disturbance which was caused in his Body by moving of
him be over; then, that the Hand of the Patient be free from all voluntary
motion, that the Fingers be not too much bent or stretched, that the Hand be
not sustained by the Patients own strength, lest it tremble, and alter the
pulse; and then that the Physician is to try the difference of holding the
Wrist upward or downward or Sidewayes, and that he must have frequently
accustomed himself to try the pulses of men in health, and (if it can be done)
to learn what sort of pulse his Patient had when his Body was in good order.

From these, and several other Cautions given by the Learned, it appears, That
though the Ancients held the Doctrine of Pulses to be of great concern in the
curing of Diseases, yet they apprehended many difficulties, in giving an
infallible determination of their significations; and they seem no more to have
believed, that every rude hand (which can only scribble an ill Book) could pass
a true Judgment upon the Pulse, than a wise man will credit the Fortune which
is told him by a Gypsy; which sort of Vagabonds (by the way) are reckoned up
by Camerarius in his Catalogue of Mountebanks and Empericks: And truly I think
with good reason: for their Predictions are as much to be relied upon, as M.
N's Physic; and therefore they may be both well ranked together, since he and
they (though by different methods) drive at the same end; for as they with
their Pedlers French, and crossing the hand, he with his Pox, and Canting,
amuses the credulous Vulgar, that he may with the less suspicion prosecute his
grand design upon their Pockets.

I will now conclude, and dismiss the Author of Medela, whose Book (though very
slight and trivial) I have all along in this Treatise taken notice of, for that
it pretends to argue, from the new Discoveries which have been made of late in
Physic, and, from I know not what imaginary change in the nature of all
Diseases, that the old way of Physic, in respect of Method and Medicines, is
become insufficient and useless, and therefore the fundamentals of it to be
demolished, and a ridiculous Chimaera of his own substituted in their room.
Whereas, the modern Discoveries in Anatomy and Chemistry, are so far from
destroying the Practice and Method of the Ancients, that they very firmly
corroborate, and establish their Doctrines, by furnishing us with the true
reasons of those Processes and Methods which were delivered down to us from
them, only upon their experience and knowledge of the matter of Fact, though
they were ignorant of the true causes. Thus we know the Ligature in letting of
blood was always used by the Chyrurgions, though the reason of it was never
understood, before the Circulation of the blood was discovered. Most of the
Doctrines in the Therapeutick part of Physic, are like this, founded upon
experience; and therefore the improvements in the Physiology, and Pathology of
that Art, will not (as M. N. would have it) destroy, but illustrate them:
Wherefore in the reforming of Physic, and suiting an Institution to the late
Discoveries in Anatomy and Chemistry, care must be taken, that we imitate wise
and thrifty Builders, who, in raising a new House in the place of an old one
which they have pulled down, make use of many of the old substantial Materials,
some of which are often much the better for their age.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
THat it does not follow from the new Discoveries in the Theory of Physic,
that a Liberty should be allowed in the practice of it. page 1, 2 The Rational
Physicians have been the only Improvers of the Art. page 3 The great
Improvements of Physic, have been from the late Discoveries in Anatomy. Page 4
The true Causes of Diseases, are to be learned from Anatomical Inquiries. Page
5 A Man is as Mechanically made as a Watch, or any other Automaton. Page 5, 6
Diseases, are the Disorders of the Springs and Engines of the Body. Page 7, 8
The difference between a dead and living Man, according to Descartes. Page 9
Chemistry has been made useful to Medicine only, by the Rational Physicians and
Philolosophers. Page 10 Chemical Medicines are not always to be preferred before
the tried Remedies of the shops. Page 10, 11 Some Medicines spoiled by Chemical
Preparations. ib. The virtue of some Remedies does not lodge in any of the
Chemical Principles, but results from the determinate Structure of the whole
Concrete. page 12, 13 The Powders of Pearl, Coral, and Hartshorn, are to be
preferred before the Magisteries; and the Reasons why. page 13, 14 Crato 's
Character of Paracelsus. ib. He often reduced slight Distempers, to dangerous
and mortal Diseases. page 15 He was (notwithstanding his great Remedies) very
unhealthful himself, and lived not beyond 47 years. ib. The Chemists are
unfaithful, and obscure in their Writings. page 16 Maxims, and Remedies which
are established by long Experience, are not to be rejected for their
unexperimented Medicines. page 17 Ignorant Men are not to be allowed to use the
best Chemical Medicines. page 18 The Opinions of Beguinus and Libavius, as to
that point. page 18, 19 The nature and force of Remedies, is known only from
Experience. page 19, 20 Most of them were at first found out by Chance, or
learnt from wild Beasts. page 20, 21 Those Medicines which have been found out
by the Enquiries of the Smell and Taste, or resolving of Bodies into their
Principles, could not be relied upon, till they were established by Experience.
ib. The Salts, Sulphurs, and Mercuries of Bodies, are believed by Chemists and
Physicians, to differ specifickly one from the other. page 21, 22 Medicines
cannot be invented. ib. Some Instances of Murders committed by Mountebanks, and
ignorant Persons, by giving those Medicines, whose virtue and force they
understood not. page 22, 23, 24, 25 The danger of Antimony not well prepared.
ib. The mixing of things which are harmless, may sometimes produce a poys^n.
ib. The strength and constitution of the sick person, ought to be understood by
every man who gives Physic. page 24, 25 Mercurius dulcis, hurtful to some
Constitutions, and the reason why. page 26 The Disease, and the Motion, and
Times of it, are to be understood by every Man who gives Physic. page 27 The
Inference. page 30
CHAP. II.
DIseases in England not much altered since the time of Hippocrates and Galen.
page 32 Epidemical Diseases then, as well as now, differed almost every Year.
page 32 Agnes answer very exactly the Descriptions of the Ancients. page 33 The
Quotation out of Sennertus is misunderstood by M. N. page 33, 34 Blood-letting
justified in putrid Fevers. ib. And sometimes when the Vrin is thick and red.
page 34, 35 Dr. Willis his Opinion as to Blood-letting in putrid Fevers. page
35, 36 The Scurvy, anciently Endemial to Brittany, and other Northern Maritim
Countries. page 37 It is the same with the Stomacace and Scelotyrbe of Pliny.
The Britannica of Pliny was Scurvy Grass. page 38 Sennertus his Opinion as to
this Case. ib. The Nature of the Scurvy, according to Senrertus, and Dr.
Willis. It consists in the Saline Dyscrasie of the mass of blood. page 40 All
the Symptoms of that Disease easily derived from thence. page 40, 41 Men fall
into the Scurvy after Fevers, by reason of the wasting of the volatile Salt of
the blood in them. page 41 The Vrin of healthy, and young men, abounds much
more with volatile Salt, than that of aged, and sickly persons. page 41 The Air
in the Northern Countries abounds with fixed Salt, and disposes the blood to
the Scurvy. page 41, 42 Respiration necessary to life, for the drawing in of
Nitre, to keep af^ot the Fermentation of the Heart. page 42 There is a great
difference in Nitres. page 43 The Specificks for the Scurvy, perform their
effects by their volatile Salts. ib. Why it is increased in the Bills of
Mortality. page 44 The Rickets, a new Disease. ib. The Reason of its first
breaking forth in England. page 45 Not altered since. page 45 Not akin to the
Pox and Scurvy. ib. The Reason of the increase of the Consumption in the Bills
of Mortality. page 45, 46 The stopping of the Stomach, the same with the
Asthma. ib. The Rising of the Lights, the same with the Suffocatio uterina. ib.
Men, as well as Women, subject to the Disease called the Hysterical Passion.
page 48 Why Women are more frequently troubled with Fits, than Men. page 49 The
Hysterical Passion described. page 49, 50 The Causes of this Disease, and its
Symptoms, according to the Ancients. page 51 They are rejected. page 51, 52 The
Causes assigned by Dr. Highmore. page 52, 53 Reasons why they are insufficient.
page 53, 54, 55, 56 The animal Constitution is primarily affected in this
Disease. ib. The motion of the Heart is caused by the animal Spirits. page 57
An Experiment to prove it. page 57, 58 The Hysterical Symptoms are Convulsive
motions. page 58 The Nature of the Seed. page 59 A nitrosulphureous Spirit the
Author of all Generations. page 59, 60, 61 How the Seed is made in Men, and
other Creatures, out of the Blood. page 61, 62 How the Seed may cause the
Hysterical Passion. page 62, 63, 64 How a defect in the uterine Ferment, may
cause Hysterical Fits. page 64, 65 A suppression of the Menses often causes
them. ib. Ill Humors flung upon the Brain, and nervous parts, will cause them.
ib. Some other causes of them. page 66 The Cause of the Rising of the Mother.
page 67, 68
CHAP. III.
THe Pox and Scurvy cannot alter all Diseases from their ancient state and
condition. page 70 The Pox and Scurvy not infectious at a distance. page 71
Blood-letting in Agnes and Fevers in the Northern Countries is justified. page
72 Dr. Harvy 's Opinion of it. page 72, 73 In the Rheumatism, Blood must be
taken away ten or twelve days together. page 74 A mad Woman cured, by being let
blood seventy times in one Week. ib. The Liver is not the shop where blood is
made. page 75 The use of it, is to separate Choler, and how that is performed.
page 75, 76, 77 How the Chyle is turned into blood. page 77, 78 The Heart, the
chief shop where the Chyle is turned into blood. page 79, 80 The innate
Spirits, Salts or Ferments of the Heart, are the makers of blood. page 80 The
Fermentation of the blood in the Heart, compared to the Ebullition which is
caused when Spirit of Nitre is poured upon Butter of Antimony. page 81 Of
Color. page 81, 82 How Colors are produced. ib. New Colors are produced, by
mingling things which ferment with one another. ib. Two ways of producing a
red Color in Bodies; by the action of Heat upon them, or by the addition of
Salts. page 83, 84 Phlebotomy is very necessary in many S^orbutick Affects.
page 84, 85 How purging Medicines perform their effects. page 85, 86 The Pox and
Scurvy are not communicable at a distance, and without Corporal Contact. page
87 Whatever infects or poisons by immediate Contact, must not necessarily work
the same effect at a distance. ib. Instances to prove this Assertion. page 87,
88 A Plague in Moravia, which only infected those persons who were Cupped and
Scarrified. page 88 A strange Poison used by the Huntsmen in Spain, made of the
juice of White Hellebore. page 89, 90 An account of the Original, and spreading
of the Pox, out of Guicciardin. page 91, 92, 93 That the Pox infects not at a
distance, is argued from the Cure of it. page 94 That the Scurvy infects not at
a distance, is argued from the Nature and Formality of it. page 95, 96
CHAP. IV.
THe Pox and Scurvy are not complicated with all Diseases. page 98, 69 The
Pestilence is not from a Complication with the French Ferment, more frequent
and violent now, than in former Ages. page 99, 100 Instances of many
depopulating Plagues in former Ages. page 100, 101
CHAP. V.
WOrms are not more frequently appearing in Fevers, and all manner of Diseases,
in these days, than former. page 105 As strange Cases of Worms, observed by the
Ancient, as Modern Writers. page 106 Worms generated in Children in the Womb,
observed by Hippocrates. ib. In the Seed, by Plutarch. ib. In the Lungs, and
treated of as one cause of a Cough, by Alsaravius. page 106, 107 The Drancucula
of the Grecians, and Vena Civili^ (...) Medena of the Arabians, what kind
^^^^sease. page 107, 108 Animals generated under the Skin, observed by
Aristotle. ib. The Lady Penruddock killed by that Disease. page 109 Worms
engendered in Metals, Stones, Fire, and Snow, the Bladder of Gall, Vinegar. page
111 Worms bred in all sorts of Animals, not subject to the Pox and Scurvy. page
112 Worms bred in Millstones. page 113 A live Toad found in the Center of a
huge stone. ib. The Cause of the Production of Insects in Man's body. page 114
Why they often accompany putrid Fevers. page 114, 115 Why Children are usually
troubled with them at the time of their breeding Teeth. ib. Insects produced by
their seminal Salts. page 116 A Disease in Germany and Hungary, which the
Polonians called Stony Robac, and the Germans Hauptwurn. page 117 The
Seminalities of Insects may be conveyed into our Blood in our meat, drink, and
air. page 118 The manner of infection from the Plague, is better made out by
the figure and motion of Atoms, than by Kirchers animated Effluxes, page 119,
120 Kirchers notion not conduci^^e to the practice of Physic, page 120 An
account of the Plague, given by Gassendus, page 122, 123 The comparison of
Runnets coagulati^^ Milk, serv^^ very well to explain how the Pesti^^^^ infects
t^ Blood and Air, page 12^ The spots in the Plague are quar'd flakes of Blood,
page 124
CHAP. VI.
MAny Maxims in Physic will remain truth the Worlds end. They are grounded
upon Experience and were in use long before the notions of Causes were
invented, page 127 Doctor Willis his opinion as to this point, page 127, 128
What Medicines are to be accounted Secrets, page 129 Medicines, the products of
Chance, not Invention, page 130, 131, 132
CHAP. VII.
Words imposed by the first Inventers of the Art of Physic, and established
by the use and consent of both Galenists and Chemists, are to be retained. page
134 The first qualities are causes of Diseases. page 135 Proved by sundry
Arguments. page 136 The meaning of the word Quality. ibid. The nature of Heat.
page 137 Of Cold. page 137, 138 Of Humidity and Dryness. page 138 Though there
be not in the Vessels four distinct humors, men are not improperly said to be
of a Phlegmatic, Choleric, Melancholic, or Sanguine temperament, page 139 It
alters not the matter, as to practice, whether a Physician suppose one of the
humors, or the rawness or overstaleness of the Blood to be in fault. page 140
Purgers are properly divided into Chologoga, Phlegmagoga, Melanagoga, and
Hydragoga. page 1^1 Hepaticks must be used in Diseases caused from imperfect
Sanguification, though the Liver do not make Blood. page 141, 142 The Spleen is
the Receptacle of Melancholy, according to the opinions of Bartholinus, and
Doctor Highmore. page 143, 144 A Digression concerning the use of the Spleen,
and Hypocondriacal Distempers. page 145 A Description of the Spleen. page 146,
147 It prepares a Ferment for the Blood. page 149 Two sorts of Ferments. page
149, 150 How the Ferment is made in the Spleen. page 152 Fixed Salts ferment
the Blood. page 153 How Medicines of Tartar, Steel, and Vitriol perform their
effects. page 153 How the Ferment of the Spleen comes to be depraved. page 156,
157. What is the fault of the Spleen in Hypocondriacal persons. page 161, 162,
163 The causes of the Symptoms in Hypocondriacal persons. page 163, 164, 165
The Head and nervous parts, how affected from the Spleen. page 166 It is proper
to say, there are bilious or choleric complexions and Diseases. page 167, 168
M. N's. ignorance in Chemistry. page 168 Sulphur is not lighter and more
aetherial than Spirit. page 169
CHAP. VIII.
THe particulars offered by M. N. in the room of them which he pretends to have
demolished, are not conducible to the practice of Physic. page 171 The growing
of Diseases from Seeds, according to Paracelsus and Severinus, a ridiculous
fancy, page 172, 173 The number of Concoctions assigned by the Ancients
sufficient. page 174 Helmonts notion of a Disease unintelligible. page 176 What
the Archaeus of the Chemists means. page 177 New words are not to be imposed
upon old notions and things. page 178 How the Vital, Animal, and Natural
Spirits differ. page 179 The Archaeus either an idle word, or a new term to
express an old notion. page 180
CHAP. IX.
THe use of the Doctrine about critical days page 181 The ignorance of their
true causes did not hinder the Ancients from making true Observations upon
them. ibid. Fevers in the Countries where Hippocrates and Galen lived,
observed regularly the critical motions, which are by them described. page 183
A Crisis in a continual Fever, is the same with a Paroxism in an Intermittent.
ibid. The cause of critical motions, according to Doctor Willis. ibid. Sweat,
the best way of Crisis. page 184 The cause of a Crisis by an Haemorrhage. page
184 When a Crisis is to be expected. page 185, 186 The Dootrine of Pulses is
justified. page 188, 189 The respective differences in the motion of the
Arteries may be observed as well as the absolute. page 189 The reasons of the
different motions of the Pulse assigned by Doctor Highmore. page 189 Paracelsus
his whimsies concerning the Pulse. page 190 The use of the Doctrine of the
Pulse in Fevers. page 191, 192 Direction must be taken from the Pulse for the
giving of all sorts of Physic in Fevers. page 193 What accidents may cause an
alteration in the Pulse. page 194

