The ENGLISH GLOBE Sch. 1


The English GLOBE Being a STABIL and Immobil one performing what the Ordinary
Globes do, and much more.

Invented and described by the Right Honorable, the Earl of Castlemaine. And
now published by Joseph Moxon, Member of the Royal Society, and Hydrographer to
his most Excellent Majesty.

Fundasti TERRAM super STABILITATE sua.

Psalm. 104. 5. LONDON. Printed for Joseph Moxon, at the Sign of Atlas on
Ludgate (...)

TO THE READER Concerning this Globe, and the occasion of the Inventing of it.
NEW and profitable Inventions in Arts are like hidden Treasures found, which
ought not to be reburied, and concealed again, but dispersed and made use of
for the common good. This Globe then, and its Description (which I have humbly
obtained from the Right Honorable, the Earl of Castlemaine) being both highly
curious and useful, I thought I could not better serve (as I have always
endeavored) this, and future Ages, then by communicating it to them; and
because the occasion of the Invention is so accidental, and (as it proves) so
happy, I shall give you a short account of it.

Waiting upon my Lord in the beginning of Anno 1672, at his then arrival into
England, I brought his Lordship (knowing that any thing new and ingenious would
be acceptable to him) one of my 3 Inch Terrestrial Globes, with the Stars
described in the inside of its Case, which when his Lordship had considered,
and bin informed by me, that its only Use was to keep in memory the situation
of Countries, and Order of the Constellations and particular Stars, He
intimated, that certainly much more might be done by it, and so returning
beyond Sea fell upon this excellent Work.

When he came home again (which happned above a year ago) and was pleased to
show me what he had done, I was as much ravished and suprised at the admirable
Contrivance of his Globe, and the many unexpected Operations performed by it,
as if I had bin a new Beginner in the Study of the Sphere; Nor could my
admiration be less, when I saw how (without the usual assistance of a Meridian
Line, Mariners Compass, or other such helps) it composed it self to the true
site and position of the World; how that in an instant, the Suns Altitude was
naturally and plainly found by it, and this in all places of the World at the
same time; Nor did it seem less strange to me, that so many curious Questions
relating to Eclipses should be resolved by it, and what is more that Altimetry
could possibly have any relation to a Globe. Besides, I saw that not only the
Practical part of Dialling was now rendered easy to a wonder, but the Theorical
also so plain, that every mean capacity might straight comprehend it; Nay, all
the foreign Requisites to this Art (as the Declination of Planes, their
Inclination, Reclination, etc.) are here as artificially and exactly found, as
by any Instrument invented for that intent alone.

And this I can also say, that as to the Geographical part, it is (considering
its bigness) not only the most useful, but also the best ordered and the best
divided Globe extant; and yet it would have bin not a little better, had not
his Lordships late Troubles hindered him from finishing it, as he designed; for
Directions are not always sufficient to express an Authors mind. But truly
notwithstanding these and other prodigious Operations, that which surprised me
with the most admiration was to find, that in a subject so trite as the Globe
(and so nicely Canvast by the greatest Mathematicians of all Ages) any thing
should be left to be added or invented to it; which also shows that the Wit of
Man has no bounds; nor can any thing better demonstrate the noble Authors great
Parts, who moreover (because he would omit nothing that I had offered at in the
Proto-type) has here showed his excellent skill in relation to the Stars by a
Projection on the Pedestal; and doubtless this kind of Projection was never
brought to that perfection before.

But Gentle Reader, I shall injure you too much if I detain you longer from
this rare present, and therefore after rendering again my thanks to his Honor
for this favor and liberty, I subscribe my self

His and Your Humble Servant, Joseph Moxon.
June 24. 1679.
A Postscript concerning the Erratas, and the Geographical part of this GLOBE.
THE Erratas of the Press being many, I shall not set them down in a distinct
Catalogue as usually, least the sight of them should more displease, than the
particulars advantage, especially since they are not so material or intricate,
but that any man may (I hope) easily mend them in the very reading. I confess I
have bin in a manner the occasion of them, by taking from the Noble Author a
very foul Copy, when he desired me to stay till a fair one were written over,
so that truly it is no wonder, if Workmen should in these cases not only
sometimes leave out, but add also, by taking one line for another, or not
observing with exactness what words have bin wholly obliterated and dashed out.

As to the Geographical part of the Globe be pleased to take notice that 1st,
The Terms or Bounds betwixt EVROPE and ASIA, or between ASIA and AFRICA, are
Strokes and Pricks -- thus: between great Empires, single Strokes in this
manner --; and between Province and Province only Pricks. And by the way, the
Author calls here an Empire, every great Tract of ground of one Appellation, as
Barbary and Zara in Affric, Siam and Pegu in Asia, Italy and Germany in Europe,
as well as France; Spain, Persia, etc. that belong to one only Prince. These
Empires are in little Capital Letters, but the Provinces or subdivided Kingdoms
are in Round Roman, as Algiers and Tunis in BARBARY, Pomeren and Austria in
GERMANY, etc. and for the Towns as London, Paris; Venice, etc. they are
generally in Italick, but when they happen to be in Round Roman, as Fez;
Morocco, Agra, etc. it shows that the Province gives the Name to the Capital
City; for the Name properly belongs to the Province, but to save trouble and
room it is now by a Reference or Dash joined to the Town.

2. The Old Name of any place is in Old Hand, and when it belongs to an Empire,
it is very big, as Sarmatia, Ethiopia, etc. when a Province, a great deal less,
as Mesopotamia, Caldea, Assyria and the like, and when a Town very little, as
Hippo, Cyrene, and so forth.

3. The Hills that are expressed have all before them the Letter M, and the Capes
the Letter C, but the Rivers have eithe either an R or else sl. after them; and
whereas some Old names, as Thule, Ophir, etc. are repeated, it is to show where
One Author would have their situation to be, and where Another.

But be pleased to remember, that whereas his Lordship did Direct in this page
24.
Treatise, that the Grand Meridian should pass throu' St. Vincent, I have
presumed to draw it over St. Mary and St. Michael, 2 Isles of the Azores; for
truly thus it suits best (according to my Tables) with the 2 a Clock Circle, as
his Lordship would have it do.

An Advertisement.
BEcause there are several who either want time, or Patience to go throu' the
whole Treatise, I here present the Reader with a Catalogue of the Operations,
which are most pleasing and suitable to the fancy and humor of such, and which
they may easily in a day or two learn, especially if they have a Master to help
them.

1. TO set the Globe level. page 4. 2. To compose the Globe. p. 8. 3. To know
the day of the Month. p. 9. 4. To take the Suns height above our Horizon, when
he shines out clear; and also when he shines dimly, and is overclouded, p. 5.
and 6. 5. To find the Suns Azimuth and Bearing. p. 10 and 12. 6. To know the
Hour several ways. p. 13. 7. To know at what hour the Sun rises or sets. p. 16.
8. To know what a Clock it is all the World over. p. 31. 9. To find where it is
day and where it is night all the World over. p. 33. 10. To find where (at that
moment) they have nothing but Day, and where nothing but Night; as also when
this happens in any place subject to this Alteration. p. 33. 11. To find the
Sun's present Height and Depression all the World over, if he shines. p. 37.
12. To find where the Sun is rising and setting all the World over. p. 34. 13.
To find what people have then the Sun Vertical, or over their heads. p. 35. 14.
To know where they are rising, where they are going to Dinner, where to Supper,
and where to Bed all the World over. p. 35. 15. To find how much any People (if
it be day with them) are past Morning, or want of Evening; and (if it be Night
with them) how much they are past Evening and want of morning; and consequently
the Babilonish and Italian Hour all the World over. p. 36. 16. To know the
Judaic Hour, p. 39. 17. To find in what Clime any Place lies. p. 26. 18. To
know in any Lunar Eclipse, what Countries see it wholly, what in part, and what
not at all; as also the true hour, which each people see her at, in her several
Affections; with her continual Height, Azimuth, and Bearing all the while. p.
59. 19. To represent the several Phases of the Moon. p. 61. 20. To find the
Proportion between any Perpendicular and it is shade. p. 65. 21. To take the
height of a Tower by the Globe. p. 66. 22. To do it seemingly without any
Instrument. p. 66. 23. To know the Hour by your Stick. p. 67. 24. To learn
presently how to make (all the 5 Dials of a Cube, (to wit, that on its p. 73.
Horizontal, that on its direct p. 80.
South, that on its direct p. 82.
North, that on its direct p. 85.
East, and that on its direct West Plane) though a man be never so unacquainted
with Mathematics. 25. To represent at any time the posture of the Heavens in
relation to the appearing Fixed Stars; and consequently to find the present
Hour, with the Height, Azimuth and Bearing of any Star; as also the time of its
Rising, Setting and continuance both above and below the Horizon. p. 138.
The General Heads.
1. THE Figure, or Delineation of this Globe, as also an account of it, and the
occasion of its Invention, together with a Catalogue of the Operations fittest
for those that cannot run over the whole Treatise, are contained in the
unfigur'd or preceding pages. 2. The Introduction begins page 1. 3. The first
Section, solving the Questions which relate to the Sun in our Elevation. p. 4.
4. The second Section, resolving the Operations that concern Geography, and the
Sun all the World over. p. 20. 5. The third Section, concerning the Moon, p.
48. 6. The Fourth Section relating to Perpendiculars and their Shades. p. 64.
7. The Fifth Section treating of Dialling. p. 70. The Figure of the Globe
fitted for a Garden or open Portico. p. 121.

Geometrical Problems, necessary for Dialling. p. 122.

8. The Use of the Line of Lines, and Line of Sines on the Sector. p. 125. and
127. 9. The sixth Section, solving (both by the Globe and Pedestal) all the
usual Questions which relate to the Stars. p. 129. and 135.
The Explication of the Letters, etc. on Sch. 1.
P. The North Pole of the World. N. The Northern Polar Circle. Z. The Zenith. E
E. The Ecliptic.. The Tropic of Cancer. Jun. 1. The Parallel of that day. May
1. The Parallel of that day. Apr. 1. The Parallel of that day. AE AE. The
Equator. Mar. 1. The Parallel of that day. Feb. 1. The Parallel of that day.
Jan. 1. The Parallel of that day.. The Tropic of Capricorn. H H. The Horizon.
S. The Southern Polar Circle. P The South Pole. N. The Nadir. Z H. The Quadrant
of Altitude: N. The Quadrant of Depression. Z H. The Quadrant of Proportion. P
AE P. The Meridian of the Place or Solstitial Colure. LL The Meridian of the
World. P. P. The Aequinoctial Colure. XII. I. II. etc. The Hour Circles, or
particular Meridians.
THE Introduction.
THIS Globe whose several Operations we are here describing, neither hangs in a
Frame, nor is moved about as the ordinary ones are, but stands stable and
immobil on its Pedestal, which makes it not only to represent the Earth more
naturally, according to the common Hypothesis, but renders it also more
expedite and useful, as shall be fully shown in the Conclusion or last Chapter;
for then (after a view of the whole Treatise) every body will the better
comprehend all the new Operations it performs, and all the particular
Advantages, it can any ways challenge to its self. But here my Reader must
remember that though I endeavor all along (even in the most ordinary things)
to be clear and easy, yet unless he has formerly read, Hewes, Bleau, or rather
Moxons Book on the Globes, I cannot promise him I shall always be understood
without the help of a Master; for I have not time to descend to all the
Definitions and minute Explanations, which those that are wholly unacquainted
with Astronomical or Geographical Principles, may perchance expect.

As for the Circles here described, there are some common Of the Circles
described on the Globe.
to all Globes; as the Equator, the Ecliptic, the Coluri, the ordinary
Circles of Longitude, the Tropics, and the Polar Circles; and some also
particular to this Globe only, as the Horizon, the Meridian of the Place, and
16 Parallels to the Equator, all within the said Tropics. Now that these
Circles in general may be the sooner found and comprehended by any new
Beginner, there are Capital Letters in the Great Figure, or Delineation of the
Globe, in Scheme the first, which sufficiently distinguish them; for the
Equator is marked with AE, the Ecliptic with E, the Polar Circles with N. and
S. The Circles of Longitude with the Roman Figures, I. II. III. etc. as well
where they fall upon the Polar Circles, as the Equator; and tho all the
Circles, that thus cut the Equator and Polar Circles at a Roman Figure be
Circles of Longitude, yet they now serve for true Hour Circles also, since they
are not here expressed, and drawn (according to the usual manner of Terrestrial
Globes) at the distance of 10 Degrees, but of 15 asunder. And here be pleased
to remember that since there is a difference between the Roman Figures which
belong to the same Circle (for if it cuts for example at IIII. on the Polar
Circles, 'twil cut, you see at six hours difference, viz. at X in the
Equator,) the reason of it will appear by and by very plainly when we come to
the Operations, that concern these Circles; of which the broadest (passing
through the Zenith and Nadir) has two Quadrants gradually divided on one half
of it, the first called the Quadrant of Altitude, reaching from the Pin Z or
Zenith, to the Horizon H, the second (called the Quadrant of Depression)
reaching from thence to the Nadir; whereas on the other half, or back part of
the said Circle, there is a single Quadrant only, viz. from the Zenith to the
Horizon, which we shall for the future term the Quadrant of Proportion. This
Circle is also marked on the Polar Circles with the Figure XII. representing
thereby, not only the 12 a Clock hour Circle or Meridian of the place, for
which the Globe is particularly designed, but the Colurus Solstitiorum also; so
that the Colorus Aequinoctiorum must be the 6 a Clock Circle, whose half is (as
you see) divided for several uses into Degrees from Pole to Pele. By these two
Circles then, you have readily presented to you the 4 Cardinal Sections, The 4
Cardinal points of the Globe.
or Points of the Globe; for as the Graduated half of the said Meridian, shows
the Globes Southern part or face, and the opposite its Northern, so the
graduated half of the six a Clock Circle gives its Eastern, and the plain side
of it its Western. Now for the Aequinoctial Parallels, or Sun's Track for every
10th day, throughout the year, (for to avoid Confusion of Circles, I describe
no more) they are distinguished by the Days of the Month, when the Sun comes to
them, the uttermost of which are the two Tropics marked not only with the 11th.
of June and 11th. of December, but with and, the usual Characters of Cancer and
Capricorn. Lastly, for the Meridian of the World, or first Circle of Longitude,
it is marked with the Letter L, and pricked also; and tho in the present Longitude
(i. e. that of London) it stands for the 2 a Clock Hour-Circle, yet in its self
it is changeable, as shall be shown hereafter, when we treat of its vid. Oper:
2. and 5. in Sect. 2.
Properties, and Divisions.

These are then the Circles here described, either common, (as I said) to all
Globes, or particular to this, and being well What the Operations of the Globe
are performed with.
observed and remembered will much facilitate the ensuing Operations, which are
all naturally performed, either by the shadow of the Sun and Moon alone, or by
the help of a small String, hanging sometimes from the Pin P, representing the
North Pole, sometimes from the Pin Z, representing (as I said) the Zenith, and
garnisht with a little Bead and Plumet, according to its Figure in the Scheme
aforesaid.

And here you are to take notice that tho the one end of the A Memorandum.
String be absolutely fastened to the Pole, to prevent the loosing of it, yet
'twill serve for the Zenith as commodiously as if it always hung from thence;
for there is made at a convenient distance from the said fastened end, a little
Noose or Ring, which (as occasion requires) is now to be over this Pin, and now
over that; Nay if you give your String but half a turn about either of the
Pins, you will (with a little Allowance) as exactly perform your Operation as
if you used the said Noose it self.

To conclude, the whole Treatise is divided into six Sections; How the Treatise
is divided.
The first solving several Questions that relate to the Sun in our Elevation.
The second, many Geographical ones, together with some that concern the Sun,
not only where we live, but all the World over. The third is of the Moon; The
4th. of the Proportion of Perpendiculars to their shades, with some useful
Corollaries thence arising; The 5th. of Dialling, and the 6th. of the Stars.

SECT. I. Solving many questions, relating to the Sun in our Elevation.
Operation I. To set the Globe level or parallel to the Horizon.
I Begin here, because it is what we first suppose done in most The first way.
Operations, especially in the nice ones, nor is the performance difficult, for
we have nothing to do, but to place the String and Plumet exactly upon the
South side of the Meridian or 12 a Clock hour Circle, and if it hangs just over
the little Star on the Pedestal, then the Plane where the Globe stands is
Horizontal and Level; otherwise it is faulty as much as the Plummet varies from
being Perpendicular to the said Star; for the Star (you must suppose) is
engraved by the Globe-maker there, where he found the Plumet to hang upon his
Placing the Globe truly level.

Let therefore the String and Plumet be always long enough A Memorandum.
to touch almost the Pedestal, for thereby you may better perceive any Error;
and remember also that in case the said Pedestal (to be less cumbersom) be not
as big as the Diameter of the Globe, then there is to be under it a little
wooden Ruler, which being drawn out, and marked with a Star will serve for this
and several other uses as you will see anon.

There is another way speculatively true, tho perchance The second way.
not so exact in practice, which is thus performed. Place your Globe on your
Plane with the String lying on the Meridian as before, and if the Extuberancy
or swelling of the Globe just touches and bears up the String at the Horizontal
Circle, then the Plane is Level, or Parallel to the Horizon, otherwise it
differs as many degrees, as are between the point, where the said String
touches the Globe, and its Horizon.

The reason of this is, That seeing the greatest and most extuberant The Reason
and Demonstration of the Operation.
Circle on a Globe is that which lies 90 degrees from its Pole, the Horizon
becomes here the greatest and most extuberant one that can be described from
the Zenith, therefore the Globe being on a Level which makes its Zenith to
correspond with the Zenith in the Heavens, the String cannot fall short of the
Horizon, because it must rest on the most extuberant Circle that occurs; nor
can it touch below it, because the Plummet drawing the said String
perpendicular from the greatest extuberancy, hinders its bending, and
consequently its inclination to any part of the Globe beneath the Horizon. Now
if the Plane be not level, then the Zenith of the Globe and Heavens not
corresponding, another Circle or part of the Globe, instead of the Horizon must
have the greatest extuberancy and this Circle, being 90 Degrees from the point
of the Globe, (which lies directly under our Zenith) it must differ from the
Horizon of the Globe, as many Degrees as its Zenith differs from that in the
Heavens; therefore the way prescribed is at least speculatively true.

Operation II. To find the Suns Almucantar, or Height.
THere are three distinct ways of performing this independent of the following
Operations, and each of great use; for the first gives you the Suns height in
an instant if he shines. The second if you have the least glimps of him, or can
guess at his place in a Cloud. The third, if you know the hour by any good
Watch, Pendulum or the like, whether we see the Heavens or no.

I. As for the first way, it is this; your Globe being level, The first way.
move it 'till the shade of the Pin in the Zenith falls directly upon the
Meridian, and then the shade of the Extuberancy (i. e. that made by the
swelling or bellying out of the Globe) will touch the true degree in the
Quadrant of Altitude reckoning from the Zenith to it. And thus you will find
not only the Sun's height, sooner perchance than by any ordinary Quadrant, but
will still have it before your eyes as long as you please, nothing being to be
further done, but to move sometimes the Globe that the shade of the said Pin
may still concur with the Meridian. But if your Globe be fixed, (or that for
some particular reason, you have no mind to stir it at all, draw your string
from the Zenith, through the shade of its Pin, i. e. lay the string in the
Plane of the Sun, and then if you mount your Bead till it reaches the nearest
part of the shade of Extuberancy, it will (by bringing it to the Meridian or
Quadrant of Altitude) lie on the true Degree, reckoning (as before) from the
Zenith to it.

The Reason of the Operation is this; The Sun when he rises The Reason and
Domonstration of the operation.
brushes the Zenith and Nadir of the Globe with his Rays, for he illuminates
always (within some few Minutes) just half of it, therefore when he gets (v.
g.) a Degree higher, he must needs illuminate a Degree beyond the Zenith, and
so proportionably from time to time, or else he would sensibly illuminate more
or less of the Globe at one moment than at another, which How much the Sun
illuminates more than half the Earth.
is absurd. Now since the Sun in truth illuminates more than an Hemispere, the
Reader must remember that Ptolomy reckons this excess (take one time with
another) to be about 26 minutes, and Tycho something less, therefore substract
13 minutes (or half the said Excess) from what the shade of Extuberancy mark's,
and you have his Height with all ordinary Exactness: but should you chance at
any time to doubt how far the said Shade of Extuberancy (which is not so
discernable as that How to know the terms of the shade of Extuberancy when the
sun shines faintly.
made by a Gnomon) just reaches, erect then a piece of stick, straw, quill,
etc. or, if you please, rest your Finger on the Globe, between the Sun and the
point in dispute, and where the shade of your Finger, straw, stick or quill is
lost, that will be the true Term of the shade.

As for the Second Way (for both the former we reckon but The second Way.
one) turn the Meridian of your Globe to the Sun as before, or because we
suppose him not to shine outright, direct by your Eye the said Meridian, so
that it lie in the same Plain with him, and this you may do in a manner as well
(if you have the least glimps of him, or can by any accident guess whereabouts
he is) as if you had the forementioned help of the Pin's shade in the Zenith.
Having thus done, Take your String in both hands, and cross with it (as exactly
as you can at right Angles) that part of the Meridian next your body, whether
it happens to be the Quad. of Alt. or that of Proportion, then putting your
Face close to it, and moving your Ey lower and lower, till by reason of the
Extuberancy you can but just see the Sun, or his supposed place in Heaven, do
but bring your String (held as before) to this point, viz. bring your String
toward you till it just takes away the Sun or his supposed place from your Ey,
and the degree in the Meridian on which it then lies will be (counting from the
Zenith) the Height required; for so far his rays would reach did he shine
outright.

The third way is when we know the Hour by any Watch, Pendulum, The Third way.
etc. thus, Find among the Aequin. or Diurnal Parallels that belonging to the
present Day, which we will suppose Apr. 10. and drawing your string from the
Zenith over that Point in the said Parallel, where it is cut by the Hour given,
i. e. by the morning 9 a Clock Circle, move your Bead to the said Point, and
the distance from the Bead to the Horizon will be the required Height, viz.
about 36 degrees, as you will find if you bring the Bead to the Meridian and count
the degrees between it and the Horizon.

The Suns Height may be also known by its Azimuth, as by Operat. 5. To know at
any time whether it be Forenoon or Afternoon.
Having therefore by any of the aforesaid ways his Height, 'twill (upon any
doubt) soon appear whether it be Fore or Afternoon, for as long as ever he
increases in Degrees, i. e. mounts higher and higher above the Horizon, it
wants of Noon, whereas if he falls or declines, it is after Noon.

OPERAT. III. To Compose the Globe, either by a Meridian Line, or without it,
to the site of the World.
IF you have a Merid. line drawn, viz. a Line lying exactly North and South,
place the Globe Operat. 1. page 4.
level with its Merid. directly over it, i. e. place so the little Notch in the
Pedestal (marked S) that it cover the Southern extremity of the said line, and
the Notch N the Northern, and then the Poles and Circles on the Globe will
(without sensible error) correspond with those in Heaven, and each painted
Region or Country on it, will be turned toward the real one which it
represents.

But if you have no line drawn, Know the day of the Month, and you have two
quick ways to do this Operation without any foreign helps.

The Globe having in it small pin-holes, on the several intersections of A way
to Compose the Globe by the Sun.
the Merid. with the aforesaid Diurnal Parallels, or (to be exacter) on each
point of the Merid. which an imaginary Parallel of each fifth day would cut;
for though we are to suppose Parallels for every day throughout the year, yet
there being no sensible difference in the Sun from 5 days to 5 days, such
holes will be abundantly sufficient; nay the aforesaid ones from ten Days to
ten Days, may very well serve the turn in any ordinary Operation: I say, the
Globe having holes in its Meridian at this distance, put the Zenith Pin, or, if
you think better a Needle, in the Hole, which most agrees with the true day of
the Month, and then exposing your Globe level to the Sun, do but move it till
the shade of the said Needle or Pin falls directly along the Diurnal Parallel
where it is placed; or, if it be not placed in any of the said Parallels, move
the Globe till the shade falls parallel to the next Diurnal Parallel, and
'twill be as truly Composed as before, supposing you know (as we have already
Operat. 2. page 7.
taught you) whether it be Forenoon or Afternoon when you operate; for, as in
the Morning the Styles of Dials cast their shades Westward, and in the
Afternoon Eastward, so must your Needle or Pin do when the Globe is Composed.

But here the Reader must take notice, that in case the shade of the A
Memorandum.
Needle or Pin will by no means fall sensibly parallel, but (as you move the
Globe) draws nearer and nearer its being so, till at last it shortens to
nothing, then the Sun is exactly South, and consequently your Globe is
composed, as soon as the shade thus vanishes.

Now, Because the shadow of the Pin is on the Globe an Arch of a Great Circle,
this way of Composing the Globe cannot be accounted Mathematically true, For as
the Sun approaches each Tropic and the Tropicks not Great Circles, it will
happen Mornings and Evenings (when the Pin projects long shadows) that the
shadow of the Pin will not ly exactly in the Parallel of the Day, but will
(more or less) intersect it in the Center or Pin-hole. Therefore though the
aforesaid way of Composing the Globe be true enough for ordinary uses, yet I
shall give you two other ways without exception.

Observe the Concentrics between the North Pole and its Polar Circle, The first
way of Composing the Globe.
and first you will find that they are equal in number to the Parallels, either
from the Equator to the Tropic of Cancer, or to those from the said Equator
to Capricorn; for to avoid the confusion of too many Parallels, there are
usually but 8 Northern and 8 Southern described on the Globe. 2ly. That they
are distant from the Pole as the said Parallels are from the Equator. And 3ly.
That they are marked not only with the Days of the Month of the Northern
Parallels, but with those of the Southern also. The Day of the Month then being
(for example sake) Apr. 10. Move but the Globe (when level) till the shade of
Extuberancy touches the Concentric marked Apr. 10. and 'twill be truly Composed;
supposing that the Eastern face of the Globe looks toward the Forenoon or
Eastern parts of Heaven, and the Western face toward the Afternoon. In like
manner, If the Day of the Month or Suns Parallel be an imaginary one between
any two that are expressed; for to avoid (as I mentioned) the confusion of too
many Parallels there are usually but 8 Northern and 8 Southern described; I say
in like manner, If the Day of the Month, or Suns Parallel happens thus, let the
said Shade but touch or fall proportionably between the correspondent
Concentrics, and the Globe will be Composed, as before. The Demonstration.


The reason of the Operation is this; The Sun illuminating (as has been said)
half the Globe, the Shade of Extuberancy (or in other terms the Confines
between the Obscure and Illuminated parts) will be still 90 degrees from the
point or place where the Sun is vertical; therefore if the Sun be ( v. g.) in
the Equator, the aforesaid Shade or Illumination must terminate in the Poles of
the World; and when he is in the Parallel of Ap. 10. the Illumination must fall
short of the South Pole, and go beyond the North Pole as many degrees as the
said Parallel declines from the Equator; But the Concentric of Ap. 10. is by
Construction just distant from the Pole those degrees; Ergo when the said shade
of Extuberancy or the Illumination touches this Concentric, the Globe must (if
its Eastern face looks toward the Fore-noon part of Heaven or the Western the
Afternoon) be illuminated as the Earth is, and consequently Composed; for its
corresponding with the Earth in its site and position is all we mean by
Composing.

As for the reason why I mark each Concentric with the 4 opposite Months,
whereas the Parallels are marked only with 2 of them, it is that the Globe may be
Composed by the help of the Northern Concentrics, even when the Sun is in his
Southern Declension, it being more convenient and ready for one to cast his Ey
on the North Pole than to stoop to the South Pole; about which otherwise there
must have been the like number of Concentrics, and marked as the Southern
Parallels are; I say this is the reason of thus marking the Concentrics; for
since the Sun in its Northern declension illuminates beyond this Pole, he must
in his Southern fall proportionably short of it; therefore move the Globe as
before (let it be Summer or Winter or any other time of the Year) till the said
Illumination or Shade touch the Concentric marked with the day of the Month, and
'twill be still Composed.

The second way I shall defer to Operat. 10. because the intermediate The 2d
way vid. Op. 10.
ones conduce much to the facilitating it, as you will see.

OPERATION IV. To find the Day of the Month.
THis Operation is also performed two ways, as being the Converse of The 1. way.
the former; therefore since that requires the knowledge of the Day of the
Month, this must require the Globe Composed. Having then Composed it by a
Meridian line, or otherwise, Consider upon what Excentric, or between which of
them the said Shade of Extuberancy or Illumination falls, and that will show
the Day of the Month.

As for the second way, you shall have it when we come to Operat. X. The Second
way. vid. Op. 10.
which treats (as we said) of the Second way of Composing the Globe.

OPERATION V. To find the Sun's Azimuth.
THe Sun's Azimuth is an Arch of a great Circle, which passes through the
Zenith and Nadir over his body, so that his Mornings or Afternoons distance
(reckoned by the Degrees of the Horizon) from the Meridian or Southern Cardinal
section of the Globe is the thing required; and for performing the Operation
there are four several ways.

The first way.
Operat. 3. page 8.
Compose your Globe; Then standing on the illuminated side, or side next the
Sun, and fixing your String by its nooze in the Zenith, hold it up by the
Plummet-end, and move it along till its Shade falls on the middle of the
Fulcrum or supporting Pillar, or (to be more exact) till it covers the Center
of the Projection, being the point (you see) directly answering the Nadir; for
then the Degree in the Horizon, which the said Shade falls upon, gives from the
above mentioned Meridian the required Azimuth. Or else guide your String by
winking (or by any other convenient means, which practice will show you) till
it concur with the Shade of the Zenith-pin, that is to say, till they both ly
in the same Plane; for then the Shade of the String it self (if it hangs strit
along the Globe) will cut the Horizon, as before.

The second way.
In case you have only a glimpse, or faint sight of the Sun, then stand (the
Globe being Composed) on the obumbrated, or other side of it, and letting your
String hang down on that side also, aim or look along it with one by toward
the Sun, and role the String gently with your finger backwards or forwards,
till it lies exactly in the same Plane as the Sun does, or (if the Clouds
suffer you not clearly to see him) till it lies in the Plane of its supposed
Place, and the Degree under your String (reckoning the contrary way, that is to
say, from the Northern or back part of the Meridian) is the required Azimuth.
Therefore (by the by) if the Sun shines out, it is but drawing the String
through the Shade of the Zenith-pin, and it will (reckoning thus) answer the
Question.

The Third way.
3dly, Having taken the Sun's vid. Oper. 2. page 5.
Height, and having found it to be, suppose 36 degrees. bring the String to the
Merid. and by the help of the Degr. in the Quad. of Alt. Mount the Bead above
the Horizon 36 degrees. which Operation we shall frequently call hereafter,
Rectifying your Bead to the Sun's height. I say having taken the Suns height,
and Rectified your Bead to it, put your Ring or Noose on the Zenith, and move
your String, till your Bead lies exactly on the Parallel of the Day. Which we
will always in our Examples, or for the most part at least, suppose to be that
of the 10th of April, and the said String will cut the Horizon at 58 Degrees
Eastward (or thereabouts) for his then true Azimuth. And here you may remember,
A Memorandum.
That as the Height gives the Azimuth, so the Azimuth once known, gives the
Height; for your string being on the true Azimuth, if you mount your Bead to
the Parallel of the Day, it will show you in the Meridian the required Height.

Fourthly, Supposing that on the 10th of April, the hour given The 4th. way.
be 9 in the Morning, draw your String from the Zenith over the Point where the
Parallel of the Day, and the 9 a Clock hour-Circle intersect, and it will fall
on the 58 Degree in the Horizon Eastwardly of the Meridian for the then Azimuth.

OPERATION VI. To find the Sun's Declension, Parallel, and Place on the Globe
at all times.
BY the Sun's Declension is meant, his Northerly and Southerly The first way.
distance from the Equator, therefore if you know the day of the Month to be
the 10th of April, you have his Parallel, because it is marked with the said
day: Now since the Colurus Aequinoctiorum, or 6 a clock Hour Circle, is (as we
said) gradually divided from the Equator to the Poles, and that the said
Parallel passes almost throu' its 12th Degree, you have his Declension, as also
his Place in his Parallel, if you have his Almucantar, or Azimuth as you will
find by the second or following way.

If now you know not the day of the Month, Take the Sun's The 2. way.
Op. 2. page 6.
Almucantar and Op. 5. page 10
Azimuth by some of the foregoing ways, and Rectifying your Bead to the
Height, draw your String from the Zenith on the Horizon, according to the
Azimuth found, and your Bead will lie on his true Place, and consequently show
his Declension and Parallel; for, as his Declension is (as we said) his
Distance from the Equator, so his Parallel is a Circle described from the Pole
according to his Declination. And pray observe well this second Way; for though
it A Memorandum.
be not extremely necessary in Relation to the Sun, yet it is of singular use,
when you come to the Moon and Stars, whose Declensions depend not on the day of
the Month.

OPERATION VII. To find the Sun's Bearing, i. e. in what part of the Heavens he
lies, according to the Points of the Compass.
HAving found by the foregoing Operation (on the 10th of April.) the Sun's true
Place in his Parallel to be, suppose there where the 9 a Clock Hour Circle cuts
it, say over this Point your String, from the Zenith, and 'twill fall at the
Horizon a little beyond the Character of SEbE for his Bearing according to the
Points of the Compass.

OPERATION VIII. To find when the Sun comes to true East or West, or any other
Bearing.
HAving found the Parallel of the Day (viz. that of the 10th of April) and put
your String over the Zenith, bring it straight to the East point, that is to
say, to the point of the Globe where the Horizon and 6 a clock Circle
intersect, and you will find the said String to cut the said Parallel about 20
minutes before 7 in the Morning, which is the exact time of the Sun's then
coming to full East. Now if the String be laid on the Western Intersection,
'twill cut the said Parallel at 20 minutes or thereabouts after 5 in the
Evening, for the time of the Sun's coming to full West. In like manner, if you
would know, when he come's ( v. g.) to S. W. you are only to draw your String
(as before) over that Bearing, and you will find by the Intersection of your
said string and Parallel, that at a quarter past 2 of the Clock in the
Afternoon, or thereabouts he will have that Bearing.

OPERATION IX. To find what Signs and Degrees of it the Sun is in, at any time.
SEEK out the Parallel of the Day (viz. that of the 10th of April) and you will
find it to cross the Ecliptic in two places, to wit at the first of Taurus, and
the first of Leo; Now because in April the Sun is still Ascending, that is to
say, the Days increase, you may conclude that the first of Taurus is his then
true place in the Ecliptic; for were he in Leo he would descend toward the
Equator, and consequently shorten the Days.

OPERATION X. To find the hour of the Day by the Sun, together with a second
way of composing the Globe, and finding the Globe, and finding the Day of the
Month.
MANY are the ways to perform this Operation as to the Hour, But now we will
insist on four only, each of which has some peculiar Propriety belonging to it;
for the First gives us the Hour by the help of the Natural Style; the Second by
an Artificial one; the Third without any Style at all; and the Fourth (together
with the said hour) the Contemplation of several pleasing Operations at a time,
and among the rest this of Composing the Globe by the Shade.

I. Having Op. 3. page 8.
Composed your Globe, (and thus we will suppose it The 1st. way.
in each of the following ways) look among the Hour Circles (which are, as we
said, distinguished near the Polar Circles, with little Roman Figures) and the
shade of the North Pole, or Axis of the World (which we may justly call the
Natural Style,) will, during the Sun's Northern Latitude, as well as the shade
of the South Pole in his Southern, show you the Hour. And thus you may find it
for a while by the Ordinary Globes, in Circulo Horario, when they are once set
or Composed, which I wonder none, of those who writ of their Uses take notice
of; I say for a while, for it will only serve your Turn there from March to
September.

II. Your String hanging by one End on the North Pole, hold The 2. way.
it straight by the other, some little distance from the Globe, and moving it
on the Noose, till its shade touch, or cover, the Apex of the South-Pole,
'twill show you (among the aforesaid Polar Roman Figures) the true Hour, even
to a minute; for the Shadow of the String (which we call an Artificial Style,
because it is Independent and Foreign to the Globe) cutting at that Instant the
Equator, and Polar Circles, gives you in each place the Degrees of the hours,
and consequently the minutes, since the 4th part of a Degree is an exact minute
in time.

III. Look where the shade of Extuberancy cut's on the Equator, The 3d. way.
and the great Roman Figures, (which are there for that purpose) will give you
without a Style or more ado the exact hour, on what side soever of the Globe,
you stand; for you must remember that the Extuberancy casts on the Equator two
shades, the one still Preceding or going before the Sun, and the other
Following him. Now if this shade be dubious, your Finger (as I showed you 2.
page 6.
before) will help you, it being the constant Remedy on all Occasions of this
Nature.

IV. As now you find the Hour by your String hanging on The 4th. way.
the Pole, so this Fourth way is to show it you, in case it had hung on the
Zenith; nor have you more to do than to hold it by the end as before, and to
move it on its Noose 'till its shade concurrs and agrees with that of the Pin
in the Zenith, or for more Assurance till the Strings shade falls so on the
upper part of the Pillar or Fulcrum that it would cover the very Nadir, were it
not hid, and then where the said String it self, or its shade cuts the Parallel
of the Day, there will be the true hour, according to the Roman Figures of the
Polar Circles. This way I would have you well observe for from hence I shall A
Memorandum.
hereafter lead you to the Contemplation (as I hinted before) of several
pleasing and useful vid. the particulars in the conclusion or last Chapter. The
2d. way of composing the Globe by the shade.
Operations at one glance or view; and to give you a little Taste at present, I
will here show you the Second way of Composing the Globe by the shade.

Having for Expedition's sake, turned the North Pole of the Globe, as near as
you can guess to that of the World, Hold up your String with one hand to the
Sun in the manner now prescribed; That is to say, 'till the String hanging from
the Zenith) casts its shade on the Nadir, then move the Globe with your other
hand, and making by a proportionable motion of the String its shade to pass
still throu' the said two points, observe when it cuts the Parallel of the day
at the like hour with that, which the shade of the illuminated Pole indicates,
and your Globe will be composed; or, to express this in fewer words, Move thus
the Globe, till the shade of the string and the shade of the illuminated Pole
agree in the Hour. Nay fixing your String in the Zenith as before, and fastening
a Thread on the North Pole, do but hold up both to the Sun till the shade of the
String passes the Nadir, and that of the Thread the South Pole, if any body then
moves your Globe about till the two shades (passing still throu' the foresaid
Points) intersect on the Parallel of the Day, Demonstration.
you have your intent; for the Sun being you see in the Planes of the Thread and
String* he must be in their Intersection. i. e. in the Parallel of the Day; but
it is impossible for him (as we Op. 3. page 8
showed you) to be in the plane of that Parallel, on the true side of the
Meridian, except the Globe be Composed, for the corresponding Circles of the
Globe and Heavens can never else agree; therefore the Operation is true; and if
so, let the Globe be but on a The 3d. way of finding the day of the month.
Meridian Line, or any way else Composed, and the Agreement of the hour in both
places, or the Intersection of these two shades shows the Sun's Parallel and
consequently the Day of the month.

So much then for this second way of composing the Globe, and finding the Day
of the Month, which first came into my thoughts by reflecting on the Projection
of that great man Mr. Oughtred, who would have bin the Wonder of this Age, had
he bin as ambitious and forward, as he was thoroughly learned.

OPERATION XI. To find the Hour of the Day when the Sun shines not.
TO perform this Operation, we must suppose you know either the Suns
Almucantar, Azimuth or Bearing; and by the way you may find these, tho he Op.
2. page 6 and Op. 5. page 10.
shine's not; I say you must suppose either his Almucantar, Azimuth, or
Bearing, for they giving you his Place in his Parallel, the next Hour Circle to
his said place shows you the time of the Day; for if ( v. g.) in the forenoon
on the 10th of April.) you know that the Sun is 36 degrees high, Rectify your
Bead but to that height, and moving the String from the Zenith your said Bead
will touch the Parallel of the Day at 9 of the Clock. In like manner if you
know the morning Azimuth to be suppose, 58 degrees, draw your String from the
Zenith over the said Degrees in the Horizon, and 'twill also cut the Parallel
of the day at 9. Or, if the Sun's Bearing be (for Example) a little more than
SEbE the laying of your String from the Zenith on that Character in the Horizon
shows you on the Parallel of the day that it is 9 as before.

OPERATION XII. To know when the Sun rises and sets.
FIND the Parallel of the Day (to wit that of the 10th of April) and where it
cuts the Horizon on the East Side of the Globe, there the Suns place at his
Rising will be so that the time of the day appears by the next Hour Circle to
be a very little past 5 in the morning; and if you cast your eye in the
Intersection of the said Circle on the West, you will find the hour to be almost 7
in the Evening.

This being so, here fallows a very pleasant and useful Operation, To find
when, and at what declension, the Sun rises or sets earlier or later, accord-
as a Corallary, viz. How to find at what time of the year, and at what
Declension the Sun rises or sets, an Hour, or any other space of time, either
early or later, than it does at the proposing of the Question: for, if you
observe but what Parallel intersects with the Horizon, on the 4 a Clock morning
hour-circle which is an hour earlier than when it rises on the 10. of April,
you will find it an Imaginary Parallel, which the next real or marked one shows
to be the Parallel, for the 14. of May and 12. of July, and consequently by the
Devisions of the Aequinoctial Colure that the then Declension is about 21
Degrees. In like manner you must have looked on the West side of the Globe if
you would have had the time of the Sun's setting an hour later than 7; and thus
you are still to operate when any other space of time is required.

OPERATION XIII. To find the Sun's Amplitude, Ortive or Occasive.
BY the Sun's Amplitude we mean his distance in the Horizon from the true East
and West Points at his Rising or Setting; so that this Operation is also a
Corollary from the former; for, knowing (on the said 10. of April) the point or
place where he Rises, you will find the Ortive Amplitude to be Northward from
East about 18 Degrees, and (on the other side of the Globe) the Occasive
Amplitude, to be Northward as much from the West.

OPERATION XIV. To find the length of the Day and Night.
DOuble the hour of the Sun's Setting, (which on the 10. of April happens, as
we said, about 7 at night) and the Product (to wit near 14 hours) will be the
length of the Day; or double (5) the hour of his Rising, and the Product (10
hours) gives the length of the Night. Nay, if you do but consider how the
Parallel of the Day is cut by the Horizon, you have the whole business
represented to the life at one view, even as it happens in the very Heavens
themselves; for that part of the said Parallel above the Horizon, being divided
to your hand by the Hour-circles, into almost 14 hours, shows the Days length,
and consequently that part under the Horizon (showing a little more than 10
hours,) gives the length of the Night.

OPERATION XV. To find the beginning and end of the Crepusculum.
BY the Crepesculum is understood the Twilight which appears before the Sun's
Rising, and continues after his Setting; for as soon as the Sun comes within 18
Degrees of the Horizon (according to the Opinion of the ancient Astronomers) or
within 16. Degrees. according to that of Tycho, and some Modern ones) his Rays are
reflected from the Atmosphere or circumambient vapors, and consequently
illuminates, so that this light still increases, by how much the Sun approaches
the said Horizon, and decreases as it recedes. Now to find it, you are to bring
the String hanging on the Zenith to the Meridian, and making the Bead (if you
follow the latter Hypothesis) to stand by the help of the Quadrant of
Depression) at 16 Degrees under the Horizon, move it on the East side of the
Globe along the Parallel of the Day (i. e. that of the 10. of April) till it
just touches the said Parallel, under the Horizon, and there will be the true
point of the Morning Crepusculum, which the adjacent Hour-circle tells you
begins about 3 in the morning; In like manner if you move your Bead on the West
or Eveningside of the Globe* you will find it to end near 9.

OPERATION XVI. To find the Sun's Depression at any time of the Night.
BY Depression we mean, how many Degrees the Sun is then under the Horizon,
which is easily performed if you know the hour of the night, by the Moon,
Stars, Clock, or the like; for, finding (as has been Op. 6. page 11.
shown you) what part or point of his Parallel the Sun is then in; i.e. where
the Hour-Circle (corresponding to the time of the night) and Parallel of the
Day intersect, draw the String from the Zenith over it, and moving your Bead to
it, bring the said Bead to the Merid. or Quadr. of Depression, and then by the
help of the Degrees there (reckoning from the Horizon to the Bead) you have
before you the required Depression.

OPERATION XVII. To find the Sun's Right Ascension.
THE Right Ascension is that Point or Degree of the Equator cut by the
Meridian, or Hour Circle that runs through the Sun's place in the Ecliptic; and
this Degree is called the Right Ascension, because in the Position termed by
Astronomers and Geographers the Right Sphere, (which together with the Oblique
and Parallel Spheres, shall be farther explained in the Vid. Oper. 13. Sect. 2.
Geographical Section) it rises or Ascends with the Sun.

To find then the Sun's Right Ascension (a thing often of great Use) you are
only to take the String (hanging from the Pole) and lay it on the Degree of the
Ecliptic possessed then by the Sun, that is to say upon the 1st. of (for the 10.
of April is still our Example) and the Degree of the Equator cut by the said
String is the required Right Ascension, which counting from or East Point (as
you must always do) happens to be 28 Degrees, or thereabouts.

OPERATION XVIII. To find the Ascensional Difference.
AS for the Ascensional Difference (i. e. the Difference between the Right and
Oblique Ascensions) we have it here before our Eyes at a View, as being that
portion of the Day's Parallel which lies between the Sun's Rising or Setting,
and the 6 a Clock Hour Circle, so that if he rises on the 10. of April at
almost 5. and sets near 7. we may conclude that the Ascensional Difference is
about 14. Degrees, for 15. make an hour. But if you will be exact, then lay the
String from the Pole on the Point where the Sun rises or sets, and when it cuts
the Equator, count there the Degrees from the said String to the 6 a Clock
Circle, and all is done. Thus then you see, that when we know the Ascensional
Difference we have the time of the Suns Rising and Setting, for it is but
adding it to 6 a Clock, if the Sun be in his Northern Declension, or
substracting it in his Southern.

The END of the first Section.
SECT. II. Of the Operations that concern Geography.
HAving given you a short account of the Operations immediately Preliminary
Considerations
relating to the Sun, without reflecting upon any part of the Earth, but that,
on which we then stand, we will now descend to those that concern Geography,
where you may have a view not only of all Countries, as to their Situations,
Extent and the like, but see at one glance when you please, several other
things appertaining to them worth the knowing, as, What a Clock it is in any
place imaginable; what People are Rising, who are going to Bed, and who to
Dinner: as also, where it is they have no Night, where no Day, with diverse
particulars of the same nature, which were thought by many formerly not
performable without Magic.

That our Instrument is Geographical, no body will (I dare say) doubt, it being
the Terrestrial Globe, and consequently the Epitome of the very Earth it self;
and besides its many other Operations) it may be perchance useful in this, that
all Countries are here more obvious, and consequently more easily found out
than in any common Universal Map or Globe. Nor does it a little contribute to
it, and fix the Position and Order of the said Countries in our Memory, that
not only the Divisions and Subdivisions of the Earth are (by our present
Directions) clear and distinct, as far as this small bulk can afford, but freed
also from the usual crowd of Towns and Places, very often neither of Note nor
Use, unless for Distraction. For the business of a Terrestrial Globe, is to
represent the situation of famous Regions and Provinces, and how they are
distant each from the other; to show us also where the late Discoveries are;
where more may chance to be made; what proportion any Place bears to the known
Parts, or they to the whole Terraqueous Mass. These (I say) and the like, are
what a Globe is properly to represent; for small and inconsiderable Places
ought not to be there, as being the chief Object of Chorographical and
Topographical Charts, to which the curious are to recur upon occasion.

As for the first or grand Devision of this Globe, to wit, the four The grand
Divisions of the Earth.
Quarters, their names are in the midst of them in remarkable Capital Letters;
nor is there any trouble about their Bounds, after that that joins Europe and
Asia is considered; for bating the little Isthmus made by the Mediterranean and
Marerubrum (which contains the limits of Asia and Africa) there is no part of
the said Quarters, which is not surrounded by the Sea. For the separation then
or Boundary between Europe and Asia, it is a fine black line, that beginning at
The Boundary between Europ and Asia.
the mouth of the Tanais, runs up the Stream to Tuia (situated on its most
Easterly F^exure,) and thence going to the nearest Banks of the River Oby,
accompanies it till it falls into the Northern Ocean. This I say is the
separation drawn by me, and not from Tuia to the mouth of Duina at Archangel;
for since there are (as to the Question in hand) different and various Opinions
among Geographers, I follow the rather this Devision than any other, since it
contains almost all the vast Dominions of the Russian Emperor, and so makes him
as it were an entire Europaean Monarc.

The Devision of each modern Country from the other (which The Division of each
modern Country from the other
have all their Names on them in small Capital Letters) is also a black pric't
line, and that you may have a glimps also of Ancient Geography, I have expressed
some of the most considerable old Nations and Empires, by Prick Lines of The
Ancient Limits of several Nations.
several colors (as the directions on the Globe it self shows you) to amplify
or contract their Bounds, when they agree not with the present Limits; but as
for Cities and Towns, there are (as I said) but very few of any sort set down,
for in all the Island of Great Britain, we mention but London and Edinburgh,
besides a Port or two, in which proportion we proceed all along. Thus having
acquainted you with these few Preliminaries, we will now, after you have a little
considered the Names of each Country, and how they all lie from your Zenith,
where you are ever to suppose the Country or Place to be, which the Globe is
made for; I say, we will now, after you have a little considered these things,
fall upon the Operations, an Employment commonly much more diverting and
pleasant than Speculation.

OPERATION I. How to find the Distance between any two places.
IF the Question be (for Example) between Constantinople, and the Place you
dwell at, (which we shall for the Future suppose still to be at London) Draw
your String from the Zenith straight over Constantinople, and having mounted
your Bead thither, bring it to the Meridian, or Quadrant of Altitude, and it
will lie (counting from the Zenith to it) on the 24 Degree, or thereabouts,
which multiply by 60 (the number of Miles contained according to the Common
Account in each Degree) shows you that the Distance required is some 1440
Miles. But if it be demanded how far it is from Constantinople to Tangier, i.
e. from any other two Places, when neither lie under your Zenith, then take a
pair of Compasses, and placing one Foot on the first Town, and the other Foot
on the second, find (in the Meridian, Equator, Horizon, or any other divided
great Circle) the Number of Degrees between the Feet, which making about 31.
amounts to near 1860 miles. Or if you have no Compasses, fix the loose or
Plummet end of your String with your Finger on Tangier, and drawing the rest of
it straight over Constantinople, place there the Bead; and if you measure that
distance in any of the said divided Circles 'twill give you the above mentioned
Degrees and Miles.

And here be pleased to remember that to free you from Multiplication A Table
of reducing Degrees into Miles.
in Relation to Miles, I have ordered a little Table to be placed in the vacant
part of the Globe toward the Southern Ocean, where you may find from 1. Degree
to 20. how many Miles any number of Degrees give; but if your Question contains
more Degrees than are set down, as for Example 31. you are only to add 660.
(which you will see in the Table is the vallue of 11. Degrees) to 1200 (the
value of 20.) and the Sum Total makes 1860. Miles for the required distance. In
this manner you must operate in other cases.

The Table of Reduction is to be in the following manner. 1 60 11 660 2 120 12
720 3 180 13 780 4 240 14 840 5 300 15 900 6 360 16 960 7 420 17 1020 8 480 18
1080 9 540 19 1140 10 600 20 1200

OPERATION II. How to find the Latitude and Longitude of any Place.
THe Latitude of a Place is its nearest distance from the Equator; What the
Latitude of a Place is, and how to find it.
If therefore you would know the Latitude of, (suppose) Constantinople, draw
the String from the Pole over the said City, and placing thereon the Bead,
bring it to the gradual devision of the Colurus Aequinoctiorum, or 6 a clock
Hour Circle, and it will lie on the 43 Degrees, and about 5 minutes more, for
the Latitude required.

The Longitude of a Place is the number of Degrees (reckoned What the Longitude
is.
Eastwardly in the Equator) from the grand Meridian to the Hour Circle, or
particular Meridian that passes through the Place required.

As for the said Grand or General Meridian, it is that from Of the Grand
Meridian.
whence we begin our Reckoning; and since it matters not (as you will plainly
see in the Memorandum of the third or following Operation) where we commence,
to wit whether from the Meridian that runs through London, or that through Paris,
Rome or any other place, if people be acquainted with it before hand; I say,
since this is so, what wonder is it, (there being by reason of some accidental
Proprieties and Causes infinite fit Places) if Geographers and other Learned men
quarrel in the Affair, and earnestly strive to have the Prerogative granted
that Country, which they are pleased to propose.

Of all places, the Hesperides, Azores and Canaries, (by reason Of the most
noted Places where Author's have placed the grand Meridian.
of their Westerly Site, or the pretended non-variation of the Needle in some
of them) have had the most vogue; but since each of the said Places make not
one but many Isles, they afforded new occasion of Dispute; for among the
Hesperides, or Isles of Cape Verd, some would have Fuego to carry away the
Bell, some St. Nicholas, but others St. Vincent, as appears by Hondius's Globe.
Now Langrenius, in his, begins from St. Mary and St. Michael in the Azores;
Johnsonius in his Universal Map, counts from Corvo and Flores, whereas the
Learned Dudley (the late Titular Duke of Northumberland) gives the honor to
Pico, and has as much reason for it as the rest. Nor is there less do about the
Canaries, for the French fix it at Ferro, several of the Hollanders at
Teneriffa, and many other Nations at Palma, which is the Place I would
willingly choose, (since the great Ptolomy thought fit at last to assign it
there) were it as convenient for my present purpose as St. Vincent.

It Is St. Vincent then I here pitch upon for this Meridian to Where we fix our
Grand Meridian.
pase throu', because it differs in Longitude from London within less than 20
Minutes of just 30 Degrees, or 2 Hours, so that the 2 a Clock Circle will
represent it (within almost a Minute in time) without need of drawing a
Particular one, and the said Meridian is (as I told you in the beginning)
distinguished from the rest by Pricks, which being distant from each other a
quarter of a Degree, are useful on several occasions.

Having thus fixed our Grand Meridian, or first Longitude, How to find the
Longitude of any place.
that of other Places fallows with ease; for if you would know the Longitude
of Constantinople, draw but your String from the Pole over it, and it will cut
the Equator near the 62. Degree for the Longitude required, as you may readily
percieve by the lower little Aequinoctial Figures.

OPERATION III. How to find out any Place, the Longitude and Latitude being
given.
THis Operation is not only useful for the finding out of Towns expressed on
the Globe, when you cannot guess whereabout they are situated, but also for the
placing them truly in case they should chance not to be set down. Suppose then
Constantinople were the Town sought for, and that you found its Latitude to be
43 g. 5. and Longitude 61 g. 46. in some book or Geographical Table; I say
supposing this, you have nothing to do, after having mounted your Bead (by the
help of the divided Colurus) 43 g. 5. above the Equator, but to move your
String on its Noose from the Pole to 61. 46. in the said Equator, and
Constantinople will be just under your Bead; and if (in case of Omission) it
should not, you may then if you please mark it out your self, for that is its
exact place.

But by the way, if the Geographical Tables agree not with A Memorandum:
the Longitude of your Globe as telling you that ( v. g.) Constantinople has
but 54 g. 36, you are then to look from whence the said Tables begin, and
finding their Commencement, suppose at Palma, and that Palma (according to the
former Operation) has by your Globe 7 g. 10. of Longitude, you must add this
number to your Tables, and then you will agree.

OPERATION IV. To find the situation of any Place according to the Angle of
Position, or Points of the Compass.
DRaw the String from the Zenith over, v. g. Constantinople, and 'twill cut the
Horizon about 5 Degrees beyond E b S Eastward, for the true situation of the
said Town from your Habitation* according to the Points of the Compass.

OPERATION. V. To find in what Clime or Parallel any Place lies.
BEfore we can here well come to Operation, there are some A preliminary
Discourse of Climes.
few Particulars to be considered; and first what a Clime is; which is no hard
thing to conceive, since most know that after the Vernal Equinox our Days not
only exceed 12 hours, but that every nearer Country to the Pole has days of
greater Length than the Remoter: Nor are there many ignorant, that when our
Days (that live on this side of the Line) increase, theirs on the other side
decrease proportionably, and when theirs increase ours decrease; so that no
People are at a Constancy, but they that dwell exactly between both Poles, to
wit under the Equator. This Diversity was thought by the Ancients a thing so
fit to be known, that they invented the Devision of the Earth into Climes, so
that as soon they heard a Country named, they presently (besides the fond
Reflections concerning the Temperament of the Air, Ingeniety of men, etc.) knew
the length of its longest Day, and consequently how much any other Place
exceeded or came short of that length.

For suppose the first Northern-Clime were to pass over all the Places on this
side of the Equator, whose longest Day is 12 hours and 1/2; and the second
Clime those of 13 hours, and so on toward the Pole by a half hourly Increment,
what difficulty could there be to resolve immediately the Question, when we
once know the Clime, or having the length of the longest Day to find out the
very Clime it self.

I Wonder therefore, that so ingenious a man as (...), should seem to assert,
that this Devision is useless, it being as easy to find the longest Day as the
Clime; whereas, were Climes in esteem and fashion, the Memory would as soon
conceive and remember in which of them any Country lay, as now it does it is
Bounds, the manner of its situation, and the like; and if so, one may quickly
judge whether they are useless, and whether it be possible that the length
aforesaid can be known by any other means so universally, and at so easy a rate.

A Clime then (generally speaking) is a space contained between What a Clime is.
two Circles Parallel to the Equator, having the Places through which they pass
differing (as to the length of their longest Days) half an hour; and this space
takes the name of Clime from (...) Inclinare vel Deflectere; for the greater
our Deflection is from the Equator or Right Sphere, the longer our Summer
Solstitial Day will be. Nor were the Ancients content What a Parallel is.
with this large Devision of the Earth, but subdevided it into Parallels, so
that Places differing a quarter of an Hour, were reckoned to be under such and
such Parallels, which some call Artificial (from their relation to the
Artificial Day) to distinguish them from all others that occur.

As for the Antiquity of Climes, it is immemorial; nor could Of the Antiquity
and number of Climes.
there be many in the beginning by reason of the small extent of the known
parts of the World; For though Ptolemy reckons about 10, that is to say 21
Parallels, as making them to reach as far as Thule; yet Homer, Ovid and other
Poets, so possessed men with the Fancy, that from the Cimerians Northward,
there was nothing by reason of the hideous vapors and exhalations, but a
dubious and creperous light, that even Pliny, and after him the Arabians
insisted only on seven, looking on all Countries that lay farther as not worth
perchance the taking notice of.

As for the seven in vogue with them* and mentioned also very Of the 7 common
Northern Climes.
particularly by our Countryman Sacro-bosco (whose credit and great Repute has
perchance not a little kept up their Fame among the Moderns) they were,
Dia-Meroes, Dia-Syenes, Dia-Alexandrias, Dia-Rhodou, Dia-Romes,
Dia-Boristheneos, and Dia-Riphoeon, being all names made by the Addition of the
Greek Preposition (...) (i. e. per) to some remarkable Town, River, or Place,
through which the middle of each Clime past; so that the middle of the first went
through Meroe, an Ethiopian City on the Nile, where (according to some) Queen
Candace Reigned; the second through Syene in Egypt, lying just under the Tropic,
the third through Alexandria; the fourth through the Isle of Rhodes; the fifth
through Rome; the sixth through the mouth of Boristhenes, now called Nieper by the
Cossacks and the other Inhabitants; and the seventh and last through the Riphoean
Hills, part of which lay according to their account in or about, the Latitude
of 50 Degrees, and consequently corresponded with the Cimerians.

'Twas here then that Alfraganus and other Arabians ended Of the 7 Southern
Climes.
Northwards, who besides several small particulars, erred not a little in making
Rome and the Boristhenes only a Clime asunder, when as their longest days
differ at least an hour. And as for the Southern Climes (to wit those on the
other side of the Aequinoctial) they thought fit to consider them, but not
knowing what to call them, as being ignorant (for the most part) of the Places
they went through, they added (...) (i. e. Contra) to the former Denominations,
so that making Antidia Meroes serve for the first Clime, Anti-dia Sienes for
the second, they proceeded in the same order with the Rest.

But now before I end, I shall endeavor to solve a difficulty Why the middle
of the first Clime has 13. hours of day.
which startles not a few, viz. how it comes to pass (seeing the Climes are
assigned (as we mentioned) by the Ancients, to know the length of the Summer
Solstitial day in every Country) that the middle of the first Clime (which in
rigor should lie no further from the Equator, than to increase the day a
quarter of an hour) runs over Meroe, where the Excess is at least an hour. I
answer, the Ancients, deeming it more equal that the middle of the Clime, and
not the end of it should be the Point where the half hourly increment was to
begin, fixed the Term a quo, not in the Equator, but a quarter of an hour
further, and therefore Taprobane (which some now think Sumatra) was the place
where Ptolemy commences all his Climes, making thereby the middle of his first
to pass per Sinum Avalitum or (Mouth of the Red Sea) and the middle of his
second per Meroen; But the Arabians, thinking that for several Degrees from the
Equator all was either Sea, or (by reason of the Heats) scarce Habitable, or
else judging it for their Honor, to have their own Country* in the first
Clime, began half an hour beyond Taprobane, and so Dia Meroes, (tho the Days
are there 13 hours long) leads the Van in their Catalogue.

These few things premised, I shall now show you the way I How the first Circle
of Longitude is divided as to the Climes.
take therein, which I think in all respects clear and ready. First, I make the
primary Circle of Longitude to be the Circle particularly appropriated to this
use, being divided and marked according to the true distance of each Clime from
the other; and as to the place where they commence on our Globe, I rather
follow Ptolomies Astronomical than Geographical Method; for (besides the
aforementioned excess of the Arabians) should we begin but a quarter of an hour
from the Equator, it makes a great space of the Earth, viz. from Taprobane to
the Equator, to be in no Clime at all; and which is more, it causes a little
confusion, when the length of the day is greater in every Clime, than what the
said Clime can justly challenge, according to its Rank and Number; I say, as
for the place where the Climes commence, I rather follow Ptolomies Astronomical
than Geographical way; and therefore beginning at the very Equator, my first
Parallel (or middle of my first Clime) is supposed to run over the places that
enjoy 12. hours and a quarter of Day, and the end of it (noted on the primary
Circle of Longitude or 2 a Clock Hour Circle with the Figure I.) over the
places that have 12. and 1/2; and thus we proceed to the Polar Circles, to wit,
where the 24th. Clime, or 48th. Parallel terminates, so that from thence we
come to the Devisions on the said Circle of Longitude, which show where the
days are as long as an ordinary Week, where as long as a Month, and where as
two, arriving at last at the Poles themselves, where there is a constant half
year of light, and as much of Darkness. And to give you a Remembrance of the
Names of the aforesaid old Climes, and that you may also see without
Calculation or Trouble where the Ancients placed them, I have set down the
first Syllable of their names (as Mer. Sy. Al. etc.) according to their
respective Latitudes.

To find then in what Clime any place is ( v. g. Constantinople) To find in
what Clime any Place lies.
you are only to draw your String from the Pole over that City, and mounting up
the Bead thither, to move it to the said Primary Circle of Longitude, and
'twill lie on the Clime or Parallel required. But if you would know what places
are (suppose) under the 4th. Clime, throu'out the World, i. e. what places have
their longest day just 14. hours; Fix the Bead* on the 4th. Clime and moving it
on its Noose from the Pole round the Globe, you may conclude that every place
it passes over, has the Sun exactly so long above the Horizon, when the days
are at the longest; and in the same manner you must proceed on the South of the
Equator, to find the Countries that lie under the 4th. Southern Of the
inequality of the Climes.
Clime. In short, here we have, besides (what has been already said) a view not
only of the strange inequallity of the Climes, (especially between the first
and last) but also of their exact distance in Degrees, and consequently in
Miles, by help of our Table of Reduction, mentioned in the first page 23.
Operation of this Section.

But seeing we are a little fallen into Speculation, 'twill not Of the 5 Zones.
be, perchance, improper to proceed yet further, and to consider here, as in a
natural and fit place the Bounds and Terms of the five Zones, so called from
(...) Cingulum, as enclosing the whole World within their respective Districts:
It Is with the Torrid Of the bounds of the Torrid Zone, which contains the
Amphiscii,
one we will then begin, whose Bounds are the two Tropics, so that the Diurnal
Parallels not only remarkably distinguish it from the other Zones, but show why
the several Inhabitants within this space were called by the Ancients
AMPHISCII, i. e. Vtrinque umbrati, or men that had two shadows, from (...)
utrinque and (...) Vmbra; nay, by the said Parallels you may find when the
shade will change and be different; For, since by these Paths or Traces the Sun
(as we often hinted) passes from Tropic to Tropic, it is evident that sometimes
he must be on the Northside and sometimes on the Southside, of all that live
here, which must then needs alter the shadow. And as for knowing To find when
the shade changes side here.
the time of this change, we are only to consult the days of the Month on each
Parallel; for that which passes over the Heads of the proposed Inhabitants,
shows that from that time to the 11. of June (or the Sun's coming to Cancer)
and so till he comes again to be Vertical, their shade will be full South at
noon: whereas from his said Vertical station to the 11. of December (when that
he enters into Capricorn) and so till he comes again to them, their shadow will
be directly North.

From this Torrid and hot Residence; we will now run to the other Of the bounds of
the frozen Zones which contain the Periscii.
Extreme, viz. to the two Frozen Zones, which lying from each Polar Circle to
the very Poles themselves, are sufficiently distinguished from the rest.

Now since the longest day within these Limits is at least 24. hours in length
(as we showed you even now in treating of the Climes) and since the Sun in this
space of time, compasses the World, it must follow that here he runs round the
Inhabitants, which gave the name of PERISCII to them, that is to say Circum
Vmbrati, or surrounded with their shadow, from Of the bounds of the Temperate
Zones which contain the Heteroscij.
(...) Circum and (...) Vmbra.

As for the two remaining Zones, they are the Temperate ones, bounded by the
Tropic's and Polar Circles: Nor do the Inhabitants of this moderate and more
excellent position want an appellation from the property of their shadow also;
for never having the Sun but on one side of them (as still setting before he
gets round) and unable to pass, as he could in the Torrid Zone over their
Heads, by reason he has no excursion beyond the Tropics) it must needs follow
that their shade who live in the Northern Zone, will ever fall North, and
theirs in the Southern, South; so that they were called HETEROSCII, i. e.
Habentes alteram solum Vmbram, or People having but one kind of shadow, from
(...) alter and (...) Vmbra.

So much then for the Climes and Zones, together with their various
inhabitants, and now we will proceed to the Operations that follow.

OPERATION VI. To know what a Clock it is at any time, in any place of the World.
THere is no Operation perchance in the whole Treatise, First way.
more diverting and pleasant than this; nor scarce any more readily performed
after a very little Reflection, even in the most difficult Cases. For having
Composed your Globe, if it be then 12. a Clock with you, the standing Hour
Circles or Meridians already described, will (by the Common or little Figures
which lie within or upon the Roman ones, that surround the Polar Circles,) show
you exactly the Hour, wheresoever you cast your Eye; That is to say, that it is
about 2. of the Clock at Constantinople, 3 at Aleppo, etc. But now, if it be
not 12. with you* but (v. g.) 3 in the afternoon, when you desire to know the
then hour at Constantinople, add the said 3 a Clock to the Figure 2. (which you
see lies, as I now mentioned on the Meridian or Hour-Circle, that runs near
that City) and 'twill tell you that it is about 5 a Clock there; and thus you
must always do, unless the time of the Day with you, and the Figure that lies
on the Meridian of the place in question make a greater number than 12; for
then the Hour sought for, is what remains above 12; as for Example, if it be 11
with you, then this with 2, ( i. e. the Figure near the Meridian of
Constantinople) making 13, do but cast away 12, and you may conclude it there 1
in the Afternoon.

There are several other ways of performing this Operation; Second way.
as finding the Difference of Longitude between you and the Place in Dispute,
and so adding or substracting it (as need requires) from the true time of the
Day, Or else by calling it always Mid day, there where the Hour Circle that
shows your Third way.
then true time of the Day (which by our Example is 3 in the Afternoon)
crosses, for by counting from thence to the Meridian of the Place in question,
either forwards or backwards (as 1, 2, 3, 4, or 11, 10, 9, 8, etc.) according
as the said Place lies East or West from 3, and all is done; I say there are
several ways to perform this Operation, but seeing the first is the most clear
and expedite, I solely insist on it: and now because you may be perchance
running over with your Eye, the whole Globe, and considering how one Situation
or Country differs from another in time, 'twill not be amiss to tell you that
there are 3 Places, that have more particular Relation to your Dwelling or
Habitation than any other.

The first is that, which lies opposite to you in your own Of the Periaeci.
Parallel, whose Inhabitants are called by the Ancients PERIAECI, or
Circumcolae, from (...) Circum and (...) habito, and though by the Word, all
People are comprehended that dwell any where in the said Parallel, yet
Geographers commonly mean those by it, that are thus Diametrically situated.
These then live in the same Zone and in the same Clime, and cast the same kind
of Shade with you: These enjoy your proportion of Heat and Cold, your Seasons
of the Year, your Increase of Days and Nights, and in short all things else of
this kind, saving that your Hours are opposite; their six in the Evening being
your six in the Morning; and your Noon their Midnight.

The Second Place lies under your very Meridian, or 12 a Of the Antaeci.
Clock Hour Circle, which makes your Hours and theirs the same, but by being 51
g 30. on the other side of the Equator, it happens that tho you all agree in
the Temperament of your Zones, number of Climes, in the Casting a Shadow on one
side only, and the like; yet their Zone and Clime are Southern, their Shade
falls toward that Pole, their Summer is your Winter; and your Spring their
Autumn; so that from this contrariety they are named ANTAECI or Adversicolae
from (...) contra, and (...) Habito.

The Last is the Nadir or Point on which the Globe stands, whose Inhabitants
are called ANTIPODES. i. e. opposita habentes vestigia, or men that walk Feet
to Feet with you, from (...) Contra, and (...) Pedes. These imply (even by the
vulgar acception of the word) the height of Opposition; and since they are the
very Antaeci of our Periaeci, participating thereby of whatever was opposite to
you in either of the former Places, it is no wonder that you enjoy together
neither Day nor Night, nor Season of the Year, nor any thing else of this
Nature.

OPERATION VII. To find where it is Day, and where it is Night, all the World
over.
COmpose your Globe, and all People that live in the illuminated Hemisphere,
enjoy DAY at that Moment; and all that live in the Obscure One, NIGHT.

OPERATION VIII. To know where at that Moment of time the Inhabitants enjoy
nothing but DAY, and where nothing but NIGHT; as also when the DAY and NIGHT
will be thus perpetual in any place subject to this Alteration.
DEscribe with your Eye an Imaginary Circle about the Where they have no Night,
and where no Day.
Illuminated Pole, its Radius being the Distance from the said Pole to the
nearest part of the shade of Extuberancy, and all places within that Circle
will have then no Night, and all places within the dark Circle of the like
Radius, round the obscured When 'twill be perpetual Day or Night at any Place.
or obumbrated Pole will have then no Day: Now if you desire to know, when
'twill be in this manner perpetual Day or Night, at any Place between the Poles
and the Polar Circles, (for you know it is never perpetual Day and Night any
where else) you have nothing to do but to measure with your String, or
Compasses the Distance between the Place required and the next Pole, which now
for Examples sake, we will suppose the Northern Pole; I say you have nothing to
do, but to measure this Distance; for placing one end of your String, or one
Foot of your Compasses on the Interfection of the Meridian and the Equator, if
you observe what Northern Parallel the other end of your String, or Foot of the
Compasses (extended at the aforesaid Distance) touches, 'twill show you by
touching ( v. g.) the Parallel marked with the 10th. of April, and 12th. of
July, that it begins to be on the said 10th. of April, perpetual Day there; and
so continues until the 12th. of July. Now if you measure from the before
mentioned Intersection toward the Southern Pole, and find the End of your
String, or Foot of the Compasses to touch the 13th. of October, and 9th. of
January, it is certain that from the said Day in October to that of January
'twill be perpetual Night there, and consequently from the 12 of July to the
13th. of October, the Days and Nights succeed each other after the ordinary
manner.

OPERATION IX. To find where the Sun is Rising, and where He is Setting, all
the World over.
COmpose your Globe, and having considered the Confines or Extremity of the
PRECEDING and FOLLOWING Shades of Extuberancy, you may conclude that to all
the Inhabitants under the first, the Sun is Rising, and to them under the
Second, that He is then Setting.

OPERATION X. To find where the Sun is Vertical at any time, i. e. what People
have him just over their Heads.
THE Sun is always Vertical to those that lie in the middle of the Illuminated
part of the Globe, i. e. to those that dwell under his then present Place in
his Parallel; therefore (as I showed you in the Op. 6. page 11.
first Section) if you Compose your Globe and hold up your String against the
Sun from the Pole, till its Shade passes through the other, or from the Zenith,
till it passes through the Nadir, 'twill cut the Parallel of the Day at the Suns
true Place, and consequently show you who they are, that have him then just
over their Heads; which happens (for Examples sake, on the 10th. of April,
about our 6 in the Morning) to them that dwell about the middle of the Coast of
Malabar.

OPERATION XI. To know where they are Rising, where they are at Dinner, where
at Supper, and where going to Bed all over the World.
THis Operation depends on this Maxim, That it is the same Hour with all People
that have the same Longitude, that is to say, that live under the same
Semi-hour Circle, or Semi-Meridian, therefore as the drawing of your String
from the Where it is Dinnertime all the World over.
Pole, over half the illuminated part of the Globe, i. e. over the Sun's
present Place, shows you that it is Noon or Dinnertime with all that inhabit
under the said String, so the drawing it over any Place distant 6 hours
Westward (i. e. over so many Where it is the time of Rising all the World over.
hours toward the left hand from the Vertical point) shows where it is then all
the World over 6 in the Morning, or Tunc to Rise; whereas had you drawn it six
hours Eastward (i. e. toward Where it is Supper time all the World over.
your Right Hand,) it would have shown you where 'twas six in the Evening or
Supper-time, and four hours further (i. e. two hours short of Midnight, or the
point opposite to Noon) Where it is Bedtime all the World over.
where it is 10 of Clock, or Bedtime.

OPERATION XII. How much any People (if it be Day with them) are past Morning,
or want of Evening; and (if it be Night with them) how much they are past
Evening or want of Morning.
IF the Place you propose has a Diurnal Parallel that runs over it, then see
what Point of the said Parallel the Preceding shade of Extuberancy cuts, and if
you count the Hour Circles or distance in time between the said Point and the
proposed Place, 'twill give you (if it be there Night) how much it lack's of
Morning; and the distance in time between the said Place and the Point made by
the Following shade of Extuberancy gives you how much it is since Evening. On
the other side, if it be Day there, the distance between the said Place, and
Point made by the Preceding shade tells you how long it is since Morning, and
the Following shade how long it is since Evening. Now if there be no Parallel
that run's over or near your said proposed Place, mount your Bead to it, and
moving your said Bead on the Noose from the Pole it will describe a Parallel,
and then you may operate as before.

The Reason of the Operation is this; The shade of Extuberancy The Reason or
Demonstration of the Operation.
getting every hour in the Equator (as you saw Oper. 10 sec. 1. page 14.
before) fifteen degrees, 'twill proceed in the same proportion on all
Parallels over which it passes, therefore, if the Distance between any Point in
the Equator and the Following shade be the distance in time of the said Point
from Evening or Sunset, and if the distance there between any Point and the
Preceding shade be the distance of the said Point from Morning or Sunrising,
it follows that the distance between any Point in an Aequinoctial Parallel and
these two shades of Extuberancy that cut it, must be also it is true measure or
distance in time both from Morning and Evening.

OPERATION XIII. To find the Sun's height in any Place, where the Globe shows
it is Day, or his Depression where it show's it is Night; as also what People
throughout the World see the Sun, at the same Height.
SUppose on the 10 of April (Having composed your Globe, and To find the Sun's
height in any place.
found it about 6 in the morning with you) you should desire to know how high
the Sun is at Rome, as also all the People that then see him at that, or any
other determined height, Measure by your String or Compasses, the nearest
Distance between Rome and the shade of Extuberancy, and 'twill give you in any
great Circle about 22 Degrees for his Height there at that moment. And the
reason of it is, because when the Sun The Reason of the Operation
(i. e. the Place where he is Vertical) is distant 90 Degrees from Rome, then
Rome sees him in his Horizon, and as soon as he gets above the Horizon (v. g.)
22 Degrees, his Rays will illuminate beyond Rome 22 Degrees; for else there
would not be always 90 Degrees from the Place where the Sun is Verticale to the
Confines of the shade and Light, or utmost Extent of his Rays; but the
distance from Rome to the nearest part of the shade of Extuberancy, is the
distance of his Illumination beyond Rome ergo it is his true Height.

In like manner if it be Night at any Place on your Globe, To find the Sun's
Depression.
and you desire to know how much the Sun is there depressed or under the
Horizon: take the Distance (as before) between the said place, and the nearest
Term of the shade of Extuberancy, and that (for the former reason) will be the
required Depression.

As for the finding out of all Places, that have the Sun (suppose To find all
the Places, that have the Sun at the same height.
22 Degrees above their Horizon, you are only to lay the Plummet end of your
String or Foot of your Compasses on the middle of the Coast of Malabar (where
we now suppose the Sun to be Vertical) and making your Bead or the other Foot
of your said Compasses to lie on Rome, describe an imaginary Circle; and then
all People under the said Circle will have the Sun 22 Degrees high, since they
are all distant from him like Rome; and thus you must operate in all other
Cases.

OPERATION XIV. To know what a Clock it is with you, the Italian, Babilonish,
and Judaic way.
YOU are first to know that as England, France, Spain, How Astronomers begin
their Computation of Time
Denmark, Sweden, most part of Germany, and many other Places follow the
Astronomical account in their Diurnal Computation of time, with this only
difference that the Astronomers begin at Noon, and so go on from 1 to 24;
whereas the aforesaid Nations begin at Midnight, dividing the whole Natural
Day into twice twelve hours; I say, as these Nations begin their Account at
Midnight, so the Italians do theirs at Sunset, How the Italians.
continuing to 24 without interruption, after the Athenian manner of old, which
is also now usually observed in Bohemia, Austria, Silesia, etc. On the contrary
some Places in Germany, and particularly Noremberg, still follows the ancient
Babilonian or Caldean Way, as commencing their 24 hours from Sunrising: How
the Babilonians.
therefore the difficulty and seeming Confusion of counting by either of these
2 last ways proceeds from the Sun's inconstancy in its Rising and Setting; for
when he is in the Aequinoctial our Globe show's us the hour, as soon after
their manner as our own: As for example, if you would then know what To find
the Babilonish and Italian hour when the sun is in the Equator.
hour it is with you, the Babilonian way, Hold up your String against the Sun,
and moove it on it is Noose from the Pole, till the shade fall on the contrary
Pole, (i. e. look what a clock it is the Op. 10. sec. 1. page 14.
second Way, and where the shade of the String cuts the Equator, the Roman
Figures there will give you the true Babilonish Hour. Or (which is all one) see
what a clock it is by the shade of Extuberancy, or Op. 10. sec. 1. page 14.
3d way, and finding the said shade to fall, suppose, on the 9 a clock
hour-circle in the Equator as the then true hour after our English Fashion; do
but cast your Eye To find the Italian Hour when the Sun is in the Equator.
on the Polar Circles, and the said 9 a clock hour-circle, will cut there at
the Roman Figure 3. so that you may conclude it then 3 a clock the Babilonian
way. Nor does the Italian manner materially differ from this, for it is but
adding 12 hours to the 3 found as before, and then 15 will be the true hour
after that account.

Now if you would know the hour when the Sun is out of the To find the hour
both the said ways at any time.
Equator (as for example, on the 10th. of April) consider the Parallel of the
Day, which giving you at first sight about one hour for the Ascensional
Difference, (as I showed you in the former Op. 18. p. 19
Section) do but add this hour to the three found, as we now showed you, and
'twill give you four for the true Babilonian hour; whereas if you substract it
from 3 ( i. e. from the aforefaid 15.) you have the true Italian hour; and thus
you are to proceed in all other cases; Only remember that when the Sun is in
his Southern Declension the Substraction of his Ascentional Difference gives
the Babilonian, and the Addition of it the Italian hour. A most ready way of
finding at any time the Babilonian and Italian Hour all the world over. Of the
Judaic way of Computing time.


But if you would have yet an easier way of performing this, consult the 12th.
Operation, and the distance in time there from Day gives you the Babilonian,
and the distance from Night the Italian hour.

As for the Jews, they divided the day always into 12. equal parts, which they
called hours, as appears by our Saviors demand; Are there not 12 hours in the
Day? therefore when the Sun is in the Equator (as it happened about the time
of the Passion) this and the Babilonish way are the same, for then the 3d. hour
is 9 a Clock with us; and our 3 in the afternoon is their 9th hour; so that at
6 our way, or at 12 theirs, the Sun Sets, and the Night begins, which they also
divided into 12 equal parts; I say, this is the same as the Babilonish way,
when the Sun is at or about the Equator, and consequently easy; but
afterward, by reason of the strange inequallity of both Day and Night, the
Computation must be troublesome, especially if we use Reduction (the common
prescribed way on the Globe) for the Summer days with us contain above 16 of
our hours, and the Winter ones not half so many, and yet both kind of Days are
to be divided into 12* equal parts or hours; Nor were the Jews the only people
that reckoned thus, for the manner was in use among the Romans, as we see by
Persius his Drunkards, who lay a Bed to digest their Wine -- Quinta dum line a
tangitur Vmbra. Nay the Greeks followed it also, and had Machines or Clocks (as
Achilles Tatius tell us) which could (notwithstanding the forementioned strange
inequality of Days) measure their Time.

But this seemingly odd and exotic account, may very exactly A most ready way
to find the Judaic Hour.
and expeditely be performed by our Globe; for, if the Globe-maker devides each
diurnal Parallel by distinct specks or pricks into twenty four parts, that is
to say; if he devides that part of each Parallel above the Horizon into 12
equal ones, and that below it into the like number, you have nothing to do but
to hold up your String against the Sun, and if you move it from the Pole on its
Noose, 'till its shade passes over the contrary Pole, then upon what prick
soever the shade falls, that will be the required hour; and in like manner if
you know the Sun's Why the days of the Week being called by the Names of the
Planets follow not each other after the order of the Planets
Depression, draw but your String over his then Place, and it will cut the
Parallel at the true Judaical time of the Night.

These Unequal Hours were also called Planetary by the Ancients, who allowed to
each a Planet to govern it; so that the first hour (suppose) on Saturday,
belonging to Saturn, if you go on still in the usual Celestial Order, as it is
expressed Saturn. Jupiter. Mars. Sol, Venus, Mercury, Luna.
in the Margent, and consequently assign Jupiter to the second hour, Mars to
the third, etc. the 25th (i. e. the first hour of Sunday) will happen to the
Sun's Lot, and the first of Monday to the Moon's, and so forward: and thus you
may see how it came to pass that the days of the week succeeded in the present
order, and not according to that of the Planets in the Heavens, that is to say,
why Dies Lunae (or Monday) and not Dies Veneris (or Friday) immediately follows
Sunday.

I shall now end this Discourse, after I have told you, that if The Advantage
in reckoning the Italian way.
we Englishmen think these Computations strange, they that use them, wonder as
much at ours; nay, each man pretends some particular Convenience and Advantage
by his Method; For first; an Italian says, that without breaking ones Brains no
body can tell our way when the Day-ends, so that idle men, who usually hate
computing do often cousen themselves, and take false measures in their Affairs*
for (continues he) if they chance to get up at 8 of the Clock in Winter, they
fancy a whole day (even St. Barnabas's) before them, when as this Hour or early
rising to Him, is 16 of the Clock, which informs him at the very instant, there
are but 8 hours to Night.

The Caldean on the other side urges that Morning, being the The Advantage in
reckoning the Babylonian way.
most precious part of the Day, is fittest to be nicely known, and though his
Hour gives him not presently the Distance to the Evening, yet it so alarms him,
as to what relates to the Morning, that he cannot make the least slip therein,
without being at the same moment conscious of his failure.

Lastly, the Jew approving both Reasons highly, triumphs in his way; for he no
sooner looks (he says) upon his Dial, but sees there not only what hours are
past, but also what remain, and are yet behind.

But notwithstanding all these shows and pretenses of Reasons our Account is so
far from coming short of any, that in reality it surpasses all* for we not only
know exactly what we want every moment of Noon (a thing of mighty Concern) but
can appoint positive hours all the Year long, for any Employment whether
private or public, whilst these other ways (by reason of the Suns inconstancy
in Rising and Setting) have all orderly and set times (as when to Dine, when to
Sup, when to Rise, when to go to Bed, etc.) still mutable and fleeting.

OPERATION XV. How to make the Globe Universal.
THis Operation is quite beyond both my Proposal and Design; for I really
intend nothing but a Dial, (according to a Determined Elevation) fraught with
several easy and natural Performances, as well divertising as useful; And if a
man cannot be content with one for his Study or Garden, unless it may serve for
Jerusalem also, he must not only quarrel with Mr. Oughtred's excellent
Projection, and all particular Analems, Quadrants and the like, but with
Stoffler's Astrolabe, an Instrument received with mighty applause by all.
Besides, it is forty to one (especially since there are, as we already see, so
many Universal Operations performable* by our Globe, tho fixed for a particular
Place,) if there chance a case in seven years that would move one to wish the
Elevation changed; Yet least this might happen, the Instrument Maker will
prepare a thin Brass Circle, gradually divided like the Horizon, and of the
same bigness; therefore if the new Elevation were (suppose) for Rome, open but
your Compasses at 90 Degrees in any of the great Circles* or, take the same
distance with your String and Bead, and having designed by your said Compasses
or String any two Points thus distant from Rome, clap over your new Horizon so,
that its divided edge rests on the said two Points; or in short, let Rome be
the Pole of the Brass Circle, and 'twill cut all the Equinoctial Parallels, as
if the Globe had been made for that City, and consequently you will soon have
there, the Suns Rising, Setting, Amplitude, Ascensional Difference, etc.
Moreover the Circle being exactly made, will stick of it self, or, at least by
the help of any scrap of Paper between, so that if at any time you set but the
Plumet-end of your String on Rome, you may then hold it down with one Finger,
and operate as you would do from your own Zenith.

But since I am fallen upon this needless affair, and since the Operation is in
effect the changing of the fixed and standing Site of our Globe, 'twill be
perchance not amiss to inform you (if you are not already well verst in the
Sphere) that there are three different and distinct Positions of it, which you
will better comprehend, if you consider your self in these three Places.

Sch. 1


Suppose first, that you were under one of the Poles, and for Of the Parallel
Sphere.
Example sake, the Northern one, it must needs follow that that Pin on your
Globe will not only be useful there, in relation to the several Operations that
must (as we showed you) be done from the Polar Pin, but from that of the Zenith
also; because now it is the Zenith there, and therefore the South-Pole being the
Nadir, all Circles must lie as they are represented in Scheme the first. Seeing
then that the Horizon is a great Circle, and always 90 Degrees from both Zenith
and Nadir, it will necessarily happen that the Horizon and Equator must
concur, so that the Equator described on the Globe will serve for an Horizon
in this Position of the Sphere, which is called by Geographers the Parallel
one, because by reason of the concurrence aforesaid, all the Heavenly Bodies
according to their Diurnal motion i. e. according to the motion of the Primum
Mobile) parallel to the Horizon; so that the Sun cannot Set during the six
Months of his Northern Declension, nor rise during the six of his Southern; for
his Rising and Setting imply the cutting or intercepting of some part of his
daily Road or Track by the Horizon. Nor want the Stars here their particular
Properties also; for being carried daily on the Poles of the World, and
consequently moving parallel to the Equator, all that are above the Horizon
cannot go under it, nor the others emerge, unless some, by their proper motion
after a long series of time, change that Order. Having then in this Sphere the
Zenith and Horizon, whatsoever is performable by your own Zenith and Horizon,
may be here ( mutatis mutandis) performed after the same manner.

Leave then but this Pole, and every step of it under any Of the Right Sphere.
Meridian (as suppose the Solstitial Colure, or 12 a Clock Hour Circle) makes
it no longer your Zenith* but to decline more and more toward your Horizon* so
that by that time you get to the Equator, both it and the opposite Pole will
be 90 Degrees from your Zenith, and lie consequently just in the Horizon, as
appears by the Second Scheme, which is called the Right Sphere, because the
Horizon (which is here represented by the Aequinoctial Colure or 6 a Clock
Circle) cuts the Sch. 2.
Equator and all Parallels to it at Right Angles, and in half; Proprieties
belonging to the Right Sphere.
therefore it appears plainly now, that both the Sun, Stars, etc. are here to
be just 12 hours above* and 12 below the Horizon. Besides as in a Barrel every
Concentric Hoop or Circle whether small or great, turns just about as the
Barrel does, having all correspondent Points up and down at the same Instant* I
say, as it happens thus in an ordinary Barrel so it must also happen here; for
the Equator and its Parallels do not a little represent such a Figure, and
therefore the Sun must be as many Hours in his Journey round the Tropics as the
Equator it self; Nay, any Star rising with a Degree of the Equator which is
its Right Ascension, as we hinted in the last Op. 17. p. 47.
Section) must still accompany each other, and having past under every hour
Circle together) set at last in the same Order. To conclude, your String from
the Zenith will be as useful as formerly; for your Bead will as well show you
what you here desire, as at your own Dwelling.

Sch. 3.


As for the oblique Sphere which is the third and last Position, Oblique Sphere.
and here expressed by the third Scheme, we are in it (you must know) our
selves, and so are all other People and Places of the World that are in neither
of the two former ones; for take any point not under the Poles or the Equator
for your Zenith, and 'twill be impossible to describe an Horizon or Circle 90
Degrees from it, which cuts not the Equator and all its Parallels obliquely.
It Is this Obliquity then that gives name to the Position, and it is this that
makes the great inequalities in days and nights; for if the Horizon has a
greater portion of one Diurnal Parallel above it, than of another (as it must
needs have by its slanting) 'twill follow, when the Sun is in such a Parallel,
that the Day will be longer than when the portion was less, and consequently
(since more of one Parallel is under the Horizon than of another) that one
Night is shorter than another; and seeing the nearer the Pole is to the
Horizon, the more equally it cuts the said Parallels, and the further it is
from it, the greater the inequality happens to be, it is no wonder that by how
much the greater the Elevation is, by so much the longer the Days are* and when
the whole Horizon falls below some of the Parallels, that then (during the
Sun's abode there) the Inhabitants have no night at all; therefore it follows
that if a Star be nearer the Pole than is the Latitude of a Place, it can never
set in that Place. All Positions (taking the year round) enjoy an equal share
of the Sun's presence.
Yet notwithstanding this strange inequality and disproportion of Day and
Night, all People in all Positions (by that time the Sun finishes his annual
Course) make them even, and thereby enjoy an equal share of both, for if under
the Pole the Sun be six months above the Horizon, he is as long under it, and
if we and the Rest, that live in the Oblique Sphere, have Summer Days of a
mighty length, our Winter Nights are of the same Dimension; therefore it
follows, that at the long Run the Inhabitants under the Equator, or in the
Right Sphere (who have always 12 hours of Day and as much of Night) cannot
boast of having more of the Suns Company than they that live in the two other,
and consequently that the assertion is true.

It Is in the Oblique Sphere then that the abovementioned Brazen Horizon is
chiefly intended; but as I said in the beginning, it is forty to one (so many
Universal Operations being performed by the Globe in its set Posture) that in 7
years a man lights on a Question, that could invite him to change it, were it
moveable as other Globes are; so that having showed you that (in case of
Necessity) it may be in effect altered even without stirring it from its
Pedestal. I shall proceed.

OPERATION. XVI. How to take the Elevation of the Pole in any place whatsoever.
SUppose you were in a strange Place, and that your Globe being one, that had
bin fitted for London, you desire to know the present Elevation. Expose your
Globe to the Sun on a Meridian Line with the Pin or Needle in the Vid. Op. 3.
sec. 1. page 8.
Hole on the Parallel of the 10 of April, or true day of the Month, and
observing at 12 a clock (when the Sun comes into the Plain of the Globes
Meridian) that the shade of the said Needle or Pin loses not it self as it
would do were the Sun directly opposite to it, for so it had hapn'd at London,
or in any place in the Latitude of 51 e 30. I say, having thus exposed your
Globe, and observing this, move your Pin or Needle from Hole to Hole, or from
one Degree of the Meridian to the other, 'till it is shade be wholly lost, and
finding the said Needle or Pin on the Parallel (suppose) of June 11th. which is
about 11. 30 higher then it is proper place (to wit the Parallel of the 10th of
April) you may conclude that your present Elevation is 63 degrees, i. e. 11. 30
higher than the Globe's; whereas had* you bin obliged to move your Needle or
Pin so many Degrees lower than the 10th of April, your Elevation had bin but 40.

The Demonstration is obvious, for since the Earth is round; The Demonstration.
as nothing perchance proves it better, than the Experience we have, that as so
many miles (suppose 60) elevates or depresses the Pole one Degree, so just 60
Miles more elevates or depresses it another: I say, since the World is round,
and that the Degrees How the Earth is proved Round.
of the Globe answer to its Degrees, it must follow that the difference between
the Pins situation now on the Globe and where it would have stood on it at
London is the true difference of the two Elevations.

OPERATION XVII. How to know in what Elevation the Sun Rises or Sets, an hour,
or any other space of time, earlier or later than he does in the Globes
Elevation.
IF the Sun rising at London on the 10th. of April about 5, and setting about
7, you would know in what Elevation or Latitude he then rises, (for examples
sake) at 4 and sets at 8, take the distance of 90 Degrees with your String or
Compasses in any great Circle, and placing one end of your String or one foot
of your Compasses, where the Parallel of the day intersects with the
Hour-Circle of either 4 in the morning, or 8 at night, observe where, or at
what point the other end of your said String or other foot of your said
Compasses touches in the Meridian, or 12 a Clock Circle of the Globe, and you
will find it to be at, or about 8 Degrees and 30 Minutes, beyond the Zenith
toward the North Pole, so that the Elevation required is greater than your own
by those 8 Degrees and 30 minutes, that is to say the Elevation is that of 60
or thereabout; whereas had your String or Compasses touched 8. 30 on the other
side of your Zenith, the required Elevation would have been less than your own
so many Degrees, i. e. it would have been that of 43 Degrees or thereabout.

This appears true by placing your Brazen Horizon, or by The Demonstration.
describing an imaginary one over the two points made by the Intersection of
the Parallel of the Day, and Hour-Circles of 4 in the morning and 8 in the
evening; for in the Elevation belonging to such an Horizon, it is evident that
the Sun rises at 4 and sets at 8. Now the Pole of every Circle being 90 Degrees
from it, and the Point in the Meridian being 90 Degrees from the aforementioned
Intersection, it follows that the said Point in the Meridian is the Zenith or
Pole of this new Horizon, and consequently by being distant from the Equator
60 Degrees, that so many Degrees is the Latitude or Elevation required.

The END of the second Section.
SECT. III. Of the Moon.
HAving now finished with the Sun, we will make a step, if you please, to the
Moon, and show you how to resolve all the useful ordinary Questions concerning
her, whether we see her by Night or by Day; for it is equal to us whether she
shines out right, and consequently casts a shade, or appears only faint and
wan, by reason of thin Clouds, or by the excess of Light during the Sun's abode
above the Horizon. Let us then begin with her Almucantar and Azimuth, as being
the Basis and Foundation of all Operations here relating to her; nor can there
be the least difficulty in any of them* unless perchance in the 7th. since they
have so great a Correspondence and affinity with those already handled in the
former Sections.

OPERATION I. To find the Moon's Almucantar or Height.
THIS is to be performed as well when she cast's a shade, as when she cast's
none, by the two first ways of finding the Suns Almucantar, and therefore
consult the page 5.
second Operation in the first Section.

OPERATION II. To find the Moon's Azimuth.
THIS is also to be found by the two first ways of finding the Sun's Azimuth,
treated of in the page* 10*
5th. Operation of the first* Section.

OPERATION. III. To find her true place on the Globe.
IF she casts no shade, her place is to be found by her Almucantar and Azimuth,
as we hinted in the page 11:
6th. Operation of the first Section, since she must ever be where these two
Circles intersect; But if she shines out clear, you have nothing to do (having
placed your Globe on a Meridian Line) but to see what hour the shade of the
enlightened Pole, or that of your String (passing over both Poles) mark's; for
this giving you her hour-Circle (which we will call the Lunar hour hereafter) her
height or Almucantar must needs tell you in what part of the said Circle she
resides. This Operation is to be well understood and readily performed, seeing
most that follow are as it were Corollaries from it; and for the better
illustrating and explaining them, we will imagine the Moon's Place to be in the
hour Circle of 2 in the Afternoon, about 43 Degrees above the Horizon.

OPERATION IV. To know the Moon's Declension from the Equator.
THIS is only the nearest distance of her true Place from the Equator, which
your Bead or Compasses will show you to be about 12 Degrees Northward, if
(according to the foregoing Example) she be 43 Degrees high, in the hour Circle
of 2 in the afternoon.

OPERATION V. To find the Moon's Diurnal Parallel, and consequently how to
Compose the Globe by the Moon.
BY the Moons Diurnal Parrallel I mean a real or imaginary Circle Parallel to
the Equator, and answerable to her present Declension, which by the former
Operation we suppose to be about 12 Degrees; Having therefore this* Parallel
you may compose the Globe by the Moon, as you do by the vid. page 8. and 15: A
Memoran.
Sun.

And here you must remember, that though the finding of the Parallel implies at
first a Meridian Line, yet the knowing how to compose thus your Globe will not
be useless; for now you are no longer confined to one Place or Line, but may
compose it where you please by the help of the said Parallel.

OPERATION. VI. To find the Moon's Bearing according to the Points of the
Compass.
THIS is to be performed after the way of finding the Sun's Bearing, in the p.
12.
7th. Operation of the first Section; for if you draw your String from the
Zenith over the Moons present Place, the said String cuts (by our Example) the
Horizon at S. W. and some few Degrees toward the South for her then Bearing.

OPERATION VII. To know what a clock it is by the Moon.
THere is no Operation treated of so intricate as this, and therefore if the
Reader (who would have his Curiosity satisfied) has not Patience enough to
descend to a little niceness, he had better* fall upon another Subject; but
though we may be somewhat long at first, in laying down and explicating all
Particulars, yet at the end we will contract the whole into half a dozen Lines,
and thereby make the Operation very expedit, and easy; I say, there is no
Operation so intricate as this; for, the Moon by reason of her different Place
in her Epicicle, is so inconstant in her daily Elongation from the Sun, that
sometimes she spends from ( v. g.) her Conjunction to her first Quarter above 8
days, tho* at another time a great deal less than 7 will serve the turn; and to
this variety and skittishness is the space also between any of her other
changes liable. If then her distance from the Sun be so uncertain, and yet is
the thing that must be known before her Place, or shade on the Globe can give
us the hour seek* how strangely fallible is the usual way (as well in some
Authors of Note, as in ordinary Almanacks) of finding it, to wit, the adding of
as many 48 minutes to the hour she shows on a Dial, as she is days old; for the
Tables, made in pursuance of this Rule, suppose her always on the 15th of her
Age to be at Full, which may happen (as I now mentioned) not only much sooner,
but also much later, so that most commonly her true Age and the said Tables are
at variance; nay, when they agree, there can be no Reliance on them, seeing
that if ( v. g.) at 6 they show tolerably what a clock it is, yet by 12 there
may happen an Error of near a Quarter, by reason that she is every moment at a
new distance from the Sun, and at one also which presently becomes very
sensible. Thus therefore we see that there must be Exceptions and Restrictions
in any one Rule that appertains to this business; nor is it to be performed by
an Instrument in a trice, as the Operations commonly are belonging to the
Stars, that have a Regular motion, or to the Sun, whose Extravagance is not
soon perceptible; I say, thus we see that there must be here Exceptions and
Restrictions, and in truth nothing but a down right Astronomical Calculation
can really perform it; yet since such a critical Exactness in the hour is never
necessary in our ordinary affairs, I shall propose this method, which will at
least come always very near the Mark.

When you desire to know what a clock it is by the Moon, How you are to operate;
take an Almanac (for if you would only have her true Age, you must recur to
one, or to something analogical) and reckon therein how many days there are in
the present Quarter from one Change to the other, i. e. from New Moon to her
First Quarter, or from her first Quarter to her Full, and so on; for I call any
of these four Aspects a Cardinal Point, or Change, and the whole time between
one Change and the other a Quarter; I say, Reckon how many Days there are, in
the then Quarter, and you will find either 6, or 7, or 7, or 8* so that if the
number be 6, her Elongation from the Sun is 55 Minutes and, per Diem, if 7 Days
51, if 7 days and half, 48; and lastly if 8 Days, 48. I mean not nevertheless
that from Change to Change there maynot sometimes happen 6 days and 16 hours or
6 Days and 20 hours, and several such Fractions and Deviations from the
Positive Terms prefixed by me: but since the forementioned whole and half days
will bring us to a knowledge exact enough of the hour sought for, we call 6
days and 16 hours 6 days and a only, as coming nearer to it than 7 whole ones;
In like manner, we call 6, and 20 hours 7 days, and deal in this Proportion
with all other number of days and hours which the Ephemerides or Almanac give
us concerning the length of the required Quarter.

And here you may be pleased to remember also, that it A Memorandum.
would not be amiss, in case you exceed much any of the foresaid terms, to add
or cast away sometimes a minute or a little more, as you shall see Cause; For
if ( v. g.) you find the Moon to be six days and 17 hours in her journey (which
according to our former Directions is to be reputed only six days and; and
consequently the Elongation 55, you may then cast away 1, because of this great
excess above the half day; and if you should find her at another time to be 7
days and twenty hours, i. e. eight days, you may add for the want of the four
hours a minute, and make her daily Elongation, 46 instead of the forementioned
45; but here you may do as you you please, for the error will not be
considerable.

These Particulars being premised, let us come to an Example; An Example.
and Suppose then that on the fifth of January, finding the Moons shadow to
mark two in the afternoon on your Globe for the Lunar hour, you should desire
to know the true, or Solar hour.

First your Almanac can tell you not only that the Moons last Cardinal Point,
was ( v. g.) her Conjunction, but how many Days and Hours she spends in going
from it to the next Cardinal Point; for finding there her said Conjunction to
be on the first day (suppose) at seven at night, and that she comes to her
first Quarter on the ninth day, near the same hour, you may presently conclude
she is 8 whole Days in this Voyage, and consequently that her Diurnal
Elongation from the Sun will be 45 minutes. Now because the said fifth day is
the 4th of her Journey, if you multiply 45 by 4, or lookin the Tables (which we
shall presently show you) belonging to her 8 Days Journey, you will have three
hours for the time that she is behind the Sun, so that the Solar or true hour
must be five at night, wanting four minutes; for you are always carefully to
substract two minutes for every hour the Moon wants of completing her whole
Days march, which in the present case happens, not before seven at night;
whereas you must have added them, had the Solar hour bin nine at night, because
then her Elongation from the Sun would have been 4 minutes more than the
aforesaid three hours.

It Is in this manner you are to opperate in all cases; but before Two
Memorandums.
we proceed, take these two Memorandums with you. First, That by the Moon's
completing a day's journey, I mean 24 hours after the time (let it happen by
night or by day) of her entering into her last Cardinal Point; as for Example,
If she comes to her Conjunction, or any other Cardinal Point, at 7 in the
Evening on (v. g) Monday, then at 7 in the Evening on Tuesday, she has
completed one day's journey, and at the same hour on Wednesday two Days, and
so on till she comes to her next Cardinal Point. The second Memorandum is, That
whereas (in the late Example) her Elongation from the Sun was three hours
(because you sought what a Clock it was on her fourth days journey from her
Conjunction to her First Quarter, at the Elongation of 45 minutes per diem.)
Now had she been thus advanced in her Course from her First Quarter to her
Full, or from her last Quarter to her Conjunction, you must have added 6 hours
to the said 3 hours, so that then the true hour would (instead of 5 at night)
have been 11; and this is to be a general Rule.

Thus much then for the way of finding what a Clock it is at The reason or
demonstration of the Operation.
any time by the Moon, and now let us make good what we have said. First we
see, that to know the Hour by the Moon, is to know the difference between the
Lunar and Solar hour, i. e. between the hour Circle she is in, and that in
which the Sun happens (at the same time) to be; or, in other Terms between the
hour she marks on the Globe by her shade, and that which the Sun would mark did
he then appear; Now seeing that in her Course from one Cardinal Point to the
other, she seldom spends the same number of days and half days, it follows (as
we hinted in the beginning) that no certain number of minutes, can be allowed
for her daily Elongation; But if we divide 6 hours, or 360 minutes (i. e. her
total Elongation from one Cardinal Point to another) by the Days and half days
she spends in the journey, the Quotient must be her Diurnal Elongation (at
least to sense) during that Quarter. Now since the Diurnal Elongation is, as
you see most commonly above three quarters, and sometimes almost an hour, the
Horary one must be (as I said) considerable, seeing in the space of every 7
hours it may amount to above a quarter more; therefore this inconvenience we
obviate by allowing two minutes for each hour after her complete days journey,
and substracting them from what she wants of it.

Here I confess there may be an Error, but it is hardly worth A memorandum.
the mentioning; for when she is either 8 days, or 7, in her journey from one
Cardinal Point to another; i. e. when her Diurnal Elongation is either 45, or
51 and, the difference from 48 minutes a day (or 2 minutes an hour) cannot be
but 3 and in a whole day: nay, when her Elongation is 55 and i. e. when she
spends 6 days and in her voyage, the difference is but 7 and from the aforesaid
48 minutes; nor can this happen till the end of every complete days journey,
and consequently is not perceivable for the greatest part of it. But since we
here see where and how any error may arise, it is easily remedied by an
Allowance, if any man thinks it worth the while to be so exact.

As for the Reason why, if she be in her Course from her Why 6 hours must be
added sometime to the Tables.
first Quarter to her Full, or from her last Quarter to her Conjunction, we
must add always six hours to the Elongation, which our Calculation or the
Tables give, it is, because the said Elongation is only the precise time of her
Departure from her last Cardinal Point, whereas if she be past her first
Quarter in her Journey toward her Full, she is so much and six hours more, i.
e. so much and the six hours, which happen from her Conjunction to her first
Quarter. Now in rigor we should add twelve hours to the Elongation we find,
when she is gone from her Full, toward her last Quarter, but seeing she is in
the Plane of the same Hour-Circle or very near it, both at Full and in
Conjunction, therefore the bare adding the said simple Elongation will serve as
well in one case as in the other; for if, the Full Moon (at suppose 2 of the
Clock at night) casts really her Shadow on the Hour-Circle of 2 in the
Afternoon, yet there is no need of hints (the thing being so plain) to prevent
your mistaking Day for Night. The like also is to be said of the last Quarter,
whose Elongation should be in truth eighteen hours, but the additional six
hours (as we allow her after her first Quarter) are sufficient, since no man
can be so ignorant as to take the Morning for the Evening, notwithstanding the
Lunar hour should be upon a Morning Hour-Circle. To facilitate then this
Operation (least what we have already said has proved tedious) we will conclude
(as I promised) with a short Recapitulation* or Abstract, as also with the
Tables of her daily Elongation, let the time be what it will (as we said) that
she spends in her Journey from one Cardinal point to the other.

The Abstract of the Operation in finding the true Hour by the Moon according
to the late Example.
AS for the Almanac, there are three things (we see) it informs us of, viz. 1.
The Hour when the Moon came to her last Cardinal Point. 2. How many days she is
going from the said Point to the next; and, 3. In which Days Journey she is at
present. Knowing then, according to the late Example that the Moon will be
eight days running throu' her Quarter, and that she is in the fourth Days
Voyage; 'twill follow that the fourth day in the Table (whose title is eight
days) will tell you that her present Elongation from the Sun is three hours;
so that the Lunar-hour being two in the afternoon, the true hour must be just
five at night; only twice two Minutes are to be abated, because she lacks 2
hours from completing her said fourth days voyage; for your Almanac*
(according to our supposition) informing you that it was seven at night when
she set out from her last Cardinal Point, it must be still seven at night
before she compleat's any whole day's Journey during that Quarter.

This then is the sum of the whole Business, nor need you trouble your self
with any other Reflection unless it be to add six hours (as I already said) to
the Elongation, in case she be going from her first Quarter to her Full, or
from her Last to her Conjunction. And to conclude take notice, that the hour
(if you see the Moon,) may be as well found by day as by night, for her Place
on the Globe (which the third p. 49.
Operation show's how to find) is always the true Lunar hour.

Tables of the Diurnal Elongation of the Moon from the Sun, whether she goes in
6, 7, 7, or 8 days, from one Cardinal Point to the other.
6. Days Card. Point. 0. Days from her Cardinal Point. 0. Hor. 0. min.
Elongation. 1. Days from her Cardinal Point. 0. Hor. 55. min. Elongation. 2.
Days from her Cardinal Point. 1. Hor. 51. min. Elongation. 3. Days from her
Cardinal Point. 2. Hor. 46. min.Elongation. 4. Days from her Cardinal Point. 3.
Hor. 42. min. Elongation. 5. Days from her Cardinal Point. 4. Hor. 37. min.
Elongation. 6. Days from her Cardinal Point. 5. Hor. 33. min. Elongation. 6
Days from her Cardinal Point. 6. Hor. 0. min. Elongation. 7. Days. Card. Point.
0. Days from her Cardinal Point. 0 Hor. 0. min. Elongation. 1. Days from her
Cardinal Point. 0. Hor. 51. min.Elongation. 2. Days from her Cardinal Point. 1.
Hor. 43. min. Elongation. 3. Days from her Cardinal Point. 2. Hor. 34. min.
Elongation. 4. Days from her Cardinal Point. 3. Hor. 26. min. Elongation. 5.
Days from her Cardinal Point. 4. Hor. 17. min. Elongation. 6. Days from her
Cardinal Point. 5. Hor. 9. min. Elongation. 7. Days from her Cardinal Point. 6.
Hor. 0. min. Elongation. 7 Days. Card. Point. 0. Days from her Cardinal Point.
0. Hor. 0. min.Elongation. 1. Days from her Cardinal Point. 0. Hor. 48.
min.Elongation. 2. Days from her Cardinal Point. 1. Hor. 36. min. Elongation.
3. Days from her Cardinal Point. 2. Hor. 24. min. Elongation. 4. Days from her
Cardinal Point. 3. Hor. 12. min. Elongation. 5. Days from her Cardinal Point.
4. Hor. 0. min. Elongation. 6. Days from her Cardinal Point. 4. Hor. 48. min.
Elongation. 7. Days from her Cardinal Point. 5. Hor. 36. min. Elongation. 7.
Days from her Cardinal Point. 6. Hor. 0. min. Elongation. 8 Days. Card. Point.
0. Days from her Cardinal Point. 0. Hor. 0. min.Elongation. 1. Days from her
Cardinal Point. 0. Hor. 45. min.Elongation. 2. Days from her Cardinal Point. 1.
Hor. 30. min. Elongation. 3. Days from her Cardinal Point. 2. Hor. 15. min.
Elongation. 4. Days from her Cardinal Point. 3. Hor. 0. min. Elongation. 5.
Days from her Cardinal Point. 3. Hor. 45. min. Elongation. 6. Days from her
Cardinal Point. 4. Hor. 30. min. Elongation. 7. Days from her Cardinal Point.
5. Hor. 15. min. Elongation. 8. Days from her Cardinal Point. 6. Hor. 0. min.
Elongation.

These Tables are to be on the Globe in the most vacant and free parts of it.

OPERATION VIII. To know how many hours the Moon has been up, and how many she
lacks of her setting, as also how long she is to be that day above the Horizon.
THis is done by numbering the Hours or Hour Circles between the Moons place in
her Parallel on the Globe and the intersections of her said Parallel with the
Horizon; for having found that her Parallel cuts the Horizon in the East at the
five a clock hour circle, and in the West at that of seven, and seeing that her
present Place is ( v. g.) at that of two in the afternoon, you may conclude
that she has bin up nine hours wanting eighteen minutes, that is, eight hours
and forty two minutes; and will set within 5 hours wanting ten minutes, or four
hours and fifty minutes; for the Moon goes from East to West (by the Motion of
the Primum Mobile or Motum Raptus) two Minutes (as we suppose) every hour (take
one time with the other) slower than the Sun; which happens by her being too
quick for the Sun in her own Motion, that is to say, in the Motion of the
Center of her Epicicle, which carries her from West to East; therefore the Moon
according to the present Example or Supposition will be above the Horizon
fourteen Hours wanting twenty eight Minutes, i. e. about thirteen hours and a
half.

OPERATION IX. To find at what at lack the Moon rises and sets.
BY the last Operation you are informed of the hours from her present station
to her Rising and Setting, which happening in the Example to be about eight hours
and forty two Minutes for the one, and four hours, and fifty minutes for the
other, it must follow, (having found the true hour to be within four minutes of
five at Night) that she rose about eight and fourteen minutes in the Morning,
and will set at nine and forty six minutes at Night.

OPERATION X. To find how long the Moon shines every night.
HAving found by the precedent Operation, that the Moon sets at 9 and 46
minutes at night, and that the Sun (by the 12th. of the first p. 16.
Section) sets the same day, (suppose the 8th. of February) at 5 in the
Evening, 'twill follow that she shines four hours and 46 minutes.

OPERATION XI. To find when the Moon comes to South, and consequently when it is
high water at London Bridge.
HAving found by the page 49.
third Operation the Moons place to be in the 2 a Clock Circle, you thereby see
that she is past the South 2 hours and 4. minutes; Now since it is always
High Water at the Bridge three hours after her coming to South, and since the
Solar or true hour is (according to our Example) 5 at Night, it follows 'twas
High Water at 4 minutes before 6. and consequently 'twill be high water again
at the same hour next morning, and 24 minutes; for from one Tide to the other
there are always about 12 hours and 24 minutes.

OPERATION XII. To know in any Eclips of the Moon, what Countries see it
wholly, what in part, and what not at all.
PLACE your Globe on a Meridian Line, or otherwise Compose it, and when you
percieve the Moon to begin to enter into the shade of the Earth, consider (as
you do when you seek by the Op. 7. sec. 2. page 33.
Suns Rays where it is day and night) what part of the Globe is illuminated, and
what not; for, since she appears to all Countries that lie in the Light, and is
hid from those in the Shade, you have not only a view of what people see her in
her then condition, but may (till her total immersion) perceive by her
illumination how the Countries, that lie in or near the Following shade of
Extuberancy, loose every moment the sight of her, and consequently, who they
are that took leave of her in the beginning of her Eclips, who when she came to
half of it, and who when wholly obscured, with infinite more Reflections of
this nature. On the other side you may find, how some that lay in the preceding
shade of Extuberancy saw nothing of her at first, but now begin to discover her
in her Angony; and if you draw on the Globe a little Circle with Chalk or the
like, in the Confines of the obscurity and light, just as she begins to be
wholly in the shadow, you will discern (by the space between the said Chalk and
the new shade of extuberancy at her Emersion) what people never saw her, tho
she were above their Horizon. Infinite are the Reflections (as I said) of this
nature, but these are sufficient to show you how to make more your self; so
that now I will end after I have remembered you, that the Sun being by his
Opposition in the same hour Circle with the Moon, especially in all Central
Eclipses, nay he is so (as to sense) for some time both before and after such
Eclipses; I say, the Sun being so, you may therefore not only (by the bare
shade of the String, or that of the illuminated Pole) know what a Clock it is
from time to time in the Polar Circles, but in the Equator also, by the shade
of Extuberancy, which performs the observations above mentioned; and thus by
the very same shade you find not only what People see the Eclipse, either in
whole or in part, (as we now told you) but at what hour it appears to each of
them, and how long; as also the Duration of her Decrease and Increase in light,
together with the time of her total Obscurity; moreover, this very shade gives
you her Height and Azimuth all along, as you may see in the Vid. Op. 1. and 2.
page 49.
Operations that concern them.

OPERATION XIII. To represent the several Phases or Shapes of the Moon by the
Globe.
THIS is rather a Speculation than an Operation, Nor should I have mentioned
it, were it not that several (who know something in Mathematics) cannot
comprehend the Cause of the Moon's continual Metamorphosis or Change, that is
to say, why she should be now more, now less illuminated, and that also in so
different a shape and manner. To comprehend therefore this, Expose your Globe
(elevated on a Stand or a Table as high as your Eye) to the Sun or Moon, and
place your self so before it as to see the whole illuminated half; for (as to
sense) the illuminated and shady parts of all Spheres are (as we formerly
mentioned) equal. Having then a while considered this great Circle made by the
Limb or Extremity of the illumination, remove your station a little on the one
side (as for Example toward the righthand) and you will find the illuminated
part to appear Gibbous or Oval, I mean not so broad as long, because so much of
it is hid from you, as you can now discover of obscurity. From hence go yet
farther side-wise, and the visible part of the Globe will be Dicotomous, or
party per pale, that is to say the light and shade will become equal.

After this make another Proportionable step, and all that is illuminated will
appear Horned or Lunular, and the obscure part Gibbous; But if you remove to
the point opposite to your first Station, you will see nothing besides a dark
and shadowed Hemisphere; whereas should you proceed further in the same Order,
you would perceive Light on the other side, first Lunular, then Dicotomous,
next Gibbous, and lastly totally predominant.

Now as the Globe is always half illuminated, whether we see little or much of
the illumination, so it happens with the Moon, who being in Conjunction appears
all dark to us* because her illuminated half is toward the Sun, and opposite
to us; but as soon as she gets from him, and consequently is no longer in the
same Plane with him and our Eye, we must needs have a view of some part of the
Illumination, seeing she can only appear wholly obscure when she is thus before
the Sun. The said Illumination also (since she is Spherical) must seem as on
the Globe the more Horned the less it is, and then blunter and blunter
according to her Increase or Elongation, till at last she becomes Dicotomous,
afterward Gibbous, and lastly Full; for by being at her greatest distance from
the Sun, or in Opposition with him (which causes our Eye to be in the middle or
between them) it is impossible she should appear otherwise than all Light: And
here you may be pleased to take notice, that if you compass your Globe with a
String or Thread that passes throu' the Zenith and Nadir, and let one half of
the described Circle represent the Illumination and the other the Obscurity,
you may perform this Operation at any time, whether the aforesaid Luminaries
shine or no.

How easy therefore is it to conceive the whole Mystery of the Moons four
principal Changes, and what men mean by them. A Corollary.
For first we see that as She is called New by an Astronomer from her being
with the Sun, (i. e. as fully between our Eye and the Sun, as her then Course
permits) so no sooner has he found by their several motions that she is gotten
90 Degrees or six hours from the Sun, but he says, she is in her first Quarter;
and when they are asunder 180 Degrees or 12 Hours (to wit as far as ever they
can be) that she is Full; and lastly, as soon as they are distant 270 Degrees
or 18 hours on the same side, and 90 Degrees or six hours on the other, that
she is in her last Quarter; so that at their next meeting she becomes New again.

OPERATION XIV. How to find how long the Moon wants of any Change, or Cardinal
Point, and consequently how old she is.
I Propose not this Operation as a thing exact, but seeing it is a Corollary of
the former, I thought fit to hint it; therefore pray take it* for better, for
worse, and make of it what you can: To resolve then these Questions by the
Globe, you are to expose it as before to the Moon when she shines, and move
about it till you can there just describe her shape; and by the way you will
come nearer the mark, if you only consider the Lunular or lesser Portion,
whether it happen to be the obscure or the illuminated part of her whole Discus
or Orb; I say, describe her Shape on the Globe, as near as you can, and
observe how many Degrees the breadth of the Horned or Lunular Portion will be
in any great Circle, that crosses it in the middle at Right Angles, and that
will give you taliter qualiter what you seek for, as appears more clearly by
the ensuing Example.

Having observed, suppose, the illuminated Portion of the An Example.
Moon to be Lunular, expose your Globe, and move about it 'till you perceive on
it an illuminated Lunula proportionable to the Real one, then finding its
measure by some great Circle that crosses it at right Angles, to be 40 Degrees,
these consequences will follow. First if the Moon be in her Increase, she is
past being New 40 Degrees, i. e. three days and about seven hours, seeing her
hourly Elongation from the Sun (is one time with another) about half a Degree
and half a minute; but if she be in her Decrease, she wants so many days and
hours from being again New. In the next Place it will happen that the obscure
part of the Globe is 140 Degrees broad; for (both parts or portions making up
the apparent Hemisphere) the said obscured Part becomes the supplement of the
former 40 Degrees; so that 140 amounting to about 279 hours, or 11 days and 15
hours, you may conclude that if she be Increasing, she wants so much of being
Full, as also that she is 50 Degrees or almost 100 hours (i. e. four Days and
almost four hours) past her first Quarter; whereas if she be Decreasing, she
will want eleven Days and fifteen hours from her next Conjunction, and be four
days and almost 4 hours beyond her last Quarter.

As for knowing the Moons state in relation to her Waxing and Waining, you need
only observe on what side of her Discus her illuminated Part stands; for if it
be on the West Side of it, she is in a Waxing Condition, if on the East Side in
a Waining or Declining one: And here also remember that as to the measuring the
aforesaid Portions of the Moons Discus, represented on your Globe, you may do
it by the Horizon, if she illuminates not much beyond the Zenith, or by the
Equator, when the illumination reaches to the Pole or near it, or by the
Ecliptic when it extends it self a good way further; for the said Portion of
the Moons Discus is measured at first sight by that great Circle which lies
equally distant from each Horn of the Lunula on the Globe, i. e. by that great
Circle which crosses it (as we said) in the middle at Right Angles; and when no
great Circle does so. you had best measure it exactly with your Compasses,
seeing that on the knowledge of its breadth, the Resolution of all the former
Questions depend. Many things of great use may be drawn from knowing the true
proportion of the illuminated and obscure parts of the Moons Orb, but this I
leave to them that have exacter Instruments than the Globe, and more time to
make Deductions.

The END of the Third Section.
SECT. IV. Showing the Proportion between Perpendiculars and their Shades.
SEeing there is the same proportion between all Shades and their
Perpendiculars; at least to sense, and seeing the several Almucantars of the
two great Luminaries are the chief Cause of the lengthning or shortning of
them, I have here adjoin'd a few by- Operations even in Altimetry it self, as
belonging naturally to our Globe, since it not only shows us several ways of
finding from time to time the said Almucantars, but gives us also at the same
instant without trouble (as appears by the ensuing Operations) the
abovementioned Proportion, and consequently the height of all things
Perpendicular to the Horizon.

OPERATION I. How to find the Proportion between the Perpendicular and its
Shade.
COnsider the Northern or back part of the Globes Meridian, which we will call
hereafter the Quadrant of Proportion, and which is not only divided like the
Southern or forepart into Degrees, but marked also (in relation to the affair
in hand,) with several Figures, of which that next the Zenith is 17, and the
remotest 188. And by the way you must take notice, that when you see a Cross
behind any Figure, it signifies half an Integer A memorandum.
more, so that 17 + is 17 Degrees and a half, 26 + is 26 and a half, etc. When
you would therefore Operate, Turn the Southern or forepart of the Meridian
toward the Sun, 'till they be both in the same Plane, i. e. 'till the shade of
the Pin in the Zenith falls directly upon the Quadrant of Proportion, and what
Figure soever, (suppose 25) the shade of Extuberancy cuts, that will be the
then Proportion between Perpendiculars and their Shades; for here you may take
notice, that we ever suppose the Shade to be 100. Nay, if finding (by any of
the Sect. 1. Op. 2. p. 5.
former ways) the Sun's height to be (suppose) 14 Degrees, you rectify your
Bead to 76 Degrees, or the Complement of it, you need only clap back your
String, that is to say, draw it from the Zenith, over the Devisions of the
afore-mentioned Quadrant, and then the Figures under the Bead (to wit 25) will
show you the required Proportion; In short, take but the Suns Height (any how)
and reckon from the Zenith as many Degrees on your said Quadrant of Proportion,
and the Figures at the end of your Account will give the Proportion sought for.
Now if the Shade of Extuberancy, or the Bead marks not even Degrees for the
Sun's Height, but (for Examples sake) 13.30, and consequently falls between the
Figures of 23 and 25 in the Quadrant of Proportion, you had best (to avoid all
Calculation and Allowance) expect a Moment longer, for then the Sun's Height
being even, and without Fraction, you may operate as before.

OPERATION II. How to find the height of a Tower by the Globe.
THIS Operation appears at first Sight to be a Corollary of the former, for
finding, as I showd you, that the Shade of Extuberancy falls in the Quadrant of
Proportion, on the number ( v. g*) 25, and that the said* number represents a
Perpendicular, do but measure the shade of any Tower and you will soon have its
height, seeing that as 100 is to 25 ( i. e. as 100 is to the number found on
the said Quadrant) so is the Shade of the Tower, (which being measured we will
suppose 80 yards long) to a fourth number, viz. to 20 the required height.

OPERATION III. How by the help of your Globe to measure any Tower or height,
and yet not* to seem to use any Instrument in the Operation.
THIS Operation may perchance a little surprise some, and yet it differs not in
reality from the former; that showing you how to measure a height by your Globe
upon the place, and this how to do it privately. To perform then the Operation,
you must choose (when you are alone) any of the aforesaid Numbers, on the
Quadrant of Proportion, as suppose 25, and seeing that belongs to the 14th.
Degree from the Zenith, rectify your Bead to the Complement, i. e. to the 76th
from the Zenith in the said Quadrant; this being done move your String hanging
on the Zenith's Pin, till your Bead touches the Parallel of the Day, which we
now suppose to be the tenth of May, and the Hour-Circle, that meets with it
there (to wit that of six in the morning, or six in the afternoon) tells you
that at those hours, on that day of the Month, the perpendicular will be the
fourth part of the Shade, i. e. as twenty five to an hundred, so that having
discoursed with some body of the possibility of measuring heights without an
Instrument, repair with him to any convenient place, about the foresaid times
of the day, and when you find by your Watch that it is exactly six, do but
measure the Shade and you will have the required height. And by the way take
notice, that as it is in your power to choose what proportion you please, and
the more odd and exotic it happens (if you can quickly reduce it) the better it
is, for then People will not perchance so soon comprehend the Operation; I say,
as you can choose your Proportion, so you may choose the Hour also, for if your
Bead be rectified to the chosen Proportion, according to the foregoing Example
and Instructions, and brought to the hour pitched upon (suppose 3 in the
afternoon) the Parallel, (to wit, that of the fifth of February,) which meets
with the the said Bead and Hour-Circle, tells you that then the Proportion will
thus happen; nay, you may choose what day and hour you please, if you will be
content with the casual Proportion or number which the Bead, when rectified (as
we mentioned) falls upon.

OPERATION IV. How to find the Hour by your Stick.
YOUR Stick being divided into ten equal parts, and each part by Pricks into as
many equal Subdevisions, you must operate thus. Rectify your Bead (on the tenth
v. g. of April) to the Sun's Meridian Altitude, and if you then move your
String on the Pin of the Zenith, to the Quadrant of Proportion, the Bead will
lie (for Example) on 87, so that having writ this on Paper with the figures of
12 above it, draw your String from the Zenith over the next Hour-Circle on
which hand you please, I mean either over that of 11. or 1. and where your
String cuts it on the said Parallel of the day, there place your Bead, and
'twill lie ( v. g.) on 93 in the said Quardrant of Proportion; noting then 93
in your paper under the hours of 11. and 1. proceed then in this manner from
Hour-Circle to Hour-Circle, 'till you come to 6, for after the Sun is within an
hour of his Rising or Setting, you may easily guests what time of Day it is;
besides shadows are then so long that they are troublesome to measure;

I say proceed in this manner to 6, and a Table like that in the 1. 2. 3. 4. 6.
12. 11. 10. 9. 8. 7. 6. -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 87. 93. 110. 140. 200. 300. 625.


Margin will show you the hour not only during that day, but during five or six
successively; without any considerable Errors, for you have nothing to do but
to erect your Stick, as perpendicularly as you can, and to measure its Shade
with it, so that finding the length of the said Shade to be, suppose 200 i. e.
twice as long as the Stick, your Paper will tell you, that when this proportion
happens, it is either eight in the morning, or four in the afternoon.

OPERATION. V. How to to take an Angle in Altimetry by the Globe.
THIS Operation is to be performed like that of finding the height of the Sun
and Moon when they shine not out, as I formerly Op. 2. Sect. 1. page 6.
showed you; that is to say, you must place your Globe Horizontal, and having
turned the Meridian toward* the Tower, move your Eye along the said Meridian,
till the Extuberancy of the Globe permits you only to see the top of the Tower,
and then bring but your String, (which we suppose you hold in both hands cross
the Meridian) toward you, till it just takes away the sight of the said Top,
and the Degree which your String then lies on, (counting from the Zenith) is
that of the required Angle, to wit, of the Angle which is ordinarily taken by
any Quadrant, Jacobs Staff, etc.

OPERATION VI. How to make and figure the Quadrant of Proportion, as also the
Demonstration of the foregoing Operations.
IT appears plainly by the Scheme here before us, that the Shade (AB) being
Radius, the Perpendicular (CB) is Tangent of (A v. g. 14.) the Degrees of the
Suns height, as also that the Perpendicular (CB) being Radius, the Shade* (AB)
is Tangent of the Complement of the said height; therefore if the Radius being
100, you mark from the Zenith to the Horizon each Degree of your Quadrant of
Proportion with Figures according to the value of their respective Tangents,
you must necessarily perform the late Operations, that give us the height of
things, the hour of the Day, etc. For if your Bead be rectified (from the
Horizon of your Globe) to (76) the Complement of the Suns height, it will be
distant from the Zenith just as many Degrees as the Sun is high, to wit 14, and
consequently being moved to the Quadrant of Proportion (which is figured we
see, from the Zenith downwards) must lie there on 25, the Tangent of his said
Height, therefore as the Radius 100 is to (25) this Tangent, so (80) the length
of the Shade must be to the Perpendicular 20.



In the next Place if your Bead be rectified every hour to the Suns height, it
must (when moved to the Quadrant) still lie on Tangent Complement of his said
hourly height; Now the Shade being always as I told you the Tangent Complement
of this height, the former little Tables must needs show you the corresponding
Hour, when we once know the value of the Shade, i. e. its proportion to the
Stick. To conclude the Tangents of the first 10 Degrees are not expressed on the
Quadrant* because when the Sun is no higher, we may easily guess at the hour,
and besides (as we said) the Shade is then extremely long, and consequently
very troublesome to measure; nor need we go further than 62 Degrees, since his
greatest Meridian Altitude exceeds not that value.

The End of the Fourth Section.
SECT. V. Of Dialling.
THE Performance of this Section no less appertains than the A preliminary
Discourse.
rest to our Globe; since it not only represents to our view, what Dials are in
themselves, and why they show us the time of the Day, but afford's us also so
natural and so easy a way of describing them, that no person can be hardly so
ingnorant, who will not (with the least Instruction) in three hours time be
able to make one on most Planes, unless perchance* for want of a little
Digestion and private practice, the Rules shove one another out of his Memory.
Nay all the accidental Requisits to Dialling (being these that follow) are here
performed without the help of any foreign Instrument.

1. To draw a Meridian Line. 2. To draw a Line Parallel to the Horizon on a
Plane not Horizontal. 3. To find the Declension of a Plane. 4. To find how much
a Plane Reclines. 5. To find how much a Plane Inclines. 6. To find how long the
Sun shines on a Plane; that is to say, when he will come on, and when He Will go off
it, at any time of the year.
Besides we have already taught you, how to know when a Plane is page 4.
Level* how to find the page 5.
Height* of the Sun, and how his page 10*
Azimuth, all which properly appertain to this Science.

These then are the Operations, I mean by Requisites, which shall be all
treated of either immediately before, or immediately after each Dial that
requires them. But though I intend to show you, as I now mentioned, this easy and
natural way of Dialling, even in what bigness you please without need of
Quadrant or Scale of Reduction, without your knowing the least Problem in the
Mathematics, or my requiring any thing else of you, let that you can draw a
Line from Point to Point, and describe a Circle, when the Radius is given; I
say, though I intend this, yet that you may not be wholly Ignorant of their
Geometrical Construction, I shall teach you that also, and therein perchance
something both expedite and new; but then I must suppose (for I have not time
to instruct you,) that you can Erect a Perpendicular, draw a true Parallel, and
know so much of the Because every body (that desires to know these and the
following Problems) has not perchance at hand Mr. Gunter's Book, I shall add
them to this Treatise as the Reader will find at the end of it: J. Moxon.
Sector as how (besides the use of the Line of Lines) to find the Chord and
Sine of any Number of Degrees by it. I mention the Sector, not that any
Ordinary Ruler, with a Line of Sines, Line of Chords, etc. is unsufficient, but
because you have under the Pedestal of your Globe a Sector to your hand, which
I have ordered there for two Reasons*

First it will be necessary, the Globe standing erect and at right Angles with
the Horizon, to bring the edge of its Pedestal to your Plane in several
Operations; Now seeing this cannot be done unless the Pedestal be greater than
the Globes Diameter (which would, make it perchance cumbersome, and to take up
too much room) there are therefore under it two small wooden Rulers about half
an Inch Broad, to slip in, or out to a determined length, so that it will be
better to have one of them a Sector (which is a very necessary Instrument) than
not, especially since it is no hindrance to the use, we chiefly intend it for.
Nor would I have any thing more on it (to avoid the Confusion of Devisions)
than the Line of Sines on the one side, and the Line of Lines on the other* and
as for its length, if it be six inches, it will make an even Foot at full
extension* which renders it a very convenient standing measure. My second
Reason for the said Sector is, because I will show you, how to find by it the
TANGENT and SECANT of any degree even according to any Radius, and how useful
an Operation this is (and particularly in Dialing,) everybody well knows that
has the least insight in it.

Suppose then you desire the Tangent and Secant of 50 Degrees; How to find the
Tangent and Secant of any degree.
open your Sector, and taking (GR) the given Radius between your Compasses, put
it over in the Line of Sines, at the Sine of 40, viz. at the Complement of the
Angle required, and the distance between the Figures of 50 and 50, will be the
Tangent sought for; and the distance between the Figures of 90 and 90 will be
the Secant of the said 50 Degrees.

These two Problems I recommend to you because they are extremly ingenious and
useful, found out it seems a while ago by Mr. Line (the Author of that
admirable Horological Pile in White Hall Garden) as, since his death, one of
his Scholars (that hinted them to me) informed me, and upon consideration I
found them exactly true, having thus demonstrated them.

Sch. 1.


It Is evident by Sch. 1. that Demonstration.
as the sine Complement AB is to the Sine CB, so the Radius AD is to the
Tangent ED. Again it is evident by Scheme 2. that as KC: KS:: CR: ST, but by
Construction KC is on the Sector the Sine of 4 or Sine complement of 50, and CS
the Sine of 50 it self, therefore CR being the Radius given, ST must be the
Tangent required, viz. the Tangent of 50, according to that Radius. On the
other side we see by the said first Scheme that as the Sine Complement AB is to
the Radius AD, so is the Radius AC. (or AD) to the Secant AE. Again you see by
Scheme second, that KC: KD:: CR: DP; but by construction KC is the Sine of 40
or Sine Complement of 50, and KD is Sine of 90 or Radius of the Sector, and CR
is the Radius given, ergo PD must be the Secant required.

Having thus done with the Preliminaries, we will now come to the business it
self, after I have told you there are five principal Planes on which a Dial may
be made; to wit the Horizontal, the Vertical, the Declining, the Reclining and
the Inclining Plane; and first of the Horizontal, since that Dial is the Basis
and Foundation of all the Rest.

Sch. 3.


Sch. 4.


Sch. 5.


Sch. 6


Sch. 10.


Sch. 7.


Sch. 9.


Sch. 8.


Sch. 11.


Sch. 12.


Sch. 13


Sch. 14.


Sch. 15.


Sch. 16.


Sch. 17


Sch. 18.


Sch. 19.


Sch. 20.


Sch. 21.


Sch. 22.


Sch. 23.


Sch. 25.


Sch. 26.


Sch. 27


Sch. 24


Sch. 28


Sch. 31


Sch. 32


Sch. 33


Sch. 34


Sch. 35.


Sch. 36.


Sch. 37.


Sch. 39


Sch. 38


Sch. 41


Sch. 42


Sch. 34


OPERATION I.
BEfore you proceed further, you must know Reader, that the Printer A
Memorandum.
(skipping a line in the last Paragraph, and then adjusting the number of
Planes to those he found expressed) has left out two, so that the before
mentioned principal Planes are 7; viz. the Horizontal Plane, the Direct
Vertical Plane, the Declining Vertical Plane, the Direct Reclining Plane, the
Direct Inclining Plane, the Reclining Declining Plane, and the Inclining
Declining Plane. First, then of the Horizontal, that Dial being (as is said)
the Foundation of this Science, and afterward of the rest in Order; for the
Author treats of all Dials that are to be described on the aforesaid Planes. J.
M.

How to describe an Horizontal Dial by the Globe, for the Elevation of London.
The first way.
OPen your Compasses at 60 Degrees in any great Circle The Construction.
of your Globe, and draw on a sheet of Paper a blind Circle with a fair
Diameter throu' it, for the Meridian or 12 a Clock hour line of your Dial; Then
take with your Compasses in the Horizon of your said Globe, the several
Distances between the next 8 morning or evening hour Circles and its Meridian
or ordinary 12 a clock hour Circle, and marking these Distances successively in
the blind Circle on both sides of its Diameter, they and the Center will be the
Points by which you may draw all hour Lines from 4 in the Morning till 8 at
Night; and if you would have a Dial bigger than the blind Circle, draw about it
a bigger Circle, if a lesser a less: nay, if you describe any other Figure as
an Oval, Square Oblong, etc. the said Points will as well guide your Ruler, as
when the blind Circle it self was the Extremity or border of your Plane. But
least this Direction should be too obscure for a Beginner, I will here adjoyn
an Example.

Having opened your Compasses, as I said, at 60 Degrees in An Example.
any great Circle of your Globe, and described a blind Circle, to wit, I p T c,
as in Scheme third, draw a fair line IT any how throu' the Center O for your
Meridian or 12 a clock hour Line; and by the way remember that in the Fabrique
of this Dial you place the point I ever toward you, and T farthest from you,
to the end you mistake not when directed to this or that hand. Having then
proceeded thus far, put one foot of your Compasses on the Meridian or
(according to the Polar Figures) the 12 a clock Circle of your Globe where it
cuts the Horizon, and the other foot on the 1 a Clock Circle, and mark this
distance in the blind Circle from I toward the left hand, to wit from I to k,
and it will give you a point or mark for your 1 a Clock hour line, and from I
to h toward your right hand the mark for your 11 a Clock hour Line. In the
next place take in the said Horizon the distance between the 1 and 2 a Clock
Circles, and place it from k onwards to l for a mark for your 2 a Clock Line,
and from h to g for the 10 a Clock line, and so on till you come to r, 8 at
night, and to a, 4 in the morning, which are the latest and earliest Summer
hours. If then you would have a larger Dial describe a larger Circle, suppose,
NESW; or if a lesser Dial, a lesser Circle, as MPQR, and laying your Ruler on
the Center O, and on each of the former Marks or Letters in the said blind
Circle successively, draw but a fair line to the designed Limb or Border
(whether it be a Circle; or the square VXYZ or any other Figure,) and your Dial
wants nothing bdt a Cock; but remember that you need not draw your hour lines
quite from the Center O, because meeting all there, they will be apt to blur;
therefore describe about the said Center, at what distance you please, a little
Circle (like g l) and your lines will terminate there with more neatness and
convenience. Now if you have a mind to put on half hours How to draw the half
hours, quarters, etc.
and quarters, you will not much err if you divide each hour into four parts,
but to be exact you must make use of your String, thus. You know that the
distance between each hour-Circle in the Equator is 15 Degrees, Draw therefore
your String from the Pole throu' the Equator of your Globe, over 7 degrees and
30 minutes, (or half the distance between each Hour Circle) and where the
String cuts the Horizon there will be the true half Hour of that Hour; so that
if you mark with your Compasses the said distance on the blind Circle, between
the corresponding hour lines, the Ruler (passing throu' that Mark and Center)
will give you in the Border the place of that half hour; and in like manner you
are to proceed in marking out the rest, as also the Quarters, and all other
Subdivisions.

As for the Style or Cock of this Dial, it must always at the Center make an
Angle with the Meridian or 12 a Clock Line (OI) equal to the Distance between
the Pole and the nearest part of the Horizon of the Globe; that is to say an
Angle equal to the Elevation or Latitude of the Place; therefore your Dial
being made (suppose) for London, open your Compasses at the aforesaid distance,
or at 51 Degrees and, and placing one foot on I, the other will fall on K in
the said blind Circle; so that drawing the blind line OK to p, you will have
the Triangle IO p, which if you so erect, that the Point O lies just on the
Center, and the Base IO on your 12 a Clock line (or Substile) your Dial is
finished.

And here you may take notice, that though this Style be the Triangle IO p, yet
you may fashion it into what shape you please, in case the side p O (which
indicates or shows the Hour) makes still an Angle of 51 Degrees and 1 / 2 with
the Meridian IO; nay, you may make it a Pin or upright Style, as appears by the
Perpendiculars AB, GH and p I, for either of them will serve the turn by
marking the hour with the shade of its Apex or Top: but then they must not be
placed in the Center O, but thereon the Substilar, where (falling from the
Indicating side O p) they stand Perpendicular to it; that is to say, the Pin AB
(being part of the Triangle or Style IO p) must be erected at B, the Pin GH at
H, and p I at I; and the reason, why they perform this Office, as well as the
whole Triangle IO p is, because their Tops are parts of the Line O p, which is
the only side of the said Triangle, that shows the Hour, as we mentioned
before. Now for the Demonstration of all, it follows in the next Operation.

OPERATION II. How to describe an Horizontal Dial by the Globe for the
Elevation of London.
The second way.
DEscribe a Circle of what bigness you please, and draw a The Construction.
Meridian, or 12 a Clock line throu' it, as before; then count in the Horizon
of your Globe how many Degrees there are between the Hour-Circles of 12 and 1,
or, (which is the same thing) between 12 and 11, and you will find their number
to be about 11. 40. These place on both sides of your said Meridian Line by the
help of a Quadrant, or Line of Chords, and they will give you (if you lay your
Ruler as before on the Center) the 11 and 1 a Clock Hour Lines of your Dial, to
wit, the distance from I to k, and from I to h, as may be seen in the aforesaid
third Scheme. Proceed then in this manner as to the rest of the Hour lines, and
for your Style and Substilar, the former Directions are sufficient.

The Demonstration or Reason why these Dials show the Demonstration.
Hour is not difficult; for if: you consider your Globe, you will see that all
its. Hour Circles are equally distant from each other, and that the Axis of the
World (of which the two Poles are the extremities) lies in the middle of them,
and is in truth a part of each, as being the common Section of them all;
therefore when the Sun comes into the Plane of any Hour Circle (for example to
that of 4 in the morning) the shade of that Hour-Circle will fall there, where
the said Hour Circle cuts the Horizon on the Opposite or Western side, and
consequently the Axis being in that Plane, as a part of it, its Shade must
needs fall there also. Now since the Blind Circle or Limb of the Dial described
is a Circle representing the Horizon, and having by Construction its Hour Lines
distant from each other as the Hour Circles of the Globe or World are distant
in their Horizons, and since the Hour Lines of This (and consequently of all
other Dials) are only the intersections of the Hour-Circles with their
respective Planes, it must needs follow, if we place in the middle of the said
Dial a Cock or Style, making an Angle of 51, 30, with its Meridian line or
Substilar (to wit, the Angle which the Axis of the World makes with the
intersection of the Meridian and Plane of the Horizon) 'twill cast a Shade
directly on the Hour line corresponding to the Hour Circle in whose Plane the
Sun then lies, in case the Meridian or 12 a Clock line of the Dial be placed
North and South, like the Meridian of the Globe when composed; for the Globe it
self without it be composed will not (as we have formerly mentioned) show the
Hour, because its Hour-Circles do not then correspond with the Heavenly ones.
And as for the reason why the 12 a Clock line is the Substilar, it is because
the true Height of the Axis above the Plane (which the Style or Cock, as I
showd you, represents) is to be measured in the Hour Circle that falls on the
Plane at right Angles, which being the Meridian or ordinary 12 a Clock Hour
Circle, it follows that its Intersection with the Plane must be the Substilar,
or Line with which the Style is to make the Angle of the Elevation.

All that we have then said of this Dial may be clearly seen by Sch. 5. which
represents your Globe cut into an Horizontal Plane, with its Dial on it, as
Sch. 4. does the Globe entire, when you consider it in the description of the
said Dial; for there you have before your eyes (by the Letters I k, l, etc.)
not only how to open your Compasses from Hour-Circle to Hour Circle for the
true placing the Distances of each Hour-Line on your blind Circle, but also the
number of Degrees in the Horizon between every Hour Circle and the Meridian.
Besides, by the Horizons oblique cutting the Hour Circles, you may see how that
(notwithstanding the equality of the Suns Horary motion) the Hour Lines of this
Dial must be unequal, and consequently that they are of different distances in
different Latitudes.

OPERATION III. To describe an Horizontal Dial Geometrically, for the Elevation
of London.
Describe a fair Circle as ABCD, and if you would have your Dial of another
Shape, you may afterward describe about it what Figure you please; I say,
describe the fair Circle ABCD, and draw throu' its Center O the Line AOC for
your Meridian or 12 a Clock hour line, and crossing it at right angles with BD
for the Morning and Evening 6 a Clock hour lines, mark in it (by the help of
your Line of Sines or any way else) from A the value of 51. 30. or Latitude of
your dwelling, which happening to reach, (for example sake) to K, draw the
blind line OK; then throu' any point of AO (suppose A) draw GH, another blind
line, parallel to BD, or at right Angles with the said AO, and taking with your
Compasses the nearest distance between A and OK, which being (suppose) the
point L, let AL, by the help of your Sector (according to our former page 71.
directions,) be the Radius to the Tangent Line GH, so that marking in it on
both sides of A, the Tangents of 15, 30, 45, 60, and 75 Degrees, the said
Center O and the point 15 will give you the Hour Lines of 1 and 11, the Center
O and 30, those of 2 and 10, and in this manner proceed to 75, which will give
you the Hourlines of 5 and 7; and as for those beyond the 6 a Clock lines, do
but produce 8 in the Morning, and 'twill give you 8 at Night, and 7 in the
Morning 7 at Night, as will 4 and 5 in the Evening, the like forenoon Hours.

Thus then you have not only an Horizontal Dial Geometrically described, almost
as soon as the former, (and this without embroyling the Plane with multiplicity
of blind Circles and Lines) but a way also (in case you have no Sector) how to
make any Tangent Line serve your turn; for, it is but taking between the
Compasses 45 Degrees of it ( i. e. a distance equal to its Radius) and finding
out (by a trial or two) the Point (suppose) R in the line OA, where one foot of
your Compasses being placed, the other just touches M (the supposed nearest
point or distance in OK from the said R) draw throu' R a line at right Angles
with the Meridian, and noting in it, as we showed you before, the Degrees of
each hour (according to this new Tangent line) the Center O and these Degrees
will give you the points of each hour line; for as the former Radius AL was to
the several Degrees in its Tangent Line, so will the now Radius RM be to the
several Degrees in its Tangent Line.

As for the Demonstration or Reason of this Dial, every body The Demonstration.
that understands Gnomonics comprehends it, I doubt not, at the first sight;
for the Angle O in the Triangle KOA, being by construction equal to the
Elevation, do but place the Base AO on a Meridian Line, and if you consider the
Side KO as the Indicating Side of the Style or Cock, it necessarily follows,
that it will represent the Axis of the World; for it is evident that its Top K
will point directly to the Pole, and touch it, if produced, whilst O its other
extremity passes throu' the Center of the Horizontal Plane; therefore if a
Circle (whose Radius is AL) were so placed on this Style or Axis, that its
Diameter crossed it at right Angles at L, the said Circle would represent
Circulum maximum semper apparentium, for that Circle in the Heavens ever
touches the Horizon, as this would do at A. This Circle then being parallel to
the Equator, is divided by the Hour Circles into twenty four equal parts, and
consequently each fifteen Degrees in its Tangent Line GH, will correspond with
its said equal parts or Divisions. Now GH is also the Tangent Line of the
Horizon, as touching it in the Point A, but where the Hour Circles cut the
Horizon, or its Tangent line, there the Points will be, to which (from the
Center) the Hour Lines in an Horizontal Dial are to be drawn; ergo O the Center
of your Horizontal Plane, and the several fifteen Degrees in the common Tangent
GH are the true points of the Hour Lines. Besides as the distance* between each
Hour Line (if AL, be the Radius) is 15 Degrees, so if AO be Radius (I mean OA
the Radius of the Horizontal Plane) the said Hour Lines will be distant as many
Degrees asunder, as they are in the Horizon of the World, or as you found them
in the Fabric of the second Horizontal Dial by the Globe. Here also you may
see, that the true place of this Dial is to be in the Center of the Earth, and
not on its superficies, but by reason of the Suns vast distance, the Error,
which thereby happens) is not sensible; nay, because the Error is not sensible,
we may safely conclude, that the Sun is vastly distant from us.

So much then for Horizontal Dials, since there now remains nothing necessary
to be known, but how to find whether they stand Level or no (which is handled
in the first page 4.
Section) and how to draw a Meridian Line for their true placing, which is
learnt by the following Operation. But before we go further let me advise you
(whenever you make a Dial of consequence, of what kind soever it be) to
describe it first on Paper, and thence A Memorandum.
to mark out the Lines on your real Plane, for thereby you will not only keep
your said Plane neat, and more judiciously choose the best place for the Center
of your Dial, but (besides the several conveniences which practice will show
you) the Lines themselves will be more exactly drawn, by reason you can manage
your Paper draught as you please.

OPERATION. IV. How to draw a true meridian Line on any Horizontal Plane.
page 8.
COmpose your Globe on the Plane, or Place where your Dial is to stand, and
making marks or pricks there (on each side of the Pedestal) at the Letters S
and N, draw but a Line throu' those marks, and that will be a true Meridian
Line, and if you do the like under the Letters E and W, you will have a true
East and West Line.

OPERATION. V. How to Describe a Vertical, or an Erect Direct South Dial by
your Globe for the Elevation of London.
The first way.
THIS Dial is made on the Plane of the Primary Vertical, which passes from the
Zenith to the Nadir throu the East West points, and being therefore erect, and
facing also directly the South, it is commonly called an Erect Direct South Dial;
so that if you draw but your String from the Zenith to the Nadir through either of
the Intersections of the Horizon with the Equator, 'twill appear upon the
Superficies of the Globe, like the emerging edge of a thin Plate, and
consequently represent the said Plane, or at least as much of it as is
requisite.

This being don't open your Compasses at 60 Degrees, as page 73.
before, The Construction.
and describe on a sheet of paper the blind Semicircle I PC (as in (...) 10)
with the Diamiter or Meridian JOT throu' it, then take with your Compasses the
distance between the Zenith of your Globe, and the Intersection of your String
with the nearest Hour Circle, and 'twill in your Blind Circle on both sides of
the Meridian or twelve a Clock Line, (to wit from I to k, and I to h) give you
marks, by which you may draw from the Center O the Hour Lines of 1 and 11; as
will the distance from k to l, and h to g (viz. the distance from the said
first Intersection to the second) the marks of 2 and 10; and in this manner you
must proceed to 6 and 6, as the latest and earliest hours, that this kind of
Dial shows; for since its Sides lie full East and West, and that the Sun never
comes to the East before 6 in the morning, nor is later in the West than 6 at
night, it is impossible that the Plane should significantly contain more
Hour Lines. And as for the Style or Cock* the distance on your Globe between
the Zenith and the Pole (being the Complement of the Elevation) gives you from
I to K the Degrees of its height above the Plane, so that you may easily place
and erect it, the Substile being still the Meridian. The Rules in the first
Horizontal Dial will show you also both how to contract and enlarge it, and how
to resolve (especially if you consult the 7th. 8th. and 10th. Schemes) any
difficulty that can possibly arise in the present Operation; for Scheme the
7th. shows you the Globe it self with the String drawn from the Zenith to the
Nadir throu' the East Intersection of the Equator with the Horizon; and Scheme
the 8th. the Globe cut into this Plane by the said String, and lastly the lower
part of Scheme the 10th. (to wit, the Semicircle PIC) the Dial described by
the foregoing Directions. Now for the Demonstration it follows in the 8th.
Operation.

OPERATION VI. How to make this Vertical South Dial by the Globe for the
Elvation of London.
The second Way.
DEscribe a Blind Circle of what bigness you please with a The construction.
Diameter throu' it, and placing your String on the East or West Point of the
Globe as before, measure (by your Bead or Compasses in any great Circle) the
distance between the Zenith and each Intersection of the said String with the
Hour Circles, and you will have the Degrees of every Hour from 12 a Clock, as
the before mentioned Seventh Scheme shows you; so that by the help of your
Sector (or of any Line of Chords or Quadrant) you may mark them successively in
your Blind Circle on both sides of the Diameter, and then if you draw from the
Center Lines throu' those marks, your Dial is finished; for as to the Style and
Substilar, you need no other Instruction than what you had in the last
Operation, which also directs you to the Demonstration, since the same serves
both.

OPERATION. VII. How to draw a Line Parallel to the Horizon; together with two
ways how to place truly all paper Draughts on their respective Plane.
HAving lately advised you To Delineate all Dials on page 79.
Paper, before you draw them on your designed Plane, and having showed you how
to describe this Dial, it is now time to teach How to draw a Line Parallel to the
Horizon, and how to place truly the draught on its Plane
you how to draw an Horizontal Line on this Plane, that you may thereby truly
place your Draughts. Slip therefore out your two Rulers, which are under the
the Pedestal (as I already mentioned) and placing the end of one on a
convenient Center* (chosen by you) in your Plane, you will have by the end of the
other (when the Plummet falls on the Asterisk or little Star) a cond Point, and
consequently marks to draw the required line by; so that if you then place the
Center of your said Draught on the Center of the Plane, and its 6 a Clock Hour
Line on your Horizontal Line, all the other Lines will fall on their true
places, and thereby show you where (with a Cole or the like) to mark out points
for the perfect and final drawing of them. The Cock also of the Paper Dial,
will direct you in the placing of the other; for they are both to be of the
same height above their respective Planes, with their Tops pointing the same
way; viz. downwards to the Horizon in all these South Dials.

But if you will have yet a more easy way of placing a Paper An easier way how
to place any paper draught on its Plane.
Draught not only on this, but on any Plane for which it is made, look what a
Clock it is by your Globe, and moving your said Draught on its Plane 'till it
shows exactly the true Hour, do but fix it there, and you may mark out the
Points for your fair Lines with all the ease imaginable.

OPERATION. VIII. How to make a Vertical or Erect Direct North Dial for the
Elevation of London.
THERE is no difference between the Fabric of this Dial and the former, unless
it be in figuring it; for a South Dial reverst is a North Dial, the Afternoon
Hour Lines being marked with the Morning Figures, and the Morning ones with
those of the Afternoon; So that the Top of the Style points now upwards, as may
be seen by Scheme 9th, and by the upper part of Scheme 10th. to wit, by the
Semi Circle PTC; therefore when you choose a Center in your designed or real
Plane for this Dial, let it be in the lower part of it to have Room for the
Hour Lines to run upwards.

And by the way you must here remember, that though I bad A Memorandum.
you in the making of this your Vretical South Dial, to take the distance
between the Zenith and the Intersection of the String with the next Hour Circle
for the 1 and 11 a Clock Hour Lines, etc, yet that Section of your Globe by
your String from the Zenith as aforesaid, gives in truth a North Dial, and
therefore in strictness you ought to have taken the Distance between the Nadir
and the several Intersections of the Plane with the Hour-Circles; but since
both Dials are (as I told you) alike, it is best always to operate thus from the
Zenith, as being more at hand than the Nadir, and consequently more convenient.

The Demonstration or reason why these Dials show the Demonstration.
Hour, differs even at first Conception but little, and at the second not at
all from that already given for the Horizontal Dial. By the first Conception I
mean our considering these Planes as Vertical and Erect; for since, the
Hour Lines of all Dials are (as I showed you in the former Demonstration) the
Intersections only of the respective Hour-Circles with the Planes, and since
the hourly indicating Shade, is the Shade of the Axis or of the Hour-Circle,
which then lies in the Plane of the Sun, it must follow, that the Mark made
(for example sake) by the 4 a Clock Morning Hour Circle on the String, and the
Center of the said Plane (which is the common passage of all the Hour-Circles)
will be two true Marks or Points for you to draw that hour-Line by, and
consequently that the Shade of the Axis will still fall on the said hour-line
as often as the Sun comes into the Plane of that Hour-Circle. Now your blind
Circle is (by construction) equal to the Circle made by the String on the
Globe, and the Marks on its Limb are equal to the Marks on the said String,
therefore the Dial must be truly drawn, and the Style placed on the 12 a Clock
line (to wit on the intersection of that Hour-Circle, which falls on the Plane
at right Angles) must truly cast its shade from time to time, seeing by its
Site and Angle it corresponds with the Axis of the World. As for our second
Conception in reference to these Dials, we shall find by it that their Planes
are real Horizontal ones to some People or other; for this Section of the Globe
being a great Circle will be the Horizon to those that live in the Pole of it,
viz. to those under our Meridian 90 Degrees from our Zenith, which being a
point in our Horizon, makes their Horizontal Dials always our Direct Vertical
ones, and their Direct Vertical Dials our Horizontal ones. It Is plain then,
that the present Dials are exactly described, if our former Directions and
Proof of an Horizontal one be true; for all the Hour Lines are here drawn from
the Center to the several intersections of the Hour-Circles and Horizon, which
(as we are to suppose) the String represents. Nor does the Cock of these Dials
differ from the former Rules; for having the Meridian or 12 a Clock line for
Substilar for the former reason, and being 38 Degrees and a half above it, it
makes an Angle equal to the Elevation of the People, who have the said Plane
for Horizon.

OPERATION IX. To make the aforesaid North and South Dials Geometrically, for
the Elevation of London.
THere is no need of a Scheme for this Operation, since it is a Corollary from
what we have now said; for make but an Horizontal Dial Geometrically (as we
formerly showed you in Scheme the 6th) according to the Complement of the
Elevation of your Place, and that will serve (the figuring only considered) for
either Dial.

Here then you may see that OS, or ON the Basis or Foot A Memorandum.
of the Style of these Dials, (that is to say, the distance between its Center
and its Horizontal edge or side) is ever the Tangent of the Elevation; for it is
the Tangent Complement of FS or NR the Styles height above the Plane. And here
also you see that the very same Dial (the figures only transposed) will serve
both for an Horizontal and this Direct Vertical one to those that live in the
Latitude of 45 Degrees, since the Elevation of the Pole and Complement of it is
there the same.

OPERATION X. To describe by the Globe, Meridian Dials, or (as others call
them) East or West Dials for the Elevation of London.
THese Dials though Vertical and Direct (as passing through our Zenith, and facing
also two Cardinal Points or Quarters of the World) are very different from the
former, nor has any body (I believe) taught yet their Description by the Globe.

To perform therefore this Operation, you must by the help Some few things to
be premised.
of your String or Compasses describe on your Globe, with Chalk (or the like
matter) an Arch (as in Sch. 11.) which having its Pole at K (the East-point,
for examples sake, of the Aequinoctial) cuts somewhere or other the 11 a Clock
Northern hour Circle, I mean the 11 a Clock hour Circle on the Northern, or
black part of the Globe; and this Arch by reaching from the point C in the
Aequinoctial Colure (or 6 a Clock Circle) to H in the Horizon on the said
Northern side of the Globe, will be a piece of a little Circle parallel to the
Meridian containing the Degrees of the Elevation of the Pole, and cutting all
the Hour-Circles also from 6 to 11. But if this be thought too troublesome a
work, the Globe-maker may avoid it by putting 6 Pricks or Asterisks upon the
Globe, where the said Arch and Hour-Circles would intersect, as may be seen in
the said 11 Scheme at C, O, S, T, V and Z; so that if beyond C he adds one
prick more, viz. at R, to give you from H the Radius, or 60 Degrees of the said
Arch, you need nothing else.

This being premised, describe on a sheet of paper (HR, or 60 degrees of the
said Arch being Radius) a blind Circle The Construction of an East Dial.
as in Sch. 12, and drawing the Line H h how you please throu' K its Center to
represent the intersection of the Horizon, open your Compasses to the said
Arches full extent, to wit, from H to C, and putting one foot on the blind
Circle at H, and the other marking there at C, draw the line PC p, throu' the
Center K, and 'twill represent the intersection of the Aequinoctial Colure (or
6 a Clock hour Circle) with your said blind Circle or Plane; so that if you
take from off your Globe, the distances between the point C, and the several
Intersections of the Hour Circles with the said Arch CH, and place them on your
blind Circle on the right hand side of PC p, as well below the Horizon H h, as
above it, and draw lines through them ( viz. O o, S s, T t, V u, and Z z) you
will have a complete East Dial described, after you have drawn 2 lines more on
the left side of the said C p, to wit, the Line N n distant from it as is O o,
and the Line M m, as is S s. As for the figuring each hour line, it must be
according to the Figures of the corresponding Hour-Circles cut by the aforesaid
Arch CH, and thus you will find them figured in the forementioned Scheme 12,
which shows you too how the Borders or Parallels are drawn for the said Figures
to lie in, as being only double Lines (equidistant at pleasure) on both sides
of the Horizon H h; and here also by the blind Lines, and by the fair ones, you
have before your Eyes what is necessary to be expressed on your fair Plane, and
what not.

Nor is there any difference in the Construction of a West-Dial, Of a West Dial.
except it be in turning on your draught the Hour Lines or Parallels the other
way, to the end they may all point Northwards on their respective Planes; for
thus (in Sch. 11.) do the Prick Lines (m 8, n 7, c 6, o 5, s 4, t 3, u 2 and z
1.) which would truly represent this Dial, if they were produced in the said
Scheme.

Now for the Substilar it is the 6 a Clock Hour Line, since that Of the Style
and Substilar.
Hour Circle falls on the Plane at right Angles, and as for the Cock it may be
a Gallows Style (as in Scheme 13) or a Pin (as in Scheme 14) so it be placed on
the Substilar and perpendicular to it, having its height equal to the Distance
between the Pricks or Asterisks C and P in the said 11 Scheme, or (which is all
one) to the distance between K and X. viz. the nearest distance between the
Substilar, and the 9 a Clock hour line in an East-Dial, and the Substilar and
the 3 a Clock Line in a West Dial.

But here you are to remember, that when I say, that the height of the Style is
to be equal to the distance between C and P. I mean in rigor equal to the
Sine, and not the Chord of that Arch; but seeing the Chord of 10 Degrees,
differs not sensibly from the Sine (and by the way the Arch CP on the Globe
will not be above 10 Degrees from the Meridian,) the interval between C and P
will serve the Turn. But if you would be more exact take between your Compasses
the distance of double CP, to wit the interval of (suppose) 20 degrees, and
half of it is the required distance; for half the Chord of 20 Degrees. is equal to
the Sine of 10. Or if you, please you may erect a needle at C Parallel to P (the
elevated Pole of the Globe) and the distance between them will be the true
Height of your Style. To Conclude, You may contract and enlarge these Dials as
you please, by drawing the hour lines twice or thrice (or according to any
other proportion) nearer or farther asunder, and so abateing or heightning in
the like manner your Style.

The Demonstration is obvious, for since the points M, N, C, O, The
Demonstration.
S, T, V and Z in the upper part of the blindCircle or Plane, and the Points m,
n, p, o, s, t, ^, z, on the lower part of it are (by being equal in distance to
those on the Arch) the intersections of the morning hour Circles of 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11* with the edges of the said Plane, it follows that the Lines drawn
from the corresponding Points, must be the true hour lines of this Dial, since
the hour Lines (as we said) of all Dials, are only the Intersections of the
respective hour Circles with the Plane. Again the shade of the Axis (the Axis
being a part of all the hour Circles) falls ever on the Hour-Line or
Interfection of this or that Hour Circle, as often as the Sun comes into the
Plane of that Hour-Circle, therefore the Style of this Dial representing truly
the Axis* (since it is above the Plane, and distant from it as it is on the
Globe) will cast its Shade every hour on the corresponding hour Line* and as
for the reason, why the height of the said Axis is equal to the distance
between the 3 or 9 a Clock Lines and the Substilar, it shall be shown in the
Demonstration of the next Operation.

OPERATION XII. How to describe an East or West Dial Geometrically for the
Elevation of London.
DRAW the blind Line H h and cross it from your left hand The Construction.
(as in Sch. 13.) with AE ae another blind-line to make an Angle at their
Intersection K equal to the Complement of the Elevation, then pricking in the
said Line AE ae on the right side of K, the respective Tangents of 15. 30 45.
60. and 75 Degrees, as also on the left the Tangents of 15 and 30, Draw but
Perpendiculars through the Pricks, and you have an East-Dial; whereas should
you cross (as in Sch. 14.) H h with AE ae from the right hand, and pricking the
aforesaid Tangents the other way, draw Perpendiculars through them, you would
have a West-Dial. By these Schemes also you may know how each Dial is to be
Figured, the East-Dial containing (as you see) all the hours from 4 in the
morning 'till Noon: and the West all the hours from Noon to 8 at Night. Now for
their Cocks, they are (as I said, in the last Operation) to be a Pin, or a
Gallows Style, and in height equal to the Tangent of 45. Degrees, or distance
between the 9 or 3 a Clock hour Lines and that of six, which is ever their
Substilar.

These Dials must be true, if their Planes lie in or Parallel The Demonstration.
to the Meridian; for since the Line H h, by being placed according to our
Hypothesis horizontal, represents the intersection of the Horizon, and the line
AE ae that of the Equator, by making an Angle with the said H h equal to the
complement of the Elevation, the substilar must be the Intersection of the
Aequinoctial Colure (or 6 a Clock hour Circle) with the Plane, since that
Hour-Circle falls on the Plane at right Angles. If then a Gallows Style be set
on the said Substilar and Perpendicular to it, its Shade must needs constantly
cross the Equator AE ae at right Angles. Now when the Sun is in the Plane of
the 6 a clock hour Circle, his Ray makes no Angle with the said Style, because
the Sun, and the Style are in the same Plane, and so the shade falls directly
along the Substilar; but when he gets (for examples sake) into the next hour
Circle, his Ray (the height of the Style being Radius) makes an Angle of 15
Degrees with the said Style, and consequently the distance of the two shades
are in the line AE a the Tangent of those Degrees. The like therefore being
said of the next Hour Circle and so on, it follows (as I mentioned in the
beginning) that the pricking from the intersection K, the Tangents of 15, 30,
45, 60 and 75 Degrees in the line AE ae, must give you points to draw the
perpendiculars or true hour lines of this Dial by, as also, that the Tangent of
45 Degrees gives the height of the Style, since the Tangent of those Degrees,
(which you see gives the 3 and 9 a clock lines) is equal to the Radius.

Here also we see not only why these hour lines are The reason of the unequal
distance of these hourlines.
so unequally distant, since they are so many Parallels marshalled according to
the Divisions of a Tangent line, but why the 12 a Clock hour line can never be
really expressed, for it is the Tangent of 90 Degrees which is infinite.

OPERATION XIII. How to describe a Declining Dial by the Globe for the
Elevation of London.
The first Way.
THIS Plane (as passing from the Zenith to the Nadir) is What a Declining Plane
is.
still Vertical, and should (you may suppose) be by right the primary Vertical,
but by its tendency toward the East or West Points, its Dial takes the
Appellation of a Declining one, that is to say, of a Dial, whose Plane declines
so many degrees from facing directly the North and South, as is its tendency
toward the said East or West points.

As for the way of making this Dial it differs little from the The Construction.
first Direct Erect one, already page 80. To describe the Morning hours of a
Declining Dial.
treated of; for supposing your present given Plane declines 40 Degrees from
full South toward the East, you must draw your String (which ever represents
the Edges, as we have said, of your Plane) not throu' the East Point of the
Horizon of your Globe, as before, but throu' 40 Degrees further toward the
North, for this makes the String to represent part of a Plane that comes nearer
(by so many Degrees) the facing of the East than it did. Then opening your
Compasses at 60 Degrees in any of the great Circles, and describing (as in Sch.
17th.) the blind one PZW, prick in it from its Meridian Line OZ, the distance
between the Zenith of your Globe and the intersection of your String with the
first Hour-Circle (to wit between Z and b in Sch. 15.) and it will give you a
mark for the 11 a Clock line on your Dial; and the distance between the Zenith
and the Intersection of your String with the next Hour-Circle (to wit between Z
and c) will give you the mark of the 10 a Clock line, and thus you must proceed
to every Hour-Circle cut thus by your String, till it falls on the Horizon,
that is to say from z to d, e, f, g, h, letters marking (as you see in the said
Scheme) the 9, 8, 7, 6, 5 and 4 a Clock Hour Circles* and consequently giving
you those Hour Lines on your Dial.

Now for the Afternoon hour lines (which are no longer equal To describe the
Afternoon Hours.
in distance to the Morning ones,) you have nothing to do but to draw your
String, on the West Side of your Globe, throu' 40 Degrees in the Horizon the
contrary way ( viz. from the West toward the South) and the distance between
the Zenith and the Point in the first Hour-Circle cut by your String (to wit
from Z to k in Sch. 16.) will give you the mark for 1 a Clock, and the distance
from thence to the next Point or Intersection gives you that of 2, to wit, from
Z to l, and in this Order you are to proceed to n, the* 4 a Clock Hour Circle,
that is to say, till you come to the intersection of the String with the
Horizon on the Westside of your Globe.

As for your Style and Substilar they differ also from those of How to make the
Style and Substilar of a Declining Dial.
direct North and South Dials; for the said Style or Cock is to be no longer
placed on the 12 a Clock Line, nor will its height now be equal to the
Complement of your Elevation, therefore having drawn your String throu' the
Degrees of Declension in the Horizon as before, and putting one foot of your
Compasses in the North Pole, find with the other the nearest Point on your
String, to wit S (as in Sch. 15.) and the distance between S the said nearest
Point and the Zenith of your Globe will be ZS in the blind Circle of Scheme the
17th, to wit the distance between the Meridian Line of your Dial and your
Substilar, which in this our Example lies from the Moridian toward your left
hand or Morning hours, and the distance from the said Point in the String to
the Pole (being from S to P) will in the said blind Circle be the height of
your Style; so that if you erect and place your said Style from the Center all
along the Substilar OS it will continually show you the Hour.

But if you fancy that the Extension of your Compasses from A Memorandum.
the Pole to the String will not give you precisely this Point, since your said
Compasses may seem to touch it in several Points; I say, if you doubt or fancy
this, fasten a Thread on the Pole, and drawing it straight over the Horizon at
40 Degrees from the Meridian of your Globe Eastwardly (i. e. till it passes
thron' the Pole of the Plane) see where the said Thread crosses your String (or
edge of the Plane) and there the true required Point will be. The Demonstration
of this Dial is in the following Operation.

OPERATION XIV. How to describe by the Globe a Declining Dial for the Elevation
of London.
The second way.
DRaw your String over at 40 Degrees in the Horizon from The Construction.
the East Northwardly, and from the West Southwardly, as before, and the
respective distances between the Zenith and the Intersection of your String
with the Hour-Circles will give you in any great Circle of the Globe the
Degrees of their respective distances as well for the Morning as Afternoon, and
the proportionable Degrees in any Circle will give you the Points for the
Drawing of your Hour Lines, as I showd you in the Construction of the former
Vertical North and South Dials; and as for the Style and Sub-stilar, you must
operate as directed in the foregoing Operation, that is to say, the number of
Degrees between Z and S gives you the Sub-stilar, and those from P to S the
height of your Style.

As for the Demonstration or Reason why Dials thus made The Demonstration of
these 2 declining Dials.
show the Hour, it is this; First you see that the String, by being on one side
removed 40 Degrees from the East point Northward, and on the other side 40
Degrees from the West Point Southward, represents on the Globe the required
Plane, and therefore wheresoever the Hour Circles cut it, there the Shade of
the Axis will fall, as we showed you before in the former Dials; Now two Points
made by the intersections of each Hour Circle with the Plane being given you
(to wit, the Center where they all meet, and their respective marks on the
String, or supposed Edges of your Plane) it must needs follow, that if you draw
Lines throu' those Points, they will be true Hour Lines; for (as we have often
said) the Hour Lines of all Dials are only the intersections of the Plane with
the hour Circles. In the next place, since PS by construction is the nearest
distance from the Pole to your String or Plane, it appears that the Hour-circle
which cuts the said Plane at S, falls on it at right Angles, and consequently
that as PS (the height of the Pole or Axis above the String or Plane) gives the
true height of the Style of this Dial, so the intersection of the Plane with
the said Hour-Circle must be the true Substilar; for the Substilar (as we
already mentioned) is only the intersection of the Plane with the Hour-Circle,
which falls at right Angles on it; Ergo The distance between Z and S gives in
your blind Circle the distance from your 12 a Clock line to the Substilan, and
PS the height of the Style.

And by the way, here it appears not only why the 12 a Clock A Memorandum.
Lines of Declining Dials continue perpendicular, but also why their Centers
keep the same distance from the Horizontal Edges of their Planes, as do the
Centers of the primary Vertical or direct North and South Dials; I say, here
all this appears; for the 12 a Clock Line (which is ever the intersection of
your Meridian with these Planes) being a Perpendicular in the primary Vertical
Plane, becomes the Axis of the Horizon, and all Vertical Dia's* by their
Declension more only about it, so that both the Center and the said 12 a Clock
Line remain the same in all; therefore the Tangent of the Elevation, being (as
I page 84.
formerly showed you,) the length of the foot of the Style, or distance between
the Center of a Primary Vertical Dial and its Horizontal Edge is that of a
Declining one also.

But to proceed with the Demonstration; you must remember Another Demonstration.
that this Dial is an Horizontal one (as we showed you page 83.
before) to those that dwell in the Pole of the Circle described by the String,
i. e. to those in our Horizon 40 Degrees Eastward from the Meridian, or (which
is all one) to those that dwell where the Thread cuts the Horizon; but all the
Hour Lines are truly drawn according to the former Rules of an page 73.
Horizontal Dial, to wit from the Center to the Points where the respective
Hour Circles cut the String or Limb of the Plane, therefore it must truly show
the hour.

OPERATION. XV. How to describe Geometrically a Declining Dial for the
Elevation of London.
The first way.
THIS Dial being (as I said) an Horizontal one to those in The construction.
our Horizon 40 Degrees Eastward from the Meridian, Find (as we showed you in
the page 23.
Geographical or 20 Section) what Elevation or Latitude they have, and describe
Geometrically an Horizontal Dial on paper for the said Elevation. In the next
place consider the difference between both Longitudes, to wit how many Hours
the Sun comes sooner to their Meridian than yours, so that if he comes,
suppose, 3 hours, 'twill follow, that the 3 a clock hour line is to be the true
12 a clock line of this Plane, because it is really so late with those People,
when it is but Noon with you, and consequently that their 4 will be your 1 a
clock, and their 2 your 11. and in the like manner you are to mark the rest,
having nothing more to do but to draw on your fair Plane a page 8.
Line Parallel to the Horizon, and to place on it at right Angles the true 3 a
Clock Line, (that is to say the 12 a clock line according to your now
alteration or present figuring the Hour Lines,) for you will have all the
requisite Marks or Points, not only to draw the other Hour Lines, but also
plainly to see, where the Substilar will fall, and how high the Cock it self is
to be; for they are all to correspond with those in the said Horizontal or
Paper draught. Now in case the difference of Longitude between these 2 Places
happens to be a Fraction, as (suppose) one hour and 10 minutes, then (if the
Declination of your Plane be still Eastward as in the former example) 10
minutes past 1 must be marked in the Horizontal Draught with the Figure 12, as
the Meridian Line, and 2 and 10 min. with Figure ^. and so on all along;
whereas if the Declination were Westward, then 11 and 10 minutes will be the
said Meridian Line, 10 and 10 minutes your 1 a Clock Line, etc; for thus you
must operate in all other Cases, that is to say, you must still allow by the
new figures the difference of Longitude, that chances to be between you and
them, to whom the Declining Plane is Horizontal. But because this manner of
Dialling may seem to some troublesome and confused (especially when the said
Difference of Longitude happens to be a Fraction, and not even Hours) I shall
here adjoin a second Geometrical Way.

OPERATION. XVI. How to describe Geometrically a Dial declining 40 Degrees
Eastward, for the Elevation of London.
The second way.
HAving made an Horizontal Dial for this Elevation in the The Construction.
lower part of your Paper Plane, (as it is expressed by the prick lines in Scheme
18) and drawn from the Center A the several Hour Lines upward as far as you
think fit, and Figured them to show what Hour Lines they are, choose in AC (the
12 a clock line) any Point, suppose P, and draw throu' it the blind Line GD
making with the said AC an Angle of 50 Degrees or Complement of your
Declension; then erect the Perpendicular PB on the said blind line at P, and
taking with your Compasses (AP being your Radius) the Tangent of 5^ Degrees
and, or true Elevation of the Pole, put one foot on P, and where the other
marks on the said Perpendicular (suppose at F) there will be the Center of your
Declining Dial; so that having bordred your Plane with fitting Parallels, to
contain the standing Figures of each hour, you have nothing more to do, but to
draw fair Lines from the said Center F, to your Border, throu' the
Intersections of the Line GD with the several Hourlines of the Horizontal Dial;
that is to say, you have nothing more to do, but to draw fair Lines throu' the
Points KLMNO PQR which give the hours of 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 1 and 2; and by
the A ready way to find the Style and Substile of a declining Dial.
way you may have as many other Morning or Evening hours as you please if you
draw the said GD long enough for the other hour lines of the Horizontal to meet
with it. Nor is there more difficulty here about the Style and Substilar than
in any of the former Dials; for (AP being Radius) it is but taking the Sine of
40 Degrees (or Declination of the Plane) with your Compasses from the Sector,
and putting one foot on your 12 a clock Line at P, the other foot will in the
line GD (to wit, at M) give you the Point for to draw the Substilar FM, and the
Sine Complement of the Declension, or Sine of 50 Degrees, will be XM the Styles
height. Nay, if (for want of a Sector or the like) you cannot conveniently find
the Sine of the said Declension, do but observe where a Perpendicular from A
falls on GD suppose at M, and PM will be the distance in the said GD between
the 12 a Clock line of this Dial and its Substilar, and AM (equal to XM) the
height of the Style above it. Thus then we see that the Fabrique of a Declining
Dial (which is wont to terrify young Students) is in a manner as quick and easy
as that of the Horizontal, since two ordinary Lines more, viz. GD and BP give
us all the Points necessary for its Description.

The Demonstration and Reason of this Dial is evident; for, Demonstration.
the Horizontal being by construction true, any Erect Plane facing the South,
that crosses its Meridian (or 12 a clock line AC) at right Angle^ will
represent a Primary Vertical or Direct South Plane, and then the Center of the
Dial described on it will be distant from P the intersection of the two Planes
on the said AC) the Tangent of the Elevation, as I showed you page 92.
before. Now since GD is (by Hypothesis) the Edge of a Vertical Declining
Plane, and since (as we showed you in the before cited place) that the 12 a
Clock line, as well in a Declining as in a Primary Vertical Dial, is
Perpendicular to the Horizon, containing in it the Centers of the said Dials,
it follows that FP (being the Tangent of the Elevation, and Perpendicular also
to the said DG where it cuts the 12 a Clock line of the Horizontal) must be the
12 a Clock line, and F the Center of our present Dial, whose Declension is 40
Degrees Eastward, since FP declines so many Degrees from CP toward the morning
Hours; for the said CP and FP represent the 12 a Clock lines of a Direct, and
of our thus Declining Vertical Plane, if you consider them flatted down, and
lying in the Horizon. This being so, it is evident that the Lines drawn from F
to KLMN, etc. are the true Hour lines of our Dial, as falling from its Center
to the several Points made on its Horizontal edge, by the Hour Circles or
(which is all one) by their Intersections with the Horizontal Dial. As for The
Demonstration of the Style and Substilar.
the Style and Substilar, let us but consider the Triangle AMP, and we shall
find that P is by construction the Angle of 50 Degrees, and A that of 40, as
substended by the Sine of the Declension, so that A being a right Angle, AM
must be a perpendicular; therefore the Hour Circle, whose intersection the said
AM happens to be, falls at right Angles on our present Plane, and consequently
gives the Substilar; Now since the Axis of the World passes through F and A,
the Centers of the two Dials, when they are joined (as we now suppose them) at
GD the common Section of their Planes; I say, since the Axis passes throu'
their Centers, its Elevation or Height above our Plane must be AM, as being the
only Perpendicular that can fall from it upon the said Plane, and consequently
its Measure; but AM you see is the Sine Complement of 40, since PM is the Sine
of 40, Therefore in all Declining Dials, The Sine of the Declension (from their
12 a Clock Line) gives in their Horizontal Edge their Substilar, and the Sine
Complement their Style. Q. E. D.

OPERATION XVII. To take the Declension of a Plane.
COmpose your Globe and find exactly the Azimuth, i. e. what Degree of the
Horizon is cut by the String's shade, when it passes throu' the Zenith and
Nadir, which we will suppose to be the 50th from the South toward the West; then
having slipped out (to an equal length) the two Rulers from under your Pedestal,
Hold your Globe level, and apply the said Rulers, as soon as you can, to your
Plane, (as you did when you drew an page 82.
Horizontal Line) and find again the Azimuth, which now being (for example) 90
Degrees shows your Plane declines 40 toward the East, because, the Azimuth
being now increast so many Degrees, the Meridian (which by the help of the said
Rulers was perpendicular to your Wall or Plane) is turned thereby from true
South (as formerly it stood) toward the East the abovementioned number of 90
Degrees; but had the shade fallen on the 10th. Degree, your Plane would (for
the same Reason) have declined 40 Degrees toward the West. In short therefore,
the difference of these two Azimuths is the thing that resolves the Question;
for when they are equal there is no Declension at all.

Of Reclining Dials.
THE Horizontal Plane lay open (we saw) to the whole Hemisphere, whilst each
Vertical one enjoyed but half of it; for, by being Vertical, a moiety of the
said Hemisphere is before, and the other behind it. Now the Reclining Plane
(which is expressed by Sch. 29.) instead of being perpendicular to the Horizon
bends toward it, yet so, that its bending has nothing in it of overwhelming or
tendency toward those, that behold it (as it happens to Inclining Planes
expressed by vid. page* 104.
Scheme 30) but still receeds, according to the Degrees of its Reclination,
farther vid. page* 105.
and farther from them, making thereby an obtuse Angle with the Horizon, and
consequently faces more than half the apparent Heavens, as the Inclining one
does less, whose Angle is therefore ever Acute.

As for the kinds of Reclining Planes, there are (I may say) 4, to wit, the
Aequinoctial, the Polar, the Direct Reclining, and the Declining Reclining
Plane; for each of these appropriates to it self a particular Fabric, or way of
making, and therefore we will Treat of them in Order.

OPERATION XVIII. How to describe a Dial on an Aequinoctial Plane, both by the
Globe, and Geometrically also.
THIS Plane is represented by the Globe, when it is Composed The Construction
and Demonstration.
and cut (as in Scheme 20) quite throu' at the Aequinoctial, therefore open
your Compasses at 60 Degrees there, and describing the Blind Circle ABCD in
Scheme 21, divide it as the Hour-Circles cut the said Aequinoctial (in Sch.
19th.) that is to say, divide it into 24 equal Divisions, and there will rest
nothing more to be done, but to draw Lines from the Center O, through as many
of those Divisions as you shall think necessary, and then to Figure them
successively from Morning to Night. As for the Style (seeing the Axis of the
World is at right Angles with any Diameter of the Equator, and runs throu' the
Center of it) it must needs follow that the Perpendicular Pin OP placed in the
Center of your Dial, will perform that Office; for when it directly points to
the Pole it represents the said Axis, as the divided blind Circle does the
Aequinoctial, and its Divisions; therefore since the Shade of the Axis ever
falls (according to the time of the Day) on This or That intersection of the
Hour-Circles with the Equator, the Shade of the Pin must fall also on the
corresponding Hour-line of the Dial, as being (in the effect) the same thing,
in case the 12 a Clock Line be placed on a Meridian line, and mounted at A (its
South side) above the Horizon, the Complement of the Elevation of the Pole, i.
e. 38 Degrees and a half for by this means your Plane, from an Horizontal one,
will be perfectly that of the Equator.

Nor is it hard to mount thus the said South side of your How to make an
Horizontal Plane an Aequinoctial one.
Dial, since it is but opening your Compasses, in any great Circle of your Globe
at twice as many Degrees as is the Complement of the Elevation, to wit 77 Degrees.
and they will give you the true length of a Perpendicular to underprop withal
the aforesaid A* or Southern point of the 12 a clock line of your Dial. And The
Demonstration.
the reason of it is, because AC the Diameter of your Dial being (by
Hypothesis) equal to the Diameter of the Globe, becomes now (C being Center of
the new Arch, made by the mounting or raising the side of your Plane above the
Horizon) a Radius double to OA the former Radius. Therefore since the Chord of
a double Arch is ever the Sine of the single Arch in a Circle, whose Radius is
double the other, it follows that the Chord of 77 Degrees is (in respect to the
double Radius AC) the Sine of 38 g. 30 m. and consequently will perform (if
erected Perpendicularly) the designed Operation.

Now for the Geometrical Construction of this Dial, (since it The Geometrical
Construction.
consists only in dividing a Circle into 24 equal parts, with a perpendicular
Cock or Style,) there is no need of more words about it; so that we will end here
with a Memorandum, viz. that A Memorandum.
as the Reclining face of this Plane, shows the Hour from Spring to Autumn, so
the Inclining Face, or other side of it does the same, for the remaining half
year, to wit, from Autumn to the Spring.

OPERATION XIX. How to describe a Polar Dial, both by the Globe, and
Geometrically also.
THE true Plane of this Dial is speculatively the Plane of the Aequinoctial
Colure or 6 a Clock Hour-Circle, but in practice that of any Circle parallel to
it, so that the Construction and Demonstration of a Dial on it, is ( mutatis
mutandis) the same with that on a Meridian Plane, of which we have already so
fusely page 8. The Construction.
treated.

Make then by your Globe (for example sake) an East Dial on a Meridian Plane,
according to any of the former ways, and if you alter but the Figures, that is
to say, if having figured the Substilar instead of 6 with 12, you mark the
Morning 7 a Clock Hour line of the said East Dial with 1, that of 5 with 11,
and so on in Order, it will be a true Polar Dial, showing you exactly the Hour,
when it directly faces the South, and Reclines so, that the Apex or uppermost
part of the Substiler or 12 a Clock line points just to the North Pole; for
then the back-part of the Plane makes an Angle with the Horizon equal to that
of our Elevation.

This Operation may be also performed of it self without the former
consideration, since it is but putting one foot of your Compasses on the
Intersection of your Meridian or 12 a Clock hour Circle with the Equator of
your Globe (to wit, on K in Scheme 22) and so describing with Chalk the Arch
CAE, I mean an Arch which reaching from the said Meridian, cuts the Morning 7 a
Clock, or if (you please) the Evening 5 a Clock Hour Circle somewhere or other;
for then if you draw a blind Circle (as in Sch. 23.) of the same bigness, and
take the several distancces between the Pricks or intersections of the
Hour-Circles with the said Arch, to wit, the distances between C and O, C and
S, etc. and place them on the blind circle, on both sides of PCK p the
Substilar or 12 a clock line, as well below the line AE ae, as about it) the
lines drawn from the said Pricks will be true Hour lines, and the distance
between C and P or between K and X will (for the reasons mentioned in the
Description of the Meridian Dials) be the height of the Style.

Now to describe this Dial Geometrically, it is yet more easily performed, for
if you draw (as in Scheme 24.) the Line AB parallel to the Horizon, and then
take a Point in the middle of it (suppose K) do but prick on both sides of it
the Tangent of 15, 30, 45, 60, and 75, and the several Perpendiculars drawn
throu these Pricks will be true Hour Lines, which you may figure as you see in
the before mentioned 24th Scheme; and as for the Style the Tangent of 45, (or
distance between the 12 a Clock line, and that of 9 or 3) gives you its height,
which is to be a Pin or Gallows Style as before, and the 12 a clock line the
Substilar.

OPERATION XX. How to describe a Direct reclining North or South Dial.
SUPPOSE then that the Plane lay directly South, and that The Construction and
Demonstration of a declining direct Dial facing the South.
its Reclination were 20 Degrees, you have nothing to do, but either
Geometrically to make on it a direct Vertical South Dial for the Elevation of
71 Degrees and (I mean for a Plane 20 Degrees nearer the Pole than your own
Zenith) or to fix your String on 71 gr. and 30 min. in your Meridian (that is
to say at A in scheme 25th. and then to draw your said string over the East or
West Points of your Globe, for 'twill represent this Plane, since it Reclines
or falls back from the Zenith 20 degrees; therefore the Distances between the
Hour-Circles that intersect with your String, must (for the former reasons)
give you in any blind Circle (which shall be equal to a great one on your
Globe) marks ( viz. b, c, d, e, f, g,) for the corresponding Hour Lines; and
the Meridian being the Substilar (since it is the Hour Circle that falls on the
Plane at right Angles) the Height of your Style must (as in all Direct Vertical
Dials) be A Direct North reclining Plane.
the distance from the Pole to A, the supposed Point, or Place where your
String is fixed. Now had your Plane Reclined 20 Degrees the other way, that is
to say* had it Reclined so many Degrees facing the North, you must have fixed
your String at N, viz. 20 Degrees short of the Zenith, and consequently your
said String would have intersected with the Hour Circles at o, p, q, r, s;
therefore a Direct Vertical North Dial for the Latitude of 31 g. 30 m. will be
the required Dial.

OPERATION. XXI. How to make a Declining Reclining Dial by the Globe.
SUppose your Plane declined 40 Degrees Eastward (as did the late Declining
page 89.
Vertical) and then Reclined 20 Degrees with a Southern Aspect, and by the way
you must remember, that I mean in general by a Planes Reclining with a Southern
Aspect, its looking toward that Quarter, though it be turned more or less from
Direct South toward the East or West; in like manner a Declining Reclining
Plane with a Northern Aspect turns from direct North toward one of the
aforesaid Points. Supposing then a Plane thus Reclining, Do but describe or
place it on your Globe, and your Operation will be as easy as any of the former.

First mount your Bead 71 Degrees and half above the Horizon, How to describe
the Plane of this Reclining Dial on the Globe.
that is to say fix it to 20 Degrees from the Zenith of the Globe; then seeing
your Plane has a Southern Aspect, (and so lies beyond your said Zenith
Northward) move your String till it cuts in the Horizon 40 Degrees Westward
from the Northern Meridian, or back part of the 12 a Clock Hour Circle. In the
next place take a Thread and tying it about your Globe so, that it lies not only
on your Bead, but crosses also the Horizon at 40 Degrees from the East point
Northward, and 40 Degrees from the West Point Southward, the said Thread will
represent your Plane Reclining and Declining, as aforesaid. Or, in short fix, a
small Needle in the Point where the Bead lies (which we suppose at A in Sch.
26.) and fastening to it a Thread or part of the string, draw it over the Horizon
at 40 Degrees from the East-Point Northwards, and it will give you the Eastern
or Morning side of your Plane, as it will the Western or Afternoon side; if you
draw it (as in Scheme 27.) over 40 Degrees of the Horizon from the West-Point
Southwards.

This being done, describe a blind Circle or Semicircle equal The Construction.
to a great one on your Globe, for Example sake, the blind Semicircle A. T. C,
and drawing from (O) the Center the blind Line OA perpendicular to the
Horizontal line H h, take the distance with your Compasses between A the
station of your Needle or Bead, and the point in the 12 a clock hour Circle
crossed by the Thread or Edge of your Plane, and this distance from A in your
blind Circle, gives you there toward your left hand the Point k, to which if
you draw a fair Line from the Center it will be the 12 a clock Line of your
Dial, and the distance from the said station of your Bead or Needle to the
intersection of the Thread with the next Hour-Circle will give you l, the mark
of the 11 a clock Line; and in this manner you must run over all other
intersections of your Thread and Hour-Circles to the very Horizon on both sides
of the Globe (I mean on the Morning and Evening side of it, represented by
Scheme 26 and 27) and placing their distances on your blind Circle, on both
sides of the aforesaid OI, do but draw lines to them from the Center, and your
Dial is described.

And here you must observe that I have (in Scheme 26. or A Memorandum.
Eastern Face of the Globe) placed A (the Station of the Bead or Needle) above
the Meridian, since its true place cannot be expressed; for it ought to have bin
on the other side of it, I mean on the Western side, which Scheme 27 is
supposed to represent.

Now for the Style and Substilar there is no difference from Of the Style and
Substilar
the Rules of the Declining Vertical, since it is but finding the nearest point
on your Thread to the Pole by your Compasses; for the distance between the said
Point on your Thread and it is intersection with the 12 a clock Hour-Circle is
the distance in the blind Circle between, k and M for the Substilar and the
distance between the said nearest Point and the Pole, gives MX the height of
the Style above the Plane. Nay, if you measure the Distance between each Point
and A in any great Circle, page 82.
'twill give you the Degrees or Distances between A and your Style, Substilar,
and each Hour-line, and consequently performs the second way (as we have all
along mentioned) of describing Dials by the Globe.

As for the Demonstration of this Dial, what we have formerly Another
Demonstration:
said about the rest proves it also; for supposing that the Thread represents
truly your Plane, and that the Hour lines of a Dial, are (as I have showed you
all along) the several intersections of the Hour-Circles with the Plane, this
Dial must be true, since all the Lines on it are the said intersections, as
drawn from its Center to the Points made by the Hour-Circles on its Edges: Nor
can there be any error in the Substilar or Style, the first being the
intersection of the Plane with it is true Meridian of the Plane, I mean with
that Hour Circle which falls on it at right Angles, and the other being the
real Height (as you see) of the Pole above the Plane, ergo, the whole must be
true.

OPERATION XXII. How to describe by the Globe a Dial Declining and Reclining as
the former, with a Northward Aspect.
THere is no need here of a Scheme, the Construction of this The construction.
Dial being in a manner the same as the former, only now you must draw your
String and Bead (fitted to the Reclination) the contrary way, that is to say,
over the South or forepart of the Globe throu' the 40th Degree in the Horizon
Eastward from the Meridian or 12 a clock hour circle, then fixing a Needle (as
page 2.
I showed you) on your Globe, or else tying a thread round it so, that it
crosses still your Bead* and the aforesaid two Points in the Horizon, you have
there the Plane represented, and may consequently (by the help of the former
Instructions) describe this Dial, whose Style is to point upward, because of
its Northern Aspect.

OPERATION. XXIII. How to describe all Inclining Dials, whether Direct or
Declining.
AN Inclining Dial (of what sort soever it be) is the back or hinder part of a
Reclining one of the contrary Aspect so that its hour lines must be mark with
the opposite Figures, and* the Style must point the other way; therefore if you
desire a Dial Declining Eastward 40 Degrees, and Inclining 20 with a Southern
Aspect, describe only the last Dial, (which has, you see, the* same Declination
and Reclination with a Northern Aspect) and then if you mark the Morning hour
lines with the Evening Figures, and place the Paper draught the contrary way,
that is to say, let the Apex of the style point downwards, you will perform the
Operation.

As for the Geometrical Description of Reclining or Inclining Dials since it is
very intricate, I shall not now trouble you with it, especially having already
showed you so facil a way by the Globe.

OPERATION. XXIV. How to find the Degrees of the Reclination or Inclination of
any Plane by the Globe.
THere are two ways to perform this Operation; for first First way.
(as I showed you in taking the page 4.
Level of a Plane,) the String rests just on the Horizon of the Globe, when it
stands on an Horizontal Plane, or one 90 Degrees from being Erect and Vertical.

Draw therefore on the Reclining Face or side of the Plane (represented by
Scheme 29.) a Line parallel to the Horizon (suppose AB) and let fall the
Perpendicular CD, then place the Notches of the Pedestal of the Globe (marked
with SN) on the said Perpendicular, and consider what Degree in the Meridian
(counting from the Zenith) the String just lies or rests upon, and that will be
as well the Inclination, if the Plane inclines, as the Reclination if it
reclines; for the Complement of this (I mean the distance between the Point, or
Resting place of the String and the Horizon) showing always how much the Plane
want's of being page 4.
Level or Horizontal, the Degrees from the Zenith, must needs show how much it
wants of being Erect or Vertical.

As for the second way, Draw a Perpendicular on the Reclining The second way.
side of your Plane* as I now showed you, and placing on it (after the same
manner) the Notches of the Pedestal, expect 'till the Shade of the Pin in the
Zenith falls upon the Meridian of your Globe; for this show's the Sun to be at
that moment in the Plane of the said Meridian; then observing on what Degree of
it the Shade of Extuberancy falls, place but your Globe Level or Horizontal
with your Meridian in the Plane of the Sun as before, and as the difference of
these Degrees shows how much your Plane wants of being Horizontal, so that the
Complement show's what it wants of being Erect, and consequently the value of
it is Reclination if it reclines, or Inclination if it inclines.

Sch 29.


Sch 30


You may also if you please draw your Perpendicular on the Inclining side of
your Plane (as in Scheme 30th) but then the required Inclination, if it
inclines, or Reclination if it reclines, will be the difference in Degrees
between the aforesaid shades of Extuberancy, after you cast away 90; for by how
much the Inclination happens to be, by so much the shade of Extuberancy
exceed's 90, since 90 is the difference between an Horizontal, and an Erect
Plane.

OPERATION XXV. How to find how long the Sun can possibly shine on a Plane, as
also (from time to time) when we may expect him after his Rising to come on, or
before his Setting to go off the said Plane.
I Deferred this Operation till we had treated of all Planes, because the
applying of it would then be better understood. It Is (though obvious and easy, of
great Use) as not only showing us what Hour lines are absolutely necessary on
all Dials, and what not, but telling us also at what a clock (all the year
long) we may expect the Sun on our Plane, and at what a clock he must go off
it; for (notwithstanding He be above the Horizon, He will not always so long
shine on a Plane not Horizontal, as by the Earliest and Latest hour lines (that
may be justly expressed on it) one might expect.

If then you would find (suppose on a Declining Plane) what The first part of
the Operation.
hour lines may be justly and necessarily drawn on it, I mean what the earliest
and latest hour lines ought to be, you are only to draw you String from the
Zenith (according to the Declension) on both sides of the Meridian (or 12 a
clock hour circle) to the very Horizon; that is to say, you must operate in the
same manner as you do, when you describe the Plane in the Fabric of this kind
of Dial; for the Hour circles cut by your said String in the Horizon show you
exactly how early he can come on, and how late he can stay on it; so that to
express further Lines were needless. This then makes you stop at 4 in the
Afternoon in your late page 89.
Example, where the Plane declines 40 Degrees Eastward, whereas had it declined
but 20 your earliest hour (as you may see if you try) would have bin five in
the Morning, and the latest five at Night. In short, describe your Plane (let
it be what it will) on your Globe with your String, and your Hour circles, (as
we said) that intersect with it in the Horizon answer the Question, since it
clearly appears (your String ever representing the Edges of the Plane) that if
the Sun lies Easterly in the Morning, and Westerly in the Evening of the
Hour-circles, that meet your String in the Horizon, He must be behind your
Plane; therefore since he is not then able (though up) to shine upon it, 'twere
needless (as we said) to express more Hour lines.

It Is the Describing also of the Plane with your String that The second part of
the Operation.
brings us to the knowledge of the second part of this Operation, I mean the
knowing at all times when the Sun comes on, and goes off any Plane; for having
described one (Declining, v. g. 20 Degrees Eastward) do but observe what
Diurnal Parallels and Hour-circles intersect on the Edges of your Plane, and
you have your Intent; for you will by this means see, that, (though the Sun rises
(for example sake) on the 11 of June before 4) the first hour circle, which
intersects with this Parallel on the Edges of the Plane, is that of a Quarter
before six, whereas about the beginning of May, he is there at half an hour
past five, and on the 10 of April at or near 5. Now if you consider in the same
manner the West Side of the Globe, you will see from time to time at what hour
he goes off it; and thus you may do, let the Plane be what it will.

Here therefore it evidently appears, if you should erect at any Why every
Erect Style or perpendicular show's not always the true Hour.
time (suppose about the 10th of April) a Perpendiculur style on an Horizontal
Plane, and draw every Hour a Line along the Shade of the said style, why such a
Dial will be false, as only telling you the true Hour twice in the year, to wit
on the 10th of April, and about the 10th of August, viz. on the days on which
the Sun run's in the same Diurnal Parallel; I say, all this now evidently
appears, since every Line thus drawn on an Horizontal Plane (except the
Meridian, or 12 a clock line) is no Hour line but an Azimuthal Section; I mean
the Section of the said Plane, with a Circle that then passes over your head
throu' the body of the Sun; so that if one of these Lines should Bear (suppose)
almost SE, and be figured with 10 in the morning, Draw but your String from the
Zenith, over that Bearing, or Point of the Compass in the Horizon of your
Globe, and it will truly represent the said shade or Line on your Plane; for it
show's it to be 10 of the Clock on the Parallel belonging to the said 10th of
April: But since your String cuts also on your Globe (v. g.) the Tropic of at a
little before 9, and the Tropic of at almost half an hour past 10, you may
conclude that this will be the true time of the Day on the 11 of December, and
11 of June, though the shade of the Perpendicular style still show's 10 a clock
at the aforesaid Bearing, let the Season of the year be what it will; therefore
a Dial thus made must be false.

Of several ingenious and humorsome Dials.
HAving thus run throu' all Planes, I shall at present show you how to make use
of the former Principles, as to the ready Describing of several ingenious and
humorsome Dials, for all are now in a manner but Corollaries from what we have
already said, and consequently easy both in Speculation and Practice.

OPERATION XXVI* How to make a Dial on any Plane whose style shall be an Arrow
fixed casually on it.
EXamine what the Plane is, and having found it to be, suppose, The
Construction:
a Vertical one Declining 40 Degrees Eastward, describe by your page 89.
former Rules: such a Dial on Paper with the Paper style F x, M. (as in Scheme
31.) exactly set, and mounted; then draw on the Plane an Horizontal Line H h,
and place on it your said Paper draught so, that the 12 a clock Line FP may
fall at right Angles on the said Horizontal line. Lastly, move your Draught
along it, till some part of F x or Indicating side of the style, (suppose the
Point A) just touches the Top or most prominent Part of the Arrow, and fixing
there the said Draught, if you draw fair Lines on your Plane under those on the
Paper, the said Arrow will always show you the Hour with its Top.

The Reason is plain: for you see by the said Top's just touching The
Demonstration.
the Edge, or Indicating side of the Paper-stile, it has the effect of the Top
of AB, I mean the Top of a Perpendicular falling from the said side on the
Sub-stile, so that X the Top of XM (both in the present Scheme and also in
Scheme. page 94.
18. or Example of a Declining Plane) has this Effect also. Now since the Top
of AB or XM or of any other Perpendicular, that falls from the Indicating side
XF on the substile FM will perform the Office of the style (as we showed you at
large in Demonstration of the page 75.
first Horizontal Dial or first Example,) it must necessarily follow, that A
the Arrow's Top does the like.

OPERATION XXVII. How to make a Dial to show the Hour without a style on any
Plane.
DEscribe (as in Scheme 32.) a Dial on P the given Plane, and erect for the
present a true style (as FAB) of Paper or the like, then fixing a Glass or any
other transparent matter (suppose G) at what distance you please, before the
said given Plane and Parallel to it, mark where A the Top of the Style just
touches the said Glass; and if there you paint a little Asterisk or spot, it
will (as often as the Sun shines) describe such another Figure (at suppose D)
by its shade on the said Plane P, and move also from Hour Line to Hour Line,
according to the true time of the day.

The reason of this is also Evident; for, if A the top of the real
Demonstration.
Style show's the Hour by casting a Shade (as we showed you all along) on the
Hour Lines, then the Asterisk being there painted where the said Top touches
the Glass, must do the like; for it is, you see, the Stile's Apex or Top, and
consequently casts a true shade to know the Hour by.

This Dial serves not only for all double Windows, or for Cavities The
Advantage or use of this Dial.
that have over them any Glass or Transparent matter, but shows us how to make
one for any Plane, that is illuminated by a Ray coming throu' a Hole, since if
you describe the Planes proper Dial on Paper, and move it duly (as before) on
the said Plane, 'till the Style, or (if that be too short) 'till a Thread drawn
along its Indicating side, touches the Hole, it will give you marks for the
drawing the fair and standing Hour Lines of your Plane, which the said Ray will
daily run over in order, and consequently show you from time to time the Hour;
for the Ray passing (as you see) throu' the Hole (v. g.) at A, and falling on
the true Hour Line at D, performs what A, the Apex of the true Style (FAB)
would do.

OPERATION XXVIII. How to describe a Dial, having a Picture of a Man in it,
that shall Point to the Hour from time to time with his Finger.
THIS Dial is on several Planes of Mr. Lines his forementioned Pile in Whitehal
Garden; and as no Dial can be more useful, so perchance none ever struck the
Fancy, both of the Ignorant and Learned, with a more sudden Admiration than
this, as I have often found by Experience, both in England, and elsewhere. Nor
truly can it but surprise one at first to think, that a Picture (without a
Machine or Movement) should have his Finger ever on the Hour, and as duly
attend the Sun's motion, as if he were alive; I say, this cannot but surprise
one, and yet this very Dial is as easy to be made, as any of the former.

Suppose then (as in Scheme 33) that the Plane given you The Construction.
were that of the Vertical Cavity, a b c d, lying directly South; describe
therefore on the Glass (ABCD) the contrary Dial, i. e. a Direct North Dial,
with a Paper Style truly mounted; and placing the said Glass over the Plane,
and Parallel to it, see where the Style just touches the said Plane, and at that
point (suppose E) let the top of the Pictures Finger be painted; then throwing
away your Paper Style, and now (by the Help of a handsome Frame or the like)
fixing there your Glass, all its painted Hour Lines (by hindering the Sun's
Passage or Light) will project so many Dark Lines on you Plane, whilst the then
true one falls directly on the Man's Finger, and consequently shows you what a
Clock it is.

For if there were a Hole that passed at E ( the Top of the Demonstration.
Man's Fingers) throu' the Center of the World to our Antipodes, it necessary
follows (by the Reasons in our former Operation) that at 10 of the Clock,
(suppose) at night, the Sun (being then Northward) must cast its Rays throu'
the said Hole or top of the Finger, on the 10 a Clock Line of this North Dial
on the Glass; but since at 10 a Clock in the morning, the Sun is in the same
Plane as he was at 10 at night (only his Station is contrary) therefore he must
now cast the Shade of the Hour Line the contrary way, i. e. on the Man's Finger;
for, in the day time the Hour-line is between the Sun and the Finger, whereas
in the night time the Finger or Hole is between him and the Hour-Line.

This Dial needs not always be made on a Glass, for it is sufficient Another
Dial of the same nature.
if you raise a thin Frame (aaaa in Scheme 34.) on the Pillars bbbb, above P
your Plane, as high as the Glasse's true Station or Place, for then you may
cross the said Frame with small Strings or Wyars, which will by their
interposition cast the same shade as the Hour Lines of the Glass would have
done; so that if the Figures belonging to the said Lines be put on the Frame,
at the end of each corresponding Wyar, and then pierced, the Sun Beams passing
throu' their Cavities, will distinguish each very perfectly on the Plane.

Tho I have not time to show you all the particulars of this Learned Man's rare
Invention in Dialling; (for most of the Dials on the aforesaid Pile may be
naturally and expeditely described by the help of this Globe) yet I will give
you two more, viz. the two following ones, because, besides their prettiness,
we may have use of them, as you shall see by and by.

OPERATION XXIX. To make a Dial by which a Blind man may constantly know the
Hour.
YOU must first get made in Brass the Armillary Hemisphere The construction.
ABCDE (as in Scheme 35) 8 Inches, suppose in Diameter, representing your Globe
cut throu' the Horizon; but the said Hemisphere is not to have any thing solid
remaining, besides the Horizon ABCE with the Pieces of the Hour Circles (1234,
etc) that reach to it from the Nadir, or rather from the Tropic of Capricorn
AFC on the Northernside, for the Southerly Circles are superfluous. Then having
placed the said Hemisphere directly North and South, as your Globe stands when
Composed, fix G a Glass Bowl of clear water 4 Inches in Diameter (i. e. half
the former) in the midst or center of it; for the Sun's Beams passing throu'
the Water will contract in a Point, and ever burn at (suppose H) the true
Hour-Circle; so that if a Blind-man puts but his Hand on the said Brazen Hour
Circles, he will soon find by the Heat where the Sun marks, and consequently
tell you the Hour; for he may easily feel how far it is from the middlemost
Hour Circle, I mean the 12 a Clock Circle or Meridian.

As for the Reason of this Operation, it is presently conceived; The
Demonstration.
for when the Sun is over against (suppose) the 5 a Clock Hour Circle on the
South Side of the Dial, he must needs be over against the same Hour on the
Northside, both hours making but one Circle; Now since the Center of the Bowl
(by being in the Center of the Hemisphere) is in the Plane of all the Hour
Circles, and since (according to the nature of Refraction) all Parallel Rays of
the Sun, passing throu' a Sphere of Water, are (where they meet with the Direct
Ray, that passes throu' the said Center) contracted into a point, viz. on the
opposite side, at the distance of half its Diameter, or two Inches according to
our present Example; I say, seeing this, it must needs follow, that at 5 of the
Clock, the Sun will burn on the corresponding Hour-Circle, and if so, then a
Blind-man (by feeling the Heat, and finding its distance from 12) must needs be
able to tell you the true time of the Day.

OPERATION XXX. To make a Dial to show the Hour when the Sun shines not.
PRepare a Blew Glass Bowl, (as in Scheme 36th) and describe The Construction.
on it (with their Respective Figures) all the Hour-Circles of the Globe, or as
many as you think fit; then fixing it where you intend, and composing it truly
by your Globe, if you place your self so at some Distance, that (a little Hole
being made at each Pole, to wit at P p) you may see quite throu' the Bowl,
'twill follow that the Hour-Circle (suppose A, which the Sun's Picture appears
on) will be the true time of the Day. I call this to know what a Clock it is
when the Sun shines not, because now the least faint Appearance of him serves
the turn, though it be not enough to cast any shadow; nay let the Sun be quite
covered, and if you can but guess (by the Adjacent Brightness,) whereabout he
is, you will be able to guess the Hour without any sensible Error; for the said
Brightness appearing on the Bowl will be proportionably distant from the Sun's
true place there, as it is from the Sun in the Heavens.

It Is clear that the Suns Picture must fall (if any where) on the Demonstration.
true Hour-Circle, because (by Composing the Bowl according to the true
Position of the Heavens) the Hour-Circles of the one concur with the other, and
fall exactly in the same Plane; therefore were your Eye in the Center of the
Bowl, its true Hour Circle, ( i. e. that which corresponds with the time of the
Day,) would be just interposed between your Eye and the Sun; but since the
whole Axis is the common Section of the Hour-Circles, let your Eye be but in
any part of it, the same Interposition must happen; so that seeing the Suns Ray
(by reason of the Blew Color) penetrates not the Glass, his Picture must needs
be on the outside of it, where the said Ray would have otherways past; Now the
Ray that goes from your Eye throu' the two Holes being the Axis, therefore
whilst your Eye remains in this Posture, it will follow that wheresoever you
see the Suns Picture on the Glass, there his place must be, and consequently
his said Picture must show the Hour.

OPERATION XXXI. How to make an Horizontal Concave Dial by the Globe, and
Geometrically also.
COmpose so your Globe in the Concavity given (suppose The Construction.
BAC in Scheme 37.) that A the Center of the said concavity shall concur with
the Center of the said Globe; then drawing your String over each necessary hour
Circle on the Globe to the sides of the Concavity, mark as many Points, as
shall be convenient for the Describing the corresponding hour Circles, and the
Pin (AD) erected in the Nadir at D as high as the said Center A, I mean a Pin
equal to the Semi-diameter of the Concavity, will with its Top always show you
the hour.

Tho the former way be impracticable when the Hole is less The Geometrical way.
than the Globe, yet it serves to illustrate and make easy the Geometrical
Operation; for you have nothing (you see) to do, but to draw hour Circles
within as you would without, were the said Concavity a whole Sphere, and then
the Top of its Semi-Diameter (i. e. the point which lies in the Center A) will
perform the Styles The Demonstration.
part; for since the Sun is every Hour (as we have before showd you) in the
same Plane of the true hour Circle, and since A the Top of the Semi-Diameter
(being in the Center of the Concavity,) is part of the Axis (or Common Section
of all the Hour-Circles) it follows, that its Shadow must fall on the true Hour.

OPERATION XXXII. How to describe Geometrically a Cieling Dial.
SEeing the Glass (which reflects the Suns Rays to show us the Hour) is
commonly fixed in the corners and by-places of Windows, the Globe can seldom be
so well ordered (by reason of its Bulk) as to help us in the Construction of
this Dial, therefore I shall only give you the Geometrical way, which is (as I
take it) both short and new; and because these Dials have commonly the Windows
(or inlets for the Sun) Southerly, for otherwise they will show but very few
hours, we will suppose ours also in the following Example to stand thus, and
afterward you shall see the difference between such a Dial, and those whose
Windows have another Aspect.

First make on any Past-board, Trencher, etc. an Horizontal The Construction.
Dial, as in Scheme 38. and fix in O its Center a Thread of a good Length, to
wit OP; then fasten the said Dial so with a Nail to a Long Masons Ruler, that
its Fiducial edge (KL) may lie upon the Meridian or 12 a Clock Line, and having
cemented and placed Level a piece of Looking Glass (of the bigness of a Three
pence) in the Window, or what convenient place else you please of your Chamber,
(which we will suppose to be G) find by the Plumet AE the Point A in the Cieling
(WXYZ) being the point (in Scheme 39.) directly over the said G, and draw
throu' it a Meridian line, viz. the Line AL.

In the next place, fix one end of a piece of Packthred on G the Center of the
Glass, and the other on some point of your Meridian line in such manner that it
make an Angle with it of 51. 30. i. e. the Angle of the Elevation, which may be
easily performed by the application of the side of a Quadrant to the said
extended Packthread, and when it is right, let the Point thus found in your
Meridian line be called B. Lastly, take the distance between the aforesaid
Points A and B, and marking it, suppose at C, on the edge of your Ruler from O,
the Center, (or fastening of the Horizontal) place so the said Rulers Fiducial
edge (KCL) along the Meridian line on the Cieling, that the point C may lie
just on A, and all is done; for then if you draw but the Thread OP straight over
each Hour-line of the Horizontal, it shows you where you are to draw all the
fair Lines of the required Dial.

Sch. 40.


As for the truth of this The Demonstration.
Dial, it appears (in Scheme 40.) by the right Angle Triangles OGH and GHF,
where HF is part of HM, a supposed Meridian line on the Floor, under that in
the Cieling, G the Station of the Glass in the Window, H the Point under the
said Station, as formerly A was the Point over it, and to facilitate the
Demonstration, let us imagine GH equal to GA, i. e. that the Glass lies in the
middle, between the Floor and Cieling; This being so, suppose that GH (instead
of representing a Perpendicular Line in the Wall (as here we conceive it) had
been a Perpendicular Stick, and that you were to describe an Horizontal Dial on
the Floor, whose Style was to be the said Stick; I say supposing this, you must
(you know) to perform the Operation, produce the Meridian Line MH to suppose N,
and fastening a String on G, find in it the Point ( v. g.) O for the Center of
the Dial, (I mean a Point, to which a String being extended from G, makes with
the Meridian (OH) the Angle of the Elevation) and so draw the several
Hour Lines from the said O according to their respective Angles and Distances;
all which is expressed at large in the third page 73.
Scheme or first Horizontal Dial; for there (you see) GH is a Perpendicular
Style, showing the Hour with its top, and that O is the Center of the Dial,
having a Line drawn to it from G making the Angle of the Elevation with the
Meridian OH: Now since O in our present case is a point without the Chamber and
consequently the Line MH cannot be produced to it, you must draw your Thread
from G to the said Meridian Line (HM) within the Chamber, and find in it the
Point F, to wit the Point where the said Thread GF makes with it an Angle equal
to that of the Elevation, for thereby you will have the distance of O, your
true Center from H, as being the distance of F from H, seeing the side GH is
common, and the Angles in both Triangles equal: This being so, if you put out
of the Chamber an Horizontal Dial whose Center shall lie on O, and its Meridian
Line concur with HF, it is but producing all its Hour Lines on the Floor, and
it must necessarily follow that G the Top of the Perpendicular Style, will show
you truly the time of the Day; But by Construction all the hour lines are thus
drawn on the Cieling, and consequently are exactly over the supposed ones on
the Floor, Ergo, the Reflext Ray from G must as truly show you the Hour above,
as the Direct Ray below; for both Rays are ever in the same Plane.

Nor is there to be any real Difference in the Operation though How this Dial is
to be made when the windows lie not Southward.
the Chamber-window should look another way; for you are only to remember, that
whilst it enjoys the least Point of South, the Center of your Dial is without
the Chamber, when it looks full East or West it is in the side or edges of it,
and when it verges Northward, it is altogether within; so that in a full
Southern Aspect, the said Center will be most abroad, and in a full Northern
one the Contrary; all which plainly appears to any one, that will consider an
Horizontal Dial truly placed (having a Perpendicular for its Style) if he draws
over the Hour Lines, a Line that shall represent the aforesaid side of your
Chamber according to its Position and Site.

OPERATION XXXIII. To make a compound Dial to wit, one containing several
useful Operations.
INnumerable are the ingenious Dials that may be invented, but since we have
been long enough on this Subject, either for my Reader's Speculation or
Curiosity, I will now conclude, and that with a Recapitulation or summing up of
much of what we have already said, by showing the Fabric of a Compound Dial;
that is to say, one that contains many useful Operations, besides the Hour; for
nothing rubs up the Memory more efficatiously, or makes us more Masters of our
Rules, than a Practical Example.

The said Dial shows as follows.
1. The Hour with us at all times. 2. The Hour in what other Countries you
please. 3. The Sun's Place in each Sign. 4. The Day of the Month. 5. The time
of the Sun's Rising and Setting. 6. The Sun's Amplitude. 7. The Sun's Height.
8. The Sun's Azimuth. 9. The Sun's Bearing according to the Points of the
Compass. 10. The Proportion between Perpendiculars and their Shadows, and
consequently the height of any Tower or the like.
To make then this Dial, you must first describe an Horizontal The Construction
of it, as to the Hour at home.
(as in Sch. 41.) about a Foot in Diameter, and let B the Center of the Plane
be the Point, where an Erect, or Upright Style (according to our Directions in
the page 73.
first Horizontal;) shows you with its Top the Hour. Now because the Shade of
an Upright Style, unless it be very short, will presently fall out of the
Plane, as well in the Morning as toward Night, therefore it will be convenient
to have your Cock or Style made so, that AB the Perpendicular or forepart of
it (as in Scheme 42.) should stand at B the said Center of the Plane, to
represent this upright Style, and its Angle AOB at O the Center of the Dial, or
Point from whence all the Hour Lines are drawn; for thus the side OA (making
with the Meridian line at O, the Angle of the Elevation) represents the Axis of
the World, and consequently casts its shadow on the Hour Lines, as the usual
Cocks of all Horizontal Dials do. The Construction of it as to the Hour in
other places.


2. Having chosen all the Places, which you desire from time to time to know
what a Clock it is at, consider well your Globe, and find under what
Hour-Circles the said Places lie; as for Example, suppose Rome lies under the
11 a Clock Hour-Circle, Constantinople under that of 10, Aleppo 9, etc. Place
therefore the said Towns toward the Limb of your Dial, under the corresponding
Hour Lines, and you will constantly know the time of the Day in the said
Places; for calling it always Noon at each Place you seek after, you have
nothing to do but to count the Hours from thence to the shade of the Style; as
v. g. If it be 4 a Clock with you in the afternoon, and you would know the Hour
at Aleppo, let Aleppo be 12, and counting from thence (1. 2. 3. etc.) 'till you
come to the Hour of the Day, (I mean the Hour then shown you by the Shade,) you
will find it to be 7 a Clock there; for Aleppo is (you see) three hours
Eastward of you; now had the Hour with you been 4 in the morning, you must have
counted backwards, as 11, 10, 9, 8, and consequently you would have found it
there 8 in the morning. In this manner then you must operate all along.

3ly. and 4ly, Find by your Globe exactly the Sun's height every To find the
Suns place and day of the Month.
hour at his Entrance into each Sign, then take by the help of your Sector (AB,
the Erect Style in Scheme 42. being Radius) the Tangent Complements of the
Heights, and putting one Foot of your Compasses on your Dial at B, make Pricks
or Marks in each corresponding Hour-line accordingly; that is to say, if the
Sun be high (suppose) 50 Degrees at 12 of the Clock, when he enters or, then
take the Tangent of 40 and prick that distance in the Meridian line, viz. From
B to f; and if his height at 1 and 11 a Clock be ( v. g.) 48 degrees, take the
Tangent of 42, and prick that distance in the 11 and 1 a Clock lines, viz. from
B to h and g, and when you have gone thus over all the Hour Lines, no sooner
will the Sun come into or but the Shade of the Point or Apex of the Style AB
will fall every hour on the aforesaid Pricks, and consequently show you the
Suns place in the Ecliptic. In like manner you must do with the rest of the
Signs, and then with the 10th Degree of every Sign, placing still the Character
of each Sign about the Limb of your Dial, near the last mark or Prick belonging
to it. This being done, see by your Globe what day of the month corresponds
with each Sign, and what with their Subdivisions, and if you mark this (as the
said 41th Scheme shows you) on both sides of the Meridian, then the said Pricks
will (by the help of the Shade of the top of AB) show you also the day of the
month. I mention here Pricks not only as an easier way, but a better way than
Lines; for besides the great difficulty of drawing them, they embarras and
confound a Dial very much, especially if there be many of them; whereas the
said Pricks are never out of an Hour-line, and consequently take up no new
room. Now to avoid Confusion and Mistakes, I would have the said Pricks of 3
sorts at least, for if one Row were (v. g.) Astericks and another Crosses, and
a 3d Plain Pricks, you would then know at first sight, to what Sign or Day of
the month any of them belongs.

5ly. Instead of troubling you with deviding the Circle To find the Rising and
Setting of the Sun.
GKLT (the upper part of the Border of the Dial) for the finding out the time
of the Suns Rising and Setting, you need only consult the Days of the Month on
your Globe, first, when He rises earliest, Secondly, when He rises at 4 a
Clock, Thirdly, when at 4; Fifthly, when at 5; and in the like Proportion go
on, till the Days come to their greatest Decrease, and putting the said days of
the Month in Order (as they are in the Scheme) under the corresponding Hours on
the morning side of your Dial for his Rising, do the like for his Setting on
the Evening side of it, and you may perform the Operation with sufficient
Exactness. In like manner you are to proceed for the Quarters, half Quarters,
etc. if you would have them expressed.

6ly. To avoid also the trouble of deviding the Circle To find the Suns
Amplitude.
(...) according to the Suns Diurnal Increment and Decrement in Amplitude, you
need only find by your Globe, what the said Amplitude amounts to on every of
the aforementioned Days (which are marked on your Dial for the Suns Rising and
Setting) and then put it in Figures under each Day, as the Scheme shows you.

7ly. Open your Compasses at the Tangent of 28 Degrees (AB To find the Height
of the Sun.
being the Radius) and putting one Foot on B describe the Circle XYZ,
afterward describe another according to the Tangent of 35 Degrees, then a
third, according to that of 40, and so on in the same Proportion as far as your
Plane permits. Now if you mark these Circles with the Figures of the Complement
of their Degrees, that is to say the Circle of 28 Degrees with the Figure 62,
that of 35 with 55, that of 40 with 50, etc. you will always know the height of
the Sun; for what Circle soever the Shade of AB touches with its Top, that will
be the required Height; and if it falls between 2 Circles, it is but considering
which of them it comes nearest to, and then you may guess at the Height with
sufficient exactness.

8ly, and 9ly. Devide one of these Circles viz. SEWN into To find the Suns
Azimuth and Bearing.
Degrees, and under each 11 Degree and, place the several Points of the Pixidis
Nauticae, or Mariners Compass in the Order as they are expressed in our said
Scheme, and you will not only have (by the Shade of AB) the Suns Azimuth at all
times, but see also how he bears from you according to the Points of the
Compass; and if the Shade be at any time too short, lay on it but a Ruler,
Label of Paper or the like, and that will truly lengthen the said Shade, and
resolve your Question.

10thly. Devide AF the Northern half of the Meridian, as To find the Proportion
of Perpendiculars to their Shades.
many times as you can by the Style or Radius AB, and then each Devision into
ten equal parts (as you see it done in the said Scheme) and by it you will know
at all times the Proportion between any Perpendicular and its Shade, and
consequently, (besides many other things) the height of any Tower, Tree or the
like, for having found the Sun to be (suppose) 25 Degrees high, and that the
Circle of Altitude cuts the Linc AF in the 22 Devision, if therefore you
measure the Shade of your Tower, and finding it (for Examples sake) to be 66
Yards long, you have what you seek; for as the said 22 is to 10 (the Styles
height) so is 66 the length of the Shade to 30 the height of the Tower.

So much then for the Construction of Dials. And now let me desire all those
that are pleased to follow this Geometrical way (which perchance is as expedite
a one, and as free from blind Lines as can be,) not to rest satisfied till they
fully comprehend what they do; for the Mechanical way of Dialling is as soon
lost as learnt, it being impossible (without continual Practice) not to forget
the Rules, especially if one can make many Dials; when as a man that
understands the reason of the Operations (by having in his Head a true Idea of
the Sphere and its Projection) will 20 years after without Memorandums or
Notes, be able (reflecting but a little) to make not only all Dials he formerly
knew, but new ones also at first fight.

To Conclude, I here present my Reader with the Globe in a new Dress, for being
painted or stained on Marble (according to Sch. 43.) 'twill be fit for any
Garden or open Portico; and least it might appear too plain, the corners of its
Base or Pedestal may be adorned with handsome well turned Branches, which not
only embellish the whole Machin by their Make, But hold out Bowls of Glass and
Wyar for use also.

For on the First Corner, to wit, That marked with A, there is The description
of the Branches or Embellishments in Sheme 43.
placed (as a Rarity.) The blind man's p. 111.
Dial. On the Second marked with B. The p. 112.
Dial that shows the Hour, when the Sun shines not, which will be often very
useful. On the third, marked with C, there is an Armillary Wire Sphere having a
Vane on the Top, that continually shows on the brass Plane within (graduated
and Nautically Charactered) from what Quarter the Wind exactly blows; as also,
(if you turn the said Vane into the Plane of the Sun) his Azimuth and Bearing.
Besides, the Sphere (being an Horizontal Concave Dial) shows the Hour too; for
the Shade of the Pin's top in the Center ever falls on the true Hour-Circle,
as I showed in the vid. p. 113.
Construction of such a Dial. And by the way you must know this Branch stands
not in it is true place in the Scheme; I mean on the third Corner of the Base,
because in Perspective 'twill fall on the Globe it self, and consequently not
appear well to the Eye in a Picture. Lastly, on the fourth Corner marked with D
there is another Glass Bowl of the former Dimension, containing orderly all the
Constellations, and remarkable Stars, and therefore, if you know the Hour, it
will compose the said Bowl or Globe, and so represent the then position of the
Heavens; but (tho you are Ignorant of the Hour) if you see a known Star, and
move the Bowl on its Axis, till the painted star on it lies just between your
Eye and the Real one, you have the Hour, and consequently may know (the Globe
being now Composed) any Star or Constellation above the Horizon; for the Axis
of this Bowl having one end pointing directly to the North Pole, and the other
fixed in the Center of a Rundle containing on its Limb the Days of each Month,
fitted to the right Ascension of the Stars, and moving also on a Plane divided
into 24 equal parts, figured with the hours of a Natural Day, 'twill follow
that the Day of the Month (when the Globe is Composed) must lie on the true
Hour, as the true Hour move'd to the Day of the Month must Compose the Globe,
as is before hinted. These short directions are sufficient for any
Mathematician, or Instrument-Maker; and as for the Branch it self, it is (as you
see) not in its true Place for the above mentioned Reason.

J. Moxon To the Reader.
HAving Courteous Reader p. 71.
engaged to show you the Problems and Operations on the Sector, which the Noble
Author supposes every one (that studies the Geometrical way of Dialling) to
know, I shall here begin.

I. Upon a Line given (AB) to erect (CD) a Perpendicular.


IF there be a Point (as C) given in (AB) the Line on which the Perpendicular
is to fall, Mark on both sides of the said Point (with your Compass) the
equidistant Points M and N, then opening them at pleasure, put one foot on M
and describe the blind Arch OF, and putting the other Foot in N, describe the
blind Arch GH, and the fair line from (D) their Intersection to the Point C,
will be the Perpendicular required. Now if you have no Point assigned (in the
said Line (AB) to terminate your Perpendicular by take two Points there at
pleasure, as suppose M and N, and opening how you will your Compasses, describe
the blind Arches OF and GH above your Line, and OP and QR below it, and the
Intersections of these Arches (to wit, D and S) will be two points to draw your
Perpendicular by.

II. Upon (C) the end of (AC) a given Line, to draw (DC) a Perpendicular.


OPEN your Compasses at a convenient width, and putting one Foot on C, let the
other (within reach of AC) mark any where, as at F: then touching or cutting
from thence the said AC (with the moving Foot of your Compasses) at, suppose,
E, and describing on the other side of F the blind Arch GH, lay your Ruler on
FE, and it will cut the said Arch, at, suppose D, so that DC will be the
required Perpendicular.

III. A Line (AB) being given how to draw (DG) a Parallel to it.


HAVING taken two points in the said Line, as suppose A and B, open your
Compasses at what width you please, and putting one foot on A, describe the
blind Arch CDE, and putting one foot on B describe the blind Arch FGH, then if
you lay your Ruler on the highest part or greatest Extuberancy of the said
Arches, to wit on the Points D and G, the Line so drawn will be the required
Parallel.

IV. To describe a true Square.


AB being a Line as long as the side of the Square you design, erect on the end
A, the Perpendicular DA of the former length; then taking between your
Compasses the said AB, put one foot on D, and describe the blind arch OF, and
again putting one foot on B, describe the blind arch GH, to cut OF, and if from
their Intersection C, you draw the fair lines CB and CD, you have a true Square.

V. To draw an Oblong, or (as they commonby call it) a Long Square.


AB being the longest side of this Square, erect on the end A, the Perpedicular
DA, of the length of the shortest; then taking between your Compasses, the line
AB, put one foot on D, and describe the blind arch OF: and taking between your
Compasses the line AD, describe the blind arch GH, to cut the said OF, and if
from their Intersection C, you draw the fair lines CB and CD, you have the
Square you design.

VI. To Describe an equilateral Triangle, or an Isosceles.


OPEN your Compasses at AB, being the side of the Triangle you design, and
putting one foot on A, describe the blind Arch OF, and again putting one foot
on B, describe the blind Arch GH to cut the said OF, and if from their
Intersection C, you draw the fair lines CA, and CB, you have a true equilateral
Triangle; Nor is there any difference in the Description of the Isosceles ASB,
for the only difference between them is, that the sides AS and BS of the
Isosceles are longer (or if you please they may be shorter) than the Base AB,
whenas all three sides are equal in the equilateral Triangle.

VII. To make a Triangle of three given Lines.


SUPPOSE the first line given be AB, the second AC, the third BC, and that you
are to make a Triangle of them: let AB be the Base, and taking the given line
AC between your Compasses, put one foot on the Base at A, and describe the
Blind Arch OF, then taking the given line BC, between your compasses, put one
foot on the Base at B, and describe the Blind Arch GH, to cut the said Arch OF,
and if you draw lines, from their Intersection at C, to A and B, on the
aforesaid Base, you have your intent.

VIII. To describe an Oval.


CROSS RP at right Angles with IM, and taking with your Compasses (on the said
lines from the intersection O) equal distances, to wit, OA, OB, OC, and OD, and
draw through the point C, the lines AK and BH, each equal to twice AC, as also
throu' D the lines AN and BL, each equal to twice BC, then A and B being
Centers, describe the Arches KPM, and HLR; in like manner C and D being
Centers, describe the Arches HIK, and LMN, and the figure thus drawn will be a
perfect Oval.



Of the Sector.
So much for the Geometrical Problems necessary for Dialling, and as for the
Instrumental ones, i. e. those performed by the Sector, they are, as I may say,
of two sorts, some belonging to one side of it, and some to the other; for the
side marked with L is divided into 100 equal parts, and called the LINE of
LINES, and the side marked with S, the LINE of SINES. First then of the LINE of
LINES, which by the way, though it be divided (as I said) but into 100 parts, may
yet stand for 1000, if you fancy every 10 Divisions a Line of 100 parts, and in
like manner it will stand for 10000 parts, if every division be deemed 100,
therefore a Line (v. g.) of 75 equal parts, may be expressed by 75 of those
Divisions, or by 7 or by.

The Use of the LINE of LINES marked with L.
I. To divide a Line into any number of equal parts.
SUPPOSE your Line were to be divided in 23 equal parts, take it between your
Compasses, and opening your Sector, place one foot of your said Compasses on
the 23 division of the Sector, and the other foot on the 23 over against it,
and the distance between the Figures 1 and 1* on the said Sector will give you
one equal Division of your Line, and the distance between 2 and 2, will give
you two equal Divisions of it, and in this manner proceed till you quite run
over it, as you design.

II. To find the proportion between any two Lines.
SET over the greater Line at 100, and 100 on the Sector, then taking the
lesser between your Compasses, find where it will be just set over also, or lie
parallel to the former, which happening suppose at 50 and 50, you may conclude,
that the Proportion required, is as 100 to 50.

III. To divide a Line as any other Line proposed is divided; that is to say,
according to any Proportion.
SUppose you saw a Line, containing 65 equal parts of the Sector divided into
three pieces, the first containing five equal parts of the Sector, the other
fifteen, so that the last must be 45; then suppose you would divide (after this
proportion) another Line, containing but thirteen equal parts of the Sector;
Open your Compasses at 13, or length of the Line to be divided, and putting it
over at 65, and 65 on the Sector, the Parallel at 5 and 5 will be the first
division of the Line to be divided, and one equal part of the Sector in value;
the Parallel at 15 and 15 will be the second, and three equal parts in value;
and the remainder (being 9 in value,) will be the third; and thus you may do in
all other cases.

IV. To increase or diminish a Line in any Proportion.
SUppose the Proportion were as 4 to 7, take the Line given between your
Compasses, and setting it over on your Sector, at the Figures 4 and 4, the
distance from 7 to 7 will be a Line encreast (in respect of the given one) as
is the Proportion of 4 to 7; In like manner you must do, if any other
Proportion were required.

Now if you would diminish a Line as is 7 to 4, put over the Line given at 7
and 7, and the distance of 4 and 4 is the required proportion.

V. Two Lines being given, to find a Third Proportional.
FIND by your Compasses how many parts of the equal Divisions of your Sector
will measure both your given Lines, so that supposing the one to contain 10
parts, and the other 20, set the second Line (i. e. the Line 20) over at 10,
and 10 on the Sector, and the distance or Parallel at 20, and 20 on the Sector,
will be 40, the required Proportional.

VI. Three Lines being given, to find a Fourth Proportional.
THE value of the Lines being found as before, and supposing the first to be
10, the second 20, the third 30, put over the second Line (to wit, 20) at 10
and 10. (the value of the first Line) and the distance or Parallel at 30 and
30. (or value of the third Line) will be 60, the required Proportional.

Of the Use of the LINE of SINES, marked with S.


I. How to find the Sine of any Angle, according to any Radius.
SUppose the Sine of the Angle you require be 50, take the Radius between your
Compasses, and put it over at the extremity of the Sector, that is to say, at
90 and 90, and the Parallel at 50 and 50 will be the Sine of 50 Degrees,
according to that Radius.

II. How to find the Chord of any Arch.
SUppose you would have the Chord of an Arch of 50 Degrees, open your Compasses
at the length of the given Radius, and put it over at 90 and 90, then take with
your said Compasses the Parallel, at the Figures 25 and 25 on the Sector, (i.
e. at the Figures of half the Degrees given) and prick or measure it twice upon
any straight Line, and that will be the required Chord.

III. How to make an Angle of any value, as also how to find the value of any
Angle already drawn.


SUppose you are to make an Angle of 50 Degrees, draw a Line, as (for Example
sake) AD, and taking any Point in it, as B, open your Compasses to a convenient
Radius, and put one Foot on B, and describe the blind Arch CF, then taking
between your Compasses the Chord of 50, according to the Radius of the said
Arch, put one Foot on C, and the other marking at suppose E, draw the Line BE,
and you have the required Angle, to wit, the Angle EBC. But if the Angle you
would make be above 90 Degrees, as suppose 130, make the Angle of its
Supplement, viz. the Angle of 50 as before, and the Angle on the other side,
viz. EBA will be the Angle you look for:

Here therefore you see how to find the value of any Angle already drawn, as
suppose the Angle EBC, since it is but describing a blind Arch, as CF, and
setting over (on the Sector) the Radius of the said Arch at 90 and 90; for if
you observe where the measure of this Arch (viz. C. E) marks a Parallel on the
Sector, as before, the Figures there (to wit, 25) being doubled (and amounting
consequently to 50) will be the required Angle.

As for the Tangent and Secant of any number of Degrees, the Noble Author has
himself showd you how to find them at page 71. and so gentle Reader having
finished my promise, I bid you Farewell.

SECT. VI. Of the STARS.
AS for the Stars, it is not my set business to meddle with them, nor is there
any Instrument that so naturally resolves all the usual Questions concerning
them, as the Celestial Globe; for there things appear as they do in the
Heavens themselves; But because such a Globe is not always at hand, I will show
you how its most necessary Operations may (in case of necessity) be performed,
even by our present Globe, and then I shall treat of the Pedestal, on which all
the appearing Stars are truly projected.

The usual and most necessary Operations of the Celestial Globe in relation to
the Stars are these.
1. To find the Declination of any Star. 2. To find the Right Ascension of any
Star. 3. To find the difference between the Suns Right Ascension, and that of
any Star, or the difference between the Right Ascensions of any two Stars. 4.
To find the true place of any Star on the Globe, i. e. the Point that
corresponds there, with its then Place in the Heavens. 5. To find the Bearing
of any Star according to the Points of the Compass. 6. To take the height of
any Star you see. 7. To find the height of any Star by the Hour though unseen. 8.
To find the Azimuth of any Star. 9. To find how many Hours any Star stays above
or below the Horizon. 10. To find when any Star rises or sets. 11. To find what
a Clock it is by any Star. 12. To know the name of any Star you see.
OPERATION I. To find the Declination of any Star.
AS for the Declension of the Stars, since the Celestial Globe and other
Instruments, that show their motions, perform this Operation by their make (for
on them the Stars are always placed, according to their respective Declensions)
we shall require here a proportionable Concession, viz. That in some of the
vacant parts of our Globe there may be a little Table, containing the
Declension and Magnitude of the most noted Stars, as also the Degree of the
Ecliptic, which agrees with their respective Right Ascensions: that is to say,
a Table containing their Declension and Magnitude, with the Suns Place in the
Ecliptic, when his and their Right Ascension are the same; and the said Table
may be made in the following manner.

The Table for the Stars.
Mag. Name. Declension. Degrees. Eclip. 1. Bulls Eye. 15 48. 6. 1. Lions Heart. 13
33. 26. 1. Arcturus. 51 4. 2. 2. Little Dog. 6 3. 19. 2. Medusa, or Algol. 39
40. 13.

And so for as many as the Globe maker thinks fit to express.

OPERATION II. To find the Right Ascension of any Star, v. g. of the Lion's
Heart.
HAving found by the Table, that the Lions Heart has the same Right Ascension
with the Sun, when he is in the 26 of, draw your String over that Degree of the
Ecliptic, and it will cut the Equator at almost 148 Degrees, for the Stars
Right Ascension.

OPERATION III. To find the difference between the Suns Right Ascension, and
that of any Star, as also the Difference of the Right Ascensions of any two
Stars.
HAving found by the former Operation, that the Right Ascension of the Lion's
Heart is toward 148 Degrees, and that the Op. 17. Sect. 1. page 19.
Suns (on v. g. the 10 of April) is near 28, the difference (by Substraction)
will appear to be about 120 Degrees, or (by the intermediate Hour Circles) 8
hours. In like manner having found (for example sake) the Little Dogs Right
Ascension, to be about 110 Degrees, the difference between it and that of the
Lions Heart is 38, or 2 hours and a half.

OPERATION IV. To find the Place of any Star on the Globe, i. e. the Point that
corresponds with its then Place in the Heavens.
HAving found by the foregoing Operation, that the difference between the Suns
Right Ascension and the Lions Heart, is about 120 Degrees, or 8 hours,
substract the said hours (for so much the Sun Rises and Sets now before the
Star) from the time given (suppose from 10 at Night) and the remaining 2 hours
shows you, that the Star is at that moment in some part of the Hour-circle of 2
in the afternoon, or thereabouts; so that the Bead rectified to the Stars
Declension, and moved on its Noose from the Pole to the said Hour-Circle,
determins the very Point or Place required, The like may also be performed by
your Compasses opened from the Pole, at the Complement of the Stars Declension.

But here you must remember that the readiest way still to A Memorandum.
find the present place of a Star is by its Almucantar and Azimuth; for where
these Circles intersect, there the Stars then Place will be; and as for the
Almucantar and Azimuth of any Star, they are found by the 6th, and 8th,
Operation of this Section.

OPERATION V. To find the Bearing of a Star at all times.
HAving found the true Place of the Lions Heart by the former Operation, if you
draw your String over it from the Zenith, 'twill cut the Horizon at or about S.
W. for its then Bearing.

OPERATION VI. To take the Almucantar or height of any Star you see.
BEcause Stars cast no shade, you must take their Height as you do the Suns
when he is overcast, and therefore consult the first Operation of the first p.
6.
Section, or the 5th, of the p. 68.
4th. Section.

OPERATION VII. To find the height of a Star at any time, by the hour though
unseen.
THE Hour being ( v. g.) 10 at Night, on the 10 of April, the Suns place is
where his Parallel cuts the 10 a Clock Hour Circle, so that knowing by the
difference of their Right Ascensions that the Lions Heart is ( v. g.) 8 hours
behind the Sun, you may conclude the Star to be somewhere in the Hour-Circle of
2 in the afternoon, to wit, in that Point, which answers to the said Stars
Declension; having therefore its Place, draw but your String from the Zenith
over it, and mounting your Bead to it, if you move your said Bead to the
Meridian or Quadrant of Altitude, 'twill lie on or about the 45th. Degree for
the required Height.

OPERATION VIII. To find the Azimuth of any Star.
FInd but the Lions Heart's Bearing, or his then true Place in the Heavens as
before, and the String will cut the Horizon on its true Azimuth. Now if you see
the Star, you may perform this Operation without any of the former Postulats;
for placing your Globe on a Meridian Line, and holding your String straight
from the Zenith, do but move it in that posture by the direction of your Eye
(as we showed you in the first Op. 5. way 2. p. 10.
Section) till it be in the same Plane with the Star, and the Degrees of the
Horizon under your String, give you the required Azimuth, which will now be
about 45 Degrees Westward.

OPERATION IX. To know how many hours any Star stays above or under the Horizon.
REctify the Bead to the Declension of the Lions Heart, and moving your String
on the Noose from the Pole, till the said Bead touches the Horizon on the West
side, see what Hour-Circle cuts with it there, and you will find it to be that
of 7 and a quarter or thereabouts; and this doubled (making in all some 14
hours and a half) gives the true time of its stay above the Horizon; so 4 and
three quarters doubled (I mean the Hour-Circle which Intersects with it on the
East side) gives you 9 hours and a half for its stay below the Horizon.

OPERATION X. To find when any Star Rises or Sets.
HAving found by the third Operation, the difference between the Suns Right
Ascension and that of the Lions Heart to be 8 hours on the 10th of April; and
having also found by the foregoing Operation, that it Rises where the
Hour-Circle of 4 and 3 quarters cuts the Horizon, and Sets where that of 7 and
a quarter does the like, add the 8 hours difference (because the Star is now so
much behind, or too slow for the Sun) to 4 and 3 quarters, which making 12 and
3 quarters in all, shows that the Star rises at 12 a Clock, and 3 quarters in
the afternoon; and by adding it to the aforesaid 7 and a quarter, that it sets
at 15 and a quarter, to wit, at 3 and a quarter in the morning.

OPERATION. XI. To find what a Clock it is by any Star.
HAving (v. g.) on the 10th. of April found the true place of the Lions Heart,
on the Globe, by some of the former ways, as (for Example) by its Height and
Azimuth: I say; having thus found the Stars true place on your Globe (which
happening (v. g.) to be in the 2 a Clock Circle) find by the third Operation the
difference between its and the Suns right Ascension, which being 8 hours, add
it to the said 2 (for the Star is as we said 8 hours now behind or too slow for
the Sun) and the then true hour will be 10 at night.

OPERATION XII. To know the Name of any remarkable Star which you see.
BY a Stars Height and Azimuth you may (as we have showed you) quickly find its
present true place on the Globe, and consequently its Declension, as being the
nearest distance between its said Place and the Equator; so that your Tables
of Declension gives you its Name; and if there should be two of the same
Declension then their right Ascensions (being different) will resolve the Doubt.

To conclude, all the former Operations may be yet more readily performed, and
that without any Table, if the Globe-maker A Memorandum.
place 10 or 20 of the most noted Stars (which will be enough to These Schemes
are properly Sch 3d and 4 belonging to Page 141 as showing ye way to describe
ye Projectio^ but they may serve for Sch 1 and 2 Page 135. if on ye higher ye
Constellation are supposd to be Engravd and on ye lower a line was draw from ye
Center to lack hour in ye limb and no Almucantar or Azi^^th expressed but by
Pricks

satisfy any ordinary curiosity) on the Globe it self, according to their true
Longitude and Latitude; for then their Declensions, Parallels, and right
Ascensions appear in a manner at first view, which must needs therefore
facilitate the other Operations.

Of the PEDESTAL.
THUS you see that our Globe (though it be a Terrestial one) may (in case of
necessity) be serviceable in relation to the very Stars; but because all
Operations that have the least Reflection in them, seem intricate and
troublesome to some, I have here adjoined (for them that will be at the Expense
of the best sort of these Globes) a most Facile way, that shall resolve in an
instant, all the former Questions and more; for there is not only a
Steriographical Projection on the Pedestal of the appearing Stars in our
Horizon, but one also so ordered, that it obviates the inconveniences which
make Stofflers admirable Astrolabe so much neglected of late; for some say,
there is no finding a Star on it without much poring, though we should know near
what Constellation it lies; others, that when we see a Star there, we are still
ignorant to what Constellation it belongs; many quarrel at the great confusion
which the Azimuths, Almucuntars, and other Circles expressed on it make; and some
again object, that the numeral Figures belonging to the said Circles are
oftentimes so hid by the solid part of the Rete, that we cannot without a new
trouble and motion perform the intended Operation. I say, this Projection on
the Pedestal (besides several other things) obviates these inconveniences, as
you will presently see.

The Explanation of the Circles and Lines of the whole Projection or Pedestal.
THE uttermost Circle (in Sch. 1) or Limb SENW of the Of the first Plane and
its bigness.
lower or first Plane, represents Circulum maximum semper latentium, or (if you
think that too large) what Parallel you please. It may be conveniently nine
Inches or a little more in Diameter, if the Globes be a Foot, and being of fine
Pastboard or the like substance, it is to be let into the Pedestal, which is
purposely made Cradle or Frame wise, that it may (by your hand underneath) be
easily turned round, and be also taken quite out, if any particular or
extraordinary occasion should require it; Nay, the whole Pedestal may be pulled
off, (if you think fit) from the handle or Fulerum, and used apart as a
distinct Instrument.

2. The great Circles described on it are only two, viz. the Of the Circles and
Stars on it, and how they are placed.
Equator ( AE ae) and the Ecliptic () divided into the 12 Signs, with their
gradual subdivisions. Now (since it will be no encumbrance to your Plane) you
may express on it also (if you please) the two Tropics, by two fine Circles,
that of Cancer touching the Ecliptic at, and that of Capricorn at. And as for
the Limb, it is divided into 360 Degrees, for being in Projection greater than
the Equator, 'twill prove more useful in all the Operations, that concern such
Divisions. Nor are the Circles or Stars placed here as on the Globe (I mean
according to the Degrees of a Quadrant equally divided) but Steriographically
projected by half Tangents, i. e. as they would appear and fall on an
Aequinoctial Plane, or a Plane parallel to it, were our Eye in the Pole, of
which more hereafter, as also the Centers and Radius's of each Circle, when we
come to the Description and Demonstration of the whole Projection; and in this
manner also (to wit, by half Tangents) the Line P. E. is divided, which shows
the Declension of any Star.

Thirdly. The Stars being all placed on this Plane according to their
respective Right Ascensions and Declensions; and by the way, when you once know
how to find by this Projection the Right Ascension and Declension of a Star (as
you will presently do by the following Instructions, that concern operation)
you will then also know by the help of Astronomical Tables (which give each
Star's Right Ascension and Declension) how to place them here: I say, the Stars
being all placed on this Plane, according to their respective Right Ascensions
and Declensions, they are to be Marshalled and reduced into Constellations; and
therefore you must suppose either fit Pictures drawn about them to express what
they are, or that the uttermost Stars of each be joined by a fine Pricked Line,
which will give you perchance, the most clear and just representation of them,
and consequently prove the easiest way for the finding them out in the Heavens;
But since Pictures have conveniences and great ones also; for thus without
consulting the written names, we cannot only find presently (even a far off)
the Constellation we seek after, but know at the same time the Place of each
Star in it, which Place for the most part gives the Star its ordinary Name: I
say, since Pictures have great Conveniences, let them be used; but then they
must be as faintly and simply expressed as can be; for deep shadows, and
unnecessary Flourishes both distract the Fancy, and cause even the Stars that
are expressed to be less conspicuous and observed.

Fourthly, When the first Plane is thus garnished and placed Of the second
Plane, and it is bigness.
in its Frame, there is another of the same bigness, either of Glass, or Talk
(represented by Scheme the second) to be put over it, and fixed or fastened in
the uttermost Molding or Ledge of the Pedestal. And here be pleased (for
distinction sake) to remember, that by the Terms First, and Second, these two
Planes are distinguished, and that by Projection is meant the whole Pedestal,
or Astronomical Machin, which (as I said) may be taken off, and used apart, as
a particular Instrument.

Lastly, the second Plane (represented, as I said by Scheme the second) has its
Limb S. E. N. W: divided (besides the subdivisions or Quarters) into 24 equal
parts, by so many straight Lines, drawn from the. Center P, and figured (I. II.
III, etc.) according to the hours of a natural Day. As for the Circle HRST, it
represents the Horizon; and the Circular Pricks within it give the Almucantars
and Azimuths of every 10 Degrees; for (on the one side) if you consider the
said Pricks as so many Circles ascending from the Horizon toward the Zenith,
the Figures along the Lines, PS and PN give you from the Horizon upwards the
height of that Star which touches any of them. On the other side, if you
consider them in File, (I mean as so many Arches passing through the Zenith, and
terminating in the Horizon) their distance from PS (the Southern part of the
Meridian) shows the Azimuth of the Star next any of them, by the Figures round
the Horizon; and least you might not readily distinguish Arch from Arch, if the
Pricks were all of the same kind or Species, there are two sorts here, viz. one
of plain and simple Pricks the other of small Astricks alternatively placed; so
that it is but observing of what Species the Prick next a Star is, (as suppose
an Astrisk,) and then following with your Eye a File or Arch of Astrisks 'till
you come to the Horizon; for the Figures at their termination there give you
the required Azimuth. Thus then the confusion which the several Almucantars and
Azimuths would make (were they all described on the Plane) is avoided, seeing
the Plane is now less filled than if the Almucantars were only expressed on it;
for disjoined Pricks circularly placed occupy not the room of a continued
Circle, and yet each Row or Circle of the said Pricks perform both the
forementioned Offices.

How to operate by the Projection or Pedestal.
FIRST the Reader must remember, that I call Rectifying the first Plane; the
placing and adjusting it so that all the Stars may appear above and below the
Horizon, as they then really do in the Heavens themselves; which Operation
being a main and principal matter (for all the other are in Truth but so many
Deductions or Corollaries) I will now begin with it; nor is there any thing
here required but the height of some Star in view (as the Lion's Heart, or the
like) which you may find by the Globe as you do the p. 6.
Sun's or p. 68.
Moons height as I mentioned p. 132.
before. Now for cleerness sake, let us suppose this Star to be about 45
Degrees high Westwardly, and then if you move your Plane till the said Star,
lies thus under a Prick of this height, you have (without ever moving more the
Plane) the several following Operations at a time.

First, You see all the Stars that are then above the Horizon and below it; for
all the painted ones within the Circle HRST, on the second Plane represent the
real ones then in sight, and the rest those that are below the Horizon.
Secondly, You see what Stars are Rising, what are Setting, what are
Culminating, and what are in their Lowest Depression. Thirdly, If you look
after any particular Star (suppose the Lion's Heart) by seeing him on the
West Side of PS (the Meridian of the said second Plane) you are sure he is not
only in a Declining state but also (by following the Prick next him to the
Horizon, according to its Species) that his Azimuth is 45 Degrees. Fourthly,
You will see his Bearing, to be about S. W. if you follow the Azimuthal Arch to
the Nautical Characters there. Fifthly, You see that the Hour of the Night is
10, by observing under what Hour-Line the 10th. of April (i. e. the day of the
Month, the Suns place in the Ecliptic) lies. Sixthly, By any real or imaginary
Hour Line that runs over the said Star, you find his Right Ascension to be near
148 Degrees; for thus the said Hour Line cuts the Limb. Seventhly, By his being
behind the Sun about 8 hours (as appears by the Hour Lines that pass over the
Star and the Suns place) you have the difference of their Right Ascensions,
which amounts to about 120 Degrees. Eighthly, Which is the most surprising (and
not performable even by a Celestial Globe) you no sooner see these things in
relation to this or any other particular Star, but at the same time also (even
without touching your Projection) you have them in relation to all the Stars in
general; for when the First Plane is rectified, we have (besides the Hour) the
Heighths, Azimuths, Bearings, Right Ascensions, etc. of all the other Stars
above the Horizon.

Concerning the other Operations, they are more restrained, as being peculiar
to the Star you enquire after; for if you would know when the Lions Heart Sets,
(which for continuation's sake we will call the ninth Operation) do but move
your first Plane till the said Star touches the Horizon, and the imaginary Hour
Line that passes over the Sun's place in the Ecliptic, show's you, that 'twill
be then about 3 and a quarter in the morning.

10ly. By the Figures about the Horizon, you will see at the same time, that
his Occasive Amplitude is near 23 Degrees* Northward, and his then Bearing (by
the Nautecal Caracters) to be WNW, or thereabouts.

11. By the imaginary Hour-line that then passes over the said Star ( viz. that
of about 7 and a quarter) you have half the time of his constant abode above
the Horizon, and consequently know, that from his Rising to his Setting there
are about 14 hours and an half.

12. By reason that the imaginary Hour-line of about 7 and a quarter passes
over the Star (as we said) at his Setting, it follows that it is Ascensional
difference (i. e. the difference between its Right and Oblique Ascension) is
about an Hour and a quarter, or 18 Degrees.

13. By the Degree of the Ecliptic that Sets with the Star (which is the 26 of)
and by the opposite Degree which then Rises (viz. the 26. of) you see that on
the 8th. of August he Sets Achronically, and on the 2. of February Cosmically.

14. Remove the said Plane, till the said Star brushes the Horizon on the
East Side, and by the precedent method ( mutatis mutandis) you will find when
he Rises, what his Ortive Amplitude is, how he then Bears, how long he is under
the Horizon, when he Rises Cosmically, and when Achronically.

15. By placing the point of a Pin or Needle, on the Class over the Lions
Heart, and then moving the first Plane, till the divided 6 a Clock Hour-line
PE, lies just under the said point the Divisions there will show its
Declination to be about 13 Degrees and 33 Minutes. The like you may do with
your Compasses; for if you take the Distance between the Pole and Star, and
measure it on PE, you have what you seek for.

Many other Operations are performable by the Projection, touching the Stars;
but since these are the most material ones, and since I have not time to treat
more fusely, I leave the rest to be found out by my Reader himself, who may
easily do it, if he understands either the Caelestial Globe, or any Instrument
belonging to the Stars. And here he is to remember, that knowing but the Hour
at any time, let him put the Suns place, Two Memorandums.
or day of the Month under the Hour-line, that corresponds with it, and the
Projection will be rectified, and consequently (having a true view of the then
posture of the Heavens) he may opperate as before. In the next place, if he
knows but the Suns place in the Ecliptic of the first Plane, and opperates with
the said place as if it were a Star, he may find out the former Operations in
relation to the Sun it self; that is to say, he may at that moment know his
Height, Azimuth, Bearing, Amplitude, etc.

16. If you would know the Stars in the Heavens, you may also do it by the help
of this Projection; for your first Plane being rectified, it gives you (as I
said) the true posture of all the Stars; so that if those you seek after be
near the Horizon, Meridian, or any other noted Quarter, those on your Plane
near its Horizon, Meridian, or corresponding Quarter will resolve the Question.
Or, if you take the height of a Star, and its Azimuth (according to any of the
former Directions) then whatever Star on your Plane has the same, it will be
that you seek after, and consequently you have its Name. Now knowing once a
Star, your said first Plane shows you what they are that lie about it, and so
by degrees you may run from one to another round the Heavens. Nor need you, as
to the knowing of the Stars, be so exact (either in rectifying your Projection,
or in having the hour of the night, or in taking the Heights, and the like) as
in other Operations: for, by the bigness of the Star, by its nearness to some
remarkable one, and by twenty other particular properties, you will be so
regulated and confined, that you may safely conclude, when you examine your
Projection, that the real Star you see, can be no other than such and such a
one.

How to Describe the PROJECTION.
HAving thus showed you the use of the Pedestal or Projection, I shall fall on
the way of Describing it, and (according to my manner all along) on the
Demonstration of it also, especially since it conduces to a more easy
comprehension of all Steriographical Projections; and if I be a little longer
than ordinary, it is now no great matter, for I have ended all the Operations I
intend at present, so that what is here further said may be omitted without
inconvenience, if the Reader be disgusted at Speculation.

As for the nature of the Projection, it is Optical, representing The Principle
on which this Projection depends.
all things in the Heavens, as they appear to the Eye, from such and such a
Station, and not according to their true and real distances. It Is chiefly
founded on the 20th. Proposition of the third Book of Euclid, which proves,
that the Angle at the Periphery is but that at the Center; for from thence it is
inferred, that if placeing our Eye on the superficies of the Sphere (v. g. at
the South Pole) we look into its Cavity, the Angle made at our Eye, by the two
Rays that issue from it (the one along or throu' the Axis to the opposite
Pole, and the other to a determined Point) will be the Angle only of half the
value of the Arch, or real distance between the two Objects, i. e. between the
said Opposite Pole and Point; now since any Diameter on the Plane of the
Equator (for that, or some Parallel Circle to it, we now suppose to be the
Plane of our present Projection) meeting with those Rays, will be the Tangent
of the Angle they make, which being in value (as we said) but half the real
distance between the said Objects, it must need follow, if any Star or Point in
the Heavens be distant from this opposite Pole, suppose 20. Degrees, That the
Tangent of 10 Degrees from the Center of the Projection (which represents the
said Pole) gives its true apparrent place there, and the like is to be said of
any other distance.

I shall not trouble the Reader with any Scheme to demonstrate this further,
because (being fusely treated of by Aguilonius and others) it is obvious enough
to all Mathematicians; and as for new Beginners (if they desire a fuller
conception of it) let them but apply themselves to any man vers't in
Projections, and in the space of ten Minutes he will show it them more clearly
and naturally, by Strings fitly placed on an Armillary Sphere, than I can here
in many hours; therefore supposing (if to such, what I have already said be not
evident) that the Heavens may be thus projected by half Tangents, let us
proceed to the way of doing it, that is to say, to the finding of the Centers
and Radius's of all the Circles which conduce to the before mentioned
Operations.

As for the Concentric Circles of the first Plane, to wit, the Of the
Concentric Circles.
Equator, the Tropics, and the Limb, which is (as I said) Circulus maximus
semper latentium, or some Parallel* to it, there is no difficulty in describing
them; for having drawn at right Angles the Lines NS and EW (representing the
four Cardinal Points) throu'P, the Center, or projected Pole, if you open your
Compasses at the Tangent of 45 Degrees, and place one foot on the said P, you
must needs project the Equator; because being distant from either Pole 90
Degrees, the Ray that touches it, and that which runs along the Axis to the
opposite or North Pole, makes an Angle at your Eye (as we said before) of only
half so much. In like manner, the Tropic of Cancer being 66 g. 30 m. from this
Pole, the Tangent of 33 g. 15 m. gives his Radius, as the Tangent of 56. g. 45
m. does Capricorn, whose real distance from the said Pole is 113 g. 30 m. for
it lies 47 Degrees beyond the former Tropic. And lastly, the Tangent of 64 g.
15 m. projects the Limb or uttermost Circle, if it be Circulus maximus super
latentium, as being yet 15 Degrees further; for the true distance of that
Circle from the said Pole 128 Degrees and 30 Minutes.

Now for the main matter, to wit, the great Circles which fall The general Rule
for projecting the great Oblique Circles.
obliquely on the Plane, take this easy general Rule for them all, viz. That
their Centers are distant from the Center of the Projection the Tangent of as
many Degrees as their Poles are distant from the Pole of the Plane, on which
the Projection is made (that is to say, in our present Case, from the
North Pole of the World) and the Secant of the said Degrees is their Radius.

Suppose then you were to project (v. g.) the Ecliptic, which Of projecting the
Ecliptic.
is the only oblique Circle of your first Plane; you know that its Northern
Pole, (being in your Meridian) is distant from the North Pole of the World 23
g. 30 m. Open therefore your Compasses at the Tangent of those Degrees, and
place one Foot in P, and the other will give you in the Line PN (the Northern
half of the Meridian of your Plane) or in the Line PS, (the Southern half of
the said Meridian) the point D, for the required Center. D then being the
Center, open but your Compasses at the Secant of the said Degrees, and you have
the Radius; Nay, the Distance from D to e, or from D to w, the East and West
Points of the Equator (or points where the Ecliptic intersects with the
Equator on the Sphere) gives this Secant; for if PD be the Tangent of 23 g. 30
m. then D e and D w are (you see) the Secants. But before we demonstrate the
aforesaid Rule, let us make an end with the great Oblique Circles of the
Transparent or second Plane, which are only the Horizon HRST, and the Azimuths
of every 10 Degrees, expressed (as I said) by plain Pricks and Astrisks.

As for the Pole of the Horizon, it is (you know) the Zenith, Of projecting*
the Horizon.
which being distant in your Meridian 38 g. 30 m. Southwards from the North
Pole of the World, it must follow by the former Rule, that the Tangent of 38 g.
30 m. (or Complement of the Elevation) from P (the Center of the Projection)
giving you ( Southwards in the Meridian of your Plane) h, the required Cent^^,
the Secant of these Degrees will be the required Radius; Nay the distance from
h to e, or from h to w the East and West points of the Equator, (or Points
where the Horizon cuts the Aequinoctial Colure) gives this Secant; for if P h
be the Tangent of 38 g. 30 m. h e and h w are the Secants. Of projecting the
primary Vertical.


The Poles of all the Azimuths, are (as every body knows) in the Horizon; now
that of the Primary Vertical, being in the Meridian also, it is distant in the
Heavens (on the North side of your Meridian) the value of the Elevation, or 51
g. 30 m. so that by the foregoing Rule (PV) the Tangent of those Degrees will,
from the Center P ( Northward,) give you in the Meridian of the Plane the
Center of this Circle, and the Secant the Radius. Nay, the distance from V to
e, or from V to w, the East and West Points of the Equator, (or points where
the said Primary Vertical cuts the Aequinoctial Colure) gives this Secant; for
if PV be the Tangent of 51 g. 30 m. V e and V w are the Secants. Besides, where
the moving foot of your Compasses (thus extended) touches the Meridian of the
Plane, there will be the Zenith in projection, and consequently distant from P
( Southward,) the Tangent of 19 d. 15 m. or half the Complement of the
Elevation; for our Zenith lies in the Meridian 38 g. 30 m. beyond the Pole on
the South Side of the Sphere or Heavens.

As for the Centers of the other Azimuths, though there be no Of projecting the
rest of the Azimuths.
Tables calculated to show how their repective Poles are distant from that of
the Plane or Projection, and consequently the aforesaid Rule may seem useless,
yet by resolving a Triangle, these Distances may be found, as also the value of
the Angle, made by your Meridian (or 12 a Clock hour Circle) with the Meridian
that passes throu' the proposed Degree of the Horizon, so that the Rule serves
as before; for if you draw a blind Line through P, that makes an Angle with PN,
answerable to the value of the Angle of those two Meridians in the said
Triangle, the Tangent of the distance found between the Pole of the Plane and
that of the proposed Azimuth will still give you its Center from P in the said
blind Line, and the Secant its Radius.

But you may avoid the Resolution of a Triangle, by the usual An expedite way
of finding the said Centers and Radius.
expedite way, viz. by drawing through V (the Center of the Primary Vertical,
found as before) the blind Line K. M. at Right Angles with P. N. (the Northern
part of the Meridian of your Plane) and then pricking on both sides of the said
V (ZV being Radius) the Tangents of all the Azimuths you would express, as (for
example) those of 10, 20, 30 Degrees, etc. for the said Pricks give their
Centers, and the Secant of those Degrees. their Radius. This Way also agrees not a
little with the above mentioned Rule; for if the distance from V (the Center of
the primary Vertical) to 10 (the Center of the Azimuth of 10 Degrees) be the
Tangent of those Degrees, it is evident, that the Radius Z 10 is the Secant; and
if this be the Secant, the distance from V to 10 is the Tangent. Thus then in
short may be drawn (mutatis mutandis) all other great oblique Circles in any
Steriographical Projection, when their Poles lie in one and the same Circle;
and now since the aforesaid Rule agrees even with this usual way of describing
these Circles, I will here Demonstrate it, having done with the great Circles
on both our Planes; for as to the Hour Circles, they are all seen in Cultro,
(that is to say, they lie directly under your Eye, and consequently are in
projection straight Lines, and distant (as on the Sphere) 15 Degrees. asunder; I
say, since the Rule agrees not a little with this way, and that I have done
with the great Circles both Planes, I will now demonstrate it by the two Lemmas
that follow.

The Demonstration.
Sch. 5.


Lemma 1.
I. THe Secant of any Arch is equal to the Tangent of the same Arch more by the
Tangent of half its Complement. That is to say, CE the Secant (for example
sake) of 60 Degrees (in Scheme 5) is equal to EB (the Tangent of 60) and to BA
the Tangent of 15, or half the Complement of 60: For the Angle ECA being equal
by Hyp. to the Angle ACH, becomes equal to Eucl. 27. 1*
the Angle EAC. therefore EA is equal to 6. 1.
EC, and consequently EB plus BA is equal to EC. QED.

Sch. 6.


Lemma 2.
II. The Tangent of any Arch greater than 45 Degrees is equal to the Tangent and
Secant of double its Excess above 45 Degrees; that is to say, AB Tangent (for
example) of 46 Degrees. (in Sch. 6th) is equal to CD Secant of 2 Degrees plus DB
Tangent of the said Degrees; for the Angle DCA being by Hyp. Eucl. 27. 1.
equal to the Angle ACH becomes equal to the Angle DAC; therefore CD is equal
to 6. 1.
AD, and consequently AD plus DB is equal to CD plus DB.

These two Lemmas being premised, let us consider the Projection The Ecliptic
truly projected.
(for example sake) of the Ecliptic, and see how it agrees with our said Rule,
to wit, That the Centers of all the projected great oblique Circles are distant
from the Center of the Projection, the Tangent of as many Degrees as their
Poles are distant from the Pole of the Plane on which the Projection is made
and that the Secant of those Degrees gives their Radius's. The Ecliptic is to
touch both Tropics on the Solstitial Colure or Meridian of the Plane, because
it touches that Colure thus in the Heavens, and on the Sphere; so that by
Construction P (the distance in Projection between the Center of the Plane and
the Point where the Ecliptic touches the Tropic of Cancer) is the Tangent 33.
15. or half 66. 30, (its real distance on the Sphere from the North Pole) and
on the other side P (the distance in Projection between the Center and the
Point where the Ecliptic touches Capricorn) is the Tangent of 56. 45. or half
113. 30. its real distance as before. Now D by Construction being distant (on
the Meridian or Diameter of the Plane) from the Center P the Tangent of 23 d.
30 m. (or real distance between the Pole of the Plane of the Projection and
that of the Ecliptic) must needs be, according to our Rule, the Center of this
Circle in Projection, and the Secant of those Degrees its Radius, if we prove
the said D to be the middle of the Line (or Diameter of the Ecliptic) and D and
D to be Secants of 23 d. 30 m.

It Is manifest that D is Secant of 23 d. 30 m. because it is equal (by Lem. 1.)
to PD, Tangent of 23 d. 30 m. plus P 69 Tangent of 33 d. 15 m.

Again D is Secant of 22 d. 30 m. because P ( Tangent of 56 d. 45 m.) is equal
by Lemma the second to the Tangent and Secant of 23 d. 30 m. Now PD being
Tangent of those Degrees, D must be Secant; therefore D and D being equal, D is
the middle of the Line,, and consequently PD (the Tangent of 23 d. 30 m. from
the Center of your Plane) gives in its Meridian the Center of the Ecliptic, and
the Secant of those Degrees the Radius, Q. E. D. and in this manner the way of
projecting the other great oblique Circles is to be demonstrated.

Nor does this Rule solely serve for the Description of the A Memorandum.
great Oblique Circles on the present Planes, but for all that are expressed on
Stofflers Astrolabe, or Mr. Oughtreds Horizontal; Nay it shows not only how to
draw the Meridians in Gemma Frisius his Projection, but, by the bare conversion
of the Terms, the Parallels themselves, tho little Circles.

For first as to the Meridians, whose Poles, (as every body The way of
describing G. Frisius's Meridians.
knows) lie all in the Equator, suppose you would describe the 10th. from the
Limb or grand Meridian, which is to be the Solstitial Colure, since, in this
Projection, your Eye lies in the East or West points of the Equator, to wit in
the Pole of the said Colure; I say, suppose you were to describe the 10th. from
the Limb, it follows by our Rule, because their Poles are 10 Degrees asunder on
the Sphere and in the Heavens, that the Tangent of those Degrees gives from A
(the Center of the Projection in Sch. 7th.) the required Center B, and the
Secant the Radius; For this Circle on the Sphere cutting the Equator at the
80th. Degrees. from the Pole of your Plane, (or point opposite to your Eye) its
extremity C must in Projection be distant from A the Tangent of 40 Degrees. only;
Now since BC (to wit BA plus AC the Tangents of 10 and 40 Degrees) is equal by
Lemma the first) to the Secant of 10 Degrees, and since BN. and BS (or distance
from B to the two Poles of the World) are visibly the Secants of those
Degreees, it necessarily follows, that the Meridian to be described (which pass
we know throu' the said three points C. N. and S.) can have no other Center but
B, nor Radius but the said Secant. Besides if if we make this Arch an entire
Circle (by the pricked Arch NAES) then AB the Tangent of 10 Degrees plus BAE =
BC (the Secant of 10) is equal (by Lemma the 2d. to the Tangent of 50 Degrees,
but the other part of the said Meridian lies (we know on the Sphere) 100
Degrees from the forementioned Pole of the Plane, and in projection the Tangent
of 50 from the Center A; ergo B is the true Center of the required Meridian,
and the Secant of 10 Degrees the Radius.

Sch. 7.


2. For the Parallels or Circles of Latitude, the same The way of describing G.
F. hia Parallels.
Rule (the Terms as I said being converted) finds both their Centers and
Radius's; for if you would project (suppose) the 80th. Parallel from the
Equator, that is to say, the 10th. from the Pole of the World, it is but
saying, That the Secant of 10 Degrees from the Center of the Plane gives you
the Center of the Parallel required, and the Tangent of the same Degrees the
Radius. To prove this, let AF (in Sch. 7.) be by Construction the Secant of 10
Degrees, and opening your Compasses at the Tangent of those Degrees place one
foot on the said F, and describe the Circle KLPO; Now because AF the Secant of
10 Degrees is equal (by Lemma the 1st.) to the Tangent of 10 and Tangent of 40
Degrees, therefore AK is the Tangent of 40 Degrees. Again because AF ( Secant
of 10) plus FP = FK ( Tangent of 10 Degrees) is (by Lemma the 2d) equal to the
Tangent of 50, ergo AP is Tangent of 50; but the Parallel required is a Circle
which on one side cuts (in the Sphere) the Aequinoctial Colure 80 Degrees from
the Pole of your Plane (or point opposite to your Eye) and on the other side at
100, or supplement of the said 80 Degrees, therefore seeing K and P the two
extreme points of the projected Circle OPLK are distant from the Center A on
the produced Axis (or intersection of the Aequinoctial Colure with the Plane)
the Tangents of 40 and 50 Degrees (to wit, the Tangents of half the real value
of these Arches) it must follow that the said OPLK truly represents the
required Parallel, and consequently that the Arch OKL is that part of it, which
is farthest from your Eye, to wit, so much of the whole Circle as falls on the
Plane. Thus much then for these Parallels, since all are to be described after
the same manner, and now having mentioned little Circles, it is fit the Reader
should know how the Circles of Altitude are to be described on the second Plane
of the Pedestal or Projection which are little Circles also.

The way is easy for if you would have the Almucantar, (suppose) of 10 Degrees
(viz. abcd in Scheme 4th) you How to describe the Circles of Altitude on the 2
Plane.
must proceed thus. Because the Horizon in projection (as we showed you before)
is distant from the Center, (on the North side of the Meridian) the Tangent of
25, 45m. or half the Elevation, to wit from P to H, and (on the South side)
from P to S, the Tangent of 64. 15, or half 128. 30. the supplement of the said
Elevation, therefore the Almucantar of 10 Degrees (being on the Sphere 10
Degrees nearer the Pole than the Horizon,) will in projection be nearer the
Center 5 Degrees. So that the Tangent of 20, 45 from the Center P giving ( a)
its extremity on the North side of the Meridian, and the Tangent of 59. 15.
giving ( c) its extremity on the South side, it follows that ( g) half the
distance between the said ( a) and c becomes the Center to describe it by; For
since all the Circles of the Sphere are still Circles in projection (except
those that are seen in Cultro (as we said) if you have the Diameter (or
straight Line that joins the extreme points of any of them) half of it must
needs give you the Center; and in this manner then are the other Circles of
Altitude, to be described. But here take notice that whereas in Sch. 2.
(representing the second or trasparent Plane) the Azimuths and Almucantars are
found (as I p. 138 and 139.
showed you) by the consideration of the Pricks or Asterisks there expressed:
Now, that the Reader may know how to Place them, the very Circles and Arches
are described on it, Sch. 4. as it represents for the said Pricks and Asterisks
are ever to be in their intersections. And by way the Instrument maker may (if
he pleases) make use of Pricks, and no Asterisks on the real Transparent Plane
of the Pedestal; for they will upon second thoughts perform better the
Operation.

The Conclusion.
HAVING thus finished all the Operations that at present occur, I shall now end
with what I promised in the p. ^.
Beginning, to wit, with showing the Reader the particular Advantages of this
Globe, which are of four kinds; For, First it does several Operations not
performable by the Ordinary Globes. 2ly. It does even the Operations (which the
other perform) much easier and quicker. 3ly. It performs many at a view, which
are to be done by the other (for the most part) successively. Lastly, It has
several by-advantages and conveniences belonging to it by it is Make independent
of the Operations.

As to the Operations not performable by any other Globe, they First kind.
are:

1. The placing of it self page 4.
Level, or Horizontal. 2. The p 8. and 15.
Composing of it self to the Position of the Heavens. 3. The showing of the
page 13.
Hour, even several ways: and this not only at Home but at the same time also
in all p. 31.
Places of the World. page 36.
4. The knowing how much any place wants of Day, if it be Night there; or of
Night if Day there; and consequently the page 39.
Babilonish and Italian Hour without any Computation. 5. The showing the p. 40.
Judaical Hour, without any Computation. 6. The showing the Sun's true Place in
the Heavens every p. 35.
Moment, and consequently in what Country he is then Vertical. 7. The Sun's
height at any time of the Day both at p. 5.
home, and in all other p. 37.
Places, where the Globe show's it is Day, as also his Depression where it
show's it is Night. 8. The Sun's p. 10.
Azimuth and p. 11.
Bearing. 9. The Ancient p. 21.
Geography as well as Modern. 10. The Hour by the p. 51.
Moon; with several other Operations concerning her. 11. The p. 65.
proportion of Perpendiculars to their shades, with Corollaries in relation to
Altimetry, and showing the Hour by your stick. 12. The performing of all the
accidental p. 70.
Requisites to Dialling, as how to draw Meridian Lines, and Lines Parallel to
the Horizon, how to find the Declension of all Planes, as also their
Reclination, Inclination, etc.
But here the Reader must remember, that when I say none A Memorandum.
of the forementioned Operations are performable by other Globes, I mean not
this always in a strict sense; for if (suppose) we have the Hour of the Day
given, we may then (as every body knows) soon find by it the Sun's height, or
if (suppose) we have his Azimuth, we have the Hour; I say, I mean not this
always in a strict Sense, but call all these Operations not performable by
other Globes, since they at first require (for the Operations they do) something
as hard to be found as what we seek after; whereas by exposing only of this
Globe to the Sun, and having but the day of the Month, most of the Premises
present themselves to us at all times with as much facility as the very Hour it
self by an Horizontal Dial.

Besides, the Reader must know, if a Brazen graduated Semicircle were hung on
the Poles here, with an erected moveable Pin, or Cursor on it, there would be
no need of the Holes (I p. 8.
formerly mentioned) in each Parallel of the Globe, for the true Composing of
it; Nay this Semicircle (omitting several other things) will also give the
hour, by being still directly over it, as often as it is moved into the Plane of
the Sun; but seeing I pretend to show all the Operations here treated of, even
on a naked and free Globe, by the sole help of a little String or Thread, I hint
only the said Semicircle, that the Reader may use it, if he shall judge it any
time fit for his business.

In the second place, as to the Operations common to all 2d kind.
Globes, but more easily performed by this, take some few Examples that follow.

1. If you would find (suppose) the Aurora by the Common Globes, you must
(after knowing the Day of the Month, or Suns place in the Ecliptic) bring it to
the Meridian; then you must put the Index Horarius on 12, and so move the said
Sun's place to the East side of the Horizon. Afterward you must find the
opposite Point to the Sun's place, and fixing your Quadrant of Altitude in the
Zenith; you must mount the said opposite Point till it meet with the 18th
Degree, and then the Index gives you what you seek for, whereas by This Globe
you have nothing to do but to p. 18.
depress your Bead 18 Degrees below the Horizon, and to move the String on the
Zenith till the said Bead touches the Parallel of the Day on the East side of
the Globe; for then it lies on the required Hour.

2. If you would but know when the Sun rises by the other Globes; you must
(after finding of the Sun's place) lay your Index on 12 and when you have
brought the said Place to the East side of the Horizon, the Index will show the
Hour: Whereas now the * Intersection of the Parallel of the day with the
Horizon performs the Operation without more a-doe.

3. If you would know the Ascensional Difference by the other Globes, you must
first find the Right Ascension, then you must find the Oblique, and lastly you
must substract the greater from the less; whereas here the p. 9.
distance on the Parallel of the day (which the Hour-Circles measure) between
the 6 a clock hour circle and the intersection of the said Parallel with the
Horizon gives at a view the required Ascensional Difference in time, and
consequently in Degrees. I shall not trouble my Reader with more Instances at
present, leaving the rest to his own Observation, and he will still find (at
least generally speaking.) That the Operations (as I said) common to both
Globes are more easily and readily performed by this than by any other.

As to the Advantages of the third kind, to wit, The performing 3 kind.
several Operations at one view, which are performed successively by other
Globes, there are at least 15 that present themselves to you ( the Globe being
composed) as soon as ever you have made the Shade of the String (hanging on the
Zenith) to pass throu' the Nadir; for then you have before your Eyes.

1. The Hour of the Day; by considering the shade of the p. 14.
illuminated Pole. 2. The Day of the Month; by considering on what Diurnal
Parallel the Shade of the String marks the same Hour with that p. 15.
shown by the shade of the said illuminated Pole. 3. The Place where the Sun is
Vertical; by considering the Sun's p. 35.
place in his Parallel, and consequently the Country under it. 4. The Sun's
Sign or Place in the Ecliptic; by considering (according to the Increment or
Decrement of the Days) throu' what part of the p. 13.
Ecliptic the Parallel of the Day passes. 5. The Suns Declination; by
considering throu' what p. 11.
Degree of the Aequinoctial Colure, the Parallel of the Day passes. 6. The
Sun's Azimuth and Bearing; by considering what p. 10. and 12
Degree of the Horizon and what Nautical Character, are cut by the shade of the
String hanging from the Zenith. 7. The time of the Sun's Rising and Setting; by
considering on what p. 16.
hour circle the Parallel of the Day and Horizon intersect on the East and West
sides of the Globe. 8. The length of the Day and Night; by considering how many
Hour-Circles cross that part of the Diurnal Parallel p. 17.
which is above the Horizon; for they show the length of the Day, as the
Hour-Circles, that cross the part under the Horizon, do the length of the
Night. 9. The Sun's Ascensional Difference; by considering the p. 19.
Hour-Circles on the Parallel of the Day between the 6 a clock Hour-Circle, and
the intersection of the said Parallel with the Horizon. 10. The Sun's
Amplitude; by considering how many p. 17.
Degrees in the Horizon the Sun rises from the true East Point, or sets from
true West. 11. Where it is Day or Night over all the World; by considering the
p. 33.
illuminated and obscured parts of the Globe; for the one show's ever where
it is Day, and the other where it is Night. 12. Where they enjoy nothing but Day,
and where nothing but Night: by considering the p. 33.
Illumination and Obscuration about the Poles: for a Circle described about the
illuminated Pole, to the nearest shade of Extuberancy, shows, that all the
Inhabitants within that Circle have nothing but Day, and that all they that
dwell within the like Circle about the obscured Pole, have nothing but Night.
13. Where the Sun is Rising and Setting all the World over; by considering the
p. 34.
preceding and following shade of Extuberancy; for the first, show's the
people to whom the Sun then is Rising, and the other to whom the Sun is then
Setting. 14. How many hours any place wants of day or night; by considering
first a Parallel to run over the Place proposed, and then by reckoning the
number of p. 36.
Hours between the said place, and the preceding, and following shade of
Extuberancy; the one bringing with it Day and the other Night. 15. What a clock
it is all the World over; by considering (according to the little Polar Figures)
the p. 31.
Hour-Circle that passes over any place, and adding to the time thus found (if
it be in the afternoon) as many hours as are past since Midday with you, or
substracting (if it be in the Morning) as many Hours as you want of Midday.
Now for the last kind of Conveniences, which this Globe 4th kind.
Challenges, to it self, to wit. Those independent of the Operations, they are
4.

1. For, First It takes up little or no room wheresoever it stands, the bottom
of the Pedestal not being ordinarily much bigger, than the foot of a large
hourglass, whereas other Globes are cumbersom, and embarras any Table or Place
on which you set them. 2. It is wholly exposed to our Eye as well below as
above the Horizon; whereas the Frame, Meridian, and the other Appendices of
common Globes, always hide more than half of them. 3 It is as cheap as a single
ordinary Globe, and yet performs the Operations of the Terrestrial and
Celestial ones. 4. It never declines from its Position; whereas other Globes by
moving on their Poles incline presently more or less to this or that side of
the Meridian and Horizon, so, that (besides their usual grating) all the
Operations become sensibly false.
FINIS.
December. 28. 1672.
A Catalogue of GLOBES, Celestial and Terrestrial, Spheres, Maps, Sea-Plats,
Mathematical Instruments, and Books, with their prizes, made and sold by Joseph
Moxon, on Ludgate Hill, at the Sign of Atlas.
GLOBES 26 Inches the Diameter. The price 20 l. the pair. GLOBES near 15 Inches
Diameter. The price 4 l. GLOBES 8 Inches Diameter. The price 2 l. GLOBES 6
Inches Diameter. The price 1 l. 10 s. CONCAVE HEMISPHERES of the Starry Orb;
which serves for a Case to a Terrestrial Globe of 3 Inches Diameter, made
portable for the Pocket. Price 15 s. SPHERES, according to the Copernican
Hypothesis, both General and Particular, 20 Inches Diameter. Price of the
General 5 l. of the Particular 6 l. of both together 10 l. SPHERES, according
to the Ptolomaick System, 14 Inches Diameter. Price 3 l. SPHERES, according to
the Ptolomaick System, 8 Inches Diameter. Price 1 l. 10 s. Gunter's Quadrant,
13 Inches Radius, printed on Paper, and pasted on a Board, with a Nocturnal on
the backside. Price 5 s. Gunter's Quadrant, 4 Inches Radius, printed on Paper,
and pasted on Brass, with a Nocturnal on the backside, and a Wooden Case
covered with Lether sit for it: A new Invention contrived for the Pocket. Price
6 s. A large Map of the World, 10 Foot long, and 7 Foot deep, pasted on Cloth
and colored. Price 2 l. A Map of all the World, 4 Foot long, and 3 Foot deep,
pasted on Cloth and colored, Price 10 s. in Sheets 2 s. 6 d. A Map of the
English Empire in America, describing all Places inhabited there by the English
Nation, as well on the Islands as on the Continent. Price 15 s. Six Scriptural
Maps, 1. Of all the Earth, and how after the Flood it was divided among the
Sons of Noah. 2. Of Paradise, or the Garden of Eden, with the Countries
circumjacent inhabited by the Patriarchs. 3. The 40 years travel of the
Children of Israel throug the Wilderness. 4. Of Canaan, or the Holy Land, and
how it was divided among the twelve Tribes of Israel, and traveled through by
our Savior and his Apostles. 5. The Travels of St. Paul, and others of the
Apostles, in their propagating the Gospel. 6. Jerusalem, as it stood in our
Saviors time; with a Book of explanations to these Maps, entitled, Sacred
Geography. Price of the Maps 6 s. useful to be bound up with Bibles. price of
the Book 1 s. 6 d. A Sea Plat, or Map of all the World, according to Mercator,
in two large Royal Sheets of Paper; set forth by Mr. Edward Wright, and newly
corrected by Joseph Moxon, etc. Price 2 s. Sea-Plats for Sailing to all parts
of the World. Price 6 d. the Sheet. The famous City of Batavia in the East
Indies, built and inhabited by the Dutch, curiously Engraved, and Printed on
four large Sheets of Royal Paper. Price 2 s. 6 d. A small Map of all the World,
with Descriptions, on one Sheet. Price 6 d.
BOOKS.
A Tutor to Astronomy and Geography, or the Use of both the GLOBES, Celestial
and Terrestrrial; by Joseph Moxon, A Member of the Royal Society, and
Hydrographer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. Price 5 s. The Use of the
Copernican Spheres, teaching to salve the Phenomenon by them, as easily as by
the Ptolomaick Spheres; by Joseph Moxon, etc. Price 4 s. Wright's Correction of
Errors in the Art of Navigation. Price 8 s. New and rare Inventions of
Waterworks, teaching how to raise Water higher than the Spring. By which
Invention, the Perpetual Motion is proposed, many hard Labors performed, and
varieties of Motion and Sounds produced. By Isaac de Cause, Engineer to King
Charles the First. Price 8s. Practical Perspective, or Perspective made easy.
Teaching by the Optics how to delineate all Bodies, Buildings and Landskips,
etc. By the Catoptricks, how to delineate confused Appearances, so as when seen
in a Mirror or Polished Body of any intended Shape, the Reflection shall show
a Design. By the Dioptricks, how to draw part of many Figures into one, when
seen through a Glass or Crystal cut into many Faces. By Joseph Moxon, etc.
Price 7s. An exact Survey of the Microcosm, being an Anatomy of the Bodies of
Man and Woman, wherein the Skin, Veins, Nerves, Muscles, Bones, Sinews, and
Ligaments are accurately delineated. Engraven on large Copper Plates, Printed
and curiously pasted together, so as at first sight you may behold all the
parts of Man and Woman; and by turning up the several Dissections of the
Papers, take a view of all their Inwards; with Alphabetical References to the
names of every Member and part of the Body. Set forth in Latin by Remelinus,
and Michael Spaher of Tyrol; and Englished by John Ireton, Chyrurgeon; and
lastly, perused and corrected by several rare Anatomists. Price 14s. Vignola,
or the Complete Architect; showing in a plain and easy way, the Rules of the
five Orders in Architecture, viz. Tuscan, Dorick, Ionick, Corinthian, and
Composite; whereby any that can but read and understand English, may readily
learn the Proportions that all Members in a Building have to one another: Set
forth by Mr. James Barrozzio of Vignola, and Translated into English by Joseph
Moxon, etc. Price 3s. 6d. Christiologia, or a brief but true Account of the
certain Year, Month, Day and Minute of the Birth of Jesus Christ. By John
Butler, B. D. and Chaplain to his Grace James Duke of Ormond, etc. and Rector
of Lichborough in the Diocese of Peterborough. Price 3s. 6d. A Tutor to
Astrology, or Astrology made easy; being a plain Introduction to the whole Art
of Astrology; whereby the meanest Apprehension may learn to Erect a Figure, and
by the same to give a determinate Judgment upon any Question or Nativity
whatsoever. Also new Tables of Houses, calculated for the Latitude of 51 degr.
32 min. Also Tables of Right and Oblique Ascensions to 6 degr. of Latitude.
Whereunto is added an Ephemeris for three years; with all other necessary
Tables that belong to the Art of Astrology. Also how to Erect a Figure the
Rational way, by the Tables of Triangles, more methodically than has been yet
published; digested into a small Pocket Volume, for the convenience of those
that erect Figures abroad. By W. Eland. Price 2s. The Use of a Mathematical
Instrument called a Quadrant, showing very plainly and easily to know the exact
Height and Distance of any Steeple, Tree or House, etc. Also to know the time
of the Sunrising and Setting, and the Length of every day in the year, the
Place of the Sun in the Ecliptic, the Azimuth, Right Ascension, and
Declination of the Sun: with many other necessary and delightful Conclusions:
performed very readily. Also the use of a Nocturnal, whereby you may learn to
know the Stars in Heaven, and the Hour of the Night by them; with many other
delightful Operations. Price 6d. A brief Discourse of a Passage by the
North Pole, to Japan, China, etc. pleaded by three Experiments and Answers to
all Objections that can be urged against a passage that way: As 1. By a
Navigation into the North Pole, and two Degrees beyond it. 2. By a Navigation
from Japan toward the North Pole. 3. By an experiment made by the Czar of
Muscovy, whereby it appears, that to the Northward of Nova Zembla is a free and
open Sea as far as Japan, China, etc. With a Map of all the discovered Land
nearest to the Pole. By Joseph Moxon, etc. Price 6d. Regulae Trium Ordinum
Literarum Typographicarum; Or, the Rules of the three Orders of Print-Letters,
viz. the Roman, Italica, and English, Capitals and Small; showing how they are
compounded of Geometrick Figures, and mostly made by Rule and Compass. Useful
for Writing Masters, Painters, Carvers, Masons, and others that are lovers of
Curiosity. By Joseph Moxon, etc. Price 5s. The Use of the Astronomical Playing
Cards, teaching an ordinary Capacity by them to be acquainted with all the
Stars in Heaven; to know their Places, Colors, Natures and Bignesses. Also the
Poetical Reasons for every Constellation. Very useful, pleasant, and delightful
for all lovers of Ingeniety. By Joseph Moxon, etc. Price 6d. The Astronomical
Cards. By Joseph Moxon, etc. Price plain 1s. Colored 1s. 6d. best colored,
and the Stars Gilt. 5s. Geographical Playing Cards, wherein is exactly
described all the Kingdoms of the Earth, curiously engraved. Price Plain 1s.
Colored 2s. best Colored and Gilt 5s. the Pack. The Genteel Housekeepers
Pastime; or, the Mode of Carving at the Table, represented in a Pack of Playing
Cards. By which, together with the Instructions in this Book, any ordinary
Capacity may easily learn how to Cut up, or Carve in Mode, all the most usual
Dishes of Flesh, Fish, Fowl, and Baked Meats: and how to make the several
Services of the same at the Table; with the several Sawces and Garnishes proper
to each Dish of Meat. Set forth by several of the best Masters in the Faculty
of Carving, and published for public use. Price 6d. Carving Cards. By the best
Carvers at the Lord Mayor's Table. Price 1s. Compendium Euclidis Curiosi. Or,
Geometrical Operations, showing how with one single opening of the Compasses
and a straight Ruler, all the Propositions of Euclid's first five Books are
performed. Translated out of Dutch into English. By Joseph Moxon, etc. Price
1s. An Introduction to the Art of Species. By Sir Jonas Moor. Price 6d. Two
Tables of Ranges, according to the Degrees of Mounture. By Henry Bond Senior.
Price 6d. Mechanic Exercises: Or, the Doctrine of Handy-Works, in nine Monthly
Exercises. The first Three, viz. Numb. I. Numb. II. Numb. III. teaching the Art
of Smithing. The second Three, viz. Numb. IV. Numb. V. Numb. VI. teaching the
Art of Joynery. The third Three, viz. Numb. VII. Numb. VIII. Numb. IX. teaching
the Art of House-Carpentery. Accommodated with suitable Engraved Figures. By
Joseph Moxon, etc. Price of each Monthly Exercise 6d. Mechanic Dialling;
Teaching any man, though of an ordinary Capacity, and unlearned in the
Mathematics, to draw a true Sun-Dial on any Given Plane, however situated;
only with the help of a straight Ruler and a pair of Compasses; and without any
Arithmetical Calculation. By Joseph Moxon, etc. Price 1s. 6d. Mathematics made
Easy: Or, A Mathematical Dictionary, Explaining the Terms of Art, and
Difficult Phrases used in Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, Astrology, and
other Mathematical Sciences, Wherein the true Meaning of the Word is Rendered,
the Nature of Things signified Discussed, and (where Need requires) Illustrated
with apt Figures and Diagrams. With an Appendix, exactly containing the
Quantities of all sorts of Weights and Measures: The Characters and meaning of
the Marks, Symbols, or Abbreviations commonly used in Algebra. And sundry other
Observables. By Joseph Moxon. Price 2s. 6d. The English Globe, invented by the
Right Honorable, the Earl of Castlemain, (and of which this Book shows the
use) containing about a Foot in Diameter, are made by Joseph Moxon. Price
ordinary made up 40s. and with the Projection described in Section 6. of this
Book. Price 50s.
At the place aforesaid, you may also have all manner of Maps, Sea-Plats,
Drafts, Mathematical Books, Instruments, etc. at the lowest Prizes.

FINIS.

