THE CATALOGUE OF THE FELLOWS and other MEMBERS of the Royal College of
PHYSICIANS, London. Printed October 4. 1695.
With some necessary AMENDMENTS and ADVERTISEMENTS.
Denotes those who took their Degree by Mandate, under some Foreign Prince or
Ambassador, etc. Signifies those who have taken the Degree of Doctor abroad,
and are admitted to that Degree in one of our Universities. Those who have this
mark * are such Ancient Members of the College who had taken their Degree of
Doctor before the Year 1659. But We have not given the Title of Doctor, to
those younger Members whose Names we find not Registered for that Degree in
either of our Universities since that Year, because we have no Anthentick,
proof of their taking that Degree, neither did the late Poll-Tax take notice of
them as Doctors. Notes those who are entered into the New Association, by
Subscribing Fifty Pounds a-Man to stand by the President and Censors for
promoting the good of the College, viz. Establishing a Monopoly for the
Corruption of the practice of Physic, Tending to the Destruction of Mankind.
Fellows.
DR. Samuel Collins, President. * Dr. Walter Charleton. * Dr. George Rogers, *
Dr. Thomas Burwell; Elect. Cens. * Dr. Peter Barwick. Sir Thomas Millington.
Knight. Elect. Dr. John Lawson,Elect. Dr. Edward Brown, Treasurer, Elect. Dr.
Josias Clark, Elect. Dr. Richard Torlesse, Elect. Cens. Dr. Samuel Morris. Dr.
Thomas Alvey. Mr. Ed. Hulse, Elect. alias Dr. Halsius. Dr. Richard Morton. Dr.
Charles Goodall. Dr. Robert Brady,Prof. Med. Cant. Dr. Phineas Fowke. Dr.
Walter Harris. Dr. William Briggs. Dr. Walter Mills. Dr. Edward Tyson. Dr.
Charles Fraiser. Dr. Frederick Slare. Palatino-Germ. Dr. Richard Darnelli. Dr.
John Bateman. Mr. William Johnston. Dr. William Dawes, Cens. Dr. Thomas Gill.
Cens.Reg. Dr. Richard Robinson. Dr. Lancelot Harrison. Dr. Martin Lister. Dr.
Robert Pit. Dr. Richard Field. *Dr. Edmund Dickenson. Mr. William Stokeham. Sir
Edmund King, Knight. Dr. Francis Bernard. Mr. Christop. Love-Morley. Mr. Edward
Baynard. Dr. Theodore Colladon. Mr. Richard Blackburne. Mr. Christian Harrel.
Dr. Simon Welman. Mr. George How. Mr. Nathaniel Johnston. Dr. Robert Pierce.
Mr. Robert Gray. Dr. Richard Smith. Mr. Joshua de Feure. Mr. Thomas Walsh. Dr.
John Ratcliff. Dr. John Harrison. Mr. Hans Sloane. Mr. Richard Blackmore. Dr.
Tancred Robinson. Dr. Richard Carr. Mr. John Hutton. Mr. James Welwood. Dr.
Peter Gelsthorp. Dr. William Musgrave, Dr. Humphrey Ridley. Dr. William
Gibbons. Dr. William Gould. Dr. John Hawys. Dr. Robert Conny. Dr. Samuel Garth.
Dr. Barnham Soame. Dr. Hugh Chamberlen. Dr. William Cole. Dr. Salusbury Cade.
CANDIDATES.
Dr. John Nicholson. Dr. Thomas Hoy. Dr. Thomas Sutton. Dr. Joseph Gaylard. Dr.
Richard Adams. Dr. Humphrey Brook. Dr. William Coward. Dr. Denton Nicholas.
HONORARY-FELLOWS.
SIr William Langham. *Dr. Robert Fielding. *Dr. John Windebank. *Dr. John
Yardley. *Dr. Thomas More. *Dr. William Burnet. Mr. Henry Sampson. Dr. Daniel
Cox. Mr. Nehemiah Grew. Mr. Thomas Gibson. Dr. Peter Alder.
LICENTIATES.
Mr. John Feak. Mr. Praise Watson. Mr. Isaac Chauncy. Mr. Christopher Crell.
Mr. John Martin. Mr. Philip Guide. Mr. John Groenvelt. Mr. Joshua Palmer. Mr.
Henry Morelli. Mr. John Peche. Mr. Thomas Hobbs. Mr. William Sydenham. Dr. John
Jones. Mr. Charles Nichols. Mr. Clopton Havers. Mr. David Hamilton. Mr. John
Deffray. Mr. William Grimbalston. Mr. Caleb Coatsworth. Mr. Sebastian le Feure:
Mr. John Tivil. Mr. Francis Upton. Mr. Thomas Botterell. Mr. James Maucleer.
Mr. John Charles. Mr. Philip Rose. Mr. Thomas Rolfe Mr. William Oliver. Mr.
Oliver Horseman. Mr. Ralph Hickes. Mr. Thomas Walker. Dr. Judocus Crull. Mr.
Peter Silvestre. Mr. Charles Morton. Mr. George Fleming. Dr. Stephen Hunt. Mr.
William Cockburn. Mr. Thomas Turberville. Mr. Edmund Devis. Mr. John Crichton.
A short Account of the Institution and Nature, of the College of Physicians,
London.
Published by themselves, 1688.
1. The FELLOWS ARE Doctors of Physic, chosen out of the Candidates, who have
been always limited to a certain Number, and are now confined to the Number of
Fourscore, by His present Majesty's (King James's) Graciouses Charter: Out of
these are chosen the President, Elects, Censors, and other Officers of the
College, who, with the rest of the Fellows, are solely concerned in the
Governing Part of the College, and have a Voice in the making and rescinding
any Statutes, Orders, or Bylaws, relating to Physic and the Practice thereof.

2. CANDIDATES Must be Doctors in Physic, admitted to that Degree in one of
our Own Universities, must not be Foreigners, and ought to have practiced
Physic Four Years before they are admitted into that Order; out of these, as
the Seminary, the Fellowships are filled up, as they become vacant, in a
perpetual Succession.

3. HONORARY FELLOWS Are such Doctors in Physic, as by reason of their being
Foreigners, or having taken their Degrees in some University beyond the Seas,
are not incorporated into either of Ours; or, for some other reason (having not
been Candidates) are not of the Number of those who have Votes in the Affairs
of the College.

4. LICENTIATES Are such other Persons Skilled in Physic, who by reason of
their being Foreigners, or their not being admitted Doctors in one of Our
Universities. or for their not being Eminently Learned, or by reason of their
too great Youth, or such like Causes, are not capable to be Elected into the
Number of the Candidates; yet may, notwithstanding, be serviceable to the
Public, in taking Care of the Health of the King's Subjects, at least in some
particular Diseases.

NOW, of all these several Ranks and Degrees of Practisers in Physic, none of
them is confined to any certain Number but the Fellows and Candidates; so that
the Rest being wholly unlimited; no Person can be excluded out of the College,
or debarred from Practice, but such as are so wholly illiterate and unskilful,
that they dare not adventure to submit themselves to the Examination and
Judgment of the President and Censors of the College, either as to the Goodness
of their Medicines, or their own Skill in all, or any Part of Physic; though
the President and Censors be Men strictly sworn to do justice to all Persons,
who shall present themselves, or their Medicines, to their Scrutiny and
Examination.

From hence it manifestly follows, That the College of Physicians is very far
from being a Monopoly, since it cannot reject any of the King's Subjects, who
are duly qualified for the Exercuse of all, or any Part of Physic.

Dr. BADGER's QVERIES to the Monopoly and Pretended College of PHYSICIANS.
I. WHether this present Medley of Physicians, who call themselves the College,
has not justly forfeited their Charter, having notoriously violated the
Fundamental Statutes of their own Society? And whether the late King James's
Gracious Charter, as they call it, by Virtue whereof they have hitherto acted,
even under this Government, could if Recorded, justify their Illegal and mad
Proceedings? II. Whether those who have taken the Degree of Doctor in foreign
Universities, but were never Incorporated into one of ours, are capable of
being Candidates by their Statute of Candidates, Chap. 11. P. 78. and whether
those who are incapable of being Candidates can be chosen Fellows, Chap. 12. p.
93? III. Whether any, who are once entered into Holy Orders, can be admitted
into the College of Physicians by their Statute of Fellows, Chap. 12. p. 100.
And whether it be decent for a Preacher to meddle with Women's Businesses and
Diseases, ibid. p. 99. And whether it be a good Plea for a Sacrilegious
Deserter of the Ministerial Function, being admitted into the College, to
allege, That Presbyterian Orders are no Orders? IV. Whether the Sacrilegious
Deserters of the Ministry, and others, who are not qualified to be Candidates,
or Fellows of the College, according to the Statutes, are fit to be entrusted
with the Power of governing and enacting New Statutes to exclude others, who
are duly qualified; and secure themselves in their Usurpation, to the Prejudice
of our Universities, and the manifest Corruption of the Practice of Physic,
tending to the Destruction of Mankind? V. Whether it be not contrary to the
Oath of the President, to admit those into the College, who have not taken the
Degree of Doctor in one of our Universities; or, who have formerly entered into
Holy Orders, since this Admission is plainly contrary to the Statutes which he
is sworn to observe, Chapter 2. of the President, p. 15? VI. Whether the President
and Censors, who are strictly sworn to do Justice to all Men, be not manifestly
guilty both of Injustice and Perjury, in denying Admission into the College to
those who are duly qualified, according to the Laws of the Land and their own
Statutes? And whether from hence it does not plainly follow (according to their
own way of arguing, in the said short Account of their Institution) That this
pretended College of Physicians is a Monopoly, since they reject the King's
Subjects, who are duly qualified for the Practice of Physic? VII. Whether
their dealing with Dr. John Badger be not a plain Instance of Injustice and
Perjury; who being examined (in 83.) three several times in Latin, according to
their own Statutes, Chap. XVI. p. 119. and having since Regularly commenced
Doctor of Physic in 1687, according to their Direction, and upon their solemn
promise of granting his Admission into the College was nevertheless rejected
and denied Admission, though the President, at the same time, did acknowledge
that there was all the Reason and Justice in the World for it? And whether
their Statute of Exclusion (New-Stat. No. 16) made three Months after he
presented himself to them for his Admission, was not contrived on purpose
against him, contrary to their Faith and Promise?
The Statutes of the College of Physicians, London, in Latin and English, are
to be Sold at the Printing-Press, under the Royal Exchange in Cornhill.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCXCVI.


