A CAUTION AGAINST Tumultuous Petitions: From a Gentleman in the Country, To
his Friend in LONDON, December. 30. 1679.
SIR,
THat little discourse we had last, wherein my opinion and suffrage was
desired, concerning the reasonableness of General Addresses of all the Members
to the Head, in an universal distemper of the Body; though in the humble dress
of a Petition, has yet so mutinous an Aspect, as carries a prodigious horror
with it, and gives us the prospect of that calamity, disorder, and confusion,
wherein such preposterous motions and commotions do usually determine by your
self procured, but just judgment of an offended Deity to an infatuated People,
that whilst the wounds of a detestable Rebellion and Civil War are yet
bleeding, are fiercely prosecuting its sad revival. And the rest of the men
that were not killed by those plagues (mentioned in Rev. 9. 20, 21.) yet
repented not of the works of their hands. The redeemed Loyal Royallists repent
not of their intemperancies, or at least reform it not; neither the Papists of
their Idolatries and Conspiracies; the Presbyterians and Parliamenteers of
their Murders, Sorceries, Fornications, and Thefts; those Witchcrafts of
Rebellion, wherewith they delude themselves and their Proselites, and are made
mere Properties to carry on their malicious and ambitious designs of the active
hands of subtle Projectors of all Factions. And too late I fear we shall find
the Jesuits, though undiscerned, to be the grand Promoters of these Petitions,
and what they could not effect as Papists, they endeavor doubtless as
heretofore to accomplish by Protestant Presbyterians, sowing the seeds of
Sedition and Dissension; and what these Petitioners would be at, is evident by
the late Insurrection and Declaration of the Scotch Rebels, timely suppressed
by Divine Providence. So let all thine Enemies perish, O Lord: But let those
that love thee be as the Sun when he goes forth in his might, that the Land
may have rest many years.

Now, Sir, it was, and is yet my wonder, that a person of your ingenuity and
parts should fall into this snare, and be caught with specious pretenses, which
are indispensably necessary to carry on a mischievous Design to subvert the
Government, which they seem to endeavor to rectify and support, and with this
Bait to catch well-meaning men, first to subscribe, and then to pursue that
Engagement, and what ere conduces to advancement, or shall be imposed upon them.

Thus the Protestation, the forerunner of the late War, had nothing in it, but
what the best Protestant Christian in the World might with a good Conscience
have subscribed, and yet upon that foundation there followed dreadful
Superstructures. Perhaps you will say, the Petition is recommended from Persons
eminent in the Nation, Patriots, and assertors of the Peoples interests and
welfare: These indeed are Persons privileged within doors, but they have no
lawful Authority when out of the House, to promote any public Petitions;
neither are a multitude to be followed to do evil.

There were no less than 250 such Princes of the Assembly famous in the
Congregation, men of Renown, (says the Text, Numb. 16. 2.) And they gathered
themselves together against Moses and against Aaron, disputing their
Prerogatives, and said unto them, Ye take too much upon you, etc. Neither did
they leave out so necessary an ingredient to their purpose, as a complacent
Complement to the People, by stiling them the holy Congregation of the Lord,
every one of them. The dreadful consequences of this follows in the Story: The
Earth's Division devours them quick, to punish them for their Division, and
Fire from Heaven consumes them, and the infecting minds of fourteen thousand
seven hundred Rebels and Murmurers met the Plague, and became mortally
infectious to one another. And are thus far paralleled in our Times, that
though the Earth did not swallow these Rebels up quick, yet the Lord did a new
thing, and the Earth did in a manner vomit up three of the grand Rebels out of
their graves, and since the Nation has felt a War, and the bloody City, whose
scum is yet in her, I fear has felt the Fire and the Plague; and though it be
affirmed the Fire was by Plot, yet I think few will venture to say the
Pestilence was a Plot. But these three prodigious Judgments had their Meteors
to declare whence they came: Lord, when thy hand is lifted up they will not
see, but they shall see, and be ashamed for their envy toward thy loyal
People, so that a man shall say, Doubtless there is a God that judges the
Earth.

How zealous God has been for the supreme Magistrate, and how severe to such
as are over-busie to censure or pry into the Errors of Princes, there is a
notable example in the punishment of Miriam, for lessening her reverence and
duty to Moses, though a Brother, because he had taken a Gypsy, or Ethiopian
Woman, or to speak in the language of our bad Times, a Miss: And yet God said
to an High Priest and a Prophetess, Wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak
against my servant Moses? and the anger of the Lord was kindled against them,
and Miriam became leprous, white as snow. Far be it from me to plead for
Incontinency, or any thing scandalous to Christianity, for I know it gives too
much occasion to the Enemies of God's Vicegerent to blaspheme, and seems to be
obnoxious to a punishment, like that of David in his Son Absalom. But I would
not have any one think, that the Errors of Princes ought to lessen our Duties.

Let us therefore fear God and the King, and not meddle with those that are
given to change, which I think is at this time a duty incumbent upon all that
have the Cure of Souls, to press upon their Congregations.

Sir, Your putting the Question to me, must be my Apology for the declaration
of my thoughts upon this Subject, which comes to you in a most unfeigned
Integrity from,

Sir, Your Affectionate Friend.

LONDON, Printed for W. C. MDCLXXX.


