The Moderate ENQUIRER RESOLVED. In a plain description of several Objections
which are summed up together, and treated upon by way of Conference, concerning
the contemned People commonly called QUAKERS, who are the Royal Seed of God,
and whose innocence is here cleared in the Answers to the many Objections that
are frequently produced by their Opposers. Which may be profitable for all to
read that have any thing against them; and useful for all such as desire to
know the certainty of those things which are most commonly reported of them.

Written in the behalf of the brethren, in vindication of the Truth, by VV. C.

The way of the wicked is as darkness, they know not at what they stumble,

Prove. 4 19. The simple believes every word; but the prudent man looks well
to his going,

Prove. 14. 15. London, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth, near
Aldersgate, 1658

TO THE READER
My Friend,
For as much as many of these People have taken in hand to set forth large
declarations of those things which are most surely believed among them, (even
as they have received them from the Lord) it seemed good to me also (having had
perfect knowledge of the things herein contained) to publish them to the view
of many people, accordingly as they were laid before me in the light of truth,
that all such as are inquisitive to understand the certainty of those things
which are usually reported of these People, might be further informed,
satisfied, and resolved.

Moreover Reader, if certain strange things have been brought to thy ears
concerning these People, and that thou art desirous to know the truth of them,
as the Athenians were to know what Paul's new Doctrine meaned, then this small
Book is very suitable for thee, and if thou look it over with patience,
moderation, and sobriety, I shall account thee more noble in that particular
then they that should reject it, and account it not worthy of reading, as they
have ^one others of the writings of the^e People, who have written most
excellent things according to the wisdom given unto them, in which writings
there are many things hard to be understood, which ev l men terms error and
blasphemy; but be thou wise unto that which is good, and simple concerning evil.

THE Moderate Enquirer RESOLVED.
Enquirer. I Hear great rumors and reports of a People called ^uakers, which
should be risen up in these last days; Can thou tell me what a People they
are? When they arose? By whom they were raised? And to what end?


Resolver. I do believe thee, that great Rumors and Reports thou hear of
them, but know this, that the generality of the Reports which are reported of
them, are mixed with untruths; Therefore have patience a little, and by the
Lords assistance I shall endeavor rightly to inform thee, and (so far as I am
allowed of God) shall also seek fully to resolve thee concerning them; but thy
first demand cannot in a few words be answered but afterward it may more
fully; yet in a word or two I say, They are a People that fears God above all
the Families of the Earth, and that do worship him in his own way, viz. in
spirit and in truth; they do also love God above all, and their neighbor as
themselves, and ^.

They were raised up (from death to life) about eight or nine years ago, and
since the year (52) they have much multiplied and increased, for the blessing
of the Lord has been (and to this day does rest) upon them, and by him (who
causes them to multiply) were they raised up, for this very end and purpose,
to praise and magnify his Name in the earth (who is God over all, blessed for
ever) and to publish his living Truth abroad, that his salvation might be known
unto the ends of the earth, and therefore has he manifested his eternal power
in them, by which the world shall be overturned.


Enq. Tho^ speak strange things o^ them, which if I knew that thou spoke the
truth, I would become one of them, for unto such a people I desire to be united.


Res. Thou now seem to vvonder, but if a third part of the dealings of the
Lord with them, were declared in thy hearing, then thou vvoulst stand
astonished to hear* what the Lord has done for them; but peradventure thou
art one of them that cannot believe it though men should declare it unto thee;
and whereas thou ^ais^, ^ If thou knew that I spoke the truth, thou would
become one of them, for unto such a people thou desire to be united, etc. But
consider, it is not an easy matter to become one of them in truth, and to be
united to them in the spirit, yet it is an easy matter to come among them, and
to conform unto them; but before thou become one of them, and united to them,
thou must be turned from darkness to light, from the power of Satan unto God,
and then thou will become as they are, and where they are, thou will be also,
and then thou will come to receive the desire of thy soul, as they have done.


Enq. Thou thy self give^ a good report of them, ^ut I hear otherwi^e abroad in
the world, where one speaks well of them, there is a hundred that cries out
against them and their errors, and blasphemies, and d^mnable doctrines.


Re^f. My testimony is true which I give of them, for I am one that has
perfect understanding of the dealings of the Lord with them, and am very
frequent among them, and far be it from me to extend beyond the truth in any
particular, or ^o fall from my testimony, which I could ^eal with my blood (^f
thereunto called.) And what if thou hear thousands in the world controuling of
them, exclaiming out against them, esteeming them not fit to live upon the
earth; this may the more confirm thee that they are of God; for if they were of
the world, the world would love them; and if they spoke of the world, the world
would hear them; but because the Lord has chosen them out of the world,
therefore does it hate them, and cry out against their doctrines and opinions,
and does suppose them to be erroneous, blasphemous, and damnable; but their
censuring and supposing of them to be so, does not make them so; for the Jews
supposed Christ to be a blasphemer, but he was not; the same generation
supposed the Apostles to be movers of sedition, and pestilent fellows, but they
were not; and at that time they were by more condemned then owned, as many
examples might be produced, but I believe thou thy self art not ignorant of
this.


Enq. No, no, but I only tell thee what I hear of this People, I my self do
not say that they are such, but I would gladly be informed of the truth of the
things reported of them, for it is a good sign to me that all men speak evil of
them, it is so much the more apparent that they are of God, for his people was
always hated of the world.


Res. This is but words springing forth of their persecutors, and back-biters
will not say the same to their face, when they are present to answer for
themselves, and for the Truth. But tell me, could thou with M^ses, rather
s^ffer affliction with such a people, (to wit) Imprisonment, spoiling of thy
Goods, loss of thy good name and reputation, and be bitten with the Priests
mouths, to be deprived of thy liberty and estate, and to be separated from thy
wife and children, kindreds and relations; would thou suffer this for the
truth's sake as these people are ready to do when they are thereunto called?
Would not this cross fall on thee heavy, this way prove to thee strait, and
this gate narrow? Would thou not rather choose to enjoy the pleasures of sin,
the delights and vanities of the world, the pleasures and renown thereof, and
while that thou live in the same, thou may enquire after the certainty of
the reports which are reported of those that are redeemed from those things in
which thou live, and confess the truth of that which they possess, and thou
thy self be out of it.


Enq. That is true; but I hope we need not be so severe and strict, and so
wil^ul as to leav^ our wives, and children, and callings; for do (...) not
know, that he that does not provide for his Family, is worse then an Infidel?


Res. Thou can not be too strict and severe in godliness, but thou waist be
too wilful, peevish, and perverse in wickedness, and too faithless in trusting
God to provide for those that he has given thee, and in that particular thou
may be as an Infidel thy self, or as one of the Gentiles which seeks after
things pertaining to this life, saying. What shall we eat? or what shall we
drink? or wherewithal shall we be clothed? but by taking of thought, they
cannot add one cubit unto their stature: Now if thou come to the light
wherewith Jesus Christ has enlightened thee, it will bring thee to the faith of
Gods elect, by which the ust does live, and then thou will come to provide
things honest in the sight of all men, and to be diligent in the creation,
serving the Lord in thy place and calling wherein thou art to abide, and not
voluntarily to leave thy wife and children without providing for thy Family
that which is honest, decent, and fitting, otherwise thou will be condemned by
the light in thy conscience, which is a swift witness against all wilfulness,
peevishness, and perverseness, both in Jew and Gentile.


Enq. Well, these things does pertain to one^ own particular, (which indeed are
good in thems^^ves) but I would be further informed ^oncern^^g these people
(called quakers) in general: I would have thee tell me how they came to have
that name, and who gave it them?


Res. To speak of things which concerns ones own particular, is commonly the
most beneficial; but it is the property of fools to be busy in other men's
matters, but let us come to thy question, how they came to have that name, the
which I intend to declare unto thee if the Lord will.

After that the Lord had visited them in his everlasting love, and convinced
them of his eternal truth, then did he manifest his eternal power in them,
which made the strong man to bow himself, and the keepers of the house to
tremble; by the operation of which power the bodies of some of these people
came to be shaken, (like as David's was) and this being apparent unto many
spectators, who despised and wondered at the workings of the power of the Lord;
these despisers and wonderers, (who were also scorners) did from hence give
these people this Name, so that thou may take notice, that it was the
generation of scorners that gave them it.


Enq. Now I understand it, but thou hints David, as though he had been a
quaker; it is true, fearfulness and trembling came upon him, but was there any
other of the holy men of God that quaked? if so, why then do the people think
it so strange now?


Res. The work of the Lord was eve^ strange to the world; for when David
qu^ked, trembled, and roared, all they tha^ saw him, laughed him to scorn, so
that h^ was a reproach of men, and despised of the people, and his words do the
scoffers and scorners o^ this generation read and sing and reproacheth and
despises them tha^ tremble and quake at the Word of the Lord as he did. There
were other of the holy men of God that were quakers; as for example. Mo^es he
was one that did fear and quake; and the Prophet Haba kuk, his lips quivered,
his belly shook, and rottennes^ entered into his bones; and that was strange to
the men of his generation, like as David's quakings and roarings was strange
and wonderful in his days; and several more examples might be instanced, by
which the ignorance of this generation might more fully be understood and
manifested. Some of which has not been afraid to call the power of God (which
has made these people to quake and tremble) Wi^chcraft, and to say that it was
of the Devil; but they were such as spoke evil of Dignities, and did err, not
knowing the Scripture, (which speaks of quakers) nor the power of God, which
causes the fleshly man to quake, and the keepers o^ the house to tremble, the
which these people do witness?


Enq. But as touching their Worship, or the manner of it, what is it? Read they
sing they, or pray they in their Meetings? Or deny they singing and praying, as
is reported of them?


Res. Their manner of Worship does differ very much from the world and they
that are of the world can neither take pleasure nor delight in it; for when
they come together, they wait upon the Lord in his light, it may be sometimes
two or three hours in silence, and sometime it happens that in less space then
one hour some of them may be moved to speak more or less to the edifying of the
rest in the mos^ holy Faith; but their Worship consists not in words but in
spirit and in truth; and in the light of truth they read their own conditions,
which light does open unto them the mysteries of the kingdom. And for singing
and praying, they do them both with the spirit and with understanding, but the
formal singing and praying of the world, which is not in the spirit, nor with
understanding, this they do deny, for they see that God is not honored by it;
and that which dishonore^h God, they disown; but that which honoreth and
exalts him alone, to that their souls are united and dearly they do it own.


Enq. But this does seem very strange (...) me, that they should sit some hours
together silence, had they not better read, pray, an^ sing, that they might
thereby get the motion^ the spirit, by exercising of themselves in s^cred
devotion?


Res. It seems not strange unto the^ alone, but unto thousands more, who can^
not apprehend that which they are mad^ partakers of in silent meetings, in the
which they vvitness the workings of the power of God, which raises the life
tha^^ is immortal in them, upon which the^ feed, and by which they come to be
nourished up unto eternal life; so that the motions of the pure Spirit of life
they fee^ daily, which is not obtained by bodily exercise, (which profits
little) neither by self-performances, which avails not, but by waiting in
the light of life, there are the motions of the Spirit of the Lord known, and
there is the sacred devotion, which is acceptable unto the Lord; and that
devotion which is out of the light, is not sacred^ but imperfect, and unholy.


Enq. Thou speak so promis^uously when thou speak of the light of life,
that I do not comprehend thee, will thou therefore t^ll me if it be the same
light of which these people speak so much, and show me what that ^^ight is? and
where that I may find a measure ^of it, for I would willingly comprehend it?


Res. If my words be obscure and promiscuous to thee when I speak of the light
of life, it is because thy understanding is dark, for my words are words of
plainness and of truth; yet nevertheless I shall endeavor to speak to thy
capacity and understanding, that I be not as a Barbarian to thee, that so our
reasoning together might not be in vain; neither would I willingly multiply
words to no purpose, which does not tend to edification, for there is enough of
that abroad in the world; wherefore let us come to the thing it self, viz. To
the light of which I spoke, which is the self-same of which these people
speak; and that of which they speak, is the same that John the Baptist bore
witness of, and the same of which the Prophets (by whom God spoke unto our
Fathers) prophesied and foretold; and he who is the light of the world,
acknowledged it when he was come into the world, whose Name was Immannel,
which by interpretation is, God with us, and they that desire to see the
presence of the Lord to be with them, they must come to the light which
comes from him whose Name is called Immanuel, and they that believe and walk
in his light, shall come to have the light of life, a measure o^ which thou have
in thy conscience, which shows thee thy sin and transgression, which separates
from God; and if thou turn thy mind to it, thou will find it a swift witnes^
against thy lusts, and earthly desires, and vile affections, and against all
manner o^ evil whatsoever. But this I would have thee to know, that it is in
vain for thee to go about to comprehend it, for it shines in darkness, and
reproves the works of darkness, but the darkness does nor comprehend it.


Enq. Is there not great contention, and much dispute betwixt these People, and
busie-minded men about the light, which (I suppose) is tedious and weari^om to
this people, is it not?


Res. Yea, for they meet with many of these busieminded men that seek to
intrude into the knowledge of high things, who by their sensual wisdom seek to
comprehend this incomprehensible Light, and the more they strive, the more they
puzzle themselves, and although they be puzzled and confounded in themselves,
yet they will not cease from propounding frivolous questions about the light,
many of which have been fully answered according to the folly of these unruly
and vain talkers, lest that they should be wise in their own conceit; but the
truth is, these people will many times avoid the questions and geneologies of
these unreasonable men, because they see them to be unprofitable and vain, and
that does very much torment them.


Enq. Why are they not given to disputing? for if the truth be on their sides,
they might through disputing overcome their opposers, and instruct them that
wilfully oppose themselves, and so do much good thereby, might they not?


Res. There is so much disputing in the World, which is altogether
unprofitable, that it is a mercy that they are no more inclined to it; for what
good can there be brought forth by it, seeing that by the generality of
Disputers the holy Scripture is not a little wrested and perverted, the Name of
God too much dishonored, and many precious hearts disturbed, grieved, and
wearied by the tedious disputing which is among men, and by reason of it much
strife and contention is brought forth, in which these people have no pleasure
nor contentment; for they have not so learned Christ, neither do they seek by
way of disputing to overcome their opposors, (whom they with meekness do
instruct when they wilfully oppose themselves) but to that of God in the
consciences of their opposers, they seek to be made manifest, that by that they
might be overcome, which will convince them of the Truch which these people
has on their sides, and by turning people to that of God in them, they do much
good; for as men come to be brought to that, they come to be brought off from
disputing, to the life of that which Disputers dispute upon.


Enq. It is very true, the Scriptures are much wrested by Disputers; but (pray
thee) tell me what do these people hold of the holy Scripture^? it is reported
they do deny them, is that true?


Res. No, they do not deny them, but does read and peruse them above all books,
and they do affirm, that they are able to make a man wise unto salvation
through faith which is in Christ Jesus; and that they which were given by
inspiration of God, are profitable for Doctrines, for Reproof, for Correction,
for Instruction in Righteousness, etc: they also hold them to be a true
Declaration of those things which were most surely believed among the Saints of
old, who were eyewitnesses, and some of them Ministers of the Word of God, of
which the holy Scriptures do testify. And further they say, that the holy
Scripture was written for their learning, that they through patience and
comfort of the Scripture, should have hope; this with much more, they affirm of
the Scripture, the life of which they witness manifested in them.


Enq. All this is good; but is there any man now that has the same Spirit the
^postles had? Or is the same light, life, and power now to be enjoyed, which
the Saints in former ages witnessed?


Res. I tell thee, whosoever has not the same spirit by which the Apostles
were guided and lead, they are none of his whom the Apostles served and owned
to be their Lord and Lawgiver, Jesus Christ, who is the same to day,
yesterday, and for ever; and they that are his, of his Fold, and of his
Priesthood, they have unity in his light, in which the Apostles had fellowship,
and they are lead and guided by the same spirit that revealed things (which had
been hid from all ages and generations) unto the Apostles and Saints, and they
are preserved in that power which gave the Saints victory over the world, and
they live in the life of immortality, which was made manifest in the Saints of
old; so that the same light, life, spirit, and power, is now made manifest
among the Saints, and to the truth of this these people can set their seals,
who are made partakers of the same according to their measure.


Enq. Have they then revelations now by the same Spirit? Or is there any
miracles wrought among them by the same power?


Res. Yea, they have revelations by the same spirit which revealed the
my^teries of God in former ages to the Saints; for if they had not revelations,
how should they come to the knowledge of the Father, whom none knows but by the
revelation of the Son? and by the mighty power of God, miracles has been
wrought amongst them, and miraculous things has been brought to pass in a
mystery, which is hid from all vulterous eyes living; and they are privy to
these things who are witnesses of the power of God, which has wrought them;
but from scoffers and scorners, dispisers and wonderers, these things are
concealed.


Enq. But such would have a sign, that they might believe, and be convert^d
also, would they not?


Res. Yea, but none must be given them but that of Jonah, for they are of the
adulterous generation that seeks one, saying, Show us a sign, or work us a
miracle, that we may believe that your God is the living God, and that he has
sent you, etc. Now they that will not believe and be converted without a sign,
would no more believe and be converted if one were showed them, then they would
have been persuaded to have repented by one that had been raised up from the
dead, when they rejected Moses and the Prophets, Luke 16. 31.


Enq. But thou spoke of miracles being wrought among these people; do they all
work miracles? Is the gift of prophecy given to all? Or have they diversity of
gifts?


Res. They do not all work Miracles, neither do they all prophecy, for they
have differences of administrations, but the same Lord; and diversities of
operations, but the same God, who has given to one by the Spirit, the Word of
Wisdom; to another the Word of Knowledge, by the same Spirit; to another
discerning of Spirits; so that they have received diversities of gifts, but the
same Spirit.


Enq. Have not every one of them received^ according to their ability, and are
they not in several states and conditi^ns?


Res. Yea, some of them have received one talent, some two, some five, and they
boast not of that which they have, because they have received it from him who
is the giver of every good and perfect gift; their conditions are also diverse,
for there are fathers, young men, and babes, among them; and some there are who
do not yet witness the birth brought forth, which is begotten by the immortal
Word of life; no^v he that is the strongest among men, will bear with the
weakest; and he that is the greatest among them, will become servant to the
least; and when one among them is overtaken with a fault, they that are
spiritual, does restore such an one with the Spirit of meekness; for sometimes
they that are weak among them, does that which the witness of God in them
allows not, and to the witness they consent, which convinces them of the evil
(that they do through weakness) which their soul hates; and a law in their
members they find, which warreth against the law of their mind, by which they
are sometimes brought into captivity to the law of sin, so that they cry out as
Paul did in his warfare, O wretched man that I am, etc. yet herein they find
comfort, that with their minds they serve the law of God, though with their
flesh (in which no good thing dwells) the law of sin; these are such as are
not yet come through the law, nor to the end of the warfare, but finds daily
the flesh lusting against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh.


Enq. Well, is not that a good condition? Did ever any Saint come further in
this life? Or are any of these people made free from the law of sin by any
other law?


Res. The time of the warfare must be known and passed through by as many as
comes to be made free through him who is the end of the Law for righteousness
sake; and he that is faithful to the Lord in the light which brings to the
warfare, the same will bring him through the warfare, yea, to the Law of the
spirit of life (by which some of the people are made free from the law of sin
and death) in Christ Jesus; and this the Saints witnessed, in whom the
righteousness of the Law was fulfilled, through which they are come unto him
who is the end of the Law, and the Prophets, by whom they are made free from
the Law, that being dead wherein they were held, and they become dead to it, by
the body of Christ, which was made a curse for them, to redeem them from the
curse of the Law; so that they are now no more under the Law, but under Grace:


Enq. But what, do they expect to be perfect, or free from sin in this life?
What ground have they for this in Scripture? Was such a state ever commanded or
witnessed by any of whom the Scripture does speak?


Res. That which is perfect, is manifested in them, and by that they wait to be
perfected; for perfection is that which they earnestly press after, and have
hope to attain unto the fullness of it, for they do believe that God would not
command and require that of men, which could not possibly be attained; for he
that said, Be ye perfect, (as your heavenly Father which is in heaven, is
perfect) he has perfected for ever, them that are sanctified; and among such
as were sanctified and perfected for ever, did Paul preach wisdom; and their
perfection he wished, who had not then attained to it, but were pressing after
it, as many of these people are now, who expects to be made free from sin, as
the Saints were, Romans 6. 18. and by the blood of Jesus they hope to be cleansed
from all sin, that being thoroughly sanctified and cleansed with the washing of
water through the Word, they might be presented to him a glorious people, not
having spot or wrinkle, nor any such thing, but that they might be holy and
perfected for ever; but this seems incredible unto many who are not yet come to
the godly sorrow for sin, which works repentance; but these people (whose
eyes the Lord has opened) do see a possibility in the thing, and they are not
without faith, but that they shall obtain it, and therefore go they on unto it,
and will proceed, if the Lord permit, who has manifested that in them which is
perfect, by which he will bring them (and has brought some of them) to the
perfection of purity, and to the beauty of holiness, where Halelujah is sung
unto the Most High.


Enq. The Scripture (I suppose) is much wrested about that point, is it not?


Res. Yea, very much: For they that are against it, heapeth up all the
Scriptureplaces that possibly they can, of the Saints failings, of their
expressions spoken in the time of their warfare; and places of Scripture they
produce, which was spoken of men in their unconverted estate; and these
Scriptures they wrest and pervert, and does add their meanings and conceivings
unto them, and therefore it is that thousands has so much to say against that
point, which they will as earnestly plead against, as any other particular
thing that is in dispute among men at this day.


Enq. What such men are they, that do wrest the Scripture, and differs so much
in their in^^rpretati^ns, which these People cries so much against?


Res. They are such as are unstable, and unlearned, who errs, not knowing the
Spirit, nor the guidings and leadings thereof, but are truce breakers, and
incontinent, who seek to subvert whole Countries by their delusions, which
people are led into by giving heed unto their false interpretations which they
give of the holy Scripture, which is of no private interpretation, and they are
such as gainsay the truth, being p^oud and presumptuous, doting about
questions and strife of words, unruly and vain talkers, such as teach things
which they ought not, for filthy lucre sake; these and such like, do these
people cry out against, for each of them do wrest and pervert the Scripture to
their own ends, seeking thereby to confirm their erroneous opinions, which are
contrary to Scripture, and contrary to Truth; so that these people have good
reason to testify against them, being that the Name of God is so much
dishonored by them, and the holy Scripture s^ ^^taordinarily wrested among
them, by the different interpretations thereof.


Enq. How d^ these people understand the Scripture? Is there not strife and
contenton a^mong them about the meaning of it?


Res. By the same spirit (by which the^ were guided that spoke forth the
Scripture do these People understand it, every one o^ them according to their
measures; and the light in which they walk, does give the^^ ^he same
understanding in the holy Scrip^^ure, which they had that spoke forth (...)
^cripture, although many among them (...) ^rt of so large a measure as the
Authors the holy Scripture had; yet that under^^ding which God has given them
by holy Spirit, is the same which holy men God had, (in its measure) so that
they far from striving and contending about meaning thereof among themselves,
for (...) which the light opens to one, is not ^tradicted by them that are in
the light, ^ therefore they are at peace among ^^selves, and in unity one with
another.


Enq. It is reported of them, that they go in^any Churches to disturb them, and
that ^ speak before the Minister have ended, and ^ieth themselves unruly in the
time of his ^ed Devotion, is this true?


(...). It Is true, some of them have gone in^any Congregations (as Lambs among
^lves) in obedience to the motions of the ^er of the Lord, and in the Assembly
(...) have spoken that which was revealed them while they stood by, and he that
^ld have holden his peace (who had first ^en) left his matter in hand, and
cried (...) Constable, or an Officer to take him ^y that begun to speak his
Revelation; (...) the unruly speaker (that should have ^en his peace, and kept
the people in or^^ beginning to be so ^urious and angry ^^st the other, this
occasioned great disorder in the Congregation, which (...) have been prevented
if the spirit of the Speaker had been subject to the spirit him that had the
Revelation, then m^ the thing have been done decently an^ order, according to
the rule of the (...) ^stle, I Cor. 14, 30, 32, 40. And as touc^ carrying of
themselves unreverently, (...) is said of them because they do not their hat in
the time of their Prayer, join with them in their unholy devoti^^ which they
are not free unto, neither (...) they bid them God speed, because (...) know
that they are out of the Doctrine Christ ^ offering unacceptable sacrifice^
which act these people will not be pa^^kers; but for any of them to go purpo^^
with an intent to disturb any Congre^^ on, I believe such a thing has never
en^ into their thoughts; for commonly (...) they have gone upon service for the
(...) to such places, it has been in the cross^ their own wills, whose lives
have bee^ great danger in them houses called C^^ches, and much of their blood
have (...) spilt, many bruises they have gotten, most shamefully have they been
intrea^ and handled in them places called Church by those that have resorted
unto them, this hundreds will witness and testify, (...) ^ been eyewitnesses
of it.


^nq. It is a strange thing that they will not from such places then; had they
not better ^ill and quiet, and molest none, then so to ^ard their lives, or at
least to take other op^unities then when People are at Church?


^es. The thing is strange in the eyes of (...), that they should (so as it
were) ha^ their lives among unreasonable men, seeks to do them mischief; but
that ^er of the Lord by which they are mo^o go to such places, does oftentimes
^culously preserve them, and into his (...) they commit their life, who has
gi^t them, the which they could freely ^own for the truth's sake, if ther^unto
were called. Now if they should mo^ny in their own wills, by speaking their
words to them, they had better be still ^iet, then to do so; but if the Lord
move (...) to speak to any, or to go to any place, had better obey him, then
bear his ^em^nts for disobedience; and if the par^oken unto, be one that cannot
bear ^d Doctrine, then will they be offended ^olested by him that speaks,
like as ^ziah (Amos 7. 12, 13.) was molested Amos, and therefore would he have
^im to to have fled into another Land, ^ot to have prophesied at Bethel,
because it was the Kings Chapel, and Court, as now several there are, (...)
would not have these people to come their Churches, because the congrega^^on is
disturbed by them, like as the Ki^^ Court and Chapel was disturbed by mos, and
the Synagogues of the Jews Christ and the Apostles, and many (...) persuade
them to the contrary; but (...) persuasions of such they do no more guard, then
Amos regarded the persw^ons of Amaziah.


Enq. What go they to Churches then, cause Amos went to the Kings Chap^ and
because Christ and the Apostles wen^ the S^nagogues as their manner was?


Res. O no; if they had no other grou^ then were they but wilful imitators,
(...) like unto the false Prophets who run w^ the Lord had not sent them; but
these (...) are moved by the same power ((...) moved Amos to go the Kings Chap^
by the same power (I say) are they mo^ to go to steeple houses, and other place
bear testimony unto the same truth (...) Amos held forth; and the same power
(...) moved the Apostles to go into the Sy^ gogues of the Jews; the same does
m^ these people now to go into the meet^ places of the Jews and Gentiles, the^
declare the powerful truth of God to them that have the form, but not the
power, showing unto them how they may come to find that which has been lost,
viz* the life and power of truth.


Enq. Well, but do they not know that t^ere are acts in force against Disturbers
of Minis^^rs put forth by our honorable Magistrates, who will not suffer godly
Ministers to be di^turbed?


Res. Yea, they know it well, and do find ^t, but rather then they will disobey
the Lord, they will choose to suffer by such acts as Shad^ach, M^shach, and
Abednego did, ^ho disregarded the decree of Nebu^hadnezzer, and would not
worship the Golden Image which he had set up; and ^hey who act by the virtue of
these acts, ^o say, they have a Law by which they ^ught to suffer; like as the
Jews did con^erning that Law which they had; by which they said Christ ought to
die, etc. ^ut show me out of the Scripture, where ^ver any honorable
Magistrates (or any that ruled for God) made Acts to pro^ect godly Ministers,
by the virtue of which ^he men that spoke unto them was to be ^ast into prison;
if they did it in their ^eeting-place; had not godly Ministers ^lwayes
Spiritual weapons to defend them withal; and was not Peter and Barn^bas, Paul
and S^las, godly Ministers, wh^ suffered by the acts of the Magistrate^ that
upheld the chief Priests? and were they Honorable Magistrates, or godl^
Ministers, who resisted these godly men whipped them, and cast them into prison
and is it not to be feared that many wh^ are called honorable Magistrates do
pro^tect such Ministers as are persecutors an^ oppressors of the servants of
the Lord who lie in holes and dungeons, by virtue o^ the acts which are made by
impruden^ Magistrates to protect ungodly Ministers by whom the nations are
deceived; tru^ly godly Ministers are ashamed of such and the power by which
they are upheld^


Enq. Do these people contemn Author^ then; as is commonly r^por^ed of them,
(...) are they Subject to the higher power, like (...) the Apostle commands
us to be?


Res. That authority which ^ is of God, an^ from him they do not contemn, neithe^
are they disobedient, but subject to him that rules in this authority for God,
if h^ exalt righteousness in the earth, and be ^ terror to evil doers, and a
praise to the^ that do well, such a Magistrate they hono^ in the Lord; and to
the higher power the^i^ soul es are subject, in which the Magistrate rules, who
is Gods Minister; and of this power unto which their souls are subject, they
are not afraid, neither are they subject because of wrath only, but also for
conscience sake; for this they know, that whosoever resists the power,
resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation.


Enq. But they do not honor Magistrates with their Hat and Knee, as they ought
to be honored, and that offends Magistrates, that receives honor of one
another.


Res. It Is true; they do not bow before them so, as most men do, neither have
they freedom thereunto; for the honor that pertains to a Magistrate consists
not in such trifling things which are of no weight. And I believe thou cannot
produce one Scripture out of the whole Bible, that will prove that Magistrates
ought to be honored with Hat and Knee, that is but a mere complement, and
vanity, a foolish fashion of the world which will pass away; and the
nonperformance of that does but offend such Magistrates as receives honor one
of another, and how can such be^ieve (says Christ, mark) if they be not yet
come to believe; who dare say that ^hey are Gods Ministers, or that they rule
^or God? and these people will rather offend them that believe not, then that of
God in their consciences, which learneth them to seek that honor which comes
from God only, before which humility does go.


Enq. But hark; It is not only said of them that they contemn authority and are
not subject to Magistrates (to which thou have answered) but also that they are
against Gospel^ Ministry; and are great railers against Minist^rys; and their
maintenance; Is that true?


Res. Magistracy, and Ministry, they allow and approve of, the one I have
showed thee before, the other I come unto, and that is Ministry; First, I shall
show thee what Ministers and Ministry they own, and what maintenance they
allow of, that Ministers may have; Secondly, what Ministers and Ministry
they disovvn, and what maintenance they do not approve of.

First, Such as are endued with povve^^ and wisdom from on high, and called to
the work of the Ministry immediately, having received gifts from him that is
ascended far above all Heavens, who for^merly gave some Apostles, some
Prophets* some pastors, and teachers, for the perfect^ing of the Saints, for
the work of the M^nistry etc. And such as he now calls and chooses, who abide
in his doctrine, and gives that freely, which they have received freely: Such
these people do own and their Ministry; but railing against any they do deny,
and Ministers that are so called and qualified as beforementioned, they do
esteem very highly for their works sake, and allows them food and raiment,
and all things that are convenient; and herewith are these Ministers contented,
even with that which they have of free gift from those unto whom they minister
Spiritual things, and so in love, peace and unity they live together, and thus
it is with these people and the ministers whom they do own.

Secondly, the Ministers that they disown are such as runs when the Lord has
not sent them; and do feed with the fat, and cloth with the wool, and make a
prey upon the people; such* as are called of men Master, and stands praying in
the Synagogues, teaching for doctrines the traditions of men; who keep people
ever learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, who are out
of the life of that which they preach to others, by whom the holy Scr^ptures
are wrested and traded (...) who are covetous, ^pro^d, hea^y and high m^^ded,
having a ^orm of godl^ness (...) the power thereof, such they disown to be
Ministers of Christ, who preach for hire, and divine for money, the love of
which constrains them to teach the people, and they that will not give them
money, or put into their mouths, they prepare war against them, and compel
them by suit of law, and thus they rob their mintenance from poor people, whose
goods they will take away by force, from such as has nothing of them nor from
them; now al such greedy unreasonable pretended Ministers and their robbed
maintenance, these people do deny and disown, neither can they pay them wages,
nor in no wise uphold them


Enq. Well, but have they not such in their parishes, to whom the law of the
land allows tithe; whether do they pay them, or suffer the penalty of the
law, and the cruelty of such men?


Res. O, alas, The covetous hirelings they are so spread over the Nation, that
scarce either city or parish are free of them, and truly volums might be filed
of the sufferings of these harmless people, which they undergo, and have
undergone in that particular, through the cruelty and mercilessness of that
unreasonable generation of greedy perverse priests, (whose blessings are
cursed, and whose seed is corrupted) for truly they have even made havoc of
the people, who for conscience sake cannot pay tithe, and therefore have their
goods been pitifuly spoiled; as has been pretty largely published to the shame
and confusion of these merciless and cruel men; but a book of remembrance is
writ, and their actions are upon record.


Enq. But are these people so simple that they will not go to Law with those
that wrong them; what is not the Law open? and the Magistrates will do justice;
will they not?


Res. If thou observed Christ's words well, thou would not call them simple, for
not going to Law with their adversaries; for did he not say, if any man will sue
thee at the Law and take away thy Coat, let him have thy Cloak also? now they
that walk in his light who spoke these words, they abide in his doctrine, and
when their adversary has sued them and recovered treble damage, and takes
away twice the worth of that which he recovered, they resist not, but bears it
patiently, knowing this that there is one that will plead their cause, to whom
vengeance belongs and he will repay.

And although that the law be open, yet they are not free to go to it; For what
said Paul to the ^orinthians, did he not tell them that there was utterly a
fault among them, because they did go to law one with another; why (says he)
do you not rather take wrong? why do you not rather suffer your selves to be
defrauded? so that here thou may see it does not become Saints to go to Law,
and that especially before them that are out of the truth; for such Magistrates
will connive at the sufferings of the oppressed, and not reprove the
oppressors, who ought by magistrates to be rebuked: But there are some prudent
understanding men that are much wearied, with being so daily encumbered with the
beggarly suits of these covetous priests, against these harmless, innocent
people: And some of the Magistrates are backwards enough in doing Justice, and
too forward in fulfilling the desires of unjust men, who deals unjustly wtih
these people, and this is not unknown to some in authority, whose bowels are
sometime moved with compassion to behold the many greivances and annoyances
which are daily renewed upon these that fear the Lord.


Enq. I suppose that Saints in former ages have suffered much by the untoward
generation have they not?


Res. Yea, yea, a cloud of vvitnesses might be produced of the sufferings of
the Saints, some of which had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, of bonds
and imprisonments, some of them were stoned, others sawn assunder, others slain
with the sword, etc. and he that was a precious Saint, and a sufferer by the
untoward generation, he testified, and said, that through many tribulations we
must enter into the kingdom of God; and further he said, that they that will
live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution.


Enq. But these whom thou mentionest were comforted in the midest of their
tribulations and sufferings; are these people so?


Res. Yea, they also are comforted in their tribulations, that they are able to
comfort them which are in trouble, by the comfort wherewith they themselves are
comforted of God; for as the sufferings of Christ abound in them, so their
consolation also abounds by Christ, of which all the opposers and adversaries
in the world cannot deprive them of; they may be bereaved of their goods, and
separated from their friends and brethren, and be debarred of their liberty and
freedom by the power of their adversary; but his power extends not so far, as
to deprive them of their peace in him which is their life, and of the comfort
and consolation which they receive from him; and that they prefer above the
whole world.


Enq. and how comes it that so many of them are cast into prison, and some
whipped, and others banished from some places; Is it for misdemeanour, or for
the truths sake?


Res. Thus it is, many of them have been moved of the Lord to go to
Steeple Houses (which are called churches) and to speak unto the priest and
people, that which the Lord was pleased to lay upon them to declare, it may be
sometime before the priest had done, and sometime after; so some in authority
being then present, have forthwith sent them to prison, for disturbing the
congregation, as they said, and it may be have caused them to be whipped, etc.
and for this very particular hundreds have been put in prison; several others
have been cast into prison, because they could not pay Tithe to the hireling
Priests; others because they could not swear; others because they have not put
off their Hats before Magistrates; others for going to visit their friends that
has been in prison, others for riding above five miles upon a first day to a
meeting; others for speaking a few words in a street, or a market to people,
whom they have exhorted to fear the Lord; others for speaking to ^ome upon the
high way; and for such like things as these, are the most part of them (...) if
not all) cast into prison; and some of them have been fined for standing
cover^d before the Judge, and has laid above a ^ear (or years) in prison for
non-paiment of the fine, and some of them after they ^ave ^uffered imprisonment
a certain time have been banished, and sent away like ^agabonds; and more
favor is showed unto ^alefactors by many in authority then is ^fforded them;
and all this do they patiently suffer for righteousness sake.


Enq. It seems by thy relation of them they suffer much wrong, do they not
petition unto the powers of the earth for relief, and make their redress unto
them in such causes?


Res. They cry unto them for Justice, but to petition unto them as unto Gods,
they cannot in the least do it: although many petitions have been put up
against them; but that does not molest nor troubble them whose trust and
confidence is in the Lord, by whom they do expect to be delivered, and not by
the arm of flesh; their manifold greivances are not hid from the Lord, who will
arise and plead their cause, and rebuke those that afflict them, and severely
punish those that do oppress them.


Enq. But in the mean time do they not seek to avenge themselves of their
adversaries, seei^g they are now become a great body?


Res. O no, they have no such thoughts, for they have referred their cause
wholly to the Lord, to whom vengeance belongs, and he will repay, of whom
they have learned to love their enemies, to bless, those that curse them, to do
good to those that hate them, to pray for those which despitefully use them,
and persecute them; and they are so far from avenging themselves that if one
smite them on the one cheek they will turn the other: And they look not upon
the number of themselves to be any thing, in reference to their redemption, out
of their hands, who exercise Lordship over them, For they know that by one, the
Lord is able to chase a thausand, and by two to put ten thousand to ^light,


Enq, Yea, that is true, yet nevertheless will they not carry weapons, for their
own defense, and for the defense of their Country?


Res. The weapons of their warfare are not carnal but mighty through God, to
the pulling down of strong holds, casting down Imaginations, and every high
thought that exalts it self against the Kingdom of God, and only such weapons
carry they, and he that put them into ^^eir hands is mighty enough to preserve
^^em and their Country, with whose ar^ur they are always armed, having their
^^nes girt about with truth, having on the ^est-plate of righteousness, and the
shield (...) faith, wherewith they are able to quench (...) the fiery darts of
the wicked; they ^ve also the helmet of Salvation and the lord of the Spirit,
which is the word o^ ^od; thus are they armed against their ene^^es that seek
to bereave them of their ^ace with God, whom they only with^^^nd, but violence
to no man will they do, ^at is contrary to the doctrine of their ^^rd to whom
they do commend them^^^ves.


Enq. I suppose by this declaration of them ^at they are a peaceable people:
But what (...) they in life and conversation, for by their ^its we must judge
of them?


Res. My report or declaration of them (...) true, and the truth I speak and
lie not, for (...) have known them from a child (or ^ce that I was a babe in
Christ) and my ^ucation in the Lord has been among ^em, and for the space of
several years I ^ave been daily conversant with them; ^d in all this time, I
have found their life ^d conversation, to be good, honest, and ^reproveable; do
but ask any conscientious man fearing God, that know^ these people, and thou
shall find that (...) testimony of them will not contra^^ mine, yea many of
their opposers will (...) knowledge, that for their life and conver^^tion they
have nothing to accuse them


Enq. But it is said they are rude (...) speech, and uses the word Thee, and
(...) particular persons; is not that an unman^^ly and absurd thing in them?


Res. No, it is the language of the (...) Scripture; and to use thou, and thee,
(...) a particular person, is proper, and (...) unmannerly nor absurd: for when
(...) Lord spoke to Adam, and Adam to hi^^ they used that language; when (...)
spoke to Pharaoh, and Pharaoh to him, th^^^ used that language; when Paul spoke
to (...) ^^grippa, and Agrippa to him, they used (...) language, and it was not
unmannerly, (...) absurd with them, neither do we read (...) it was then
accounted rudeness of spee^^^ And although that this seems so stran^^^ to the
men of this generation, yet it is (...) proper phrase of the Scripture, and
(...) language of all them of whom we read (...) the Scripture.


Enq. I have not observed that so (...) before; but now in their buying and
selli^^^ how do they do? are they of as many (...) (...) other men; or keep
they to yea or nay in ^^eir communication?


Res. To yea and nay, they keep, knowing (...) whatsoever is more comes of
evil, (...) when they have a commodity to sell, ^^ey set a reasonable price of
it, and do not ^act upon the people; and when that ^ey buy a commodity, they
proffer a rea^^nable Price for it, for the which they ^^ppose the party may
well afford it, and ^at which they judge to be the value of ^e thing, and so in
few words dispatch^h; and thus they abide in the Doctrine (...) their Lord, who
has said, Let your yea (...) yea, and your nay be nay, for whatso^er is more
than these, comes of evil.


Enq. But men are so accustomed to many (...) in their dealings one with
another, that should think men will scarce meddle with ^em in affairs, if they
will abate nothing of ^e price which they first set on their com^odity, for
that is most usual among ^n?


Res. It Is true, it is usual among men to ^^ter many needless words in their
deal^gs, and to swear many grievous Oaths because they will not trust one
another; ^^t is not the manner of these People to ^o so, neither have they
freedom thereun^^ in the least, whereupon some of their Cu^toms have absented
from them (...) season, and have made trial of others* (...) they not finding
such ^idelity in others, (...) such just and upright dealings by them, (...)
have returned again to this people, and (...) made further proof of them, and
have fou^ their Commodity to be good and substa^^tial, and well worth that
which they ga^ for it, whereupon they have brought oth^^ Customers with them,
and acquainted the^ with the condition o^ the People, that the would have so
much as they asked, and the they were not given to many words, and (...) to the
which ^he people in process of (...) have well condescended, so that now when
they are known, they are credited, and (...) extraordinarily provoked (by those
th^^ know them) to superfluity of words; and (...) they come to use men to that
which the^ have been little accustomed unto, (to (...) to few words in their
buying and selling*


Enq That is well done of them; yet (...) much against them; for it is said,
they (...) not speak to men upon the way, but pass (...) them without saluting
of them, neither (...) they doff their hats to any, which gives gre^^ offense
to many; wherefore do they carry th^m^selves so uncivilly?


Res. When they have occasion to spea^ to any man, they speak unto him wh^the^
(...) be upon the way, or in the street, or upon the Market, or in any other
convenient ^lace; but to salute men in a complement^ng way, by doffing their
hats unto them, and bowing before them, and giving them ^attering Titles,
(according to the custom and manner of the world) that they are (...) free to
do, and that is a principal thing (...) of the many) which men have against
them; although they honor all men in the lord, without respect of persons, and
be^aveth themselves civilly toward all, yet ^an doff their hat to none, for
that is an ^ct of as proud and uncivil persons, as lives, ^ho will show humility
in that thing, when ^hey are as proud in their heart as Haman ^as, and will
deride and scorn those that cannot for conscience sake do it; and these ^re
they that are offended when it is not ^one, and carry themselves uncivilly to
^ch as does it not.


Enq. Well, but it is a fashion which men ^ve, and a token of civi^ respect;
had they ^t better please men by conforming unto them (...) this thing of small
importance, then to of^nd them through abstaining from doing of it; ^r we read
that Paul became all to all; unto (...) Jews he became as a Jew, etc.


Res. The fashions of this World will ^ass away, but the Word of God endures
for ^ver, by which Word these people (...) redeemed from the World, so that
the^ cannot be conformable to it in its way^ worships, customs, and fashions;
all whi^^ will pass away, and if they should seek (...) please men, then were
they not the se^^vants of Christ, whose servants never (...) such a token of
civil respect (as doffing (...) the hat) that we read of in the whole
Sc^^pture; and who dare call them his servan^ that receive honor of men from
their ha^^ and are offended if it be not given the^ surely they are not like
unto him in the thing, for he received not honor from me^ neither did he seek
it, but said unto tho^ that did, How can ye believe that recei^^ honor one of
another, and seek not (...) honor that comes from God only?

And although Paul became as a Jew u^^ to the Jews, as without law to them th^^
were without law, yea all things to all me^ this he did for the Gospels sake,
not (...) please men, but that he might by all mea^ save some, therefore
condescended he (...) the simplicity in them, speaking low thin^^ to their
capacity and understanding, the so by guile he might catch them, and ga^ or win
them to the truth; but who dare (...) that he became an Idol-worshipper wit^
Idolaters? If so, how should he have brought any from that Idolatry to have
worshipped the living God? Or who dare say that he became an opposer of Truth
with opposers? If so, how should he have gained any of them to the truth; but
it was not so with Paul, who showed himself in all things approved of God, ^n
whose sight he commended himself to every man's conscience?


Enq. I am persuaded that if these People ^ere admitted to answer for
themselves upon ^ll occasions, many would come to be satisfied (...) things
concerning them, wherein they are (...)-informed.


Res. Oh yea; but alas such reports are ^umored abroad of them (by such as say,
^eport, and we will report it) as is not fit^ng to be named among Christians;
and ^ese Reports being credited, or regarded ^y simple people, they become
odious and ^espised among men, and therefore is it ^at there is so much
whooting and hissing (...) them in the streets; but if they might (...)
admitted to make their own defense in ^e presence of prudent and understanding
^en, having their accusers face to face, to love their accusations that they
have a^inst them, I believe many would come to (...) better satisfied, the
mouths of gain (...) would come to be stopped, and the ignorance of foolish men
would come to be silenced; but that is the policy and subtilty of their grand
Adversary (who was a Liar from the beginning) to make people believe all the
horrid lies that can be spoken and invented of them, and thereby comes the
minds of thousands to be evil affected against the precious truth, which if
the^ were but rightly informed of the certainty of things reported, they would
either b^ brought to the acknowledgement of the truth, otherwise to lay their
hands upon their mouths, and become silent, if the^ were not evil men, and
seducers, and suc^ thou know will grow worse and wors^


Enq. Has the truth of God been so d^famed, blasphemed, and reproached in
oth^^ generations, as it is now in this age?


Res. Yea in all ages, when the Lord appeared by his power to reveal his
precio^^ Truth upon the face of the earth; Sat^^ (who goes to and fro in the
earth) has sti^red up his instruments to defame, bla^pheme, and reproach it,
by whose blasph^mies the living Truth has been much ^^faced, and so it is now
at this day, by (...) multitude of lies, false reports, and aspe^^ons which are
cast upon it by wicked a^ ungodly men, who cry out against such (...) formerly
have defamed, blasphemed, a^^ reproached the Truth, and they themsel^^^ are
blasphemers and reproachers, like as the Jews did, who exclaimed against their
Fathers for killing the Prophets, and yet they themselves put him to death who
was the Prince of Glory, of whom the Prophets prophesied.


Enq. But I would yet ask something concerning these People; Baptize they their
children? Or are they themselves baptized?


Res. Their children they do not baptize according to the course of the World,
for they find no Scripture that speaks of Infants baptism, nor no example in
the Scripture for the same; yet they who are in the unity, are baptized by one
Spirit, into one Body; and so many of them as were baptized into Jesus Christ,
were baptized into his death, that they should walk in newness of life; and
this is the only baptism which they do witness.


Enq But were ^hey never baptized with Elementary water?


Res. Some of them in the time of ignorance were baptized with outward Water,
supposing that it were necessary for salva^ion, but after they had taken up the
Ordi^ance, they took up their rest also in the ^ead form, and did apply the
Promises which ^as due to Believers, although little or no ^eformation was
wrought in them, yet ^hey were conceited in themselves that it was well with
them, until the Lord in his infinite love opened their blind eyes, and then
they saw themselves to be poor, naked, and miserable, and that that rest which
they had taken up, was not the rest which the Lord had prepared for his people;
neither was that baptism wherewith they were baptized, the baptism which should
save them by the resurrection of Jesus Christ; neither did the Promises pertain
unto them, which they had applied to themselves; and that which gave them to
see these things, was the light of Jesus Christ in them, bywhich they were
brought afterward to witness the baptism of the Holy Ghost, and Fire.


Enq. But are there none of them sent to baptize, that so others being baptized
by them, might come to witness, the one baptism also?


Res. The same command that Christ gave at the first, he is with us to the end
of the World; which is, Go teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, of the Son* and of the Holy Ghost; but here is no outward Water
mentioned; and the everlasting Gospel they are sent to preach, and they do turn
people from darkness to light, from the power of Satan unto God, and so many as
receive their testimony, and believe in the light which they are turned unto,
they come to witness the one baptism, which is by one spirit, into one body,
although they be never dipped nor sprinkled with outward Water, and hundreds of
these people are come to witness this, who have never been baptized with
outward Water since they believed.


Enq. Own they the Lords Supper?


Res. Yea, the Supper of the Lord they own, and at the Table of the Lord (which
is richly furnished) they sit and do eat abundantly, to the eternal refreshing
of their souls.


Enq. Well, but do they break bread, and drink wine at that Table, like as
professed Christians do?


Res. The Bread that they break is the Body of Christ; and the Cup that they
drink, is the Blood of Christ; but many professed Christians who talks of the
Lords Table, discerns not his Body, and so eats and drinks their own damnation,
yet notwithstanding Christians in Christ breaks one Bread, and drinks of one
Cup and they have unity one with another, even as these people do witness with
whom Christ does ^up, and to the substance they are come, and therefore go they
not by Imitation, ^ike as many do who are called Christians, who yet never came
to eat the flesh of Christ, nor to drink his blood, and therefore have they no
life abiding in them.


Enq. But yet there is something more in which I desire also to be satisfied
concerning these People, for many exclaims out against them, for judging and
condemning others: Now pray thee tell me, what do they judge in others? any
thing besides that which is condemned in themselves?


Res. Nay, It is that only, (to wit) deceit and unrighteousness, which the
judgments of the Lord has passed upon in their own particular; and when they
meet with such as pleads for that which is ordained of old for condemnation,
perhaps they may sharply reprove them, if they judge not the deceit in them;
then the party reproved being one that cannot stand in the judgment, exclaims
out against them as if they were censorious Judges, and horrid blasphemers,
when they have judged and reproved nothing but deceit in them, and that which
is to be eternally condemned, even the very same that is judged in their own
particulars.


Enq. Well, but duth not Christ say, Judge not, that you be not judged? And
Paul says, The man that judges is inexcusable, whosoever he is?


Res. Yea, those are the words of Christ and Paul; by the way take notice of
the following words: did not Christ there speak to the hypocrite that beheld
the Mo^e that was in his brothers eye; but considered not the beam that was in
his own eye: And ^ake Paul's words also as they are: Thou art inexcusable, O
man (says he) whosoever thou art that judge; for wherein thou ^^udgest
another, [mark wel] thou condem^nest thy self; for thou that judge, do the
^^ame things: There is now the man that is ^nexcusable, who judges another for
that which he is guilty of himself; and if thou ^or any man can tax these
people in this, ^hen say that they are inexcusable who are ^^ound guilty in
this thing,


Enq. There is another thing which men ^^ath against them, which is this, They
say that they will not respect persons, but to a Prince or Lord, or whatsoever
that he is, they will say Thee, and Thou to him, and stand with their Hats on
in his presence, as if he were a ^an of no reputation; Is this true?


Res. He who is their God (who has ^ade of one blood all Nations of men for ^o
dwell upon the face of the earth) he is no respecter of persons, and if they
who ^are his people, should have respect to persons, they should commit sin,
and would be convinced of the Law as Transgressors; and for them to have
respect of persons, that were not good; and as for the properness of Thee and
Thou, I have showed thee before. And why may not they stand with their hats
on in the presence of the greatest man upon the face of the earth, ^e^ing that
they stand daily covered in the presence of their God, whose Name is the Lord
of Hosts, who fills Heaven and Earth, in whom they honor all men, without
the respecting of any ones person, or the greatness and magnificency of any,
for what is man but dust? and wherefore should he be adored by his
Fellovv-creature? as if honor pertained to him, which indeed is only due to
his Creator, who formed him of the dust, to which he must return, and then
his honor shall be laid in the dust with him.


Enq Well, but hear, these people say that they are moved of the Lord to do
this, and the other: and that they are sent of God to publish his truth; now if
this were true, they should turn many from their wickedness, should they not?


Res. The truth they must acknowledge, whether they before whom it is
acknowledged, can bear it or no; the which truth has been often rejected by
such as resist the Holy Ghost, by the which these people have been often moved
to declare un^^ the sons of Adam their sin, and to show them their
transgression, and to exhort ^em to repentance and amendment of life, and many
have been turned from darkness (...) light, from the power of Satan unto God,
by those among them, that were sent (...) publish his Tr^th, and to preach his
e^erlasting Gospel unto the Spirits in Pri^^n; yea, thousands are converted,
and tur^ed from iniquity and wickedness, and are ^rought to serve God in purity
and holy^ess in his own Temple, and therefore they ^ave not run as uncertainly,
(or without ^^^ding) neither have they fought as one ^^at beats the air, for
they who are tur^ed from wickedness, by them are the seal (...) their
Apostleship in the Lord.


Enq. It is said that they permit women to ^eak or prophecy among them; Is not
that ex^es^y against the Scripture? For did not Paul (...) that he would not
permit a woman to speak (...) the Church? And where do they read of any ^omen
in the New Testament that prophesied?


Res. For Women to prophecy (upon whom the Spirit of the Lord is poured out) ^
not expressly against the Scripture, but a ^^^filling of the Scripture; for the
Scripture ^ith, That is shall come to pass afterward ^^at I (the Lord) will
pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall
prophecy: Now the fulfilling of this, these people do witness, who will no^
permit a Woman (upon whom the spir^^ of the Lord is not poured out) to speak in
the Church; but notwithstanding every Sister in Christ upon whom the spirit of
the Lord is poured out, (who by that spirit is moved to prophecy) they forbid
not; for the same Paul that did not permit a Woman to speak in the Church, he
wrote un^to the Church that they should not quench the spirit, nor despise
Prophecy; neither do we read that he, nor none of his company did forbid
Philip's daughters to prophecy, [ Acts 21. 8, 9.] who were Virgins, and four
in number, upon whom the spirit of the Lord was poured out; and who will say
that he would have quenched the spirit in Phoebe, if she had been moved by it
to prophecy in that Church of which she was a Servant? And the Spirit of the
Lord, these people will not limit in male or female, who are one in Christ.


Enq. What charity has these People? will they relieve the fatherless and
widow, etc.


Res. They have that charity which suffers long, which is kind and envieth
not; which vaunteth not it self, nor is puffed up; they have that charity which
rejoiceth not (...) iniquity, but in the Truth, which bear^^^h all things,
hops all things, endures (...) things; yea the Charity which they ^^ve
will never fail; and therefore are ^^ey so charitable to the fatherless and
^iddows, whom they rel^ive within their ^ates; if they be naked they cloth
them, (...) they be hungry they feed them, if they (...) destitute of Lodging,
they take them in; (...) discreetly they do it, and with much ^isdome, lest any
should depend upon it, and live in idleness, and this they do, espe^ally to
them of the household of Faith, ^ho cannot work, nor have not of their ^wn
wherewith to subsist, such they Re^eve, that so there need be no Beggar in
^^rael.


Enq. According to the words in thy An^^er to my first Proposition, so I find
it that (...) few words my first demand could not be ^swered, but afterward it
would be more ^lly; Truly I may say to thee as Agrippa ^id to Paul, that he
almost persuaded him to (...) a Christian, even so thou (by thy sober (...)
plain Answers) have almost persuaded (...) to be one of these people; for
verily I have (...) desired to be satisfied in those things ^herein thou have
kindly resolved me, like a ^^reind that desires my eternal felicity, and (...)
the future I hope not to entertain every unsavory report of them as some do,
but (...) to withstand false Reporters, for no^^ have wherewith to answer them.


Res. I am glad that thou art so well^^tisfied and resolved, for that was the
(...) thing that I aimed at, (excepting the (...) of God, and the clearing of
these Peo^^^ innocence) from the very beginning; (...) when I wished thee to
have patience a (...), then I told thee that by the Lords a^^^stance I should
endeavor to inform (...) rightly, and to resolve thee fully so far (...) was
allowed of God. And now seeing (...) it is come to this issue, let me persw^^^
thee to wait upon the Lord in his (...) light, which now in some measure do^^^
convince thee of his precious Truth, (...) which these people do walk; and be
(...) too forvvard in contending for them, (...) thou be one with them in the
life a^^ power of Truth, and then thou vvilt be ^^^able to answer their
opposers, as I ha^ been (by the Lords assistance) to ansvv^^ thy objections,


Enq. For my own particular I find mu^^ more contentment in my self then I did,
a^^ am for the present as an empty Vessel ((...) touching Objections against
these people) (...) I know the subtilty of Sa^an is great, (...) may yet
possess me wi^h do^bts and fear^ ^ (...) bring Objections into my mind when
thou (...) not with me to answer them, and to (...) me: Therefore I entreat
thee to tell me (...) I should do in such a cause.


Res. Thy chiefest remedy in such a (...), is to stand still in the light which
^^weth thee the subtilty of Satan to be ^at; and enter not into consultations
(...) flesh and blood, for that is the way to (...) in doubts and fears, and
the same that ^^teth them in, will bring Objections (...) thy mind, and take
Exceptions against (...) Truth, and against them that are in it; (...) all
these thou must judge down with (...) light, and let them be made thy
foot^^ol, then will that spark of love in thee ^^hich is toward the Truth)
become a ^^me, which many waters will not be (...) to quench; and when
things arises in (...) mind which thou art not clear in, nei^^^r can
comprehend, cumber not thy (...) with them, but dwell low in the cross (...)
thy vvil, and then the aspiring mind (from ^^ich frivolous objections does
arise) (...) come to be kept under the judgment, (...) then a principle of
life thou vvi^t feel, ^^ich will thresh and hew down thy lusts, ^^^rupt
desires, and inordinate affections; (...) as these come to be mortified in
thee, ^wilt thou come to be brought into unity with the Lords people, and to
lie do^^ with them in their Fathers bosom of lo^ where (I hope) thou may at
any (...) find me, in the general Assembly of (...) Ransomed ones of the Lord,
where (...) is sung to the Most High without ceasing.


THE END.
^OSTSCRIPT* OR, Something Written after.
^Ultitudes of Objections may arise out of that mind against the truth, which
cannot close with truth (to wit) the carnal mind, in which an irrecon^ble
enmi^y lodges against the ways of God, the ^^^ship of God, the righteousness
of God, and against truth of God, in which these People are established, that
nothing can satisfy that unsatiable mind but (...) and destruction, for I know
if many Volumes were ^it (more then are) in explanation, and vindication of
(...) truth, yet notwithstanding this busy mind would (...) blemishes upon the
truth, through its defaming, scan^^^^zing, and reproaching of it, whereby their
minds (...) to be blinded in whom death reigns, so that they ^old no beauty nor
comelines^ in the pure everlasting (...), being surprised with jealousies,
doubts, and fears ^^^cerning the immutability, the eternal excellency of the
(...) truth of God, which to us that believe is exceed^^^ precious, and beauty,
glory, and majesty we behold in (...) which does as far exceed the words,
beauty and glo^^^ as the light of the sun exceeds the light of one sta^, (...)
all things below to us that are saved, are but as ^^oss and dung in comparison
of the eternal living ^^^th of God, the excellency of which has not been ^own
by the Apostates, who have been Apostatized (or ^^anged from that of God in
them) since the days of (...) Apostasy.

But rejoice O ye Saints, and be exceeding glad, who (...) come out of that
long, dark, and dolesom^ Night of ^^ostacy (where you were well acquain^e^ with
sorrow and grief) unto the everlasting day of joy and glad^^^ where sorrow and
sighing is sted away; rejoice I say (...) joy unspeakable, for the Lord God is
your Shepherd* (...) you shall not want, ^ut with the finest of the VVhea^^
(...) shall be ^ed, in Pastures which are green and large, (...) your souls may
delight themselves in fatness. And (...) this my friends, that the Lord God
will wipe away (...) r^proach, and sweep away the refuge of lies, (...) which
your enemies (who have smitten you with the (...) of wickedness) have with
falsehood hid themselves, (...) their rod shall not always rest upon your Lot,
(...) shall you always be a prey unto them, for the Lord (...) will deliver
you out of the hands of those that (...) you, and Kings and Princes he will
rebuke for (...) sak^s; where^ore be of good cheer in the Lord, he (...) shall
come, will come, and will not tarry.

The End.

