A CATHOLIC PILL To Purge POPERY. WITH A Preparatory Preface, OBVIATING The
growing Malignity OF POPERY AGAINST Catholic Christianity.

By a true Son of the Catholic Apostolic Church.

Useful for all private Families.

Imprimatur, G. Jane.

LONDON: Printed for J. Coals in Vine-street near Hatton-garden, and Will.
Miller at the Gilded Acorn in S. Paul's Churchyard near the Little North Door.
1677.

A CATHOLIC PILL, TO PURGE POPERY.
THere is no Subject for these few years last past that has more exercised the
Pen and the Press, than the Controversies between the Protestants and Papists;
And he that has taken the pains seriously to examine both their Arguments, and
has had competent abilities to weigh the strength of their Allegations, must
needs without flattery give the glory of the conquest to the renowned and
victorious writings of the late famous assertors of the Protestant Religion
professed in the Church of England: Never was such strength of Reason brought
to convince, Never such sound Arguments from Scripture, Fathers and Councils,
never such pure discovery of the Falseness, Novelty, Idolatry, of that vain,
idle false worship practiced in the Roman persuasion, as has of late been
published among us, to the Immortal Honor of those Famous Authors. It Is
impossible for the wit, and learning of man to add any thing de Novo to what
has been said, proved, and wrote upon that voluminous Subject. Yet because
many of those writings may be above the Vulgar capacity, many likewise so dear,
that a poor Man's purse cannot purchase them (unless the sixpeny book, published
as I take it, By that Reverend Divine D. Floyd of Reading, called the book with
the Blew Cover, whose Title is A Seasonable Discourse, showing the necessity of
maintaining The established Religion in opposition to Popery) Unless I say
those discourses I find none of that worth or Cheapness, of that condescension
to the meanest Capacities as this Pill to purge out Popery, put forth with
general approbation, and cum privilegio, in the year One thousand six hundred
twenty four, What need every one has to furnish himself with good
preservatives against the Poison and Infection of that Soul and Body destroying
Religion, none will question, but such as care for neither -- Debauched, and
loose Creatures, who live as if there were no God, and die, as if they should
become like the beast that perish. It Is upon such as these the Popish Priests
do prey, And where these Carcasses are, thither the Roman Eagles do resort. But
to men of reason and understanding, to persons of civility, learning and good
manners, there they are shie, how they make their approaches. There they
tremble and quake for fear of a Bastle, to such as these they only insinuate
plausible stories; And tell them there is no difference between us in
Fundamentals, they believe the same Creeds with us, and Worship the same God,
and the Lord Jesus Christ as we do, The matter is only in some circumstantial
things which the Church has power from Christ to enjoin the performance of:
Wherein they say we differ. But who does not see the vanity of this Allegation?
For if the difference between us indeed were only in things Circumstantial and
Ceremonial, we might be blame worthy to have withdrawn our selves from their
Communion, for surely it cannot be lawful to separate from the Church for
enjoining some Ceremonies, though perhaps they seem to us but useless and vain.
Were there nothing but that to hinder us from their Communion, We should not
refuse to be Roman Catholics to morrow; But if we make it appear that the
things we differ in are of the substance and foundation of Religion, which to
comply with themin, is not only to deny the Faith, but incur to our selves
Everlasting Damnation. Then we hope we have reason and Religion on our side to
continue in that way we are in, And utterly detest the damnable Doctrines of
the Romish persuasion. And that I may make it appear as plain as the light of
the Sun: Do but consider with me these few instances, And I will detain you no
longer from the Romish Catholic Catechism.

First, They say indeed, that they believe the holy Scripture to be the Word of
God, and that they have not taken away any Institution of the Gospel. But is it
not apparent that they esteem Humane Traditions, not only equally with, But
many time above whatsoever is written, either in the Old or New Testament,
under the pretense of an unwritten Word -- which increases every age, and
changes it is face every day and is made to speak whatsoever they will have it?
They introduce into Religion whatsoever their Popes, and his Creatures have a
mind to, And all must pass as current Coin that comes from their fingers: But
our Lord Jesus Christ does not condemn those only who reject the Commandments
of God, but those who make them of none effect by their Traditions: And he
professes that they Honor God in vain who teach for Doctrines (necessary to be
believed upon pain of Damnation) the Traditions of Men, etc.

Secondly, They adore God I confess (And who would not adore the Creator of the
World) but do they not adore diverse Creatures likewise? Not only those which
they suppose to be changed into the Substance of the Body of our Creator (as
the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament) but also diverse others. Which they confess
to be but mere Creatures as Saints, Relics, Images, and the Cross, which as
many of their Doctors say positively ought to be adored with the worship of
Latria (that is to say, with the Sovereign Adoration wherewith they adore God:)
but God Almighty commands us, not only to adore and serve him, with all
possible Reverence and Veneration -- But worship him only and solely, Matthew.
4.10. And the Scripture does expressly condemn those, who adore and worship such
as by nature are no Gods, Gal. 4.8. And we know and you may know too, if you
will, that the Angel not only exhorts Saint John in the Revel. 19.21. To adore
God, but he refused the adoration which that holy Man (being as it were
surprised) would have given him, fee says he thou do it not, Worship God.

Thirdly, You pray unto God I confess (and who would not pray unto so good a
Father, and so gracious and merciful a God?) but you pray also to the Saints
departed, though the Scripture afford neither command, promise, or example,
Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel knows us not, And you worship Angels
likewise, as Gabriel, Michael, etc. contrary to the command of S. Paul, Coll.
2.18. Let no man beguile you in a voluntary humility of worshipping of Angels
intruding into those things, which he has not seen.

Fourthly, You say you put your trust and affiance in God, but do not you trust
also in Creatures, what else mean those prayers so frequently in your books, O
glorious Saint in whom I put my trust! And it is very ordinary with the
devoutest person among you to call the Blessed Virgin, your confidence, your
refuge, and your only hope, but the holy Scripture not only commands you to
trust in God, but it forbids you to trust in the Creatures, Jer. 17. Cursed be
man that trusts in man and makes flesh his Arm, but blessed is the man that
trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is.

Fifthly, You confess that it is by the goodness and mercy of that God you are
saved, so far you are right. But you believe also that you are saved by the
merit of your Works, and if you have none good of your own, you buy some of
other of folks, which Priests make you believe they have store of; And counsel
you as many as have money to buy; But does not the Apostle say, That every one
shall give an account of himself to God. Again, Every one shall give an account
what he has done in the body, whether it be good or evil. And the Apostle
expressly, Romans 11. If it be by grace then it is no more of works, Ephesians. 2. We
are saved by grace through faith, and not of our selves, it is the gift of God,
and not of Works, lest any man should boast.

Sixthly, You would be no Christians if you did not believe that Jesus Christ
was made of Woman in respect of his Humane Nature, and like unto his Brethren
in all things (sin only excepted;) And that in respect of his Divine Nature he
is the express Image of the Father, Very God, of Very God, But you believe and
adore another Christ, who is made of bread, and is not at all, either God or
Man, having not the least resemblance of either nature, though by his
resurrection from the dead his glory is much Augmented. Yet it has not
destroyed the verity of his humane Nature, nor made his body invisible, or
impalpable. After the Consecration of your Priests, I neither see or touch any
thing but bread, I cannot see or touch the natural body of Christ, is it
possible any man living should persuade me by any Arguments in the World in
this particular contrary to my five senses? Behold my hands and my feet, Handle
me and see, for a Spirit has not Flesh and Bones as you see me have, and where
there is not Flesh and Bones to be seen, and felt, there cannot be a Corporal
presence: Behold then, oh, you Papists to what a Religion you invite and call
us, even to the Idolatrous practice of the Heathen World to pray unto our
fellow Creatures, to Worship Images and fall down to the Stock of a tree, I say
to the worshipping of the consecrated Host, which is a more stupid Idolatry
then the worst of the Heathens were ever guilty of, you invite us to a Religion
that takes from us half the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: Notwithstanding the
Institution of Christ in express words, and the constant practice of the
Primitive Church to the contraty. You practice the heathen persecution of
taking away our Bibles, and would involve every Layman in being a Traditor, the
next step in the account of the Primitive Church to Apostasy from the Christian
Faith. You tempt us to a Religion that contrary to the command of trying all
things and holding fast that which is good, and paying to God a reasonable
service, enjoins an implicit faith and blind obedience, To a Religion that
instead of the guidance of the Word of God sets up an Infallible Judge and
Arbitrator of all Doctrines the Pope of Rome: Who instead of the Faith once
delivered to the Saints, adds new Articles of Faith: And instead of that our
propitiation made by Christ and the condition thereof Faith and Repentance,
sets remission of sins upon quite other Terms, and proposes the gift of God to
be purchased with money. For instance Sacrilege is valued at seven Groats,
Incest at five, Simony at seven, Perjury six, Murder five. And so on for every
sin, if you have but money you need not fear a pardon, though you never Repent
or forsake your sins. But let me instance a little further.

In the seventh place you confess with us that Jesus Christ is ascended into
heaven and there sits at the right hand of God: but you pretend to believe that
he is also on Earth, and in a Million of places at once, That he is on Altars,
and in Pyxes, in the hands or in the stomach of the Priests, and of all those
that do Communicate. But the holy Ghost tells us not only that Jesus Christ in
respect of his Humane Nature is ascended into Heaven, but that the Heavens must
contain him until the time of the restitution of all things, Act. 3. and that
he shall then descend in the same manner as he ascended, Act. 1. This glorious
Savior not only says, I go to my Father, but to show us that he withdrew his
body out of the world so absolutely that it should be no more there in any
manner whatsoever, he says, I leave the world and go unto the Father. John 16.
The poor you have always with you, but me you have not always, John 12. And he
gives express caution against the false Imagination of his Corporal Presence,
If they say Christ is here, or he is there, believe it not, Behold he is in the
desert go not forth, behold he is in the secret chambers, believe it not,
Matthew. 24.

Again, in the eighth place, you give Jesus Christ the Honor to call him the
Savior and Redeemer of the World. -- But then do you not affront him to
Communicate these glorious Titles to mere Creatures, do not the devoutest
persons in your Religion call the Blessed Virgin the Redeemer and Savior of
the World, and Bell. in his fourth chapter of his Book of Indulgences says
expressly that the Saints are in some sort our Redeemers -- But the Gospel tells
us, Not only that Jesus Christ is our Savior; but it tells us plainly that
there is no salvation in any other, and that there is no name under heaven
given amongst men whereby we must be saved, Act. 4.

Ninethly, In appearance you exalt the sacrifice which Christ has offered on
the Cross -- But in effect you annihilate it, and tacitly accuse it of
Insufficiency -- for you have invented another, which is that of the Mass --
But the Apostle does not only say, That Jesus Christ offered up himself to God,
That he has purchased Eternal Redemption for us -- And that by one oblation he
has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. But he teaches expressly that
he offered not himself often, for then must he have often suffered from the
foundation of the World. And as it is appointed for men once to die, and after
that to judgment, so Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many. And that
where there is remission of sin there is no more offering for sin, and that
without shedding of blood, there is no remission, Heb. 9.10. With one hand you
Papists lay hold on the merits of Christ; but with the other you lay hold on
the merits of Saints and Martyrs: you pray unto God not only through the merits
of Jesus Christ, but through the merits of Saints whose Relics are under your
Altars: your devotoes affirm that the holy Virgin saves us, and brings us to
heavenly glory, not only by her prayers, but by her merits; and the Roman
Divinity says plainly that there are some Saints and Martyrs that have
suffered more then their sins did deserve: and that their superabundant
satisfactions are put into the Treasury of the Church, and distributed by the
Popes Indulgence; They after cry By the prayers and by the Merits of the holy
Virgin Mary, of Michael the Archangel, of S. John Baptist, of the holy Apostles
Peter and S. Paul, and of all the Saints, without making any mention at all of
Jesus Christ and his merits. And

Tenthly, and lastly, for I should tire you if I should proceed to farther
Instances, the Papists do profess to believe with us that the blood of Jesus
Christ purges and cleanses us from all our sins; Why then have they invented
the fire of Purgatory? If all sins are washed away and purged by the blood of
Christ, what then remains to be purged in this Imaginary fire? They mock the
world in calling of it pugatory: for according to Romish Doctrine it serves not
to purge but to punish souls, and to satisfy Gods Justice, so that it is not a
purging but a pain, and a punishment: and what resemblance can there be betwixt
this subterranean fire, and the blood of Jesus Christ? Is the grace and pardon
of a King applied to a man by breaking him on a Wheel, or by burning of him
quick? But the most torturing Wheels and the most ardent fires are nothing in
comparison to this pretended Purgatory, if it be true which those of your party
say, that it is ten times hotter then our fire, and that it differs from hell
fire in duration only -- Open then your eyes and see the Sun of truth which
shines so bright in the Gospel, Jesus Christ has by himself purged our sins,
Heb. 1. And the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all iniquity, 1 John 1.
And that there is no condemnation to those who are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1.
That they pass from death to life; And when they put off this body of flesh
they have a house eternal in the heavens, 2 Cor. 5. They then are over with the
Lord: And blessed they are who die in the Lord, so says the Spirit, They rest
from their labors, and their works follow them, Rev. 14. But what rest or
comfort can there be in such dreadful torments? Do they not manifestly
contradict the words of Wisdom, which say, the souls of the righteous are in
the hands of God, and no torment shall touch them: I could make the like
observations upon all the other controverted points of that Religion.

And therefore had not our forefathers reason to separate the pure and simple
Christian Doctrine from this prodigious medly of so many humane Inventions and
Traditions? Did they not well in shaking off the yoke of so many Ceremonies and
Superstitions, borrowed the most part from Paganism, and Judaism? Of which yoke
we may truly say as S. Peter did of the Jewish, It is a yoke the which neither
we, nor our fathers have been able to bear. In vain do they tell us of the
writings of their Fathers and the distinctions of their Doctors; we are
resolved to hearken to no other proof then what can be alleged out of the word
of God, or by consequence deduced from it, for what concerns our salvation, and
the service of God. We will trust him alone who is our Lord and our God, he
has merited heaven for us and he alone can show us the way thither, while we
follow the light of his word we are sure we shall not go astray. Let not then
the Papists trouble themselves to force us to their abominable fooleries: For
the most eloquent discourses imaginable, the most plausible humane reasonings,
the most authentic Authorities of the Fathers, The subtilest distinction of
the Schools, are not sufficient to make us believe, either adoration of
Creatures, the Invocation of Saints, the worshipping of Angels, the Veneration
of Images, the power of the Pope, the merit of works, their most unreasonable
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, the pretended Sacrifice of the Mass, the
imaginary fire of Purgatory or the like. Nothing is capable to make us
acknowledge any other Mediator, any other Savior and Redeemer then Jesus
Christ. Any other sacrifice then that of his Cross, any other Purgatory then
his blood, nor any other merit then his obedience. Nor any other Infallible
guide then the holy Scripture, And therefore though we are by the uncharitable
Papists damned for Heretics, that we have no reason to fear that God Almighty
will condemn us: because we have trusted to his Divine Word, and holy
Ordinances; we have fashioned our service according to that pattern he has
left us in the Scriptures, we have closely adhered to the purity, and
simplicity of the Christian Doctrine. We cannot give that honor and glory to
the creatures which is due only to the Creator. We content our selves in
Worshipping of one only God in Spirit, and in truth, we put our whole trust,
and hope in him alone, and we put up all our petitions to him, in the name only
and for the sake of Jesus Christ our Lord. We cannot believe those false
Priests who tell us that Christ is here and there, we admit of no other
sacrifice then that of the Cross, nor any other purgatory, than that of his
blood: we admit of no more Sacraments then those which Christ did Institute,
and we celebrate them no otherwise then the Apostles have done before us, we
pray to no Saints, worship no Angels, nor bow down to any Image, Crucifix or
Picture, and therefore we hope through the infinite merits of God in Christ
Jesus, because we have been faithful in his service, obedient to his commands,
and observed his Ordinances, we shall not be condemned, or eternally rejected
from his presence; But we hope to hear from our Saviors own mouth, These words
of eternal Consolation, Because you have kept the words of my patience, been
faithful in my service to the death, you shall receive the Crown of Life: You
have been good servants, enter, you into the joy of your Lord: Inherit the
Glorious Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the World. Which God
Almighty grant us, for our Lord Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

A PILL TO PURGE OUT POPERY; OR, A CATECHISM FOR ROMISH CATHOLICS; Showing,
that Popery is contrary to the grounds of the Catholic Religion, and that
therefore Papists cannot be good Catholics.
The Speakers A weak Christian. A Minister.


DIALOGUE I.
Christian. AMong the diversities of opinion that are in the world, how may I
know which is the truth whereto I must clear, and who are the true Church, and
true Catholics?


Minister. a Believe not every spirit (that is, every doctrine, which men
bragging of the Spirit do teach) but try them whether they be of God no; a
Examine all things, hold fast that which is good, a 1 John 4.1. b 1 These. 5.21.


C. Whereby shall I try them?


M. By the Scriptures, John 5.39. Acts 17.11.


C. I am unlearned, and the Scriptures are hard to be understood.


M. There are indeed many things in them, hard to be understood, 2 Pet. 3.16.
but such things as are necessary to be known of all to salvation, are plainly
set down, Prove. 8.9. The meaning of which place is this:

The Word of God in points necessary to salvation, is easy unto all that have
a desire unto it. Turn to the places of Scripture, added to every answer of the
Catechism, and you shall find this to be most true.


C. Is there no other way and means, whereby to try and know the truth and the
true professors?


M. Yes, it may be done even by the aforesaid grounds of Religion. Whatsoever
Doctrine is agreeable thereunto, is true, and to be received: but whatsoever is
contrary to the same, is false, and to be rejected: but whatsoever is contrary
to the same, is false, and to be rejected. As many as do sincerely and soundly
embrace, profess, and practice the same, they are the Catholic Church, (that
is, parts and members of the Catholic Church) and true Catholics indeed. But
such as teach, profess, and practice things contrary thereunto, are not the
Church, nor true Catholics.


C. The Papists say, that they only are the true Church, and true Catholics,
and that we are not.


M. So the Jews cried: a The Temple of the Lord: b We are the seed of Abraham:
the children of God, a Jerem. 7.4. b John 8.33, 41.

But Christ told them they were the children of the Devil, John 8.44.


C. Are not the Papists then good Catholics?


M. No, but rather gross Heretics.


C. What is an Heretic?


M. One that does err in any fundamental point of Christian Religion, and does
obstinately teach, maintain, and defend the same.


C. Do the Papists err in the fundamental points of Religion?


M. They do teach and maintain many false opinions, against the very grounds of
Religion; as by and by shall be showed in many particulars.


C. Are all Papists then Heretics?


M. No: for there are (no doubt) many of them that do err of simplicity and
ignorance, and which would be brought from their errors if they had the means,
namely, the Scriptures in their own language, preaching, catechizing, and the
like. We do not therefore account them all Heretics, but only those before
mentioned.


C. How do you prove that they are not good Catholics?


M. I prove it thus: They are good Catholics which are of sound faith and good
life, ( Aug. lib. quaest. in Mat. cap. 11.) but Papists are neither of sound
faith nor good life: therefore they are no good Catholics.


C. How do you prove that they are not of sound faith?


M. Even by the Apostles Creed (which may serve instead of a rule, whereunto
the faith of all men ought to agree) contrary whereunto they teach many things.


C. Show me wherein?


M. The Creed is a confession of faith, containing the sum of the Gospel, and
of such things as are necessary to be believed of all that will be saved. They
have devised many other new Articles of Faith, besides, and contrary to the
Articles of the Apostles Creed: which they hold necessarily to be believed of
all that will be saved: As namely, Indulgences and a treasury of Saints
merits, the real presence, the Popes Supremacy, Purgatory, and such like. In
the Council of Trent, the curse Anathema is pronounced upon all such as deny
these or any of them, Master Perkins first vol. Page 621. The Creed teaches
what every one in particular is to know and believe: and a true faith cannot
stand without certain knowledge. The Papists maintain an implicit or an
ignorant faith; namely that it is enough to believe as the Church beleiveth:
though they know not what the Church is nor what the Church believes. And they
commend this faith by the example of an old devout father, a Colliar, who being
tempted of the Devil, and asked how he believed, answered, That he believed as
the Church believed: being asked again how the Church believed, he answered, As
I believe: whereupon the Devil (as they say) was fain to depart.


C. It should seem it was but a simple Devil: for if he had been wise, he would
have asked him this question; What if the Church believe that thou art a fool;
what would the Colliar think, you have answered then?


M. I think he would have said nothing: for if he should have said, I believe
so too, the Devil might then have begged him for a food indeed. And yet such
fools are the simple and ignorant Papists, which content themselves with this
kind of faith: for thus one may reason with them; You are to believe as the
Church believes: but the Church believes that you are fools: therefore you are
to believe so too. This their implicit faith, every one of himself may have.
The Devils in some fence may be said to have a better says then this: for they
know what is contained in the Scriptures, and believe it to be true, Mat. 4.6.
Iam. 2.19. This fond and ridiculous kind of says, is a notable means to nuzzle
people in blindness, superstition, and perpetual ignorance. Again, Faith is a
certain and true persuasion of the heart, whereby we are persuaded, and in some
measure assured of the forgiveness of our sins, and eternal salvation. The
Papists say, it is presumption to be assured of salvation, and will have men to
doubt thereof: the which is contrary to tht nature of true faith. They call the
certainty of remission of sins, a faithless persuasion: and the faith of
Devils, not of Apostles, Council. Trid. Sess. 6. cap. 9.12, 13. Rhem. Annot. 1.
Cor. 9. Sect. 9.


DIALOGUE 2.
C. Show me, I pray you, what things in particular they teach contrary to any
Article of the Creed?


M. I could show you many, but I fear that then I should be tedious to you: I
will therefore set down only the chiefest. In the second and third Article is
described and set forth unto us, both the person and office of our Mediator,
namely that he is both God and man, a Prophet, Priest, and King.

Concerning his Person, although in words they confess him to be God and man,
yet in deed they deny it: for they ascribe to him a body invisible and
infinite: they teach that he is corporally present in infinite places at once,
which is proper only to God, and contrary to the nature of a true body. And so
in effect they do even deny his Manhood. The Son of God is called Jesus,
because he is a Savior, yea the only and perfect Savior which saves us from
our sins: That is, has delivered us not only from the blame, or guilti^ses,
but fully also from the punishment due to our sins, Mat. 1.21. Acts 4.12. Heb.
7.25.

The Papists teach, that there must also some satisfaction of our own come to
make up our perfect Redemption, Council. Trid. Sess. 14.6.8. Can. 11.15. They
will not be saved only by Jesus Christ, but by the merits also of Saints, their
own merits, Popes pardons, etc. yea, they ascribe that to others, which is
proper to Christ alone, and so consequently make them their Saviors. As for
example.

They ascribe to S. Francis the same titles, properties, power, and the very
same office due to Jesus Christ, and in all respects they make him like to
Christ: whatsoever Christ did, that (as they say) did S. Francis. And what is
this in effect, but to make him their Savior? That they do ascribe the former
things to S. Francis, is to be seen in a book written on purpose, to show the
conformitty between him and Christ, called the conformity of Francis, the which
has bin confirmed by the authority of the Church of Rome. Pope Gregory the
Ninth, enjoined the faithful to hold, and firmly to believe the things taught
in the said book concerning S. Francis, and that he should be punished as an
Heretic, that would think the contrary. Confor. P. 2. lib. 1. Fol. 3.


C. To whom else do they ascribe that which is proper to Jesus Christ?


M. To the Virgin Mary. They describe her nature by her name (Maria,)
consisting of five letters and these (as they say) do import the five offices
to be exercised by her toward us. The first is Maternitatis, of Mother hood:
signified by the letter M: for the (as they say) is the Mother of mercy through
whom we obtain mercy. Her second office is Conservationis, of crnserving the
treasure of God: signified by the letter A: which represents Aream thesauri,
the chest of treasure: for in her, as they say, we shall find an infinite
treasure of the wisdom and grace of God. Her third office is, Directionis and
gubernationis, of direction and governing by example of her life. This is
imported by the letter R and therefore she is named Regina, the Queen. Her
fourth office is, Jaculationis and repulsionis inimicorum, of slinging and
repelling back of enemies: signified by the letter I, and therefore they pray
thus to her: Tu nos ab host protege, and hora mortis suscipe. Protect thou us
from the enemy, and receive us at the hour of death.

Her last office is Advocationis, of Advocation, imported by the letter A. From
whence they pray thus: O our Advocate, turn thy merciful eyes unto us. And what
do they herein, but even place her in the room of Jesus, and make her their
Savior? These be the very words of Friar John Viguerius (a Doctor, yea, and a
public professor of Divinity among them) in his Institutions to his Catholic
Theology, Cap. 20. Sect. 9. Fol. 21 4. And herein he is like to such as can
make bells to sound, even what pleases their fantastical brain, and as best
may seed their superstitious humors.

Further they say, That she is the original of our salvation, and the recoverer
of grace and forgiveness, our hope, our salvation, resurrection, etc. Yea, that
to her it is given to bruise the Serpents head, that she has done it, and
procured that peace between God and man, which no man could procure, Viguerius
ibid 214, 215: Comfor. Fran. in conclus. Lib. 1. Is not this to make her a
Savior?


C. Surely yes, and I think it most horrible blasphemy,


M. Account you this blasphemy? what say you then to that which Carolus
Scribanius, a Jesuit, has written of her? As namely, First, that the milk of
Mary may come into comparison with the blood of Christ. Secondly, that that the
Christian man's Faith may lawfully take hold on both as well as one. Thirdly,
that the best compound for a sick soul, is to mix together her milk and Christ's
blood. Fourthly, that the sins and spiritual diseases of the soul, are cured as
well by her milk, as by his Blood. Fifthly, that her milk and the merit and
virtue of it, is more precious and excellent than Christ's blood. These most
horrible blasphemies, with many such like, are to be found in the aforesaid
Jesuits book: which M. C. has put into English, and sufficiently answered,
calling it (The Jesuits Gospel.) Besides all these things, in a book called
the Ladies Psalter, they have put out the word Lord, and put in the Word Lady,
As for example, Psalm 110.1.

The Lord said unto our Lady, Sit thou mother at my right hand, etc. The like
they do in the rest of the Psalms. And is not this good stuff, think you?


C. These Books were written long agone, and it may be that they are now
rejected by the Papists.


M. The latter of them was indeed written long agone, but is not rejected, but
stand uncontrouled, or rather defended by the Jesuits, and those of the
principal. The former was written but lately. And whereas both the Author and
his book (as M. C. says) deserved the fire and halter, it was so far from
being misliked in the Roman Synagogue, or any way censured, that the book has
bin reprinted, and the Author and his book stand enrouled, approved, and
commended (in their great Volumes set out for that purpose) for good and
Catholic. As they place S. Francis and the Virgin Mary in Christ's room, so do
they the Pope also: ascribing that to him which is proper unto Jesus Christ,
and may not (without blasphemy) be ascribed to any creature. They say that the
Pope is the Sun: The Church the Moon. The Pope is the Bridegroom: the Church
the Bride. The, Pope is the head: the Church the Body. And what is this, but to
place the Pope in the room of Jesus Christ; and even to say that the Pope is
Christ? Confor. F. 2. li 2. fol. 10. That they do thus place S. Francis, the
Virgin Mary, and the Pope in Christ's room, and so make them Saviors, is more
at large, and sufficiently proved (out of their own writers) in a little
Treatise (set forth by M. Thomas Rogers, in the year 1589.) entitled, An
historical Dialogue of Antichrist and Popery


DIALOGVE. 3.
C. Hitherto you have showed, how the Son of God is called Jesus, because he is
a Savior, and how the Papists do place others in his room. Now show me also
why he is called Christ, and what that title signifies.


M. Christ signifies, Anointed, which title sets forth his office: namely,
that he is our only true Prophet, Priest, and King.


C Do they teach any thing contrary hereunto.


M. They do even deny this office of his, and so consequently deny the fruits
of his coming in the flesh, 1. Ioh, 4.3.


C. She^ me wherein they deny his Office.


M. Christ is a Prophet to teach his Church, and to reveal the will of God unto
us, to whom all are to hearken, Mat. 17, 5, Ioh. 10, 27. Act, 3, 22, 23, And
this he has perfectly done in the Scriptures.

They preferred their own blind traditions before the Scriptures: they lay
aside the Scriptures, accounting and calling them dumb Judges, A nose of Wax,
The black Gospel: Inken divinity, etc. Piggins Contr. 3. de Eccl. Hierarch.
lib. 3. cap. 3. A certain Popish Doctor reasoning with M. Tindal, was not
ashamed to say, that we were better to be without Gods Law then the Popes. They
likewise set up Images to be Laymens books, and so in all this they deny by
consequence his Prophetical office. Christ is also a Priest and that for ever,
after the order of Melchisedec, Heb. 7.24. And in this his Office he has none
to succeed him. They acknowledge not this, but maintain still an outward and
corporal Priesthood, to offer up an outward Sacrifice, even Christ himself,
Rhem. on Heb. chap. 7.7 Sect. 7.8.


C. If this were true, why then the Priest were become a Mediator between God
and Christ: the which is most absurd, to think that any creature should be such
a one.


M. It is indeed most absurd: and yet in the very Canon of the Mass they
intimate this much, when they request God to accept their gifts and offerings
(namely, Christ himself offered) as he did the Sacrifices of Abel and Noah. And
which is more absurd then this, (yea blasphemy for any to affirm) they by then
former doctrine) do make the Priest to be more worthy in some respect, then
Christ's for the person that does offer a sacrifice, is of more worth and honor
then the thing which he offers; but the Priest (as they say) offered up
Christ to God his Father: therefore the Priest that offered him, is of more
worth and honor than Christ, whom he ostereth.

As Christ is a Priest, so He alone (and that but once for all) offered
himself: and by his own offering once offered, has made a full and perfect
satisfaction for all our sins, Heb. 9.12, 14, 26, 10, 14, 18. They teach, that
in the Mass, there is daily a Sacrifice offered for the sins both of the quick
and the dead: and so they make Christ's Sacrifice not to be the perfect and
only Sacrifice of the New Testament, but set up another in the stead thereof.


C. They say that their sacrifice is not a new sacrifice, or another from
Christ's: but that it is the same.


M. The Author to the Hebrews teaches, that Christ's sacrifice neither may, nor
ought to be reiterated and repeated: for as it is but one, so it was but once
offered. And this word (Once) he uses five several times, Heb. 7.27, 9, 12,
26, 28, 30.


C. They say that Christ indeed was offered but once after a blo^dy manner, but
he is often offered after an unbloody manner.


M. This distinction of theirs has no warrant out of Gods Word: nay rather it
is directly against the Word: for Heb. 9.22. it is said, Almost all things are
by the Law, purged with blood: and without shedding of blood is no remission.
From whence we may thus reason, Without shedding of blood is no remission: but
in the Mass is not shedding of blood: therefore no remission. And therefore it
is no sacrifice for sin.


C. Though this their distinction be not to be found in the Scriptures, yet it
is in the writings of the Fathers.


M. The Fathers indeed make mention of unbloudy Sacrifices: but they hereby
understand not outward and bodily Sacrifices for sin, but the Spiritual
Sacrifices of Christians, and they so call them, in comparing them with the
bloody sacrifices of the Law, and with Christ's bloody Sacrifice.


C. The Papists do not say that the Sacrifice of the Mass is an expiatorie, but
an applicatorie Sacrifice: that is, it serves not properly to make any
satisfaction to God, but rather to apply unto us the satisfaction of Christ
already made?


M. Their doctrine is, that it is a Sacrifice propitiatory: that is available
to obtain ( ex opere operato, by the very work wrought) remission and pardon
of all their sins: yea, that it is available to obtain all other benefits; as
peace, health, and such like, Council. Trid. Sess. 2.2. can. 3. Bellar. lib 1.
de Miss. cap. 25. lib 2. cap. 3. But let it be (as you say) that they account
it but an applicatory sacrifice, yet this makes nothing for them. The
Sacrifices of the Law did serve to apply the virtue of Christ's Cross: and yet
the Apostle excludes them by this reason; that where there is remission of
sins there is no more Sacrifice, Heb. 10.18. Wherefore if the Apostles reason
be good, it concludes also against their Sacrifice applicatory. Again, the
Apostle teaches, that therefore the Sacrifices of the Law are abolished by the
death of Christ; because they were but shadows of good things to come, and
could not make the offerers perfect, etc. Heb. 10.1, 2, 3. And therefore, this
kind of applying sacrifice (which they fain themselves) has ceased. We need
not now a Sacrifice for the application of Christ death: for Christ to that end
has appointed the preaching of the Word, and has instituted Sacraments,
whereby his death, with all the benefits thereof, are most fruitfully applied
unto us, Gal 3.1. 1 Cor. 11.26. Again, this their applying sacrifice, is
against the nature of a Sacrament, in which God gives Christ (...) us: whereas
in a sacrifice God receives from man, and man gives something to God.


C. The ancients Fathers used to call the Supper of the Lord, a Sacrifice: it
should seem therefore, that there is some sacrifice offered therein to God.


M. It is true that they called it so: not that Christ is therein offered a
Sacrifice to God, but in other respects. First because that therein there was
an offering and giving of Alms, Bread, Wine, etc. which are a spiritual
Sacrifice. Secondly, they called the Sacrament, a Sacrifice, not properly, but
figuratively: because there was therein a representation of that Sacrifice
which was offered upon the Cross, and because it is a commemoration of Christ's
body, which he offered for us, and of his blood which he shed for us, Thirdly:
It is called a Sacrifice, because it is an application of the Sacrifice offered
upon the Cross, unto our selves. Fourthly, It is so called, because of the
sacrifice of prayers and thanksgivings: and because in the Lords Supper we
offered our selves unto God to be consecrated unto him, and serve him in body
and soul.


C. What is then your opinion of the Popish Mass?


M. It is an abridgement of all Superstition and Idolatry: there is in it
adoration directed to bread: there is (as they say) the body of Christ offered
really in a sacrifice of propitiation: which which was never offered but once
with shedding of blood. There is adoration of stocks and stones, invocation of
dead men, saying of Masses to the honor of Saints and Angels, worshipping of
dead men's bones, and such like abominations.


C. If the Mass be such an Idol, and so contrary to Christ's sacrifice, whence
had it then its first beginning?


M. The Mass had this original: First, the Lords Supper was celebrated in most
simple and plain manner. Secondly, it began to admit some increase of
ceremonies, especially the offerings for the dead, which was but a thanksgiving
for them until more then two hundred years after Christ. Thirdly, prayers for
the dead, got entrance into the Lords Supper about the year four hundred, and
then came in Purgatory, and the redemption of souls from thence by Masses, M.
Perkins 2. Vol. 554. 1. D. Again you are to know that Mass is like a beggars
cloak, patcht up with many pieces, whereof some were put in at one time, some
at another. One Pope puts in one patch, another Pope puts in another: and it
was not fully patcht, as now it is, till twelve hundred years after Christ,
Acts and Monuments, page 1274 etc. And in the Canon of the Mass, there are to
be found a full half hundred of errors and blasphemies, Synopsis Papismi, the
13. general controversy, quaest. 8.


C. But how can the Mass be so late and new, seeing that the Fathers in their
writings make mention of it?


M. The word (Missa) which is now called the Mass) in the Fathers, signifies a
public meeting to the Communion, and to Prayers, or the solemn dismission of
that meeting, or even the form of their religious worship. And the Phrase,
Missam facere, (used in some of the Fathers) does not signify to say the
Popish Mass, but to dismiss some out of the assembly. After the Sermon the
Catechumenists (that is, such as learned the Catechism, and were not admitted
to the Lords Supper) are dismissed, And hereupon the Communion was called Missa
figuratively, because when it began, there was a dismission of some, Perkins 2.
Vol. 552. 2. D. 553. Synopsis Papismi, the 13. general controversy, Quaest. 2.


C. I am satisfied touching the Sacrifice of the Mass, by which (as I do now
plainly perceive) they do even deny the Priesthood, and the only Sacrifice of
Christ: I pray you now to show me wherein else they deny his Priesthood?


M. Christ's Priesthood consists of two parts, Satisfaction, and Intercession.
As by his own Sacrifice once offered, he has made a perfect satisfaction for
our sins: so he now continually makes intercession to God for us, Romans 8.34.
Heb. 7.25. Papists teach, that the Saints in Heaven do make intercession to
God for particular men, according to their several wants: and that having
received particular men's prayers, they present them unto God. And so herein
they do also deny the Office of Christ's Priesthood, Rhem. on Luke 16. Sect. 4.
on 2 Cor. 1.3. on 2 Pet. 1. Sect. 3. and in many other places.


C. They say that Christ indeed is the only Mediator of Redemption; but the
Saints are also Mediators of Intercession.


M. This is but an idle distinction: for Christ only is the Mediator as well of
the one as the other. For in a true and sufficient Mediator, there must be
these properties: first of all, the Word of God must reveal and propound him
unto the Church. Secondly, he must be perfectly just, and such a one, as in
whom was no sin ever found. Thirdly, he must be a Propitiator, that is, bring
something to God, that may appease and satisfy his wrath and justice for our
sins. Now, these three properties are not to be found in any creature, but in
Christ alone: and therefore he is the only Mediator of Intercession, as well as
of Redemption, Perkins 1. Volum. 603, 604.


C. Do they teach any thing contrary to the Kingly Office of Christ?


M. Yes, they teach that the Pope is Christ's Vicar, and head of the Church;
that he can make Laws to bind the conscience; that he can make new Articles,
and abolish the old, that he can dispense with all the precepts both of the Old
and New Testament: And so herein (and in many other such like things) they deny
the Kingly Office of Christ.


C. It seems then to me (by this which you have said) that though in words
they confess Christ, yet in deed and in truth they deny him.


M. They do so indeed: for whosoever denies the Office of Christ, (for the
performance whereof he came in the flesh) denies in effect, Christ to be come
in the flesh: but the Papists deny his Office, therefore they deny him to be
come in the flesh: and so they are no good Catholics, but rather Heretics.


C. What should move the Church of Rome in words to acknowledge Christ, and yet
to deny his Office?


M. It makes much for her profit, and by this means they do the more easily
deceive people. That their profit and advantage is the only end they aim at
appears by a most blasphemous speech of a Pope of Rome, (Leo the tenth) who
being somewhat moved against one of his Cardinals, for alleging a place
against him out of the Gospel concerning Christ, answered him thus, Quantum
nobis profuit ista fabula de Christo? O what advantage has this fable of
Christ brought us? Sleydan de statu Relig. etc. Reip. lib. 1. They are herein
much like to a Fowler, who spreading his net to catch Larks, has tied to his
net an artificial Lark, a Lark in show, but not indeed: This he causes to move
and stir: the which the Larks perceiving, and thinking it to be a Lark indeed,
they fall down by him, and so are caught in the net. So they have a Christ in
their mouths, to draw people to them, but it is a counterfeit Christ. Or if it
be the true Christ, yet they do it but as the Lark catcher does, who many times
has in his net a true and living Lark indeed, but it is to deceive the Larks,
and the more easily to catch them in his net. So they profess Christ, have his
Word and Sacraments among them, but it is only to deceive simple people, and to
make a prey of them.


DIALOGUE. 4.
C. Do they teach any other thing, contrary to any other Article of the Creed?


M. Yes, diverse things: In the Article we profess to believe, that Christ was
conceived by the holy Ghost: and so he and h^ only was conceived without
Original sin. They ^each, that the Virgin Mary was also conceived without
Original sin: and that by this means it came to pass, that Christ was free from
all spot, Council. Trid. Sess. 5. cap. 1. de peccato originali. And so herein
they do altogether overthrow this article of Christ's conception by the holy
Ghost, to whose only power the Scripture does impute Christ's holiness, and not
the Virgin Mary, which was no less then all others conceived and born in sin,
and did need Christ to be her Mediator as well as the rest of mankind. There
was a long time a foul stir in the Church of Rome, between the Dominicans and
the Franciscans about this point, Acts and Monuments, p. 732. It was the common
opinion of Fathers and Writers until Lumbards time; (which was about the year
1150.) that she was conceived in Original sin, Perkins 2. Vol. 596. In the
fourth Article we profess, that Christ suffered, etc. by which he has made a
full and perfect satisfaction for the sins of his elect, and for the whole
punishment thereof, both ete^^al and temporal.

The Papists teach, that Christ has satisfied for sins going before baptism;
but concerning sins following baptism, the fault is remitted by the passion of
Christ, and the punishment (which of infinite is made finite) is to be
satisfied for, by men themselves, either here or in Purgatory: that is, men
themselves must satisfy the justice of God, for the temporal punishment of
their offenses, either on earth or in Purgatory.

There is (say they) a certain infernal place in the earth, called Purgatory,
in the which as in a prison house, the souls which were not fully purged in
this life, are there cleansed and purged by fire, before they can be received
into heaven: Bell. de Purgat. lib. 1. cap. 1. and cap. 3. lib. 2. cap. 6. Rhem.
on 1 Cor. 3. Sect. 4.

They say also, that it is an Article of Faith, to believe that there is a
Purgatory; and that he which believes it not, is sure to go to hell, Bellar.
ibid. l. 1. c. 15. But this is so far from being an Article of Faith, as that
it is a mere fable, and contrary to an Article of Faith. The blood of Christ is
the Purgatory of our sins, 1 John 1 7. Afflictions are called the fiery trial,
1 Pet. 1.7, 4.12. whereby we are cleansed from our corruption, as gold is from
the dress by fire. No other Purgatory is to be found in Scriptures. The
Scriptures mention but two sorts of men, believers, and unbelievers; and but
two places after this for them, heaven for the one, and hell for the other,
Luke 16.25, 26. John 3.36. Revel. 20.14, 15. and 21 7, 8. They that die in the
Lord, rest from their labors: which cannot be true, if any of them go to
Purgatory. Their works follow them, that is, the reward of their works, Revel.
14.13. If any man should have gone to Purgatory, then the thief upon the Cross
had gone thither, who repenting at his end, wanted time to make satisfaction
for the temporal punishment of his sins: but Christ said to him, To day shall
thou be with me in Paradise. The Doctrine of Purgatory came into the Church,
out of the Heathen Writers; for the Philosophers and Poets were the first that
ever wrote of it: and Popish Purgatory was unknown to the Fathers many hundred
years after Christ, Perkins, 2. Vol. 568, 569.


C. If Purgatory be but a fable, contrary to an Article of Faith, then what is
the cause that the Church of Rome so stiffly maintain it?


M. There is great cause why they should so do, for it keeps in the fire in the
Popes Kitchen: for if the fire of Purgatory were not great, the fire in the
Popes Kitchen would be but small; for, by this means they have store of Money
for Pardons, Masses, Diriges, and other such like Trumperies.


DIALOGUE. 5.
C. Do they teach any thing else contrary to the Creed?


M. Yes, The sixth Article says, that Christ ascended into Heaven, etc. and
the Scriptures say, that the Heavens must contain him, etc. Acts 1.11. and
3.21. They teach contrary hereunto, namely, that Christ is corporally present
in the Sacrament, and that in many places at once: The which is contrary to the
nature of a true body, and contrary to the nature of the Sacrament, which is a
remembrance of Christ. Virgilius against Eutychus, lib. 4. says thus: When it
(that is, the flesh of Christ) was on earth, it was not in Heaven: and because
it is now in Heaven, it is not on Earth. This is the Catholic Faith and
consession. It is an Article of Faith to believe the Catholic Church: and
faith is the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1. Therefore the Catholic
Church is always unto the world invisible, and not to be espied but by the eyes
of Faith: because things se^n are not believed. The Papists teach that the
Catholic Church is, and has been always visible. Rhem. on Mat 5. Sect. 3. The
Church is said to be Catholic, that is, universal, because it is not tied to
any one special place, but is spread abroad over the face of the earth. They
tie it to Rome alone, which can be but a particular Church, and not Universal.
In the Church there is a Communion of Saints: and these are they that are
sanctified by the blood and Spirit of Christ, having the perfect holiness of
Christ put upon them, by imputation of Faith, and the quality of imperfect
holiness poured into their heart by the spirit of sanctification. And such are
the Faithful here on earth, 1 Cor. 1.2. Psalm. 16.2.

The Papists acknowledge none to be Saints, but such as are in heaven. They
teach that the Pope can canonize Saints: whereas to make one a Saint, is only
the work of God, 1 Cor. 11. The Pope has canonized many, that indeed were
never true Saints of God, but wicked men, and rank Traitors to their Princes,
as Becket, with many others.

This canonizing of Saints was never heard of with the Fathers, until the year
Eight hundred and eighty, and then Adrian took up this authority. And Alexander
the Third, after him, confirmed it in his decrees.

In the Creed we profess to believe the forgiveness of sins, that is, I believe
that God, for Christ his sake, does freely forgive the sins of his Elect, and
my sins also. And herein consists our justification, namely, in this free
forgiveness of our sins, and the imputation of Christ's righteousness to us. The
Papists teach many things contrary to this Article. First, That men are to make
satisfaction for their sins. Now, satisfaction for sins, and forgiveness of
sins, are contraries. If we satisfy in our own person, we are not justified
freely: if we be justified freely (as most certainly we are, Romans 3.23.) then
we make no satisfaction at all. If a man can satisfy and pay a debt, then he
needs no forgiveness: but if the debt be forgiven him, then it is plain, that
there is no satisfaction made. The satisfaction for our sins was made by
Christ, and not by us.


C. Did not the Ancient Fathers teach men to make satisfaction for their sin?


M. The satisfaction which they maintained, was an Ecclesiastical and public
mulct, or penalty imposed upon notorious offenders, thereby to testify their
repentance, and to satisfy the Church whom they had offended, Perkins, 1. Vol.
577, etc. 2. vol 165. 2. D. 166.

The efficient cause of our justification, is God alone. It is God only that
forgiveth our sins, Esaias 43.25. Mark 2.7. Romans 8.33. They teach that the Pope
can forgive sins, and we know that he gives pardons, not only for the time
past, but also for the time to come: yea they teach that priests have right to
remit sins, and they allege these places to prove to it, Matthew. 16.19. John
10.23. Now we are to note this, that as none can forgive a debt, but the party
to whom the debt is due: so none can forgive sins, but God only, against whom
the sin is committed, Psalm. 51.4. The power of binding and loosing committed to
the Apostles and Ministers of the Word, is, by declaring the will and pleasure
of God out of his Word, both to pronounce forgiveness of sins to all that are
truly penitent: and the retaining of them to the impenitent. The Pope and his
Clergy are never able to prove themselves to be the true Ministers of Christ:
and they cannot so much as challenge this latter authority and power to
themselves, much less the former which is proper to God only. The motive or
impulsive cause, which moved God to justify us, was not any thing in us, but
only the grace of God, that is, the free good will and pleasure of God, Romans
3.24. Ephesians. 2.8. Tit. 3.5, 7. They teach that we are not justified by grace
only, but by works also, that is, by the merit of our works. And to this end
they have (of late years) devised a first and second Justification. The first
is, when a sinner (of an evil man) is made a good man: and this (they say)
comes only of Gods mercy by the merit of Christ. The second is, when one (of a
good or just man) is made better and more just: and this proceeds from works.

But we are to know, that there are not two kinds of justification, a first and
second; but one and the same justification, considered in different respects.
In respect of Gods actual acceptance of a man's person, justification is
absolute: but in respect of the actual application, and manifestation of Gods
acceptance unto a man's conscience, justication is by parts and degrees. Master
Scudder on the Lords Prayer, page 303. to 390.

And further we are to note, that the Papists second justification, is no other
then sanctification, which is an effect and fruit of justification: the which
is imperfect, and not able to justify us before God. The material cause of our
justification, is the active and passive righteousness and obedience of Jesus,
Christ, his inherent holiness, his fulfilling of the Law, his death, sacrifice,
and full satisfaction.

The formal cause, or the form of justification, is the righteousness of
Christ, imputed of God unto us, Romans 5.19. Romans 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 1.30. 2
Cor. 5.19, 21. Phil. 3.9. The Papists deride this doctine, that Men are
justified by the imputation of the righteousness of Christ: which righteousness
is not in us, but in Christ. The Rhemists call it a new no justice, a
fantastical apprehension of that which is not, Rhem. on Romans 3. Sect. 7. They
hold them accursed that so affirm and teach: And they teach, that the only
formal cause of our justification, is the justice of God, whereby we are not
reputed and accounted just, but are made just ind^^d: and this (...) is that
which every man has within himself, and is inherent in him, Council. Trid.
Sess. 6. cap. 10, 113 Rhem. on Phil. chap. 3 Sect. 3. The instrumental cause of
justification, on our part, (...) true and lively faith, whereby we receive and
apply unto our selves the mercy of God, Christ Jesus and all his benefits,
resting upon him alo^^ for salvation.

They teach, that says does not justify, as an instrument in apprehending the
righteousness of Christ, but as a proper and true cause, is actually justifies
by the dignity, worthiness and meritorious work thereof, Bellar. l. 1. de
^u^^^cat. cap. 17. They teach also, that says is not the only cause of our
justification, but that there are other also, as hope, charity, (...)-deeds and
other virtues: yea, they say, that works are more (...) then faith, in the
matter of justification: and pronounce him (...) that shall say, a (...)
justified only by faith, Rhem. (...) Rom 8. Sect. 6. and (...) J^m. 2. Sect. 7.
B^^^. l. (...) de J^^^^. c. 13. ^^^^l. ^^il. Se^^ (...) C^n. 9. These and other
s^^h like th^^g, they (...) contrary to the Doctrine of j^s^^fi^ation, which is
a (...) ground of Religion. And if therewere no more points of difference
between us, these were sufficient to keep us from uniting of our Religions: for
hereby the Church of Rome does raze the very foundation.


C. You said before, that we are justified freely: I would know how this can
be, if we be justified by the righteousness, and for the merit of Christ.


M. Because the Decree of God the Father for our Redemption is free, and we pay
nothing again to God of our own. And therefore by the word (freely) our merits
are excluded, but not Christ's. By which it appears, that in respect of our
selves, we are justified freely of Gods mere mercy and grace, without any
respect of our own righteousness or worthiness, but yet through Christ, and for
his righteousness and obedience imputed to us: both which are signified by the
Apostle, Romans 3.23, 24.


C. Show me (I pray you) what is meant by, Merit, what the Doctrine of the
Papists is concerning merit, and whether that our works be meritorious, or no.


M. By, Merit, we understand any thing, or any work, whereby Gods favor and
life everlasting is procured; and that for the dignity and excellency of the
work or thing done. Now the true merit whereby we look to attain the favor of
God, and life everlasting, is to be found in the person of Christ alone, in
whom God ^s well pleased. The Papists make two kinds of merit: the merit of the
person, and the merit of the work. The merit of the person is (as they say) a
dignity in the person, whereby it is worthy of life everlasting. The merit of
the work, is a dignity or excellency in the work, whereby it is made fit, and
enabled to deserve a life everlasting for the doer of the work. See Rhem. on
Romans 8. Sect. 5. We now do renounce our own personal merits, and all merit of
our own works, and rely only upon the merits of Christ, and we hold that no
works of ours can merit. That no man by any works of his can merit, may be
proved by the properties and conditions that must be in a work meritorious, and
they are five.

First, the work must be absolutely perfect: but all our works are unperfect,
as well in parts, as in degrees of accomplishment. In parts, because we omit
many things which the Law prescribes, and do many evil things which the Law
prohibiteth. In deg^ees, because the works of the Saints are unc^e^n, Esaias
46.6. Phil. 3.8.

Secondly, a man must do the work of himself and by himself: for if it be done
by the help of another, the merit does not properly belong to the doer. But the
good works which we do, are not ours, but are wrought by God in us.

Thirdly, a man must do the work, of his own free will and pleasure, not of due
debt: for when we do that which we are bound to do, we do no more but our duty.
But whatsoever we do, we do it as poor debtors; we are miserable Bankrupts, we
have nothing; we have less then nothing to pay, Luke 17.10.

Fourthly, the work must be done to the benefit and profit of him from whom we
look to be repayed. But no man by any work of his can bring any profit unto
God, John 22.2, 3, 5, 7. Psalm. 16 2.50.12. We may benefit men, but we cannot
benefit our Maker, from whom we have received life and limb, soul and body, and
all that we have; we can give him nothing, and therefore can deserve nothing
from him, Romans 11.35.36.

Lastly, the work and the reward must be in proportion equal; for if the reward
be more than the work, it is not then a reward of desert, but a gift of good
will. But there i^^o proportion between our works, which ar^ altogether
unperfect, and the excellency of those great blessings, and benefits which the
Father gives us freely in his Son, Romans ^ 18. And therefore in this and the
former respects, there can be no merit in any mere man: wherefore it is no less
absurd to say, that we merit salvation at Gods hand^ by good works, then if one
should say, Thou have given me an hundred pounds, therefore thou ought to
give me a thousand.


C. Was not this Doctrine of merit taught in the times of Ancient Fathers?


M. Merit being taken in his proper sense, for due and just desert, was never
allowed of the sound Professors for a thousand years after Christ, Perkins, 1.
Vol. 574, 575. second Vol. 535, 536. Such therefore as will be justified and
saved by their own works and challenge eternal life by their merits, do show
themselves to be most proud and unthankful persons, and deserve most justly to
be condemned eternally.


C. The Papists at their end, do renounce their own merits, and profess that
they look to be saved only by the merits of Christ.


M. If there were nothing else but this, it were enough to prove their doctrine
of merit, to be a false doctrine: for if it were a truth, then a man is not
only in his life time to profess it, and maintain it, but also in his death;
yea rather to die for it, then to deny it. But seeing they in their life
profess it and maintain it, but at their death renounce it; it is a manifest
argument, that even they themselves do know, that it is not a true, but a false
Doctrine.


C. If they know that it is not a truth, what makes them then in their
lifetime so stiffly to maintain it?


M. It serves greatly to maintain and uphold the Popes Kingdom: for they teach,
that the over plus of Christ's merits, and of the merits of Saints and Martyrs,
is the treasure of the Church, which being gathered together, and put into a
store chest, is in the Popes custody, and he alone has the plenary opening and
shutting of this Chest, and the ordering and disposing of these merits: by
virtue whereof, he gives out Indulgences and Pardons when and to whom he will:
So that such as have not merits ^now of their own, may have them from thence.
And so hereby he maintains and upholds his Kingdom: for hereby comes in
infinite wealth and revenues, Perkins 3. vol. 1. part, page 165. 2. D. 2. Vol.
590. 2 a. In these and many other particular points, the Papists teach contrary
to the Articles of the Creed, and therefore are no true Catholics, neither do
they belong to the Catholic Church, as is thus proved: Whosoever have not the
Catholic Faith, do not belong to the Catholic Church: but the Papists have
not the Catholic Faith, therefore they do not belong to the Catholic Church.
That they have not the Catholic Faith, is plain by that aforegoing


DIALOGUE. 6.
C. Do they teach any thing contrary to the Doctrine of the Sacraments?


M. Yes, many things. Christ ordained but only two Sacraments. The Church of
Rome has added to them five more; namely, Confirmation, Penance, Matrimony,
Orders, and Extreme Unction.


C. Are not these Sacraments indeed?


M. No, surely; for there are four things necessarily required to make a
Sacrament. First, the Authority of Christ commanding it. Secondly, the element
or outward sign, as the matter of it. Thirdly, the word of institution, as the
form. Fourthly, the end and use, to be a seal of our faith, for remission of
sins. These four things are not to be sound in their five latter Sacraments,
and therefore they are no Sacraments indeed, Master Attersol on the Sacraments,
page 119, to 150. Synopsis Papis. Controv. 14, 15, 16.


C. May not the Church then institute and ordain Sacraments?


M. None may ordain a Sacrament, but only the Lord. As none may put a sign and
seal to a man's last Will and Testament, but only the maker of the Testament: so
none may ordain Sacraments (which are signs and seals of the New Testament and
Covenant of Grace) but only the Lord which made the Covenant. And therefore the
Church of Rome, in doing the contrary, proves her self not to be the true
Church of Christ, but rather the Church of Antichrist. They do also in many
other things teach contrary to the Doctrine of the Sacraments. As,

First, that the Sacraments do give grace, and namely, remission of sins, ex
opere-operata, by the work wrought, Rhem. Acts 22. Sect. 1.

Secondly, that not only faith does justify, but the Sacraments also, Them.
Romans 6 Sect. 5. Whereas Sacraments are Signs and Seals of Justification, Romans
4.1.

Thirdly, that Infants dying without Baptism, cannot be saved, Rhem. Joh. 3.
Sect 2. They have also added many idle ceremonies to Baptism, as Cream, Tap^^s,
Salt etc. with an opinion of salvation and worship annexed unto them: yea, in
times past they baptized bells, but now they began to be ash^^^d of it, and say
that they were but only hallowed, and consecrated to holy uses ^elar. l. 4 de
Pant. Romans cap. 12. Synops s Papis^. Contr^. v. 12. Quest. 5. Concerning the
Lords Supper, they have likewise most gr^sly abused it in many things.

First, they take away the Cup from the Laity: whereas the Church of Rome for
above a thousand years after Christ, used both signs in the Communion. The
Communion under one kind, was decreed, and determinated as a public Law, in
the Council of Constance, about the year 1114. Perk. 2. Vol. 554.2 b.

Secondly, they reserve the Bread in boxes, pixes, and other vessels of the
Church, for days, weeks, and months. They show it to the people, the Priest
lifting it over his head, and going with it in procession. All this is contrary
to the Sacrament: for it is no Sacrament, unless there be a giving, receiving,
eating, and drinking, M. Attersol on the Sacraments, 386, 387.

The reservation of the Sacraments was not allowed of, but rather found fault
withal by the Fathers, Perk. 2 Vol. 557.

Thirdly, they adore, fall down and honor the Sacrament with Divine Worship,
calling it their Lord and God. A thing never heard of among the heathen
Idolaters, namely, to worship a piece of Bread, or rather, a thin Water.

The adoration in the Sacrament belongs unto Christ sitting in Heaven: and is
an inward worship of the heart, or lifting up of the mind, being stirred up
with the outward signs. Pope Honorius the third (in the year 1220.) was the
first that ever instituted the adoration of the Sacrament. And after him, Urban
the fourth ordained a Feast in honor of the body of Christ, Perkins, 2 Vol.
564. Attersol on the Sacraments, 388, 389.

Fourthly, they turn the Sacrament into a sacrifice for the quick and the dead,
abolishing the fruit and remembrance of the death of Christ, disannulling his
Priesthood, giving him to his Father, whereas the Father has given him to us,
etc. ib. p. 309.

Fifthly, they maintain Transubstantiation. These are their very words: If any
man shall say, that there remains the substance of Bread and Wine in the
Sacrament, after the words of consecration, or shall deny that the whole
substance of Bread and Wine is changed and converted into the body and blood of
Christ (the forms and shows only of Bread and Wine remaining: which singular
and miraculous conversion the Church calls Transubstantiation) let him be
accursed. Con. Trid. Sess. 13. Can. 2. This their Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, is a very fable to mock fools withal, and it overturneth
both the nature and use of the Sacraments, page 45, 46. and page 365. to 369.
If there were a miraculous conversion (as they say there is) of the Bread and
Wine, it would appear to the outward senses. For all true miracles are wrought
openly, clearly, and evidently to men's senses, John 6.26. But the Bread and
Wine, by the judgment of all the senses, remains and appears to be the same
in substance which it was before, of the same quality, quantity, color, taste,
handling, smelling, virtue and nourishment: there is not any one sense, or all
the senses together, that can judge otherwise of it, then it did before. If a
man should be called in, when the Bread and Wine is set on the Table, and
bidden to consider well what he there sees, smells and tastes; and then is
willed to go forth, and to come in again, after the Consecration is ended by
the Priest, and to do the like: and then is asked what he thinks of it: he,
no doubt, will answer (unless fear of persecution make him to conceal the
truth) I see, feel, smell, and taste the same wafer-cake, and wine that I did
before: I can perceive no natural and substantial change therein. And therefore
it follows, that there is no miracle wrought, and consequently, no
Transubstantiation at all. The difference that is, is in the end and use only.
Before consecration, it was common Bread and Wine, ordained for the nourishing
of our bodies. After consecration, it becomes holy Bread and Wine, sanctified
by the Lord, not so much to feed the body, as the soul.


C. Did not the Ancient Fathers hold this Doctrine of Transubstantiation?


M. They knew nothing hereof for at least Eight hundred years after Christ.
Afterward begun the disputations of Transubstantiation, but not approved as an
Article of Faith. The Church for a whole thousand years taught no other then
spiritual receiving of Christ. In the year One thousand two hundred and fifteen
Transubstantiation was decreed and determined in the Council of Lateran, under
Pope Inn^cent The third, and made a main matter of Faith, Perk. 2 Vol. 558, 559.


C. What say you then of their Transubstantiated, or consecrated host (as it is
called) or the bread in the box carried in procession and worshipped?


M. Surely it is nothing else, but a wheaten, or breaden god, or rather an
Idol, nothing inferior to Aarons Calf, or Jeroboams Calves, or the Nehustan,
and piece of Brass that Ezechias brake in pieces: nay, as vile and detestable
as an Idol among the Heathen. And for a conclusion of their doctrine of
Transubstantiation, I will here set down a witty conceit which one showed me
not long since: I have kept the matter, but changed the Meeter, to make it
somewhat the sweeter.


The Priests do make Christ's body and blood,
Hereof none must once doubt:
They eat, they drink, they box him up,
They bear him all about.
DIALOGUE 7.
C. I am satisfied touching the first point, namely, that the Papists are not
of sound Faith: but how do you prove that they are not of good life, seeing
they do so many good works?


M. I prove it th^^ Where the Doctrine is corrupt, the life cannot be good: but
their Doctrine (as yea have heard) is most corrupt, therefore then life cannot
be good. A true says is the ground of a good life, and without which it is
impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. yea, whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin,
Romans 14 23. A true says they have not, and therefore their works cannot be
good, and such as may please God. That they have not a true and sound Faith,
has b^^n showed in many particulars, and it further appears also in this,
that they do even wilfully reject the means whereby it is wrought, namely, the
preaching, hearing and reading the Word of God, They have not, neither will
they have the Scriptures to be soundly preached, read, and heard in their own
tongue. That they cannot abide to have them in their own Language, appears by
this one example: One Panier a Town clark of London (in the time of King Henry
the Eighth) hearing that the Scriptures should be put into English, he spoke to
this effect, and confirmed it with an Oath, viz. that if he knew that the
Scriptures should be put into English, and that the King would have them to be
read in the Church, rather then he would live so long to see it, he would cut
his own throat: But (as Hall says, who heard him speak it) he was not so good
as his word: for, instead of cutting his throat, he hanged himself.


C. What is the cause that they cannot abide to have the Scriptures in their
own Language?


M. S. John gives the reason. For, every one that does evil hates the light,
neither comes to it, lest his deeds should be reproved and discovered, John
3.20 If the Owl flies abroad by day, the b^d^^^ and by discern him, follow
him, and ^all upon him; and therefore he flies abroad in the night and then he
is quiet. If the Scriptures should be suffered to be expounded and read of all
Nations in their own Language, th^n that Owl of Rome (the Pope I mean) with all
his fooleries and abominations, would be discerned and discovered, and then the
world would hate him, follow after him, and persecute him, (even as the small
birds do the Owl:) and therefore they cannot abide the Scriptures in the vulgar
tongue, but love darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evil.


C. What say you then to their good works, as building of Churches, giving of
alms, etc?


M. These and such like works, required in the Law of God, in themselves are
good, and to be practiced of all: but to them they are (as the Fathers called
the virtues of the heathen) but splendida peccata, glittering dross, and
beautiful deformities.


C. Do they teach any thing contrary to the moral Law, and to the Doctrine of
good works?


M. They do both teach and practice many things directly contrary to Gods
Commandments. They teach for good works, such things as are not commanded, but
rather forbidden in the Law of God, as namely, to go on Pilgrimage, to vow
single life, to fast forty days and forty nights, etc.

First, concerning set Pilgrimages unto certain Images: there was none of the
Fathers did so much as dream of them for Six Six hundred years after Christ at
the least, Perkins, 2 Vol. page 541, 542.

Secondly, the necessity of the vow of continency was established first, and
annexed unto Orders about Three hundred and eighty years after Christ, and that
by Pope Siricius. But it had no universal admission, until the time of Pope
Hildebrand, in the year 1070. Perk. 1 Vol. 583. to 587. 2 Vol. 575, 576. Acts
and Monuments, 1151.

Thirdly, their Doctrine of single life was never commanded of God, nor known
in the Primitive Church, but has sprung up since, and is indeed the very
Doctrine of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.13. So as is also the forbidding of meats for
Religions sake. They teach also, that a man may fulfill the Law, yea do works of
supererogation, that is, more than the Law does require: and that men of their
abundance, may allot to others such works of supererogation, Rhem. on 1 Cor. 9.
sect. 6. 2 Cor. 8 sect. 3. This Doctrine of theirs makes the Law of God to be
unperfect, and is directly contrary to the words of Christ, Luke 17.10. And it
was not know of the Ancient Fathers. They spoke indeed sometimes of
Sepererogation, but in a far other sen^e then Papists do. There are no such
works to be found in the person of any mere man or Angel, but only in the
person of Christ. God and man, Perk. 1 Vol. 598, 599. 2 Vol. 540, 541.


DIALOGUE 8.
C. Show me, I pray you, in particular what things they teach contrary to the
Commandments?


M. I could plainly prove unto you, that they do both teach and practice many
things contrary to every one of the Commandments; but I will only set down the
chiefest, and such as most men know to be true.

The first Commandment concerns the inward worship of God: the ground of which
worship is the true knowledge of God; and without which, none can truly worship
and serve him: for such as our knowledge is, such is our worship, 1 Chronicles. 28
9. Psalm. 9.20. Jer. 9.24. The Papists teach that Ignorance is the mother of
devotion: but the truth is, it is the mother of superstition and Idolatry, Gal.
4.8. The Papists therefore being ignorant, and without the true knowledge of
God, cannot truly worship him, but must needs be Idolaters, worshipping they
know not what. The first Commandment requires that we have the true Jehova for
our only God. They make Christ's body to be God, because they hold that it may
be in many places at once, which thing is proper only to God. They make the
Pope to be God, and that in plain words. Christopher Marcellus said to the
Pope, Thou art another God upon earth: and the Pope took it to himself, Council.
Later. Sess. 4.

They give the power to the Pope, which is proper to God, and so make him to be
God. As, that he can make holy that which is unholy, pardon sins, etc. Perkins
1 Vol. 400. 1. and they give Divine Worship to creatures, and so make them
their Gods. The second Commandment concerns the outward worship of God, or
the form and manner of his worship. This Commandment they have clean put out of
the Decalogue, and to fill up the number, they divide the last into two. The
scope of this Commandment is, that no Image is to be made of God, nor any
worship performed to him him in an Image, Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16. But they teach it
lawful to make Images of the true God, and to: worship him in them, and that
there is a Religious worship due to them, Belarm. de imag. sanct. lib. 2. cap.
21. And in the second Nicen Council it was decreed, that the Image of God
should be worshipped with the same worship that is due unto God. Their practice
is answerable to their Doctrine: for they worship the Images of God, of Christ,
the Saints, the wooden Cross, yea, a piece of bread.


C. They say, that they do not worship the images, but God, Christ, and the
Saints in the image.


M. Suppose that this were true, yet in so doing, they commit gross Idolatry,
and the same that the people of Israel did, for which God plagued them greatly,
Exodus 32.5, 28. I think there is none so very a Calf, as to think that they did
worship the Calf it self. The Calf was but a representation of God; and yet
they sinned greatly in making it, and worshipping God in it. The Heathen in
times past could say as much for themselves, concerning their worshipping of
Images, as the Papists now do: and yet as they were Idolaters, so are the
Papists: for as touching their superstition and Idolatry, blood cannot be more
like to blood, or an egg to an egg, then the one of them is to another. The
Heathen had for every Nation and Province, some peculiar god. Among them, the
Elements had their several gods to rule over them. The Heathen had a certain
god assigned to their cattle. The Heathen had peculiar gods for learning and
learned men; and for handycrafts men. And all these have the Papists likewise.
The Heathen erected Altars, ordained Priests to offer Sacrifices, fell down
before their Idols, etc. So the Papists deck and adorn their Images, go on
Pilgrimage to them, fall down upon their knees before them, and make their
prayers unto them. And what is all this, but to worship the very images
themselves, the which is most gross Idolatry? Musculus on Psalm. 16. verse 4.
page 139, 140. Virels grounds, page 87. to 92. Attersol on Philemon, page 63,
64.


C. They say, that there be degrees of Religious Worship, the highest is
Latria, and this is due unto God: the lowest is Dulia, proper to Saints, etc.
Bellar. de imag. Sanct. lib. 2. cap. 25. The Scripture acknowledges one only
kind of Religious Worship, and that due only to GOD, Matthew. 4.10. Revel. 22.9.
And this distinction of theirs was not known and received into the Church, till
Four hundred years after Christ, Perk. 1 Vol. page 696. 2 Vol. 530.


C. Was not the making and worshipping of Images approved of by the Ancient
Fathers?


M. There was no use of Images among Christians, especially in their Churches,
for Three hundred seventy years after Christ. Adoration of Images was never
publicly authorized till Seven hundred eighty eight years after Christ, in the
second Council of Nice, Perk. 1 Vol. page 696. 2 Vol. 421.

If you be disposed to see more at large when Images first came up, how they
were forbidden and condemned by Fathers, Emperors and Councils, and how all
that the Papists can say for them, is answered: then read the book of Homilies
against peril of of idolatry: for I know none that has written more soundly,
fully, and plainly thereof.


C. Do they teach and practice any thing else against the second Commandment?


M. Yes, to the right worshipping of God, there is required a reverend use of
the means of Gods worship and service, the which are sincere prayer, preaching,
hearing of Gods Word, and the use of the Sacraments. Concerning prayer, it must
be made with understanding, 1 Cor. 14. verse 15. Contrary hereunto is their
praying in an unknown tongue, In the purest Churches for the space of Eight
hundred years at the (...) Divine Prayer was never performed in a (...) unknown
to the people, Perk. 2 v^^ ^57, Concerning the Sacraments, they do not rightly
administer and receive them, but have added and taken from them at their
pleasure.

The helps and furtherances of Gods Worship are specially two; Vows and
Fasting. The Papists make these to be parts of Gods Worship; yea, they make
fasting to be a work of satisfaction to Gods Justice, for the temporal
punishment of sin, and a meritorious work, Rhem. on 1 Cor. 15. Sect. 7. Perk. 1
Vol. 596. Synopsis Papisini. The sixth general Controversy, quaest. 3, 4. The
nineteenth general Controversy, quaest. 8. In a word, all their Carnal
Ceremonies, devised by men, and wherein they place the Worship of God, are
contrary to the second Commandment. The most of which Ceremonies, they have
borrowed, partly, from the Jews, partly from the Gentiles, Willet on Jude, page
215, 216.


DIALOGUE 9.
C. Do they teach and practice any thing contrary to the Commandments
following?


M. Yes, The third Commandment concerns the glorifying of Gods Name in the
whole course of our life. They teach men to give the glory which is proper to
God, to creatures, as to the Virgin Mary, the Pope, etc. They teach it lawful
to swear by Saints, and not by God only. They maintain perjury, because they
teach with one consent, that one being examined, may answer doubtfully against
the direct intention of the Examiner, framing another meaning to himself in the
doubtfulness of his words. As for example, A man is asked whether he were not
such a day at the Mass, in such a place? They affirm that he may say no, and
swear unto it (although he were at it) reserving this to himself; not with
purpose to reveal it to the Examiner: whereas (in the very Law of nature) he
that takes an Oath, should swear according to the intention of him that has
power to Administer an Oath: and that in Truth, Judgment and Righteousness,
Jer. 4.2. They are also egregious blasphemers of Gods Name. They have uttered
most horrible blasphemies concerning the Scriptures. See Doctor Willets four
Pillars of Papistry, page 49. to 61. The fifth Commandment requires subjection
and obedience to Superiors, and namely, to Kings and Princes, who are Supreme
and next under Christ, Romans 13.1, 2. 1 Pet. 2.13. They teach that the Pope is
Supreme head over all persons, etc. that he owes no subjection to Kings and
Princes, but has power to make them, and to put them down at his pleasure. The
Pope and his Clergy will not be in subjection to them, but rather exercise
Lordship over them. The Popes Supremacy was unheard of and unknown, till the
year of Christ Six hundred. It was first broached by the murdering Emperor
Phocas, at the ambitious desire of the proud Boniface the third, about the year
Six hundred and seven. And since that time, the Popes have showed their
intolerable pride, in their behavior toward Princes. The Pope in his writings
calls himself, Servus servorum Dei, The servant of Gods servants: but in his
actions, he will be Dominus dominorum, the Lord of Lords: wherein he plainly
shows himself to be that man of sin and Antichrist, which exalts himself
above all that is called God, 2 These. 2.4. This may be showed by many examples.

Alexander the Third, did tread upon the neck of the Emperor Frederick the
First, blasphemously abusing the words of the Psalm, Thou shall tread upon the
Lion and Adder, etc. Acts and Monuments, p. 185. Pope Celestine crowned Henry
the fifth with his foot, and with his foot spurned it off again, ibid. 221. The
Papists also teach and maintain disobedience to Parents; for, they teach that
it is lawful for the Child, being a Roman Catholic, to deny his duty to his
Parents, being Heretics. And as the Scribes and Pharisees taught, that if the
Children did bring to their Corban (that is, their Treasury) though they
neglected their Parents, yet they were free; so they teach children to give
that they have to Monasteries, etc. wherewith they should relieve their
Parents, Bucanus Common places, page 901.


DIALOGUE. 10.
C. Do they teach and practice any thing contrary to the sixth Commandment?


M. Yes, the sixth Commandment forbids us to kill, or hurt any man. They
teach it lawful for Subjects not only to rise up against, but even to kill
their Princes the Lords Anointed (if they be excommunicated by the Pope) and
that it is a meritorious work so to do. This with other such like Devilish
Doctrines, and the Authors thereof, are to be seen more at large in Bucanus
Common places, concerning Magistrates: and in Master Tailor on Psalm. 32. page
208, 209.


C. Can you name any that have put it in practice?


M. Yes, Pope Gregory the seventh, called Hildebrand, hired one to kill the
Emperor. A Monk poisoned King John. Henry the third, King of France, was slain
by a Friar. Yea, Pope Sixtus Quintus highly commended the Friar for doing it.
Henry the fourth of France was also slain by a Papist. Many of them, (yea of
their Priests and Jesuits) have attempted to kill our late Queen Elizabeth,
and our King James, with all his royal issue, and that after a most barbarous
manner. These Popish Traitors may very fitly be compared to that base and
unnatural bird the Cuckoo: who though he be hatched, fed and brought up by a
little bird, yet he devoureth both the natural young ones, and also the dam her
self.


C. Are there none that teach and practice the killing of Princes but Papists?


M. This Doctrine was never maintained by any Heretics (besides the Papists)
as our most Christian and Learned King has showed in a speech of his, uttered
in the Parliament house, in the year One thousand six hundred and five, by
occasion of the Gunpowder Treason. And herein you may see how contrary they are
both to the Doctrine and practice of the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles,
who both taught and practiced subjection, even to wicked and Idolatrous
Princes, and did never so much as attempt to hurt them. As for example, Saul
was a wicked King, forsaken of God, and one that did most cruelly persecute
David, who was anointed to be King after him. At two several times the Lord
delivered Saul into his hands, so that he might (without any resistance) have
killed him; yea, Abishai desired that he might strike him but once with his
spear. But what said David? Touch him not, for who can lay his hand on the
Lords anointed, and be guiltless? Nay, his heart smote him for cutting off the
skirt of Saul's Robe, 1 Samuel 24.4, 5, 6, etc. chap. 26.8, 9, etc. And
afterward, when one brought tidings to David that he had slain Saul, what did
David? Did he commend him for it, as the Pope did the Friar? No, he caused him
to be slain for his labor, 2 Samuel 1.14, 15, 16. Now what think you of David?


C. He was a man after Gods own heart, endued with the Spirit of God.


M. It is most true, and therefore the Papists (which both teach and practice
the contrary) are endued with the spirit of Satan. S. Paul says, that to
forbid marriage and meats, is a Doctrine of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.1, 3. If that be a
Doctrine of Devils then much more is this. In the sixth Commandment is also
condemned all cruelty; yet herein they exceed and excel all others. And this is
a special note of a false Religion, and yet this is one special means whereby
Popery is upheld. See Tailor on Psalm. 32. page 204. to 208. Solomon describes
an harlot by three properties, cruelty, treachery, and flattery, Prove. 2.16,
17, 18. As a dishonest and unchaste woman is thus discerned, so is a corrupt
Religion. And these are very badges and Ensigns of the Whore of Babylon: Where
they get the sword, they show all cruelty: where their power fails, they work
by treachery: where this speedeth not, they will deceive by flattery and
hypocrisy. See the Preface to Dr. Willets Treatise on the Epistle of S. Jude,
page 2, 3, etc.


DIALOGUE. II.
C. What do they teach and practice contrary to the seventh Commandment?


M. They hold and teach, that Marriage is unlawful in the Clergy: and that the
Marriage of Ministers is the worst sort of Incontinence and Fornication, Rhem.
on 1 Cor. 7.9. Sect. 8. Whereas Marriage is the remedy against Fornication, 1
Cor. 7.2. They allow the^^ Priests to keep harlots, (rather then to Marry) so
they do it closely: for this Caveat is given them: Si non cast, tamen caute.
If thou can not live chastely, thou may keep a whore warily. And what
uncleanness and filthiness has been committed by many Popes and Popish
Priests, all the world knows. A taste hereof, I will give you in a few
Examples.

Pope John the thirteenth was an Adulterer, and an incestuous person, Being
found without the City with another man's wife, he was so wounded of her
husband, that within eight days after he died, Acts and Monuments, page 143.
Pope Sixtus the fourth erected at Rome a Stews of double abomination, not only
of women, but also of men, Ibid. 6. page 667. Alexander the sixth committed
incest with his own daughter Lucretia, Guicciardine, lib. 3. Innocentius the
eighth had diverse bastards, and boasted of them. See Willet on Jude, page 188.
They had one Pope that did beget no child, but was begotten with child, and
brought it forth in going on procession; and that was Pope John the eighth, who
proved to be Jone, and not John. This they deny, but there was of late years
written a book by M. Alexander Cook, and another written in Latin by a
stranger, wherein they prove (and that out of Popists Writers) that there was
such a one. For they sufficiently prove themselves to be men indeed, in
begetting Bastards. It is an old saying, It must needs be a holy Procession,
where the Devil bears the Cross: so it must needs be an holy, chaste and pure
Church, that has such unholy, impure, unchaste, and filthy heads, as many
Popes have been. And as were the heads, such was the rest of the body. Their
Monasteries and Monkish Cells were detected of most infamous Incests,
Fornications, etc. as does appear in the inquisition made in the time of King
Henry the eighth, Praefat. Balaei. de actis Roman. Pontif. See a little book
(lately set forth) called the Friars Chronicle. Contrary to the eighth
Commandment are the Popes Bulls, Indulgences and pardons for sin; and all for
money. They sell such things as are not to be sold, namely, remission of sins,
and the merits by which men may come to the Kingdom of Heaven. But no penny, no
Pater noster, Synopsis Papismi. Controversy 14. part. 3. Popes Bulls and
Indulgences (wherein is given absolution from the guilt of temporal punishment)
were not known to the Catholic Church, for One thousand years and more after
Christ, Perk. 2. vol. 589. And herein they maintain licenciousness; for what
need one care what sin he commits, when for a little money he may have a
Pardon for it?

One Roger Holland (sometime a Papist) says thus, I was of this your blind
Religion, having liberty under your Auricular Confession, I made conscience of
sin, but trusted to the Priests absolution; he also for money, doing some
penance for me: which after I had given, I cared no further what offenses I
did: no more then he cared, after he had my money, whether he fasted with bread
or water for me or no, Acts and Monuments, page 2040.


DIALOGUE 12.
C. Show me also, I pray you, what they teach and practice contrary to the two
last Commandments.


M. The ninth Commandment condemns all lying, and dissimulation, railing,
mocking, etc. They maintain equivocation, which (as the Secular Priests have
said) ( Quodlibet 2. Art. 4. page 6.) you may term in plain English, lying, and
cogging. They are notorious liars, and slanderers, raylers, and mockers, Willet
on Jude, page 195. and 205. 212. They have falsified men's writings, putting in,
and putting out what they please, as is to be seen, in their Index
expugatorius. See Perk. 2 vol. page, 489, etc.

There have been in times past games appointed for lying. If there were any
such now, the Papists would carry the Whet-stone from all the Heretics in
Christendom. The tenth Commandment condemns Original Corruption, and the very
evil thoughts and lusts of the heart without consent.

They teach, that concupiscence in it self is not sin. These are the very words
of the Council of Trent; This concupiscence (which the Apostle sometime calls
sin) the holy Synod declares, that the Catholic Church did never understand
to be called sin, because it is truly and properly sin in the regenerate, but
because it comes of sin, and enclineth unto sin: If any man think the
contrary, let him be accursed, Sess. 5. cap. 1. de pec. orig. Wherein, they
both decree against the Apostle himself, Romans 7.23. and also they gain say
themselves; for if this concupiscence boil of Original sin, as out of a
fountain, and that is damnable: It follows, that concupiscence or lust is
also sin before God, and does deserve condemnation. They say, that in the
regenerate it is venial. But this is an undoubted principle, that all sins in
themselves and their own nature are mortal. And concerning this venial sin, it
was not known among the Fathers for Seven hundred years after Christ. And thus
you see what gross things they both teach and practice contrary to the
Commandments of God: whereby it plainly appears, that Popery cannot be of
God, for thus I reason; Whatsoever Religion does teach things contrary to the
Commandments of God, is not of God: but Popery does so, and therefore it is not
of God, and so by good consequence, Papists cannot be good Catholics.


DIALOGUE 13.
C. Hitherto you have showed, that the Papists teach many things contrary to
the Creed, the Sacraments, and the ten Commandments, now tell me, I pray you,
whether they teach any thing contrary to the Lords Prayer?


M. They do likewise teach and practice many things contrary thereunto, I will
but only name some of them. The Lords Prayer teaches us to call upon God only.
They teach and practice prayer to Saints. In the first Petition, we pray for
the hallowing of Gods Name. They give unto Saints departed, that which is
proper to God, and so dishonor Gods Name. In the second Petition, we pray for
the erecting of Gods Kingdom of Grace in our hearts, and also for the means
thereof, namely, the preaching and hearing of Gods Word. They hinder the coming
of Gods Kingdom, in rejecting the Word of God, and in persecuting such as will
preach, hear, and read it. Contrary to the third Petition is their Doctrine of
Free Will. Contrary to the fifth Petition is their Doctrine of satisfaction for
sin. In the sixth Petition, we pray for strength to withstand Satan and his
temptations. They teach people to drive away the Devil with holy water, and
such like childish toys. These and other such like things, they teach and
practice contrary to the Lords Prayer.


DIALOGUE 14.
C. If Popery be so contrary to the grounds of Religion, then we may not join
with them in their profession.


M. It is true indeed, we must therefore do as the Lord bade Jeremy (Chap.
15:19.) Let them return to thee, but return not thou to them. We may join with
them in respect of Civil Society, but not in respect of Religion; and yet even
then we are to take heed, lest we be corrupted by them; for he that touches
Pitch, shall be defiled therewith. Some think that our Religion, and the
Religion of the present Church of Rome, are all one for substance, and that
they may be united, but they are grossly deceived, for an union of these two
Religions can never be made, more then the union of light and darkness; and
that because the Church of Rome (as has at large been showed) has struck at
the very foundation.


C. If Popery be so contrary to the very grounds of Religion, then, what is the
cause that so many (yea, of the more wise and learned sort) do embrace and
cleave to it?


M. One special cause of it is, that because men will not receive the love of
the Truth, therefore God will send them strong delusion, that they should
believe a lie, 2 These. 2.10, 11.

A second cause is, ignorance of the Scriptures, and of the grounds of
Religion, for if men would well acquaint themselves herewith, they should
easily see the grossness of Popery.

A third cause is, that Popery is very agreeable and pleasing to man's corrupt
nature; As for example, to be justified by our good works, to have Images to
Worship God in, to live in Ignorance, to have pardons for our sins, to serve
God in outward Ceremonies, as in choice of meat, difference of days, etc. These
are things very agreeable and pleasing to our corrupt nature, and therefore one
especial cause why so many embrace Popery.

A fourth cause is, the tyranny of the Church of Rome, whose chief means to
uphold her Religion, is fire and sword: for were it not for this, many
thousands in a few years would utterly renounce Popery.

A fifth cause, why so many (especially of the Learned) do embrace it, is pomp
and profit; that is, ambition and covetousness.

This was that which made the Scribes and Pharisees (even against their own
knowledge) to withstand Christ and his Gospel.

And this makes many learned Papists to do the like. They know (no doubt) that
in some things they err: as it does appear by the words of Stephen Gardener on
his death bed.

The Bishop of Chichister seeing him to be in a desperate case, comfort him
with the hope of remission of sins by the merits of Christ. Gardener hereunto
answers thus; What, will you open that gap now? you may speak it to me, and
to such as are in my case; but if you teach it to the people, then farewell
all; meaning our authority, pomp, and profit by absolutions, Masses, etc. These
are the special causes why so many embrace Popery.


C. There is one thing more that I would gladly know concerning the Papists,
and that is, whether a Papist may be saved, seeing that Popery is so contrary
to the grounds of Religion?


M. You are then to mark what a Papist is. A Papist (as the Rhemists on Act.
11. Sect. 4. do describe him) is one that cleaves to the Pope in Religion, and
is obedient to him in all things.

Every one now that is under the jurisdiction of the Pope, is not to be counted
a Papist; for there are some, even in Italy, Spain, etc. that hold the Grounds
of Religion, do sigh and groan under the Romish yoke, and desire to be freed
from it, yea, would rejoice to see it.

Again, there may be some, that (for want of knowledge, and the means thereof,
are entangled with some points of Popery, but yet they hold the foundation,
which is Christ Jesus, and look to be saved by his merits, and not by their
own, or any others. Such we account not Papists, but the true Church and
children of God. But by Papists, we mean such as cleave fast to the Pope in
Religion, are in all things obedient to him, will not be reclaimed from their
errors, refuse to hear the Word of God, to read the Scriptures, or any other
good books. Of such we may boldly say, that if they thus continue to the end,
they cannot be saved.


DIALOGUE. 15.
C. I do now plainly see that Papists are no good Catholics, because they are
neither of found faith, nor good life: but tell me (I pray you) who indeed are
the true Church, and the true Catholics?


M. All that do truly and sincerely embrace, profess, and practice the
afo^esaid grounds of Religion, in what country soever they live.


C. Is the Church of England the true Church?


M. Yes, for it has the special marks of the true Church: namely, the Word of
God sincerely and soundly preached, and the Sacraments rightly administered.


C. The Papists say, that there are diversities of opinions among us, that we
cannot agree among our selves, and that therefore we are not the true Church.


M. In all substantial points of Religion, we agree both amongst our selves,
and also with all other sound Protestants in Christendom. In other things there
have been, are, and will be diversities of opinions, and differences to the
worlds end. They should first pluck out the beam of their own eyes: for we can
truly charge them with greater differences: As namely, with that sharp and
bloody contention between the Franciscans and the Dominicans; and with the late
bitter contention between the Jesuits and the secular Priests: wherein the
Priests did write as bitterly against the Jesuits (and namely, against
Parsons) as ever did any Protestant: nay there was never any Protestant writer
that did lay such foul and odious crimes to their charg, as the Priests did.
And herein they verified the old proverb, When thieves f^ll by the ears, true
men come to have their goods. For one dissension that is among us, they have
(at least) ten among themselves. D. Willet (in his fourth Pillar of Papistry)
has set down at large:

First, the contradictions and diverse opinions of old Papists and new.

Secondly, The contradictions of the Jesuits amongst themselves.

Thirdly, that their stoutest Champion, Bellarmine, is at variance with
himself, shamefully forgetting himself, saying and unsaying: now of one
opinion, by and by of another. And no marvel. Oportet enim mendacem esse
memorem. A liar had need to have a good memory.

Fourthly, he shows the repugnances, inconveniences, and inconsequent
opinions which Popish Religion has in it self. And thus you see, how they
charge us with that, wherein themselves are most faulty.


DIALOGUE 16.
C. Are there none among us, that maintain any strange and new opinions,
contrary to the grounds of Religion?


M. If there be any such, our Church does not approve of them, but rather
censure and punish them.


C. There be some that profess the former grounds of Religion as we do, and yet
say that there is no true Church among us: and therefore will not join with us
in prayers, hearing the Word, and in the use of the Sacraments, but separate
themselves from us; what say you of such?


M. I say, that they are possessed with the spirit of pride and singularity;
and that in so doing, they do even deny these Articles of Faith, the Catholic
Church, and the Communion of Saints, and are such as the Apostle speaks of,
Romans 16.17. Heb. 10.25, 39. Master Perkins (in his first Vol. page 409.) calls
them a schismatical and undiscreet company, and says, that they are full of
pride, thinking themselves to be full, when they are empty; to have all
knowledge when they are ignorant, and have need to be catechized. Another says
thus of them: The error of those men is full of evil, yea of blasphemy, who do
in such manner make a departure from this Church, as if Christ were quite
banished from hence, and that there could be no hope of salvation to those that
abide here. And further he says, that if they cannot find Christ here, they
shall find him no where. The errors of these men you may see in a little
Treatise set forth by M. Barnard, called, The Separatists Schism.


C. I pray show me some example, that they ought not to separate themselves
from us, and that they do sin in so doing.


M. In the Church of Corinth, the incestuous man was not punished; fornication
was lightly regarded, yea, there were some that even denied the Resurrection,
yet S. Paul does account and call them the Church and Saints, he does not
persuade any to make a separation, but does plainly rebuke them, and shows
how they should punish the evil doer. I speak not this to excuse any gross sin
that reigns amongst us; (for I wish that the same might be severely punished)
but to show, that where the Word is truly preached, and the Sacraments rightly
administered (as in our Church they are) none ought for any cause to separate
themselves: And, that such as do it, do sin grievously, I will show you by a
familiar example. A mother conceives and brings forth a son, and that with
great travel and pain: She traineth him up to man's estate, and that not without
great care and labor: This son at length espying some spot and blemish, or some
infirmity in his mother, forsakes her, and will not acknowledge her to be his
mother, what would you now think of him?


C. Surely I should think such a one to be a very wicked and unnatural son.


M. Even such are they, who (for some seeming faults in our Church) deny it to
be a true Church, and do separate themselves from it; whereas this Church has
conceived them, brought them forth, and nourished them. For if ever they were
truly begotten unto Christ, and born a new, it has been by our Church, and our
Ministry, by which likewise they have been trained up, and brought to that
knowledge which they have.


C. There are many amongst us that make great profession of Religion, but I can
see no good works come from them: nay, they are not only barren in good works,
but also live in some one gross sin or other. Are these the true Church, and
true Catholics?


M. Though they live in the Church, yet they are not of the Church: they are
but Hypocrites and shall (if they repent not) have the reward of Hypocrites;
yea, it shall be easier in the Day of Judgment for many Papists, then for them;
because by their barren and fruitless, yea wicked life, they have caused the
Name of God, his Gospel, and the true Professors thereof, to be evil spoken of.
Let all therefore that will be accounted the true Church, and true Christians,
he careful to adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things, and that by
a godly conversation, and by doing of good works.


C. The name of God be blessed for this our conference, whereby I find my self
much edified. There remains yet one thing more, which I will demand of you,
and that is, How I may come to know and be assured, that I am indeed a member
of the true Church, and that I shall certainly be saved?


M. Be diligent to hear the Word of God preached. Read the Scriptures. Receive
often the Sacrament. Acquaint your self thoroughly with the aforesaid grounds of
Religion. Join hereunto earnest and hearty prayer. Set apart some time for
these things, specially be careful to spend the Sabbath herein. And to all
these things join an holy conversation, indevouring above all things to have
always a clear conscience toward God, and toward men. In doing this, you shall
at length come to that full assurance, whereof S. Paul speaks, namely, that
you are the Child of God, and that nothing shall be able to separate you from
the love of God, which is in Christ, Romans 8.38.


Babylon is fallen, it is fallen, Rev. 14.8.

Praise, honor, glory and power, be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and
unto the Lamb for evermore. Amen. Revel. 5.13.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader.
THese Books following are Printed for, and sold by William Miller, at the
Gilded-Acorn in S. Paul's Churchyard, where also you may be furnished with
most sorts of Bound or Stitched Books, as Acts of Parliament, Proclamations,
Speeches, Declarations, Letters, Orders, Ordinances, Remonstrances,
Commissions, Articles: As also Books of Divinity, Catechisms, Church
government; Sermons on all Occasions; and most sorts of Histories, Poetry,
Plays and such like, etc.

Books in Folio.
ASsemblies Annotations. Bakers Chronicle. Gesners History of Beasts and
Serpents. Heylin's Cosmography. Josephus History of the Jews. Juvenal with Cuts
by Sir Robert Stapylton. Ambroses works. Cradocks Harmony. Churchil Divi
Britannici. Elson on Colossians. Knowledge and Practice, quar. Principles, oct.
Richards Vines Treatise of the Institution, Right Administration and Receiving
of the Lords Supper, in two Sermons, oct.

Quarto.
Gunters works. Barbers Sermon, Isa. 9.6. J. B. Sermon, Survey of Man, Job
14.10.
Dod on the Lords Prayer.

Medice Cura Teipsum, or the Apothecaries plea against Doctor Christopher Meret.

William Lord Bishop of Gloucester, Entitled, a plain and full Exposition of
the Catechism of the Church of England.

Edward Lord Bishop of Norwich, Entitled, a Sermon preached before the Peers
at Westminster the 7. Nov. being a day of solemn Humiliation for the continuing
Pestilence.

Not. Hardy Dr. Entitled, Justice Triumphing, etc. a Sermon preached the 5. of
Novem.

-- Entitled, The pilgrims wish, a Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mrs. Anne
Dudson.

-- Entitled, A loud Call to great Mourning, a Sermon preached on the 30. Jan.
1661. before the Parliament:

-- Entitled, Lamentation, Mourning and Woe, a Sermon preached the Lords day
after the dismal Fire in the City of London.

-- Entitled, The Royal Commonwealths Man, etc. a Sermon preached at the
Funeral of Sir Thomas Adams.

-- Entit. Totum Hominis, etc. a Sermon preached the 15. March at the Assizes
in York Marriage of Arts a play.

Faithful Shepherdess a play. Horatius a play. Polyencles a play. Combat of
love and friendship a play. Spanish Gypsy a play.
Fettiplace, the souls narrow search for sin, oct.

English Dictionary, or Expositor, the twelfth Edition Revised and enlarged, by
S. C. duod.

Complete Bone-setter, oct.

Templum Musicum, or the Musical Synop, oct.

The famous game of Chess-play, oct.

Shelton's Tachygraphia, Lat. oct.

Clarks Looking-glass for persecutors. oct.

Printed for F. Coals and William Miller.

FINIS.

