A CAUTION TO ALL TRUE English Protestants, Concerning the Late POPISH PLOT, BY
WAY OF CONFERENCE, BETWEEN AN Old QUEEN- ELIZABETH-PROTESTANT, AND HIS
COUNTREY-NEIGHBOUR.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Janeway in Queens-head Alley in Paternoster-Row.
1681.

A Caution to all true English Protestants, concerning the late Popish Plot,
etc.
P. I Am glad to see you, good Neighbor, for I understand you have been lately
at London. Pray what News do you bring concerning the Popish Plot?


C. Worthy Sir, I do as much rejoice to see you; But as for News about the
Plot, the whole I can say, is what I have received from those Gentlemen, with
whom my business mostly was, and they have almost persuaded me, that there is
no such thing as a Plot; and really I do very much question it, or at least as
to a Popish one.


P. How is it that you can be tempted to gratify those, who design your ruin,
by entertaining such thoughts as these?


C. Sir, I must be plain with you; Although I am a young man, and not of your
parts, learning, and experience, yet I can see somewhat. Had there been such a
Plot as you talk of, how is it, that so many good Protestants are now so much
in doubt, that they know not on whom to fasten it, whether on the Papist, or
Presbyterian?


P. You say that many are in doubt, and know not where to fasten the Plot, that
supposes, that there is Evidence enough of the being of a Plot; but the great
Quaery is, Who are the Plotters? Neighbor, let me be free with you, for this
is not a time to be silent, or afraid to speak; for our Religion, the
Protestant Religion is in danger; and that which is the Papist's advantage is,
that there are so many unwary persons amongst us, who through a strange
heedlesness, are too apt to serve the Papists design to the loss of their
Religion, the ruin, and destruction of their families, yea, and of their own
immortal Souls. I pray let me be free, for it may be my experience and
knowledge is greater than yours, at least in this. Show me then, why you
believe that there is a Plot, and yet know not where to fasten it?


C. That there is a Plot, is evident, it being confirmed by so many Witnesses,
viz. Dr. Oats, Capt. Bedlow, Mr. Prance, Mr. Dugdale, etc. to the great
satisfaction of His Majesty, Two Parliaments, and also the Judges of the
Nation, especially my Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, who passed Sentence on
several.


P. You say well, in that you have sum'd up Arguments unanswerable to prove a
Plot; to which may be added the Miraculous Providence that have appeared in
bringing in Dr. Oats, and after that, Capt. Bedlow, etc. yea, and the attempts
have been made to baffle His Majesty's Evidence, which have conduced to the
corroborating and strengthening them; and what is worthy our notice, is, that
these men might have gained many a Thousand pound by withdrawing their
Evidence, even when their noncompliance with the Papists overtures is attended
with the greatest hazards imaginable; witness Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, and
Justice Arnold, etc. So that, I must profess unto you, that when I consider how
miraculously several persons, to one another strangers, have been at diverse
times compelled to make discovery of this Hellish Plot, notwithstanding the
great discouragements they have met with in their going through with their
Evidence; I cannot comprehend how any, who are not extraordinarily ignorant,
nor some of the Plotters, can say, They question the being of the Plot.


C. Sir, we question not the being of a Plot; but our Doubt is, Whose Plot it
is, whether the Papists or Presbyterians?


P. Oh Neighbor! how is it possible, that you can be convinced, that there is
a Plot, and yet question, whether it be Popish? for the same Evidence that
there is a Plot, is for its being a Popish Plot; which was freely confessed by
some of those that were concerned in the Conspiracy.


C. What do you say freely confessed? Madam Cellier suggests as if Prance and
Dangerfield were put in the Rack, and tortured.


P. I Will believe no such thing; for, we have no such Law, and (I think) no such
Engines as a Rack; it being more agreeable to Popish Principles and Practices.
But for your further satisfaction, I refer you to them, who can give you the
best account thereof; only I add this, That if these men's Confessions had been
the product of the Torture, they might soon after they had received their
liberty, have abandoned the Land, by running into some Popish Country, and
thereby gratify both the Papists, and themselves, and receive greater
advantages than they can reasonably expect at home, yea, and be far from the
fear of being Arnoldiz'd; surely they might be Canonized, and have made as
great profit, it may be, of the Relics of those clothes in which they were
Tortured, as it is said Coleman's Wife has made of her Husbands. But can any
one in his wits think, that if these men's Confession were the product of a
Torture, that they would not long ere this have made their escape? But moreover
consider, the most material Evidences are Dr. Oats, Capt. Bedlow, and Mr.
Dugdale, etc -- But who put these men on the Rack? did they not come in of
their own accord, being compelled by none, but by that God, who rules both in
Heaven and Earth? Yea, and Captain Bedlow's Confession on his dying bed is such
as can never be obliterated while the world endures; for he, a dying man,
confirms the whole he had said before, making further discovery of their bloody
designs.


C. You mention Capt. Bedlows Discovery on his dying bed; what think you of the
Jesuits at Tyburn? shall we not value the Evidence of five on six dying men,
before that of but one?


P. Compare the circumstances of the Jesuits with those of Capt. Bedlow, and
you will see, you have great reason to credit Bedlow before the Jesuits. For, 1.
Jesuits have their equivocations, and mental reservations, even when they
profess their abhorrence of these things, but so had not Bedlow. 2. They are
sure of their absolution;
1. Either from one another as Priests; or, 2. what is very remarkable, even
from Tyburn it self: their being hanged for the Catholic Cause, (as they call
it) being meritorious of a pardon. This is to be found in Bellarmine de Sacr,
Bapt. l. 1. c. 6. where Bellarmine [notwithstanding what Dominicus a Soto, and
Mart. Ledesmius in 4 disp. 3. q. un. art. 11. say to the contrary] asserts,
That the more probable opinion is, that Martyrdom, or hanging for a Popish
principle, does confer the first grace ex opere operato; whence if any one yet
remaining in his sins, having no love to God, by virtue of his Martyrdom ex
opere operato (i. e.) by reason of his being hanged for the Catholic Cause,
which they call the Cause of Christ, he shall be justified and saved. So that
although a Papist dye with a lie in his mouth if it at Tyburn, or some such
place for the promoting the Popish design, or Treason, his being hanged is
enough to procure the pardon of that Lie; But Capt. Bedlow expected no pardon
from any of their Priests, neither was at his dying hour in a capacity of
receiving it from Esquire Ketch.


C. How! do the Papists hold such dangerous Errors! then surely no wonder that
some of these Jesuits were so confident in their lying at Tyburn; it being said
by the Learned, that one of them dyed with another lie in his mouth.


P. That Is true, Gawen did so, as has been shown by those that writ Answers
to their dying Speeches, and as all the Learned know; and it has been since
proved by Mr. Jenison, that another of them dyed with a lie in his mouth; and
therefore their confident pleading their Innocence, when most guilty, should
never tempt you to doubt concerning the being of a Popish Plot.


C. I cannot but acknowledge that there has been, and it may be still is a
Popish Plot; but is there not a Presbyterian one too?


P. Alas poor man! what should tempt you to fear that there is a Presbyterian
Plot.


C. Tempt us to fear a Presbyterian Plot, do you say? Good Sir, don't you hear
some of our Clergy, that are good Protestants, to make the Presbyterians, as
bad as the Papists, yea worse; for some of them say, they would rather turn
Papist, than Presbyterian: and if the Presbyterians are as bad as Papists, why
may not they then have their Plots, as well as the Papists?


P. Neighbor, I must confess, that there are too many of our Clergy, who do
very frequently talk as you say; but you must remember, that there are a
greater number of the more sober and judicious of our Clergy, that are of
another mind, and who are grieved at the very heart to find so many young brisk
blades in their Pulpits, and out of them, to be so subservient unto the Papists
in their Plots: which must either be an effect of their folly, or of their
treachery unto the Church of England.


C. What, Sir, do you say it must be the effect either of their folly or
treachery unto the Church of England? How do you make that out, Good Sir?


P. This is easily done, for unless they are prodigiously ignorant, they cannot
but know, that the bravest Protestant Subjects in the Land, are branded by the
name of Presbyterians, as appears by Mr. Dangerfield's Narrative; yea, such
persons as are the honor of our Church, and the Glory of the Kingdom are under
the Presbyterian name rendered Plotters, such as my Lord President, and many
others. Which being so, what Son of the Church without folly, or treachery, can
say, that the Presbyterians are as bad as the Papists? What! is the Glory of
the Church of England, when under a Presbyters name, as bad as Popery; and
would they indeed be rather Papists than such Presbyterians? what do they then
say, but that they themselves are really Papists?


C. They do not mean those worthy persons you mention, but such as are for
Petitions, to wit, the Dissenters from the Church of England.


P. Neigbour, see how you are abused; For 1. the Papists, whose design these
men serve, mean all undaunted Protestants, when they say Presbyterians. 2. You
your self suggest the same; for by Presbyterians you mean such as were for
Petitioning, viz. Dissenters; But, who more for Petitioning, than such as are
for the Church of England? Who were those that Presented the Petitions? were
they not Sons of the Church? Again, How many Grand Juries Petitioned; but are
all those Dissenters? Really, if all such as were for Petitioning be Dissenters
from the Church, the Church of England is become inconsiderable, which is
according unto Popish suggestions; which are, that either we must be Papists or
Presbyterians, as if there were no Protestants in England but the
Presbyterians; and as if the Church of England had dwindled into nothing, or
turned Papists, or Presbyterians; and that the Parliament being hearty enemies
against Popery, are Presbyterians. Thus you see how those young hot-heads among
our Clergy do either discover great Folly, or Treachery, or both.


C. I must acknowledge that part of our Clergy, who do talk thus, do discover
themselves guilty of great folly, or of a wretched Treachery: But I hope it is
not so with all our Clergy.


P. No surely; it is not the temper of all the thorough Protestants among the
Clergy, which are many; they abhor these things, though for their doing so, are
hated by these high-flown men, as much as if they were Dissenters.


C. Truly Sir, I think you are in the right; but I would fain know, what those
Presbyterians are, that the name is become so odious.


P. If you expect that I should acquaint you with what the Presbyterians are, I
must first distinguish between a few hot brains that are among them, and the
more sober and greater part.


C. Why, Sir, are there hot heads among them also? How comes this to pass?


P. There are some Fools and Knaves crept in amongst all Protestant Parties,
whether Episcopal, or Presbyterian; and a thousand to one but the high-flown
and factions, on all sides, are the extremely ignorant, or such as are but
Protestants in Masquerade (i. e.) Protestants in name, but Papists in heart.
The over-zealous in all parties, who are of the more ignorant sort, being the
Fools made use of by these disguised Papists, that turn themselves into all
shapes as their interest directs.


C. Do you really believe that this is so, Good Sir?


P. I do indeed: for Divide and Impera, has been ever the Roman Maxim; that
is, to use all means for the dividing Protestants; and in order hereunto, the
man of sin, of late called, The Gentleman of Rome, sends forth his Instruments
among all sorts of Protestants with a dispensation for the dissembling their
own, and for the professing any other Religion; and accordingly it is not to be
questioned, but that there are some among our Clergy, others among the
Dissenters, at least among the Presbyterians in Scotland, where through their
influence some of a softer temper have been ensnared to an insurrection. These
Emissaries being the brands of Hell, that have turned the whole Europaean World
into a fire, they being the men to whom we owe all our divisions, Civil Wars,
etc. yea these Jesuits are the men that occasioned the last Wars, and the Death
of the late King, and all the Disturbances that have been ever since.


C. Really Sir, you have acquainted me with what I knew not till now; Pray,
good Sir, show me how I shall come to know these; for let them be of our
Church, or among the number of Dissenters, did I know 'em, I would hate 'em, as
I hate the Devil.


P. Neighbor, it is hard to give Infallible tokens of these Villains, since
it is so easy for the Devil to transform himself into an Angel of light;
however that you may not be grossly deceived, I Will tell you whom you may have
some reason to suspect.


1. All such as do mischievously suggest unto the people any thing unduly of
His Majesty. 2. All such as do misrepresent unto his Majesty his Parliament;
for nothing more sure than that they are sound Protestants, who give the
greatest assurances of their Loyalty unto their Prince, and of their Fidelity
unto the Protestant Religion; and therefore, whoever would insinuate, as if
they were of a Republican spirit, and enemies to the Crown, are to be suspected
as Papists, whose hearts are full of Treason. 3. Such as endeavor to
misrepresent unto his Majesty, the Great and Loyal City of London; which City,
as it contains the Wealth of the Nation, even so it is the strength thereof,
and next to Heaven, and a Parliament, His Majesty's greatest security. 4. Such
as suggest, that those who are zealously devoted for His Majesty's safety in a
courageous prosecuting of the Conspirators, and Plotters, are enemies to the
King, and factious, are to be suspected. 5. All such as discourage and reproach
the Kings Witnesses, whether more publicly in Courts of Judicature; or less
so, in Coffee-houses, or otherwise; such (I say) are greatly to be suspected,
in that they do the utmost they can, for putting a stop unto a thorough
prosecution of the Plot, in which none but Papists can be Active. 6. All such
as on either side heighten the divisions among Protestants; for the greatning
our divisions, weakens us, and tends to the strengthening of the Popish
interest, our decay being but in order to their flourishing. Whence then,
1. Such among the Dissenters, as reproach all the Church of England, as if
they had been all intolerable, and friends to Popery, etc. 2. All such as
reproach and revile all Dissenters, as if they had been as bad as Papists; Such
are to be suspected. I might insist on many other Notes, and might raise the
number unto that which Bellarmine says of the Notes of the true Church; but
desiring you to make the best improvement of these for the present, must go on
to the next thing.
C. Sir, I humbly thank you for this, and I hope I shall be careful how I give
credit to the discourses of these persons you mention, lest I unawares should
serve the Papist to my own hurt. But, Sir, I beseech you to go on, and show me
what the sober Presbyterian is.


P. The sober Presbyterian is a thorough Protestant, who does agree with our
Church in all the great Doctrines that we profess to own; they are such
Protestants as are in France and Holland, etc. differing from the Church of
England about somewhat indifferent, as we say [but sinful as they say]
concerning the manner of Worship and Church Discipline.


C. Is this all the difference between us and them?


P. No surely, for there are many among them that could comply with us both in
Worship and Church Discipline, who yet cannot conform, because of subscribing
to some Articles and Declarations.


C. But will they take the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy?


P. They will do so, but they will not abjure the Covenant.


C. Then they are good Subjects; but what is the Covenant?


P. That Covenant was unhappily contrived, as many of themselves say, though
the subject matter in many things is good, as their swearing to preserve his
Majesty, and to oppose Idolatry, etc. And because they think that they cannot
abjure it, unless they swear that that is evil which they think good, viz. the
opposing sin, and preserving his Majesty, they refuse to abjure it.


C. Then they pretend Loyalty, as one reason why they will not abjure it, and
conform.


P. It Is true; But this abjuring is not to continue long, the time is almost
expired; and then the terms of their Conformity will become more easy; and did
we lay aside this Oath, and the Declaration that is much of the like import,
many would conform; and if we were as moderate as the Protestants in Queen
Elizabeth's days, such as conform not, might be Indulged to preach publicly in
our Churches.


C. Really, Sir, methinks I like this proposal well, it does argue, that you
are a man of good moderate Principles; and what need, Sir, such a Bussle about
Conformity and Nonconformity? Let us bear with one another, and give the same
liberty to others which we would expect for our selves, and unite and
strengthen our hands against the common enemy, the Papist. Are we not all Good
Christians, Honest Protestants, and Loyal Subjects?


P. Now you speak like a true thorough Protestant; for this is the prayer of
all judicious well-tempered Protestant Divines, and People, whether Episcopal
or Presbyterian.


C. But, Sir, I should be more heartily of this opinion, if I might be assured
that these Presbyterians were men of such sober Principles as you say.


P. Why do you doubt on it, do you think I would impose on you?


C. No Sir, I believe you would not impose on me: but the reason of my doubt is
this; I have been told that these Presbyterians are a wicked people, full of
pride and selfishness; and who would have done God more service, if they had
conformed at their Black Bartholomew day; for they are for the Corinthian-Law,
First they will hang you, and then Judge you.


P. Who told you so, Neighbor?


C. Who told me so! Truly Sir, I saw it in the Writing of one of their own,
even in the Writing of a Nonconformist very lately, who speaks it from his own
experience; and can you in the least question it?


P. Whose writing, I pray? for I would willingly know the Author, or see his
Books; for, if it be a sober good man, that speaks thus, I should be inclined
to think it true, though one witness is not enough to condemn them. But were
the Presbyterians really such to one another, what would they be to us, had
they power? and that they may never be countenanced by such as are in power, it
should be our endeavor; and if nothing will keep down their pride but the
execution of Laws against them, that should be done. But pray, Sir, what is the
Man, or what are his Writings? do you know him?


C. I have heard much of him from my friends in London, but I Will not report it;
only here are his books, you can best find out the temper of the Author. Pray
peruse them, and give me your sense.


A Second CONFERENCE.
P. Neighbor, I am glad to see you again, I have since I last saw you, perused
those Books you gave me; and that you may not be deceived, I must freely assure
you, that in reading his first book, called England's Alarm, I suspected him;
for, he acted the part of a Papist in Reviling our Clergy, and thereby doing
his utmost to widen the differences between us and the Dissenters.


C. It Is true, when you gave me your sixth Note, I suspected him, and resolved
to beware of such an one. But have you not seen his other Writings?


P. I have so.


C. But how do you like them?


P. Worse and worse: for therein he has acted most exactly according to the
measures the Papists have taken in their carrying on the Plot.


C. In what particulars, good Sir?


P. You must remember that Mr. Dugdale gave in on Oath, that 'twas the Papists
design to kill the King, and to cast it on the Presbyterians: and Mr.
Dangerfield assures us, That to the end the people might be prepared to
believe, that the Presbyterian Principles were adjusted for such bloody
designs, their counsel was, that Pamphlets be written to represent them as a
proud, and wicked, selfish and bloody people. All which is done by this man,
John Humphryes (as he at last calls himself), who represents the Presbyterians
to be men for the Corinthian-Law, that will first hang a man, and then Judge
him: and this he says, he has experienced, as if they had first hanged him,
and then judged him; and he as able to tell the world as much after his being
hanged by 'em, as Sir Edmondbury Godfrey was able to walk from Somerset House
to Primrose-hill after his being strangled. The second Popish Miracle!


C. How, Sir, does he say so?


P. Mistake me not; but he speaks to this purpose, viz. that he has
experienced, that the Presbyterians are for the Corinthian-Law, i. e. first to
hang men, and then judge them; and who can imagine, but that this is his
meaning? But whether it be so or no, he does act agreeably unto the Popish
measures, and does their work for them more effectually than Madam Celliers,
who is professedly a Papist.


C. Do you think he is a Papist?


P. Sir, I know not what to think of him; but sure I am, he acts as like the
Papists, as if he had been spit out of their mouths; and if he be not a Papist,
he is a Child, not to say a --


C. Good Sir don't scandalize the man, for he is a man of worth among that
Gang, and a man of learning and moderation. Author of the middle way, Is he not?


P. Neighbor, you are a young man, be not, too credulous; you cannot but be
sensible, that you have been in some things mistaken; and remember, that you
your self just now said, that you did suspect him, and would be ware of such an
one; and I wish all good people would; and whereas you say he is both a
learned, and a moderate man, the Author of the middle way; it is all a great
mistake.


C. Say you so, Sir. But how does that appear?


P. I Will show you particularly; and must assure you, that it is not the Author
of the middle way, but a man of another temper: The Author of the middle way
(though a Nonconformist) is a man of great learning, and judgment, and
moderation, whose soul abhors to write so inhumanely, or so unlike a Christian
as this man has done; for this man fills his Papers with such unclean stuff,
that I am ashamed to rehearse it; for it discovers so much ignorance, passion
and peevishness, that he must be considered either as a man cracked in his
intellectuals, or as a man of evil principles; but consider him either way, his
Reputation cannot be such, as to engage any sober man to regard his scurrilous
and lying Pamphlets.


C. But there are many who follow him, yea some sober persons.


P. If so, I am heartily sorry. It Is a great reproach to Dissenters: for, which
reason, those ignorant persons (for none but such can be deluded by such a man)
are to be lamented and blamed; for what is there in the man (if his
Conversation and Preaching be suitable to his Writings) that should tempt any
to admire him? Is it his boldness, or his ignorance, or his error, or his
bespattering and aspersing all Protestants? Will they believe his Preaching?
why then will they not believe his Writing, and conclude all Protestants to be
as vile as he makes 'em? Or will they believe his Writings, and that all
Protestants (for no Conformist, nor Nonconformist can escape the lash of his
tongue), are such as he says they are, then hitherto they have been deceived?
and to whom can they turn for safety, but to the Papists? And if you will
believe what he says when he rails against Dissenters, even so you must when
he rails against the Church of England.


C. Truly, Sir, there is as much reason in what you say, and therefore I shall
have a greater care of such than formerly; for according to the representation
you have given of the Presbyterians, they cannot be as bad as he makes them;
and if they are not, he does very ill to revile 'em thus.


P. Remember he reviles all Protestants, our Church as well as Dissenters; and
therefore I caution you not only against that man, but every such man, and
still be engaged to adhere unto the Protestant Religion, which is the true
agreeable to the sacred Scripture, confirmed of old by many a Miracle, and all
the Prophets and Apostles; and of late also by the blood of many Martyrs.


C. I thank you for your advice, and wish that the more ignorant among the
Dissenters, would follow the same; for, I have been informed by a Neighbor,
who knows many of 'em, that they are mighty ready to entertain any reports,
though ungrounded, and prejudicial to the Protestant interest.


P. My good friend, I do wish so too; and moreover do heartily desire, that
there were not as many in our Church, that are too peevish and foolish, yea too
apt to believe any thing that is buz'd up and down by the Papists.


C. It Is sad, if it be true as you say.


P. I speak no more than I know; for whenever the Papists would revile the
Episcopal, (it may be sometime under the notion of a Dissenter): Oh how ready
are Dissenters to take it up, and say, Report, and we will report; and our
people are even with them, and it rejoices too too many of 'em to hear any
thing evil, how falsely soever, against the Dissenters.


C. Then we do the Papists work for them.


P. We do so: And truly unless they will on both sides be advised, and think
better one of another, and consider more deliberately what is their
joynt-interest, we are a ruined People.


C. But, Sir, what is our Joynt-interest?


P. I Will be particular in showing you.


1. To be fully persuaded that the Papists are carrying on a bloody Plot
against the Protestant Religion, his Majesty's Life and Government: For nothing
more sure, than that the eradicating the Protestant Religion, and the
destruction of the Protestants, is the Papists aim. Whence although their
designs are so inhumane and cruel, that they dare not before an Execution own
it; yet nothing more evident, than that they breathe after the blood of the
King, and of all Protestants, whether Episcopal or Presbyterian; and no
question their aim is mostly at such as are in places of profit; and
consequently more against the Conformist, than the Nonconformist.

2. The uniting at least so far, as to use all just means for the preservation
of true Religion, our King, our Families, and Posterity.

1. All old quarrels and animosities must be forgotten; and we must learn of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to be more meek and humble, forgiving those that
trespass against us, and never render evil for good; but contrariwise, good for
evil. The Episcopal must forget the injuries they received from the
Presbyterians long ago, and do nothing by way of revenge; and the Presbyterians
must not remember the severities they have met with from the Episcopal these
last twenty years, and render evil for evil.

2. All should resolve as one man, to act like Queen Elizabeth's Protestants.

3. It greatly concerns all Protestants, never to fear the Papists cruelties,
nor expect their mercies.

1. Fear them not. Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you; nothing can more
effectually break all their Plots, than Protestant courage. Their work is
Hellish, and so is their Master, and so are their principles, and the methods
they take; it is after the blood of Innocents they hunt, by lying and perjury,
and every evil way blaspheming God and the King; and therefore God is against
them, and their own consciences cannot but now and then terrify and affrighten
them. But our cause is the Lords, the defending our King and our selves against
the unjust cruelties of the Papists, the abiding firm to Gospel Truths; God is
on our side; Why then should we fear? Fear them not, but stand still, and you
shall see the Salvation of God.

2. Expect not their mercies, they are a treacherous deceitful people, and no
faith is to be kept with Heretics, i. e. with Protestants, is their Rule. Let
not Dissenters, nor any of the Church of England think that they shall be
spared, if ever Popery prevails; they will say, Hail Master, and betray you;
they will kiss you, and cut your throats. Believe them not, for they are made up
of lies, equivocations, and mental reservations, and count it meritorious to
kill Protestant Dogs, as they call us. Be not therefore frighted out of your
R^^gion, nor flattered into their snare. Queen Mary made brave Promises to the
Gospellers (i. e.) the Protestants, but all ended either in cruel Prisons, as
the Bishops Cole-house, Lollards Tower, etc. or in Smithfield, and many other
Fires.

4. It Is our joint-interest to remember the wonderful deliverances God has
given our King, the great City, and these Kingdoms, in order to the showing our
unfeigned thankfulness by an hearty Reformation. Let us not insist on the
Tything Mint, Annise and Cummin, and neglect the great and weighty matters of
the Law; nor let us insist on trifles, and neglect this great duty of
Reformation. It Is the call of the present Providence, the duty of the day, and
the Lord help both you and my self to an honest obedience, and then we shall
all have cause to magnify the Lord for further and fuller Salvations.

C. I thankfully acknowledge your love, in that you have given your self so
great a trouble to inlighten me in these necessary points. I would only beg the
favor of your thoughts concerning one thing, and I have done.


P. What is that, Neighbor?


C. Sir, I have been told, that there was a Parliament some months since, that
did Resolve in the House, That if the King should be taken away by any untimely
death (which God forbid) they would revenge his death on the Papists. What
reasons can there be given for such a Resolve?


P. It Is not to be questioned, but that that great Council did what they did on
the highest reasons, namely, To show their Loyalty and Love to his Majesty, to
assure the Papists that the day should not be their own, though they should
accomplish their Devilish design, viz. the death of our Sovereign, and
therefore 'twould be their Interest to keep themselves from Treason, and the
blood of Protestant Princes.


C. But what equity is there in revenging his death on all Papists?


P. Great equity: For the Treason of these bloody wretches is of the highest
nature, it being to destroy the best of Kings, and the Protestant Religion, yea
and to ruin these Kingdoms by turning us all into blood, which design can never
in their own apprehensions be accomplished but by the whole Popish strength;
and therefore it is not to be questioned but that the whole party, at least all
men of brains, and interest, are acquainted with, if not engaged in it.


C. But Sir, you suppose that though the most part be acquainted with it, yet
all may not actually engage in it; must they feel the smart of Protestant
revenge also?


P. Sir, I tell you, that as it is not to be supposed, but it is known to all in
general, although some may hate the Treason because of the bloodiness thereof,
at least with reference to their kindred that are among Protestants; or it may
be, they are so much English men as not to engage actually; yet since they know
the Treason, their concealing of it is enough to make them guilty.


C. There is much in that which I did not so much consider, and I am sure for
my employ, you know Sir, calls me unto diverse parts of the I and, that the
generality of Protestants are so firm to the Protestant Religion, so dutiful,
affectionate, and loyal to his Majesty, that they will be so full of rage,
should the Papists make the attempt and kill the King, that they will soon have
cause to repent of such treachery.


P. I am of your mind, being the more encouraged to conclude so from the
special Providence of God, that have appeared in favor of the Protestant Cause
against them already. God has been, is, and will be known by the Judgments he
executes in the Earth; the wicked being taken in the snare, they have laid for
the innocent. The Lord reigns, and by signal Providence he has prevented the
execution of Popish Plots, in doing so by his own arm; turning (...) against
them, which they designed for themselves; as the death of Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey, etc. God brings about his own glory, and the Protestants safety by the
most unlikely and improbable ways, as might be shown diversely. But I am called
away, and can only add, That if we are not too secure, nor too fearful, but act
as becomes good Protestants, and Loyal Subjects, we shall see the Doom of the
Plot, and of all Plotters. Farewell. I must be gone.


FINIS.

