Catechism made Practical. THE CHRISTIAN INSTRUCTED, I. In the Principles of
Christian Religion; positively, in the shorter CATECHISM. II. In what he is to
refuse, and what to hold fast, in the greatest Points of Controversy: And how
to confute Errors, and defend the Truth. III. In the Practice of several
Duties; VIZ. (1.) The Practical Improvement of the Holy Trinity. (2.) Baptism.
(3.) Prayer. And (4.) Preparation for the Lord's Supper.


Joh. 12.35. -- Walk while ye have the Light, lest Darkness come upon you. --

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Church
Yard, 1688.

The AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO Ministers, Governors of Families, and People under
their Charge. ESPECIALLY, To his much honored Friends, and next Relations.
THere are three things most worthy our Ministerial Work and Endeavors, and
most desirable to be found in the Flocks committed to our Charge and Oversight:
1. The saving Knowledge of the Truth. 2. A Judgment to discern between Truths
and Errors; especially, such as concern Faith and Holiness, the Principles of
the Oracles of God, and the things which accompany Salvation. 3. A gracious,
lively Spirit, sincerely devoted to God in Christ, and strongly inclined to
holy Exercises, and practice of Religious Duties. Or, if you will, take all in
three short Sentences: 1. Conviction of Judgment of Saving Truth, and damning
Errors. 2. Sound Conversion to God. 3. A Conversation according to the Will of
God, revealed in the Gospel.

The Church is called God's Husbandry, and God's Building, 1 Cor. 3.9. and
Ministers are highly dignified, when called Workers together with God, 2 Cor.
6.1. and Laborers together with God, 1 Cor. 3.9. The Field is God's, the Seed
is his, the Husbandry is his, and the Increase is given by him. We are
Laborers together with him, enabled by him, and working by his power and
influence, under him, and for him. All our Sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5.
without him, we are nothing, and can do nothing. Who then is Paul? and who is
Apollos? but Ministers by whom ye believed, as the Lord gave to every man. I
have planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the increase. So then, neither is
he that planteth any thing, nor he that waters, but God that gives the
increase, 1 Cor. 3.5,6,7. As we are Husbandmen, we must sow and plant; but
that is not all, we must also mound and fence our Fields and Plantations. As we
are Builders, we must lay the Foundation, carry on the Building, by Edification
in Faith, 1 Timothy 1.4. and secure the Building, that it fall not, like an House
built upon the Sand. This Husbandry is elsewhere called a Garden, and this
Building called an House. How graciously does the Most High condescend to
delight himself in, and to be entertained by his Church, as by a Royal Spouse,
with his own Graces and Gifts, the Fruits of his Holy Spirit, when they are in
Act, put forth, and exercised, as in a Garden of Spices, and Orchard of
Pomegranates, or at a Table prepared for him! Cant. 4.14,15,16. chap. 5.1. and
1.12. What a blessed Life may we lead by walking with God, appearing before
him, calling upon him, praising him, and hearing him speak! There is ordinary
(not mean, but rich and plentiful) and extraordinary Entertainment for hungry,
feeding Believers, in the Ordinances of the Gospel. In the Gospel there is a
Feast prepared, and that a Wedding-Feast, a Wedding-Feast of a King's Son, his
only Son, the Prince of Life; but they who sit at it, must have a
Wedding Garment, the Ornament of Grace, Faith, Repentance and Love, a
Suitableness of heart, and Preparation, Matthew 22.

2. Toward this most desirable End, there are three things to be found in this
little Book; 1. Here are the Foundations of Faith and Godliness laid; a View of
the Principles of Christian Religion, according to the Word of God, out of
which they are gathered, and by which they are proved, and agreeing with the
appproved Doctrine of the Reformed Churches. 2. Here are the most important
Doctrines, briefly touched in these Principles, cleared, proved, desended, and
rescued out of the hands of them who have handled the Word of God deceitfully,
and have led many into the Errors of the Wicked; that the studious Christian
may know what he ought to contend for, and to continue in; and how to maintain
his Ground. 3. Here are Directions for Practice of several great Duties of all
baptized Christians; 1. How to improve the Doctrine of the most holy Trinity,
the Mystery of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and his Baptism, or Entrance
into Covenant with God. 2. Direction for Prayer, with a Prayer taken out of the
Catechism, for the most part. 3. Direction for the Communion in the Lord's
Supper.

3. Of these three Parts, be pleased to take this following Account.

1. Some time since, a little Book was printed, called Principles made
practical, directing the poorer, and weaker sort of Christians, who had learnt
the shorter Catechism, and could not buy, nor spare time to read other
profitable Books, to make use of their Catechism, to furnish them with matter
for Prayer, and Preparation for the Lord's Table. As mean and defective as it
was, it was attended with a Blessing to many that embraced it, as an help to
them; and therein I rejoice. That Impression being sold off, and worn out in
the hands of many, long ago, another Edition of it has been much desired, and
called for from many places. I have re-viewed it, corrected the Faults in the
Sense of it, and begged of God to open a passage for it; and seeing it was
blessed before in a plain, homely dress, I have not at all trimmed or adorned
it. To those two Duties, I have now added another Chapter, of the practical use
of the Doctrine of the glorious, eternal Trinity, and improvement of Baptism,
upon these Considerations: 1. The Doctrine of the Trinity has been, and is
looked upon as a mere Speculation, under a Veil of Mysteriousness; as if it
were as dangerous to look into it, as it was into the Ark: Whereas, though it
be an high and glorious Mystery to be adored, and with profoundest Reverence
and Humility to be studied and taught, yet it is revealed by God himself, as
the Object of our Faith and Worship. See Calvin 's Instit. l. 1. c. 13. Sect.
28, 21. Perfecta scientia est sic Deum scire, ut licet non ignorabilem, tamen
inen^rabilem sci^, Hilar. De P. and ^it. Unitate.
So God reveals himself in the Creation of the World, in the Creation of Man,
and in the Covenant of Grace. When we are admitted into Covenant, and made
visibly free of the City of God, we are devoted to God the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost. This Doctrine is a Fundamental of our Christian Faith, and
therefore to be explained to the People of God, in Covenant with him, as far as
it is revealed in his Word; and that is enough for our present State. 2. The
very Titles and Appellations of the Persons in the Godhead inform us of the
exceeding great usefulness of the Knowledge of the Trinity. Has God revealed
himself as a Father, and would he not have his Children know him, and be the
better for it? Has he made known himself, as the Son, and Holy Ghost, and not
intend us a particular Kindness by it? He most graciously conveys to his People
the Knowledge and Assurance of most astonishing, incomprehensible Love, Grace,
Power and Goodness to allure and draw us into his Covenant, to oblige us to
take him for our God, and become his Sons and Daughters; that we, ignorant,
lost, miserable, helpless Sinners might become happy for ever in him. 3. As the
Plurality of Persons, or one God, and three Persons are revealed to us, so the
practical Use and Benefit of it is also revealed; and therefore it is to be
opened to his Vovenant People. As soon as we know the Covenant, and our
Entrance into it, we know our God to be the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost. And this Knowledge is not laid up for the Wise and Learned (which has
been most depraved by, and lost in those proud, and subtle, and learned Wits
in all Ages;) but laid open before the Faith of the weakest Believer, to whom
it is revealed. I am verily persuaded (says the judicious Mr. Lawson) that the
Mystery of the Trinity is more clearly and fully delivered in the Scripture,
than we understand it, Theopolitica, p 32. N. 3. And I have wondered how
familiarly that Man of Search and Reach, Dr. Thomas Goodwyn, speaks of it, as
if he saw how it was, in his excellent Discourse of the Knowledge of God, 2
Vol. Fol. We must humbly follow the Scripture Light, and dive into this Deep no
further than our Line does reach; growing more and more in Grace and Knowledge,
till we come to see him face to face, and to know him, as we are also known. I
cannot but observe the Doctrine of the excellent and modest Melancthon: These
things are wonderful, and above the Creature's reach. Sed scimus, etc. But we
know these Mysteries are revealed to the Church, that we may worship and call
upon God aright, etc. Christ would have the sum of the Gospel to be
comprehended in this first Ceremony (of Baptism;) wherefore he testifies at
once, that we are received of God; and teaches us, who God is, and what God we
invocate, and what he does bestow upon us I baptize thee in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; that is to say, I testify that
thou art received of the Eternal Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost;
that by their Mercy and Power thou may be delivered from Sin, and eternal
Death, and be endowed with Righteousness and eternal Life. -- He makes a
Covenant with thee in Baptism, and affirms, that he is the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and that he appointed the Son to be a Propitiation, and sent the
Holy Ghost to begin in thee Righteousness and eternal Life. Loc. Commun. de 3.
Personis, it. de Filio. The glorious, infinite God, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, is the Object and Foundation of our Faith and Hope, the bottomless,
incomprehensible Spring of all Grace, Promises, Blessings and Privileges
granted in the New Testament; and being so made known, we, by Faith,
acknowledge him as such, and promise Love and Obedience to him. We receive from
the Father, through the Son, by the Holy Ghost, Grace and Life, even all manner
of Grace; and all that are alive, live by them, upon them, and to them:
Therefore again, the Knowledge of this Mystery is practical, and necessary to
Salvation; for except we believe, and worship God, as he has revealed himself;
except we keep Covenant with him, as God, in Covenant, and that as he has
declared himself therein, how can we be saved? By him, as thus made known, we
are quickened, strengthened, encouraged and comforted in all our Services, and
every step of Duty, in our way to Heaven. The reverend and learned Beza
observes, That Arrius, Sabellius, Actius, and other ancient Heretics, did many
ways pollute and profane the most holy Mystery of the Trinity; but none of
them ever grew to that degree of Impudence, as to rank the Knowledge of it
among things unnecessary, and which, if known, make no Man the better, Vol.
Tractat. Theol. fol. p. 100. De Haeret. Puniendis. The necessity of knowing and
believing the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost To Be (that is, according to their
meaning, that there is a Son, and Holy Ghost, as well as the Father, but not
Co-essential) is professed by the Socinians, Racov. Catech c. 6. p. 30,31. So
that he is no Christian, who does not believe it. But what they say, is not
sufficient. As the Being of one God is the Foundation of all Religion; so that
this God is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as the God of all Grace in Covenant is
the Foundation of the Christian Religion, and distinguishes it from that of
Heathens, Mahumetans and Jews: And it is such a Foundation, as is a living Root
to the Tree of spiritual Knowledge, and eternal Life to every true Believer.
Our Orthodox Divines assign it the chief place in Fundamentals, and practical
Doctrines; and therefore it is of great use and benefit to have it, and the
Benefits of it declared. So does the most reverend Archbishop Usher often
profess; Sermon. before King James I on Ephesians. 4 13. Bishop Prideaux, Praelec 17.
de Sancta Trinitate, N. 3 7. Hornbeck, Socin. Confutat. lib 1 cap. 9. it.
Disputat. Theol. 4. and inter vetera and nova, lib. 2. cap 2. Unicum est
Religionis Fundamentum says Beza, Loc Citat. Zanch de 3. Flohim. lib. 5 cap 9.
Partis Secundae. Mr. Baxter, Theol. Method. p 76 Q2. it. p. 122. N. 10. Ursin
Catech. Explicat a Pareo. p. 159 Q8. Dr Owen, of the Trinity, and of the Holy
Ghost, lib 1. p. 8. p. 44. Sect 4. p. 126. Dr. Potter, etc

4. The practical use and benefit of it being known, it is a great inducement
to Christians to study it, and a furtherance of their Faith, Hope and Joy, and
all other Graces; and it will engage them to hold fast the revealed Doctrine of
it; which is most necessary in these Days, when they who display their Banners
against our Church (and one Factor for them, who has served, and dis-served
his Principals, borrowed an Argument of the same stamp; but he will write no
more) would drive us into a Belief of T^ansubstantiation, because we believe a
Trinity, and an Incarnation; which if we should admit, they might not only
brand us: as the foulest Heretics that ever were since Christ left the World,
but for being so. But this Insinuation of an Antichristian Error of theirs,
has brought forth an excellent Discourse, in two Parts; The Doctrine of the
Trinity, and Transubstantiation compared. Of the practical Use of the Mastery
of the Trinity, the words of Armenius are notable: At vero Oeconomiae and
Dispensationis etc. But if respect be had to that Dispensation, in which the
Father, in the Son, and both through the Holy Ghost, has perfected our
Salvation admirabilis est dulcedinis, etc. it is of wonderful sweetness, and
does produce most exuberant Fruits of Faith, Hope and Charity, Considence and
Trust, Fear and Obedience in the Hearts of the Faithful. Dispur. Publica Sexta,
Sect. 12. Oper. 4 p 192. But his Followers in other Opinions, leave him here,
where they should follow him, as the learned Professors of Leiden show: Censura
in Confessionem, c. 3. p. 56,57. where they show the practical Use of the
Doctrine of the Trinity. Nor do they show the injustice of the Censure, but
plead for their Silence and Caution; Exam. Censurae, p. 51. The English Reader,
that can, may consult reverend Dr. Cheynel. of the Divine Trin-Vnity, cap. 9.
Mr. Baxter, of the Knowledge of God, p 8, etc.

5. Much has been written about Baptism controversially, and but little that I
have seen about the practical Use of it. It is a great Duty, and Grace to
improve it, to the Ends of it, and much neglected. Parents are generally
importunate to have their Children baptized, and as generally negligent to
train them up as baptized Members, in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord;
and so we have so many ignorant and ungodly in the visible Church. I wish what
is written upon the Subject, were more common, and more understood, by the
reverend Dr. S. Ford, of the practical Use of Infant Baptism: Dr. Manton's
Sermon of the Improvement of Baptism, in the Supplement of the
Morning-Exercise, at Cripple gate: Mr. Joseph Whiston, his Essay to revive the
primitive Practice of Infant Baptism: And Mr. Daniel Rogers, of the Sacraments,
speaks with Light and Life. Though having room here to speak thus much in this
place, for these things, I have said but little in that first Chapter, because
limited.

2. In the second Chapter, I have showed the Use which may be made of the
Catechism, to accommodate the sincere, fervent Soul with Matter for Prayer. It
is a Temptation to neglect the Duty, when there is want of Mattter to utter
before God. If any will object, that this will be to bring People to pray by
rote, as they say their Catechism by rote; and to bring them to a Form: I
answer to the first; this Objection may be set up to neglect Catechizing and
Teaching, and so is impious and erroneous. Again, As God has blessed
Catechizing to his Church, so by often and serious Meditation upon the
particular Points of Catechism, their Knowledge increases, and comes to be
enlarged, beyond the Words of the Catechism, so it may work upon the Affections
also; and then they may also enlarge in Prayer, beyond the Lines of this
Prayer, if they can, and when need is. But as what is necessary and profitable
to be learnt and believed, is comprehended in the Catechism, so what is
generally necessary to be asked, is contained in the Prayer. And they who are
convinced, and believe the Truth of the Doctrine taught, according to the
Scripture, will pray with Understanding, and by Faith, believing and knowing
what they pray. And if some are commended for turning Sermons into Prayer, I
see as much reason for turning a Catechism into Prayer. Yea, but this is to
bring them to a Form. What then? Take away Formality, and senseless
Customariness, and running a Stage, or a Round of Prayer, without Preparation,
Attention, or Care, what Answers are made, and what can be judiciously or
charitably said against a Form of Prayer? Whereas many holy, and very able
Ministers, as well as private Christians, have in Judgment chosen a Form; at
least, ordinarily: And a Form is necessary to others, because of Weakness. Do
you, who object against all use of Forms, really think, that whoever is
regenerate and sanctified, has the Spirit for Extempore Prayer; by which I
mean, a present Ability to vary Words and Matter upon all Occasions? And that
none have the Spirit of Christ, or Adoption, but such as can do, or such as do
so; and that they who keep ordinarily to the same Matter and Words, are
destitute of the Spirit? Or do you think that Professors in these Days, have
more of the Spirit, than holy Men had in former times? You will never be able
to prove these things, and you are confutable by Clouds of Examples of holy and
able Men, excellent for Gifts. If you say the Spirit is limited in a Form of
Prayer, take heed you do not limit the Spirit to a sort of Men. The Spirit of
Grace does excite his own Graces in the Soul that prays; and those Graces act
according to the Capacity of them that pray; and also brings many things to
mind, which were not thought of before; and when God brings in Matter, he does
help to utter it, but not all alike. I condemn lary, heartless Formality; mine
own practice is known to many; but I honor the Name and Memory of holy and
eminent Men and Fathers, who had the Spirit of Holiness in a great measure, who
used Forms on ordinary stated Times and Occasions: And I would not discourage
sincere weak ones from using a good Form, lest I dis-hearten them from praying
at all. Let me add; I do not teach any to be tied up to a Form, the same number
of Words and Petitions for all times; but give Directions for Matter and Use of
Prayer; with a Prayer, that may be daily used with Acceptance, if prayed with
Understanding, and Faith, and other Graces. It has been the Study of many, and
some of them able, good Men, much an Prayer, to publish Prayers fitted to
several Occasions: But, alas! what can they do, if the Hearts of them that use
them are not fitted for them? It is not Devotion that is printed in a Book, but
what is kindled in the Heart: And he is poor indeed, that has not a Prayer for
his Mouth, except his Book be in his Pocket, or before his Eyes.

There is great reason for these Exhortations, Pray without ceasing, and
Continue in Prayer; for we have continual cause to draw near to God. And we
that are Ministers have to do with many Souls, in various Conditions; and
general Praying is no more effectual, than general Preaching: In the one, there
are particular Applications of the Word to Men's Hearts, from God; in the
other, particular Applications to God, on the behalf of Men, according to
particular Conditions. And there is a more excellent way, than making a Prayer
of Patches taken out of Books of Devotion: The holy Scripture is the
Prayer Book; it affords Matter for Prayer, as well as Preaching: And how can
that Man preach, that cannot pray? And this of praying with, and for particular
Persons in private, and also in public if the Case require it, according to
their particular Cases, is one of those, Every good Work, for which we should
be furnished, 2 Timothy 3.16. Those Men whom God honored most in the Reformation,
and Edification, and Comfort of his Church, have been most like to Elijah for
praying: And we should study to show our selves Men approved of God, in this
part of our Ministry, with sound Judgment, heavenly Wisdom, and holy
Affections. Epaphras was wont to labor fervently in Prayer, Col. 4.12. And the
Apostle besought the Romans to strive together with him in Prayer, Rom 15.30.
But yet this striving, though in some active Spirits, it cannot be confined to
a set Form of Words, does not require us to lay aside all Forms, which many
holy Men that I could name, have used, out of Judgment and Choice; and have
prevailed with God, by Faith and Fervency. And let those who speak much of
praying, and daily, or frequently pray apart, and together, took well to the
matter, and to their Spirits, and see that they do not offer the Sacrifice of
Fools, nor be rash to utter a Matter before God. And it were better with the
Church of God, if we did put on Charity, if we were clothed with Humility, if
we disputed less about Forms, and prayed more with all manner of Prayer and
Supplication in the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.18. Unbelief and Hypocrisy are a dead
Load upon the Heart, and keep Prayer from ascending. When a Man's Heart is
God's, and when the Prayers we make, are our own Sense, offered up in the Name
of Christ, by the Spirit of Adoption, according to the Will of God, we shall be
heard. Yet I would not be understood, as if Prayer were not a Duty of Natural
Religion, or that only regenerate Persons should pray; but they, be sure, pray
acceptably. Wrangle not your selves into Breaches of Communion, and Disunion
of the Spirit; and let all things be done in Peace. And so I offer this Help to
such as need it, as God shall be pleased to make it serviceable. Of Forms, and
Extempore Prayers, you may see Bishop Downham, of the Lord's Prayer, p 137. And
Mr. Baxter's Cases.

3. The last Chapter of this Part contains Directions for Self-Examination, and
Preparation for the Table of the Lord; Behavior at it, and after it. Much has
been printed upon this Subject, and yet Communicants are comparatively few, and
prepared ones, we fear, are fewer. The low and distracted, broken state of the
Church of Christ, is matter of Grief and Mourning. How unlike are we to a Body
animated by the same Spirit, joined to the same Head! How many live and die,
grown to Years, that never tasted of the Supper! How many but very seldom! How
many are ignorant, profane, negligent, stupid, do we what we can! Oh, that
Longing after, and Love to Christ, had more power with many, than the
Observation of Customs and Seasons, and the Laws of Men! Some are affected with
the Duty and Privilege, and seem earnestly to desire it, who fall off again.
How many are afraid of it, lest this Table of the Lord become a Snare? How many
break Communion, upon distaste of a Form of Administration (though very sound,)
or some dis-liked Communicants, against whom they do not proceed as they ought?
How many labor under great Desections, Melancholy and Fear? How many put
themselves off, and abide in Vnsettlement; that separate from public, and do
not join with other Assemblies? What! Do they wait for some higher
Dispensation? Or do they seek for what is no where promised; or keep in
suspense, as afraid to renew Covenant with God? Or what other Reason? But can
they live without Communion with the Lord? How can they think of dying? How
many, incorporate with particular Churches, that with hold Communion from all
others, for mere Accidents and Circumstances? Oh, take heed, lest between this
Way, and that Way, you do not keep out of the Way which the Lord himself has
commanded you, to show forth his Death. I should rejoice to see Matters of just
and rational Offense taken away, and Access to the Lord's Table to be as free
and open, as the Way to Heaven is. But hour, or when shall it be, as long as
that which is an Offense to one, is a Duty to another? Oh, let us remember our
Covenant with God, our being incorporate with the Body of Christ, labor to
grow together in him, who is not a little Head of a Sect, or Party, but of all
that call upon him, in all places. I look upon Breaches in, and about, and from
this holy Ordinance, next to breaking the Unity of the Spirit, to be, of all
Breaches, the most deadly. Let us not divide for mere Accidents, but look to
the main. The substance of the Ordinance, and what is left, as perpetual to the
Church, is delivered us by the holy Apostle, who received it from the Lord, 1
Cor. 11.23, etc. where there is no Rehearsal of the Circumstances of Place,
Gesture, and other Accidents of the first Supper; but the standing Ordinance
and Institution: And where the Institution is observed, the Ordinance is pure.

The next necessary Injunction is, Self-Examination. Let us look more to our
own Hearts, and fit them for Communion with the Body and Blood of our Lord, and
we shall not be so given to divide, as we are. And as for Communicants, pray
for them, admonish them, proceed regularly, make not their Sin yours, and their
Presence does not pollute you.

2. The Design of these three Chapters being to carry them further on, who had
been conversant in the forementioned Catechism, has given occasion to bring it
forth once more to Light; with some few Propositions, to fill up some spaces
between one Point, and another; and to explain them with Quotations of
Scripture. It is not hard to see, how some will be offended at this, for its
first Name and Title: But, without detracting from the Church Catechism, or any
other Form of sound Words, by which Christ has edified his Church, I cannot
easily conceal, nor express my due Admiration of this. 1. For the Soundness of
the divine Matter, clearly and excellently expressed. 2. For the
Comprehensiveness of it. 3. For the Method and Connection of Parts. 4. For its
Consonance with the holy Scripture; by which it is proved, and upon which it is
built.


Whereby it appears, the Faith of the Learner is not made to stand upon the
Word of Man, Decrees of Councils, or Synods; but the Word of God.

Every Answer is full and clear; but that which raises up my Heart in praise
of God for it, is the rare Description of my glorious Redeemer, and the
Doctrines that belong unto it. In them we have as much Truth as can be laid
together; and as many Heresies cast out from them, as can be summed up in so
few Words. There is an Antidote against the Prison of Cerinthus, Ebion, Arrius,
Samosatenus, Nestorius, Eutyches, the Socinians, and other Heretics, which
appeared with the Reformation, and gave those blessed Souls, who were the
Lights of the World, much trouble.

The Harmony of the whole with the Doctrine of our Church, has been judiciously
showed by Mr. Thomas Adams; (whose Learning, Graces, and sweet Temper might
have been a great Blessing in these Times, if God had been pleased to continue
him on Earth) in a Book called, Principles of Religion explained, published by
his genuine, worthy Brother, Mr. R. A. And the Agreement of it with the
Doctrine of our Church is manifest to all that know the one, and the other; and
therefore the Enmity expressed against it, most proceed from an ill Opinion of
the first Compliers of it, and the Time of its Birth: But shall the Wrath of
Men endure to all Generations? Can we forgive the Living, and never forgive the
Dead, who were rarely accomplished for so great a Work? Is it not time, and
high time, to mortisie An mostlies? And have we not great cause, if there be
any Love to Truth, to bless God for causing so much pure Light to shine in
those Days of Clouds, Tempest, Whirlwind, Confusion, Smoke and Fire?

If I should express the high Esteem the most Reverend Primate Usher had for
it, as I have often heard from several Persons, I should but make some Men
think the worse of both.

The great Esteem which has been, and still is showed to it by some of all
Ranks, makes it seem impossible to suppress it, without an Inquisition. And let
those who have said, it was worse than the Racovian Catechism, speak out; and
then we know what Opinion and Affection they have for this Church, and
Christianity it self: And let them take notice now zealously the Convocation in
the Year 1640. declared against Socinianism. So that if these Men, who prefer
a Socinian Catechism; that is, to say plainly, an Antichristian Collection of
Heresy, they dissent from the whole Church of England, and the most zealous
Antipuritan part of it. But I hope these Speeches were only spoken while the
hot Fit was upon them.

I could wish those Gentlemen, who presented a certain Catechism, stigmatized
to their hands, no doubt, to recollect themselves, and see whether they were so
cantious, as to present nothing but what was seditious in it; or whether they
presented all, from the Title Page, to the Finis; and the very Scriptures, the
Creed, the Ten Commandments, and Lord's Prayer, always printed in it. If they
presented nothing in it, but what was false, erroneous, scandalous and
dangorous; then it is altogether safe, and untainted: But if they presented it
all together, without Reservation of due Reverence to any Doctrine, Scriptures,
Creed, Commandments, or Lord's Prayer; then all that is in it fared no worse
than the Rule of Faith it self.

These, and other ways to suppress this Book, had this unhappy Effect, that it
has widened the Separation, and increased Suspicions and Jealousies in the
Minds of Men.

There are many Catechisms yet common in several parts of the Kingdom, which
have never been dis-allowed in the strictest Times.

It is no Derogation from the Church Catechism, that People grow in sound
Knowledge by larger, that may be used as Expositions of it.

This Catechism speaks for it self, and the Oracles of God speak for it; and I
will say no more, but what tends to Satisfaction about the present Publication
of it. 1. The best instructed in these parts, both of them who learn the
Church-Catechism first, and hear it publicly explained, and that object
against the first introductory Questions and Answers, have a great Opinion of
this, and are much profitted and delighted with the Answers and Scriptures; and
come to be better versed in the Scriptures, than otherwise they could be,
without greater pains. 2. Because the poorer sort cannot buy many Books; and it
will encourage and allure them to learn this more perfectly, when they find
more benefit by it than bare Knowledge. 3. Because it does excellently explain
the Covenants, Creed, Commandments, and Lord's Prayer. 4. All due Respect
reserved to many other Catechisms, I know none so capable of being improved to
the aforesaid Uses as this is.


And many other Advantages may be made of it, if well studied, and thought
upon. As, 1. To inform us of our highest Aim and Happiness, to take off our
Affections from the World. 2. The Way to attain it, by the Scriptures; and the
Way and Means revealed in the Scriptures, and to show us the great use we ought
to make of the Scriptures, to direct us to God. 3. It acquaints us with God in
his Nature, Attributes, Trinity in Unity; with his Works of Nature and Grace,
the way of God's Government by Laws and Covenants, and the different States of
Man. 4. It serves to humble us under Conviction of Sin, Guilt, Corruption and
Wrath. 5. It teaches an humbled Spirit, what he shall do to be saved, and by
whom, and how. 6. We come to know Jesus Christ; what, and who he is, what he
has undertaken and done, and what he procured, and for whom. 7. We see what
Benefits are to be had from Christ, and his Offices; how we are united to him,
and partake of his Fullness of Grace. 8. It directs the Believer how to walk,
and abide in Christ. 9. It is exceeding comfortable to find so many, and so
great Advantages and Blessings from Christ, in Life, in Death, and for ever.
10. It does endear Christ to the Soul exceedingly, and makes the Grace and Love
of God in Christ illustrious and wonderful.


And Lastly, I must drive the Nail that will go: This, or none, will be
embraced by many: And if Good be to be done by Catechizing, it must be done by
this, or by none; or some other, not so complete as this.

Considering the Times, and danger of many, who are not well and thoroughly
instructed, and are disposed to take the Infection; who are forward and
venturous to hear any who has his Way prepared, and strewed with Commendation;
I have labored to expel or prevent Infection, by showing them how to discern
between Truth and Error, in the Substantials of Religion.

And so I have done the third necessary Part of an Husbandman, and Builder;
which is, to fence and secure his Plantation, and Building.

Every Particular, almost, in every Section, is a Truth rescued out if the
Hand, or Jaws of some heretical and erroneous Teacher, or other. Some of these
are so well known, that I need not name them; and it is not convenient to name
others. But because I could not forbear, I have named the Socinians, or
Disciples of Laetius, and Faustu Socinus; and quoted the Socinian Catechism,
brought foth at Racovia. But why these? For these two Reason.

1. Because their Doctrine is a new Gospel, another Gospel, which they dignifie
with the Style of Saving Doctrine; and the Embracement of this Doctrine is that
by which the true Church may be known, and there is no need of enquiring after
the Notes or Marks of the true Church; Cap. de Ecclesia Visibili. They subvert
the very Foundations of Christian Faith and Hope, the holy Trinity, one God,
and three Co-essential Persons; or Three, but one and the same God. They
acknowledge the Names, but disown the Persons: There is but one Person, and
that is the Father. They own the Son, and Holy Ghost; but then make the Father,
and the Son not to be of the same Nature and Essence; and deny the Holy Ghost
to be God, or a Person in the Godhead. And so they make us, who are created by
one that is God, to be but redeemed and saved by one that is not God; and made
new Creatures, and sanctified by one who is not God, save by Title. They take
away the glorious Crown of Essential Godhead from the Head of God my Savior,
and lay that Honor in the Dust of Manhood, though they acknowledge him more
than a mere Man, a Divine Man, and only a Subordinate to God; a mere
Instrument, a second Cause of Salvation; an Helper, but not a perfect Savior;
a great Prophet, an improper Priest, and a little King. I am sure, according to
their Doctrine, I must look for another Christ; for such an one as they
describe, cannot do, for my Salvation, what my State requires. But blessed be
God the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost, for making himself known to me in the
Glass of holy Scripture; and in Honor, Love and Thankfulness, I have, where
ever Occasion is offered, vindicated the Glory of God my Savior, and of God my
Sanctifier. And for their Subtilty in managing their Cause, I verily think they
have lost it, by one Concession of theirs, which you may see in the second and
third Commandment; where I have spoken but briefly, yet, I hope, not obscurely.
I have mainly set my little Strength against them principally; but I hope God's
Power will be seen in my Weakness.

2. As the reverend and judicious Josias Simder observes, that out of the
School of that impure Servetus went forth those egregious Disciples, Gonaesius,
Gribuldus, Blandrata, Gentilis, Paul Alciatus, Gregorius Paulus, Casanovius,
Menno, and numerous Troops of Anabaptists, who all differed in some things from
one another, (Tractat. de Aeterno Dei Filio;) so most of our differing Sects
are corrupted with some Points or other of Socinianism; and not only among them
is this Infection spread, but others also. In the Asphaltes of Socinianism, all
flow together; Gebal, and Amon, and Amalek, Anabaptists, Remonstrants,
Separatists, and Quodlibetists, said Dr. Prideaux, Lect 19. De Satisfactione
Christi. The Convocation, in the Year 1640. took notice of its Growth, and took
care to smother it: And since, all manner of Teachers took liberty to set out
their Light; they who are conversant in their Opinions, know how strongly they
savor of it. And I desire them, for whose Benefit, in part, I direct these
Discourses, to take warning^ from Dr. Owen (who has taken great and learned
pains against them, in his Vindiciae Evangelicae, and Comment on the Hebrews,
etc) against Socinianism; who speaks of a choice Society of Christians, who
were divided, and in no small part infected by some of their Arts; Preface
before his Confutation of Biddle 's Catechism. And, by the way, take notice,
that the most abominable, pernicious Errors may be imposed upon injudicious,
undiscerning People, by a copious Rehearsal of Scripture; as is to be seen in
that Catechism of Mr. Biddle, which he calls, A Scripture Catechisin. Such need
is there of able Ministers, well studied, to sland upon the Watch-Towers; and
such need is there of Humility in People, to know their Teachers. And one
Socinian Doctrine is of dargerous tendency to corrupt the Minds of Men, who are
for Liberty of Prophesying of gifted Men, that they hold, there is no necessity
of a Calling, Mission, or Ordination of Ministers, Capit. 2. de Eccles.
Christi. They can furnish them who are disposed to cavelling, with Cavels and
Objections enough, suited to proud, corrupt Nature, and many Opinions grown too
common. And Men that are devoted to Reason, but never felt the twoedged Sward
of Conviction of Sin and Wrath, and of their need of a Savior enter into their
Souls, are apt to venerate them as the Oracles of Reason. What I have done, or
can do, is but little; yet I trust, Truth will be seen in its own Light, and
found to stand upon its own strong Foundation.

I was confined to Brevity; and it is not easy to me, who am used to
expatiate, to make things plain to every Capacity, to be clear, short and
strong, Had I foreseen there had been so many Half-lines, as I see there is, I
would have filled up my Sense in some places; but now that cannot be.

Such as it is, I do most humbly dedicate it to my God and Master in Heaven;
and for your Service, my much, and most honored Brethren, Friends and dearest
Relations. Accept of this, as a Present, a profitable Return for many Favors
and Blessings received from you. I beseech you, continue your Care and Pains in
instructing your Families: Build up your selves and them in your holy Faith;
and as you were educated your selves, go on to train up yours: And the Grace of
our Lord Jesus be with your Spirits. To others, I deliver with mine own hands
the best Legacy I have to leave them; charging you all, and every one, by that
Covenant between God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and you, that you do, in
your whole Lives, live to God, by Faith: Renew Repentance, and let the Love of
God constrain you, etc. 2 Cor. 5.14. As you have received Christ Jesus the
Lord, walk in him, Col. 2.6. And renounce whom, and what you have renounced. In
every Condition, live by Faith; and in every thing, by Prayer and Supplication,
make your Requests known to God. Phil. 4.5. In every State, learn to be
contented, Phil. 4.11. In every thing, give thanks, 1 These. 5.18. and always,
for all things, unto God, and the Father, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Ephesians. 5.20. Study, believe and live according to these things: Hold fast the
form of sound words, which you have heard of me, etc. 2 Timothy 1.13. I do not
leave you Wood, Hay, Stubble; but Gold, Silver and precious Stones, 1 Cor.
3.12. Therefore highly value them, as Talents, and a Treasure; and know, that I
do rejoice more in leaving you these precious Legacies of the New Testament,
than if I had Thousands of Gold and Silver to leave you. And let all that shall
receive any Benefit by these Endeavors for Good to your immortal Souls, bless
the Lord for ever.

Brief Directions.
1. You that teach others, teach them their Baptismal Vow. 2. Next, inform them
what they are by Nature, and what they may, and must be by Grace: Acquaint them
with Christ. 3. After they can say the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and the Ten
Commandments, enter them into the Catechism, and lead them as they are able. 4.
Make Application to their Hearts of what they learn. 5. When they have learnt
the Catechism, go on to the Proofs. 6. When they grow in Judgment, often
repeat, and study well the several Sections of the second Part, as you go over
those Points in the Catechism, to which they belong. 7. As soon as you can,
give your selves to Prayer; and be not dissuaded by them who are against all
Use of Forms. Think not that God will not be served, but with New and New.
Pray, for the Matter of it, what is pleasing to God, and good for you, with
Understanding, spiritual Sense, and Faith; and as you can, do more, and better.
Thus do, and the Lord help you by his Holy Spirit. 8. Renew your Baptismal
Covenant; and, as engaged by Covenant, examine your selves, and so eat, etc.
And Lastly, Having once preparedly joined your selves to the Lord, and his
Church, in the Communion of his Body and Blood; having drunk of that one Cup,
and being made one Bread, take heed of Neglects and Apostasy. Remember, As
often as you do it, etc. you show forth the Lord's Death until he come. And
while you live, continue so to do.

It will be a Benefit to you, to lay up the short View of these Principles in
your Memories, and often repeat them to your selves.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is lately published the Second Edition of Mr. Pools Annotations on the
Bible, in which the whole Sacred Text is inserted; in two Volumes, in Folio:
Useful for Families and Closets.

Sold by Jo. Robinson, in St. Paul's Churchyard.

A SHORT CATECHISM According to the DOCTRINE OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND. With
Scripture Proofs at large.

Newly revised and corrected, with more Scriptures, and Propositions (for
Illustration) annexed.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1688.

A short View of Divinity, or Summary of this CATECHISM.
Showing, 1. what is Man's chief End. 2. The way to it.

I. Man's chief End, is either, 1. The chief End of Intention what he ought to
aim at above all things, as the Scope of his Life and Actions, that is, to
glorify God. Or, 2. Man's chief End of Fruition, his chiefest Good and
Happiness; and that is, to enjoy God for ever.

II. The Way to attain this chief End, is by the holy Scriptures. The
Scriptures principally teach, 1. What Man is to believe. 2. What God requires
Man to do. 3. What Man may, and ought to ask of God, and pray for. The
Scriptures are a Rule of Faith, a Rule of Life and manners, a Rule of Prayer.

I. The Scriptures teach what Man is bound to believe. 1. Concerning God. 2.
Concerning himself.

1. Concerning God, Man is to believe. 1. What God is in his Essence or Being,
and Attributes. 2. What he is in Relation to himself, as the Essence subsisteth
in three Persons; the Father, the Son, the Holy Ghost. 3. What God is in
Relation to his Creatures, in general, and to Man in special, of whom the
Scriptures principally speak. God is to be considered in reference to Man, 1.
As Creator. 2. Preserver. 3. Governor. 4. Redeemer. 5. Benefactor and gracious
Rewarder. 2. Man is to be considered, as 1. a Creature. 2. as a defective,
needy, insufficient Creature, and sinful. 3. As under Government, as a Subject
governed by Law, and Covenant. 4. As redeemed; under which consider, 1. Man's
Sin. 2. Man's Misery. 3. Man's Inability to recover or restore himself.
Concerning our Redemption, Note, 1. The way, by which by a Covenant of Grace.
2. The Person, by whom, our Lord Jesus Christ. Concerning this Redeemer,
observe, 1. who, and what he is. 2. His Office in general, a Mediator. A
Mediator in three Offices: 1. A Prophet. 2. a Priest. 3. a King, in a twofold
State, of Humiliation and Exaltation. 3. The Application of Redemption by the
Holy Spirit. The Redemption is applied in effectual Calling. They who are
called, are justified, sanctified, and adopted. And these are partakers of
great Benefits from Christ, in this Life, at Death, after Death, at the
Resurrection, and in Heaven for ever.

II. The Scriptures teach what Man is obliged to do, to please and glorify God;
and that is Obedience to the moral Law; which Law shows what we ought to do,
and what we ought not to do. But Man has transgressed this Law, and is fallen
under the Wrath and Curse of God. The Scriptures further teach what is to be
done to escape the Wrath of God; which is, 1. Faith in Jesus Christ. 2.
Repentance to Life, toward God. 3. A diligent Use of means, which are, 1. The
Word heard and read. 2. The Sacraments, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord. 3.
Prayer.

III. What Man ought to pray for, taught generally in the Scriptures;
particularly in the Lord's Prayer, The Sum of all is, our highest End and the
way to it: the way to it is by Faith in Jesus Christ (with its adjunct
Repentance) which we are taught in our Creed. 2. By Love and Obedience, the Sum
of the Commandments. 3. By Invocation, taught by our Savior.

A SHORT CATECHISM, According to the DOCTRINE OF THE Church of England.
Quest. 1. WHat is the chief End of Man?

Answ. MAn's chief End (for which he was made and redeemed, and to which he
should aim) is to glorify 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or
whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of God. Romans 11.36. For of Him, and
through Him, and to Him are all things; to whom be glory for ever. Amen.
God, and to enjoy him for Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? And
there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. V. 26. My flesh and my
heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. V.
27. For lo, they that are far from thee, shall perish; thou have destroyed all
them that go a whoring from thee. V. 28. But it is good for me to draw near to
God; I have put my trust in the Lord God, that I may declare all thy works.
ever.

2. Q. What Rule has God given to direct us how we may glorify and enjoy him?

A. The Word of God (which is contained in the Scriptures of the Old and New 2 Timothy 3.15. And that from a child thou have known the holy scriptures, which are
able to make thee wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus.
V. 16. All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness. Ephesians.
2 20. And are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone.
Testament) is the only Rule to direct us how we may glorify and enjoy 1 John
1.3. That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye also may
have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with
his Son Jesus Christ. V. 4. And these things write we unto you, that your joy
may be full. Psalm. 73.24. Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward
receive me to glory. Joh. 20.31. But these are written, that ye might believe
that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing, ye might have
life through his Name.
him.

3. Q What do the Scriptures principally teach?

A. The (holy) Scriptures principally teach, what Man is (bound) to believe
concerning God, and what Duty God requires of 2 Timothy 1.13. Hold fast the form
of sound words which thou have heard of me, in faith and love, which is in
Christ Jesus. 2 Timothy 3.16. see before.
Man.

4. Q. What is God?

A. God is a Joh. 4.24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must
worship him in spirit, and in truth.
Spirit, Job 11.7. Can thou by searching, find out God? Can thou find out
the Almighty unto perfection? V. 8. It is as high as heaven, what can thou
do? Deeper than hell, what can thou know? V. 9. The measure thereof is longer
than the earth, and broader than the sea.
Infinite, Psalm. 90.2. Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever thou
had formed the earth, and the world, even from everlasting to everlasting,
thou art God.
Eternal, and James 1.17. Every good and perfect gift is from above, and comes
down from the Father of Lights, with whom there is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning.
Unchangeable in his Exodus 3.14. And God said unto Moses, I am that I am; and
he said, Thus shall thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM has sent me
unto you.
Being, Psalm. 147.5. Great is our Lord, and of great power; his understanding
is infinite.
Wisdom, Rev. 4.8. And the four beasts had each of them six wings about him,
and they were full of eyes within; and they rest not day and night, saying,
Holy, holy, holy Lord God Almighty; which was and is, and is to come. Isa 6.3.
And one cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts,
the whole earth is full of his glory.
Power, Rev. 15.5. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name? for
thou only art holy; for all nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy
judgments are made manifest.
Holiness, Deuteronomy. 32.4. He is the rock, his work is perfect, for all his ways
are judgment: a God of truth, and without iniquity, just and right is he.
Justice, Exodus 34.6. And the Lord passed before him, and proclaimed, The Lord,
the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness
and truth. V. 7. Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and
transgression, and sin; and that will by no means clear the guilty; visiting
the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and upon the childrens children,
unto the third and fourth generation.
Goodness and Truth.

5. Q. Are there more Gods than one?

A. (This God is one, and) there is (and there can be) but one only, the living
and true Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. Jer. 10.10.
But the Lord is the true God; he is the living God, and an everlasting King: at
his breath the earth shall tremble, and the nations shall not be able to abide
his indignation. 1 Cor. 8.4. As concerning therefore the eating of those things
that are offered in sacrifice unto idols, we know that an idol is nothing in
the world, and that there is none other God but one. V. 6. But to us there is
but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.
God.

6. Q. How many Persons are there in the Godhead?

A. There are three Persons in the Godhead (or Divine Being, and Nature) the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one God; the same in
substance, equal in 1 John 5.7. For there are three that bear record in heaven,
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one. Matthew.
28.19. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 2 Cor. 13.14. The grace of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost, be
with you all. Amen. Joh. 10.30. I and my Father are one. Phil. 2.6. Who being
in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God. Compare Isa
6.3,5,8. with Joh. 12.41. and Acts 28.25. Acts 5.3,4. But Peter said, Ananias,
why has Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost and to keep back
part of the price of the land? Whiles it remained, was it not thine own? and
after it was sold, was it not in thine own power? why have thou conceived this
thing in thine heart? thou have not lied unto men, but unto God.
Power and Glory (and all divine Perfections.)

7. This one God, the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost, is the first efficient
Cause, or Creator; the preserving and disposing, and the final Cause of all
things.

Romans 11.36. For of him, and through him, and to him are all things: to whom be
glory for ever. Amen.

8. What soever God has done, and brought forth, he did according to his
Eternal Purpose and Decrees.

Ephesians. 1.11. -- Who works all things according to the counsel of his own
will.

9. Q. What are the Decrees of God?

A. The Decrees of God are, his Eternal Purpose, according to the Counsel of
his Will, whereby, for his own Glory, he has foreordained whatever comes to
Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the
world, that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love. V. 11. In
whom also we obtained an inheritance, being predestined according to the
purpose of him, who works all things after the counsel of his own will. Romans
9 22. What if God, willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known,
endured with much long suffering, the vessels of wrath, fitted to destruction?
V. 23. And that he might make known the riches of his glory, on the vessels of
mercy which he had before prepared unto glory?
pass.

10. Q. How does God execute his Decrees?

A. God executes his Decrees in the works of Creation and Ephesians. 1.11. Who
works all things according to the counsel of his own will.
Providence.

11. Q. What is the Work of Creation?

A. The Work of Creation is, God's making all things of nothing, by the Word of
his Power, in the space of six days, and all very Genesis chap. 1. throughout.
Heb. 11.13. Through faith we understand, that the worlds were framed by the
word of God; so that things which are seen, were not made of things that do
appear.
good.

12. Q. How did God create Man?

A. (After all the rest of his Works) God created Man Male and Female, after
his own Image, in Knowledge, Righteousness and Holiness, with Dominion over the
Genesis 1.26. And God said, Let us make Man in our own image, after our likeness;
and let them have dominion over the rish of the sea, and over the fowl of the
air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing
that creeps upon the earth. V. 27. So God created man in his own image, in
the image of God created he him, male and female created he them. V. 28. And
God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and
replenish the earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea,
and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that creeps upon
the earth. Col. 3.10. And have put on the new Man, which is renewed in
knowledge, after the image of him that created him. Ephesians. 4.24. And that ye
put on that new Man, which after God, is created in righteousness and true
holiness.
Creatures.

13. Q. What are God's Works of Providence?

A. God's Works of Providence are, his most Psalm. 145.17. The Lord is righteous
in all his ways; and holy in all his works.
holy, Psalm. 104.24. O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou
made them all, the earth is full of thy riches. Isa. 28.29. This also comes
from the Lord of hosts, which is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working.
wise and powerful Heb. 1.3. Who being the brightness of his glory, and the
express image of his person, and upholding all things by the word of his power;
when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the
Majesty on high.
preserving, and governing all his Creatures, and all their Psalm. 103.19. The
Lord has prepared his throne in the heaven, his kingdom rules over all.
Matthew. 10.29. Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing, and one of them shall
not fall to the ground without your Father? V. 30. But the very hairs of your
head are all numbered. V. 31. Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than
many sparrows.
Actions.

14. God's Providence is either general toward all his Creatures, or special
toward Mankind in the state of Creation before the Fall, and in the state of
Corruption since the Fall.

15. Q. What special Act of Providence did God exercise toward Man, in the
state wherein he was created?

A. When God had created Man, he entered into a Covenant of Life with him, upon
condition of perfect Obedience; forbidding him to eat of the Tree of Knowledge
of Good and Evil, upon pain of Gal. 3.12. And the law is not of faith; but the
man that does them, shall live in them. Genesis 2.17. But of the tree of
knowledge, of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it; for in the day thou
eatest thereof, thou shall surely die.
Death.

16. Q. Did our first Parents continue in the Estate wherein they were created?

A. Our first Parents, being left to the freedom of their own Will, fell from
the Estate wherein they were created, by sinning against Genesis 3.6. And when the
woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the
eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise; she took of the fruit thereof,
and did eat; and gave also to her husband with her, and he did eat. V. 7. And
the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked, and they
sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons. V. 8. And they heard the
voice of the Lord God, walking in the garden in the cool of the day: and Adam
and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God, amongst the
trees of the garden. V. 13. And the Lord God said unto the woman, What is this
that thou have done? And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I did
eat. Eccles. 7.29. Lo, this only have I found, that God has made man upright,
but they have sought out many inventions.
God.

17. Q. What is Sin?

A. Sin is any want of Conformity unto, or Transgression of the Law of 1 John
3.4. Whosoever commits sin, transgresses also the law; for sin is the
transgression of the law.
God. (Any defect in keeping strictly and perfectly to the Law, or any thing
cross or contrary to the Law, is Sin.)

18. Q. What was the Sin whereby our first Parents fell from the Estate wherein
they were created?

A. The Sin whereby our first Parents fell from that (holy and happy) Estate
wherein they were created, was their eating the forbidden Genesis 3.12. The woman
which thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat.
Fruit.

19. All Mankind sinned, and fell in Adam 's first Transgression: For,

20. Q. Did all Mankind fall in Adam 's first Transgression?

A. The Covenant being made with Adam, not only for himself, but for his
Posterity, all Mankind descending from him by ordinary Generation, sinned in
him, and fell with him in his first Genesis 2 16. And the Lord God commanded the
man, saying, Of every tree of the garden thou may freely eat. V. 17. But of
the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it, for in the
day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die. Romans 5.12. Wherefore as by one
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all
men, for that all have sinned. V. 18. Therefore as by the offense of one,
judgment came upon all men, to condemnation: even so by the righteousness of
one the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life. V. 19. For as
by one man's disobedience, many were made sinners: so by the obedience of one,
shall many be made righteous. 1 Cor. 15.21. For since by man came death, by man
also came the resurrection of the dead. V. 22. For as in Adam all die, so in
Christ shall all be made alive.
Transgression.

21. Q. Into what Estate did the Fall bring Mankind?

A. The Fall (of our first Parents) brought Mankind into an Estate of Romans
5.12. see above. Chap. 3.23. For all have sinned, and come short of the glory
of God.
Sin and Misery.

22. Q. Wherein consists the sinfulness of that Estate whereinto Man fell?

A. The sinfulness of that Estate whereinto Man fell, consists in the Guilt of
Adam's first Sin, the want of Original Righteousness, and the corruption of his
whole Nature, which is commonly called Original Sin, together with all actual
Transgressions which proceed from Romans 5.10. to 20. Ephesians. 2.1. And you he has
quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins. V. 2. Wherein in times past ye
walked according to the course of this world, according to the prince of the
power of the air, the spirit that now works in the children of disobedience.
V. 3. Among whom also we all had our conversation in times past, in the lusts
of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind; and were by
nature children of wrath even as others. Jam. 1.14. But every man is tempted
when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed. V. 15. Then when lust has
conceived, it brings forth sin; and sin when it is finished, brings forth
death. Matthew. 15.19. For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders,
adulteries, fornications, thefts, false-witnesses, blasphemies.
it.

23. Q. What is the misery of that Estate whereinto Man fell?

A. All Mankind by their Fall, lost Communion with Genesis 3.8. Adam and his wife
hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God amongst the trees of the
garden. V. 10. And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid
because I was naked, and I hid my self. V. 24. So he drove out the man: and he
placed at the end of the garden of Eden, Cherubims, and a flaming sword, which
turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life.
God, are under his Wrath and Ephesians. 2.2,3. see before. Gal. 3.10. For as many
as are of the work of the law, are under the Curse; for it is written, Cursed
is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the law, to
do them.
Curse, and so made liable to all miseries in this Life, to Death it self, and
to the pains of Hell for Lam. 3.39. Wherefore does the living man complain, a
man for the punishment of his sins? Romans 6.23. For the wages of sin is death,
but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Matthew.
25.41. Then shall he say to them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed,
into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. V. 46. And these
shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eternal.
ever.

24. But all Mankind were not left to perish in the state of Sin and Misery:
For,

25. Q. Did God leave all Mankind to perish in the state of Sin and Misery?

A. God having, out of his mere good pleasure from all Eternity, elected some
to everlasting Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in him before the
foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in
love.
Life, did enter into a Covenant of Grace, to deliver them out of the state of
Sin and misery, and to bring them into an estate of Salvation by a Romans 3.21.
But now the righteousness of God without the law is manifested, being witnessed
by the law and the prophets. V. 22. Even the righteousness of God, which is by
faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe; for there is no
difference Gal. 3.21. Is the law then against the promises? God forbid; for if
there had been a law given, which could have given life, verily, righteousness
should have been by the law. V. 22. But the scripture has concluded all under
sin, that the promise by faith in Jesus Christ might be given to them that
believe.
Redeemer.

26. Q. Who is the Redeemer of God's Elect?

A. The only Redeemer of God's Elect, is the Lord Jesus 1 Timothy 2.5. For there
is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus. V. 6.
Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time.
Christ; who being the Eternal Son of God, became Joh. 1.14. And the Word was
made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the
only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth. Gal. 4.4. But when the
fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under
the Law.
Man, and so was, and continues to be God and Man in two distinct Natures, and
one Person, for Romans 9.5. Whose are the Fathers, and of whom, as concerning the
flesh, Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever. Luke 1.35. And the
Angel answered and said unto her, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the
Power of the Highest shall over-shadow thee; therefore also the holy Thing
which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. Col. 2 9. For in
him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead, bodily. Heb. 7.24. But this Man,
because he continues ever, has an unchangeable priesthood. V. 25. Wherefore
he is able to save them to the utmost that come to God by him, seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them.
ever.

27. Q. How did Christ, being the Son of God, become Man.

A. Christ, the (Eternal) Son of God, became Man, by taking to himself a true
Heb. 2.14. Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he
also himself likewise took part of the same, that through death he might
destroy him who had the power of death; that is, the Devil. V. 16. For, verily,
he took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of
Abraham. Heb. 10.5. Wherefore when he comes into the world, he says,
Sacrifice and offering thou would not, but a body have thou prepared me.
Body, and a reasonable Matthew. 26.38. Then says he unto them, My soul is
exceeding sorrowful, even unto death; tarry you here, and watch with me.
Soul, being conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost, in the Womb of the
Virgin Mary, and born of Luke 1.31. Behold, thou shall conceive in thy womb,
and bring forth a son, and shall call his name Jesus. V. 35. see before. V. 42.
And she spoke out with a loud voice, and said, Blessed art thou among women,
and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. Gal. 4.4. see before.
her, yet without Heb. 4.15. For we have not an High Priest which cannot be
touched with the feelings of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted
like as we are, yet without sin. Heb. 7.26. For such an High Priest became us,
who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than
the heavens.
Sin.

28. Q. What Offices does Christ execute as our Redeemer?

A. Christ, as our Redeemer, executes the Offices Acts 3.22. For Moses truly
said unto the fathers, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of
your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he
shall say unto you. Heb. 12.25. See that ye refuse not him that speaks; for
if they escaped not who refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we
escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from heaven. Compared with 2
Cor. 13.3. Since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me, which to you-ward is
not weak, but is mighty in you. Luke 4.18. The spirit of the Lord is upon me,
because he has anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor, he has sent me
to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and
recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised.
of a Prophet, Heb. 5.5. So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an
High Priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten
thee. As he says also in another place. V. 6. Thou art a Priest for ever after
the order of Melchisedeck. V. 7. Who in the days of his flesh, when he had
offered up prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto him
who is able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared.
of a Priest, and Psalm. 2.6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion.
Isa. 9.6. For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the
government shall be upon his shoulders, and his Name shall be called Wonderful,
Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. V. 7.
Of his government and peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David,
and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment and
justice, from hence forth even for ever: the zeal of the Lord of hosts will
perform this. Matthew. 21.5. Tell ye the daughter of Sion, Behold, thy King
comes unto thee, meek, and sitting upon an ass, and a colt, the foal of an
ass. Psalm. 2 8. Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for thy possession; thou shall
break them with a rod of iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like a potter's
vessel. V. 10. Be wise now therefore, O ye kings: be instructed, ye judges of
the earth. V. 11. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.
of a King, both in his Estate of Phil. 2.8. And being found in fashion as a
man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
cross. V. 9. Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a name
which is above every name: V. 10. That at the name of Jesus every knee should
bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; V.
11. And that every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the
glory of God the Father.
Humiliation (on Earth,) and Exaltation (in Heaven.)

29. Q. How does Christ execute the Office of a Prophet?

A. Christ (as our Redeemer) executes the Office of a Prophet Heb. 1.1. God,
who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in time past unto the fathers
by the prophets, V. 2. Has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom
he has appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds.
, in revealing to us by his Joh. 1.18. No man has seen God at any time; the
only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him. 1
Pet. 1 10. Of which salvation the prophets have enquired, and searched
diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should come unto you. V. 11.
Searching what, or what manner of time the spirit of Christ, which was in them,
did signisie, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the
glory which should follow. V. 12. Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto
themselves, but unto us they did minister the things which are now reported
unto you, by them that have preached the gospel unto you, with the Holy Ghost
sent down from heaven; which things the angels desire to look into.
Word and Spirit, the Joh. 15.15. Henceforth I call you not servants, for the
servant knows not what his Lord does; but I have called you friends; for all
things that I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto you.
Will of God for our Salvation Joh. 20.31. These things are written, that you
might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing, you
might have life through his Name.
.

30. Q. How does Christ execute the Office of a Priest?

A. Christ (as our Redeemer) executes the Office of a Priest, Heb. 9.14. How
much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered
himself without spot to God, purge your consciences from dead works, to serve
the living God. V. 28. So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many; and
unto them that look for him, shall he appear the second time, without sin unto
salvation.
in his once offering up of himself a Ephesians. 5 2. And walk in love, as Christ
also has loved us, and has given himself for us, an offering, and a sacrifice
to God for a sweet smelling savor.
sacrifice to satisfy Divine Justice, and Heb. 2.17. In all things it behoved
him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful
High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of
the people. Romans 5.9. Much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall
be saved from wrath through him. V. 10. For if when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son: much more being reconciled, we shall
be saved by his life.
reconcile us to God, and in making Heb. 7.24. But this man, because he
continues ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood. V. 25. Wherefore he is able
to save to the utmost those that come to God by him, seeing he ever lives to
make Intercession for them.
continual Intercession for us.

31. Q. How does Christ execute the Office of a King?

A. Christ executes the Office of a King, Psalm. 110.1. The Lord said unto my
Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool. V.
2. The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion: rule thou in the
midst of thine enemies. V. 3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy
power, in the beauties of holiness from the womb of the morning: thou have the
dew of thy youth. Acts 15.14. Simeon has declared how God at the first did
visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a People for his Name. V. 15. And to
this agree the words of the Prophets, as it is written. V. 16. After this I
will return, and build again the Tabernacle of David, which is fallen down, and
I will build again the ruins thereof, and I will set it up.
in subduing us to himself, Isa. 33.22. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our
Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will save us.
in ruling, Isa. 32.1. Behold a King shall reign in Righteousness, and Princes
shall rule in Judgment. V. 2. And a Man shall be as an hiding place from the
wind, and a covert from the tempest; as Rivers of Waters in a dry place, as the
shadow of a Rock in a weary Land.
and defending us, 1 Cor. 15.25. For he must reign, till he has put all his
Enemies under his feet. Psalm. 110.5, The Lord at thy right hand shall strike
through Kings in the day of his wrath. V. 6. He shall judge among the heathen,
he shall fill the places with the dead bodies: he shall wound the heads over
many countries.
and restraining and conquering all his and our Enemies.

32. Christ, as our Redeemer, did execute these three Offices, both in the
State of his Humiliation, when he was upon Earth, and still does execute them
in Heaven, in his Exaltation.

33. Q. Wherein did Christ's Humiliation consist?

A. Christ's Humiliation consisted Luke 2.7. And she brought forth her first
born Son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a Manger,
because there was no room for them in the Inn.
in his being born, and that in a low condition, Gal. 4.4. And when the fullness
of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a Woman, made under the Law.
made under the Law, Heb. 12.2. Looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of
our Faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross,
despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the Throne of God. V.
3. For consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself,
lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds. Isa. 53.2. For he shall grow up
before him as a tender Plant, and as a Root out of a dry ground; he has no
form nor comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we
should desire him. V. 3. He is despised and rejected of men, a Man of sorrows,
and acquainted with griefs, and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was
despised, and we esteemed him not.
undergoing the Miseries of this Life, Phil. 2.8. And being found in fashion as
a Man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of
the Cross.
the Wrath of God, Luke 22.44. And being in an agony, he prayed more earnestly,
and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground.
Matthew. 27.46. And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying,
ELI, ELI, LAMASABACHTHANI: that is to say, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me?
and the cursed Death of the Cross, 1 Cor. 15.4. And that he was buried, and
that he rose again the third day according to the Scriptures.
in being buried Matt. 2.40. As Jonas was three days and three nights in the
Whales belly; so shall the Son of Man be three days and three nights in the
heart of the earth. Acts 2.24,25,26,27, -- 31. V. 24. Whom God has raised,
having loosed the pains of death, because it was not possible that he should be
holden of it. V. 25. For David speaks concerning him, I foresaw the Lord
always before my face, for he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved.
V. 26. Therefore did my heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad; moreover also my
flesh shall rest in hope. V. 27. Because thou will not leave my Soul in Hell,
neither will thou suffer thine holy One to see corruption. V. 31. He seeing
this before, spoke of the Resurrection of Christ, that his Soul was not left in
Hell, neither did his flesh see corruption.
and continuing under the power of Death for a time.

34. Q. Wherein consists Christ's Exaltation?

Christ's Exaltation consists in 1 Cor. 15.4. And that he was buried, and
that he rose again the third day according to the Scriptures.
his Rising again from the dead on the third day, Mark 16.19. So then after the
Lord had spoken to them, he was received up into Heaven and sat on the right
hand of God.
in ascending up into Heaven, Ephesians. 1.20. Which he wrought in Christ when he
raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly
places.
in sitting at the right hand of God the Father, Acts 1.11. Which also said, Ye
men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into Heaven? This same Jesus which is
taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner, as ye have seen
him go into Heaven. Chap. 17. V. 31. He has appointed a day in the which he
shall judge the World in Righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained,
whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from
the dead.
and in coming to judge the World at the last Day.

35. Christ our Mediator wrought Redemption from that State of Sin, and Misery,
into which we fell, and purchased a happy State of Life, and Salvation, for all
to whom it is applied.

36. Q. How are we made partakers of the Redemption purchased by Christ?

A. We are made partakers of the Redemption Purchased by Christ, John 1.11. He
came unto his own, and his own received him not. V. 12. but as many as received
him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe
on his Name.
by the effectual Application of it to us, Tit. 3.5. Not by works of
Righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by
the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost. V. 6. Which he
shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior.
by his holy Spirit.

37. Q. How does the Spirit apply to us the Redemption purchased by Christ?

A. The (holy) Spirit applies to us the Redemption purchased by Christ, Ephesians.
1.13 In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the Word of Truth, the Gospel
of your Salvation; in whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with
that Holy Spirit of Promise. V. 14. Which is an earnest of our Inheritance,
until the Redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory.
John 6.37. All that the Father gives me, shall come unto me; and him that
comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. V. 39. And this is the Fathers Will
which has sent me, that of all which he has given, I should lose nothing, but
should raise it again at the last day. Ephesians. 2.8. By Grace ye are saved
through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the Gift of God.
by working Faith in us, and thereby Ephesians. 3.17. That Christ may dwell in your
hearts by Faith, that ye being rooted and grounded in love. 1 Cor. 1.9. God is
faithful, by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ
our Lord.
uniting us to Christ in our effectual Calling.

38. Q. What is effectual Calling?

A. (Which) effectual Calling is the Work of God's Spirit 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has
saved us, and called us with an holy Calling, not according to our works, but
according to his own purpose and Grace which was given us in Christ Jesus
before the World began. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. But we are bound to give thanks always
to God for you, Brethren, beloved of the Lord, because God has from the
beginning, chosen you to salvation through sanctification of the Spirit, and
belief of the Truth. V. 14. Whereunto he has called you by our Gospel, to the
obtaining of the Glory of the Lord Jesus Christ. John 16.8. And when he is
come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgmnent.
, whereby, convincing us of our Sin and Misery Acts 2.37. Now when they heard
this, they were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter, and to the rest
of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall we do?
, inlightning our Minds in the Knowledge of Christ Acts 26.18. To open their
eyes, and to turn them from darkness unto light, and from the power of Satan
unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them
which are sanctified by Faith that is in me.
, and renewing our Wills Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heart also will I give you, and a
new spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of
your flesh, and I will give you hearts of flesh. V. 27. And I will put my
Spirit within you, and will cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep
my judgments, and do them.
, he does persuade and enable us to embrace Jesus Christ, freely offered to us
in the Gospel John 6.44. No Man can come unto me, except the Father which has
sent me, draw him, and I will raise him up at the last day. V. 45. As it
written in the Prophets, and they shall be all taught of God; every Man
therefore that has heard, and has learned of the Father, comes unto me.
Phil. 2.13. For it is God that works in you, both to will and to do of his
good pleasure. John 7.37. In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus
stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink.
.

39. They who are effectually called do receive and partake of many Benefits by
Christ: Some in this Lise, before they die; some at their Deaths, and some at
the Resurrection, in the last day.

40. Q. What Benefits do they that are effectually called, partake of in this
Life?

A. They that are effectually called, do in this life partake of Romans 8.30.
Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called,
them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified.
Justification, Ephesians. 1.5. Having predestined us unto the adoption of
Children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his Will.
Adoption, 1 Cor. 1.30. Of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto
us Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption.
Sanctification, and the several Benefits which in this Life do either
accompany or flow from them.

41. Q. What is Justification?

A. Justification is an Act of God's free Grace, wherein he pardons all our
sins Romans 3.24. Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption
that is in Jesus Christ, V. 25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation
through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of
sins that are past, through the forbearance of God Romans 4.6. Even as David also
describes the blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes righteousness
without works; V. 7. Saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven,
and whose sins are covered. V. 8. Blessed is the man, to whom the Lord will not
impute sin.
, and accepts us as righteous in his sight 2 Cor. 5.19. To wit, that God was,
in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses
unto them, and has committed to us the word of reconciliation. V. 21. For he
has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him.
, only for the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us Romans 5.17. For if by one
man's offense, death reigned by one; much more they which receive abundance of
grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by one, Jesus
Christ. V. 18. Therefore, as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men
unto condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon
all men unto justification of life. V. 19. As by one man's disobedience, many
were made sinners; so by the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous.
, and received by Faith alone Gal. 2.16. Knowing that man is not justified by
the works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ; even we have believed
in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by
the works of the Law; for by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified.
Phil. 3.9. And be found in him; not having mine own righteousness, which is of
the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which
is of God by faith.
.

42. Q. What is Adoption?

A. Adoption is an Act of God's 1 John 3.1. Behold what manner of love the
Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God;
therefore the world knows us not, because it knew him not.
free Grace, whereby we are received into the number, and have a right to all
the privileges of the Sons of God Joh. 1.12. As many as received him, to them
gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name.
Romans 8.17. And if children, then heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ, if
so be we suffer with him, that we may be glorified also together.
.

43. Q. What is Sanctification?

A. Sanctification is the work of God's free Grace 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. God has from
the beginning chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit,
and the belief of the truth.
, whereby we are renewed in the whole Man, after the Image of God Ephesians. 5.23.
And be renewed in the spirit of your mind. V. 24. And that ye put on that new
Man, which after God, is created in righteousness, and true holiness.
; and are enabled more and more to die unto Sin, and live unto Righteousness
Romans 6.4. Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death; that like as
Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we
should also walk in newness of life. V. 6. Knowing this, that our old Man is
crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we
should not serve sin. Romans 8.1. There is therefore now no condemnation to them
which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.
.

44. Q. What are the Benefits which in this Life do accompany, or flow from
Justification, Adoption and Sanctification.

A. The Benefits which in this Life do accompany, or flow from Justification,
Adoption and Sanctification, are, Assurance of God's Love, Peace of Conscience
Romans 5.1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through
our Lord Jesus Christ. V. 2. By whom also we have access by faith into this
grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. V. 5. And hope
makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the
Holy Ghost, which is given unto us.
, Joy in the Holy Ghost Romans 14.17. For the kingdom of God is not meat and
drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.
, Increase of Grace Prove. 4.18. The path of the just is as the shining light,
that shines more and more unto the perfect day.
, and Perseverance therein to the end 1 John 5.13. These things have I written
unto you that believe on the name of the Son of God, that you may know that ye
have eternal life; and that ye may believe on the name of the Son of God. 1
Pet. 1.5. Who are kept by the power of God, through faith unto salvation.
.

45. Q. What benefits do Believers receive from Christ at death?

A. The Souls of Believers are at their death made perfect in Heb. 12.23. To
the general assembly, and church of the firstborn, which are written in
heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made
perfect.
Holiness, and do immediately pass into 2 Cor. 5.1. For we know that if our
earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an
house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. V. 6. Therefore we are
confident; knowing that whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from
the Lord. V. 8. We are confident, I say, and willing, rather to be absent from
the body, and to be present with the Lord. Phil. 1.23 For I am in a strait
betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far
better. Luke 23.43. And Jesus said unto him, Verily, I say unto thee, to day
shall thou be with me in Paradise.
Glory; and their Bodies being still united to 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. For if we believe
Jesus died, and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God
bring with him.
Christ, do rest in their Isa. 57.2. He shall enter into peace, they shall rest
in their beds, each one walking in his uprightness.
Graves till the Job 19.26. And though, after my skin, worms destroy this body,
yet in my flesh shall I see God. V. 27. Whom I shall see for my self, and mine
eyes shall behold, and not another, though my reins be consumed within me.
Resurrection.

46. Q What benefit do Believers receive from Christ at the Resurrection?

A. At the Resurrection, Believers being raised up in Glory 1 Cor. 15.43. It is
sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory: it is sown in weakness, it is raised
in power.
, shall be openly acknowledged, and acquitted in the Day of Judgment Mat.
25.23. His Lord said unto him, Well done, thou good and faithful servant; thou
have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things;
enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. Matthew. 10 32. Whosoever shall confess me
before men, him will I also confess before my Father which is in heaven.
, and made perfectly blessed, in full enjoying of God 1 John 3.2. Beloved, now
are we the sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be; but we
know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as
he is. 1 Cor. 13.12. For now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to
face: now I know but in part, but then I shall know even as I am also known.
, to all Eternity 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. Then we which are alive, and remain, shall be
caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and so
shall we be ever with the Lord. V. 18. Wherefore comfort one another with these
words.
.

PART II. What Duties God requires of Man in his holy Law.
1. Q. What is the Duty which God requires of Man?

A. The Duty which God requires of Man, is Obedience to his Mic. 6.8. He has
showed thee, O man, what is good: and what does the Lord require of thee, but
to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? 1 Samuel 15.22.
And Samuel said, Has the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings, and
sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is better than
sacrifice; and to hearken, than the fat of rams.
revealed Will.

2. Q What did God at first reveal to Man for the Rule of his Obedience.

A. The Rule which God at first revealed to Man for his Obedience, was the
Moral Law Romans 2.14. For when the Gentiles, which have not the Law, do by
nature the things contained in the Law; these having not the law, are a law
unto themselves. V. 15. Which show the work of the law written in their hearts;
their consciences also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while
accusing, or else excusing one another. Romans 10.5. For Moses describes the
righteousness which is of the law, that the man which does those things shall
live by them.
.

3. Q. Where is the Moral Law summarily comprehended?

A. The Moral Law is summarily comprehended in the Deuteronomy. 10.4. And he wrote on
the tables, according to the first writing, the ten commandments, which the
Lord spoke unto you in the mount, out of the midst of the fire, in the day of
the assembly; and the Lord gave them unto me. Matthew. 19.17. And he said unto
him, Why call thou me good; there is none good but one, that is God; but if
thou will enter into life, keep the commandments.
ten Commandments.

4. Q. What is the sum of the Ten Commandments?

A. The sum of the Ten Commandments is, To love the Lord our God with all our
Heart, with all our Soul, with all our Strength, and with all our Mind; and our
Neighbor as our Matthew. 22.37. Jesus said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. V.
38. This is the first and great commandment, V. 39. And the second is like unto
it, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. V. 40. On these two commandments
hang all the law and the prophets.
selves.

5. Q. What is the Preface to the Ten Commandments?

A. The Preface to the Ten Commandments is in these words, Exodus 20.2.
[I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out
of the house of bondage.]

6. Q. What does the Preface to the Ten Commandments teach us?

A. The Preface to the Ten Commandments teaches us, That because God is the
Lord, and our God, and Redeemer, therefore we are bound to keep all his Luke
1.74. That he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of the hands of
our enemies, might serve him without fear, V. 75. In holiness and righteousness
before him all the days of our lives. 1 Pet. 1.15. But as he that has called
you is holy, so be you holy in all manner of conversation. V. 16. Because it is
written, Be ye holy, for I am holy. V. 17. And if you call on the Father, who
without respect of persons, judges according to every man's work, pass the
time of your sojourning here in fear. V. 18. Forasmuch as ye know that ye were
not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain
conversation, received by tradition from your fathers. V. 19. But with the
precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish, and without spot.
Commandments.

7. Q. Which is the first Commandment?

A. The first Commandment is, Exodus 20.3.
[Thou shall have no other Gods before me.]

Q. What is required in the first Commandment?

A. The first Commandment requires us to know, and acknowledge God to be the
only true God, and our 1 Chronicles. 28.9. And thou, Solomon, my son, know thou the
God of thy father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind;
for the Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of
the thoughts: if thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake
him, he will cast thee off for ever. Deuteronomy. 26.17. Thou have avouched the Lord
this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep his statutes, and
his commandments, and his Judgments, and to hearken to his voice.
God, and to worship and glorify him Matthew. 4.10. Then says Jesus unto him,
Get thee hence, Satan; for it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God,
and him only shall thou serve. Psalm. 29.2. Give unto the Lord the glory due
unto his Name; worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness.
accordingly.

Q. What is forbidden in the first Commandment?

A. The first Commandment forbids the Psalm. 14.1. The fool has said in his
heart, There is no God: they are corrupt, they have done abominable works,
there is none that does good.
denying, or not worshipping and glorifying the true Romans 1.21. Because that
when they knew God, they glorified him not as God; neither were they thankful,
but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened.
God, as God, and our Psalm. 81.10. I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee
out of the land of Egypt: open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it. V. 11. But
my people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me.
God; and the giving that Worship and Glory to any other, which is due to him
Romans 1.25. Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served
the Creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever. Amen. V. 26. For
this cause God gave them up unto vile affections: for even their women did
change their natural use, into that which is against nature.
alone.

Q. What are we specially taught by these words [before me] in the first
Commandment?

A. These words [before me] in the first Commandment, teach us, that God, who
sees all things, takes notice of, and is much displeased with the Sin of
having any other Ezekiel. 8.5, to the end. Psalm. 44.20. But if we have forgetten
the name of our God, or stretched out our hands to a strange God, V. 21. Shall
not God search this out? for he knows the secrets of the heart.
God.

8. Q. Which is the second Commandment?

A. The second Commandment is, Exodus 20.4,5,6.
[Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, or the likeness of any thing
that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the
water under the earth: thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor serve
them: for I, the Lord thy God, am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the
fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that
hate me; and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my
Commandments.]

Q. What is required in the second Commandment?

A. The second Commandment requires, the receiving, observing and keeping pure
and entire, all such religious Worship and Ordinances, as God has appointed in
his Deuteronomy. 32.46. And he said unto them, Set your hearts unto all the words
which I testisie among you this day, which you shall command your children to
observe to do all the words of this law. Matthew. 28.20. Teaching them to observe
all things whatsoever I have commanded you; and lo, I am with you always, unto
the end of the world. Acts 2.42. And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles
doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers...
Word.

Q. What is forbidden in the second Commandment?

A. The second Commandment forbids the worshipping of God by Deuteronomy. 4.15. Take
ye therefore good heed unto your selves ( for ye saw no manner of similitude on
the day that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb, out of the midst of the fire) V.
16. Lest you corrupt your selves, and make you a graven image, the similitude
of any figure, the likeness of male or female; V. 17. The likeness of any beast
that is on the earth, the likeness of any winged fowl that flicth in the air;
V. 18. The likeness of any thing that creeps on the ground, the likeness of
any fish that is in the waters beneath the earth. V. 19. And lest thou lift up
thine eyes to heaven, and when thou see the sun, moon and stars, even all the
host of heaven, should be driven to worship them, and serve them, which the
Lord thy God has divided unto all nations under the whole heaven. Exodus 32.5.
And when Aaron saw it, he built an altar before it; and Aaron made
proclamation, and said, To morrow is a feast of the Lord. V. 8. They have
turned aside quickly out of the way which I commanded them: they have made them
a molten calf, and have worshipped it, and have sacrifioed thereunto, and said,
These be thy Gods O Israel, which have brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.
Images, or any other way, not appointed in his Deuteronomy. 12.31. Thou shall not do
so unto the Lord thy God; for every abomination to the Lord, which he hates,
have they done unto their gods; for even their sons and their daughters have
they burnt in the fire to their Gods. V. 32. Whatsoever I command you, observe
to do; thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it.
Word.

Q. What are the Reasons annexed to the second Commandment?

A. The Reasons annexed to the second Commandment (to enforce our Observance of
it) are, God's Sovereignty over Psalm. 95.2. Let us come before his presence
with thanksgiving, and make a joyful noise unto him with psalms. V. 3. For the
Lord is a great God, and a great King above all gods. V. 6. Oh, come, let us
worship and bow down, let us kneel before the Lord, our Maker.
us (in these words, For I, the Lord.) his Propriety in Psalm. 45.11. So shall
the King greatly desire thy beauty, for he is thy Lord, and worship thou him.
us, (in these words, Thy God;) and the Zeal he has to his own Exodus 34.13.
But ye shall destroy their altars, break their images, and cut down their
groves. V. 14. For thou shall worship no other God; for the Lord, whose name is
Jealous, is a jealous God.
Worship, ( in these words, For I, the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting
the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, etc.)

9. Q. Which is, the third Commandment?

A. The third Commandment is, Exodus 27.7.
[Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.]

Q. What is required in the third Commandment?

A. The third Commandment requires the holy and reverend use of God's Matthew.
6.9. After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which art in heaven,
hallowed be thy Name. Dent. 28.58. If thou will not observe to do all the words
of this law, written in this book, that thou may fear this glorious and
fearful Name, THE LORD THY GOD.
Names, Psalm. 68.4. Sing unto God, sing praises to his name: extel him that
rides upon the heavens, by his name JAH, and rejoice before him.
Titles, Rev. 15.3. And they sing the song of Moses, the servant of God, and
the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God
Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints. V. 4. Who shall not
fear thee, O Lord, and glorisie thy Name? for thou only art holy; for all
nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy judgments are made manifest.
Attributes, Mal. 1.11,14. For from the rising of the sun, even unto the going
down of the same, my Name shall be great among the Gentiles; and in every
place, incense shall be offered unto my Name, and a pure-offering; for my Name
shall be great among the Heathen, says the Lord of Hosts. V. 14. But cursed be
the deceiver, that has in his flock a male, and voweth, and sacrifices unto
the Lord a corrupt thing; for I am a great King, says the Lord of Hosts, and
my Name is dreadful among the Heathen.
Ordinances, Psalm. 138.1. I will praise thee with my whole heart; before the
gods will I sing praise unto thee. V. 2. I will worship toward thy holy
temple, and praise thy Name for thy loving kindness, and for thy truth; for
thou have magnified thy Word above all thy Name.
Word, and Job 36.24. Remember that thou magnisie his work, which men behold.
Works.

Q. What is forbidden in the third Commandment?

A. The third Commandment forbids all profaning, or abusing of any thing,
whereby God makes himself Mal. 1.6. A son honors his father, and a servant
his master. If then I be a Father, where is mine honor? And if I be a Master,
where is my fear? says the Lord of Hosts unto you, O priests, that despise my
Name: and ye say, Wherein have we despised thy Name? V. 7. Ye offer polluted
bread upon mine altar; and ye say, Wherein have we polluted thee? In that ye
say, The table of the Lord is contemptible. V. 12. But ye have profaned it, in
that ye say, The table of the Lord is polluted, and the fruit thereof, even as
wheat is contemptible. Chap. 2. V. 2. If you will not hear, and if you will not
lay it to heart, to give glory to my Name, says the Lord of Hosts, I will even
send a curse upon you, and will curse your blessings; yea, I have cursed them
already, because ye do not lay it to heart. Chap. 3.14. Ye have said, It is in
vain to serve God; and what profit is it, that we have kept his ordinances, and
that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of Hosts?
known.

Q. What is the Reason annexed to the third Commandment?

A. The Reason annexed to the third Commandment, is, That however the Breakers
of this Commandment may escape punishment from Men, yet the Lord our God will
not suffer them to escape his righteous 1 Samuel 2.12. Now the sons of Eli were
sons of Belial: they knew not the Lord. V. 17. Wherefore the sin (...) the
young men was very great before the Lord; for men abhorred the offering of the
Lord. V. 22. Now Eli was very old, and heard all that his sons did unto all
Israel, and how they lay with the women that assembled at the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation. V. 24. Nay, my sons; for it is no good report
that I hear: ye make the Lord's people to transgress. 1 Samuel 3.13. For I have
told him, that I will judge his house for ever, for the iniquity which he
knows; because his sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not.
Deuteronomy. 28.58. If thou will not observe to do all the words of this law, that are
written in this book, that thou may fear this glorious and fearful Name, THE
LORD THY GOD; V. 59. Then the Lord will make thy plagues wonderful, and the
plagues of thy seed; even great plagues, and of long continuance; and sore
sicknesses, and of long continuance.
Judgment.

10. Q. Which is the fourth Commandment?

A The fourth Commandment is, Exodus 20.8,9,10,11.
[Remember the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy: six days shall thou labor, and do
all thy work; but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God; in it
thou shall not do any work; thou, nor thy son, nor thy Daughter, thy
manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is
within thy gates: for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and
all that in them is, and rested the seventh day; wherefore the Lord blessed the
Sabbath Day, and hallowed it.]

Q. What is required in the fourth Commandment?

A. The fourth Commandment requires, the keeping holy to God, such set time as
he has appointed in his Word; expressly, one whole Day in seven, to be an holy
Sabbath unto the Deuteronomy. 5.12. Keep the Sabbath Day, to sanctisie it, as the Lord
thy God has commanded thee. V. 13. Six days shall thou labor, and do all thy
work: V. 14. But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God; in it thou
shall not do any work; thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy
manservant, nor thy maid servant, nor thine ox, nor thine ass, nor any of thy
cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates; that thy man servant, and
thy maid servant may rest as well as thou.
Lord.

Q. Which day of the seven has God appointed to be the weekly Sabbath?

A. From the beginning of the World, to the Resurrection of Christ, God has
appointed the seventh Day of the Week to be the weekly Sabbath: And the first
Day of the Week ever since, to continue to the end of the World, which is the
Christian Genesis 2.2. And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had
made; and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he made. V 3.
And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctisied it; because that in it he
rested from all his work which God created and made. 1 Cor. 16.1. Now
concerning the collection for the saints, as I have given order to the churches
of Galatia, even so do ye. V. 2. Upon the first day of the week, let every one
of you lay by him in store, as God has prospered him, that there be no
gatherings when I come. Acts 20.7. And upon the first day of the week, when the
Disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached to them, ready to depart
on the morrow, and continued his speech until midnight.
Sabbath.

Q. How is the Sabbath to be sanctified?

A. The sabbath is to be sanctified by an holy resting all that Exodus 20.8.
Remember the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy. V. 10. But the seventh day is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God; in it thou shall do no manner of work; thou, nor
thy son, etc.
day, even from such worldly Employments, and Recreations, as are lawful on
other Nehem. 13.15. In those days saw I in Judah, some treading wine-presses on
the Sabbath Day, and bringing in sheaves, and lading asses; as also wine,
grapes and figs, and all manner of burdens, which they brought into Jerusalem
on the Sabbath Day; and I testified against them in the day wherein they sold
victuals. V. 16. There dwelt men of Tire also therein, which brought fish, and
all manner of wares, and sold on the Sabbath Day unto the children of Judah,
and in Jerusalem. V. 17. Then I contended with the nobles of Judah, and said
unto them, What evil thing is this that ye do, and profane the Sabbath Day? V.
18. Did not your fathers thus? and did not God bring all this evil upon us, and
upon this city? yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel, by profaning the Sabbath.
V. 19. And it came to pass, that when the gates of Jerusalem began to be dark
before the Sabbath, I commanded that the gates should be shut, and charged that
they should not be opened till after the Sabbath: and some of my servants I set
at the gates, that there should be no burden brought in on the Sabbath Day. V.
21. Then testified I against them, saying, Why lodge ye about the wall? If ye
do so again, I will lay hands on you. From that time forth came they no more on
the Sabbath. V. 22. And I commanded the Levites, that they should cleanse
themselves, and come and keep the gates, to sanctify the Sabbath. Remember me,
O my God, concerning this also, etc. --
days, and spending the whole time in the public and private Exercises of
God's Luke 4.16. And he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up; and, as
his custom was, he went into the synagogue on the Sabbath Day, and stood up for
to read. Acts 20.7. And on the first day of the week, etc. Psalm. 92. Title, A
psalm, or song for the Sabbath Day. Isa. 66.23. And it shall come to pass, that
from one New Moon to another, and from one Sabbath to another, shall all flesh
come to worship before me, says the Lord.
Worship; except so much as is to be taken up in the works of Matthew. 12. from
V. 1, to 13. At that time Jesus went on the Sabbath Day through the corn, and
his Disciples were an hungered, and began to pluck the ears of corn, and to eat.
But when the Pharisees, etc. -- V. 12. Is it lawful to do well on the
Sabbath Days?
Necessity and Mercy.

Q. What are the Sins forbidden in the fourth Commandment?

A. The fourth Commandment forbids the omission, or careless performance of
the Duties Ezekiel. 22.26. Her priests have violated my law, and profaned mine
holy things: they have put no difference between the holy and profane, neither
have they showed difference between the unclean and clean: they have hid their
eyes from my Sabbaths, and I am profaned among them. Amos 8.5. Saying, When
will the New Moon be gone, that we may sell corn; and the Sabbath, that we may
set forth wheat? making the ephah small, and the shekel great, and falsifying
the balances by deceit. Mal. 1.13. Ye said also, Behold, what a weariness is
it! and ye have snuffed at it, says the Lord of Hosts: and ye brought that
which was torn, and the lame, and the sick; thus ye brought an offering: Should
I accept this of your hand, says the Lord.
required, and the profaning the Day by Acts 20.7. And upon the first day of
the week, when the Disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached unto
them, ready to depart on the morrow, and continued his speech until Midnight.
-- V. 9. And there sat in a window a certain young man, named Eutychus, being
fallen into a deep sleep; and as Paul was long preaching, he sunk down with
sleep, and fell down from the third loft, and was taken up dead.
idleness, or doing that which is in it self Ezekiel. 23.38. Moreover, thus they
have done to me; They have defiled my Sanctuary in the same day, and have
profaned my Sabbaths.
sinful, or by unnecessary Thoughts, Words, or Works, about our worldly
Employments or Jer. 17.24. And it shall come to pass, if ye diligently hearken
unto me, says the Lord, to bring in no burden through the gates of this city
on the Sabbath Day; but hallow the Sabbath Day, to do no work therein; V. 25.
Then shall there enter into the gates of this city, kings and princes sitting
upon the throne of David, riding in chariots, and on horses, they and their
princes, the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and this city
shall remain for ever. V. 26. And they shall come from the city of Judah, and
from the places about Jerusalem, and from the land of Benjamin, and from the
plain, and from the mountains, and from the south; bringing burnt-offerings,
and sacrifices, and meat offerings, and incense, and bringing sacrisices of
praise unto the house of the Lord. Isa. 58.13. If thou turn away thy foot from
the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the Sabbath a
delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and shall honor him; not doing
thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words.
Recreations.

Q. What are the Reasons annexed to the fourth Commandment?

A. The Reasons annexed (to press the Observation of the Sabbath Day) to the
fourth Commandment, are, God's allowing us six Days of the Week for our own
Exodus 20.9. Six days shall thou labor, and do all thy work.
Employment, (in these words, Six days shall thou labor;) his challenging a
special property in the seventh, (in these words, But the seventh day is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God;) his own Example (of finishing all his Works in
six days, and resting on the seventh, in these words, For in six days the Lord
made heaven and earth, etc. and rested the seventh day;) and his blessing the
Exodus 20.11. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all
that in them is, and rested the seventh day; wherefore the Lord blessed the
Sabbath Day, and hallowed it.
Sabbath Day, (in these words, Wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath Day.)

11. Q. Which is the fifth Commandment?

A. The fifth Commandment is, Exodus 20.12.
[Honour thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long upon the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.]

Q. What is required in the fifth Commandment?

A. The fifth Commandment requires the preserving the Honor, and performing
the Duties belonging to every one, in their several Places and Relations; as
Ephesians. 5.21. Submitting your selves one to another, in the fear of God.
Superiors, 1 Pet. 2.17. Honor all men. Love the brotherhood. Fear God. Honor
the King.
Inferiors, or Romans 12.10. Be kindly affectioned one to another, with brotherly
love, in honor preferring one another.
Equals.

Q. What is forbidden in the fifth Commandment?

A. The fifth Commandment forbids the neglecting of, or doing any thing
against the Honor and Duty which belongs to every one, in their several
Places and Matthew. 15.4. For God commanded, saying, Honor thy father, and
mother, and he that curses father, or mother, let him die the death. V. 5. But
ye say, Whosoever shall say to his father, or his mother, It is a gift by
whatsoever thou might be profitted by me, V. 6. And honor not his father,
or his mother, he shall be free. Thus have ye made the commandment of God of
none effect by your tradition. Ezekiel. 34.2. Son of man, prophecy against the
shepherds of Israel; prophecy, and say unto them, Thus says the Lord God unto
the shepherds, Woe be to the shepherds of Israel, that do feed themselves;
Should not the shepherds feed the flocks? V. 3. Ye eat the fat, and cloth you
with the wool; ye kill them that are fed, but ye feed not the flock. V. 4. The
diseased have ye not strengthened, nor have ye healed that which was sick, nor
bound up that which was broken, nor brought again that which was driven away,
nor sought that which was lost; but with force and cruelty have ye ruled them.
Romans 13.8. Owe no man any thing, but to love one another: for he that loves
another, has fulfilled the law.
Relations.

Q. What is the Reason annexed to the fifth Commandment?

A. The Reason annexed to the fifth Commandment, is, a Promise of long Life and
Prosperity (as far as shall serve for God's Glory, and their own Good) to all
such as keep this Deuteronomy. 5.16. Honor thy father and thy mother, as the Lord thy
God has commanded thee; that thy days may be prolonged, and that it may go
well with thee in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee. Ephesians. 6.2.
Honor thy father and thy mother, (which is the first Commandment with
promise.) V. 3. That it may be well with thee, and thou may live long on the
earth.
Commandment.

12. Q. Which is the sixth Commandment?

A. The sixth Commandment is, Exodus 20.13.
[Thou shall not kill.]

Q. What is required in the sixth Commandment?

A. The sixth Commandment requires all lawful endeavors to preserve our own
Ephesians. 5.28. So ought men to love their own wives, as their own bodies. He that
loves his wife, loves himself. V. 29. For no man ever hated his own flesh,
but nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord the Church.
Life, and the Life of 1 King. 18.4. For it was so, when Jezabel cut off the
the prophets of the Lord, that Obadiah took an hundred prophets, and hid them
by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water.
others.

Q. What is forbidden in the sixth Commandment?

A. The sixth Commandment forbids the taking away of our own Life, or the
Life of our Neighbor unjustly, or whatsoever tends Acts 16.28. But Paul
cried with a loud voice, saying, Do thy self no harm, for we are all here. Genesis
9.6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed; for in the
image of God made he man.
thereunto.

13. Q. Which is the seventh Commandment?

A. The seventh Commandment is, Exodus 20.14.
[Thou shall not commit Adultery.]

Q. What is required in the seventh Commandment?

A. The seventh Commandment requires the preservation of our own, and our
Neighbor's Chastity, in Heart, Speech and 1 Cor. 7.2. Nevertheless, to avoid
fornication, let every man have his own wife, and every woman her own husband.
V. 3. Let the husband render unto the wife due benevolence; and likewise also
the wife unto the husband. V. 5. Defraud you not one the other, except it be
with consent for a time, that ye may give, etc. V. 34. There is difference also
between a wife and a virgin: the unmarried woman cares for the things of the
Lord, how she may be holy, both in body and in spirit; but she that is married,
etc. -- V. 36. But if any man think that he behaveth himself uncomely toward
his virgin, if she pass the flower of her age, and need so require, let him do
what he will, he sins not; let them marry. Col. 4.6. Let your speech be
always with grace, etc. 1 Pet. 3.2. While they behold your chaste conversation,
etc. --
Behavior.

Q. What is forbidden in the seventh Commandment?

A. The seventh Commandment forbids all unchaste Thoughts, Words and Matthew.
15.19. For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
fornications, thefts, falsewitness, etc. Matthew. 5.28. But I say unto you, that
whosoever looks on a woman, to lust after her, has committed adultery with
her already in his heart. Ephesians. 5.3. But fornication, and all uncleanness, or
covetousness, let it not be once named amongst you, as becomes Saints. V. 4.
Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, etc. --
Actions.

14. Q. Which is the eighth Commandment?

A. The eighth Commandment is, Exodus 20.15.
[Thou shall not steal.]

Q. What is required in the eighth Commandment?

A. The eighth Commandment requires the lawful procuring and furthering the
Wealth, and outward Estate of our selves and Genesis 30.30. For it was little
which thou had before I came, and it is now increased unto a multitude, and
the Lord has blessed thee since my coming; and now, when shall I provide for
my own house also? 1 Timothy 5.8. But if any provide not for his own, and
especially for those of his own house, he has denied the faith, and is worse
than an insidel. Lev. 25.35. And if thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen to
decay with thee, then thou shall relieve him; yea, though he be a stranger, or
sojourner, that he may live with thee. Deuteronomy. 22.1. Thou shall not see thy
brother's ox, or his sheep go astray, and hide thy self from them; thou shall
in any case bring them back again unto thy brother. V. 2. And if thy brother be
not nigh unto thee, or if thou know him not, then thou shall bring it unto
thine own house, and it shall be with thee until thy brother seek after it, and
thou shall restore it to him again. V. 3. In like manner shall thou do with his
ass, and with his raiment, and with all lost things of thy brother's, that thou
have found: thou may not hide thy self. V. 4. Thou shall not see thy
brother's ox, or his ass fall down by the way, and hide thy self from them:
thou shall surely help him, to lift them up again. Exodus 23.4. If thou meet
thine enemy's ox, or ass, going astray, thou shall surely bring it back to him
again. V. 5. If thou see the ass of him that hates thee, lying under his
burden, and would forbear to help him; thou shall surely help him. Genesis
47.14. And Joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the land of
Egypt, and Canaan, for the corn which they bought, and he brought the money
into Pharaoh's house. V. 20. And Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for
Pharaoh; for the Egyptians sold every man his field, because the famine
prevailed over them: so the land became Pharaoh's.
others.

Q. What is forbidden in the eighth Commandment?

A. The eighth Commandment forbids whatsoever does, or may unjustly hinder
our own, or our Neighbor's Wealth, or outward Prove. 21.17. and 23.20,21. and
28.19. See all these in the Bible. Ephesians. 4.28. Let him that stole, steal no
more; but rather let him labor, working with his hands the thing which is
good, that he may have to give to him that needs.
Estate.

15. Q. Which is the ninth Commandment?

A. The ninth Commandment is, Exodus 20.11.
[Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor.]

Q. What is required in the ninth Commandment?

A. The ninth Commandment requires the maintaining and promoting of Truth
between Man and Zech. 8.16. These are the things that ye shall do; Speak ye
every man the truth to his neighbor; execute the judgments of truth and peace
in your gates.
Man, and of our own, and our Neighbor's good 3 Jon. v. 12. Demetrius has a
good report of all men, and of the truth it self: yea, and we also bear record,
and ye know that our record is true.
Names; especially Prove. 14.5. A faithful witness will not lie, but a false
witness will utter lies. V. 25. A true witness delivers fouls, but a
deceitful witness speaks lies.
in Witness-bearing.

Q. What is forbidden in the ninth Commandment?

A. The ninth Commandment forbids whatsoever is prejudicial to Truth, or
injurious to our own, or Neighbor's good 1 Samuel 17.28. And Eliab, his eldest
brother, heard when he spoke unto the men, and Eliab's anger was kindled
against David; and he said, Why came thou down hither? and with whom have
thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? I know thy pride, and the
naughtiness of thy heart; for thou art come down that thou might see the
battle. Levit. 19.16. Thou shall not go up and down as a talebearer among thy
people, neither shall thou stand against the blood of thy neighbor; I am the
Lord. Psalm. 15.3. He that back-biteth not with his tongue, nor does evil to his
neighbor, nor takes up a reproach against his neighbor.
Name.

16. Q. Which is the tenth Commandment?

A. The tenth Commandment is, Exodus 20.17.
[Thou shall not covet thy neighbor's house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbor's wife, nor his manservant, nor his maid servant, nor his ox, nor
his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbors.

Q. What is required in the tenth Commandment?

A. The tenth Commandment requires full Contentment with our own Heb. 13.5.
Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such things
as you have; for he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. 1 Timothy 6.6. But godliness with contentment is great gain.
Condition, with a right and charitable frame of Spirit toward our Job 31.29.
If I rejoiced at the destruction of him that hated me, or lift up my self when
evil found him. Romans 12.15. Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with
them that weep. 1 Timothy 1.5. Now the end of the commandment is, charity out of a
pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned. 1 Cor. 13.4.
Charity suffers long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not
it self, is not puffed up, V. 5. Does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not
her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, V. 6. Rejoiceth not in
iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth; V. 7. Bears all things, believes all
things, hops all things, endures all things.
Neighbor, and all that is his.

Q. What is forbidden in the tenth Commandment?

A. The tenth Commandment forbids all coffeehouse with our own 1 King.
21.4. And Ahab came into his house heavy and displeased, because of the word
which Naboth the Jezreelite had spoken to him; for he had said, I will not give
thee the inheritance of my fathers: and he laid him down upon his bed, and
turned away his face, and would eat no bread. Esth. 5.13. Yet all this avails
me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the king's gate. 1
Cor. 10.10. Neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and were
destroyed of the destroyer.
Estate, envying or grieving at the good of our Gal. 5.26. Let us not be
desirous of vain glory, provoking one another, envying one another. Jam. 3.14.
But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not
against the truth. V. 16. For where envying and strife is, there is confusion,
and every evil work.
Neighbor, and all inordinate Motions and Affections to any thing that is Romans
7.7. What shall we say then? Is the Law sin? God forbid: nay, I had not known
sin, but by the law; for I had not known lust, except the law had said, Thou
shall not covet. V. 8. But sin taking occasion by the commandment, wrought in
me all manner of concupiscence; for without the law, sin was dead. Romans 13.9.
For this, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not
steal, Thou shall not bear false witness, Thou shall not covet: and if there be
any other commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Deuteronomy. 5.21. Neither shall thou desire thy
neighbor's wife, neither shall thou covet thy neighbor's house, his field, or
manservant, or his maidservant, his ox, or his ass, or any thing that is thy
neighbor's.
his.

17. Q. Is any man able perfectly to keep the Commandments of God?

A. No mere Man, since the Fall, is able, in this Life, perfectly to keep the
Commandments of Eccles. 7.20. For there is not a just man on earth, that does
good, and sins not. 1 John 1.8 If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us. V. 10. If we say that we have not sinned,
we make him a liar, and his word is not in us. Gal. 5.17. For the fiesh lusts
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary
the one to the other; so that ye cannot do the things that ye would.
God; but does break them in Thought, Word and Genesis 6.5. And God saw that the
wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the
thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. Gone. 8.21. And the Lord
smelled a sweet savor; and the Lord said in his heart, I will not again curse
the ground any more for man's sake, for the imagination of man's heart is evil
from his youth; neither will I again smite any more every thing living, as I
have done. Romans 3.9. What then? are we better than they? No, in no wise; for we
have before proved, both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under sin, -- and
so on, to V. 21. Jam. 3.2. For in many things we offend all. If any man offend
not in word, the same is a persect man, and able also to bridle the whole body,
-- and so on, to V. 13.
Deed.

18. Q. Are all transgressions of the Law equally heinous?

A. Some sins in themselves, and by reason of several Aggravations, are more
heinous in the sight of God than Ezekiel. 8.6. He said furthermore unto me, Son of
Man, see thou what they do? even the great abominations that the house of
Israel commits here, that I should go far off from my Sanctuary? But turn
thee yet again, and thou shall see greater abominations. V. 13. He said also
unto me, Turn thee yet again, and thou shall see greater abominations that they
do. V. 15. Then said he unto me, Have thou see this, O son of man? Turn thee
yet again, and thou shall see greater abominations than these. 1 John 5.16. If
any man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he
shall give him life for them that sin not unto death. There is a sin unto
death: I do not say that he shall pray for it. Psalm. 78.17. And they sinned yet
more against him, by provoking the most High in the wilderness. V. 32. For all
this, they sinned still, and believed not for his wondrous works. V. 56. Yet
they tempted and provoked the most high God, and kept not his testimonies.
others.

19. What does every sin deserve?

A. (But whatever the Sin is, great, or small) every Sin deserves God's Wrath
and Curse, both in this Life, and that which is to Ephesians. 5.6. Let no man
deceive you with words; for because of these things comes the wrath of God
upon the children of disobedience. Gal. 3.10. For as many as are of the works
of the law, are under the curse; for it is written, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things which are written in the book of the law, to do
them. Lam. 3.39. Wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the punishment
of his sins? Matthew. 25.41. Then shall he also say unto them on the left hand,
Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and
his angels.
come.

PART III. What Duties God requires of sinful Man in the Law of Grace, or
Gospel, for the escaping of God's deserved Wrath and Curse.
1. GOD has not left sinful man to perish in the state of Sin and Misery, into
which he is fallen; but the first Covenant of Life or Works being broken by the
first Adam, God has made a second Covenant of Grace, to bring sinners to
Eternal Salvation, by Jesus Christ, the Redeemer, according to certain Terms
and Conditions, which God does require of all, and does work in all that are
saved. There are several Duties and Conditions which God requires of sinful
Man, to escape the Wrath and Curse of God due to us for Sin. We call them
Conditions, because God requires them from us.

2. What does God require of us, that we may escape his Wrath and Curse due to
us for sin?

A. To escape the the Wrath and Curse of God due to us for Sin, God requires
of us Faith in Jesus Christ, Repentance unto Acts 20.21. Testifying both to the
Jews, and also to the Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our
Lord Jesus Christ.
Life; with the diligent use of all the outward means, whereby Christ
communicates to us the Benefits of Prove. 2.1. My son, if thou will receive my
words, and hide my commandments with thee, etc. V. 5. Then shall thou
understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God. Chap. 8 33.
Hear instruction, and be wise, and refuse it not. V. 34. Blessed is the man
that hears me, waiting daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors.
V. 35. But whosoever finds me, finds life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord.
Isa. 55.3. Incline your ear, and come unto me; hear, and your soul shall live;
and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of
David.
Redemption.

3. Q. What is Faith in Jesus Christ?

1. A. Faith in Jesus Christ is a Heb. 10.39. But we are not of them who draw
back unto perdition, but of them that believe to the saving of the soul.
Saving Grace, whereby we receive, and rest upon him alone for Salvation, as he
is offered to us in the Joh. 1.12. But as many as received him, to them gave he
power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name. Isa.
26.3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee,
because he trusts in thee. V. 4. Trust ye in the Lord for ever, for in the
Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength. Phil. 3.9. And be found in him; not
having mine own righteousness, which is of the law; but that which is through
the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith. Gal 2.16.
Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith
of Jesus Christ, even we have beheved in Jesus Christ, that we might be
justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law; for by the
works of the law shall no flesh be justified.
Gospel.

4. Q. What is Repentance unto Life?

2. A. Repentance unto Life is a Acts 11.18. When they heard these things, they
held their peace, and glorified God, saying, Then has God also to the Gentiles
granted repentance unto life.
Saving Grace, whereby a Sinner, out of true sense of his Act. 2.37. Now when
they heard this, they were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter, and to
the rest of the Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do? V. 38. Then said
Peter unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus
Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy
Ghost.
Sin, and apprehension of the Mercy of God in Joel 2.12. Therefore also now,
says the Lord, Turn ye even to me with all your heart, and with fasting, and
with weeping, and with mourning. Jer. 3.22. Return, ye backsliding children,
and I will heal your back slidings: Behold, we come unto thee; for thou art the
Lord our God.
Christ, does, with Grief, and Hatred of his Sin, turn from it, unto Jer.
31.18. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus, Thou have chastised
me, and I was chastised as a bullock accustomed to the yoke: Turn thou me, and
I shall be turned; for thou art the Lord my God. V. 19. Surely, after that I
was turned, I repented; and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh;
I was ashamed; yea, even consounded, because I did bear the reproach of my
youth. Ezekiel 36.31. Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings,
which were not good, and shall loath your selves in your own sight, for your
iniquities, and for your abominations.
God, with full purpose of, and endeavor after new 2 Cor. 7.11. For behold,
this self-same thing, that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it
wrought in you; yea, what clearing of your selves; yea, what indignation; yea,
what fear; yea, what vehement desire; yea, what zeal; yea, what revenge? in all
things you have approved your selves to be clear in this matter. Isa. 1.16.
Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings before mine eyes,
cease to do evil. V. 17. Learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the
oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow.
Obedience.

5. Q. What are the outward Means whereby Christ communicates to us the
Benefits of Redemption?

3. A. The outward and ordinary Means whereby Christ communicates to us the
Benefits of Redemption, are, his Ordinances; especially, the Word, Sacraments
and Prayer; all which are made effectual to the Elect for Matthew. 28.19. Go ye
therefore, teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. V. 20. Teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo, I am with you always, even unto the end
of the world. Amen. Acts 2.42. And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles
doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers. V. 46. And
they continuing daily with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread from
house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart; V.
47. Praising God, and having favor with all the people. And the Lord added to
the church daily such as should be saved.
Salvation.

6. Q. How is the Word made effectual to salvation?

1. A. The Spirit of God makes the reading, but especially the preaching of
the Word, an effectual means of convincing and converting Sinners, and of
building them up in Holiness and Comfort, through Faith unto Nehem. 8.8. So
they read in the book in the law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and
caused them to understand the reading. 1 Cor. 14.24. But if all prophecy, and
there come in one that believes not, or one unlearned, he is convinced of all,
he is judged of all. V. 25. And thus are the secrets of his heart made
manifest; and so falling down on his face, he will worship God, and report that
God is in you of a truth. Acts 26.18. To open their eyes, and to turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive
forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith
that is in me. Psalm. 19.8. The statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the
heart: the commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes. Act, 20.32.
And now, brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is
able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are
sanctified, Romans 15.4. For whatsoever things were written afore-time, were
written for our learning, that we, through patience, and comfort of the
scriptures, might have hope. 2 Timothy 3.15. And that from a child thou have known
the holy scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through
faith which is in Christ Jesus. V. 16. All scripture is given by inspiration of
God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, etc. V. 17.
That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto good works. Romans
10.14. How shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? and how
shall they hear without a preacher? V. 15. And how shall they preach, except
they be sent? etc. And V. 16. For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ, for
it is the power of God unto salvation, to every one that believes; to the Jews
first, and also to the Greeks.
Salvation.

Q. How is the Word to be read and heard, that it may become effectual to
Salvation?

2. A. That the Word may become effectual to Salvation, we must attend
thereunto with Prove. 8.34. Blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily
at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors.
Diligence, 1 Pet. 2.1. Wherefore laying aside all malice, and all guile, and
hypocrisies, and envies, and all evil speakings, V. 2. as newborn babes,
desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby.
Preparation, and Psalm. 119.18. Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous
things out of thy law.
Prayer; receive it with Faith and Heb. 4.2. For unto us was the gospel
preached, as well as unto them; but the word preached did not profit them, not
being mixed with faith in them that heard it. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. With all
deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish, because they receive not
the love of the truth, that they might be saved.
Love, lay it up in our Psalm. 119 11. Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I
might not sin against thee.
Hearts, and practice it in our Luke 8.15. But that on the good ground, are
they which, in an honest and good heart, having heard the word, keep it, and
bring forth fruit with patience. Jam. 1.25. But whosoever looks into the perfect
law of liberty, and continues therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a
doer of the word, this man shall be blessed in his dealing.
Lives.

7. Q. How do the Sacraments become effectual Means of Salvation?

1. A. The Sacraments become effectual Means of Salvation, not from any virtue
in them, or in him that does administer them; but only by the Blessing of 1
Pet. 3.20. The like figure whereunto even Baptism does also now save us: not
the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience
toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. Matthew. 3.11. I indeed baptize
you with water unto repentance; but he that comes after me, is mightier than
I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear; he shall baptize you with the Holy
Ghost, and with fire. 1 Cor. 3.6. I have planted, Apollo watered, but God gave
the increase. V. 7. So then, neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he
that waters, but God that gives the increase.
Christ, and the working of his Spirit in them that by Faith receive 1 Cor.
12.13. For by one spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews
or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free; and have been made all to drink into
one spirit.
them.

Q. What is a Sacrament?

2. A. A Sacrament is an holy Ordinance instituted by Christ; wherein, by
sensible signs, Christ, and the Benefits of the new Covenant are represented,
sealed and applied to Genesis 17.7. And I will establish my covenant between me
and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations, for an everlasting
covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. V. 10. This is my
covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy seed after thee; Every
man-child among you shall be circumcised. Exodus 12. throughout. 1 Cor. 11.23.
For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you, that the
Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread. V. 26. For as
often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lord's death till
he come.
Believers.

Q. Which are the Sacraments of the New Testament?

3. A. The Sacraments of the New Testament are Matthew. 28.19. Go ye therefore
and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
Baptism, and the Lord's Matthew. 26.26. And as they were eating, Jesus took
bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the Disciples, and said,
Take, eat; this is my Body. V. 27. And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and
gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it; V. 28. For this is my blood of the
New Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins.
Supper.

Q. What is Baptism?

1. A. Baptism is a Sacrament, wherein the Washing of Water, in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Matthew. 28.19. Go ye therefore and teach
all nations, baptizing them, etc.
Ghost, does signify and seal our ingrafting into Christ, and partaking of the
Benefits of the Covenant of Grace, and our Engagement to be the Romans 6.4.
Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death; that like as Christ was
raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk
in newness of life. Gal. 3.27. For as many of you as have been buptized into
Christ, have put on Christ.
Lord's.

Q. To whom is Baptism to be administered?

2. A. Baptism is not to be administered to any that are out of the Visible
Church, till they profess their Faith in Christ, and Obedience to Acts 8.36.
And as they went on their way, they came to a certain water: and the Eunuch
said, See, here is water, what does hinder me to be baptized? V. 37. And Philip
said, If thou believe with all thine heart, thou may. And he answered, I
believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. Acts 2.38. Then Peter said unto
them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ,
for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.
him; but the Infants of such as are Members of the Visible Church, are to be
Acts 2.39. For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that
are a-far off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. Genesis 17.7. And I
will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, in
their generations, for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee; and to
thy seed after thee. V. 10. This is my covenant which ye shall keep between me
and you, and thy seed after thee; Every man child among you shall be
circumcised. Col. 2.11. In whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision
made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the
circumcision of Christ. V. 12. Buried with him in baptism, wherein also ye are
risen with him through the faith of the operation of God, who has raised him
from the dead. 1 Cor. 7.14. For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the
wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband; else were your
children unclean, and now they are holy.
baptized.

Q. What is the Lord's Supper?

1. A. The Lord's Supper is a Sacrament, wherein, by Giving and Receiving Bread
and Wine, according to Christ's Appointment, his Death is showed forth; and the
worthy Receivers are, not after a corporal and carnal manner, but by Faith,
made Partakers of his Body and Blood, with all his Benefits, to their spiritual
Nourishment, and growth in 1 Cor. 11.23. I have received of the Lord that which
also I delivered unto you; that the Lord Jesus, the same night wherein he was
betrayed, took bread; V. 24. And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and
said, Take, eat, this is my body which is broken for you; this do in
remembrance of me. V. 25. After the same manner also he took the cup, when he
had supped, saying, This cup is the new testament in my blood: this do ye, as
often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. V. 26. For as often as ye eat this
bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lord's death till he come. 1 Cor.
10.16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood
of Christ? the bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ?
Grace.

Q. What is required to the worthy Receiving of the Lord's Supper?

2. A. It is required of them that would worthily partake of the Lord's Supper,
That they examine themselves of their Knowledge to discern the Lord's 1 Cor.
11.28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and
drink of that cup. V. 29. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats
and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's body.
Body, of their Faith to feed upon 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether ye
be in the faith; prove your own selves: know you not that Jesus Christ is in
you, except ye be reprobates.
him, of their 1 Cor. 11.31. For if we would judge our selves, we should not be
judged.
Repentance, 1 Cor. 10.16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
communion of the blood of Christ? V. 17. For we being many, are one bread, and
one body; for we are all partakers of that one bread.
Love, and 1 Cor. 5.7. Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new
lump as ye are unleavened: for even Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us.
V. 8. Therefore let us keep the feast; not with old leaven, neither with the
leaven of malice and wickedness; but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and
truth.
new Obedience; lest coming unworthily, they eat and drink Judgment to 1 Cor.
11.28,29.
themselves.

3. The third outward and ordinary Means whereby Christ communicates to us the
Benefits of Redemption, is Prayer.

Q. What is Prayer?

1. A. Prayer is an Offering up of our Desires unto Psalm. 62.8. Trust in him at
all times, ye people; pour out your hearts before him: God is a refuge for us.
Selah.
God, for things agreeable to his 1 John 5.14. And this is the confidence that
we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us.
Will, in the Name of Joh. 16.23. And in that day ye shall ask me nothing:
Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name,
he will give it you.
Christ; with Confession of our Psalm. 32.5. I acknowledge my sins unto thee,
and mine iniquity have I not hid: I said, I will confess my transgressions unto
the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Selah. V. 6. For this
shall every one that is godly pray unto thee, in a time when thou may be
found: surely in the floods of great waters they shall come nigh unto him. Dan.
9.4. And I prayed unto the Lord my God, and made my confession, and said, O
Lord, the great and dreadful God, keeping the covenant and mercy to them that
love him, and to them that keep his commandments.
Sins, and thankful Acknowledgment of his Phil. 4.6. Be careful for nothing;
but in every thing, by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your
requests be made known unto God.
Mercies.

Q. What Rule has God given for our Direction in Prayer?

2. A. The whole Word of God is of use to direct us in 1 John 5.14. And this is
the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his
will, he hears us.
Prayer; but the special Rule of Direction is, that Form of Prayer which Christ
taught his Disciples, commonly called The Matthew. 6.6,10,11,12,13. After this
manner therefore pray ye, Our Father, etc. -- Luke 11.2. And he said unto them,
When ye pray, say, Our Father, etc.
Lord's Prayer.

PART IV. A short Exposition of the Lord's Prayer.
IN the Lord's Prayer there are three Parts: 1. A Preface. 2. Six Petitions. 3.
The Conclusion.

1. Q. What does the Preface of the Lord's Prayer teach us?

A. The Preface of the Lord's Prayer, which is, Matthew. 6.9.
[Our Father which art in Heaven,] teaches us, to draw near to God with all
holy Reverence and Confidence, as Children to a Father ready to Romans 8.15. For
ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but we have received
the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. Luke 11.13. If ye then,
being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall
your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him.
help us; and that we should pray with, and for Acts 12.5. Peter therefore was
kept in prison; but prayer was made without ceasing of the church unto God for
him. 1 Timothy 2.1. I exhort therefore, that first of all, supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men: V. 2. For kings, and
for all that are in authority, etc.
others.

2. Q. What do we pray for in the first Petition?

1. A. In the first Petition, which is, [Hallowed be thy Name,] Matthew. 6.9.
we pray, that God would enable us, and others, to glorify him in all that
whereby he makes himself Psalm. 67.2. That thy way may be known upon earth, thy
saving health among all nations. V. 3. Let the people praise thee, O God; let
all the people praise thee.
known; and that he would dispose all things to his own Psalm. 83. throughout.
Glory.

Q. What do we pray for in the second Petition?

2. A. In the second Petition, which is, Mat. 6.10.
[Thy Kingdom come,] we pray, that Satan's Kingdom may be Psalm. 68.1. Let God
arise, let his enemies be scattered: let them also that hate him, flee before
him. V. 18. Thou have ascended on high, thou have led captivity captive, thou
have received gifts for men; yea, for the rebellious also; that the Lord God
might dwell among them.
destroyed, and that the Kingdom of Grace might be Rev. 12.10. And I heard a
loud voice, saying in heaven, Now is come salvation, and strength, and the
kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ; for the accuser of our
brethren is cast down, which accused them before God day and night. V. 11. And
they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony,
and they loved not their lives unto the death.
advanced, our selves and others brought into it, and kept in 2 Thessalonians. 3.1.
Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have free course,
and be glorified, even as it is with you. Romans 10.1. Brethren, my heart's
desire and prayer to God for Israel, is, that they might be saved. Joh. 17.9. I
pray for them: I pray not for the world, but for them that thou have given me;
for they are thine --. V. 20. Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also
which shall believe on me through their word.
it; and that the Kingdom of Glory may be Rev. 22.20. He which testifies these
things, says, Surely, I come quickly, Amen. Even so, Come, Lord Jesus.
hastened.

Q. What do we pray for in the third Petition?

3. A. In the third Petition, which is, Mat. 6.10.
[Thy Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven,] we pray, that God would make
us able and willing to know, obey and submit to his Will in all Psalm. 67.
throughout. Psalm. 119.36. Incline my heart to thy testimonies, and not to
covetousness. Matthew. 26.39. And he went a little farther, and fell on his face,
and prayed, saying, O my Father! if it be possible, let this cup pass from me:
nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will. 2 Samuel 15.25. And the king said
unto Zadock, Carry back the ark of God into the city: if I shall find favor in
the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both it, and his
habitation. Job 1.21. And said, Naked came I out of my mother's womb, and naked
shall I return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away; blessed be
the name of the Lord.
things, as the Angels do in Psalm. 103.20. Bless the Lord, ye his Angels that
excel in strength, and do his commandments; hearkening unto the voice of his
word. V. 21. Bless the Lord, all ye his hosts, ye ministers of his, that do his
pleasure.
Heaven.

Q. What do we pray for in the fourth Petition?

4. A. In the fourth Petition, which is, Mat. 6.11.
[Give us this day our daily bread,] we pray, that of God's free Gift, we may
receive a competent Portion of the good things of this Life, and enjoy his
Prove. 30.8. Remove far from me vanity and lies: give me neither poverty nor
riches: feed me with food convenient for me. V. 9. Lest I be full, and deny
thee, and say, Who is the Lord? And lest I be poor, and steal, and take the
name of my God in vain. Genesis 28.20. And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will
be with me, and keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat,
and raiment to put on. 1 Timothy 1.4. For every creature of God is good, and
nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving. V. 5. For it is
sanctified by the word of God, and prayer.
Blessings with them.

Q. What do we pray for in the fifth Petition?

5. A. In the fifth Petition, which is, Mat. 6.12.
[And forgive us our Debts, as we forgive our Debtors,] we pray, that God, for
Christ's sake, should freely pardon all our Psalm. 51.1. Have mercy upon me, O
God, according to thy loving kindness; according unto the multitude of thy
mercies, blot out my transgressions. V. 2. Wash me thoroughly from mine
iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. V. 7. Purge me with hysop, and I shall be
clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow. V. 9. Hide thy face from my
sins, and blot out all mine iniquities. Dan. 9.17. Now therefore, our God, hear
thou the prayer of thy servant, and his supplication. V. 19. O Lord, hear; O
Lord, forgive, for thine own sake.
Sins; which we are the rather encouraged to ask, because by his Grace we are
enabled, from the Heart to forgive Luke 11.4. And forgive us our sins; for we
also forgive every one that is indebted, to us. Matthew. 18.35. So likewise shall
my heavenly Father do also to you, if ye, from your hearts, forgive not every
one his brother their trespasses.
others.

Q. What do we pray for in the sixth Petition?

6. A. In the sixth Petition, which is, [And lead us not into Temptation, but
deliver us from Evil,] Mat. 6.13.
we pray, that God would either keep us from being tempted to Matthew. 26.41.
Watch and pray, that ye enter not into Temptation: the spirit indeed is
willing, but the flesh is weak.
Sin, or support and deliver us when we are 2 Cor. 12.8. For this thing, I
besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me.
tempted.

3. Q. What does the Conclusion of the Lord's Prayer teach us?

A. The Conclusion of the Lord's Prayer, which is, Mat. 6.13.
[For thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever. Amen,] teaches
us, to take our Encouragement in Prayer from Dan. 9.4. And I prayed unto the
Lord, my God, and made my confession, and said, O Lord, the great and dreadful
God, keeping the covenant and mercy to them that love him, and keep his
commandments. V. 7. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us,
confusion of faces; as at this day, to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, and unto all Israel, that are near, and that are far off, through
all the countries whither thou have driven them, because of their trespass that
they have trespassed against thee. V. 8. O Lord, to us belongs confusion of
face, to our kings, to our princes, to our fathers, because we have trespassed
against thee. V. 9. To the Lord our God belongs mercies and forgivenesses,
though we have rebelled against him. V. 16. O Lord, according to all thy
righteousness, I beseech thee, let thine anger and thy fury be turned away from
the city Jerusalem, thy holy mountain; because for our sins, and for the
iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and thy people are become a reproach to
all that are about us. V. 17. Now therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of thy
servant, and his supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon the Sanctuary
that is desolate, for the Lord's sake. V. 18. O my God, incline thine ear, and
hear; open thine eyes, and behold our desolation, and the city that is called
by thy Name; for we do not present our supplications before thee for our
righteousness, but for thy great mercies. V. 19. O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive;
O Lord, hearken and do: deferr not, for thine own sake, O my God; for thy city,
and thy people are called by thy Name.
God only; and, in our Prayers, to praise him; ascribing Kingdom, Power and
Glory to 1 Chronicles. 29.10 Wherefore David blessed the Lord before all the
congregation; and David said, Blessed be thou, Lord God of Israel, our father,
for ever. V. 11. Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory,
and the victory, and the majesty; for all that is in the heavens, and in the
earth, is thine: thine is the kingdom, O Lord; and thou art exalted, as Head
above all. V. 12. both riches and honors come of thee, and thou reignest over
all, and in thine hand is power and might; and in thine hand it is, to make
great, and to give strength unto all. V. 13. Now therefore, our God, we thank
thee, and praise thy glorious Name.
him: And in testimony of our Desire and Assurance to be heard, we say, 1 Cor.
14.16. Else, when thou shall bless with the Spirit, how shall he that occupies
the room of the unlearned say, Amen, at the giving of thanks, seeing he
understands not what thou say? Rev. 22.20. He which testifies these
things, says, Surely, I come quickly. Amen. Even so, come, Lord Jesus. V. 21.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. AMEN.
Amen: (or, So be it.)

The Ten Commandments.
EXODUS XX. GOD spoke all these words, saying, I am the LORD thy God, which
have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

I. Thou shall have no other Gods before me.

II. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in
the water under the Earth. Thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor serve
them: for I, the LORD thy God, am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the
fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that
hate me: and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my
commandments.

III. Thou shall not take the Name of the LORD thy God in vain: for the LORD
will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

IV. Remember the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy. Six days shall thou labor, and
do all thy work. But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the LORD thy God: in it
thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy
manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy eattel, nor the stranger that is
within thy gates. For in six days the the LORD made heaven and earth, the sea,
and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the LORD blessed
the Sabbath Day, and hallowed it.

V. Honor thy father and thy mother; that thy days may be long upon the land
which the LORD thy God gives thee.

VI. Thou shall not kill.

VII. Thou shall not commit adultery.

VIII. Thou shall not steal.

IX Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

X. Thou shall not covet thy neighbor's house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbor's wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor
his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbor's.

The LORD'S Prayer. MATTHEW. VI.
OUR Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this Day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Debts, as we forgive our Debtors. And lead us not into
Temptation, but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power,
and the Glory, for ever. Amen.

The CREED.
I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth: And in Jesus
Christ, his Only Son, our Lord; which was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of
the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried;
he descended into i. e. Continued in the state of the Dead, and under the power
of Death, till the third Day.
Hell; the third Day he arose again from the Dead, he ascended into Heaven, and
sits on the Right Hand of God the Father Almighty; from thence he shall come
to judge the Quick and the Dead. I believe in the Holy Ghost; the Holy
Catholic Church; the Communion of Saints; the Forgiveness of Sins; the
Resurrection of the Body; and the Life Everlasting. Amen.

FINIS.
PART II. A sensible Demonstration of the existence of God.
SECT. I. God is.
I. ALL Religion and Righteousness is grounded upon this foundation, That God
is. Besides the belief I have in God, by revelation and Spiritual sense, I am
convinced that he is, by these evident proofs, laid all together. 1. I am
certain, that I was come into the World before I knew of my coming. 2. I am
certain I made not my self; I was, before I knew my self to be what I am. 3. I
am certain my Parents and other Persons, and Creatures were in being before me.
4. I am certain, that no Being is so likely to make himself, and all other
things, as Man is, because he is a rational Being, of great invention and
contrivance. 5. No Men of this inquisitive and learned Age pretend to make, or
to be present at the making of the admirable frame of the Universe; and if any
Man or Men of former Ages had made the World, we of this Age should have found
them in it. For, 1. They who could make themselves, could preserve themselves.
2. They who could make themselves and the World, must needs be great and happy.
3. They who were once great and happy, and always continued to be so. For, 1.
if they did depose, or divest themselves of their happiness freely and of
choice, they were defective in Wisdom, to exchange a happy Being for a less
happy, or for nothing, and by consequence were not wise enough to make the
World. 2. If they grew weary of themselves, they were not happy. 3. If they
were constrained to unmake themselves, they were not superior, but subject to
other Powers. Therefore I believe there were no such Men, no such self-makers,
and makers of other things. I conclude that I am made by another, who made all
things else; and he is the first infinite Cause, in which my thoughts, and
belief do rest, who is infinitely Wise, Great, and Good, to whom be glory for
ever.

Again, it is impossible to prove, there is no God; for all things are mediums,
to prove that he is, and there is no medium to prove that he is not. Lastly,
all Men Die; they who are prepared and willing do believe in God, they who are
unwilling cannot refuse to Die, therefore there is a Superior Power, that is
Lord of Life, and Death; and he is the living God.

SECT. II. Of the Holy Scriptures.
The Scriptures are of God.
1. NO Man can know the mind and will of the infinite God, Creator and Governor
of the World, except he be pleased to make it known. That his will should be
known, is necessary, or else we could not worship, nor please him by doing his
Will.

2. Besides the light of Nature, we have his will made know by revelation; by
which God, who made the World, is so revealed and declared, that as sure as I
am that God made the World so sure am I that God gave the Scriptures to direct
us in the way of Duty, and Happiness.

3. I find the Book of God in the possession of his Church and People, like a
Royal Charter in a City, by which the City is constituted and governed, and
enjoy their privileges. When I peruse the Charter, I know it to be the King's,
and no private Man's invention, or forged instrument. I know the great Charter
of the City of God to be his Word.

1. By the matter of it. For instance, Who can describe, or declare the
infinite God by his Glorious Names, and Titles, and attributes, but himself?
Who can declare his relation to himself, as Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, but
himself? Who can prescribe his Worship, make Laws, set down rewards, and
declare what shall be in the World to come, but himself?

2. I observe the Style and Manner of speaking, the manner of revealing, the
admirable consent of the Old and New Testament, tho given the one so long
before the other, the scope of the whole, their perfection, and efficacy, as
able to make a Man Wise to Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. by the operation of the Holy
Ghost.

Authority of the Scriptures.
1. The Scriptures derive their Authority, from God their Author. The Church is
not the Author of the Scriptures, therefore they derive not their Authority
from it. The Testimony and Tradition of the Church, is but Ministerial. We are
directed to place our faith in the Word, as it is Gods, who gave it by
inspiration, 2 Timothy 3.16. 2 Pet. 1.21. Heb. 1.1. 1 These. 2.13.

Apocrypha not Scripture.
2. The Books called the Apocrypha, are neither the Books of Moses, nor the
Psalms, nor the Prophets, therefore not Scriptures given by inspiration. See
Luke 24.4.27.44. nor were they committed to the Church, or kept by it, as the
Oracles of God, Romans 3.1.

The Scriptures are a perfect rule.
3. The Scriptures are able to make a Man Wise to Salvation, and to make the
Man of God (the Minister of God, the New Testament Prophet) perfect and
thoroughly furnished to all good Ministerial Works; therefore they are a perfect
rule for Doctrine, Worship, and Manners.

4. Unwritten Traditions of the Church, are not of equal authority, nor to be
received with the same pious affection, with the Holy Scriptures. Those
Doctrines which were delivered by one teacher to another, or by Oral Teaching
to the Church, are now written, 2 Timothy 2.2. 2 These. 2.15. As much as our Lord
thought necessary, John 20.30. and sufficient, 2 Timothy 3.15.16. are written. Our
faith is limited to things written, Jo. 20.31. 2 Pet. 1.19. These traditions
pleaded for, were not committed to faithful Men, nor faithfully kept by Men who
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. We have enough, and our Lord would
not leave us too much, Joh. 21.25. Had we been bound to believe more, more had
been written.

5. The Holy Scriptures are plain in all things necessary to salvation; clear
as the Sun to those uses intended by our Lord, Ps. 19.8. Ps. 119.105,131. They
are a shining light, 2 Pet. 1.19. If they were not clear, how could Timothy
know them as he did, from a Child? 2 Timothy 3.15. How could the Bereans examine
Doctrines by them? Acts. 17.11. There are sufficient means to help the
unlearned to understand so much as to make them wise to Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15.
Ephesians. 4.11. to 16. Acts 8.29. to 37.

6. The laity, or common People ought to have the free use of the holy
Scriptures. God spoke to all, Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 32.46. Chap. 6.1,2,6,7,8. Exodus
24.7. Deuteronomy. 31.11,12. The laity are to be saved by faith in Christ, and his
word; and the Scriptures were written to direct and help them, Joh. 20.31. All
were wont, or commanded to search them, Joh. 5.39. All are blessed that
meditate in them, Ps. 1.1,2. They are part of the spiritual armor for all
Christians, Ephesians. 6.17. Unless we should expect the Priests and the Learned
would fight for the laity, and save them the trouble of that warfare.

7. The translation of the Scriptures is necessary, approved of God, and
ordained by him: except there should be but one language among Men, or that
none should believe and be saved, but them who understood the Original. God
spoke in a known Tongue, so did the Prophets and Apostles, and they who did not
are reproved, 1 Cor. 14.9,12,13. etc. The Apostles sent to preach to all
Nations, had the gift of Tongues, that every Nation might receive the Gospel in
their own language: The end of writing is the same with speaking.

8. Scriptures translated and copied from the Originals, or first writings
under the hands of the Scripture-pen-men, are the word of God, the foundation
and rule of Faith. The Scriptures read in the Synagogues, and in common use
among the Jews, were but copies transcribed; yet our Savior refers the Jews to
them, John. 5.39. The Eunuch had no other, Acts 8. nor the Bereans, Act. 17.11.
The Ephesians were Greeks, and probably had the Greek translation, and yet they
were built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2.20. God
being the God of every one who believes and shall be saved of every Nation, as
well as of the Jews, has taken care, and does to stir up, and fit holy Men,
tho not infallible, as the Prophets and Apostles were, for this work; and
wherein some have failed, others have helped. We give a secondary honor to
Translations as such, but an equal honor to the word of God translated, which
we give to it in the Original; the change of the Language does not alter the
will of God. An Embassy delivered by an Interpreter is the Kings Embassy.

9. The best interpreter of the Word, is the Holy Spirit. Knowledge in Original
Languages is necessary to a translator, and to Doctors or Teachers, for their
better teaching. But he who has most of the Holy Spirit, does best understand
the mind of the Spirit. All have these helps to understand them. 1. The
Grammar, and plain literal sense: the scope, coherence, and continual reading,
with prayer, and comparing hard places with plain, help us to understand the
Scriptures. 2. Universal reason, and true, with undeceived senses, help us to
understand many Doctrines. See Acts 17.11. 1 Cor. 1.13. Romans 15.4. 2 Timothy
3.15,16. Luke 24.32. Ephesians. 1.17,18.

10. There is no visible, standing, infallible Judge of controversies in Faith
and Religion: And there is no need of any, because there is none constituted.
In a great controversy the Apostles themselves did search the Scriptures, and
inquire into the mind of the Holy Ghost, and consented to it, Acts 15.15,28.
The Holy Ghost is the infallible Judge, and he speaks in the word, Acts
28.24,25. The Scriptures themselves judge, as the Law does in controversies
among Men. There is a ministerial public judgment for edification, Ephesians. 4
6,7. Romans 12.6. and a private judgment of discerning, given by the holy Spirit
to believers, without which they could not discern truth from error, nor
believe, nor try the Spirits, nor judge of what is spoken to them, 1 Cor. 2.15.
Phil. 1.10. 1 John 4.1,2. 1 Cor. 10.15.

11. The Holy Scriptures are not mute and dumb. Speech and voice are attributed
to them, and God speaks by them, Romans 3.19. It says to them that are under the
Law, Isaias (now dead) cries, Romans 9.27. see ver. 17.

12. The Scriptures are not a dead letter; the Law is so called in opposition
to the Gospel, 2 Cor. 3.6. yet it kills, and therefore is no dead letter void
of power; it is the Ministry of condemnation, denouncing death against
transgressors, v. 7. and the Gospel is the power of God; therefore no dead
letter.

13. There is a Divine efficacy, and power in the Scriptures, in their kind, as
the means, and instruments of Salvation, Romans 1.16. They are able to make a Man
wise unto Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. And the sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.17.

14. The Scriptures are the word of God, Ephesians. 6.17. by which we understand
the written word, and not Christ. See also Mar. 7.13. compared with Mat. 15.6.

15. The Holy Spirit is the principal cause of all the knowledge and wisdom to
Salvation which any Man has, Ephesians. 1.17. What was given by the spirits
inspiration, is understood by his illumination; a natural understanding cannot
see.

16. The promise of the spirit, Joh. 16.13. does not intimate such a
dispensation as is above the Holy use of Scriptures. They are given by
inspiration, and to continue in their use to the end of the World, Mat. 5.18.
The Spirit will not nullify his own work.

17. The Scriptures are of the same use to us, and all Ages to come, which they
were of to them that first received and believed them. They are written that we
should believe them, that shall be saved, Joh. 20.31. They are profitable for
all things, for all good works, therefore we cannot be wise to Salvation
without them, 2 Timothy 3.15,16,17. 1 John 1.1,2,3,4.

18. The authority of the Old Testament is equally Divine with the New. All
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3.16. They mutually prove one
another, Luke 24.44. Acts 26.22,23. chap. 24.14. A proof from the Old Testament
is as good as any from the New; both make up one perfect Canon and Rule of
Faith.

19. Consequences clearly, or immediately drawn from Scripture, or by clear
natural light, are Divine, for they are contained in the Scriptures. Those
consequences drawn by our Savior, and Peter, to prove the fundamental Article
of the Resurrection, are now part of Scripture, Mat. 22.32. Acts 2.30,31. and
were virtually contained in the Scriptures before. If we can draw consequences
from Scriptures by sound Mediums, in imitation of them, what we prove by such
consequences is true, and to be believed.

20. The sense of Scripture is but one, plain and simple, to imform, and fettle
our understandings, and faith; and not ambiguous to confound us, or keep us in
doubts. When the Scriptures speak plainly and properly, the sense is proper;
when by metaphors and figures, then it is plainly so. If the sense were
ambiguous how could they be understood? how could they serve for Doctrine or
for conviction of Error? but they are profitable to those and other ends,
therefore plain, 2 Timothy 3.16,17.

21. There are no contradictions in Scripture, for they are all given by
inspiration of God, who cannot contradict himself. If any contradiction
appears, it is because our understandings cannot reach their coherence.

22. Divine. Revelation, and right reason, are different lights from the same
father of light. There is nothing therefore in Scripture contrary to right
reason. To bring matters revealed to be judged by reason, is to bring the
Spirit of God, before the tribunal of Man, who is both blind, corrupt, and
partial; and to make the Reason of Man, now in a corrupted state, to be more
Divine and certain than Revelation, Ephesians. 5.8. 1 These. 5.4. Ephesians. 4.17,18. 1
Cor. 2.14. There is the greatest reason in the World to believe what God has
revealed. Right reason and revelation agree; where Scripture is contrary to
reason, the reason is not good.

23. God has taken care to preserve Canonical Scriptures from being lost. The
Scriptures are perfect, 2 Timothy 3.15,16,17. If any were lost, the rest would be
imperfect. If not one jot or tittle shall pass away from the Law till all be
fulfilled, the whole Law, and Revelation is safe, Mat. 5.18.

SECT. III. Of the Trinity.
THE Doctrine of the most glorious Trinity is fundamental, and practical,
because we are baptized in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost. Our Christian faith and hope is built upon them; we receive Gifts
and Blessings from them together, and from each one distinctly; and we glorify
and worship them together, and distinctly, as being devoted Servants to God the
Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost. This mystery is known only by Revelation.
There is enough in nature to make it credible; and the practical use of it, is
to be made known, as well as the truth of it to be proved, by the Holy
Scriptures. Concerning it, observe, 1. There are three Relatives, or Persons in
the Godhead. 2. What a Person in the Godhead is. 3. These three are one God,
in Being or Essence, co-essential, and coequal; for there can be no inequality
in the same infinite Godhead, or Essence.

I. There are three, This is acknowledged by the Socinians, who pronounce them
to be no Christians, who do not believe it. Racov-Catech. c. 1. But they deny
that there are three Persons in the Godhead, because a Person is Essentia
individua intelligens, an individual intelligent Being: But this reason is not
good: It implies that because a Person in the Godhead, is not like a Person in
Nature, therefore there are no distinct Persons or Relatives in the Godhead.
Concerning these three, observe,

1. They are named together, Mat. 28.19. 1 John 5.7. and apart, in many
Scriptures by their several different Names. These three are more than one.
They say there is but one Person in the Godhead, and that is the Father. But
the Father is not every one of these three; there are two more distinctly named
besides him. The Father is not the Son, nor the Son the Father; nor is the
Father, nor the Son, the Holy Ghost; the Holy Ghost is not the Father, nor the
Son. If the Father be a Person so is the Son, and so is the Holy Ghost. The
Father and the Son are two and not one, and the Holy Ghost is a third. If the
Father relate to the Son as Father, and the Son relate to the Father as Son,
(as they do) then they are distinct Persons, and then there are also more
Persons than one; and as the Father and the Son are two, the Holy Ghost is a
third: Not a quality of God, for there are no accidents in God; and if he were
a power or a quality, there would be no need of naming him as distinct from the
Father and the Son, for he would be included in the Father, as the power of God.

2. These three are distinctly named in our Baptism, which is a covenanting
action, and solemnity. Covenants are between Persons. The God of Grace, who
takes a number of Persons into Covenant with himself, does declare himself to
them, that they may know to whom they are obliged, and related in Covenant. Our
great duty is to believe in God, to honor and serve him, and to expect what he
has promised. He reveals himself as our God in Covenant; and that not only as
God, but as Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. We are obliged in the same duties to
the Son, and Holy Ghost as to the Father, and partake of Grace, Love and
Communion, from each one together, 2 Cor. 13.14. Ephesians. 1.2,3. As God has made
himself known to us in Covenant, so we are to believe and order our conceptions
of him.

3. Persons are known by personal properties, and actions. These three are
known and distinguished by distinct properties and actions, in reference to one
another, and toward the Creatures. We are bound to believe in the Son as the
only begotten Son, therefore as distinguished from the Father, John 20.31.
chap. 3.16,18. The property and action of the Father is to beget: The Son is
called the first begotten, Heb. 1.6. The Divine nature is unchangeable and
indivisible, and not multiplicable; therefore there is no proper action nor
passion, as in nature, nor production of new Being in this eternal Generation;
the manner of which is not revealed. The Son was brought forth before all time,
Prove. 8.22. His goings forth are from everlasting, Mic. 5.2. the Father has
given to the Son to have Life in himself, as the Father has Life in himself,
Joh. 5.26. It is the property of the Father to have Life in himself, and to
give Life to his Son: It is the property of the Son to have Life in himself
from the Father: I live by the Father, Joh. 6.57. The personal action of the
Father and the Son toward the Holy Ghost is, to send him, Joh. 15.26. The
personal action of the Holy Ghost is to come, to proceed, to receive, to give,
Joh. 16.7,8,13,14. to testify, Joh. 15.26. as a distinct witness from Christ's
own, and the Father's of him, Joh. 5.37.

2. What a Person in the Godhead is. The Greek Church used the word Hypostasis,
Heb. 1.3. and the Latin Church Person^, and from them we borrow the word
Person. There is great reason why we should retain the word, though we will not
divide from any for the use of a Term, that acknowledge what is revealed in
Scripture, and can express the truth better. A Person in the Eternal God head
transcends a Person in Nature. A Person in Nature is usually desined or
described to be, a Complete, Perfect, Singular, Living, Understanding Being, or
Substance, subsisting by it self, not sustained by another, nor a part of
another. The Persons in the Godhead, differ from a Created Person, as will
appear in these particulars. 1. Every particular Man partakes of the same
common, general and special Nature, but these particulars cannot be one Man,
but every Person in the Godhead is that one, only living and true God. 2. As
Persons are multiplied in Nature, so the nature is multiplied in Persons: but
there is but one God; the Divine essence is one, and not multiplied. 3. One
Person in nature is not another, nor in another, but the Father is in the Son,
and the Son in the Father, and yet distinguished, John 10.38. chap. 14.11. Joh.
17.21. 4. One Person in nature is not only distinguished from another, but is
separated from another in time, and place and many other respects. But, 1. The
Godhead or God being eternal, the Persons in the Godhead, are Coeternal,
none is before the other. 2. Where one is, the other is, the nature being
indivisible. The Son is where the Father is, though the humane Nature be not
Omnipresent. 3. What the one has the other has, Joh. 16.15. All that the
Father has are mine, said the Son; and the Holy Ghost has what the Son has.
He shall take of mine, and shall show it unto you. 4. If you know the Son you
know the Father also, Joh. 12.4. chap. 14.9,10,11. 5. What one does the other
does, John 5.19. None of these things can be affirmed of different Persons in
humane Nature. The three Persons in the Divine essence must not be measured by
individuals, or singular Persons in Nature, but as one Person is really
distinguished from another by a Personal property, so because the Father, and
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, are so distinguished, we call them Persons, tho
improperly, in a sense peculiar to them. Now a Person in the Godhead is God as
related to himself. I humbly conceive it thus; God the Father is related to God
the Son, and God the Holy Ghost. God the Son is related to God the Father, as a
Son to a Father, and to God the Holy Ghost: And God the Holy Ghost is related
to the Father and the Son. You saw before the relative property of each
Glorious Person. A Person in the Trinity is not a compound of an essence, and a
property, for the Divine Nature is infinitely perfect, most pure, simple or
uncompounded. This relation is eternal and primary: They bear a voluntary
relation to the Creatures, as Creator, Redeemer, Comforter. This was intended
before time, but actual in time. And to remove all gross imaginations of the
incomprehensible Trinity of Persons, though we take Person and Body, in our
Language for the same, let us take heed of imagining, three Bodies, when we say
three Persons.

III. These three Glorious Persons are one God, in essence.

1. It is most certain there is one God, and but one, Deuteronomy. 6.4. Is. 44.8. 1
Cor. 8.4. 2. It is certain, there are three Persons, as explained. 3. The
father is confessedly that one God, 1. Cor. 8.4. It is as true that the Son,
the word, is God, Joh. 1.1. and the Holy Ghost is God, Acts 5.4. Therefore
these three are that one infinite God. It is contrary to reason, to say, there
are three Gods: It is not contrary to reason, that these three should be one,
because it is revealed, and they must be one God, or not God at all; for there
is not to us Christians, nor to Mankind more than one God.

But before I produce more evidence for this truth, I make hold to premise.
Suppose an Infidel should desire a Socinian to instruct him in the nature of
the true God, and to show him the essential difference between God, and all
Creatures whatsoever: Surely he must show him, how God has made himself known.
And how is that? but by his Glorious Names, Titules, Properties, Attributes,
and Operations which are above the power of Creatures, and by which Creatures
are produced. Now if the very same Characters by which he declares the true God
to an Infidel, be ascribed to the Son, and Holy Ghost, then, as his
demonstration of the nature of God is good, so our demonstration of the
essential Deity of the Son, and Holy Ghost, must needs be as good. If Christ be
God by donation of eminent power, office, or near conjunction with God; if the
Holy Ghost be a quality, or God by office, they are but Creatures; and if
Creatures, tho the highest, have those properties which are essential to God,
then it will follow, God has nothing peculiar to his own infinite Being; which
is impious, and irrational. But God is distinguished from all Creatures, and
the properties of God are truly ascribed to the Son and Holy Ghost, therefore
they are the true God, and not Creatures.

The three Persons are one God.
There being no dispute against the Father I shall apply my self to prove the
Son, and Holy Ghost to be the true God.

Proved by their essential Name.
1. The Name which Jehovah signifies Eternal Being, is proper to God, and not
common to any Creatures. That they may know that thou whose Name alone is
Jehovah, art most high over all the Earth, Ps. 83.18. This name is translated
Lord, and its signification given, Rev: 1.4. which is, which was, and which is
to come. This Name is the Name of the Son, as it is the Name of the Father, Ps.
110.1. Jehovah said to my Lord, that is Christ, Mat. 22.42. The Son is called
Jehovah, Is. 40.3. Prepare the way of Jehovah, i.e. Christ. Mar. 1.23. Luke
1.76. The Angel appearing in the Bush was Jehovah, Exodus 3.2. Compare v. 4.5.
with Acts 7.30,31,33. Not a Created or common Angel, but the Angel of the
Covenant, Mal. 3.1. Declared by Christ, I am the God of thy Fathers, Acts 7.32.
The Holy Ghost is also meant by the name Jehovah, Is. 6.3. called Adonai, v. 8.
Acts 28.25. As the Prophets were wont to say, Thus says the Lord, so the
Apostles, say, Thus says the Holy Ghost. Acts 21.11. It Is true, magistrates
are called Elohim; but they are not Gods by nature, for they shall die like
Men, Ps. 82.6,7. But he who is called Jehovah is God by nature, and is not
mortal like Men.

By essential properties.
2. The property of unity is attributed to God, Deuteronomy. 6.4. and these three are
one, 1 John 5.7. a Text tho wanting in some Copies, yet in other Copies, and
agreeable to the Text, Joh. 10.28,29,30. I and the Father are One: One in
Power; therefore One in Being and Essence. The Spirit; the Water, and the Blood
agree in one, as Witnesses, but are not one in Nature: but the Father, Word,
and Spirit, are One, which is more than to agree in One. The Father is One,
Ephesians. 4.6. 1 Cor. 8.6. Christ is One, 1 Cor. 8.6. Ephesians. 4.6. the Holy Ghost
is One, 1 Cor. 12.4,11. Ephesians. 2.18. and these three are One, not in Testimony
only but in Being.

3. They are Eternal: From everlasting to everlasting thou art God, Ps. 92.2.
see Is. 44.6. ver. 4. chap. 48.12. The Father is eternal, Rev. 1.4. That Christ
the Son is the Alpha and Omega, the First and Last, and therefore coeternal
with the Father, is clear, Rev. 1.5,6,7,8. v. 11. chap. 21.6. chap. 22.13. The
Holy Ghost is eternal; the Mystery of Christ, which was kept secret since the
World began is made known by the Commandment of the Eternal God, Romans 16.26.
Now, he who made it known, is the Holy Ghost, therefore he is the Eternal God,
Ephesians. 3.5. He moved Holy Men to speak, 2 Pet. 1.19. The Apostles were at his
command either to preach, Acts. 10.19,20. or not to preach. Acts 16.6.
Therefore he is God.

By essential Operations.
3. The immediate and essential difference between God, and the Creatures is,
that he is their Maker, and that they are created. The Creation of the World,
is the proper Work of God, without Instrument or Co-worker, Ps. 33.9. for he
spoke, and it was done, etc, Ps. 148.5. If there were an instrument, that
instrument was either infinite or finite: not infinite, for the infinite is the
first cause, and the instrument cannot be the first cause: nor was it finite,
for a finite instrument cannot receive power to produce so vast an effect, as
exceeds its capacity. The Son is not the instrument of the Father, by whom he
made all things, nor the Holy Ghost. He that made all things is God, Heb. 3.4.
Genesis 1.1. I am the Lord that spreads abroad the World by my self, Is. 44.24.
By my self, how? not as by an instrument, but by no other than my self. Or who
was with me? see Is. 45.6,7. This Glorious Work is the Work of the Father, 1
Cor. 8.6. Heb. 2.10. of the Son, or Word, Joh. 1.3,10. Heb. 1.10. Col. 1.16.
and of the Holy Ghost, Job 26.13. By his Spirit he has garnished the Heavens,
his Hand has formed the crooked serpent, or that constellation in the milky
way like a Serpent. Certainly Job was not mistaken in his Creator: He said, the
Spirit of God has made me, and the Breath of the Almighty has given me life,
Job 33.6. There is an order of Creating, and producing all things, observed by
the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, but the one is not the instrument of the other,
they are one infinite first cause, therefore one God. See and take notice of
the three Persons together, Ps. 33.6. By the word, (the eternal essential word,
the Son,) of Jehovah, were the Heavens made, and all the host of them by the
breath, or Spirit of his Mouth, the Holy Ghost. And he by whom, and through
whom, and to whom are all things is one God, to whom be glory for ever, Romans
11.36.

Objections closely answered.
Before I conclude, I will lay down some truths, which contain the answers to
several objections, or corrupt expositions contrary to this Doctrine.

1. God is one indivisible essence, therefore there can be no participation of
it; therefore Christ is not the Son of God by participation of some degree of
the Godhead, or in some respect. God is called the God of Gods, Magistrates
are called Gods, Ps. 50. 1. Ps. 82. But no where called Jehovah, nor said to
create the World; by him Kings Reign, Prove. 8.15. therefore they are not as
much God, as he is.

2. Christ affirmed, I and the Father are one, Joh. 10.30. that he did the work
of God, v. 37. That the Father was in him, 38. which is more, than that he was
sanctified and sent into the World. He was Man, but more than Man.

3. We do not say, that the Son and Holy Ghost are God, merely because they are
joined with the Father in the form of Baptism. But farther, 1. We are Baptized
into the Name of God as God in Covenant. 2. When mere Creatures are joined with
God, the difference between God and them is made known; but here the Son and
Holy Ghost are joined with the Father as our God and superiors: An order is
declared, but no inferiority. 3. Moses was a typical mediator in the Covenant
with Israel; but they were in Covenant with God, as the superior party, who was
the Lawgiver by the Ministry and hand of Moses. But Christ is both a Mediator
and God in Covenant.

Of the practical use of this Doctrine of the Trinity, I shall speak, Part III.
Chap. I.

SECT. IV. Of the Decrees of God.
NOthing can be objected against the Decrees of God, but what reflects upon his
counsel, and right to dispose of his Creatures. He works all things according
to the Counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1.11. Angels and Men had no more of
their own, than the meanest of Creatures; therefore it is meet, that they
should be as subject to the will of God, as any other of his Creatures. There
is no repugnance between the Decrees of God, and his revealed Will, and the
judgment to come: As his Laws, so are his Decrees, Holy, Wise, Righteous,
Stable and Certain. The execution of his Decrees is the best exposition of
them. God is not the Author of Sin, nor a mover to Sin, nor a forcer of Man's
will. In the last judgment we shall see that the Blessed of the Father, were
first elected to eternal Life, and that it was of Grace, before the foundation
of the World, Ephesians. 1.4,5. 2 Timothy 1.9. and that the rest are condemned, as
Workers of Iniquity, Mat. 25. ult. and for iniquity.

SECT. V. Of the Creation of Man.
1. BY the renovation of the Image of God, we understand what it was before it
was lost, Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 3.10. It did not consist only, or principally in
Dominion over the Creatures: Had not Man been Wise, Holy, and Righteous, he had
not been fit for dominion.

2. The Image of God was most upon Man's Soul, which was breathed into his Body,
after his Body was created, Genesis 2.7. and therefore the Soul is of a Nature and
Substance different from the Body. Spirits and Flesh are opposed, therefore not
the same, Heb. 12.9. The Soul is Spiritual and Immortal.

3. The Soul had not been the Soul of Man, in the state of Creation, if it had
not been Wise and Holy; therefore the Image of God, which is supernatural to us
now, had been natural, and was so by grace, in that State. Man was then Holy as
naturally as he was rational.

4. Man was not Created in a state of mere indifferency to good and evil, for
he was Created after the Image of God, which carried him toward God alone; but
he was not fixed, and confirmed against all temptation to Sin.

5. Man was not Created a mortal dying Man. He knew nothing of Death, till he
was threatened; and felt no signs of it, till he had sinned. His Life and
Happiness were only forfeitable upon supposition of Sin: therefore, though his
Body was made of Earth, and so corruptible, yet if he had not finned he had not
died. Death was not the condition of his nature, but the punishment of his Sin,
Genesis 2.17. chap. 3.19. Romans 5.12. chap. 6.23. chap. 8.10.

SECT. VI. God's Providence.
1. Without a preserving and governing Providence, the World had fallen into
ruin, or confusion. The wise and mighty of the World have cause to acknowledge
the Sovereignty of it. How often are their policies and methods broken, and
themselves cut off before their works are sinished?

2. Nothing is too great, and nothing too mean, for Divine Providence; for high
and low, great and small are his Creatures.

3. It extends to all things. Nothing is more free, and secret than our
thoughts; yet, Ps. 139.2. Prove. 21.1. more contingent than a lot; yet Prove.
16.33. or more voluntary than the works of Man; yet, Ps. 33.13,14,15. nothing
more inconsiderable, than the lighting of a poor sparrow; yet, Mat.
10.29,30,31. Luke. 12.6. What is Man? yet, Ps. 8.4. Ps. 144.4. There is a set
time to be born, and an appointed time upon Earth, Job 7.1. chap. 5.26. Ps.
91.16. Uncertain Life is shortened, or prolonged by means: good means by Gods
ordination, evil by his just permission. All men die in judgment or in mercy;
therefore, as there is a providence in raising up one, and putting down
another, so there is in the Life and Death of good and evil Men.

SECT. VII. Of the Covenant of God with Adam.
1. A Covenant is a solemn contract or agreement between parties. The parties
in this Covenant were God the sovereign, and Man the subject, bound to
whatsoever God required.

2. The substance of the Covenant is in Genesis 2.17. Adam's being in possession
of happiness, to be continued until he sinned, was equivalent to a promise,
which is implied also in the threatening. Adam's consent was enough to make it a
Covenant on his part, as it was on Isreal's part, Exodus 19.8. He knew what he
did, and actually consented, or else he had sinned before he did eat; and he
knew it would be for his good; and being already so happy, he was obliged to
consent. The Covenant was solemnized by a sign, the Tree of Life, and was known
to Satan, Genesis 3.1. and to the Woman, ver. 2,3.

SECT. VIII. Of Adam's first Sin.
THere was a declining of Heart from God before the fruit was eaten, how else
could the Woman be so senseless of the Serpents contradicting of Gods word? how
could Adam be so sleepy as to eat without reproof, or reluctance? The Sin was
unconceivably heinous. Man believed Satan against God; changed his highest end;
turned from God to the Creature, that, upon the Devils word, he might abuse the
Creature to become as God. He brake Covenant, and all the Bonds of Duty,
Gratitude and Love; he sinned against a known prohibition, and despised both
the threatening of Death and the promise of Life.

All mankind fell by Adam's Sin.
Adam was in a condition to covenant with God, for he had perfect knowledge of
what he did. It was not necessary that all mankind should be personally
present, which could not be, because they were to be propagated by generation:
And if they had been present they had not been wiser than he, nor more obliged
to stand.

2. All mankind were contained in him, and represented by him, as a common
Person and Parent: and as a Covenanter for himself, and all his Posterity.

3. All mankind were concluded by him, as well as included in him, Romans 5.12.
Death is a Punishment; Punishment presupposes Sin, and Sin a Law. The
Punishment is general, so was the Law. When did all men Sin? in Adam's Sin,
Romans 5.19. Infants die, who sinned not actually in their own Persons, ver. 14.
therefore Death does not pass upon all for actual, personal Sin: yet, for Sin;
therefore for that Sin, which was the Sin of all Men, in effect, as included in
him.

4. The Man Christ Jesus is only free from Sin, for he was not Man by ordinary
Generation, nor included in that first Covenant, but is the second Adam, and
head in another Covenant.

5. The Blessed Virgin was not free from Original guilt, and pollution: None
but Christ was: If she had been, she had been as Holy as he, yea her Parents
had been also without Sin; and so it had been no privilege to her: But they
were unclean, Job 14.1. and so was she, because born of unclean Parents. She
confessed Christ her Savior, Luke 1.47. and died, therefore she was a Sinner,
Romans 5.12.

SECT. IX. Of Original Sin, why so called.
ORiginal Sin is so called, because it was the first Sin, derived from the
beginning, and because it is the spring and Original of actual Sin in us.

Wherein it consists.
Original Sin consists, 1. in the guilt of Adam's first Sin. That Sin which
brought Death upon Adam as a punishment, brought it so also upon us, Romans 5.12.
His other actual Sins are not imputed to us, for he stood no longer in the
public capacity of a Head, and Covenanter.

2. In the want of Original righteousness. Adam lost it for himself, and for
his Posterity also. By entertaining the temptation to eat, and the first motion
to Sin, he gave place to evil, and so he lost what he had; and coveting once
what was forbidden, he afterward coveted more evil, and Satan followed him
with temptations to sin more. The want of righteousness was his Sin, and
Punishment also. And it is a Sin in mankind and Punishment upon us still. The
want of it is a Sin in us, for we are bound to love God with all the heart,
which we cannot do for want of it: And it is a Punishment upon us, and God is
not bound to restore the righteousness, and take off the punishment.

3. In the corruption of our whole nature. All the powers of our Souls are
corrupted as well as our sensual appetites, Romans 7.23. Romans 8.5,6. Tit. 1.15.
This is Sin working all manner of concupiscence, Romans 7.8. Adam's habitual
corruptions and vices followed upon his actual offense, by his own and Satan's
doing, and Gods just judgment. Our actual offenses, proceed from our natural
and habitual corruptions. Adam sinned and forfeited for himself and us, who are
as much his Posterity, as Cain and Abel were. And God by a righteous Act has
concluded all under Sin, Romans 11.31. Gal. 3.22. This corruption is fitly called
the Old Man in opposition to the New Man, which is from Christ by the
regeneration of the Spirit, Romans 6.6. Ephesians. 4.22. Col. 3.9. Such as our first
Parents were after their transgression, such are we by nature, Ephesians. 2.3. that
is by a Law of Nature, that like should beget like, not only in a natural, but
moral kind, and evil qualities. Without the image of God, what is Man but a
young Insidel? he loves Self better than God, and wanting the guidance of
knowledge and wisdom, and stay of holiness in himself, he sins of his own
being an active Creature, and tempted by Satan, and the World. He is corrupted
in his nature, or he could not imitate. His aptness to imitate is one spark of
corrupt nature. Cain killed his Brother when he had no example to imitate.

SECT. X. Of the Miseries of Men by the Fall.
SInful Man is a miserable Creature. I shall not speak of all the miseries the
World groans under, only take notice of two.

1. Death is a punishment of Sin, as you heard before. God reserved in his own
will and power how far this punishment should be executed. They who are
redeemed from eternal Death suffer a temporal, Heb. 9.28. as a punishment for
Sin, and for no other cause. Death was not known before it was menaced. If
Death had been the condition of nature, it had followed nature in time; it
might have been foretold, but not threatened as a punishment for Sin.

2. The pains of Hell. To teach Men that Death eternal, and not temporal, was
threatened to Adam; and that eternal Death is but the continuation of temporal,
is to tempt Men to despise temporal death, and in their distresses to make away
themselves, to put an end to the miseries of this Life. Then the sensual
voluptuous Man might say, Let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall die; and
the miserable sufferer will say, I will die rather than live in misery: And if
eternal Death be but such a privation of Life, that I shall never be restored
to Life when I am once Dead, I had rather never live again than live again to
be miserable. What work would Socinianism make in the World, if it be
propagated, and entertained? It is too far gone; but they pretend the Glory of
God for it: For how can it consist with the justice and goodness of God, to
punish and torment Men in Hell for ever, for the Sins, sollies and vanities of
a short Life? To answer this objection and clear the proceedings of Divine
Judgment, I humbly offer these considerations.

1. There is self-love, partiality, and hard thoughts of God at the bottom of
this objection: Men are more sensible of their just sufferings, than of the
sinfulness of Sin.

2. There is no more unrighteousness in judgment, and execation, than in the
constitution of Gods Government and Laws. The great day appointed, will be a
day of judgment, and not injustice, Acts 17.31. The sentence will be righteous,
therefore so will the execution of it be. They who do such things are worthy of
Death, Romans 1.16. The Judge of all the Earth will do right, Genesis 18.25.

3. It was just that Adam should die, for he knew the Law, and the threatening:
Is it not as just that the wicked should be condemned to Hell, who take no
warning, nor counsel?

4. A Sinners heart is eternally turned away from God. It is just in God to
sentence him to depart from him for ever, who will never of himself turn unto
him.

5. We are not sit to judge in Gods cause, for we know not the heinousness of
Sin, nor the dishonor of God; and we are ignorant, partial, and corrupted
parties. Parties are no meet judges.

6. If we can never repair the dishonor done to God by sin, is it not just we
should suffer for ever?

7. There is a proportion between the Sins of a finite Creature committed
against the infinite God, and the punishments inflicted by an infinite God upon
a finite offender.

8. Is it just, if a magistrate punish by Death, who can never restore the
malefactor to Life, for momentany sins? why then shall God be thought unjust to
punish with eternal Death?

9. It is most certain, God will do nothing to his own dishonor, and knows how
to glorify his goodness, and justice.

10. By Gods judgments severally pronounced upon the Criminals, Genesis 3.13,20.
it is clear that God does observe a just rule and proportion in punishment. He
does not punish all alike.

11. They can deserve no less, who now despise goodness, and forbearance, and
Death it self.

12. The mediator between God and Man, will judge between God and Man. He who
took our Nature will not wrong the worst of Men.

13. Humbly observe the judgment to come, Mat. 25.41. etc, where note, 1. The
judge cannot be excepted against, by the worst of Sinners. 2. The wicked are
persons who shall live for ever. 3. For the fire is everlasting. 4. Everlasting
fire is everlasting punishment. 5. If the punishment be everlasting, the
suffering malefactors will be everliving. To die eternally, is not, therefore,
to be extinguished, or to cease to be, but to be miserable for ever.

From what is said, it follows, 1. That concupiscence is Sin, Romans
7.7,17,20,22,23. 2. Every Sin is mortal by desert, and venial or pardonable
only by Grace, Romans 6.23. Ephesians. 1.7. 3. There is no third place, beside Heaven
and Hell; therefore there is no Purgatory for Venial Sins. 4. No Man can, or
shall suffer more than he deserves, Ps. 130.3. Gal. 3.10.

SECT. XI. Of our Recovery.
1. GOd has elected some to eternal Life. Election is of Persons and not of
qualities, or for the sake of qualities. Election is of Grace in the free
chooser, and not in the chosen, who are graceless before God makes them
gracious.

2. The Covenant of Life, or Works, or Nature being broken, God did not renew
that, but made another, called the Covenant of Grace, because it proceeds from
Grace, after a Breach; and promises Grace to keep it, in the construction of
Grace or Gospel sense. The Moral Law, or Commandments is the same in both
Covenants, but the promisory State and Privileges are very different.

By a Redeemer.
1. Christ is our Redeemer from guilt and justice by a Ransom and Price: from
our Enemies, Satan, the World and Sin by Power. He is our Lord because of his
Right and Power to govern and redeem us. He is Jesus, which is as much as
Savior; Christ, which is as much as Messiah or Anointed, to be Mediator,
Prophet, Priest and King.

2. His Person is Wonderful. He is Emmanuel, God with us, God-Man. He was the
eternal Son of God before he was the Son of God by the Virgin Mary. He had a
Being, and a Glory before he was Man. See, John 17.5. Where note, 1. Who
Prayed; he did not pray, as he was God: for God wants nothing, and has nothing
to ask. 2. Nor only as he was Man, for as Man he had no Glory with the Father
before the World began. 3. He prayed as he was mediator, a Priest by Office. 4.
As Priest, it was his duty and office to pray; and he prayed to God as Father,
for himself as Son, now in both Natures. 2. Note what he prayed for. Wherein
observe, 1. He had a glory with the Father before the World was. 2. That glory
was the glory of a Son, v. 2. Glorify thy Son. 3. He had that glory of a Son,
before he was Man, for he was not Man before the World was. 4. He was with the
Father as a Son from eternity, begotten in a manner unconceivable, therefore we
say, he was the eternal Son of God. 5. The glory of a Son was not lost, but
darkened by his taking our Nature, and the form of a Servant. Now then, he
Prayed for this, that his humane Nature now united to him might partake of the
glory, which he had as a Son, and that his Sonly glory might shine forth. This
glory of a Son was his essential glory, possessed with the Father, and not a
glory to which he was predestined, as the Adversaries pretend, who quote 2 Timothy 1.9. But mark, Christ says, The glory which I had with thee before the
World was. He had it, the Elect had it not before they had a Being: they were
predestined to it in Christ, as their decreed Head, and Savior, who
possessed it before all time, in his own Person.

2. This Eternal Son of God became Man: How? not by ceasing to be what he was
before; but by taking to him that humane Nature, which he had not before, into
Personal Union: See, Joh. 1.14. He was in Being before he was made Flesh, and
what he was, before he was made Flesh, we read, ver. 1,2,3. 1. He was God. 2.
He made all things, therefore was not made himself. 3. He was in the beginning
of time; he did not then begin to be; but was before that beginning was, in
which all things were made by him. He must needs be, and be able to make all
things, before they were made by him. Now this is He, who was made Flesh, or
took our Nature. They who deny his Eternal Godhead, say, 1. Christ is called
the Word, or Speech of God, because God spoke by him. 2. They will not have our
translation stand, was made, but Was. 3. Was Flesh, that is the speech of God,
was Flesh; that is, he was frail, subject to infirmities, and sorrows. But
beside the absurdity of their sense, which comes to this, The speech was frail,
that is, the Man, who was the speech of God, was a frail Man, there are two
things strongly for our sense. 1. What ever is spoken of the word, which was
made Flesh, or became Man, is very glorious. 2. If their corrupt meaning were
true, it would better agree; And we saw his frailty and Sorows, than what
follows, And we saw his Glory, as the only begotten Son of God: even under the
Cloud and Veil of his humane Nature, we beheld more than Man, or Creature, even
the Glory of the only begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth.

To be short: Let us believe, 1. He who took our Nature was the only begotten
Son of God, not so called, only because more beloved than all other Children,
as Isaac was. 2. He took humane Nature to Union with his own Divine eternal
Person, and not a humane Person. 3. The Divine and humane Nature in the Person
of the Son, are distinct, and not mixed or confounded. 4. Because he is but one
Person, the properties of each Nature are attributed to the Person, by what
Divines call, the Communication of Properties, Acts 20.28. 5. The humane Nature
is not Omniscient, nor Omnipresent as the Divine nature is. 6. Christ is
mediator according to both natures. The mediator is God and Man in one Person;
therefore, and all the parts of the mediatory office, being performed by the
mediator, he does all things, according to both natures, because he is called
the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. Therefore some say, he is but a Man, others
say he is Mediator only as he is Man. But Mediator includes both Natures; he is
both, and does act according to both: he is called the Man Christ Jesus,
because of his compassion, and freedom of access to pray for all Men. 7. We
have but one Redeemer, who gave himself for us, 1. Tim. 2.6. 1 John 2.1,2.
therefore but one Mediator of Redemption and Intercession. 8. Christ is not
called the Son of the Highest, Luke 1.32,35. as being the Son of Mary, and
adopted to be the Son of God: He was the Son of the highest, before he was the
Son of Mary; and adoption is an act of favor toward one who is the Son of
another by Nature. Believers, Children of wrath, of strangers, and Enemies, are
the Children of God by Adoption, Joh. 1.12. But Christ is a Son of the same
Nature with the Father as God, and the Manhood is taken into Personal Union
with him; and is so the Son of the Highest, that he is over all, God blessed
for ever, Romans 9.5.

SECT. XII. How Christ became Man.
1. WE do not say, Christ is a Person constituted of two different Natures,
which being United make one third; but that the second Person in the Godhead,
took the humane Nature (not a humane Person) into Union with himself, which did
not subsist before he took it. This contradicts no principle of reason. We
know every Man is constituted of Soul and Body. God who has done the one, has
done the other. I pray turn to Heb. 2.14. where observe, 1. A gracious end and
intention toward sinful Man. 2. What Christ did to accomplish it, He himself
also took part of the same. Where note, 1. A Person taking: He took, He was a
real Person, an understanding, free Agent; he knew what he took, and to what
end. 2. He was a free Person in Being before he took it. 3. He took what he had
not Before he took it. 4. That which he took was the seed, or humane Nature in
the Line of Abraham. 5. Surely he was one who could destroy the power of the
Devil, before he took it, for humane Nature could not do it. If Christ be but a
Man, or as they say a Divine Man, how can it be said he took the seed of
Abraham? He was before he took that, or else he could not take (...); He was
not Man, before he took it, he could not be Man before he was Man. What he was
before he took the Nature of Man, and who he was, see before, ver. 9, etc.

2. He took a true Body, and reasonable Soul, complete humane Nature. 1. A
Body, Heb. 10.5. The words inform us of a Covenant between the Father and the
Son as two distinct Persons, and what each one was to do. As the Father was in
Being before this Body was prepared; so was the Son before he came to do his
Will, in that Body, and so was the Holy Ghost, by whom this Body was conceived.
The Father was to prepare a Body for his Son, which was prepared by the Holy
Ghost and assumed by the Son.

3. This Body was a true Body, not a phantasm, or a Celestial Body, passing
through the Body of the Virgin, like lightning through the Air, or Water
through a Chanel, but a substantial humane Body, with Flesh and Blood, for
Sacrifice, Heb. 10.10. Heb. 2.14. Luke 24.39.

4. There was a reasonable Soul in this Body; the Divine Nature was not instead
of a Soul to him; he had a true reasonable Soul: Understanding, Luke 2.4.
Willing, chap. 22.42. Sorrowing, Mat. 26.38. and so he was a Man approved of
God, Acts 2.22. the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5.

He was conceived by the Holy Ghost.
1. The Conception of the Holy thing was wonderful. 1. In respect of the cause,
the Holy Ghost. 2. In respect of the Mother, a Virgin. 3. In respect of the
purity, without Sin. 4. in respect of the ends of it, both immediate and remote.

2. The Operation of the Holy Ghost with the concurrence of the Father and the
Son, was his forming, or creating the Body of Christ of her Blood or natural
matter in her Womb. That which is conceived in Her, Mat. 1.20. He was made of a
Woman, Gal. 4.4. The Operation of the Holy Ghost was not upon the Divine
Nature, or Person of the Son, but altogether upon the Virgins Womb, causing her
to conceive a true substantial Body, with a Soul created in it, and both
prepared for Union with the second Person, who took the humane Nature, so
Conceived, into personal Union with himself. That which this nature received
from the Son, was personality, or to be one Person with him. The Holy Virgin
was active and passive in this Conception. Thou shall Conceive in thy Womb,
etc, Luke 1.31. and that which is Conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost, Mat.
1.20.

3. Yet the relation continued between the Father and the Son; the Son was the
Son of the Father, and not of the Holy Ghost.

4. The manner of this Conception is so expressed, as to denote a mighty secret
Operation of the Holy Ghost upon the Virgin. See Luke 1.35. like the influence
of the Spirit in the first Creation, Genesis 1.2. or alluding to Ruth 3.9.

He was Born, etc.
1. After the Virgin had miraculously Conceived, she grew with Child, Luke 2.5.
was found with Child, Mat. 1.18. and at full time was Born of her, Luke 1.35.
chap. 2.7. Mat. 2.1. Certain signs of the reality of the humane Nature; that
Mary was a Natural Mother, tho not in a natural way, and not a Spiritual Mother
by Faith; that the Body came not down from Heaven, or was made out of the Womb,
and not formed in her Womb of her Nature and Substance, as some have imagined.
He is said to come down from Heaven, as God condescending to be our Mediator,
and as Mediator, in respect of his Mission and Authority.

And why.
Our Mediator is God and Man, in one Person, that he might be a middle person
and so mediate between God and Man; he was Man that he might obey and die, that
the promises made to Adam, Abraham, David, might be fulfilled, Genesis 3.15. Gal.
3.16. Acts 2.30. Romans 1.4. and with respect to all the Children, Heb. 2.14. He
must be Born without Sin, a Holy thing, that he might be a Priest and
Sacrifice. He was God-Man, that he might satisfy and merit by his obedience and
sufferings.

SECT. XIII. Of the Prophetical Office of Christ.
1. OUr Savior declared the Father, 1. as the Brightness of his Glory, Heb.
1.3. Joh. 14.9. 2. As a Prophet, foretold Acts 3.24,25,26.

2. This great Prophet teaches outwardly by his word, and Ministers, and
inwardly by his Spirit, and this is effectual to Salvation. Christ both
preached and gave repentance, which is Gods prerogative: See, Acts 3.26. 2.
Tim. 2.25. He at once opened the Heart, and the Scriptures, Luke 24.32,45. He
so Preached, as to heal the broken in Heart, etc. which are Works proper to
God, Luke 4.18. Ps. 146.7. Ps. 147.3.

3. Christ as Mediator does act in subordination to his Father, yet not as if
he were but Man only, instructed by God, and to that end taken up to Heaven in
the space of the forty days temptation, to receive Revelations from him; nor as
if he were but God only by deputation, as they say. He is a Prophet as God-Man,
Joh. 1.18. The only begotten Son has declared him. Even while he was upon
Earth, as Man, he was in the Bosom of the Father, as God, as one essentially
with him, and intimate in all his thoughts. He was greater than John Baptist,
who was greater than the Prophets; he was full of grace, therefore God, Joh.
1.15. 1 Pet. 5.10.

4. He is a Prophet still; for the Gospel is his Gospel, Romans 1.16. and ver. 9.
He by his Spirit enlightneth our Minds, Ephesians. 1.17. and so the Scriptures are
able to make us wise to salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15.

5. Christ is not only the Mediator of the New Testament, because he declares,
or makes the Covenant in the Name of God, Heb. 8.6. He as a Prophet or an
Apostle, and Ambassador does deal with Men, teaching and persuading them; but
so, that he is also the High Priest of our profession, or Covenant-agreement
with God, and so he is a surety of the Covenant, engaging himself to make good
Gods promises to us, and our obligations to God, Heb. 7.22. He acts between
both, for both.

6. As a Prophet he was sent of God, and was known by this Title or
Periphrasis, He that was to come, Luke 7.19,20. And two things are to be noted
of him, 1. His quality as the Son of God, Joh. 3.17,18. and as related to Man,
as the Son of Man, and so he received the Spirit not by measure, Joh. 3.34. It
abode upon him. 2. His Mission, or Sending, with command to honor him, Joh.
3.17. chap. 5.24. As God he could not come nor descend, but he who was God
came. His Original was from Heaven, as God, and he was in Heaven as God: and
his Commission and Authority to do the Office of a Mediator, was from Heaven,
or from God, Joh. 7.29. chap. 8.42. chap. 3.34. He could not be in Heaven as
Man, while he was upon Earth, nor till he ascended. His coming and descending,
denotes to us, 1. The condescension. 2. The Authority and Commission of Christ.

SECT. XIV. Of Christ's Priestly Office.
1. CHrist is truly and properly a Priest, and not Metaphorically, as if he
only did something like a Priest. He answers the description of a Priest, made
Heb. 8.3. more fully, chap. 5.1. We have him described in the fitness of his
Person to be a Priest, as holy, harmless, etc, Heb. 7.26. by the order of his
Priesthood, Heb. 6.20. and by his call to his Office, Heb. 5.4,5,6. He had a
true real Sacrifice to Offer for Men, for the Sins of Men, Heb. 8.3. He offered
himself, Heb. 9.14. Heb. 5.7. chap. 9.14. chap. 10.12. chap. 9.26. and entered
into the Holy place of Heaven to make Intercession, Heb. 7.25. He excelled all
legal Priests, and is as truly a Priest as ever any Priest was.

2. The Sacrifice which he offered, was a real proper Sacrifice: See again,
Heb. 9.14. and Ephesians. 5.2. This Text is grossly perverted to this sense, That
the help and kindness showed to Men by the Death of Christ was as pleasing to
God, as if it had been a Sacrifice acceptable to him. But in the words observe,
1. Christ had power to dispose of himself, and accordingly he gave himself:
there was neither violence, nor injury done him. His Death was violent from
Men, but voluntary of himself. Not my will, but thy will be done. 2. He gave
himself for us; as the Beasts were sacrificed for Men, for their Sin, under the
Law. 3. The nature of his Gift; he gave himself a Sacrifice and Offering to
God. 4. He gave himself an Offering and Sacrifice to God, who required it. 5.
He gave himself for a sweet smelling savor, as Genesis 8.21. Levit. 1.9. It was
offered to make atonement, and God was satisfied, and well pleased with it.

3. The Excellency, Essicacy and All Sufficiency of his Blood, his Life, his
Death, as a Sacrifice appears, 1. It was but one Sacrifice for Sins, Heb.
10.12. 2. It was offered but once, Heb. 9.25,26,28. This offering, was
suffering, thereby to put away Sin, in its Guilt and Obligation to Punishment,
Heb. 9.26.

4. The end of this Sacrifice, was, 1. To satisfy Divine justice, and, 2. To
reconcile us to God. To explain, and prove this, consider, 1. God is
essentially Holy and Just; he hates Sin, and Sin deserves it: See, Ps. 11.7.
Ps. 45.8. Romans 1.31. 2 These. 1.6. It is a righteous thing with God, etc. 2. As
God may make a Law, so he may threaten to punish, and punish according to his
threatening and righteous Law. 3. God did both, and Man sinned, and by Sin
became liable to punishment. 4. Such was the Wisdom of God, in making a
positive Law, which might be relaxed, and the punishment transferred upon
another, who might satisfy by bearing the punishment. 5. Yet God stood upon
this, that his essential and governing Justice should be satissied, and that
the Satisfier should die. So it was agreed, in the Covenant of Redemption,
between the Father and the Son, Is. 53.10. See the place. What God required,
the Mediator performed. Mark, 1. The Guilty Sinner could not satisfy by
suffering Death. 2. The Mediator must be God-Man, that he might suffer,
satisfy, merit, and save the Sinner. 3. Christ did voluntarily engage as a
surety to die and satisfy. 4. The Death he suffered was the punishment of Sin,
the curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13. 5. He was made a Curse for us, in our stead
and for our good, to redeem us that were under the Law, Gal. 3.13. 6. God had
respect to his justice in the Blood of his Son, Romans 3.25,26. that he might be
just. 7. This Blood and Death was the Price of our Redemption, which was
sufficient, and a satisfaction; it was given to God, and accepted of him,
Ephesians. 5.2. 8. The benesit follows, which is Redemption in a proper sense, 1 Timothy 2.6. Romans 3.24. Ephesians. 1.7. And there are two great proofs of this perfect
satisfaction. 1. Because Christ rose from the Dead. 2. They who believe in him
are justified. Romans 4.25. Romans 3.25,26.

2. The other end of Christ's Priesthood and Sacrifice was to reconcile us to
God. Christ died to atone, or appease the Holy, and just indignation of God.
His Blood is the propitiation for our Sin, Romans 3.25. and when we were enemies,
we were reconciled to God by the Death of his Son, Romans 5.10. He is the
propitiatory Sacrifice for Sin, and propitiation was the effect of it. 1 John
2.2. The propitiatory, or Mercy-Seat in the Temple did not reconcile Sinners to
God, but it was a type of Christ, the true propitiatory, and a sign that God
was reconciled, and propitious or gracious: but Christ did reconcile Sinners by
his Death, as he intended, He. 2.17. and God has so set him forth, Romans 3.25.
and declares himself to be truly and properly reconciled.

3. We are actually reconciled to God, when we believe in Christ, and are
converted: but our conversion is not our reconciliation. Christ by making
atonement, made way for our conversion, and reception upon repentance. The
reconciling of Sinners is the Work of Christ: the conversion of Sinners is the
Work of the Spirit.

There are two parts of the Priestly, office of Christ. 1. Satisfaction by
Sacrifice. 2. Intercession upon satisfaction or Redemption. His Intercession is
a part, and but a part of his Priesthood, Heb. 7.25. He had a Body and Soul for
Sacrifice, Heb. 10.9,10. He offered himself upon Earth, Heb. 9.12,14. and
purged away Sin by expiation, Heb. 1.3. chap. 10,12. His Death was a Sacrifice
for Sins, and not a preparation for Sacrifice, or a way to his Resurrection.
The suffering part he finished upon Earth; and began his Intercession upon
Earth, John 17. and at other times, and continues it in Heaven; and his
Intercession does presuppose his propitiation, 1 John 2.1,2. The reason why he
could not be a Priest upon Earth, was not because he was not properly a Priest
or had no Sacrifice upon Earth to offer, but because he was not of the order of
Aaron, but of Melchisedeck, Heb. 8.4.

Upon what is said of the Priesthood^, Sacrifice, and Satisfaction of Christ,
it follows, 1. The Sacrifice of the Mass is false and sinful; for, 1. Because
none ever did, or could offer Christ, but himself. He is a Priest for ever, and
there is none of his order to succeed him, or represent him, Heb. 7.27. chap.
9.12. 2. He was offered once and to be offered no more, Heb. 9.12. ver. 28
chap. 10,12,13,14. 3. The Sacrifice of Christ was Bloody; without Blood there
is no remission of sin, Heb. 9.22. there is no Bloodshed in the Mass,
therefore no remission of sin by it. 4. To Sacrifice Christ is all one as to
kill him, and put him to suffer, Heb. 9.22. Christ is in not the hands of the
Priests to be killed. 5. Christ profitteth none but the living through Faith,
the Mass is for the Living and Dead but to what purpose?

2. The satisfaction of Christ is perfect, his sufferings are meritorious;
there is therefore no place, use, or need of humane satisfactions, 1 John 1.7.
1 Pet. 2.24.

SECT. XV. Christ is King.
1. BEside his absolute, and unchangeable dominion as God, he has a Royal
Sovereignty as mediator. He has Royal Titles, Rev. 1.5. Rev. 19.16. He has
Kingly power, Ps. 2.7,8,9. and a Kingdom, yea Kingdoms belong unto him, Rev.
17.14.

2. His Kingly power is universal, made Heir of all things, Heb. 1.2. but not
of this World, like earthly Rings, Joh. 18.36.

3. He was decreed, and foretold to be King before he was born, Ps. 110.1,2,3.
and was born King, Luke. 1.31,32,33.

4. He actually exercised his Kingly Power before, but not so gloriously and
fully, as after his Resurrection and Ascension, John 17.1,2. for he wrought
Miracles, raised the Dead, cast out Devils, and gave power to his Disciples to
do so. Therefore it is not true, that he was not King before his Ascension, and
that his Resurrection and Ascension were only preparatory to his Kingly Office.

5. His Kingly Power is exercised toward his People: 1. In subduing and
converting them, Ps. 110.3. Acts 3.26. chap. 5.31. chap. 26.18. 2. In governing
them being subdued, Heb. 1.8,9. Mat. 2.20. 3. In succouring them when tempted,
Ephesians. 6.10. 4. In keeping them to salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. John 10.28. Is.
32.1,2. Toward his enemies, as he pleases he restrains them, breaks them, and
will overcome them, Ps. 2.9,10. Ps. 110.1. 1 Cor. 15.25. Genesis 3.15. Romans 16.20.
And he shall judge the World, Romans 14.9,10,11. Phil. 2.10,11.

Hence it follows, that it is sinful arrogance and usurpation to pretend to
be Universal Head and Monarch over Christ's Church; to extend power to the
Living and Dead; to bring out of Purgatory, if there were any such Place; to
make Laws for Conscience; to dispense with the Laws of God; to dispose of
Kingdoms; to Pardon Sins, or work Miracles, or any part of Christ's Royal Power.

SECT. XVI. Of two Degrees of Christ's Humiliation.
1. CHrist endured the Wrath of God. Wrath in God is not an infirmity or
passion, or inconsistent with his mercy, and patience; but it is his holy and
righteous Will to punish, or to take Vengeance upon Sinners: See, Romans 1.18.
Romans 3.5. It is his Will and Power as Judge, Heb. 10.30. It is set out in
Scriptures terribly by Metaphors, of fire, and anger of the face, etc. Heb.
12.29. 2 These. 1.8,9. Ps. 34.15.

2. Our Savior suffered it, as our Surety, and Sacrifice for Sin: It was heavy
upon his Soul and Body, which had sunk under it, if he had not been supported
by the Omnipotency of his Godhead; yet he submitted to it, because it was his
Father's Will, and his own. This was the cause of his Agony; it was this that
made his Soul sorrowful to Death; it was this which made him deprecate, Father
if it be possible Let this Cup pass from me; it was this which made him cry
out, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? Mat. 27.46. Where note,

3. Christ suffered immediately from God: Why have Thou for saken Me? But it
was no separation of the Godhead, from the suffering Manhood, nor a casting
him off, for still he held his interest; my God, my God; nor was it more than
he looked for, nor was it any breach of promise in God, nor a complaint of
wrong; it was the interruption of the light of Gods Countenance, and the
heaviness of his punishing justice upon him, suffering in the stead of Sinners.

The Cursed Death of the Cross.
1. The Death of Christ was a Cursed Death, Phil. 2.8. Gal. 3.13. therefore it
was a pena^ Death, by a judicial Act of God, in which Men and Devils were
instruments. He was Holy, etc. Heb. 7.26. He knew no Sin, by commission, or
participation; yet he suffered the Death of a Sinner, therefore he died in our
place and stead, 1 Pet. 3.18. when he died for our good. He suffered the same
punishment for substance, which was due to Sinners; he could not die
spiritually, for then he had not been Holy nor a pure Sacrifice for Sin: he
could not die eternally, for then he could not have satisfied for Sin, nor
risen from the Dead, nor done many other Acts of a Savior. That which was
necessary for Sinners to suffer, and accidental to punishment, was not
necessary for Christ to suffer; nor could it stand with the Excellency of his
Person, nor Nature and End of his Office, as Mediator. He suffered what was
satisfactory, and abundant, and meritorious: The same punishment, for
substance, which God threatened to Man for Sin, but not the same in every kind
and circumstance, was undergone by Christ.

SECT. XVII. Of three Degrees of Christ's Exaltation.
1. Of Christ's Resurrection.
NOte carefully, 1. Who rose: Christ, Romans 4.25. 1 Cor. 15.4,12, to 20. Luke
24.46. 2. What rose, or was risen; or in what respect. No more was raised up,
than what was buried; namely, his Body; yet, as the whole Man is said to rise,
or to be raised from the Dead, when only the Body is raised, so it is said of
Christ, 1 Cor. 15.20. Christ the first fruits of them that slept. V. 23. --
Afterward they that are Christ's. V. 35. And with what bodies do they come.
Acts 24.15. There shall be a Resurrection of the just and unjust; i.e. of just
and unjust Persons, and not Bodies only: So Christ is said to rise, when his
Body only was raised. 3. By what Power Christ rose, or was raised. There is a
Concurrence of the three Persons, in the Resurrection of Christ: 1. The Father,
Romans 6.4. Chap. 8.11. 2. Of the Holy Ghost, 1 Pet. 3.18,19. Romans 8.11. 3. Of
his own Power, Joh. 2.19. Chap. 10.18. The Power is the same Power of God. The
Resurrection of Christ is spoken of, actively attributed to the Father, Romans
4.24. and to his own Power, as his own Act, Joh. 2.19. -- I will raise it up.
What the Father did, he did; the Father's Power and his being all one and the
same, producing one and the same individual Effect. It is also spoken of
passively; Christ was raised from the Dead: -- I will raise it up, Joh. 2.19.
is more than to say, I shall rise again; and more than was ever spoken of, or
by any Believer. That place, Luke 17.33. speaks not of the Resurrection, but of
the Way to be saved eternally, and of the Encouragement to suffer Death for
Christ. On Joh. 10.18. consider, 1. Christ, as Mediator, received Commandment
from the Father, which none could execute but he who was God. 2. The Command
given did presuppose Power in himself to execute it. None but God can raise the
Dead; and it is more to raise himself, than to raise another. Those Men who
raised the Dead by the miraculous Power of God, did not raise their own Bodies;
but Christ says, I will raise it up, and I have Power. 3. Every true Believer
may say, When I am dead, I shall be raised up: But none can say, I will raise
it up. The Temple of Christ's Body could not raise it self, the Soul could not
raise it; but there was a Will and Power in Christ, proper to God; not lent him
for that Act and Time only, but essential and proper; I will raise it up, and I
have power to take it up. To make a difference between Excitabo, and Erigam,
and the meaning to be, Christ being excited from the Dead, did erect his own
Body, is, to make an hard shift to deny the Divine Power of Christ. What though
it be said, 1 Pet. 3.18. He was quickened by the Spirit; and not, by his own
Spirit; as long as the Spirit of God is called the Spirit of Christ? Romans
8.9,11.

To make the Resurrection, Ascension and Session of Christ at the Right Hand,
to be only in order to his governing and defending the Faithful, and only to
belong to his Kingly Office, is to speak short of Scripture: For, 1. He was
declared to be the Son of God, by the Resurrection from the Dead, Romans 1.4. 2.
He arose for our Justification, Romans 4.25. being discharged, and his
Satisfaction accepted. 3. For our Sanctification, Ephesians. 2.5. Col. 2.12,13.
Chap. 3.1. Romans 6.4,5,6,8. 4. Having conquered Death, he arose, to raise the
Dead, 1 Cor. 15.13,14,15,16,21,22.

2. Of Christ's Ascension.
The Ascension of Christ was the Exaltation of his Humane Nature, by a Motion,
or Remove, from where he was, to where he was not before: He was parted from
them, and carried up into Heaven, Luke 24.51. Act. 1.9. Joh. 16.5.7.28. Chap.
20.17. Act. 3.21.

2. The Ends and Reasons of it are, 1. That he might be glorified in his Humane
Nature, as he was Mediator, Joh. 17.5. 2. That he might lead Captivity captive,
Ephesians 4.8. Col. 2.15. 3. To perform that part of his Priestly Office, which was
to be done in Heaven, Heb. 9.24. 4. To send the Comforter, Joh. 16.7. Act.
2.33. Luke 24.49. Joh. 7.39. and give Gifts, Ephesians. 4.10. 5. That Believers
might be justified, and more assured of Justification, Romans 8.34. 6. That we
might be more holy and heavenly, Col. 3.1. 7. To prepare a place for the
Coheirs, Joh. 14.2. who, even now, possess it in him, while they are on Earth;
as he is an Head, a Pledge, and Cause of their Glorification, Ephesians. 2.7. Heb.
6.20. Ephesians. 2.6. Because I live, ye shall live also, Joh. 14.19.

Hence it appears, 1. He ascended not into Heaven only for his own personal
Glory, or for the Government of the Faithful, or because it was the place of
Immortality, and Commonwealth of Saints.

2. His glorified Body is not in all places, but in Heaven, from whence we look
for him, Phil. 3.20. Col. 3.1,4.

3. Of Christ's Sitting on the Right Hand of God.
1. The Meaning of this Article of Christian Faith, is not to be taken from the
word of Posture, Sitting; for Stephen saw him as standing, Act. 7.55. Nor from
the Right Hand; for properly, God has no Right Hand; but from the importance
of the whole Phrase; which signifies, Majesty, and Excellency of Honor and
Power, Genesis 44.13,14. 1 King. 1.19. Psalm. 45.10. Matthew. 20.20. Chap. 25.33. of
Christ, as Mediator.

2. The Humane Nature was glorified, by Union with the Son of God. The
Mediator, obscured by his Humiliation, was glorified at his Resurrection, more
at his Ascension, most at his sitting on the Right Hand of God. Which denotes,
1. A Super-Eminency of Power, next to the Father, who governs all things
immediately by Christ: He was crowned with Glory and Honor, Heb. 2.9. Ephesians.
1.20,21. Phil. 2.9. Heb. 12.2. 2. All Creatures are subjected to him: 1. Good
Angels, Col. 2.10. 1 Pet. 3.22. 2. Evil Angels, Heb. 2.14. Col. 2.15. 3. All
Authority in Heaven and Earth, Matthew. 28.18. 4. The future State of Glory is at
his dispose, Ephesians. 1.21. 5. The dumb Creatures, Heb. 2.8. Psalm. 8. 6. His
Friends, Heb. 1.6,7,14. Matthew. 28.20. 7. His Enemies, Psalm. 110.1. Heb. 1.13.
to be destroyed, 1 Cor. 15.25,26. Heb. 2.14.

3. How happy is this for the Church, in order to, 1. Its universal Good,
Ephesians. 1.22. 2. For our Justification, and the Comfort of it, Romans 8.34. 3. For
our Sanctification, Col. 3.1,2. 4. For our Comfort in Afflictions, 1 Pet. 1.11.
Romans 8.17,18. in Necessities, Heb. 2.6,7. in Temptations, Heb. 2.17,18. and
against the Fear of Men, Devils and Death, 1 Cor. 15.25,26. Heb. 2.14,15. Rev.
1.18.

4. Hence it follows, that there is no other Head of the Catholic Church,
Visible, or Invisible, but he who sits on the Right Hand of God, Ephesians 1.22.
Matthew. 28.18. He never gave this Power to any Vicar.

SECT. XVIII. Of the Application of Redemption.
1. THey who affirm Redemption by Christ to be improper, and metaphorical, give
this as the Reason; Because there is none to receive the Ransom, or Price of
Redemption, from Christ. But consider these Particulars, and then judge: 1.
Christ offered himself to God, Ephesians. 5.2. 2. It was for us, and our Sins, 1 Timothy 2.6. 1 Cor. 15.3. Matthew. 20.28. 3. In dying, he did the Will of God, Heb.
10.7,9. Joh. 10.18. 4. The Effect of this Redemption followed, 1 Cor. 6.20. Ye
are bought, etc. upon Consideration of it, God justifies, Romans 3.25,26. see 1
Pet. 1.19. The Ransom was paid, therefore it was accepted and received; the
Effect and Benefit followed, therefore it was received; and God was the
Receiver. And it is not absurd to say, That the Son of God, the Second Person,
as an offended God, was satisfied by himself, as he was Mediator.

2. This Redemption must be applied to us, and then we reap the Benefit of it
actually, when it is applied effectually.

3. For the Benefit of it was intended for us, to bring us to God, and make us
one, Joh. 17.20,21.

4. When we believe it is effectually applied, Joh. 3.15,16,18. Mar. 16.16.
Joh. 1.12.

5. This Application is peculiarly ascribed to the Holy Spirit, not excluding
the Father, and the Son; see 1 Cor. 1.9. Joh. 5.25. There is an Order of
Working observed in the glorious Trinity: After Christ's leaving the World, the
Holy Ghost was to take the Administration of Christ's Kingdom, by Agreement; as
seems clear from Joh. 16.7,14,15,16. He shall give of mine to you, by
Application of it to their Benefit.

6. The way of this Application is, by Union with Christ, by which we are
invested in his Benefits, 1 John 5.12.

Union with Christ.
1. Nothing can be more real than this Union: See, I pray, Joh. 17.21,23. Chap.
14.20. And the real Benefit follows, Romans 8.1. Col. 1.27. It is most
excellently set out, Joh. 15.1. Ephef. 4.15,16. 1 Cor. 12.27. Ephesians. 5.23,30.
Chap. 2.20.

2. The Terms of this Union are Persons, You in me, and I in you. An Union of
Qualities, and not of Persons, is as irrational, as Accidents without Subjects.

3. We are not united to Christ by means of our Union, as particular Members
with the Universal Church; for Christ, the Head and Savior, is the immediate
Object of our Faith; therefore by Faith we are immediately united to Christ,
and that in Order of Nature, before we are united to the Church, though at the
same time: And Christ is to every true Believer, what he is to the whole Church
of Believers; an Head of Influence, a Vine, a Shepherd, an Husband.

4. Faith is the Means, Grace, or Bond of Union on our parts: By Faith we
receive Christ, Joh. 1.12. live by him, Gal. 2.20. and feed upon him, Joh.
6.47,48. Ver. 35.

5. The Spirit of God is the Author of this Union, and Faith is called the
Spirit of Faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. as well as of Regeneration and Sanctification,
wherein Faith is a principal Grace.

6. We call this a mystical Union, in opposition to a natural and visible
Union: It is supernatural, illustrated by natural, artificial and civil Union,
in metaphorical Shadows and Illustrations. We do not darken or deceive the
Minds of Men, by calling this Union Mystical, or Secret: The whole of our
Religion, and, in particular, this Union is a Mystery, 1 Timothy 3.16. Ephesians.
5.32. and therefore to expose this Term, Mystical, to derision, is to reflect
upon the Gospel, and our Christianity, and calls for Repentance.

7. A political Union is an Union of Persons in Policy or Government, and is
too narrow and low to express this Union; for we are united to Christ as a
Savior, and receive Benefits from him in all his Offices, and not only as King.

SECT. XIX. Of Effectual Calling.
1. EFfectual Calling is the same Work of Grace, as Regeneration, or
Conversion. When God calls inwardly by his Spirit, as outwardly by his Word,
this Call is effectual, or attains its proper Effect, to bring a Sinner to God.
This Work is set out by Calling, because by it we are brought hom, who are far
from God by Nature; not in Place, but Affection and Condition. When Faith
answers, and we submit, as Paul did, saying, Lord, what will thou have me to
do? Act. 9.6. we are called and saved, 2 Timothy 1.9.

2. Election and Vocation are not all one: The Elect, and Called, are the same
Persons: Vocation is the Execution of the Decree of Election, which is the
Cause, or necessary Antecedent of it, and is known by it. In Vocation, Electing
Love takes hold of the Sinner, to bring him out of Sodom, or Egypt, or
spiritual Bondage, into Light and Liberty: The one is from Eternity, the other
in Time; the one is in God, the other the Work of God upon the Sinner.

3. They who love God, are called; but it is not true that they love God before
they are called; for then the Answer would be before the Call. If they do not
love God before they are called, they do not love God before they are elected;
see Romans 8.28. where note, 1. God does purpose. 2. He calls according to
Purpose. 3. They who love God, are called; and called to love God, and not
because they love God: See the Order amplified, Romans 8.30. Ephesians. 1.4,5.
Election and Predestination are before Vocation: If our Love to God be the
Reason or Motive of God's electing us, then we love God first, contrary to 1 John 4.19.

4. They wrong the Teachers of the Truth, who say, we deny Free Will, whereas
we assert it to be as essential to Man, as Reason is, and that Free Will
continues in every state; in Innocence, Corruption, Renovation and Glory.
Sinful Man is a moral, free Agent; he does act according to his Imaginations,
Propensions and Lusts: He does freely serve Sin, and is free from
Righteousness, Romans 6.20. When he is made free from Sin, by renewing Grace, he
acts as a new Man, freely toward God, but with much opposition from
in-dwelling Sin. As the Man is, so is his Will: An unregenerate Man is
unwilling, averse and perverse, impotent and dead one way, that is, to God's
Will, and bent another. If gracious Motions and Actions are contrary to sinful
in the Regenerate, they are contrary to, and above the performauce of the
Unregenerate. As every degree of spiritual Light is from above, so every degree
of Liberty to Good is given of God. If spiritual Objects are not known, nor
perceived, but by Revelation of the things, and Illumination of the Mind, they
are not willed, but by the renewed Will.

5. The Socinians (I name them for all of the same mind) deny Original Sin
altogether, and therefore assert, A Man may, of himself, believe and obey, etc.
To clear the Truth (besides what has been said for Original Sin,) 1. To deny
Original Sin, is, in effect, to deny Actual. 2. To assert Freedom of Will as
they do, is, to fancy Man as able now, as before the Fall? If we are not
fallen into a state of Sin, we have no need of a Redeemer, nor Faith in him;
but we are taught the need of Redemption and Regeneration both. 3. There is no
force nor violence done to the Will of Man, when God calls and draws him to
himself by Christ. 4. What probity or aptness was in Paul, a Blasphemer; or in
the Jews, before pricked in their hearts; or in the Jailer, or in any Gentile,
to turn to God; or for which God turned them, and not others? What probity, or
aptness, or inclination toward Conversion was in them, who counted the
preaching of Christ Foolishness? 5. Expound that Text, Act. 13.48. by probity
of Mind, or aptness; then the meaning of the place must needs be this, As many
as were apt to Eternal Life, believed; and so they were apt to Eternal Life,
before they believed. Were they apt before their Eyes were opened, before their
Hearts were turned, or the Gospel preached? But admit they were not the blind
Heathens, but Proselytes, who left their Heathenism, and Uncircumcision, that
are spoken of; how came they to be apt to believe, whenas many Jews remained
Unbelievers? The truth is, 1. All Preparations and Aptness toward God, is not
from our Free Will (which stands off) but Grace. God and our selves are
opposed, Ephesians. 2.8. If from our selves, not from God; if of God, not from our
selves. The first beginning of a good Work in us, is from Grace, Phil. 1.6. the
first Will, and first Motion is God's Work, and not our own, Phil. 2.13. Where
was this Probity and Aptness in them who say, they were foolish, disobedient?
etc. Tit. 3.3. and Idolaters? etc. See 1 Cor. 6.9,10. 3. Effectual Calling is
from one contrary point, and state to another, from Darkness to Light, Act.
26.18. Ephesians. 5.8. from Idols, to the living God, 1 Thessalonians. 1.9. from Satan, to
God, Act. 26.18. from Death, to Life, Ephesians. 2.1,5 from serving Sin, to God,
Romans 6.17, to 22. What is in Man's Will and Nature toward God and Holiness,
but what is not of our selves?

6. This heavenly Calling is drawing, Joh 6.44. which we profess, as well as
they, to be without force or violence: And they who are drawn, are taught of
God. But then, we say, 1. There is, besides the proposal of exceeding great and
precious Promises, an inward Teaching by the Holy Ghost; and they only who are
so taught, are drawn powerfully and sweetly to Christ. 2. This effectual
Teaching and Drawing is not common to all, for then all would believe and come.
Christ, as listed up, is a drawing Object, that has enough in him to draw all
Men to him; yet all, and every Man come not. We must, from the Event, expound
the words, All Men, Joh. 12.32. with limitation unto all sorts, degrees, and
Nations, and not of individuals and particular Men: even as Paul was to be a
Witness to All Men, Acts 22.15. and Joh. 12.19. i.e. many.

7. In vain do Men speak of a good Life without Regeneration or Faith in
Christ: and Gospel Assistances are not sufficient without the effectual
operation of the spirit. Assistances do only suppose infirmity in us: and they
who are regenerate are subject to weakness: but unregenerate are worse, than
impotent or weak: and weak believers have inward Life, as well as outward
assistances, Joh. 15.4. Col. 1.11. Phil. 4.13. Therefore outward means are not
sufficient to un regenerate dead Sinners.

8. The work of effectual calling does convince us what we are by nature before
it: we are Ignorant, Averse, Dead, Rebellious. A new Heart will I give you: not
a new faculty, but, a Will made free from its Love to evil and Enmity to good.
God effectually persuades, and also enables us to believe in Christ.

The effectually called are justified.
1. To justify is all one as in English, to make just; but in this point, it is
to be taken, as in a course of Law, to absolve, acquit, discharge, to repute a
Man as just who is guilty, subject to accusation, and condemnation.

2. We agree, that in this gracious act, God does acquit the believer (who is
penitent) also from deserved condemnation, and does put him into the condition
of a Righteous Person.

3. There is a concurrence of free grace, and satisfaction, and redemption in
this act: See, Romans 3.24. God's love and Christ's Death, Romans 5.9.

4. He that is justified is accepted, and looked upon as Righteous in the sight
of God.

5. God justifies as both gracious and just, Romans 3.24. with ver. 26. the
Sinner is in himself unrighteous: the righteous God looks for a perfect
Righteousness; the Righteousness of Christ is most perfect, called the
Righteousness of God by Faith, Romans 3.22. and the Righteousness of one, Romans
5.17,18. With this alone, the just God is satisfied, who does graciously
impute, or reckon it to every one who believes: by faith we are invested in
it, and entitled to it by Gods free gift.

6. The just God set forth Christ a propitiation, or atonement by the Sacrifice
of himself, Romans 3.25. With this God was satisfied; and it being intended for
him that believes, it is accounted to him, and he receives and applies it for
his justification.

7. The Person being untighteous, and guilty, is not justified, as an innocent
Righteous Person in himself: but for Christ's sake He does repent and confess
his iniquity and guilt, 1 John 1.9. and is taught to plead, as we see, Romans
8.33,34. He is taught to show cause, why he is not condemned.

8. It is the nature of Faith in general, to answer to, and correspond with the
gracious Acts of God: so it does in Justification. Here Is a gift of
Righteousness, and Faith humbly receives it: and because that perfect
Righteousness of Christ is that by which a guilty offender is justified, Romans
3.19. and faith alone does receive, appropriate, and apply it, therefore we are
justified by faith alone, Romans 3.22,25,26,28.

9 I humbly conceive, Faith is not imputed for Righteousness, Romans 4.5. as that
which is accepted instead of a perfect personal Righteousness: thus if we have
faith it shall serve, and be taken, where perfect Righteousness is not to be
had: For, 1. The Person justified, is in himself unrighteous and guilty, and
God does not justify him for that which is taken instead of Personal
Righteousness, for then God would seem to have respect to a Man's own Personal
Righteousness, in defect of which he takes what may be had. 2. Because God
looks upon our Mediator, as Obeying, Dying, Satisfying, and not upon us, who
are unable to satisfy: See, Romans 3.22,24,25,26. 3. Because our Faith is not to
be taken separately from its object, Christ. It was not looking, but looking on
the Serpent, that healed; so it is believing in Christ, that justifies, and
saves, Joh. 3.14,16. Faith without works is imputed, but not without Christ. I
do not say, that Faith is imputed, as taken for its object, i. e. Christ is
imputed; nor that faith is imputed, as taken in lieu of Personal Righteousness,
but Faith with its object, Christ, is imputed, for Faith cannot be separated
from him, its object: for the Righteousness of Christ, and Faith in Christ, are
required to justification, the one with, and not without the other.

10. Not to impute Sin, is not to reckon it to condemnation, and it is not so
reckoned, because Christ died: and when it is not imputed to condemnation, it
is pardoned, Ephesians. 1.7.

11. They who say, we are justified by Faith, as a condition, and are not
Socinians, do mean soundly, and no more, but that Faith is required to
justification, and to ascribe as little as may be, to Faith, and as much as may
be to Christ. To say that Faith is a condition without which, a Man is not
justified, is to speak too little, because it is positively required, not as
that without which, but as that by which a Man is justified. And they who say,
as the Glorious Reformers spoke, we are justified by Faith, as by an
instrument, produce warrant from the Scripture, make up the number of Causes
complete, and ascribe, but the lowest degree of causality to Faith; both agree
in the main Doctrines, and differ in manner of Explication.

12. He who is justified by Faith in Christ, is also justified by Works. The
Person spoken of by Paul, is a guilty unrighteous Sinner, Romans 3.19. The Person
spoken of by James, is a formal professor, who says he has Faith, chap. 2.14.
He has no true Faith who has not Works to his Faith, and therefore cannot be
justified.

13. The way of justification, even before Christ, was by Faith in him, Romans
3.21,22.

14. No Man is actually justified, before he does believe. The believer was
intentionally justified from eternity; in decree, meritoriously from the Death
of Christ.

15. A Justified Person is taught to pray for pardon, Mat. 6.12. and to confess
his Sin, 1 John 1.9.

Are Adopted.
1. To adopt is to make, or take one for a Child, who by Nature is not a Child,
and he has the Name, State, Dignity and privileges of a Child.

2. Adoption is an Act of Grace, and if that which follows our effectual
Calling, and justification be an Act of grace, then surely Vocation and
Justification, must be by Grace?

3. Adoption is the foundation of our Coheirship with Christ.

4. The privileges and honor belong to them who believe, Joh. 1.12. they have
a right to them, though they may want the comfort of them through unbeleif.

5. By regeneration, we partake of the New Nature: by Adoption we are admitted
to the condition of Sons.

6. Gods People under the Law, were Sons; but in minority under Tutors, etc,
Gal. 4.4. yet they had the free Spirit, Ps. 51.12. They with their fear had
boldness, and we have fear with our boldness, and liberty, Phil. 2.13. Heb.
4.16.

And Sanctified.
1. To Sanctify, is, to make Holy.

2. We abhor that slander, That because we are justified by imputed
Righteousness, therefore we may take license to sin. We say a justified Man is
Sanctified, and must be so, 1 Cor. 6.11. 2. Imputed Sanctification, 1. Cor.
1.30. does not excuse from inherent. 3. A show of sanctity is but hypocrisy.
4. We teach as the Apostle did, Heb. 12.14. and derive holiness from its proper
causes, Romans 6.1,2. Romans 3.31. 1 Pet. 2.24. Gal. 5.6. Tit. 2.14.

3. To believe, in the first notion of it, is not all one as to obey: obedience
is necessary to Faith. They who obey are true believers, and they who obey not
are hypocrites, Romans 10.15. Heb. 5.9. James 2.14, etc.

4. Sanctification is the Work of God, the Father, Jude 1. of Christ. Joh.
15.24. of the Holy Ghost, 2 These. 2.13. We can no more regenerate or sanctify
our selves, than we can justify our selves.

5. The Righteousness of justification is perfect, Romans 8.1. of Sanctification
imperfect; therefore we need continued justification and forgiveness.

6. Justification is a change of State, Sanctification of Nature; it is total
in respect of parts, but not complete in degrees; we are growing, but not grown
perfect.

7. In our Conversion we turn from Sin, and Creatures, to God; in our
Sanctification we die to Sin, and live to God; to which we are enabled by
virtue of our Union with Christ, Romans 6.3 chap. 8.10. and by his spirit
dwelling in us, Romans 8.13. Romans 6.5,6.11. 1 Cor. 6.11. 1 Pet. 1.2. and by
growing in some graces, we grow in all, and inward graces are increased by
outward Ordinances, threatenings, promises, afflictions, temptations, and
mercies sanctified.

8. Regenerate Saints, have Sin in them abiding, though they have the spirit,
Gal. 5.16,17,18. 1 John 1.8. chap. 2.1. James 3.2. and sin actually, 1 Kings
8.46. Peter sinned in denying Christ, and after he was again converted, Gal.
2.11.

Obj. He that is born of God sins not. 1 John 3.4.

Answ. No, not as he who is of the Devil and not born of God, v. 8. and he
purifieth himself, v. 3.

Obj. I am able to do all things, therefore to live without sin, Phil. 4.13.

Answ. All have not Paul's Grace and Power. 2. Paul himself in his regenerate
state was not free from Sin, Romans 7.16,17,18,22,25. 3. All things, i. e.
Evangelically not Legally. 4. All things, that is, Want, and Abound.

Obj. We pray, Thy Will be done, etc. nothing more agreeable to it than
perfection; and if we ask we shall receive, 1 John 5.14.

Answ. We are not taught to Pray for perfection in this Life, for it is no
where promised. We are sincerely to wish and endeavor it.

SECT. XX. Assurance of God's Love.
1. SUch an assurance of Gods Love, and the fruits of it, as overcomes fears
and doubts, is attainable in this Life, and is no vain confidence: See 2 Pet.
1.10. In it observe, 1. The exhortation is made to believers in general. 2. The
diligence is the means of attaining it. 3. Effectual Calling may be known, and
made sure. 4. He that is sure of his Effectual Calling, is sure of his
Election: See also, 1 These. 1.3,4. to ver. 7. 2 These. 2.13,14. Heb. 6.9,10.

2. Assurance is ordinarily gathered by spiritual sanctified Reason, and Divine
Testimony: thus, he that is called is elected. The spirit delivers, and
testifies that truth. But I am called: this is true by experience, and
spiritual sense of the Work of God upon us, and the truth of grace: therefore I
am elected, this is the conclusion, and there is an assurance of all three
propositions.

3. The ordinary reasons why so many want it, are, 1. Because some look upon it
as too high for them, 2. or use not diligence, or, 3. know not how to gather
it, or, 4. doubt of the truth of their graces, or, 5. want holy confidence in
drawing the conclusion, therefore I am elected.

Peace of Conscience.
1. Peace of Conscience is the tranquillity of it, or rest from the terrors of
the Law, and threatenings of wrath. Having it, we undergo troubles and
afflictions, we submit to God, serve him, and wait for eternal Life.

2. It proceeds from peace with God, Romans 5.1. and is Gods gift, Romans 15.13.

3. It is often broken by temptations, omissions of duty, and commission of
Sin. But the soundation and Bond of it a bides strong on Gods side; and it is
regained by renewing Faith, Repentance, Watchfulness, and Obedience.

Joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.17.
1. Spiritual joy is the happy flourishing state of a true believer. It is the
fruit of the spirit, Gal. 5.22. a gift of God, Romans 15.13.

2. It springs from Faith in Christ, 1 Pet. 1.8. and hope of Glory, Romans 5.2.

3. The objects of it, are God in Christ, Romans 5.11. Phil. 4.4. 4. It Is
accompanied with Righteousness and peace, Romans 14.17. 5. It Is consistent with
godly Sorrow, Mat. 5.4. and sympathy with mourners, Romans 12.15. 6. It is
strongest in sufferings, 1 Pet. 4.13. Romans 5.3. and after hard services, Acts
5.41. 7. There is no hope of it to the impenitent, Ps. 51.8. Luke 13.5. 8. It
is allayed in believers with fear, Ps. 2.11. and sorrow, Romans 12.14.

Increase of Grace.
Growth in Grace is promised, Prove. 4.18. Ps. 1.3. It grows, by abiding in
Christ, John 15.4,5. and a diligent use of Ordinances, Ephesians. 4.11,12,13. and
exercise of Grace, Phil. 4.8. 2 Pet. 1.2,4. to 10. Increase is promised here;
but perfection is reserved for Heaven.

Perseverance.
1. If Perseverance in Grace were not certain, none could be saved.

2. It depends not upon the strength of inherent Grace, but upon Gods Will. 1.
Election is to salvation, 2 These. 2.13. 2. Calling is to Glory, 1 These. 2.12. 1
Pet. 1.3,4. 3. The promise goes home to the end, John 3.15,16. and faith looks
for it, Heb. 11.1. 4. The Covenant is firm between the Father and the Son, Is.
53.11. accordingly Christ. performed his part, Heb. 2.10. chap. 12.2. John
17.15. Heb. 7.25. and to the true Believer, Heb. 10.14,15,16,17,23. Tit. 1.2.
5. They have the spirit to abide, Joh. 14.16. an earnest, 2 Cor. 1.22. and
Seal, Ephesians. 4.30. 6. They believe and hope to the end, Heb. 10.39. 1 Pet. 1.9.
Romans 5.2. 7. They continue running, and pressing, 2 Timothy 4.8. Philip. 3.15. 8.
They are kept to salvation, 1 Pet. 1.4,5. These are comforts to the diligent
and sincere, Hypocrites and Apostates have no part in them, 2 Pet. 1.5. to 10.

SECT. XXI. The Souls of Believers are happy at their Death.
1. THe existence, and immortality of the Soul was proved before.

2. The destruction of the Soul, is not of the substance, but the punishment of
Hell, Luke 12.5. They who die in the Lord are Blessed, Rev. 14.13. and shall be
with him, Ph^l. 1.23. for ever, 1 These. 4.16. In confidence of which, they
commit their Souls to God, Ps. 31.6. Acts 7.59. 2 Timothy 4.12. 2 Cor. 5.1,4. 2 Timothy 4.8.

3. They do immediately pass into Glory, Phil. 1.23. or else, it had been more
desirable to enjoy Christ in Bonds, than be dissolved: See Luke 23.43. Mark,
the words are not, I say this day, etc. but, I say unto thee, This day thou
shall be with me in Paradise. The Soul of Christ was that day in Paradise,
therefore the Soul of the penitent was to be with Christ in Paradise that day,
for he was promised to be with Christ.

4. No Man can merit eternal Life, or degrees of Glory, by his good Works: it
comes by gift, Romans 6.21. 2 Timothy 4.8.

SECT. XXII. Christians are obliged to, or by the Moral Law.
1. GOD is the Lord and God of believers, therefore they are bound to observe
these Commandments. 2. They are bound to keep by the equity of that other part
of the preface, who brought thee out, etc. A redeemed People must serve their
Redeemer. 3. The Lord Jesus was the Redeemer out of Egypt, and gave the Law to
Moses, Acts 7.30. to 34. Heb. 12.26. whose voice shook the Earth. 4. They Love
God, therefore it is a Law to them, which requires Love, Mat. 22.38,39.

2. If ye walk in the spirit, ye are not under the Law, Gal. 5.18. does not
contradict this; for we are not under the ceremonial Law, nor the moral, for
Righteousness; nor under the coaction and servile obedience, nor condemnation
of it, for it is the Law of the Lord our God, who is so in the Covenant of
Grace.

3. The Law is as it always was, a perfect Law; therefore our Savior did not
as a Prophet, add new precepts to it. He instituted new Sacraments, and
instanced in some duties, not known to the Pharisces; but they are all
reducible to some precept of the ten.

4. No Man ever did or can do more than is required in the Law. Our Savior did
the will of God, and no more, Heb. 10.7. Angels do no more, Ps. 103.20.
Believers are unprofitable Servants, Luke 17.10.

5. Therefore, 1. There are no works of supererogation. 2. No Man can merit for
himself, or others. 3. Therefore there is no treasure of merits to be dispensed
to them that want. Of Christ's fullness there is a dispensation made by himself,
but he has no Lord Treasurer of merits and indulgences in his Kingdom. 4.
There are no counsels of perfection. The young Man in the Gospel, Mat. 19. had
more to part with, and deny himself in, than others, but more than self denial
was not required of him, which is enjoined to all, and was practiced, Acts
2.44,45. 5. Vows of poverty make no Man perfect.

Obj. But as many as be perfect, etc, Phil. 3.15.

Answ. Christianity is a comparative perfection, as Heirs at Age, Gal. 4.1,2,3.
but absolute. A sincere believer is Evangelically perfect in Christ, and
account of grace, but not perfect according to the Law.

Commandment I.
1. Prayer was always a duty, Ps. 27.6,7,8. Our Savior did not add the Lords
Prayer, as a new precept to the first Commandment.

2. Christ added not the precept of Worshipping himself, to the first
Commandment, for he was always an object of Worship. Compare Acts 7.30. Is.
6.1,3. with Joh. 12.41. Is. 45.23. with Romans 14.11.

Commandment II.
1. God is invisible, therefore no Man can make an Image of him, 1 Timothy 1.17.
His People saw none, therefore he forbad them to make any, Deuteronomy. 4.15,16. Every
Image made for God, must be a real lie, for none can be made like him, Acts
17.29. All those representations of him in Scripture Visions, are for
understanding, and not for sight.

2. All signs of honor before Images are forbidden, Exodus 20.5. Levit. 26.1.
Is. 2.8,9. chap. 44.13. to 20.

3. It is Heathenish to Worship the true God by Creatures or Images, Romans
1.22,23.

4. The Israelites did not believe the golden Calf to be God; but made it to be
a visible sign of Gods presence. The feast was to Jehovah, and not to the Calf,
yet it was abhorred and punished, Exodus 3^.5, etc.

5. Images beg^t carnal thoughts of the invisible God, therefore are not sit to
instruct the vulgar, Deuteronomy 4.15,16. Jer. 10.8,14,15. Hab. 2.18. Ps. 115.4 to 8.
Romans 1.22,23.

The Worship of God.
1. God is the only Object of Divine Worship, the Father through the Son, by
the Holy Ghost, Ephesians. 2.18. and no Creature, either Saint or Angel, Matthew
4.10. Deuteronomy. 6.13. chap. 10.20. Col. 2.18. Heb. 1.14. Act. 10.25,26. chap. 14
14,15. Rev. 19.20. chap. 22.8,9.

2. The Socinians prove, that Divine Honor is due to Christ, from Luke 17.5.
Matthew. 8.25. Act. 7.59,60. 2 Cor. 12 7,8. 1 Thessalonians. 3.11 That the first
Commandment is not changed, by giving him such honor; for he is no strange,
but a subordinate God. From this Concession of theirs, I argue for his Glory,
against their false Opinion of Christ. 1. He who said, Thou shall have no other
God but me, says of himself, I am Jehovah, thy God. We must have none for God,
but he who is Jehovah: Thou shall have no other God but me; or, before me.
Therefore, if Christ ought to be worshipped by this Commandment (as they
confess,) he is God Jehovah, the only true God. He ought to be worshipped with
divine Honor, by virtue of this Commandment: But there is no God to be
worshipped, according to this Commandment, but Jehovah, thy God; therefore he
is Jehovah. 2. There is no subordinate Jehovah: Christ is Jehovah, therefore
not a subordinate God. 3. A subordinate God, is a strange God: Any God but me,
is a strange God; therefore any God but Jehovah, is a strange God; for Me is a
Relative to Jehovah, and Me is the same as God Jehovah. 4. The Object of our
Worship in that Commandment is but one Jehovah, thy God: If Christ be not that
one Jehovah, he is not at all to be worshipped, by this Commandment; but he is
to be worshipped as God, therefore he is Jehovah. 5. There is but one Cause of
our Salvation, Tit. 1.3,4. chap. 2.13. 1 Timothy 2.3. chap. 4.10. therefore it
cannot be, that Christ is honored as God, by the first Commandment, because he
is the second Cause of our Salvation. 6. If Christ be not God Jehovah, and yet
ought to be worshipped with divine Honor, the Commandment must needs be
changed; for if there be a new Object of Worship, there is a Change of the
Commandment.

3. The Worship of God is kept pure, when it is not depraved with mixtures of
false Objects with the true; it is entire, when the Ordinances are not more,
nor fewer than Christ has enjoined; nor any part taken from, nor added to them.

4. When God is worshipped with the Heart, he is worshipped in Spirit, and when
he is worshipped plainly, without Types and Shadows, he is worshipped in Truth,
Joh. 4.24.

5. The outward manner of God's Worship must be suitable to God, and to the
general Rules of his Word. A Form of Words is necessary in some parts of
Worship, and is but a manner, or mode of doing, and corrupts not the
Substance. Circumstances are variable, and must answer to the End of Worship.

Commandment III.
1. Christians may lawfully swear, when lawful Power, Matter, Cause and End
require it, and when it is in a due manner. The Light of Nature taught it, Genesis
21.15 chap. 24.3,9. chap. 31.52. chap. 47.31 Holy Men used it, and directions
are given for it, Jer. 4.2. Swearing by the Creatures, or causless, profane
Swearing, is only contrary to our Savior's Law, Math. 5.37. Calling for, or
imposing Oaths on slight Occasions, calls for Mourning and Repentance in our
days.

2. Christ, and the Holy Ghost, are God Jehovah. It is lawful to swear by none,
but by God Jehovah. It is lawful to swear by God and Christ, say the Socinians,
Romans 1.9. 2 Cor. 1.23. chap. 11.31. Phil. 1.8. 1 Thessalonians. 2.5,10. and by the Holy
Ghost, Romans 9.1. therefore Christ and the Holy Ghost are God Jehovah. He whom
we honor by lawful Swearing, is no other than Jehovah, thy God.

Commandment IV.
1. There was a Sabbath from the beginning of the World; the first Seventh
after the Sixth of the Creation, was a Sabbath, Genesis 2.2,3. Exodus 20.11.

2. A Day of Rest is as necessary under the Gospel, as before; if it be not
kept holy, we are worse, and not better for it. We are not discharged from
Ceremonial Burdens, to take more liberty to contrive Business, make Bargains,
travel, coach about, receive and pay Visits, meet in Coffee-houses, speak our
own Words, or do our own Deeds.

3. The Commandment is contained in these words, Remember the Sabbath Day, to
keep it holy. The Confirmation and Establishment of it runs in these words,
Wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath Day, and sanctified it. We are obliged
to a weekly Sabbath, or Day of holy Rest; and not to the Seventh, any more than
a First, when the Lord thought fit to make a Change. Beside the Duty laid down,
there are many words added, by way of Explication and Motive only.

4. The Observation of the First Day, was universal in all Christian Churches,
1 Cor. 16.1,2. As I have given order in the Churches of Galatia, so do ye; upon
the first day of the week, etc. This Order given for Charity, does strongly
intimate the Observation of the First Day, weekly: And this Order was given to
the Churches of Galatia, who are blamed for observing the legal Sabbaths, Gal.
4.10. They vanished, the First Day is established.

5. The believing Gentiles received the Observation of the First Day, together
with the Faith; and the Christian- Jews made no Controversy about it.

6. It is called, The Lord's Day, Fev. 1.10. as instituted by him, and as
consecrated to him. Easter Day is only the first Lord's Day in order; every
first Day of every Week, is of the same nature, and for the same end.

7. The word, Remember, does not imply, that it is a Ceremonial Precept; but
rather a strictness of Command, and a Caveat against carelessness and
forgetfulness of it. Religion grows, or decays; is preserved, or lost;
according as this Day is observed, or not.

8 Sabbath signifying Rest, our Lord's Day may be called Sabbath, without
Judaizing; as it is in our Homilies.

9. A Day of bodily Rest is necessary for spiritu^l.

10. Parents, Masters and Governors must see that it be sanctified. To
sanctify it, is a Moral Duty: and though the Fourth Commandment be not a prime
Moral Precept, as the First is, yet it has a consequential Morality in it.

Commandment V.
1. All the Duties of this Commandment are enjoined under the Name of Honor,
teaching us a mutual Estimation of all Ranks of Men.

2. Parents must not provoke their Children by Rigor, or unjust Commands,
Ephesians. 5.4. yet they may wisely correct, as well as instruct them, into due
Obedience, Heb. 12.6,7,8. And they who do the duty of Parents, are to have the
honor.

3. Children in the power of Parents, ought not to marry without their Consent,
if possible by dutiful means, Col. 3.20. Ephesians. 5.1. -- In all things, and --
In the Lord.

4. To make Vows, and enter into Orders of Religion, without Consent of
Parents, or to violate Marriage-Covenants for the same reason, or to seduce any
so to do, is sinful, Numb. 30.4,5,6. Col. 3.20. Matthew. 19.6. 1 Cor. 7.5.

5. Vows of blind Obedience are not seasonable, therefore sinful, Act. 4.19. 1
Cor. 11.1. Romans 12.1.

6. All Orders of Men are subject to temporal Laws, and must answer, when
accused, Act. 26.2. Peter taught Subjection to all in Authority, 1 Pet.
2.13,14. Romans 13.1.

7. Belivers under the Old Testament, had spiritual Promises, and not only
temporal: They had the Promise of Christ, therefore all in him, Genesis 3.15.
chap. 12.3. of the Spirit, Gal. 3.14. lived by Faith, Heb. 11.13. looked for
Eternal Life, Joh. 5.39. and were Godly, therefore had the Promises of the Life
to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. Under the Gospel, we have better Promises, Heb. 8.6.
because we are put into a better State.

Commandment VI.
1. It is lawful for a Christian to be a Minister, or Servant of God; therefore
to be a Magistrate, and to bear the Sword, Romans 13.4,6. Captains left not their
Places by becoming Christians, Matthew. 8. Act. 10.3. Soldiers are directed, Luke
3.14. The Promises of great Peace, Isa. 2 4. Mic. 4 3. Zech. 9.10. intimate the
nature and influence of the Gospel, which is not brought in by the Sword, nor
propagated by it.

2. It is our duty to live peaceably, etc, Romans 12.18. yet a Man ought to
maintain his own right, Acts 21.37. chap. 22,23. to 26. But hatred and revenge
are great sins, Genesis 4.6. chap. 31.24. Levit. 19.18. Love and Righteousness
must be promoted, and maintained.

Commandment VII.
1. Marriage is of the Law of Nature, and not peculiar to the Church, Plurality
of Wives at once is contrary to the first institution, Mat. 2.13,14,15. One
should die before another be taken, Romans 7.2,3. 1 Cor. 7.39. It is not Lawful
to divorce for every cause, Mat. 19.1. to 10. to marry in the Lord, 1 Cor.
7.39. and Love entirely, Ephesians. 5.25. are preventives of many sins.

2. Fornication is a great sin, 1 Cor. 6.13.18. ver. 9.

3. It is better to marry than to burn, 1 Cor. 7.9. All have not the gift,
chap. 7.2. therefore a single Life is not more perfect in it self. And for
Ministers it is Lawful in such cases, Heb. 13.4. 1 Cor. 9.5. 1 Timothy 3.2,4.
chap. 5.12. Peter's Wife had a Mother, therefore he had a Wife, Mar. 1.30. and
we believe Philip had a Wife, for he had four Daughters, Acts 21.9.

Commandment VIII.
1. Men have a distinct property in goods. 2. Every Man should peaceably enjoy
his own. 3. yet alienation by sale, commutation, charity, contracts, and
payments of tribute, and debts is Lawful. I believe Paul well understood the
manner of the King, 1 Samuel 8.11, etc. yet speaks of no more than of tribute,
and customs, Romans 13.6,7.

Commandment IX.
1. Equivocation, because truth is darkened; and, 2. Breach of Faith even with
heretics, are unlawful, Ps. 15.1. to 4. Ezekiel 17.15,16. Romans 1.31. Rev. 21.8.

Commandment X.
1. Concupiscence is sin. 2. Thoughts are under Law, for it is spiritual. 3.
Sin remains in the regenerate; tho it reign not, it is Sin, Gal. 5.17,18.

2. Every sin deserves Death, therefore there are more than seven deadly sins,
Mat. 24.51. 1 Cor. 6.10. Rev. 21.28.

SECT. XXIII. What God requires of Man, to escape wrath.
Faith.
1. FAith should not be defined by ignorance; for it is the evidence of things
not seen, Heb. 11.1. and cannot be without knowledge, Joh. 17.3. Joh. 4.22.
chap. 10.38. chap. 16.30. chap. 17.7,8.

2. Faith is a certain firm assent, not only to Doctrines because Christ is the
object of it, Joh. 1.12. chap. 3.16. Romans 3.26.

3. Unbelief is a disallowance; therefore on the contrary, faith is an
approbation of, and consent to the way of Salvation by Christ, 1 Pet. 2.4

4. Faith goes further yet, it is a trusting in Christ, Ephesians. 1.13. A guilty,
lost, penitent mourner must have a Savior which he can trust.

5. Faith may be abstracted in some consideration; but can never be separated
from good Works, Ephesians. 2.8,9,10. Gal. 5.6. James 2.14,18,26.

6. Faith answers to the offer of the Gospel: and therefore receives Christ, as
a Prophet for Wisdom, as a Priest for Righteousness, as King for
Sanctification, and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. Mat. 11.28. Joh. 7.37. Mar. 9.7.

Repentance.
1. Repentance is to be Preached in Gospel times, Acts 26.20. Luke 24.47. 2.
Christ repented not for us; it is Gods gift and our duty, Acts 11.18. chap.
17.30. 3. It is not the sinner who grieves for Sin; but the spirit who
convinces of it. 4. The Law discovering sin, and wrath, is subordinate to the
Gospel; drawing the Soul to God by grace and mercy. 5. In, or by sin, the
Creatures heart is turned to Self and Creatures from God: by repentance, he
returns from Self and Creatures to God. 6. An intention to repent once in a
Man's Life, is not repentance; for it is an actual return to God, with godly
sorrow, and with fruit, 2 Cor. 7.9. 7. Repentance takes in all known Sin, the
habits and Dominion of which are broken by it, yet the in-dwelling of Sin does
hinder it to be a repentance to Life.

SECT. XXIV. Outward and ordinary means of Grace.
1. THere is no such perfection of grace, as to live above Ordinances. They who
had extraordinary measures of the spirit, observed Ordinances, and brought
Converts under them, Acts 2.41,42. chap. 6.4. chap. 12.5. chap. 22.7.

2. The Administration of them, and Preaching the word was, and ought to be
committed, Authoritatively to Ministers, and Pastors, qualified, ordained, and
called. The Apostles went out by commission, Mat. 28.19. See Heb. 5.4. Men must
be competently able, Tit. 1.9.2 Tim. 2.2. for the Office and Work, 1 These.
5.12,13. 1 Timothy 4.6. and Ordained by Pastors, Tit. 1.5,6,7. 1 Timothy 5.22. chap.
4.14. and so, he is distinct from brethren, 1 Timothy 5.6. over whom he is an
officer with authority, 1 These. 5.12,13. Heb. 13.7,17. 1 Cor. 14.34,35. 1 Timothy
2.12. A minister must give himself to his work, 1 Timothy 4.13,14,15. must abide
in his calling, except necessity requires absence, Acts 20.3,4. else how can he
watch, and be an example to them? Believers have enough to do in their own
places, without taking upon them any part of the Ministers office, Ephesians. 6.4.
1 These. 5.11. Romans 15.14. and much good might be done, if done with humility,
and judgment.

SECT. XXV. Of the Sacraments.
1. OUr Lord sealed the New Testament with his Blood, and added visible signs,
and seals, as means of Grace, Mat. 26.24. etc, Mat. 28.19. 2. There are not
seven, but two Sacraments, which are proper to Christianity, and common to all
Christians. 3. Sacraments are not empty signs, but effectual to their end: See,
Romans 6.3,4. Gal. 3.26. 1 Cor. 10.16,17. and they are effectual after their
kind, for by them we are instructed as by a visible word; and excited, and
sealed. 4. They do not confer grace, by the very doing or using them: for there
is no natural virtue of conveyance of grace: It is not the outward washing, 1
Pet. 3.20,21. nor does the intention of the Minister make them effectual; but
the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. 1 Cor. 11.28. 1 Cor. 7.19. Ephesians. 5 25,26. 5. The
Minister of the New Testament, 2 Cor. 3.6. Mat. 28.19. is the only Minister of
the Seals, 1 Cor. 11.23.

Of Baptism.
1. The Baptism of the spirit is the Work of the spirit, and not the ordinance
enjoined. We have no Ordinance of Baptism, but what is with Water, which is
necessary to Baptism, as Bread and Wine to the Lords Supper.

2. Baptism is a necessary duty; but it is the unbelief that damneth, Mat.
16.16. and not the mere want of Baptism.

3. Of the form of Baptism see what is spoken of the Trinity before, and of the
improvement of Baptism after.

4. Note carefully the ground or reason upon which the Apostles received the
first converts to Baptism, Acts 2.39. for the promise is to you, etc.

5. There is no particular command for Baptizing Infants by Name; but seeing
the ground of Baptizing the repenting, believing Jews, was because the promise
was to them, and their Children; and not only to them, but to the Gentiles that
were far off, and should believe in Christ, the Infants of such Parents, are
included in the command of Baptizing, because they are named in the promise or
Covenant of grace. They who deny their Baptism, are obliged to produce by what
word or Act of God they are excluded.

Of the Lords Supper.
1. Where ever Christ was Bodily present, he was visibly present, and seen. He
is not seen in the Sacrament, therefore though believers have Communion with
his Body and Blood by Faith, 1 Cor. 10.16. he is not present in Body. He is in
Heaven, Acts 3.21. and when he will come, he shall be seen, Rev. 1.7.

2. There is no Transubstantiation: if there were any it were more likely, that
the Body and Blood of Christ should be turned into Bread and Wine, because it
is Bread and Wine as well after consecration as before; than that the Bread and
Wine should be turned into the Body and Blood of Christ: as sure as it was
Bread and Wine before it was blessed; it is as surely the same after it is blessed,
when eaten and drunk. Was there ever any change of one differing, and unlike
substance into another, and the change not seen, or sensibly perceived? Moses's
Rod, was not a Rod, when it was turned into a Serpent: the water was not water
but Wine, when our Savior turned it into Wine. But here is no change at all
perceived when our Savior spoke to his Disciples This is my Body, and was he
not alive at the table? Did they eat him alive? or was he at the same time
alive at the Table, and Dead in the Bread, and Wine? But they tell us, we must
believe: Well then, we believe, our Savior was alive when they did eat, that
he was not dead before he was Crucified, therefore the Disciples did not eat
his Body, nor drink his Blood. If they did not eat and drink that Body and
Blood, did he create a Body and Blood, for them to eat and drink? did he create
one for them all? or did every one of them eat a several body? Take either way,
it will then follow, they did not eat his Body, and drink his Blood who rose
from Table as whole as he sat down. We believe that what those Communicants
did eat and drink, all believers do still eat and drink; they did not eat and
drink it, therefore neither do we. They understood our Saviors meaning: it was
a Sign, a memorial; as Circumcision was called the Covenant, Gone. 17.3. See
Genesis 41.26. Joh. 15.1. chap. 10.9. 1 Cor. 10.4.

3. The Cup of blessing belongs as much to every Communicant as the Bread: Our
Savior, and his Ministers gave both, and Communicants received both. See Mat.
26.26. 1 Cor. 10.16. 1 Cor. 11.25,26.

Besides these I shall lay down several truths contrary to so many errors.

1. There is a distinction between Ministers and Stewards, and the family of
Believers, 1 Cor. 4.1. As Christ, and the Apostles did, so Ministers and
Stewards take Bread and Wine, bless, break, give, 1 Cor. 10.16. -- which we
bless, etc. The Communicating believers do join with the Pastor in prayer and
thanksgiving, and then they take, and eat, and drink, and that is all they
ought to do. Except the Bread and Wine are Consecrated to that end, according
to our Saviors institution, it is no Sacrament. It is not true therefore, that
the Lords Supper was instituted that the Faithful might break the Bread.

2. In showing the Lords Death we show, 1. The nature and end of his death, as
a Sacrifice to God for sin, 1 Cor. 5.7. 1 Cor. 11.24,25. Mat. 26.28. Mark
14.24. Luke 22.19,20. 2. The painfulness of his death. 3. The Allsufficiency,
satisfaction and merit of it. 4. We humbly show it by Faith to God, as a
propitiation, and price of Redemption, and plead it, and rest upon it. 5. We
show it against accusations of Conscience, and all other from Satan, and the
World. 6. We show it to all the Churches as one Body, 1 Cor. 10.11. Therefore
to show the Lords Death is more, than to thank Christ for his love, and to
celebrate the good turn of his suffering with praise.

3. The resurrection, ascension, and intercession of Christ, are his own
mediatory actions; therefore, that is no good reason why Christ ordained this
remembrance of his death, because it was the chief, or most properly his own
action.

4. We receive Covenant Blessings, as well as give thanks at his Supper, 1 Cor.
10.16.

5. Assurance of pardon is not necessary before we eat and drink this Supper,
it is a help to assurance, but it is a feast for the weakest believers that
thirst, that discern the Lords Body and examine themselves.

6. This, in the words, This is my Body, does not comprehend all the
Sacramental actions; each of which has its particular edifying, instructing
signification.

7. We do not only partake of Christ's benefits, but have Communion with his
Body, and Blood, 1 Cor. 10.16.

8. To bless is ill expounded to use it. To use the Cup is not a Sacramental,
Scripture Phrase. To bless it according to the institution of our Savior, is
peculiar to the Minister; the congregation joining with him, and beholding the
Sacramental actions, and hearing the words, This is my Body, Take eat, This do,
etc. In those congregations, where the household of God, do not receive every
one from the hand of the Minister, but take themselves, the whole is first
blessed, broken, poured out, and the words of institution and command repeated;
or it is no Sacrament, as was said before: See 1 Cor. 11.24. All do use it, as
they say; but all do not bless it.

9. True believers have spiritual, real, nourishing, and comforting Communion
by Faith, with the Body and Blood of Christ, and not a figurative. Benefits
flow from Communion: See again, 1 Cor. 10.16.

SECT. XXVI. Of the Lords Prayer.
1. TAke both Evangelists Matthew and Luke together, and it appears that this
prayer is both a form of prayer, and a pattern for prayer; and yet it is rather
a form of matter, than of words, seeing both those Holy Writers do not keep to
the same words. And why it may not be used as a prayer, as well as the Grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God the Father, and the Communion of the
Holy be with you, let them who use the one, but disuse the other, consider of
it: yea much rather, because there is not so much, as pray or bless the
Assembly, after this manner said of that solemn form of dismission, which is
said of this prayer.

2. The matter, and method of it is Wonderful, and deserves our study that it
may be understood. We are taught how to conceive of God, as a Glorious Father;
that his glory should be our aim above all things; how we should be affected
toward him and his Kingdom; how our Wills should come in to his Will, concur
with it, and submit to it in all things; we are taught how small a portion of
the World should content us, how we should acknowledge him to be the giver of
all; to have our dependence upon him, and to have daily recourse to him by
prayer. We are taught to confess our sins to him and be earnest for pardon, and
to what degree of grace we should grow even to forgive, and love our enemies.
We are informed of our greatest dangers, and evils, and to pray for deliverance
from evil, and temptations to evil, and how we should praise and magnify him,
as glorious in our eyes.

3. We are not tied to the very words and syllables of it, as is before
intimated; yet it is as strange that it is not used at all by some, as that it
should be the only prayer in the account of others.

4. We do not conclude our other prayers with this, as if this made our other
prayers acceptable; we are heard for our faith in Christ, and sincerity of our
hearts, and not for these words.

5. All our petitions are ultimately referred to the glory of God, our highest
end, in the first petition.

6. Great care should be taken, that all our prayers both private, and public
do agree with this holy rule of prayer. All Christians should conspire, to pray
the same things, and be always disposed to maintain Communion with God, and
with all his People, as Brethren and Children of the same Heavenly Father.

7. We should so pray, as being in earnest, and maintain our fervency to the
last, sealing our prayers with an Amen of fervent desire, Faith and trust.

The end of the second Part.
PART III. The Christian instructed in the practice of several duties.
CHAP. I. Of the practical use of the Doctrine of the Trinity, and improvement
of Baptism.
1. IT is matter of sad consideration, to see the ignorance, infidelity,
formality, and looseness of Baptized Christians who live liker unbaptized
Heathens, than Christians. Some of the causes of this ungodliness, are, 1. Some
make no more account of Baptism, than of a Ceremony; and others ascribe too
great a virtue to the very act or work of Baptizing. And generally there is
much curiosity, and expense in preparing for entertainments, where there is
little sense of what is to be done in the holy solemnity of Baptism, by prayer,
humiliation, and faith. 2. The neglect, or negligent, cold, imperfect way, of
early, and holy education of Baptized Infants. 3. The not improving of our
Baptism, when we are grown up, for graces, assistances, privileges, comforts
and engagements to God; as if the Laver of Regeneration were a Fountain dried
up, or no more to be used, than while we are first washed.

2. I have said before, that the doctrine of the Trinity is a fundamental,
practical doctrine, to be explained to all and known of all, because we are all
Baptized in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. I am
limited to a very short discourse, and therefore must say as much in little, as
I can in the following points.

In the form of Baptism, Mat. 28.19. we have two things; 1. A commission to
teach and Baptize. 2. A direction, with commandment, to Baptize in the Name;
or, into the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Here
observe, 1. The Author, or the Lord who gave this Commission, and Command; the
Lord Jesus, ver. 18.2. The parties. 1. The Minister employed, and his office to
teach the Gospel, or Covenant of grace, and to Baptize with Water. 2. The
principal parties, between whom he deals, and officiates in this solemn Act.
1. God, the most high and gracious God making, and declaring, a Covenant of
grace, and taking sinful, and undone Man into it. 2. Man graciously taken into
Covenant, and dutifully accepting of, and submitting to the grace of God,
declared in that Covenant, according to the terms, and constitution, or Laws
thereof.

3. To Baptize with Water is a Ministerial Act, between God, and the party
Baptized. By it God does graciously admit, and receive a guilty polluted Sinner
to himself, in Covenant; and the poor polluted Sinner does consent, and submit
to God, upon Covenant terms; and Baptizing with Water, is an outward, visible,
Sign and Seal, by which God does signify his grace, and bind himself, as God in
Covenant, to perform his gracious promises; and the party Baptized, does
declare and signify his humble acceptance of and sincere consent to the
Covenant of grace, and binds himself to perform what God requires of him.

4. This is done in the Name, or into the name of the Father, the Son, and Holy
Ghost. Where God does more fully and clearly, and distinctly declare himself,
than ever he did to Abraham, or any of his Covenant People before, at least
together, and at one time.

5. According to this declaration of himself, as God, the everlasting, and
Almighty (by which name he took Abraham into Covenant, Genesis 17.1.) the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, he takes his people for his own, and they take
him for their God.

6. And so we are related to God, as Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and have a
right to him as Father, as he has to us, as Children; and to him, as Son of
the Father, and what the Son has done for us, as he has a right to us, as
Children, and Brethren, Heb. 2.11,12,13,14. And we have a right, as well as
relation to God the Holy Ghost and to what he does, as he has a right to us,
to teach, lead, sanctify, and dwell in us. We have God engaged to us, and we
are engaged, and obliged to God, the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost, as such.

7. As God said, I am the Lord thy God thou shall have no other Gods but me,
binding his Covenant People to himself, in which this positive duty is implied,
Thou shall have me for thy God; so here, in our Baptism, we are engaged to have
God the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost for our God; to have him is both our
duty, and happiness.

8. Therefore we must not take up, and satisfy our selves, with the knowledge,
and faith of God in general, That God is, or that God is one, the Creator, and
Governor of all things, but must enlarge our knowledge, and faith into the
mystery of God, Col. 2.2. the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and into the
mavelous Works of Redemption, Sanctification, and Salvation, in which the
grace of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost does gloriously appear.

9. God, descending to us in Covenant and exalting us to be his People, is the
highest object of our knowledge, faith, fear, love, desire, delight, hope and
trust: We must honor and worship him, own and obey him, according to this
revelation as Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

And now I come to show you, that this Doctrine of the Trinity or three Persons
in the Godhead, is a practical Doctrine, as well as fundamental, and to be
known and believed of all Christians: and then the practical improvement of
Baptism.

1. Let us take this Mystery, as it is revealed to us.

2. And because, it is revealed to us, we ought not to be terrified from a
humble search into it. It is plain, 1. That Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are
one God; and that one God in Covenant. 2. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are
severally Named. 3. Therefore, there is a relation of the one to the other, and
a distinction between them. 4. There is an order, but no inequality in Essence,
for we are to honor, and obey the one equally with the other. 5. No doubt but
this is for his Glory, that he has thus declared himself, and for the good of
his People: and what we cannot now understand, we shall understand in Heaven, 1
Cor. 13.10. 6. Every Baptized Person must hold fast the faith, and profession
of the Trinity of Persons in the same indivisible Essence and Godhead: for
every Person is declared to be our God, to have a right to us, and we are
devoted to them, as one God, and three Persons. 7. What is briesly summed up in
this form of Baptism, is more particularly explained in Scripture, and more
distinctly in the New Testament; therefore, we ought to enquire into the
Scriptures, into the common and also distinct acts, and Operations ascribed to
God, as one, and to each one of the most Glorious Persons. 8. In these words,
we have the foundation, object, rule and measure of our holy Faith
comprehended. Our Faith is sounded upon God; he is the highest Object of it:
Our Faith must follow the Order laid down; the Father is the First Person, the
Son the Second, and the Holy Ghost the Third; and the Order of Acts and
Operations follows, according to the Order of Subsistence; the Father does all
through the Son, by the Spirit; by the Spirit we come, and believe in the Son;
and through him, we come to the Father. The Relation of the Three is double; 1.
To one another: The Father is related to the Son, as a Father; and the Son to
the Father, as a Son; and both to the Holy Ghost, and the Holy Ghost to both,
as the Spirit of the Father, and the Sun. 2. To us, who are baptized: He is a
Father, Son and Holy Ghost to us, that take him for our God. From these Names
of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, we come to have right Notions of God, as God of
Grace, Love, Authority and Power; and of our own Relation and Obligation to him
for all Grace and Mercy, and our Dependence on him, and Obedience to him, as
Children. Lastly, Here is the true Measure of our Faith concerning God: Our
Faith is defective, and unsound, if we do not believe in one God, the Father,
the Son, and Holy Ghost. The Knowledge of this great Mystery is very necessary,
and of great use to us; 1. In respect of our Faith, and Life of Faith. 2. To
direct us in our right worshipping of God. 3. In our universal new Obedience.
And indeed, the Mystery of the Incarnation, and the whole of our Redemption and
Salvation, does spring from the Mystery of the Trinity.

1. We must exercise Faith in God the Father, Joh. 5.24. -- And believes on
him that sent me, Joh. 14.1. as the Fountain of Grace, Father of Mercies, Ephesians.
1.2,3. 2 Cor. 1.3. as teaching, and drawing to Christ, Joh. 6.44,45. loving us,
Joh. 16.27. as the Father of Christ, and our Father, Joh. 20.17. 2. We must
exercise Faith in Christ, Joh. 14.1. Believe also in me; as the only Begotten
of the Father, Joh. 20.31. as the Way to the Father, Joh. 14.6. as having
Eternal Life in him, 1 John 5.11,12. It is an Observation of great moment, that
the Mediatory Offices of Christ are grounded upon, and have their Efficacy from
the Sonship of the Second Person. The Son took our Nature, and was consecrated
to be our High Priest, Heb. 7.28. The Son is our all-wise, and mighty Prophet,
Matthew. 17.5. and our King, Psalm. 2.6,7. Heb. 2.1,8. The Son has all Power and
Authority with the Father, and therefore we may draw near to him with Faith and
Confidence of Acceptance and Prevailing. 3 We must believe in the Holy Ghost.
We cannot believe in the Father, and the Son, except we believe in the Holy
Ghost: His Wisdom, and his Power, is the Wisdom and Power of God, 1 Cor. 2.4,5.
We cannot believe the Scripture, except we believe in him, by whose Inspiration
the Scriptures were spoken and written, 2 Pet. 1.21. Our Faith does depend upon
his Testimony, 1 John 5.6. He is a Witness, both in Heaven and Earth, Ver. 7,8.
We believe in him, as a Witness, a Teacher, a Comforter, Joh. 14.26.

2. We cannot worship God In Spirit acceptably, except we believe in the
Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost. That one Text is of singular use to Believers,
Ephesians. 2.18. For through him ( i. e. Christ, the Mediator) we have access by
one Spirit ( i. e. the Holy Ghost) unto the Father. And thus we worship the
Father, Ephesians. 3.14. Joh. 4.24. the Son, Heb. 1.6. Joh. 5.23. Phil. 2.6,11. and
the Holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 13.14. Prayer is made to the Holy Ghost, as well as to
the Father, and the Son: Sometimes Prayer has been made to one, Ephesians. 3.14.
sometimes to another, Acts 7.59. sometimes to two, 1 Thessalonians. 3.11,13. and
sometimes the three are named, 2 Cor. 13.14. But when one is only named, the
other are not excluded. What need have we to be renewed in the Spirit of our
Minds, that we may have divine and spiritual Thoughts and Conceptions of God,
in our Approaches to him?

3. Universal Obedience and Service is to be performed to the Father, the Son,
and Holy Ghost, Matthew. 1.6. Compare 2 Cor 6.18. with 2 Cor. 7.1. Whosoever
shall do the Will of my Father which is in Heaven, Matthew. 12.50. The Son must
be honored and obeyed, Joh. 5.23. Matthew. 17.5. Heb. 5.9. 2 Cor. 5.14,15. And
the Holy Ghost is to be served and obeyed, Romans 8. from 9. to 15. We must obey
his Motions, Teachings, Reproofs, Convictions and Commands.

So much of the first Head: Now of the second: We are enabled by the Spirit,
accepted through the Son, with the Father.

2. The Improvement of our Baptism: Consider two things; 1. All Persons
baptized, are bound to improve their Baptism for their own Good, and Glory of
God. 2. Parents ought to improve it for their Children. And then I shall show
in what Particulars, and how this Improvement, and Advantage of Baptism is to
be made.

1. Baptism is a Bond made between God and us. As by Circumcision, the Jews
were bound to observe the whole Law, though it was an Ordinance given before
the Law, Gal. 5.3: Genesis 12.7,10, to 13. so Christians are Debtors to Christ, to
observe all things commanded by him, Matthew. 28.20. Abraham was bound for
himself to walk before God, etc. Genesis 17.1. And he was eminently faithful and
sincere in performance of his Covenant-Bond, and Duty toward his Household,
Genesis 18.19. as was David also, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. yea, all Israel were strictly
commanded to teach their Children, Deuteronomy. 6.7. and so are Christian-Parents,
Ephesians. 6.4.

2. All Persons are bound for themselves, when grown up to Years of
Understanding, to remember this Bond and Covenant, solemnly entered with God.
Though they have neglected the Duties required, and have not humbly claimed the
Privileges of a Vovenant People, yet the Bond is a perpetual Bond, and the
Transgression of it will be charged upon them, to their sorer Condemnation, if
they repent not. I say, all baptized Persons are obliged to God, and must
remember their Covenant, whether they be, 1. Unconverted: Or, 2. Converted, and
called.

1. All unconverted Sinners are obliged to God the Father, the Son, and Holy
Ghost; and therefore, to serve and honor God, as a redeemed, holy People; and
therefore to turn from the Service of Sin, and their Enemies, to serve the
living and true God, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 1.9,10. Consider, 1. You have the means of
Grace and Salvation, in some measure; the design and end of all which is to
bring ^ou to God. You are not in darkness, as Pagans are: Though all of you may
not have the Light of the Gospel, shining gloriously in an able, zealous
Ministry, the want and scarcity of which is a great hindrance and loss to
Souls; yet you have the Scriptures, which are able to make you wise to
Salvation, etc. 2 Timothy 3.15,16. When the Teachers of the Jews were deeply
corrupted, it was a great benefit to have the Scriptures, Joh. 5.39. And if
Ministers are negligent, yet Parents are bound to train up their Children, Ephesians.
6.4. The very reading of the Scriptures is profitable to Salvation, Act. 8.28,
etc. 2. They who attend upon the Means of Salvation, are instructed, reproved,
warned and checked. Conscience is met with one time or other; and who is so
dead and senseless, that never found in himself a necessity of becoming a new
Man? And then, how might the Consideration of their being baptized, of the
nature and obligation of Baptism, work them toward Conversion and Reformation?
Reasoning thus with themselves:

1. I am not mine own, but God's: I am dedicated and joined to him by Covenant:
It is both my Glory, and my Duty to be the Lord's. Shall I, who am related to
the most high God, as a Child, turn to be a Child of the Devil? Shall I, who am
redeemed with precious Blood, sell my self to Sin, and become a Slave? Shall I,
who am baptized into the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Sanctification, defile my
self, and drown my self in the mire of Sin? The Sons of God are lead by the
Spirit of God, Romans 8.14. Am I God's, or am I not? If not, What? Oh, what will
become of me for ever? 2. I am washed with Water, and I must be washed with
Blood and Regeneration; or else I cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, Joh.
3.3,5. Nothing that defiles, shall enter therein, Rev. 21.27. Oh, wash me
thoroughly, and cleanse me from my Sin, Psalm. 51.2. 3. When you are convinced of
the necessity of Regeneration, improve your Baptism toward it. Say then, 1. I
am baptized into the Father, who is the Father of Mercies, and God of all
Grace; who teaches, calls, draws and meets returning Prodigals. O Father
of Mercies, make me a Child: Oh, draw me, call me, meet me, receive me. Thou
art my God by Covenant, thy Sign and Seal is upon me: Oh, forsake me not, but
put thy Spirit within me. 2. I am baptized into the Name of Jesus, who came
into the World to save Sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. Matthew. 1.21. Tit. 2.14. Oh, redeem
me by thy Power, from this Bondage, from Sin, Satan, and the evil World: Oh,
wash me by the Merits, and Efficacy of thy Blood, 1 John 1.7. Oh, bring me
home, a Stray-Sheep! Seek me, and save me. Be thou my Peace, and my Advocate.
3. I am baptized into the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Light, Wisdom, Life,
Sanctification and Holiness. Oh, make me a new Creature; wash me, according to
thy Grace and Power, Joh. 3.5. Tit. 3.5. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. Baptize me with thy
Baptism, and I shall be a new Man, and clean in thy sight.

2. Let all such as are regenerate, and called, remember their Baptism; 1. By
way of Thankfulness and Praise to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for Grace
and Love, that God is their God, and that they are his People; that they have
obtained Mercy. They may go so high as Election, and praise God as the Apostle
does, Ephesians. 1.3. to 8. 1 These. 1.2,3,4. How happy are you in such a Father,
such a Savior, such a Comforter; and that you are under Grace, and made safe
by Covenant? 2. Improve Baptism for Grace, and Growth in Grace and Holiness; 1.
Because you are separated to God, as an holy God, and are joined in Covenant;
and therefore are not Debtors to the Flesh, to live after the Flesh, Romans 8.12.
We are bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6.20. and joined to the Lord, and therefore
are one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. one Mind, one Will, one Aim, one Way and End. 2.
Because you are crucified with Christ, therefore we should be holy; see Romans
6.6. Gal. 2.20. Chap. 5.24. Chap. 6.14. By virtue of our Union with Christ, we
must go on to mortify Sin, Romans 6.3. and live to God, Romans 6. from 4. to 13.
By this we have great and effectual Assistance, and are under the strongest
Engagements to Holiness.

3. Improve your Baptism for Privileges, which are exceeding great and high:
As, 1. Apply it for your Acceptance with God, Ephesians. 1.6. Though we are vile
and hateful in our selves, yet we are beloved of the Father, accepted in the
beloved Son, and sanctified by the Spirit. 2. Apply it for Justification and
Reconciliation. The Father will not condemn them, for whom his Son died: The
Father will not be wroth with them that believe, and are in him, in whom he is
well pleased. The Terror of Condemnation is taken off by the Holy Ghost the
Comforter. 3. Apply it for Adoption, and the Privileges and Comforts of it,
Joh. 1.12. Gal. 4.6. Adopted Children have the Spirit of Adoption, and the
Earnest of the Spirit, Romans 8.23. Ephesians. 1.13. Chap. 4.30. and all things with
Christ, Romans 8.32. 4. Improve it for Communion with God, 1 John 1.3. 1 Cor.
1.9. What may not a Child have, that is fit and good for him, from a Father,
and such a Father? as Ephesians. 1.3. that comes to him in his Son's Name, and has
the Son to be an Advocate for him, and the Spirit to make Intercession in him?
See Joh. 16.26,27. 1 John 2.1. Romans 8.26. You may be bold for a Child's Portion
in Covenant, that have the Heart and Spirit of a Child.

4. Improve your Baptismal Relation to the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost, for
Assurance. The great Promise is, that God will be our God, All-sufficient for
all things, and all times. What Circumcision was, Baptism is: See Romans 4.11.
Col. 2.11,12. Say then, you have the Seal of God added to his Promise: Oh, show
it, and plead it, for Confirmation and Assurance of Pardon, Act. 2.38. Chap.
22.14. and all other Blessings.

5. Improve Baptism for your Continuance and Constancy in Duty and Obedience,
against all Temptations to Apostasy. Make quick Denials to the Importunities of
the Flesh, World and Devil. Say, What have I to do with thee, Satan? Get thee
hence. I am baptized, I am delivered and redeemed from thee, and sworn in
Covenant against thee. I am a Soldier of Christ; in his Name, by his Authority
and Power, I will resist thee. I will not turn away from Christ, nor be
treacherous to him, and mine own Soul, etc. Say to the World, I am crucified to
thee; what have I to do with thee? The Lord is my Portion. Go, tempt and allure
them that know thee not, and that have their Treasure upon Earth. I am dead to
thee: But, Lord, there is none in Heaven but thee, and none upon Earth besides
thee, etc. Psalm. 73.25. Say to the Flesh, I am redeemed, I am joined to the
Lord: Shall I take the Members of Christ, and make them Members of an Harlot?
God forbid. How shall I serve sin, that am freed from it? To this End,
Remember, 1. To whom thou art engaged: Thou art married in Covenant to the
Lord; thou art to honor thy Father in Heaven, who is better than all, above
all; thou art a redeemed Servant, and Member of Christ; thou art related and
engaged to the Holy Spirit. 2. Remember the nature of thy Obligation; it is a
solemn Covenant, an Engagement of the highest nature. 3. It is a
Pre-engagement; thou art promised to God first, and wilt not be false. 4. It is
an unspeakable Mercy, Honor and Blessing to be Sons and Daughters in Covenant
with God: Will you forfeit it? 5. Your present and future Happiness depends
upon your observing, loving, honoring, serving God, and walking before him. 6.
God will judge you by his Son Christ, in the last Day: And what will he do to
them in that Day, who are ashamed of him now? Oh! re-turn, and repent, ye
Revolters.

Lastly, Improve your Baptismal Relation and Covenant, by Mediation, by Prayer,
by Thanksgiving, by Communion at his Table; and all by Faith, with Love and
Reverence. Let it not be a small thing in your Eyes to be the Sons and
Daughters of the Almighty God, who is a great King.

Secondly, Improve your Baptism for others; Parents for your Children, 1.
Before they are baptized. 2. After they are baptized.

1. Before: From the Water of Baptism, learn and lay to heart gross Pollution,
and Corruption; such as no Soap or Nitre, no Tears, or Blood, or Righteousness
of our own could purge away. 2. Bless God heartily for the Blood of Jesus, and
the Sanctification of the Spirit. 3. See the Necessity and Benefit thereof. 4.
And then address your selves to God, as Father, Son and Holy Ghost, for your
Seed. 1. Beg that the Infant may be taken into the Covenant of Grace, with you.
2. That the Child may ever continue under the Grace, and in the Duty of the
Covenant. 3. Pray for the inward Grace, and rest not in the outward Privilege.
To that end, 1. Be sensible of the sinful Defilement, Death and Misery of the
Infant by Nature: Humble your Souls in the Sight of God, under the
Consideration of it. 2. Look unto the Promise, or free Covenant of Grace, and
the part that Infants have in it, Act. 2.39. and the Grace expressed by Christ,
to Infants, Mar. 10.13, etc. 3. Exercise Faith in the free Grace and Love of
the Father, the Love and Redemption of the Son, the Grace and Power of the Holy
Ghost. 4. Do not look upon Baptism as an empty Sign, but as an Ordinance of
God, established by a Word of Command, and Promise, for great Ends, and of
great Efficacy to those Ends, by the Operation of the Spirit. It is not a Sign
of nothing, nor a Seal of nothing; but look to the Grace of it. 5. Taking
Encouragement from Free Grace, apply your selves to the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, for the Infant, by earnest Prayer: The matter of which may be, 1. That
God would be so merciful, as to receive the Infant to Baptism. 2. That God
would be his Father, Redeemer and Sanctifier; and be his God, according to the
Grace of every Relation. 3. That the poor Infant may be taken out of the old
corrupt Stock, and planted into Christ, so as to receive Life and Nourishment
from him, Romans 6.3, etc. 4. That he may, in time, have Faith, and the Adoption,
the Privileges of a Child, and the Grace to continue in the Duties. 5. That he
may never turn after the Flesh, World and Devil; or if he do, that he may
return to God, in Covenant, and never revolt again. 6. Look upon the Grace, and
the Obligation of Baptism together; the Grace, and the Duty. Water in Baptism
is as significant and conducive to its End, as Bread and Wine in the Lord's
Supper.

2. Improve Baptism for them that are baptized: Thus, 1. Respect your Infants,
as the Children of God, committed to your Charge for Education, as more God's
than yours. Make a difference between them, and the Breed of Insidels,
Atheists, Worldlings and Devils. 2. Continue in fervent Prayers for them from
their Infancy. 3. Begin to instruct them, and train them up for God, as you
feed them; plainly, frequently, seasonably, sensibly. They will soon take
notice of things which they see; of the Moon and Stars, etc. Make known to them
the invisible God, his Wisdom, Power, Goodness and Providence. 4. As they grow
in Capacity, labor to fill them, and labor that Knowledge may enter into
their Souls: Make frequent Applications to them, when you are taken with their
Comeliness, Beauty, Features, Actions, Speeches, and how pretty they are when
dressed: Make spiritual use of these things to your selves and them. 5. Take
Considerations from their Baptism to plead for them with God; 1. When you
observe them to be dull and backward to Goodness, and forward to Naughtiness;
when you see them negligent, forgetful, untractable, and are afraid of them.
Oh, say, as you mourn to God, This Child is dedicated to thee, in Covenant with
thee. Oh, make him thine own: Work upon his Soul what I cannot: Give what I
have not to give: Teach him, redeem him, convert him, sanctify him, rule him:
O thou who did once receive him, do not now reject him. 2. When you are
crossed and afflicted, contend with them for God upon Covenant-Engagement, and
plead with God for them upon Covenant-Mercies and Promises. Show unto them what
an Honor, Liberty, Mercy it is to be God's Covenant-child; how much they are
obliged to keep Covenant with the Heavenly Father, Son and Spirit; how happy it
will be for them in the great Day to be called, Ye blessed of the Father; and
how terrible it will be to depart as cursed Revolters, and treacherous
Unbelievers, and impenitent Workers of Iniquity, to be tormented in Everlasting
Fire, with the Devil and his Angels. The Lord teach you to profit.

CHAP. II. Of Prayer. Showing whence and how the Matter of Prayer is drawn out
of the Catechism; with a Form, or Pattern of Prayer thence deduced.
Prayer is the offering up our Desires to God for things agreeable to his Will,
in the Name of Christ, with Confession of our Sins, and thankful Acknowledgment
of his Mercies.

When your offer up your Desires to God, how will you conceive of him? What
Titles will you give him? Look to Ans. 4. God is a Spirit, etc. (as follows
in the Prayer.)

You cannot expect to speed for your own sakes, nor presume to go in your own
names, or in the name of any Creature, Saint or Angel; but in the Name, that
is, by virtue of the Mediation of Jesus Christ. Here look to Ans. 30. And in
making continual Intercession for us.

In your Prayers, you offer up your Desires to God, for things agreeable to his
Will. What are your Desires? You want all spiritual and heavenly Blessings, and
temporal good things, which God has promised, and directed us in his Word to
ask; particularly, in that Prayer, called The Lord's Prayer. Particularly, pray
for the Application of the Benefits of Redemption, and the Benesits which they
who are effectually called, partake of in this Life: And what Believers do
receive at their Death, and at the Resurrection; see from Ans. 40, etc. You
must also pray for the Means of Grace, by which you obtain these Graces,
Privileges and Blessings; as the Continuance of the Christian Sabbath, as in
the fourth Commandment. See Cat. Part 3.. 5, etc. The outward and ordinary
Means, etc. You cannot but desire the Mercies of this Life, such as respect
your outward Man. What makes Men outwardly happy, but a Competency of the good
things of this Life, and Prosperity (as far as shall be for God's Glory, and
our Good.) Then Men live happily upon Earth, when every one does perform his
Duty, when we enjoy Peace, when we live in Safety, Honor, Chastity, good
Repute, outward Wealth, and are content with our own Condition; as you may
gather from what is contained in the six last Commandments.

When you pray, you must confess your Sins. What Sins? See the sinfulness of
that State into which Mankind fell, and the several Sins against each
Commandment. Make therefore your Requests known, with humble Confession of your
Original Sin; bewail your Guilt, the Loss of Original Righteousness, the
Corruption of your Nature, and your many actual Sins, of Thought, Word and
Deed; of Omission, or careless Performance of the Duties requ red; and of
Commission of Sins forbidden in each Commandment. See, and search each
Commandment, as opened in the Catechism; together with the heinousness of your
Sins, and the greatness of them, with their several Aggravations. See Part 2.
of the Cat. With a thankful Acknowledgment of his Mercies. For what Mercies?
For all Mercies revealed, offered and received; particularly, for the Covenant
of Grace, for Jesus Christ the Redeemer, for all the Benefits of Redemption,
for Grace, for the Means of Grace, for outward Mercies, public, private,
personal. We offer up our Desires for what we want, and make a thankful
Acknowledgment of what we have and enjoy. And so the matter of both is the
same; when you know what to pray for, you know also what to be thankful for.

And to humble us in the sight of God, and to make us earnest and importunate,
let us lay to heart the Misery of our State since the Fall, Answ. 22, 23, etc.

Here follows a Form, or Pattern of Prayer, sramed according to those
Directions.
Lord sesus Christ, our Advocate, in whom thou art well pleased. For thine
infinite Mercies, and for thy Goodness sake, be nigh unto us by thy Holy
Spirit, through Jesus Christ. According to the multitude of thy tender Mercies,
be merciful unto us, and blot out all our Iniquities.

A short general Confession.
We humbly confess and bewail, that the Covenant being made with Adam, for
himself, and his Posterity, we who descend from him by ordinary Generation,
sinned in him, and fell with him: And now (O Lord, most holy and just!) we are
guilty before thee; we have lost Original Righteousness, and our whole Nature
is corrupted; whereby we are apt and prone to all manner of actual
Transgressions, which proceed from this our Original Sin.

We acknowledge, that for our Sin, we are justly deprived of Communion with
thee, and fallen under thy Wratn and Curse, and made liable to all the Miseries
of this Life, to Death it self, and to the Pains of Hell for ever. Oh! we have
daily broken thy Commandments, in Thought, Word and Deed, and our Sins are very
heinous in thy Sight, because of many Aggravations.

A large Confession of Sin.
Holy Lord! our Nature is so corrupted and degenerate, that we have, by acting
according to it, transgressed all thy holy Commandments. Oh! we have not loved
thee with all our Heart, with all our Soul, and with all our Mind: We have not
loved our selves as we ought, nor our Neighbor as our selves. We are bound to
keep all thy Commandments, because thou art the Lord our God, and Redeemer.
But, Oh! we have not known thee, nor acknowledged thee, the only true God, and
our God, nor worshipped and glorified thee accordingly. As we have confessed
thee with our Mouths, so in our Works we have denied thee: We have not
worshipped and glorified thee as the only true God, as God (infinitely blessed
and glorious;) but have robbed thee, and given that to others, which is due to
thee alone; and have not considered in our Hearts, that thou (who hate
Iniquity) see all things, take notice of, and art much displeased with such
Transgressors.

We have not received, observed and kept pure and entire all such religious
Worship and Ordinances as thou have appointed in thy Word; nor have we
considered thy Sovereignty over us, Propriety in us, and the Zeal which thou
have to thine own Worship.

We have not holily and reverently used thy Names, Titles, Attributes,
Ordinances, Word and Works; but have often profaned the things whereby thou
have made thy self known; neither have we laid to heart, that though the
Breakers of this Commandment may escape Punishment from Men, yet thou, the Lord
our God, wilt not suffer them to escape thy righteous Judgments.

Glorious and holy Lord! We have not kept holy to thee such set Times as thou
have appointed, not that one whole Day in seven which is our Christian Sabbath:
We have not sanctified it, by an holy Resting all that Day, from such worldly
Employments and Recreations as are lawful on other Days, and by spending the
whole time in the public and private Exercises of thy Worship, or only in the
Works of (mere) Necessity and Mercy: But on the contrary, we have sinned by the
Omission, or careless Performance of the Duties required, by often profaning
the Day by Idleness, or that which is in it self sinful, and by unnecessary
thoughts, Words and Works, about worldly Employments, or Recreations.

And we have not, as we should, considered thy merciful allowing us six Days
for our worldly Employments, thy challenging a special Propriety in the
Sabbath Day, thine own Example, and thy blessing of it; all which should have
moved us to keep it holy.

Thus have we sinned against thine infinite, glorious Majesty: (We have sinned
against Heaven, and against thee.) To these great Offenses against thee, the
Lord our God, we have added many Sins against our Neighbor also: We have not
only failed in performing the Duty which we owe to every one, in their several
places and relations, but have (often, and many ways) done contrary thereunto:
We have sinned in not preserving the Honor, in not performing the Duties
belonging to every one, in their several places and relations; as Superiors,
Inferiors and Equals; but have neglected or done many things against the Honor
and Duty belonging to every one, in their several places and relations.

We have not been so careful and charitable as we ought, to do whatsoever
tends to the Preservation of our own, and our Neighbor's Life; of our own,
and our Neighbor's Chastity, in Heart, Speech and Behavior; but have sinned
by unchaste Thoughts, or Speeches, or Actions. We have not (studied) to procure
and further the Wealth, and outward Estate of our selves, and Neighbor; but
have often hindered both. We have not labored to maintain and promote Truth
between Man and Man, and of our own, or our Neighbor's good Name; but have
(either by Imprudence, Inconsiderateness, Want of Zeal, Credulity, or some
corrupt Affection) spoken, or entertained what is prejudicial to Truth, and
injurious to our own, and our Neighbor's good Name.

O Lord, we have not been sully contented with our own Condition, nor have
(always) had a right and charitable frame of Spirit toward our Neighbor, and
all that is his; but have been subject to Coffeehouse, to envy or grieve at
the Good of our Neighbor, and to many inordinate Motions and Affections.

For these our manifold Iniquities, Transgressions and Sins; yea, for the least
of them, we deserve thy Wrath and Curse, both in this Life, and that which is
to come; but for Jesus Christ's sake, have Mercy upon us.

O Lord, thou have been pleased, out of thy mere good Pleasure, to decree to
bring thine Elect out of the State of Sin and Misery, by the Lord Jesus Christ,
the only Redeemer. He was graciously pleased to humble himself to the Death of
the Cross, to satisfy thy divine Justice, to reconcile us to thee; and now he
ever lives making Intercession for poor Sinners.

Supplication, or offering up our Requests in the Name of Christ.
O thou, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ (the Father of Mercies, and the
God of all Grace,) for the sake of thine Eternal and Beloved Son, have Mercy
upon us; and apply to us, by thy Holy Spirit, the Redemption purchased by
Christ, by working Faith in us, and thereby uniting us to him. For Effectual
Calling.
We humbly pray thee, convince us of our Sin and Misery, enlighten our Minds in
the Knowledge of Christ, renew our Wills, and persuade and enable us to embrace
Jesus Christ, freely offered to us in the Gospel.

For Justification.
Oh, that thou would justify us freely by thy Grace, and pardon all our
Sins, and accept of us as righteous in thy sight, only for the Righteousness of
Jesus Christ, imputed to us. For Adoption.
Oh, that thou would receive us (who are, by Nature, Children of Wrath) into
the number of, and give us a right to all the Privileges of the Sons of God.

For Sanctification.
Gracious Father, by the mighty working of the Spirit of Sanctification, renew
us in our whole Man, after thine own Image; and enable us more and more to die
to Sin, and to live unto Righteousness.

For the Benefits which accompany, or flow from Justification, etc.
And being justified, sanctified and adopted, we beseech thee, vouchsafe us
Assurance of thy Love, Peace of Conscience, Joy in the Holy Ghost, Increase of
Grace, and Perseverance therein unto the End.

And when we come to our End, we humbly pray thee, at our Death, to make us
perfect in Holiness, to bring us immediately unto Glory; and let our Bodies,
being still united to Christ, rest in their Graves till the Resurrection. At
the Refurrection, we pray thee to raise us up in Glory; openly to acknowledge
us, and acquit us in the Day of Judgment; and to make us perfectly blessed in
the full Enjoyment of thee (our God) to all Eternity.

For Grace, and a Biessing upon the Means of Grace.
And, Gracious and blessed Lord, since thou have appointed Ways and Means, by
which we may attain these Blessings, we humbly entreat thee to work in us Faith
in our Lord Jesus Christ, and Repentance unto Life; and to make us diligent in
the use of all outward Means, whereby Jesus Christ does communicate to us the
Penefits of our Redemption. We beseech thee, by thy Holy Spirit, to make the
Reading and Preaching of thy Word, an effectual Means of convincing and
converting Sinners, and building up us, and others, in Holiness and Comfort,
through Faith, unto Salvation. We pray thee, teach us to attend to thy Word
with Diligence and Preparation, and to receive it with Faith and Love; to lay
it up in our Hearts, and practice it in our Lives.

Continue to thy Church thy holy Institutions and Sacraments: Bless the one to
be a Sign and Seal of our Engrafting into Christ, and partaking of the Benefits
of the Covenant of Grace, and to engage us to be the Lord's. Bless the other
also, that by Faith the worthy Receivers of it may be Partakers of the Body and
Blood of Christ, with all his Benefits, to our spiritual Nourishment, and
Growth in Grace.

For all Men, and for outward Mercies.
O Lord, thou have commanded us to pray for all Men; We beseech thee to grant
unto the King, and all our Superiors, the Spirit of Wisdom and Grace, to
perform the Duties of their several places: Help them so to rule, that our
Lives, Chastity, Wealth and outward Estate, that our good Names, and Truth
between Man and Man, may be secured, maintained and promoted; (that under them
we may lead peaceable and quiet Lives, in all Godliness and Honesty.) Grant
that, in all our Conversation among Men, we may behave our selves humbly,
reverently and obediently toward our Superiors; and may live in Peace, neither
doing Violence to the Life of our Neighbor, nor suffering from them: That we
may live soberly chastely, honestly; not hindering, but furthering the good
Estate of each other; promoting of Truth, and the good Name and Repute (without
slandering, or reproaching;) not witnessing falsely against one another;
learning to be contented with our own Condition, without Envy, or Grief at each
other's Good; and suppressing all inordinate Motions and Affections contrary
thereunto.

Against our bodily and spiritual Enemies.
O thou (who have all Power both in Heaven, and in Earth) be graciously pleased
to exercise thy Sovereign, Kingly Office, in subduing us wholly to thy self; in
ruling and defending us; in restraining and conquering all thine, and our
Enemies (both within us, and without us: Sin, Satan, and the World; and make us
more than Conquerors over all, even our last Enemy, Death.)

For the Calling and Conversion of the Elect, etc.
Gracious Lord, who of thy mere good Pleasure, did elect some of the
Posterity of fallen Man, and enteredst into a Covenant of Grace, to bring them
out of the State of Sin and Misery, and to bring them into an Estate of
Salvation by Jesus Christ; be pleased, according to the Riches of thy Grace, to
make known the Lord Jesus Christ, the only Redeemer, in all his Offices, to the
World. Reveal by thy Word and Spirit, thy Will for the Salvation of poor
Sinners; and cause thy Word to be preached, read and heard, that it may be
effectual to convince and convert Sinners, and to build them up in Holiness and
Comfort, through Faith unto Salvation.

Before you go to the Word.
O Lord, (who have Compassion on the Ignorant, and of them who go out of the
way;) who have, by thy Holy Spirit, made the Reading, but especially the
Preaching of thy Word, an effectual Means of convincing and converting Sinners,
and of building them up in Holiness and Comfort, through Faith unto Salvation;
be pleased, for Christ's sake, to prepare our Hearts, that we may attend to thy
Word, and receive it (as newborn Babes) 1 Pet. 2.1.
by Faith and Love, and lay it up in our Hearts, and practice it in our Lives.

Before the Sacrament, or Communion.
Most holy, wise and merciful Lord God; when all Mankind was fallen into an
Estate of Sin and Misery, it pleased thee to enter into a Covenant of Grace, to
bring thy People out of that sinful and miserable Condition, into an Estate of
Salvation, by thy beloved Son, the only Redeemer; thou art graciously pleased
to teach us convince, convert, build up, and comfort us by thy Word; and for
our furtherance in Faith, Holiness and Comfort, to represent to us Jesus
Christ, and all the Benefits of the New Covenant, by sensible signs, (the Bread
and Wine broken, poured out, given, and received;) and not only to represent
Christ to us, but also to seal and apply him, and the Benefits of the New
Covenart. Be thou pleased, by thy Spirit of Grace, to help us to receive the
Bread and Wine, according to thy divine Appointment, that we may receive them
worthily, and be Partakers, by Faith, of his Body and Blood, with all his
Benefits, to our spiritual Nourishment, and Growth in Grace. We pray thee, help
us to examine our selves, and so let us eat: Oh, let us not eat and drink
unworthily, not discerning the Lord's Body; but give us a clear and saving
Knowledge to discern the Lord's Body, a lively Faith to feed upon him, a
renewed Repentance to Life, a pure and fervent Love; and quicken us to walk in
new Obedience to all thy Commandments. Oh, help us to remember him, and show
forth his Death (both by our Profession, and holy Conversation) till he come
again.

For the Lord's Day.
O Lord our God, who have commanded us to remember to keep holy the Sabbath
day; for Jesus his sake, forgive us our great Forgetfulness, both in preparing
for it, and performing the Duties of it. Thou have been very merciful to us, in
allowing us six Days for our own Employments: Thou have strictly enjoined us to
sanctify this whole Day; and to move us thereunto, thou have set before us
thine own Example (both of finishing all thy Works in six Days, and resting the
seventh;) and have blessed the Day, and sanctified it: Yet we have not
considered, nor regarded these Reasons annexed to this thy holy Commandment, to
persuade and quicken us to this great and holy Duty. Pardon us, O Lord,
according to the Riches of thy Grace, this our Transgression; and seeing thou
give us hopes of enjoying another Sabbath, we beseech thee, help us by thy
Holy Spirit to sanctify this Sabbath, by an holy Resting all this Day, even
from such worldly Employments and Recreations as are lawful on other Days; In
reading, hearing, singing Psalms, Meditation, Prayer, Conference.
and to spend the whole time in the public and private Exercises of thy
Worship, except so much as is to be taken up in the Works of Necessity and
Mercy (which thou shall call us to:) And keep us, by thy Grace, from the
Omission, or careless Performance of the Duties required; from profaning the
Day by Idleness, or any thing in it self sinful; or by unnecessary Thoughts,
Words, or Works, about our worldly Employments or Recreations. And bless the
whole Day to us.

For Morning, for every Day, according to Ans. 11.
Most holy, the All-wise, and Almighty Lord God; who do by thy most holy,
wise and powerful Providence preserve and govern all thy Creatures, and all
their Actions; we do most earnestly beseech thee to give us thy Holy Spirit, to
preserve our Souls from Sin and Temptations, to govern our Thoughts, Wills,
Affections, our Words and Actions, that they may be holy. Overruled our vain,
sinful Thoughts, Imaginations, Designs, Purposes, Motions and Affections to
Evil. Raise in us Holiness of Design in our Conversation, that we may aim at
thy Glory. Give us Wisdom and Discretion to order all our Affairs according to
thy Laws: Give us Ability and Strength, that by thy Power we may carry on all
the Affairs and Works of our particular Calling; preserve us by thy Power
therein from our Enemies, and from all Harm and Danger. We humbly commit our
selves to thy holy, wise and powerful Providence; we desire thy Grace to depend
thereupon, and to ascribe the Glory of all our Success to thy Blessing. Let us
see and acknowledge thee in whatsoever shall come to pass this Day; for all
things are by thee, and through thee, and for thee; to whom be Glory for ever.

For Night.
O Lord, who have created the Evening, and the Morning; and have, by thy great
Wisdom, ordained the Night for Rest, and that part of our Time on Earth should
be spent in Sleep and Rest, that being refreshed thereby, we might be enabled
for thy surther Service. When we are at rest, we have neither Knowledge to
discern, nor Wisdom to fore see, nor Power to resist the Evils that may befall
us: But thou, by thy holy, wise and powerful Providence, preservest and
governest all Creatures, in all their Actions. Therefore we adore thy
Providence; and in considence of thy Wisdom, Power and Goodness, cast our
selves upon thee this Night; humbly beseeching thee to preserve our Souls from
Sin, (that we imagine not Evil upon our Beds,) our Persons, our Relations, our
Habitation, our Comsorts, from Danger and Destruction, from all Creatures who
are subject to thy Command. Keep us, that we sleep not the Sleep of Death; let
neither Men, nor Devils, nor any other Creature disturb or hurt us: And thou,
who governest all Creatures, and all their Actions, govern us, our
Imaginations, Affections, Senses, Actions, that sleeping or waking, we may be
thine.

And all we beg, as in the Name of Christ, so for the sake of Christ. AMEN.

Directions to use this Form, Persuasions to Family Prayer especially, and
Resolution of some Questions briefly touched.
dug up in your own Ground, if indeed, you make this little Catechism your
own. Now labor with your own Hearts, and in this small Treatise; and the Lord,
by his own Spirit, teach you how to pray. I perceive these Prayers to grow to
such a length, that I sear, some will be discouraged from the length, and
seeming tediousness of all this; therefore receive these few Counsels and
Directions.



2. If you cannot spend so much time at once for Prayer, then let that which is
omitted at one-time, be used at another; and particularly, on the Lord's Day,
and before the Sacrament, it is requisite to be more large and full.

3. The least Prayer you can use at any time, is, the shorter Confession, noted
in the Margin, with those Petitions for Effectual Calling, and the Benesits of
Redemption; for Grace, the Means of Grace, and outward Mercies; for the
Morning, and the Evening; which are all noted in the Margin.

4. Though I have not drawn up a Form of Thanksgiving for you, yet, as it is
your Duty to return Thanks for Mercies received, as much as to pray for
Mercies; so, if you observe how good God has been to you, in granting your
Requests, it is but turning that which was before the matter of your Request,
into the matter of Thanksgiving, and presenting your Returns of Praise in the
Name of Christ.

5. You may use this Prayer alone, as well as with others, changing We for I,
and I for We; Us into Me, and Me into Us. (This is necessary for the younger,
and weaker sort to observe.)

6. Take heed of praying by Rote, in mere Form, as a laudable Custom: But
strive for the Spirit of Supplication and Adoption; affect your Hearts with
your Exigencies, and the Excellency of the things you pray for.

1. Of neglecting this holy Duty, both in your Families, and in secret also. 2.
Of the careless, sleepy and cold Performance of it.


1. Consider, that God never had, nor has a Child, who does not use to call
upon him. Prayer is the first Exercise of a Convert, Act. 9.11. They who are
born of God, and adopted, have the Spirit of Sons, Romans 8.15. Gal. 4.6. They
who are effectually called, are a Royal Priesthood; every one of them offers
up spiritual Sacrifices to God, 1 Pet. 2.5,9.

2. No Master, or Superior in Families, can neglect set and solemn Prayer, in
and with his Family, without Sin and Danger.

1. Not without Sin; for, to pray without ceasing, to continue in Prayer, and
watch in the same with Thanksgiving, are joined with other Duties, which belong
to Relations and Members of a Family; see Ephesians. 6. to v. 10. and v. 18. and
very clearly, Col. 4.1,2. It is as much your Duty to continue in Prayer, etc.
with your Eamilies, as it is for your Masters to give to your Servants that
which is equal. Secondly, You cannot omit Prayer, but with Hazard and Danger,
Jer. 10.25. He is as an Heathen, who calls not upon God, and lies open to the
Fury and Wrath of God. Prayer is a Protection to Families and Persons, Ezekiel.
9.4. It Is true, many thrive, and live in Ease and Peace, who call not upon God:
But is their Prosperity and Peace blessed to them? See 1 Timothy 4.5.

2. Take heed of the cold and careless Performance of Prayer; see Mat. 15.8.
Rom 12.11. As you must not be slothful in your own Business, so not cold, but
servent in the Service of God, James 5.16. And take heed of Formality,
Hypocrisy and Boasting, Luke 18.10, etc.

Qu. But how shall I bring my Heart to be serious and earnest in this holy Duty?

Ans. 1. By the gracious Assistance of the Spirit of Supplication, who teaches
and exciteth the Soul to Prayer, and makes Intercession in us, Romans 8.26.

2. Study well, and work upon thy Heart a serious Consideration of those
Answers that unfold the State of Sin and Misery, and the places of Scripture
out of which they are taken.

3. Know, and be assured, that the multitude of thy Sins are against an higher
Law and Power, than Man's; against the infinite and sovereign Majesty of the
most high God. Arraign thy self before his highest Tribunal. Let Conscience
indict thee of the Omissions of what is commanded by the holy Law of God, and
which thou art engaged, by solemn Promise in Baptism, to obey and keep; and
what thou have committed, which is expressly and clearly forbidden. And then
consider against whom thou have offended; even that God who is infinite in
Holiness, hating Sins; in Righteousness, taking Vengeance upon all Impenitents;
in Wisdom, knowing where to find you out, and where to punish you; in Power,
able to undo thee, and to torment thee in Hell for ever, and to make this World
an Hell to thee.

4. Lay to heart the desert of every Sin, God's Wrath and Curse, all the
Miseries of this Life (though he forbear, and spare thee,) the Sting of Death,
and the Pains of Hell.

5. Affect thy Heart with the Heinousness of thy Sins, and their many
Aggravations, whereby thou deservest far sorer Punishment. And if ever thou will be scrious, these Considerations will make thee.

Quest. But what do you mean by the Aggravations of Sin?

Answ. By Aggravations of Sin, are meant, those Circumstances which render the
Sin greater. To aggravate, is to greaten, magnify, to make to weigh heavier.
Such as these: The Person offending, if of Age, Place, Office, Experience,
Profession; does more offend, even in the same Sin, than others do: Thou that
teach another, etc. Romans 2.21. Heb. 5.12. For instance; The Quality of the
Person offended; as God, Christ, Spirit, Superiors, etc. Sins against the
Gospel are greater than against Moses's Law; as being against clearer Light,
and Grace more amply revealed. Sins often repeated, long continued in, against
Reproof, Purposes, etc. and the Circumstance of Time, makes the Sin the
greater: As, to ^erve Sin, the Devil and the World, on the Lord's Day, or any
other time of divine Worship. These, and other Circumstances, do aggravate;
that is, do add to the greatness and weight of the Offense.

Quest. But when I see my Iniquity, and my Sin, and am humbled for them, how
shall I deal with God for Mercy? What shall I say, and plead?

Answ. 1.Confess thine Iniquity, and lament thy perishing Condition without a
Redeemer, if God had left thee to perish in the Estate of Sin and Misery.

2. Plead this; that God, out of his own mere good Pleasure, without thy
seeking, or the motion of any for thee, did elect some to Eternal Life, and did
enter into a Covenant of Grace, to bring them out of the State of Sin and
Misery, and to bring them into an Estate of Salvation, by a Redeemer.

3. Plead that the Eternal Son of God became Man, etc. that he offered up
himself a Sacrifice, to satisfy Divine Justice, to reconcile us (Sinners) to
God, that that Satisfaction is accepted by the Father, and that he makes
continual Intercession for all that come unto him heavy laden and weary.

4. Seeing that God was graciously moved, of his own good Pleasure, to contrive
the Redemption of Sinners by his Son Christ; and seeing that Jesus Christ had
given Satisfaction to the Divine Justice, and finished his Work; and seeing it
is the Office of the Holy Spirit to apply the benefits of Redemption to
miserable Sinners, in the Work of Effectual Calling, be instant with him, that
he would be pleased to convince thee of thy Sin and Misery, and to enlighten
thee in the Knowledge of Christ, and renew thy Will, and to persuade and enable
thee to embrace Jesus Christ, who is freely, and as he is freely offered to
thee in the Gospel. Beg earnestly to be taken into the Covenant of Grace, and
to be taken into the number of Elect Children.

5. Be not sparing to insist upon this, that Jesus Christ, with all the
Benefits of Redemption, is freely offered to thee, as well as others, being
offered to all, in the Gospel; and therefore, though thou art unworthy, plead
the Freeness of the Grace offered, and urge that thou may have a Share and
Portion in that free Grant, and that thou do come to declare thy Acceptance
of it.

CHAP. III. Directions for the worthy Receiver to examine and prepare himself
to receive the Lord's Supper.
1. What a Sacrament is. 2. What the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is. 3. What
is required of the worthy Receivers of it.
See those Answers.

Quest. What do you understand by Worthy Receiving?

Answ. Not that any of us can be worthy of it, but that we must be fitted and
prepared for it; and so worthy for it, when we come in a manner suitable to it,
and rightly disposed. It does not signify Merit and Desert, but Disposedness,
Fitness, Suitableness and Preparation, according to the Rule of the Gospel, and
the Institution of Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1.24. to ver. 30.

1. What is to be done by worthy Receivers, before they come. 2. What in the
time of Receiving and communicating. 3. What is to be done afterward.


For the first of these, your Catechism shows you, It is required of them that
would worthily partake of the Lord's Supper, that they examine themselves of
their Knowledge to discern the Lord's Body, etc.

Quest. To examine your selves: What Is that?

Answ. To put your selves to it (as the common Phrase is,) to demand, and urge
to know, whether you have Knowledge to discern the Lords Body, and Faith to
feed upon him, etc. It is, to enquire in general into your spiritual State,
what manner of Christians you are; and in particular, to know how you are
disposed toward Christ in this Ordinance; and to know this by Search and
Trial, not resting in Guesses and Presumption.

The Graces and Dispositions of Soul which you are to examine, in order to your
Eating and Drinking worthily, are five. 1. Knowledge to discern the Lord's
Body. 2. Faith. 3. Repentance. 4. Love. 5. New Obedience.




Quest. What is it to discern the Lord's Body?

Answ. For your understanding of this, keep in your Mind the Notion of a
Sacrament; remember what this Sacrament is. Yet, to help you herein, observe
the Elements, or outward Matter of the Sacrament, and what they (the Bread and
Wine, broken, poured out, given and received, eaten and drunken) signify,
betoken, or stand for. You see plainly Bread and Wine, but observe the Actions
of the Minister.

1. He blesses; that is, he prays, and sets them a part, according to
Divine Appointment.

2. He breaks the Bread, and pours out the Wine; which does represent, and
bring to your Mind the Death of Jesus Christ, as shedding his Blood, even to
Death, to satisfy Divine Justice, etc. Col. 3.4.
And know, that he who gave his Life a Ransom for many; for so doing, he is the
Life of them that believe; 1 John 5.12.
and therefore he that has the Son, has Life.

3. Observe the Bread and Wine thus blessed, broken and poured forth, are given
to you by the Hand of the appointed Officer; denoting that God does exhibit,
offer and give to every faithful Soul, his crucified Son, with all his Benefits
for Life and Nourishment.

And Lastly, As an hungry Man receives Food, eats and drinks for the
Maintenance of his Life; which is maintained, when the Food which he eats is
digested by him, so also, when you take, eat and drink the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ by Faith, you are united to him spiritually; (which Union is
signified by taking, eating and drinking the Bread and Wine) and receive
spiritual Life, Nourishment and Growth in Grace. Now therefore, if you discern
the Lord's Body, you do sensibly perceive, that what is given and received,
eaten and drunken, is not the same natural Body and Blood of Christ crucified,
and shed at Jerusalem, and now in Glory. You know by your Senses, that it is
truly and substantially Bread and Wine. Yet Secondly, you observe, that though
this Bread and Wine be the same for kind, with other common Bread and Wine, yet
it is not common Bread and Wine in the Use and End of it; but you see it
broken, blessed, given, taken and eaten, as betokening the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ, which was offered as a Sacrifice to satisfy Divine Justice, and
is now offered and given to you of God, with all the Benefits of the New
Covenant, which is confirmed by that precious Blood. So then, you see the Bread
and Wine, but discern the Body and Blood of Christ, signified and represented
by them. When you see the Bread and Wine so blessed to this blessed End, you
must believe and know that the Redeemer and all his Benefits are communicated
to you. Examine now your Knowledge; 1. That it is Bread and Wine. 2. The
Actions (Sacramental,) and what they signify. 3. The Use and End for which
they are applied. Say then, Here are Bread and Wine, the Signs of that blessed
Body and Blood which were given for Sin. And because it is not common Bread and
Wine, they should not eat and drink it in a common manner, but worthily; i. e.
in a manner befitting so great a Mystery.

2. Trial of Faith.
The second Grace, about which you must examine your selves, is Faith: Search
and enquire whether you have it in you. To that End you must remember two
things: 1. What saving Faith is. 2. Examine whether it be in you.


For the first, see the Cat. Part 3. Answ. 3. Remember that Faith in Jesus
Christ is a saving Grace, whereby we receive, and rest upon him alone for
Salvation, as he is offered to us in the Gospel.

For your better proceeding in the second thing, viz. your Examination, whether
you have this Saving Faith in Jesus Christ, begin with the latter end of your
Answer: How is Jesus Christ offered in the Gospel? To that End, look back to
Answ. 23,24,25,26. Christ, as our Redeemer, executes the Offices of a Prophet,
of a Priest, and of a King, both in his State of Humiliation and Exaltation.
See and observe the three other Answers distinctly. Let us go on therefore: How
is Jesus Christ offered in the Gospel? Answ. As the only Redeemer of God's
Elect, as the only Savior, exercising a three fold Office, of a Prophet, of a
Priest, of a King, etc. Such as he is, in such a way, he is freely offered in
the Gospel.

etc. Do I believe that God has revealed, or made known his Will for my
Salvation? That Jesus Christ has revealed that Will of God clearly and fully?
Am I sensible of my going astray from the Way to Happiness? Am I sensible of my
Ignorance of the Way to Life? Is there any other Way, or any other Prophet, to
direct me to Eternal Life? Do I renounce all other that are contrary to this? 2
Pet 1.19.
Do I believe this to be the sure Word of Prophecy, to which I do well to take
heed; 2 Timothy 3.16.
that was given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for all things? Do I
know that I need both the Word, and the Spirit of Christ? Do I take Jesus
Christ, as my infallible Prophet, to teach me by his Word and Spirit; not
cleaving to the Word, without the Spirit; nor pretending to the Spirit, without
the Word? Who is my Prophet and Teacher? What is the Rule of my inward and
outward Man, to direct my Heart and Conversation? Do I keep to this Rule? Can I
rest upon this Teaching of Jesus Christ, by his Word and Spirit, as alone
sufficient for my Salvation?

the Father well pleased in him? Is not he offered to me as Righteousness and
Redemption? Do I receive him alone, renouncing all Self-Righteousness and
Merit, or the Merit and Intercession of Saints and Angels? And do I rest upon
him alone for my Salvation, as my only Mediator and Intercessor?

spiteful, cruel Adversaries, that seek to destroy my Soul; the Flesh within,
the Devil and the wicked World without me; beside the last Enemy, Death? Oh,
how unable am I to go out against them! Are they not more, and mightier than I?
Can any but the Lord Jesus, the only Potentate, and King of Kings, restrain and
conquer them? Can he do both; not only restrain, but also conquer them all? Are
they not his Enemies, as well as mine? Oh then, do I receive him, to subdue me
wholly to his Obedience? Do I own him as my Sovereign King? And do I rest upon
him, that he will subdue my sinful Lusts, though they are often too hard for
me? Do I rest upon his Power to protect me, or to restrain his and mine
Enemies? Do I believe that he is able to bring me to Glory, notwithstanding all
Opposition from all mine Enemies? How shall I withstand Temptations, mortify
my Lusts and Passions, overcome the World, endure Persecutions, and go forth to
meet the last Enemy? -- Then, O my Soul, rest upon him still. In a word,
Examine if you receive him as a Prophet for Wisdom; for Righteousness, as a
Priest; for Sanctification and Redemption, as a King: See 1 Cor. 1.30. Do you
rest upon Christ alone, whole Christ, and none but Christ? What Answer does thy
Heart make to these Demands?

3. Trial of Repentance.
That you try and examine your Repentance, remember what it is: See the Cat.
Part 3. Answ. 4. Repentance unto Life is a Saving Grace, whereby a Sinner, out
of a true Sense of his Sin, and Apprehension of the Mercy of God, in Christ,
does, with Grief and Hatred of his Sin, turn from it, unto God, with full
Purpose of, and Endeavor after new Obedience.



Quest. Here you may desire to know, when a Sinner is duly sensible of his Sin?

Answ. You may know by what accompanies it: When he does with Grief of Heart,
and Hatred of his Sin, (his old, beloved, secret Sin,) turn from it, unto God,
with full Purpose of, and Endeavor after new Obedience. No Man is sensible of
Sin, as highly offensive, and contrary to God, but does grieve and sorrow for
it: No Man is sorry in a Godly sort, that does not turn from it, unto God, as
hating it, and endeavoring to please God. Men may hear of Sin, and talk of it,
without these Effects; but they were never sensible of what they speak.



3. Do I grieve for Sin? What is my Grief? Is it deep and hearty, arising in me
from a clear Sight and Conviction of Sin? Do I grieve that I ever sinned at
all, that I have dishonored and displeased God, though I should not go to
Hell, nor fear it? Does it break my Heart, and make me mourn before God, when I
remember it?

4. Do I hate it? Do I hate all Sin in general, for its corrupt, base and
devilish Nature and Qualities? Do I hate mine own Sin in special? Do I flee
Occasions, and watch against Temptations to it? Do I pray against it, to be
delivered from it, and enabled against it? Do I die to it, and mortify it, and
cease to make provision for it? These are the Signs of Hatred of Sin.

5. Have I turned from Sin? Do I turn further and further from it? Whose am I?
To whom do I belong? Satan? Or am I turned from him, to God? Am I really
turned, so that I yield those Members, which were Instruments of
Unrighteousness unto Sin, to be Instruments of Righteousness unto God? Do I
turn to love, fear and serve him, as the Lord my God?

6. How do I turn? Feignedly, weakly, and in pretense; or with a Purpose of
Heart? Is my Purpose full and fixed, or but half persuaded? Am I so turned,
that I resolve, in the strength of Grace, to return back no more, but to go
forward? Do I so purpose, that I will endeavor all Ways, by all Means, by the
use of all Ordinances, to walk in new Obedience, as a new Man? Do I turn to
God, as well as cease from Sin? Whence do my Resolutions and Purposes arise? Do
they arise from that Saving Grace of the Spirit, working in me a Sense of Sin,
as Sin; and an Apprehension of the Mercy of God in Christ? Or do spring from
worldly Sorrow, Fear, or Shame; Loss, or Harm; sudden Passion, or serious
Consideration?

4. The Trial of Love.
Love: And though your Catechism tells you, you must examine your Love; yet it
helps you not to try it, as you are helped in the Trial of Faith and
Repentance. It will be necessary for me to open to you the Nature and
Properties of this divine Grace; and that by showing you the Objects of it, or
toward whom this Grace of Love is exercised.

Examine your Love, 1. To God. 2. To Man.

1. Concerning your Love to God, you must observe, that we are bound to love
God in those three distinct Relations in the Godhead; that is, we must love the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; for in our Baptism we take these three
glorious Persons in the God head, for our God: And what Duties we are engaged
to in our Baptism, we must exercise and engage our selves anew to perform when
we come to the Lord's Table; for then, and there we renew our Covenant with
God. And as we are bound to believe in God the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, so we are bound to love the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost.

This being spoken on the way, I shall describe this Grace of Love, as near as
I can, as Faith and Repentance are described before; and that by pointing out
the Cause and Reasons, and the Effects of it, by which you may try the Truth of
it.

Rom 5.8. Luk 7.37. Ps 116 1,2,3. to 10. Cant. 1.3. chapter 5.9,10 1 John
4.9,10,19. Ps. 63 2,3. Deuteronomy. 30.20. c. 10.20 c. 11.22. Joh. 14.15. 1 John 5.3.
chap. 3.1,6. chap. 4.10,11.
Love to God is a Saving Grace, whereby a Sinner, out of the sense of his Sin,
Baseness, Corruption and Misery, and from an Apprehension of the infinite
Perfections of God; especially, his Grace, Goodness and All sufficiency, he
does adore and admire him, he does desire him, and cleave to him; he labors
to do the things that please him, and to conform to him in all things.

etc. See Exodus 34.6,7. Do thou believe the Love of God to thy Soul? Is he
thy God? Has he engaged his Attributes and Glory to thee, to be on thy side,
and for thy good? Do thou believe thy self to be corrupted, polluted, guilty
and helpless? Do thou look upon the Creatures as vain, and unable to make
thee happy; that God is All-sufficient for thee in all Conditions, at all
Times? Do thou adore and praise him? See Psalm. 103. from 1. to 19. Do thou
believe that God is infinitely better than all Creatures, and to be loved above
all? And do thou esteem and love him above all the World, even with all thy
Heart, Strength, Soul and Mind, Matthew. 22.37. Luke 10.22. even above Father,
above Mother, Wife, House, Lands; yea, Life it self? Do thou desire him,
prize him, and prefer him before all? Psalm. 16.5,6. and 4.6,7. and 144 15. Do
thou labor to be like him, to imitate him, to keep his Commandments? 1 John
4.10,11. 1 Pet. 1.17. and still to give God the Precedence, to choose him above
all, to fear him more than Men or Devils, and to obey him rather than Man? This
in general.



1. Examine your Love to God the Father. Say to thy Soul, O my Soul, What am I
about to receive? Bread and Wine But what is represented thereby? The Body and
Blood of thy dear Savior, the only begotten of the Father, as crucified, with
all the Benefits of his Death? But whence came this to pass? How came he to be
one of us, in our Nature, to be thus abased and crucified, to become a
Propitiation and a Ransom for Sin? Oh, behold and wonder, Romans 5.5,8,9. This is
an Act of the Father's Love and Grace. Do thou perceive and admire the
Father's Love, in making a Covenant of Grace, to bring thee, and such as thou
art, out of the State of Sin and Misery; (mark that) and to bring thee into the
State of Salvation by the Redeemer? Admire this way; that it should be by a
Redeemer, that the Redeemer should be the Eternal Son of God, that such a
glorious Person should so humble himself, and die such a Death for Enemies and
Sinners, when Sacrifices and Offerings God would not! Heb. 10.5. Oh, do thou
not love the Father, 1. Because he was pleased, of his mere good Pleasure, to
decree the Salvation of poor Sinners?

2. Because he took that way to bring his chosen ones out of Sin and Misery, to
obtain Everlasting Salvation?

3. Because he sent his Son, 1 John 4.9. Joh. 3.16.
in the Form of a Servant, to humble himself to Death, even the Death of the
Cross, to take away Sin, by that kind of ignominious and painful Death?

4. For sitting him thereunto: For it pleased the Father, that in him should
all Fullness dwell, Col. 1.19. Heb. 2.10,11,17. chap. 7.26.

5. And that when all other means could not do it (as was intimated before?)
Heb. 10.5.

6. And who, and what are they, for whom the Infinite Wisdom does consult,
Infinite Mercy and Grace act in such a wonderful way and manner? Even Sinners,
Enemies, when weak; weak, and without Strength; and therefore worthless, and
good for nothing, Romans 5 6,7,8.

7. And to make this Love more admirable, that every one that believes, should
become a Child of God, 1 John 3.1. Joh. 1.12.

Study and behold this infinite Mercy and Grace: He gave his Son to be thy
Redeemer, and gives every one that shall be saved to his Son: And though they
are given to the Son in Election, to be redeemed by him, they must come to
Christ; but they cannot come, except the Father draw them, Joh. 6.39,44,45.
Does not thy Love grow warm, and gather Strength by these Considerations?

Herein is Love: God gives and sends his Son to be thy Savior; a complete and
perfect Savior he is; and he, with the glorious Purchase of his Blood, things
present, and things to come, a Testament full of Blessings, sealed in that
precious Blood, is set before thee, upon the Table! Now the Father of Mercies
is ready to receive thee; and if thou receive thy Savior, thou shall be made a
Son, even a Co heir with Christ.

Perceivest thou not the Love of God in all this? Examine thy self now: Is not
God better than Father and Mother to thy Soul? What says thy Heart to this
Father's Love? Will thou love him better than Father and Mother? Will thou
honor and reverence him as a Father, high above all? Will thou serve and
imitate him, Ephesians. 5.1. and pass the time of thy sojourning here in his sear?
1 Pet. 1.17. Show thy Love, by keeping all his Commandments. Will thou refuse
to be abased, shamed, afflicted, persecuted, and even to die, when he calls
thee to it, for his sake, and for his Glory? Herein thou will manifest thy Love
to him, who has blessed thee, etc. Ephesians. 1.3.

Cant. 1.3. Because of the savor of thy good Ointment, etc. therefore do the
Virgins love thee. The Reasons of thy Love to Christ may be reduced to two
Heads; 1. What he was, and became for thee. 2. What he is to thee, and for thy
benefit.

1. What he was, and became for thee. And here observe, that thy Love must run
out toward him, as thy Redeemer, in his threefold Office. And take notice of
this; Whatever Christ was for thee, in reference unto God, he performed as thy
High Priest; and because he discharged that Office, he is become a Prophet, and
a King. Had he not satisfied the Divine Justice, and reconciled God to Sinners,
he could never have taught his Church the Way of Salvation; because there would
have been no Salvation wrought or purchased, and he should have had no People
to rule and defend.

Now examine thy self: Do thou not wonder that the Eternal Son of God should
become thy Redeemer? Thy Redeemer, who art the sinful Offspring of sinful
Parents? That he should take upon him the Seed of Abraham, and not the Nature
of Angels? Heb. 2.16.
That he should save thee by his own Debasement, Dishonor, and bitter
Sufferings? Have thou not Cause to love him, 1. For taking thy Nature, so much
below him, into Union with his glorious Person?

2. For taking thy Nature, with all the afflictive Meanness of it; not with
Honors, Ease, Pleasure, Reputation and Pomp? Mar. 10.45.
He who was the Lord of all, came not to be ministered unto, but to minister.

3. For suffering the Wrath of his own Father, as a most provoked, mighty
Judge, who spared not his own Son? Romans 8.32.

4. For taking on him the Guilt of Sin, which is most odious and contrary to
him; so far as, that he who was holy, harmless and undefiled, did bear the Sins
of many, Isa. 53.11.
and was numbered among Transgressors, to suffer the most bitter and reproachful
cursed Death; and that for the Transgressions of his apostatized and revolted
Creatures? And now still he makes Intercession for thee, he pleads his own
Sufferings for thy Salvation, and his Merits for thy Discharge.

Ask thine own Soul seriously; What would thou have done, had not he thus
low abased himself, and been thy Surety? How could thou have reconciled the
provoked Majesty of Heaven? Could thou have born the Wrath and Curse which
was due to thee for thy Sin? Oh, how should the Sense of Sin, Guilt and
Damnation, due to thee, beget a deep Sense of thy Savior's Love, and thereby
inflame thy Love?

2. Consider what he is to thee, and for thee: Surely he is All in all, a
merciful and faithful Savior. Have thou any Knowledge of thy fallen, depraved,
cursed, woeful Condition? And does it not make thy Love to burn within thee? He
was a Surety for thee, and he is a Savior to thee: He gave himself for thee,
and now he gives himself to thee, with a large Share, and full Portion of the
Purchase of his most precious Blood. Know thou not that the holy and jealous
God was angry with thee, that all the Miseries of Life, Death and Hell were due
unto thee, and that neither thy Tears nor Blood could wash away thy Sin; and
that Christ has done all that was required for thy Atonement? Oh, do thou
not love him entirely and intensely, to the highest degree, who procured thy
Pardon by his own Condemnation and bitter Death; who has obtained for thee an
Acquittance from thy Trespasses and Debts, a Patent for Adoption, and a Kingdom
with that Prerogative, even a Co heirship with himself? Romans 8.17.

Now thy Love to Christ, as thy Priest and Advocate, will appear,

1. In thy high prizing his Righteousness, and counting thine own, even all
things, but Loss for him, Phil. 3.8,9.

2. In esteeming thy Life to be wrapped up in him, 1 John 5.12. Col. 3.3,4.



1. Do thou love and delight in his Word and Ordinances? Do thou keep his
Word, and treasure it up in thy Heart? Joh. 14.23.

2. Do thou submit thy carnal Reason to the Spirit and Word of Christ? Do
thou embrace the Motions of his blessed Spirit, though contrary to the
Inclinations of thine own carnal Affections and Lusts? Thy Obedience to his
teaching will prove thy Love to him, and thy Delight to hear him.



1. Art thou glad that there is a Law forbidding Sin; that there is a Law in
thy Mind, warring against the Law in thy Members? Do thou yield thy self to
his Rule and Government? And do thou account it thy Liberty, and thy
Happiness to be under his Command?

2. Do thou bring all thy Lusts to his Cross, to be crucified; and deliver up
thy most beloved Sins, to be mortified by his Spirit? This is a sure Sign of
Love to him, when we do not tolerate any Lust against his Will.

3. Art thou for Christ, against all that rise up against him? Do thou seek
his Glory, endeavor that his Scepter and Throne may be set up and exalted in
the World, and in thine own Heart?

4. Art thou prepared to follow him, the Captain of thy Salvation; to leave
all, and follow him; as one that goes a Warfare after Christ, to sight the good
Fight of Faith, and withstand the Flesh, World and Devil?

Thus far of the Love to the Second Person, with the Reasons and Effects of it.



1. For his infinite Excellencies; as God.

2. For his Work and Office; which is, to apply to us the Benefits of our
Redemption. The Spirit of God does these things for thee, in order to thy
Salvation; for which thou art infinitely obliged to love him.

1. He reveals the deep things of God, the Mysteries of Redemption, 1 Cor.
2.10,11,12.

2. He enlightneth thy Mind, to see and know the things of thy Peace, Ephesians. 1.17.

3. He does convince thee of thy Sin and Misery, and thereby he prepares thee
for Cure and Deliverance, Joh. 16.8.

4. The Renewing of the Will is from him, who is the Spirit of Regeneration,
Joh. 3.5.

5. He persuades and enables every one to believe and embrace Jesus Christ,
that shall be called and saved, Ezekiel. 36.27.

6. He sanctifies the Heart; yea, the whole Man, throughout; and makes thee
holy, that thou may see God, if ever thou see him, 2 These. 2.13.

7. He teaches thee to cry Abba, Father, as the Spirit of Adoption, Gal. 4.6.

8. He seals all that are sealed to the Day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30.

9. And all the spiritual true Joy, Peace and Comfort, which any one has, come
from him, Gal. 5.22. together with all Ability for any Service, Fruit and
Benefit from Ordinances; which would not have been effectual to Salvation, if
he had not blessed them. So that if you love Grace, or hope for Glory, you
cannot but adore and love the Holy Ghost, even as the Father, and the Son.

Show and manifest your sincere Love to the Holy Ghost, by your Love to the
Word given by his uspiration, and all holy Ordinances. And for what do you love
the Word and Ordinances? Try it: Is it not for the heavenly Wisdom, Holiness,
and the divine Efficacy and Tendency of them, to make you wise to Salvation?

2. If you love the Holy Ghost, you will desire and improve Communion with him
in all divine Institutions and Ordinances, in which he is graciously pleased to
communicate his Graces: As in preaching the Word, Isa. 61.1. in Prayer, Romans
8.26,27. in Sacraments, Matthew. 3.11. He makes the Christian within, Romans 2.29.
engrafting us into the Body, 1 Cor. 12.13. He makes the Flesh of Christ to be
Bread indeed, and his Blood to be Drink indeed, and his Words to be Spirit and
Life, Joh. 6.63. Ephesians. 5.18,9.

3. You will walk in the Spirit, and bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit, Gal.
5.22. and 16.

And thus much of our Love to God.

to every Man, being your Neighbor in true Sense.

Your Neighbor is either a Brother, or an Enemy.

1. Try your Love to all the Saints, and holy Brethren; not only in that
particular Society of Christians, with whom you hold personal and local
Communion; but to all that are scattered abroad, though under different
Governments and Administrations, as to Circumstances of Worship; even all that
are in the Body, and that love our Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity, Ephesians. 6.24.
1 Cor. 1.2.
You cannot love Christ, except you love the Brethren, 1 John 4.20. Joh.
13.34,35. 1 Cor. 10.17. For we being many, are one Body.

Examine your selves: 1. Do you love them, as being all one in Christ Jesus, 1
Cor. 16.24. as Fellow-heirs of the same Grace? Ephesians. 3.6. And do you love them
for the Truth's sake, and for the sake of Grace; even against all the
Prejudices of Custom, Education, and smaller private Differences? See Gal.
3.27,28. 1 Cor. 12.13.

2. Do you love them, though they excel you in Gifts and Graces, Degree and
Place; or them that are many Steps below you in the World? See 1 Cor. 12.24,25.
chap. 13.4.

3. Can you sympathize with them, and suit Affections to their various
Conditions, 1 Cor. 12.26. Bear one another Burdens? Gal. 6.1,2. Can you visit
them, and take part with them in their Reproaches and Sufferings for Christ and
Righteousness? Act. 7.23. Heb. 11.25,26.

4. Does your Love extend to all the Saints? Ephesians 6.34. 1 Cor. 16.24.

5. Can you break with all the World, rather than with them; and do and suffer
more for them, than for any other; and count Jerusalem your chief Joy? Psalm.
137.6.



1. Do you pray for them, that God would turn them, and forgive them? Mat.
5.44. Act. 7.60. Luke 23.34.

2. Can you forgive them their Trespasses, Luke 11.4.
as far as they are against you? As they are against the Law of God, you cannot
forgive; but so considered, you must pray for them: But as the Sin is an
Offense against you, Charity requires you to forgive them; Ephesians. 4.32. Col. 3.13.
and not only the Offense is to be forgiven, but the Injury and Damage, if it
be small and tolerable. But if you cannot, without Sin, remit the Damages, yet
you must seek your Right with a charitable Heart.

3. Can you feed your Enemy, when hungry; and cloth him, when naked? Romans
12.20. In a word; Endeavor to carry your self according to the Law of Love,
Romans 13.10.

5. Trial of New Obedience.
New. New Obedience, is an hearty, sincere Respect, or Aim at God's Glory, in
keeping all his Commandments; or having a Respect to all God's Commandments,
and walking before God in Righteousness and Holiness all the Days of our Life,
being redeemed from the Hand of our Enemy. It is called New Obedience, in
opposition to the Service of Sin, or obeying the Law in our Members: For we
being Sinners by Nature, and corrupted with Original Sin, are inclined and
given to serve Sin, and to live after the Flesh, Romans
6.11,12,13,16,17,18,19,20. But when we are united to Christ in our Effectual
Calling, and have Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ,
then we become dead to Sin, and free from the Dominion of it; we are married
unto Christ, in Covenant, that we may abound in Fruits of Righteousness, which
are by Jesus Christ, to the Praise and Glory of God, Philip. 1.11. Romans 7.4. We
are bound to do whatsoever he commands us, Matthew. 28.20.

1. The Subject and Principle, or Root of this New Obedience. 2. The Rule of
it. 3. The End and Design of it.


1. Whence is it that you perform Service or Obedience unto God? Do you serve
him from Faith, Love, and unfeigned Repentance toward God? Are you effectually
called? (Remember what that is.) Are you united to Christ by Faith? (See what
that is.) Are you turned from all Sin, from your bosom, darling, costly Sin, to
God, to obey his Law? (Try your Repentance.) Have you a new Heart? Have you the
Image of God renewed upon you? Are you sanctified by the Spirit? (Look to Ans.
35.) For New Obedience proceeds from the Heart, renewed and sanctified.

Will of God, Psalm. 119.105. Thy word is a lamp to my feet, etc. V. 6. When I
have respect to all thy Commandments, at all times, always, even to the End,
Psalm. 119.112. Phil. 2.12. He that is such an one, does not live in any known
Sin, nor neglect any known Duty: He makes Conscience of Duty to God and Man,
Act. 24.16.

New Obedience proceeds from a Principle of Renewing Grace, is regulated by the
Word of God, and directed to his Glory: And so what you learn first in your
Catechism, is the End of your Conversation and Obedience: See Col. 1.10. Phil.
1.11. 1 Pet. 2.9. chap. 4.11.

Preparation for the Lord's Supper.

Having examined your Hearts, if you find these Graces in you, then the Work of
Preparation is, to stir up the Grace of God given you, in putting your Souls in
a readiness to receive Jesus Christ, as offered to you, with all the Benefits
of the New Covenant, by adding to your Self-Examination, humble Consession of
Sin, earnest Supplication for Forgiveness of Sin, and Grace. If you find a
Want, or Weakness of Grace, then sharpen your Desires after it, and pray for
it; and add your Thanksgiving for the Means of Grace, and for Grace received.

Thus much for the Duties before the Sacrament.

CHAP. IV. Duties at, and after the Communion; together with Motives and
Persuasions to perform the whole Duty in a due manner.
Faith, and the Benefits of the New Covenant. Look unto Christ crucisied, with
a broken Heart, sorrowing for Sin. Meditate on the Love of God in his Son
Jesus, on the Sufferings of Christ, on the Satisfaction given, Redemption and
Victory obtained for thee: Cast thy self upon him, trust to him, give thy self
to him, delight in his Love, apply him for what thou do most stand in need
of; renew thy Covenant, and thy Engagement to be the Lord's, and excite thy
Love to all Saints, and be thankful.



1. Consider, Have you discerned the Lord's Body, made an affectionate
Remembrance of him? Have you received him by Faith? Are you nourished by him?

2. If you find Quickening and Comfort, then bless God for it, beg a Continuance
of it, watch against Relapses, fulfill your Vows, encourage yourselves to a
frequent Attendance on that Ordinance.

But 3dly, If you find not present Benefits by it, then you must more exactly
review your Preparation and Carriage at the Sacrament; in both which, if you
can approve your selves to God, and your own Conscience, then wait for the
Fruit in due time: But if you find that you have failed in either (Preparation
or Carriage) you must be humbled, and attend upon it afterward with more Care
and Diligence.

in the last Day, between the Sheep and the Goats: Woe, woe to them, when Christ
shall bid them depart from him, who, for Love of Ease, Ignorance and wilful
Impenitence, go away from him, represented at his Table!

I shall draw out a few Arguments to persuade poor Souls to a conscientious,
well-prepared Address to the Table of the Lord, out of the same Store house,
your very Catechism.



1. I beseech you to consider the great and gracious Condescension of the most
high and holy God, to reveal to you the great Mystery of Redemption by his
beloved Son; and to make it plain, and to confirm weak Faith, to represent it
by sensible Signs. The Bread and Wine admonish you of the Necessity of Christ,
without whom you cannot live; and of the Benefit of Christ, whose Effect is
spiritual Nourishment, and Growth in Grace. You have need of this plain way of
Information, by sensible Signs: God stoops very low therein; neglect it not.
What an Advantage is this, to be doubly taught; by the Word, and by teaching
Signs?

2. Consider once again what is conveyed to your Souls by these visible Signs.

1. Jesus Christ, as dying; yea, as dead, in our stead, for our Sins, to
satisfy for them, to reconcile us to God, and to procure Forgiveness of Sins;
and that his Death was effectual for these great Purposes, because we show
forth the Death of Christ, by which all heavenly Blessings are become Legacies
in the New Testament.

2. Is it not profitable for you to see Jesus Christ, and all the Benefits of
Redemption set before you? That God withholds nothing from you, if you will
receive Christ; but sets him, and all things with him, before your Eyes;
invites you to take him, and all his Benefits? He offers him; yea, gives; yea,
seals the Gift of Righteousness and Life, to make it sure to you for ever, if
you will but take, and receive, as he has appointed you. And what can be more
to you than Jesus Christ, and the Purchase of his most precious Blood? Are the
Forgiveness of Sins, Reconciliation, Adoption, Supplies of all Grace, the
Promises, which are exceeding great and precious, such vile and common things,
that you will not have them, though for coming for? Have you no need of Christ,
or no need of receiving him in this Ordinance? Surely, if he enjoined it to
them who had been trained up in his Doctrine, known his Life, seen his
Miracles; how gracious is God to us, in appointing us such an Help, who have
more need of such repeated Confirmations of his Grace? Can you do as well
without? Or what need you care to have your Graces strengthened, or Forgiveness
sealed? Can you be so unthankful, and cold in your Love, as to neglect to
remember him, in a Way of his own Appointment? Or would you be so careless to
have the Act of Oblivion sealed by the Great Seal, and to be sure of Life? Or
are you so rich, that you can be without a part in the Everlasting Covenant? Is
he a Child of God, that never enquires for the Legacy bequeathed by Will? What
is this, but the New Testament, confirmed by the Death of the Testator?

This do in remembrance of me, was given by the Lord, in the same Night wherein
he was betrayed. That which you are invited to, is with greatest Earnestness to
be desired: You will certainly die for ever, without Christ. Come, Soul; take
me, and live, says Christ: Whosoever will, let him come. And will you not
come? Can neither the Authority of God, nor his Love, nor the last Charge of a
dying Savior prevail with you? Oh! will you not observe his Charge, which was
given in the same Night wherein he was betrayed! When he was ready to sacrifice
his Body and Blood for your Sins! When he was ready to drink the bitter Cup of
God's Wrath, appointed to be drunk by Infinite Justice! When he was ready to
shed his Blood for the Remission of Sin, and to make the Covenant of Grace of
force by his Death? So that thereby all the Children might come in for their
Portions and Share; because the Testator being dead, the Legacies became due to
all that claim them. Will none of these things move you; but rather let all be
lost, than you trouble your selves, to examine your selves, to repent of Sin,
and embrace Christ; or to shake off your damning Security, and spiritual Sloth?
The Lord rebuke you in Mercy, that you may be saved.

Thus was my Body broken; thus was my Blood shed; thus my Hands, and my Feet,
and my Sides were wounded: Thus I gave up the Ghost for you? -- And upon this,
that Christ died, a Proclamation is made to all, that have any thing to accuse
the Soul of; Romans 8.33.
Who can lay any thing to the Charge of God's Elect? It is Christ that died.
And to all Sinners that are cast in Law, that cannot deny nor mitigate their
Offenses, nor bear the Sentence; much less endure Damnation by that Sentence: I
say, to all Sinners, notice is given; 1 John 1.2.
If any Man sin, there is an Advocate with the Father; who is also the
Propitiation for our Sin. O Sinner, wilt not thou come to see this Death showed
forth? Soul, what have thou to show, or plead, wherefore the Sentence of
Eternal Death should not be pronounced against thee, but this? Have not thou
sinned against the infinite God? Does not thy Conscience accuse, judge and
condemn thee, according to the Law which thou have transgressed? What can
thou say for thy self? If thou offer to plead any thing of thine own, either
good Intentions, Desires, Purposes, Works, or any Circumstances, to extenuate
and pare off the grossness of thy Sin, thy Conscience (except the Ignorant and
Erroneous,) like an upright Judge, well learned in the Law and Gospel, must
needs stop thy Mouth, overruled all thy Pleas, and tell thee, that without
shedding of Blood, there is no Remission of Sin; and that no Blood but the
precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without Spot, can cleanse thee from thy
Sin. Wilt not thou therefore cast thy self upon the free Grace of God,
reconciled and satisfied with the Death of his dear Son? And will thou not come
to that Ordinance, which he commanded his People, to the End of the World, to
observe; in which his Death is showed forth; and there show him to God, as the
Death of thy Mediator, who has made Peace, and taken away Sin? And show him
also to all thy Adversaries, and Accusers: "Lo, all you that seek my Soul, to
destroy it: This is he, who gave his Life a Ransom for me: He has fulfilled
the Law, satisfied the Divine Justice: What have you to say against me? Against
all your Accusations, this I plead and allege, that Christ died, and overcame
Death; and that he died for me. And be it known to all Infidels and
Blasphemers, that the crucified Christ is my Lord and Savior. Into him I was
baptized, to him I am joined, I am his. And, O you, the blessed Saints of God,
take notice, that I hope to be saved, even as you, by him whose Name is Jesus,
who came to save his People from their Sin."

O you careless ones, who will not be at the Cost of a Sacrament, who will not
come to the Light, forsake your Sins, nor be joined to the Lord, to be his by a
renewed Covenant: You that will not take pains to know the Lord Jesus in the
great Work of Redemption, in which you are deeply concerned; that will not take
time and pains to prepare your selves for the Supper of the Lord; give me leave
to ask you these few Questions.

1. Have you sinned at all?

2. What does every Sin deserve?

3. Is there any other Redeemer but the Lord Jesus Christ?

4. Do you think that his Death is showed forth in his holy Sacrament?

5. Ought you not to obey his last Will, to make a Remembrance of him? And will
you not come to remember him? Oh, what a Sight does the brokenhearted Penitent
see, when the Father shows the Death of his Son, as fully satisfied and
pleased in him! And when Jesus Christ shows forth his Death, as satisfying
for all; with a full Discharge to all that repent and believe the Gospel! Oh,
how must the Heart needs melt and love, as Mary wept and loved!

Let me add: Would not thou hate and abhor that Minister that would refuse to
baptize thy Child, or account thee as an Heathen, or a Publican? And is it
nothing to thee, that thou carriest thy self like an Heathen, by thy
strangeness, sinful and slothful refusing to come to this Ordinance? Thou do
discover the Ineffectualness of thy Vow in Baptism to bind thee to be a through
Christian, and that thou art not the better for it; that thou think that the
preaching of Christ is but a dry thing, of no power upon thy Heart; that there
is not that Good to be had by Communion with Christ, that we say there is. In a
word, Thou art backward to renew thy Covenant in thine own Person, in thy riper
Years; and would be as slack to be baptized, if it were now to be done, as
thou art to eat the Lord's Supper; for both are Seals and Signs of the same
Covenant: And by consequence, thou art backward to become a Christian. And what
will thou be accounted at the last Day?



1. Sin is a great Dis commodity to any one. The Sin of unworthy Eating and
Drinking, is a Sin of great Indecency and Mis-behaviour toward Jesus Christ
crucified for Sin: Thou art guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord; that is,
thou prophanest that which is most holy, and abusest that which should be most
dear to thy Soul.

2. Thou eatest and drinkest Judgment to thy self; for they who eat and drink
unworthily, provoke God to punish them; they draw down Judgments upon
themselves, and others also.

3. Thou losest the Benefit of spiritual Nourishment, and Growth in Grace; thy
Sins grow, thy Heart waxes worse and worse, more deceitful and hard, if not
more profane; even to nauseate that from which thou receivest no saving
Benefit.

In a word; Thou have no Communion with the Father, in his Love; with Christ,
in his Merits; with the Holy Ghost, in his Grace and Comforts; nor with the
Saints of God, in Love, and heavenly Privileges. Oh, what a Loss and
Disadvantage is this! Consider what I say, and resolve, by the Grace of God,
against affected Ignorance, spiritual and killing Sloth and Ease; against
Unbelief, and Falseness of Heart, shrinking from thy Covenant, Vow and Promise;
and see that thou sin no more, by Omission of this great Duty, and Neglect of
this high Privilege, nor by an unworthy Eating and Drinking: But hunger and
thirst after Christ, and thou shall be filled with his Grace and Glory. Come
with thy Wedding Garment, and thou shall never be cast out. If thou will show
forth his Death until he come again, when he comes he will receive thee to
himself, and thou shall be for ever with the Lord. So be it, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the Catechism, page 6. Letter t, for Heb. 11.13. read 11.3. PART II. p 9.
l. 3. r. the Law is called a Letter, etc. ibid. l 24. add, the things of the
Spirit. p. 11. l. antepenult. r. if not one jot, etc. p. 19. Sect. 1. r.
Jehovah, which signifies, etc. p. 38. l 12. for [,] put [.] p 49. l. 21. dele
in. p 59 l. 10. f give, r. show. p. 60. n. 5. l. 2. r. and Faith, and is
called, etc. p. 77. l. 21 r. but not absolute. p. 87. l. 25. dele not. p. 88. l
7. r. does not hinder. p 94. l. 15. after bless it, add, as the Minister does.

Other Faults (by reason of the Author's distance from the Press) have escaped,
which the Reader is entreated to correct and pardon.


