Catholicism WITHOUT POPERY AN ESSAY To Render the Church of ENGLAND A Means
and a Pattern of UNION TO THE Christian World.

LONDON: Printed for I. Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultry, 1699.

Advertisement.
THE Reader is desired to take Notice of Two Things.

1. That this Discourse is not Written by the Direction, Assistance, or Advice
of any Person or Party whatsoever; nor with the Privity of any in Authority,
but is the mere and only Result of the Author's own Thoughts; who makes it his
Request, that the Reader would forget that it has an Author, and take it as if
it were produced by the casual falling together of the Letters of the Alphabet;
it being too common a thing for Men to slight Truth, if they approve not of him
that utters it; and to indulge Error if recommended by the Author's Name: And
yet at the same time let the Reader be assured, that the Author is not afraid
that the World should know what he earnestly desires may be concealed, for the
Reason aforesaid.

2. That for the same Reason diverse Passages are made use of therein, without
referring to the Books whence they are taken; there being in so learned an Age
no great danger of Plagearism; and in so divided and contentious an Age too
much danger of the abovesaid Inconvenience.

THE PREFACE
Christian Reader.
THE Substance of the following Discourse was Written above eight Years since,
and Presented in Manuscript to Her Late Majesty, of ever Blessed Memory. But
Wars abroad, made it unseasonable to attempt Peace in the Churches, while the
States of Europe were so hotly engaged; and had the Church of England rendered
it self a Pattern of Peace, yet the Nations about us were not at leisure to
observe that Pattern.

The Divine Power, Wisdom and Goodness, assisting the Best of Kings, has.
Restored Peace to the Nations of Christendom among themselves; And why may not
Peace, among the Churches of Christendom, be expected by the same Means?

And because the Design of the following Discourse is to attempt it first at
Home, yet with an Eye to the Peace of the Christian World; I will look back on
the Past Age, and consider the Cause of our Divisions, both in Church and State.

Two Controversies have miserably divided this Nation for more than one
Century: I mean the Controversy between the Prerogative of the King, and the
Liberty of the Subject; and the Controversy between a Strict Uniformity in
Matters of Religion, and a Lawless Liberty of Conscience. And our Enemies of
the Roman Communion, have ever since the Reformation, industriously kept alive
both these Controversies, in order to reduce us to our former Bondage to Rome.
They took the side of Prerogative, and Strict Conformity, till they had set
these Kingdoms in a flame, and broke in pieces the English Government, both in
Church and State. They used the Pretense of Loyalty, to Murder the Poor
Protestants of Ireland; and of Uniformity, to drive many excellent Men out of
the Church. And when they had ruined Prerogative, and the English Church, by
appearing for them; They then fell in for Anarchy in the State, and an
extravagant Liberty of Conscience in the Church, and broke us into Numberless
Parties and Sects: And while their Emissaries wrought diligently to build a
sort of Babel among us, they cast the Reproach thereof on the Protestant
Religion.

Again, when the Nation grew weary of Anarchy, of changing Governments every
Moon, and springing new Churches almost as often, and found a necessity of
Restoring the English Constitution, they returned to their old Methods of
straining the Prerogative, and destroying both our Civil and Religious
Liberties by Arbitrary Power; and on that side of the Controversy they
continued till the late Happy Revolution. They knew (though we were forbid to
say) that both the late Kings were in their Interest; and that the Prerogative
would be certainly on their side, that the Dispensing Power rendered all Laws
already made against them useless, and would consequently restore Popery by our
Celebrated Magna Charta: They knew that Modelling Corporations would destroy
Legislation for the time to come, by making Parliaments like those in France,
Tools and Vassals to the Crown, as the Council of Trent was to the Pope.

Thus Humane Wisdom seemed to Promise them all Imaginable Success; for the
Church-Party being secured by the Doctrines of Passive-Obedience, and
Non-Resistance misunderstood; the Dissenters Caressed with an Illegal
Toleration; and the Papists among us United to destroy us; we were like Isaac
bound; and laid on the Altar, had not our good Angel, in the very Act of
Sacrificing, staid the Knife.

I do but touch these things as being Foreign to the Design of the Following
Discourse, yet I cannot pass them without observing that Solid and Lasting
Settlement both of Religion and Civil Liberty, which we owe to His Majesty.

Two things the Nation had learned by sad Experience.

1. By the Confusions and Distractions of the late Times, they learned that a
Commonwealth would never do in England; for though for a season that
Government made a Figure in the World, it soon dwindled into a single Person
under another Name, and at his Death consumed away in Anarchy. 2. By the late
Reigns the Nation had learned that Arbitrary Power would never do in England,
though affected and attempted with all possible Application in both those
Reigns.
What then could Humane Wisdom think fit to be done upon the Late Revolution,
but to settle and establish the English Government on its Ancient and Solid
Foundations.

The most Renowned Politician observes, That those Kingdoms and Governments
stand longest that are often renewed, and brought back to their first Beginnings.
And though in the last Age, we could not attain it, we are now blessed with the
Old. English Constitution. The English Government exceeds all others in the
World, being a just Mixture of the Three Forms of Government, Monarchy,
Aristocracy; and Democracy: Monarchy justly boasts its Union; Aristocracy its
Grandeur, and Democracy its Liberty: Now the English Government has all the
Advantages of these Governments, without the Disadvantages of any; it has
Monarchy without Arbitrary Power; Aristocracy without Faction; and Democracy
without Anarchy; and hence we are blessed with King, Lords and Commons.

The Just Prerogative is Establish*d, the Invaded Liberties of the Kingdom are
restored, and the Encroachments of the Late Reigns condemned by Act of
Parliament: So that there is an end of the Controversy between the Prerogative
of the King, and the Liberty of the Subject; and nothing but the most incurable
Infidelity can be Proof against that Evidence of His Majesty's Love to the
English Liberty, which He has given by permitting an Election for Parliament,
during his Absence: and passing the Bill for Disbanding the Army.

The Controversy between a strict Settlement, and a Boundless Liberty, in
Matters of Religion, is also in some good measure compromised; we have now no
Spanish Inquisition to force Men's Faith and Consciences into the same Mould,
which is just as reasonable as to make an Engine to draw Men's Bodies into the
same Dimensions. We have no wild Liberty for Adamites to run about the Streets,
or Enthusiasts to disturb us in the time of Divine Service; but the Church of
England is secured in its Legal Establishments; and a Liberty to Dissenters has
received the Sanction of a Law.

Now that Maxim, Salus populi suprema lex est, appears in its Beauty, being
writ upon all the Actions of our King, and not used by the People, in
Opposition to Monarchy.

Now the other Maxim, Bono principi inservire est optima libertas, is rightly
applied, being writ upon the Actions of the People, both in, and out of
Parliament, and not used by the King to enslave his People. The Courage and
Conduct of our King, and the Wealth and Valor of the People, have once more
made Great Britain a happy Nation, and the Arbiter of the Fate of Europe.

The Glory of His Majesty in procuring the late stupendous Peace, and
restoring to our Neighbors their Ravished Liberties, is as much greater than
that of Alexander, Pompey, Caesar, or of any other of the Famed Conquerors, as
it is more Glorious to hinder the World from being Conquered, than to Conquer
the World, to save Men's Lives than to destroy them. And what was said of the
Romans, who Restored Liberty to the Conquered Cities of Greece, in the Days of
Flaminius, is more Emphatically true concerning His Majesty, and his Loyal
Subjects; That at last there are a Prince and a People in the World, born for
the Safety of all others, that crossed Seas, and made Wars, at their own Costs
and Peril, to relieve the Oppressed, to establish Laws, and cause them to be
observed, and to maintain the Public Security throughout the whole Earth.

But this is a Subject fit to fill a Volumn, and not to be crammed into a
Parenthesis in a Preface, and therefore I must hasten to what I principally
intended.

And notwithstanding Matters in the State are so happily adjusted, and
Persecution ceases to be the Reproach of the Church, yet we are still on very
ill Terms among our selves in Matters of Religion; and to make the following
Discourse more intelligible, as well as the Design of the Author, I must a
little consider the Grounds and Causes of our Divisions.

When by the Divine Mercy we had escapt out of the Tyranny of Rome, and the
Protestant Religion became the National Religion of England, Ignorance was
lamentably visible, not only in the Laity, but Clergy; and whoever looks over
the Lists of the Indocti, Mediocriter Docti, and Docti, into which Classes the
Clergy were divided, will plainly see the Necessity of the Forms of Prayer, and
Homilies so much complained of.

And as the Clergy's Ignorance made these things necessary, so the First
Reformers thought it their Wisdom to make the Transition from Popery to
Protestant Religion, as Indiscernable as might be; for this reason while they
took away other Parts of the Clergy's Habits, they left the Surplice, that
People might not miss the other Trinkets; while they took away
Transubstantiation, they left the Posture of Kneeling, which was much more
sensible than the Doctrine; while they took away the Adoration of the Cross,
they nevertheless continued it at Baptism; though they threw off the Latin
Service, they kept a Liturgy in English; while they Renounced the Authority of
the Bishop of Rome, they nevertheless continued the same Archbishops and
Bishops, in the same Provinces and Sees. This Conduct they hoped, would have
brought the Papists to Church, and it had that effect for some time; but after
that the English Refugees, who went hence in the Reign of Queen Mary, returned
from among the Learned and Pious Reformers abroad, who had gone quite through
the Work of Reformation, perhaps a Step too far, the Clergy of England fell
into two Parties, one Party were for finding out Means of Reconciliation with
Rome, and bringing the Pope to Terms: The other Party were for Accommodating
Matters, and Forming an Union between the English Church, and Foreign
Protestant Churches; but there having been much fewer Non-Conformists found
among the Clergy, upon the Change of Religion made by Queen Elizabeth in
Substantials, than that made by King Charles the Second in Circumstantials, the
Party which inclined to Rome were much the stronger, and most prevalent at
Court. And although the State of Rome was generally opposed, yet the Church of
Rome was much hanker'd after; though most were against the Pope's Supremacy,
yet many were for allowing him to be Principium Unitatis: On the other side,
the most Learned and Pious of the Clergy were for the other Union. Accordingly
those that inclined toward Rome, were extremely fond of the Ceremonies, that
their Coalition with the Holy See might be the more easy: From using the Cross
at Baptism, they might easily proceed to its farther use; from Kneeling at the
Sacrament, they might take an occasion of Believing Transubstantiation, or
letting it alone; that they might easily slip on something more upon the
Surplice, they had hopes to prevail with Rome to allow the Liturgy in English;
and while they kept up the Difference of Order, between Bishops and Presbyters,
they were capable not only of arriving at the Lordship of a Bishop, and at the
Grace of an Archbishop, but (upon the Coalition) had a Prospect of the
Eminency of a Cardinal, and the Holiness of a Pope: They were for allowing
Sports on the Lord's Day, and for Holidays, and a Religion that Men might wear
Genteely; for Singing Prayers, which makes little difference between Latin and
English, in Point of Edification, especially in that Time when very few could
read. They were fond of Godfathers, and Godmothers, Bowing at the Name of
Jesus, and to the Altar, and setting the Communion Table Altar-wise. On the
other side, the Pious Puritan Bishops, were for Union with the Protestants
abroad, who scrupled most of these things, and were for that Reason for taking
these things away, or at least for leaving them indifferent: They were indeed
for the pure Primitive Episcopacy, and I conceive, had they seen the following
Discourse, would generally have Subscribed thereto. And this is in Truth the
Reason that so many are to this Day so extremely fond of things which they
themselves account to be indifferent in their own Nature, and which others take
to be sinful: The Grotian and Cassandrian Design was the good work in hand, so
much applauded by Archbishop Laud, and his Adherents and Followers; and
Opposed by the Archbishops Abbot and Usher, the Bishops Hall, Davenant, and
others. And this is the true Difference between the High Church and Low Church
(as they are called) to this Day.

And here I cannot, without great and pungent sorrow, lament the Misery of the
Church of England, for almost a whole Century: By this Means, Protestant
Religion (which lies in those things wherein both sides agree) and even
Morality it self has been little regarded, and Men's Zeal for the most part
has been employed in this Controversy. It Is better to be Papists than
Presbyterians: Put the Laws in Execution against Dissenters; was the Cry on the
one side, and the Dissenters often in fits dragged to the Court Spiritual, and a
Lay-Chancellor having said, I Admonish you, I Admonish you, I Admonish you,
away they were sent to the Devil. On the other side, Conformity was aggravated
to the utmost, and condemned as Antichristian: Some have run from the noise of
a Reader in the Church, saying, They heard the Devil. And others refused to
hear a Reverend Devine in a Meeting House, because he had by License preached
in a Church. I confess, such Follies were not common, I mention them as
prodigious Effects of Controversies about Indifferent Things, but yet by
Persecution on the one hand, and Exasperation on the other, both sides did
generally depart from the true Spirit of Christianity: And if the printed
Discourses on both sides be well considered, and an Impartial Inquisitor were
in search for Christians, by our Savior's Character, By this shall all Men
know that ye are my Disciples, Job. 13.35.
if ye love one another; How few had he found worthy the Christian Name?

If any thing which I have offered in the Following Discourse may tend to
Restore Christianity among us to its Primitive Purity, and to hasten its
Promised Peace in the Christian World, it will increase my Thankfulness to Him
who gave me Being. But whatever the Success of these Sheets may be, I Am sure
they take a very all way to oppose Persecution, and to Restore the Christian
Spirit, who endeavor to overthrow the Fundamentals of Christianity. The Arians
were at first professed Enemies to Persecution, but as soon as they had Power,
proved the greatest Persecutors: And Men worse than they in their Principles,
will not be better in their Practices, whatever Moderation they may pretend.
And although my Savior has taught me, That I ought not to call for fire from
Heaven on those that will not receive Him. Luke 9.55.
2 Pet. 2.1.
Yet seeing the Apostle Peter having Prophesied of such who should bring in
damnable Heresies, in denying the Lord that bought them; adds, That they shall
bring upon themselves swift destruction. It Is certainly dangerous to put Power
into the Hands of Men of such Principles, lest they involve the Government in
their own Ruin. I aim at no Man by this Reflection; and I desire to Excuse no
Man whom the Character will fit; especially if they agree with the full
Description of those dangerous Men, Prophesied of by the Apostle Peter, who
walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, 2 Pet. 2.10.
and despise government; having eyes full of Adultery, and that cannot cease
from sin, who while they promise Men Liberty, are themselves the servants of
corruption. Certainly it is every Christian's Duty to take the Advice of the
Apostle Jude, who describing the same Men, exhorts us to contend earnestly for
the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints. Jude 3.
The late Act therefore against Blaspheming, does rather Promote than Disserve
the Design of this Discourse. And if this attempt may stir up the Spirits of
others, whose Parts and Qualifications are equal to such an Undertaking, to
offer better Means to the same end, In magnis voluisse sat est, I shall greatly
rejoice to be Confuted by Proposals of better Expedients. For were the Peace of
the Christian World Established on Foundation-Truths, it would be with all the
Sons of Peace, without regard to their Lesser or Greater Eminency, as it was
with the Heavenly Host, at their first Creation; they will not envy each other
their Degrees of Excellencies, Job. 38.7.
but the Morning-Stars will sing together, and all the Sons of God shout for
Joy.

Books Printed for John Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultry.
A Free Discourse, wherein the Doctrines which make for Tyranny are Displayed;
the Title of our Rightful and Lawful King William Vindicated, and the
Unreasonableness and Mischievous Tendency of the Odious Distinction of a King
De Facto, and De Jure, Discovered. By the Honorable Sir Robert Howard, Oct.

An Effort against Biggotry, and for Christian Catholicism. By Henry Chandler,
Quarto.

Remarks on a late Discourse of William Lord Bishop of Derry, concerning the
Inventions of Men in the Worship of God. With a Vindication of the Remarks from
what is Objected against them in his Lordships Admonition. By J. Boyse. Octavo.

A Preservative against Deism: showing the Great Advantage of Revelation above
Reason, in the two great Points, Pardon of Sin, and a Future State of
Happiness. With an Appendix, in Answer to a Letter of A. W. against Revealed
Religion, in the Oracles of Reason. By Nath. Tailor, Octavo.

Mr. Woodhouse, Mr. Shower, Mr. Williams, Mr. Alsop, and Mr. Calamy's Sermons,
Preached to the Societies for Reformation of Manners in the City of London,
Octavo.

Catholicism WITHOUT POPERY.
An ESSAY to Render the Church of England a Means and a Pattern of Union to the
Christian World.
NO Arguments against the Protestant Religion have been Improved with equal
success, to those which are drawn from the Unity of the Roman Church, and the
Innumerable Divisions among Protestants; and although each Point in
Controversy between us and Rome has been so discussed, as to set the Truth of
the Protestant Cause in the clearest Light, yet the Popish Dragoons, and the
Protestant Divisions, still pervert the World. It Is true, that there is no
Argument in Dragooning, and I hope it will appear in a short time, that there
is as little in the other Topic; yet the same Men who scarce know how to
submit their Senses to Transubstantiation, are by those very Senses induced to
Popery, while they see Divisions, or feel Dragooning.

The last of these Popish Arguments, is not to be Confuted by a Pen in its
Practice, and needs no Confutation in the Theory; being not Defensible
otherwise than by main force.

But the former requires most Serious Consideration, not so much to evince that
nothing can be concluded from those Divisions against the Truth of Protestant
Religion, as to take away the very Topic it self.

The great and substantial Division of England is taken to be, into Churchmen
and Dissenters; and again, Churchmen are subdivided into High Church and Low
Church, and many will be called Churchmen, who are indeed of no Church: and
these last having nothing but the Name, are not the Subjects of Christian
Unity: But yet, nevertheless, through the Iniquity of the late Reigns, the best
mark of a Churchman was never to come to Prayers, and the most scandalous Life
the surest Evidence of a true Son of the Church. All Sober Men were called
Presbyterians, and no Man was supposed able to observe his Baptismal Vow, and
the Oath of Allegiance both together; as if, in this Sense, it were impossible
to serve God and Mammon. This, and some other things, seem to have put the true
Notion of the Church of England out of Men's Heads, and to make it obnoxious to
the Romanists for its Invisibility: And hence, upon the Happy Revolution, it
was a Question between a very Eminent and Learned Prelate, Vox Cleri, P. 68.
and the Prolocutor of the late Convocation, What it was that distinguished the
Church of England from other Protestant Churches? The Bishop rightly affirming,
That the Church of England is an Equivocal Expression, and was not
distinguished from other Protestant Churches, but by its Hierarchy and
Revenues: And the Prolocutor asserting, That the Church of England was
distinguished by its Doctrine, as it stands in the Articles, Liturgy, and
Homilies, as well as by its Hierarchy. And although since His Majestys happy
Accession to the Throne, His Pious and Princely Care of the Church has filled
the Archi-Episcopal and Episcopal Seats with Men of Consummate Piety, Learning,
and Moderation, whereby, and by giving the Royal Assent to the Act for
Indulgence, He has been our Deliverer from Tyranny in the Church, as well as
in the State; yet it cannot be forgotten, how during the Prevalency of the High
Church Party in the late Reigns, not Kneeling at the Sacrament, not Baptizing
with the Cross, Hearing in Congregations which are Churches of Christ (within
the Definition given by the Articles of the Church) were Prosecuted with the
greatest Violence, and Men cast out of the Church for those Reasons; while Men
of the most Profligate Lives, Swore D -- n them, they were for the Church of
England; and were admitted to the Sacrament without reserve; That great Numbers
of the sober Serious Subjects of England, were kept out from that which was
called the Church, for Conscience sake; and all the Profane and Vicious let
in, that were willing to enter: That those things that would make a Man Holy on
Earth, and prepare for Heaven, yet would not let him into the Church; and that
he might be a beloved Member thereof, who was not fit to live on the Earth, and
made most visible haste to the Devil! These, and the like considerations, made
me wonder, that no Man had concerned himself to tell us plainly, What the
Church of England is. And since the Cant of that Party is still, The Church!
the Church! I will, like an Honest Lay-Christian, that is not any way infected
with Priestcraft, return a short Answer to the Question, which may be at least
of use, to put some Body upon explaining it better.

The Articles of the Church, to which all the Clergy have Subscribed, and to
most of which (since His Majesty's happy Accession to the Throne) the
Dissenting Ministers have also subscribed, expressly Teach us; That the Visible
Church of Christ is a Congregation of Faithful Men, Article XIX.
in which the Pure Word of God is Preached, and the Sacraments be duly
Ministered, according to Christ's Ordinance, in all those things that of
necessity are requisite to the same.

Now, whether this Description be meant of the Universal Church, or of a single
Congregation; it is thence an easy Conclusion, That the Church of England is
that Part of the Universal Church which is Composed of all the Congregations of
Faithful Men in England, in which the Pure Word of God is preached, and the
Sacraments duly Ministered, according to Christ's Ordinance, in all those things
that of necessity are requisite to the same: And if this Description be
allowed, it is impossible to exclude the Presbyterian, Independent, and
Antipaedobaptist Churches, from being Part of the Church of England. Of the
Antipaedobaptist may be the greatest doubt, because they deny Infants to be
capable Subjects of Baptism; but nevertheless, that Error excludes them not out
of this Description; for to the Subjects they allow to be capable, and of which
their whole Communion consists, the Sacraments are duly Administered, according
to Christ's Ordinance, in all those things that of necessity are requisite to
the same. It is therefore a wonderful thing to hear Men on one side loudly
declare, in the Presence of God and the Congregation, That they Believe the
Holy Catholic Church; and yet calling their Brethren that go under those
several Denominations, Phanaticks, Hypocrites, and other odious Names, and
Excommunicating them out of the Church. And it is no less wonderful on the
other side, to hear some under those several Denominations, accusing those that
conform to the Established Ceremonies with Antichristianism, and denying the
Church of England to be a True Church, when they themselves have Subscribed to
that very Article, and Five or Six and Thirty more of their Thirty Nine, and
are really Part of the same Church. And this one Consideration Justifies the
Practice of those who condemn the Imposition of unnecessary things, by
Communicating with the Moderate Dissenters, and condemn the Separating,
Censorious, and Schismatical Humor, wherever sound amongst the Dissenters, by
Communicating with the Conformable Part of the Church. And indeed, it seems to
be little considered by the Generality of Protestants, how great the Agreement
is between all the said Parties: They have the same Rules of Faith, Manners and
Devotion; for they own the same Scripture to be of Divine Authority, and a
perfect Rule of Faith and Life; the same Creeds are Professed by them all; the
same Ten Commandments are acknowledged by them all, as the Divine Law; and they
agree to our Saviors Exposition thereof, and to all the Precepts, and the
Ordinances, and Sacraments of the Christian Religion; they have the same Object
of Worship, the same Mediator, the Inspiration of the same Holy Spirit; they
have the same Objects of their Hopes and Fears, they fly from the same Wrath,
and expect the same Glory.

Again, these several Parties do condemn the Twelve new Articles of the Roman
Faith, all the Idolatries of the Mass, Image Worship, Praying to Saints and
Angels, and for the Dead, Monkery; 1 Timothy 4.1, 2.
with all the Doctrines of Demons invented by the Hypocrisy of those Liars, nor
do any of them retain any thing substantial in Doctrine or Practice introduced
by the Apostasy of the Latter Times.

The Disagreement among them lies only about Imposing and Refusing
Circumstances of Worship, Observation of Days, the Use of Habits and Gestures,
of Forms and Ceremonies, and Unscriptural Forms of Church Government; and about
Subscriptions, and Oaths, and Laws made to enforce Men's own Inventions: All
which I shall briefly touch, when I have in the following Propositions,
endeavored to show what are the true Terms of Union for the whole Christian
World; and how all the abovementioned Parties may enjoy this their Unity in
the Church of England.

When our Savior condemned the Jewish Divorce, he grounded his Sentence upon
this Foundation, From the Beginning it was not so; and to discover the true
Terms of Christian Unity, we must look back to the Rise of Christian Religion.

CHRISTIANITY came into this World Pure and Free, without the Jewish Yoke of
beggarly Elements, without the Heathen Niceties of painful Rights and
Ceremonies. It taught to Worship God in Spirit and Truth; bound Men to no City
or Mountain; prescribed no Postures, nor Dresses; it threw down all Enclosures,
and was a Gospel sit to be Preached to every Creature: Our Savior taught in
Synagogues and in Mountains; and in a Coat woven from the top throughout. The
Apostles wore the Habits of the Places where they dwelt, and taught in the
Synagogues that were built: Both Christ and they used the Septuagint
Translation, and complied with the Customs and Hours of the Jews. And in short,
the Apostles Rule was to become all Things to all Men, 1 Cor. 9.22.
and to comply with the innocent Usages of all Places; but when those Customs,
or Usages, Gal. 2.3, 4, 5. Gal. 5.1, 2.
were added to Christianity, or imposed, they always rejected them with
Abhorrence.

Thus were Matters left by the Apostles, and the Disciples of the First Age
followed their Example; and hence the Christians among the Jews, complying with
their Customs, and the Christians among the Gentiles with theirs, the Christian
World might within one Age, be distinguished into the Judaizing and Gentilizing
Christians. Paul Circumcised Timothy among the Jews: And Church History tells
us, That Fifteen Jerusalem Bishops were Circumcised; And the Empire of
Habbasia, which was Discipled by the Aethiopean Eunuch, a Jewish Proselyte,
continue Circumcision to this Day, (though as no Religious Rite.) On the other
side, the Roman Christians, and others among the Heathens, used several of
their Customs, by that General Rule, of becoming all Things to all Men.

But as in the Apostles Time, some used their Liberty for an Occasion to the
Flesh, and this Charitable Principle occasioned Differences among the Apostles
themselves; (for Paul withstood Peter to the Face at Antioch, for withdrawing
from the Gentiles to please the Jews) so in the following Ages, Gal. 2.11, 12.
when the Power of inward Religion grew more cold; the Customs which were taken
up as convenient, such as keeping Days in compliance with the Jewish and
Heathenish Festivals, distinguishing the Clergy by Habits, as both Jews and
Heathens used to do their Priests, became at last to be accounted Sacred; and
the Days were taken for Holy Days, and the Clothes for Holy Garments.

But the greatest Depravation of Christianity, came from the Agreement that was
between Jews and Gentiles, in their setting up of Highpriests: The show of
Order, and Unity, Mark 8.27. Luke 9.18.
that appeared therein, was very tempting. When our Savior had told Simon,
Mat. 16.13. to 24.
that he should be called Cephas; and that the Church should be built on his
Confession of Faith; it is probable that the Apostles began to think of his
being the Chief; for the Question was soon after started among them, Matthew.
18.1. Mark 9.33. Luke 9.46. Ibid. and Mat. 20.25. Luke 22.25. Mark 20.42. Heb.
7.23, 24.
which of them should be greatest; that is to say, the Pope. And had not our
Savior Positively and Catagorically resolved the Question, both on that
Occasion, and in Answer to the Ambitious Sons of Zebedee, Hierarchical
Domination in greater and lesser Popes might have been thought Justifiable from
the Example of the Jews, whose Hierarchy was of Divine Institution; But that
our Savior is our only High Priest, is most evident. That by that Rule of his
[It shall not be so done amongst you,] he has taken away all color of
Domination among his Ministers, on Pretense of his Institution, seems a
reasonable Opinion, for the several Evangelists do so expressly agree in that
Prohibition, that it is impossible to evade it by the common Distinction, viz.
That our Savior there forbids Tyranny and Ambition, but not Superiority,
especially since the Evangelist Luke speaks not of the Authority exercised by
Tyrants, but Benefactors.

It does no where appear that the Apostles were the Governors of the Seventy,
nor is any Difference in Order to be found in Scripture between Bishops and
Presbyters; for the Difference between the Apostles and the Seventy appears to
be this, that the Apostles were Persons chosen to be Witnesses of all that
Jesus did or taught, and of his Resurrection and Ascension; they were of the
Family of our Savior, and Privy to his whole Conversation in which Respect
they neither had nor can have Successors: No more than the Evangelists,
whom no Man pretends to have had Successors, as Evangelists.

And it seems most reasonable to believe, that whereas Dr. Hammond, and others
hold, that the Presbyters mentioned Acts xx. were also Bishops: So they were
Apostles also in the sense of St. Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Theodoret, and
others; and Luke x. 1. and diverse other Places, the same word is used
concerning them, viz. (...), from whence (...) is derived: And if we say that
Apostles, Bishops, or Presbyters, and Deacons are Officers of Divine
Institution to continue in the Church, surely we are right, for such only do we
find in Scripture, and of such did the Governors of the Church at Philippi
consist. Phil. 1.1.


Some indeed, in Ecclesiastical History, are said to have succeeded the
Apostles, but they succeeded them not as Matthias did Judas, for he succeeded
him in the Extraordinary Work of the Apostolate, and therefore was chosen out
of those who had accompanied with the Apostles all the Time, that the Lord
Jesus went in and out amongst them, beginning from the Baptism of John, unto
the same Day that he was taken up, and was added to them to make twelve
Witnesses of his Resurrection; Acts 2.21, 22.
but the Nature of the Succession was as Apostles, Bishops and Presbyters in
their several Sees; whereas Apostles, in the strict Sense as Apostles, were not
confined to any See, but were Ministers of the whole Catholic Church, and on
whom, (as St. Paul speaks of himself) was the care of all the Churches; and
unless it can be made appear that the Apostles have such Successors, and also
such as were Witnesses of what our Savior did and taught, as Matthias was the
Apostolate, as to so much of it must be Temporary from the Nature of the thing.

The Arguments for a Superiority of the Order of Bishops, drawn from the
Precedence of James at Jerusalem (who there seems to be Superior to the
Apostles, though he was none of the Twelve) concludes only for a Bishops Power in
his own Church where he is fixed, but nothing for the Superiority in Order of
Bishops above Presbyters, as of revealed Institution. If Ignatius, who tells us
that St. Stephen was a Deacon to St. James, had told us also of his Presbyters
of a distinct Order, no doubt but his Testimony had been concluding; but a
(...) and a Bishop are all one in Antiquity: And although at first the Twelve
Apostles, who had the Infallible Direction of the Holy Ghost, did ordain those
President Bishops perhaps then, but certainly afterward they were made by
Election. The Epistles of St. John to the Angels of the Seven Churches of Asia,
prove not this Distinction of Order, nor any thing more than shall be hereafter
accounted for in this Discourse. And however the Epistles of St. Ignatius stand
Irrefragably defended from the charge of being Spurious, I cannot see but that
allowing the Bishop to be (...), is sufficient to comply with the full Sense of
those Epistles, especially if it be considered that the Bishops of which he
speaks were made so by the Apostles themselves, and no doubt were chosen by
infallible Direction, and must therefore deserve a most singular Respect.

But allowing Men to think as they see Evidence concerning this Difference of
Order, certainly the Practice of the Church may be such as may allow of
Different Apprehensions, without occasioning either Tyranny or Schism, the
Method whereof is attempted in this Discourse.

However it is plain, that both our Savior and his Disciples did wholly reject
all Temporal Jurisdiction, and applied themselves entirely to their Spiritual
Administrations; and that there was no Distinction Causes into of Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical, and Temporal or Civil in the Christian World for above Three
Hundred Years after Christ. Indeed, while the Emperors were Heathens, and the
Judges too throughout the Empire, the Christians (according to the Advice of
St. Paul) forbear to go to Law, 1 Cor. 6.5, 6.
and referred all their Differences usually to the Bishops or Pastors of the
Congregations, of which they were Members. And when Constantine came to the
Empire, his mistaken Zeal confirmed the Custom, (though the Apostle's Reason
for it ceased:) And whereas the Civil Power ought to have been reassumed by the
Christian Magistrate, and the Clergy eased of Secular Business, his Edict set
up the Clergy's Domination; and from Arbitrators they became Judges, and
Christian Magistrates might not Judge unwilling Christians.

This Corruption grew so fast, Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 11.
that about the Year 430. in the Popedom of Celestine, the Patriarchs of Rome
and Alexandria, did Degenerate from an Ecclesiastical, to a Secular Ruling and
Dominion: And when I consider, how positively that Degeneracy is forbidden by
our Savior, Matthew. 20.26. Luke 22.25. Mark 10.43.
who upon all Occasions reproved it in his own Disciples. When I consider what
Miseries the Clergy Domination has caused more than Twelve Hundred and Sixty
Years, since that Degeneracy; how it has turned the Church into a mere Worldly
Kingdom, and the Laws thereof into Humane Politics; I cannot but rejoice, that
by the Laws of England this Degeneracy is or might be cured (were the Laws put
in Execution) and the Supremacy restored to the Civil Power. And whether the
Pope of Rome by this Degeneracy did commence the Apocalyptick Beast entering
into the Seat of Daniel's 4th Beast, and so the time of his Reign be expired,
may be worth the Consideration of those that study the Apocalypse. But certain
it is, that in England the Bishop of Rome, before the Norman Conquest, had no
allowed Jurisdiction; but the Conqueror coming in under the Pope's Banner, gave
him leave to send Legates into England: From William Rufus he attempted to gain
Appeals to Rome, which occasioned the Banishment of Anselm, Archbishop of
Canterbury, during the Reign of that King. Upon Henry the First, he Usurped the
Donation of Bishoprics. On King Stephen, Appeals to Rome. On Henry the Second,
the Exemption of Clerks from the Secular Power. And from King John he got the
whole Kingdom.

I shall not trace the Steps, by which the Kingdom recovered it self out of the
Hands of the Clergy; but (notwithstanding the Pope held our Ancestors
Consciences in Slavery, till the Reign of Henry the Eighth) many Acts of
Parliament were made to uphold and maintain the Sovereignty of the King, the
Liberty of the People, the Common Law, and the Commonweal, as appears by the
Statutes of Edward the Third and and Richard the Second, Henry the Fourth and
Henry the Fifth, being Laws of Praemunire, and Provision, by which the Civil
Power was preserved, and the Body secured against the monstrous pretended
Foreign Head: And upon the whole, the Civil Power of England kept it self out
of the Hands of the Priests in all Matters and Causes, except Causes
Testamentary, and of Matrimony, Divorce, Rights of Tithes, Oblations, and
Obventions; for as the Emperors, out of a Zeal and desire to Grace and Honor
the Bishops, allowed them Jurisdiction in Causes of Tithes, because they were
paid to Priests; in Causes of Matrimony, because Marriages were Solemnized in
the Church; in Causes Testamentary, because Testaments were many times made in
Extremis, when Priests were present. So the Kings of England, before the
Reformation, did all along derive Jurisdiction in these Causes, to the Bishops,
though the Right remained in them as the Fountain. But herein England has been
more unhappy than the Empire; for whereas the Bishops, when Christian Emperors
granted them this Jurisdiction, proceeded in these Causes, according to the
Imperial Law, as the Civil Magistrate did proceed in other Causes; our Bishops
introduced the Imperial Law, and (since it came into the World) the Canon Law
also into England, and endeavored all they could to destroy Caesar's Image and
Superscription. They called their Courts, Courts Christian, as if the Civil
Courts were but Courts of Ethnicks, and their Causes Spiritual, as if Civil
Causes were Carnal: And yet if an Honest Man Examine the Matter, he will
probably find as much Christianity in Westminster Hall, as in Doctors Commons,
and Adultery a Crime no more Spiritual than Murder.

Since the Reformation began, the Civil and Pretended Spiritual Authority have
been wresting, and they are not yet fully agreed. It was Enacted by the
Statute, 24 Hen. VIII. Cap. 12. That all these Spiritual Causes should be
Judged within the King's Authority, and not elsewhere. By the 26 Hen. VIII.
Cap. 14. The Parliament took upon them (even in those Popish Times) to Create
new Bishops, Suffragans, and to appoint their Sees. And this multiplying of
Bishoprics is no new thing, for if you will believe Giraldus Cambrenses, he
tells us, (in a Writing which he presented to Pope Innocent the Third) That in
Britain there were in the time of the Romans Five Provinces, and accordingly
Five Arch-Bishopricks; under each of which was Twelve Bishoprics; so there
were Threescore Bishoprics at a time, when the Island was not wholly
Christianized. Nor is the Translation of Sees any Novelty; for in the Year 604,
Pope Gregory did, for the sake of Austin the Monk, procure the Translation of
the Archiepiscopal Seat from London to Canterbury, where it remains to this
Day, notwithstanding the endeavor of Gilbert Folioth, Bishop of London, in the
time of Henry the Second, and the endeavors of other Bishops of London since,
to recover the Archiepiscopal Dignity.

But (to proceed) by Statute 1. Edw. VI. Cap. 2. The Writ of Conge delire was
ousted, and it was Enacted, That none but the King by his Letters Patents
should collate to an Archbishopric, or Bishopric; That all Process
Ecclesiastical should be in the King's Name, and the Test in the Name of the
Person having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and the Seal to be the King's Arms.
And though this Act was Repealed by the First Marie, Cap. 2. yet that Act was
Repealed again, by Primo Jacobi, Cap. 25. And some think that the Statute 1
Edw. 6. Cap. 2. is revived thereby, and those who are Enemies to the Church,
are ready to enquire, What Penalties our Bishops are liable to, by Issuing
Process in their own Names, and using their own Seals. For notwithstanding the
Cant of The Church! the Church! their Courts are the King's Courts, and their
Law, the King's Ecclesiastical Law; and this is acknowledged by the Oath of
Supremacy, and all the Laws made to this purpose, are but in Affirmance of the
Common Law; notwithstanding the Author of Vox Cleri, Vox Cleri, P. 1.
was so fond of Loyalty to the Church.

This indeed was an Expression which explained the Carriage of the High,
Church-Party to His Present Majesty; for though they talked loud in behalf of
the Prerogative, it was only that the Prerogative might pay them Tribute; and
they were willing it should rob the Lay-Subject, if it allowed them to possess
what they had filch'd from the Crown; The King and Queen must first Swear
Allegiance to the Church, before they should be Crowned; and then they thought
they had catched them, and refused to Swear Allegiance to them, as the Law
required; but if instead of that horrible abuse to which the Sacrament was
exposed in the Late Reigns, a Test were Composed, renouncing Transubstantiation
and Commonwealth Principles, and obliging to maintain the Government of
England, by King, Lords and Commons, as it is now Established; the King and
Kingdom would be secured, beyond all possibility of Danger, and the just Rights
of the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Clergy, would be maintained, though
those Jacobite Churchmen were sent out to the French King, whom they were not
able to bring in to them. And it is observable, That as in the Late Reigns, all
the Champions for the Hierarchy, strove to prove that it was the Duty of
Dissenters, to submit to the Church Established by Law, in those things which
they acknowledged to be in themselves unnecessary Impositions, because they
were imposed by Authority; but they commonly left the Government to shift for
it self, and to Answer for those Impositions to God, Conscience, and the World:
So now the same Party left His Majesty, and all concerned in the Late
Revolution, to Answer for it to God, their own Consciences, and the World; for
they washed their Hands, and said, They were Innocent of being concerned
therein; but they were under the force of Providence; and if His Majesty would
uphold the Power of the Church, and take care to sit fast, they would pay Him
Allegiance; otherwise they were ready for the next that came, if he had the
good luck to get the better. And this is the Substance of the late Writings of
that Party. How much better Friends are they to His Majesty, who believe Him to
have an undoubted Right to his Crown, and to Govern the Church as well as the
State; and that they are bound not only not to Resist Him, but to Assist Him
with their Lives and Fortunes, against all Opposers.

The Church of England rightly understood, is Lovely and Desirable; but that
which has confounded and divided the Church is the Jumble and Mixture that
has been made, between the Bishop's Power, which is of the Essence of his
Office as a Presbyter, the Power which he has as President of the Presbytery,
and the Power which he has by Delegation from the King. A Primitive Bishop (as
is clear by innumerable Testimonies) had no more under his Charge than he could
Personally know; and when Churches grew larger than one Bishop could Personally
inspect, they had more Bishops, yet so as that one Bishop had the Precedence;
and in a short Time he only ingrost the Name, and the others were called
Presbyters; from among whom, upon the Death of the Bishop, another was chosen
to succeed him. But the Truth is, as is most evident, and particularly by the
Testimony of that Incomparably Learned, and Pious, Archbishop Usher, That
every Presbyter has a Right of Governing his Church, and Administering
Discipline, Vid. Usher's Reduction.
and thence has the Name of Rector; and is in the English Office of
Ordination, commanded to Administer Disciplinam Christi, the Discipline of
Christ; and he expressly avers, That the omission of the Exercise thereof in
England, is only from the Custom received in England; and that, that Impediment
may be removed by Law: So that the Relation a Bishop has to a Particular
Congregation, is no more than as a Presbyter; the Precedence of a Bishop to the
Presbyters in a Diocese, is of Pure Primitive Practice, grounded on the General
Rules of doing all in Order, though it be no part of Revealed Institution: All
Societies are taught by the Light of Reason to keep some Order; and for
convenience of Regular Converse, the Person of a certain Number, whom they
agree to be First in Honorable Qualities, has a Natural Right to be
President, though still of the same Order: Thus the President of a College of
Physicians, is no more than a Physician to his Patients, but he is a President
to the other Physicians; and it would be a strange Fancy for such a President
to claim a Right of being Physician to all the Bodies in London, and alone to
administer some sort of Physic to all within the Bills of Mortality; I doubt
such an Usurpation would increase the Number of the dead, and be justly
reckoned horrid Tyranny over the Living.

But there is a third, piece of an English Bishop, and in that he is plainly
the King's Ecclesiastical Lord Lieutenant, in such a compass of Ground, called
a Diocese; and this he has by positive Humane Law; and in this respect is not a
Church, but a State-Officer, entrusted with part of the Civil Power: His Courts
are Civil Courts, and he sits in the House of Lords, with respect to His
Temporal Baronage.

If the Distinction aforesaid were well understood, how easy were it to end
the Controversy about the JVS DIVINVM of EPISCOPACY, and the JVS DIVINVM of
PRESBYTERY and INDEPENDENCY; about the Delegation of the Bishop's Power to
Lay-Chancellors, and the Bishops Lording it over God's Heritage: And how easy
would it be to Rectify abundance of Matters complained of in the present
Practice of the Church? For Example, If the Bishops were made by the Delivery
of the Baculum and Annulum by the King, Staff and Ring.
as they were before the Conquest, or by Letters Patents; and were he made
President of the Presbytery by their Election, especially if the King did
usually give the Staff and Ring, or grant the Letters Patents to the Person
first chosen by the Presbytery; they might with the greater Assurance Pray for
the Assistance of the Holy Spirit at his Election. Were his Lay-power
understood to be Delegated to his Lay-Chancellor, (according to the good
Example of Sylvanus of old) who would find fault? And the Legislators would
soon think of giving their Courts a Civil Process, instead of their horridly
abused Spiritual Weapon Excommunication. Were the Presbyter restored to his
Just Right, we might soon see some good Effect of Discipline, which can never
be exercised to any purpose, till Parish-Communion be made more pure, and the
Pastor's Power be restored. One Physician may as well take the Charge of all
the Bodies in London, as one Bishop of their Souls; and the Congregations that
are gathered from the several parts of great Cities, cannot have the personal
Inspection, nor ready Access to the Pastoral Help, nor enjoy the Advantage of
that Article of the Creed, Communion of Saints, which ought to be provided for
in a well Disciplined Church. And this is what my Soul longs for, and not
without hope; For he that will impartially consider the late Writings for
Episcopacy, particularly those of Doctor Maurice, and Doctor Scot, and the
Writings against it, particularly of Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Clerk son, will, as I
conceive, find these things true.

First, That the Roman and English Prelacy, as now Exercised, are wholly dropped
in the Scuffle, and no Foundation found for either in Scripture, or Primitive
Antiquity.

Secondly, That Independency, if it be meant only of the Relation between a
Pastor and his Flock, and his Independent Right of Exercising the Power of the
Keys over them, it is plainly Jure Divino; but if taken in a Sense excluding.
National Churches, taking away all the common ordinary Means of Communion among
Christian Congregations, and leaving the Power of Ordination, and Admission to
the Lord's Supper, in the People, has as little Foundation in Scripture, or
Antiquity.

Thirdly, That Councils are for Advice, not Legislation, for Concord, not
Domination, and have no Power to make Laws for the Universal Church. They can
no more Alter, or add to the Laws of Christ, than the Jewish Priests could Add
to, or Alter the Laws of Moses: And as there never was, so there never can be a
General Council; and that a Visible Head of the Universal Church on Earth,
Monarchical or Aristocratical, is a mere Chinera, never designed by GOD, nor of
Use to Men.

Fourthly, That the Episcopacy which within a certain compass of Ground,
provides a Person chosen by the Presbytery, to a Superintendency, to preside in
Conventions of the Clergy, within his Precinct or Diocese, to be consulted, and
principally join in the Ordination, and Confirmation of Persons, who desire to
be admitted to the Lord's Supper; to be advised with by every Presbyter within
his Precinct, where any Difficulties arise concerning the Exercise of the Keys;
but which destroy not the Power of the Presbyter, nor the Primitive Church
Species, has good warrant in Scripture, Antiquity, Reason, and the Nature of
the thing; I say, chosen by the Presbytery: For even Mr. Dodwel, (that
unaccountable Bigot to Prelacy) acknowledges, that Bishops were first made by
Election.

Fifthly, Episcopacy thus stated is Jure Divino, as all things aagreeable to
right Reason are Jure Divino, (that is to say) Reason teaches such Things
without Revelation; and if Reason had not been sufficient to this End, he that
spent Forty Days on Earth after his Resurrection, instructing his Apostles in
the Things concerning the Kingdom of God, would not have Omitted to direct them
herein: He that was faithful only as a servant, gave Rules for every Pin in the
Tabernacle; Hebr. 3.5.
and the very Color of the Ribbons used by the Priests. And our Lord, who was
Faithful as a Son over his own House, would not have Omitted a Matter of such
Importance. So when Christ had Instituted the Office of Presbyters, or Bishops;
and the Apostle given an Account of, and Instructions for their Office, there
was no need to Institute the Method of their Concord, which right Reason taught
Men of all sorts of Learning, as Philosophers, Physicians, etc. Again,
Presbytery, if it mean only an Equality of Gospel Ministers, by the Institution
of Christ, it is Jure Divino, as plain as Words can make it; if it be meant,
the Form of Government so diversified, as is usually meant by that Word, it is
not Jure Divino, having no Revealed Institution: And Reason taught all the
Christian Church to appoint a President Bishop for Life; and nothing but the
Rise of Popish Prelacy could make the other Method seem Reasonable; and Calvin
himself (as I take it) fell into it, out of Necessity, and not out of Choice:
But surely this Part of Church Government, is no more determined by Revelation,
than the Form of Civil Government.

Sixthly, While under the Notion of CHVRCH GOVERNMENT, the Clergy encroach on
the Prerogative of the Civil Power; whether it be in an Episcopal or
Presbyterian Form, neither God nor His Majesty will have the Obedience paid
them which is due; and the only way to support both Civil and Ecclesiastical
Government, is to keep them entirely distinct, and unconfounded, to give to
Caesar the Things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are Gods. To own
the Divine, as the Vicegerent of Christ, in his Prophetical and Priestly, and
the Civil Magistrate, as his Vicegerent in his Kingly Office. Particularly the
Civil Power is to appoint the Bounds of Bishoprics; and so is the Twelfth
Theses of that clear headed and accurately Learned Dr. Isaac Barrow. By the
Laws of God, and according to Ancient Practice, Princes may Model the Bounds of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, Erect Bishoprics, Enlarge, Diminish, or Transfer
them as they please. Thus he; where by Princes he necessarily intends the
Legislative Power, wherever it is placed, by the Respective Constitution of
Christian Kingdoms.

Seventhly, Were these things well considered, the Controversy between the
Episcopal and Presbyterian, would be certainly reconciled, and even the
Independent and Antipoedobaptist, would probably be folded, if the Terms of
Union, which the Church prescribes, did not keep them out: Which will come next
to be considered, after I have premised the few following short Propositions.

First Proposition.

When God, bringing his First-begotten into the World, commanded all his Angels
to Worship him; Hebr. 1.6. Luke 2.14.
their Song was, Glory to God on High, on Earth Peace, and good Will toward
Men: But while Christians have joined with the Heavenly Host in the First
Clause of that Song, they have neglected the two other Parts thereof, and for
want of Peace on Earth, the former and latter Clauses have made us yet but
little Harmony.

Second Proposition.

The Eternal Father has called himself The God of Peace, Romans 15.33.
the Blessed Jesus is The Prince of Peace; Romans 16.20.
the great Legacy which he left behind Him, Isai. 9.6.
was, His Peace; and The Gospel of Peace, John 14.27.
is the great Instrument of Erecting that Kingdom, of which Peace is one of the
greatest Glories. Till God give his People the Blessing of Peace, we cannot
expect that Happy Time when all the ends of the Earth shall fear him; Psalm.
67.7.
and his Name will never be Hallowed to purpose, Mat. 6.9, 10.
nor his Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven, till this Kingdom of his be
come.

Third Proposition.

The Methods which Men have taken to attain Peace, have been various.
Conquerors have endeavored it, by making Mankind Slaves, and reducing the
World under an Universal Monarchy. Mark 9.38. Luke 9.49, 54.
The Apostles themselves began to be Tempted by the Antichristian Spirit, and
were for bringing all under their Master, by Silencing first, and then by Fire
from Heaven. Popes have attempted it, The Reason of this is Plain, if the Pope
be Antichrist, and his Reign extended to 1260 Years.
by pretending to Infallibility; and Councils, by making Canons. Some Places
have labored to attain it, by an Inquisition; and others, by Penal-Laws,
concerning doubtful Matters of Speculation: And of them all (except the
Apostles, who were afterward better Instructed) we must conclude with the
Apostle, The way of Peace they have not known; or, at least, not practiced to
walk therein.

Fourth Proposition.

Ever since the Fall of Man, this Lower Creation has been a Stage of War; Genesis
3.15.
the Seed of the Woman, and of the Serpent, have been in constant Action: 1
John 3.8.
Our Savior came to Destroy the Works of the Devil, Ephesians. 2.2.
whilst the Spirit that works in the Children of Disobedience, keeps up his
Works with all Diligence; and therefore there is no Peace, says God, Isai.
57.21.
to the Wicked. Peace without Holiness is impossible, and the World seeks it in
vain: The Apostle Instructs us to follow Peace with all Men, and Holiness;
Hebr. 12.14.
and the Prophet assures us, Isai. 32.17.
That the Work of Righteousness, shall be Peace; and the Effect of
Righteousness, Quietness and Assurance for ever. And that when God has wrought
all our Works in us, Isai. 26.12.
He will Ordain Peace for us.

Fifth Proposition.

It is therefore Impudent Folly, for men to Apprehend that they can have Peace
with one another, while they are at open Enmity with God. He that has all Men's
Hearts in His hand, will manage them so, that his own Word shall be
Established; if Men will not join in the Practice of Things, in the Theory of
which they all agree, they will be still the Instruments of Divine Vengeance on
one another. And therefore if Magistrates would labor for Peace, they must lay
the Foundation thereof in the Reformation of Manners; and be very Cautious of
making Laws, about Matters of Speculation: For our Savior has told us, John
1.17.
That if any will do his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine; the way to know
more, is to Practice what we do know. Otherwise,

Sixth Proposition.

While Men Dispute with Vehemence, and turn Divinity into the most Abstruse and
Exquisite fine Notions, they make Christianity unintelligible, and distinguish
all Religion out of the World. They Impose on the Credulous, confound mean
Capacities, divide Christians into Sects, and every Sect Adores its own
Distinguishing Character, till if the Question be, what Religion a Man is of?
It Is Answered, A PAPIST, A CHVRCH OF ENGLAND MAN, A PRESBYTERIAN, AN
INDEPENDENT, AN ANTIPOEDO BAPTIST: But no Man does, and who can truly answer,
I Am a Christian!

Seventh Proposition.

True Religion is the Bond of Union. Isai. 11.9.
When the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord; as the Waters cover
the Sea, Isai. 2.4. Mich. 4.3.
then Men shall beat their Swords into Plow-shares, and their Spears into
Pruning Hooks: Then Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation, nor shall
they learn War any more; then nothing shall hurt or destroy in all God's Holy
Mountain. And since it is evident, that although Actions are, Belief is not
within the Power and Reach of Humane Law; and that the Generality of Mankind
never will, without a Miraculous Power, and Extraordinary Revelation, agree on
the Matters so hotly Disputed even among Protestants, it is worth the while to
consider, what are the probable Means which the Scripture has Revealed, and
which it is our Duty to Use, for attaining an Universal Peace among Christians.

There is a Rock on which our Savior promised to build his Church, that the
Gates of Hell should not prevail against it: So solemn a Promise requires a
Serious Consideration; for as the Papists taking it to be the Person of Peter,
and his Successors, have by that Mistake concerning this Rock, laid the
Foundation of the Antichristian Kingdom; so the Kingdom of CHRIST MEDIATOR, is
truly and surely built upon this Rock, which our Savior intends in that
Promise; and that is, Matt. 16.18.
That JESUS CHRIST IS THE SON OF THE LIVING GOD.

Ye believe in God, John 14.1.
believe also in me, was the Substance of our Savior's Doctrine, and the
Apostles Creed. I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of the living God, was
Martha's Creed. Mark. 16.18. John 11.17.
And he that Confesses, That Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, God dwells
in him, and he in God: John 1.4.
It is the end of Writing the Gospel; and this (says the Apostle) is the Word
of Faith, That if we confess with our Mouth the Lord Jesus, John 20.31: Romans
10.8, 9.
and believe in our Hearts, that God has raised him from the Dead, we shall be
saved: And accordingly, upon his Profession of the Creed; Acts 8.37.
I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, the Ethiopian Eunuch, who
before believed in God, was Baptized, and the words of Baptism instructed him
as they do us, in the Foundation of the Christian Church.

And before any other Creed was made, the Effect of this Creed was Miraculous,
both with respect to the Holy Lives of those that professed it, and the great
Increase of the Number of such.

Now what was sufficient in the first Ages, was so to after-Ages, and is so
now; 1 Cor. 3.11.
For other Foundation can no Man lay, than that which is laid already, was a
Truth in St. Paul's Time.

The Apostles Creed, and the other Creeds, subscribed to by the Church of
England, are not Additions to, but Paraphrases of this Creed, or Truths which
necessarily follow from the Belief thereof, and many of the Articles thereof
were added in After-Ages, in contradiction to the several Heresies which rose
at several Times to the endangering that Foundation.

For Instance, Iraeneus Adv. Haeres. Lib. 1. cap. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, etc.
all the Heretics mentioned by Iraeneus, wherewith the Devil vexed the Church
for the first Three Hundred Years, were for a Plurality of Created Gods, whom
they held also to be Creators; and for this reason it should seem were those
Words, MAKER OF HEAVEN AND EARTH added, which were not in the Creed, called the
Apostles for many Years; as appears in the Symbol recited by Marcellus
Ancyranus, in the Confession of Faith which he delivered to Pope Julius, with
the Exposition of the Apostles Creed, written by the Latin Doctors: The Nicene
and Athanasian Creeds were further Explications of this Creed, in Opposition to
Arrius, who struck at the very Foundation, even the Godhead of Christ. And the
Second Council of Constantinople, enlarged the Nicene Creed, in the Article
that concerned the Holy Ghost (in Opposition to Macedonius, who denied the
Godhead and Personality of the Holy Ghost) and in the Articles concerning the
Catholic Church, and the Privileges belonging thereunto; and when the Roman
Church (after the Days of Charles the Great) had added the Article of the
Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, in Opposition to the Greek Church;
the Council of Trent it self has recommended it to us, Council. Tredend. Ses.
3.
As that Principle in which all that Profess the Faith of Christ do necessarily
agree, and the firm and only Foundation against which the Gates of Hell shall
never prevail. Thus out of their own Mouths may we judge those pretended
Servants of our Savior.

His Blessed Promise has been performed to a Tittle; his Church has been
preserved in spite of the Gates of Hell, and the Rock has been like the
Foundations of the Earth, unshaken by all Assaults of Hell; of all that are
there already, and all that are hastening thither. And it is to me a most
Important Observation, which is made by that Prophet, and Apostle of this
Latter Age, Archbishop Usher, Usher's Sermon, June 20. 1624. page 27.


That whatsoever the Father of Lies either has Attempted, or shall Attempt,
yet has he neither hitherto Effected, nor shall ever bring to pass hereafter;
that this Catholic Doctrine, ratified by the common Assent of Christians,
always, and every where, should be Abolished, but that in the thickest Mist
rather of the most perplexing Troubles, it still obtained Victory, both in the
Minds, and in the open Confession of all Christians, no ways overturned in the
Foundation thereof; and that in this Verity, that one Church of CHRIST was
preserved in the midst of the Tempest of the most cruel Winter, or in the
thickest Darkness of her Wainings.

And (he further adds) that if at this Day, we should take a Survey of the
several Professions of Christianity, that have any large spread in any Part of
the World; as of the Religion of the Roman, and of the Reformed Churches in our
Quarters; of the Ethiopians, and Egyptians in the South; of the Grecians, and
other Christians in the Eastern Parts; and should put by the Points wherein
they differ one from another, and gather into one Body the rest of the Articles
wherein they all agree: we should find that in those Propositions, which,
without all Controversy, are Universally received in the whole Christian World,
so much Truth is contained, as being joined with Holy Obedience, may be
sufficient to bring a Man to everlasting Salvation; neither have we cause to
doubt, but that as many as do walk according to this Rule, neither overthrowing
that which they have builded, by super inducing any Damnable Heresies,
thereupon, nor otherwise Viciating their holy Faith, with a lewd and wicked
Conversation: Peace shall be upon them, and Mercy, and upon the Israel of GOD.

This is a Consideration of the greatest Weight, and discovers the Foundation
of Christian Unity, and of the Peace of the Universal Church.

And even J. W. (in his Contest with the Right Reverend and Learned Doctor
Stilling fleet, Stilling. Answ. to sev. Treatises 68.70.
now Lord Bishop of Worcester) proves the Unity of the Roman Church, by this
Argument: All those who Assent unto the Ancient Creeds, are Undivided in
Matters of Faith: But all Roman Catholics Assent unto the Ancient Creeds;
Ergo, all Roman Catholics are Undivided in Matters of Faith.

These, says the Doctor, are the most Healing Principles that have yet been
thought of: Fie, for shame, why should we, and they of the Church of Rome
quarrel thus long! We are well agreed in all Matters of Faith, which, says he,
I shall demonstratively prove, from the Argument of J. W. drawn from his two
last Propositions.

All who Assent to the Ancient Creeds are Undivided in Matters of Faith: But
both Papists and Protestants do Assent unto the Ancient Creeds, Ergo, They are
Undivided in Matters of Faith; and though this way of Arguing was only Ad
hominem, it is great Pity that the Major Proposition of the last Syllogism, was
not pronounced out of the Infallible Chair.

But certain it is, That the Papists, notwithstanding their great Boast of
Unity, are much more Divided within themselves, than any Protestants from each
other; for the Rent goes through the main Foundation of their Faith, Their
Church's INFALLIBILITY: For where to place it they can by no means agree; but
(as among that Party which calls it self the Church of England) though some are
Socinians, Note, If that Notion be true, viz. That the Vaudois and Albigeois
are the Two Witnesses, it is Demonstration that Hierarchy and Liturgy are no
proper Terms of Union: For although they have been pure Churches ever since the
Apostles Days, they have always been without both.
some Calvinists, etc. yet all agree in the Hierarchy and Common Prayer: So
there are two things in which all Papists do agree, viz. the Hierarchy under
the Bishop of Rome, and the Sacrifice of the Mass: Upon these two Poles the
Antichristian World stands firm, though almost all others are controverted. Fas
est and ab host doceri. And therefore why may not the Governors of the Church
of England fix upon those Terms of UNION, wherein all Christians in the World
are agreed, which are few and plain, and restore them to their Primitive Right
of being the Foundation of the Peace, and Unity of Christians? Terms of Divine
Institution will as certainly Unite the Christian World, as Terms of Humane
Institution have done the Antichristian. And since it is not a Matter at
present practicable, to bring all sorts of Christians together, to agree on
those Terms, it will be the Glory of the Church of England to set an Example
which will be followed by all the Christian World.

There are (in a Word) some Truths which are the First Principles of the
Oracles of God; Heb. 5.12.
and these are the Truths which ought to be the Terms of Union. But I would not
be misunderstood, as if I thought no other Truths necessary for a Growing
Christian. There are the Principles of the Doctrine of CHRIST (or as the
Original) the Word of the beginning of CHRIST which are necessary to Unite a
Man to the Christian Church, Heb. 6.1.
and which are suited to the Unlearned, as well as the Learned, and ought to
admit him into its Communion: But there is also a going on to Perfection, which
becomes all Men that live in that Communion, the degrees of which are various,
and the highest degrees most desirable; but yet he that has but two Talents,
ought not to be cast out of the Church, because he has not Five: Nay, he that
has but one, may improve it to Salvation, though he never understood
School Divinity, nor the Power of the Church in Decreeing Ceremonies. But
though I might, I will not presume to name those Truths or Terms of Union; the
Moderate of all the aforesaid Persuasions, will easily agree therein. And to
the Consideration of the Sons of Peace, I leave the Particulars; though I think
I may say, That the Articles of the Church to which the Dissenters do
Subscribe, contain them all.

But it will still be Objected, That though an Assent to those Doctrinal
Articles, to which the Dissenters have Subscribed, and which include Scripture,
as the Rule of Faith and Manners, and thence Collect Rules of Faith, Practice
and Devotion, were made the Terms of Admission into the Church of England; yet
there remain many things in Point of Practice, which keep up Differences, and
divide us into Parties; as, I. Forms of Prayers. II. Habits of the Clergy. III.
Presentations. IV. The Cross in Baptism. V. Kneeling at the Sacrament. VI.
Godfathers and Godmothers. VII. Holy Days. VIII. Ordination of Ministers,
Subscription, and Oaths on one Hand.


Objections, Antipathy, and Prejudices against all these things, and some
Indecencies on the other hand. And I will shortly touch on all these Heads,
when I have premised,

First, Indifferent Things used in Religion, or by Religious Men, and suffered
to remain according to their Nature, were never the occasion of Division; and
Indifferent Things enforced by Laws, have ever caused Divisions in the
Christian World. To instance in the Church of England, kneeling at the
Sacrament is imposed, and keeps out Thousands of Good Christians out of the
Established part of the Church: whereas sitting when we sing Psalms is not
commanded, but the Posture has obtained in all Assemblies, as well of the
Church, as of the Dissenters: We have had abundance of Paper spoiled in Writing
for, and against Kneeling at the Sacrament; but not a Page for or against
Sitting when Psalms are Sung: And yet we may Argue as strongly against Sitting
when we Praise God, as against Kneeling at the Sacrament, abstracted from the
Imposition. We do not pretend to an Uniformity in Time; but in some Churches
the Parish meet at Nine, in some at Ten, in others not till Eleven; yet the
Church of England never received any prejudice by the want of Uniformity
therein. The Surplice has even divided the Martyrs among themselves, being an
indifferent thing imposed; wearing black Clothes is used by Conformable Men,
and the Teachers among all the Dissenters indifferently; and yet one may prove
the Unlawfulness of the Clergy's wearing Black, with as strong Arguments as any
Man can use against wearing White. But when Men will be giving Religious
Significations to Insignificant Things, we see what comes on it: Imposition is
warring against the Nature of Man: Adam in Innocence fell by the Breach of a
Positive Law, concerning a Matter in it self indifferent, abstracted from the
Sanction of the Law, although it received the Sanction from GOD Himself: And it
must be highly unreasonable for Men to expect from fallen Man that Obedience
which was not paid by Adam to GOD Himself, except, at least, their Power to
Command were as Evident as His.

The Right Reverend Prelate, Doctor Jeremy Tailor tells us, in his Liberty of
Prophesying, That he that makes an Article of Faith, or a Term of
Church Communion, without a Divine Authority, chalks out a new way to the
Devil. The Incomparable Chillingworth, and the Excellent Hale of Eaton, have
fixed the Name of Schismatics on the Imposers of unnecessary things: And
certainly, he that in Matters of Religion makes indifferent things necessary,
Usurps Power Superior to Christ and his Apostles, yea, to GOD Himself, for
they thought fit to leave them indifferent; Job 40.12.
And shall he that contendeth with the Almighty instruct Him? If it was not
well done, he that reproves GOD let him answer it. As for the Appointing of
Churches, and Places, and Times for Assembling, and Circumstances of the like
nature, Reason makes such Appointments necessary, but still without Restraint,
as to other Places or Times, and such Appointments, fall not under the Notion
of Indifferent Things. It Is an absurd way of Arguing, That the Church may
command Indifferent Things, because Things Good are Commanded, and Evil Forbid
by God, and they have no other way of Exerting their Power; Would they be
Greater, or Wiser than their Master: Our Savior died to bear witness to the
Truth, and the single Truth, that he immediately died to bear witness unto was,
That He was a King. And I know no Man, or Church, that has any thing to do to
mend our Savior's Institutions: Their Power in Religious Matters is to enforce
what He has commanded, and to restrain from what he has forbidden, and
accordingly to Administer Rewards and Punishments. This is Power and Work
enough for Souls that are sincere; and wherever any Power on Earth has been
found making such Additions, they have also been found entirely negligent of
what is commanded, or forbid by God; and their whole Zeal has been employed,
in enforcing their own Innovations: Christians as well as Jews, have made void
the Commandments of GOD, through Men's Traditions.

But to Reflect a little upon the several Particulars abovementioned.

Form of Prayer.
I. I am of Opinion, That a Set Form of Prayer appointed to be read in all
Churches which receive Maintenance from the Government, The beginning of the
Preaching of John the Baptist, was the beginning of the Gospel; and yet John
taught his disciples, and our Savior his, a Form of Prayer.
is not only lawful, but desirable; yet so as no Man be compelled to use it
against his Judgment or Conscience; For a Form of Prayer Composed in Scripture
Language, or according to the Sense of Scripture, is certainly Dictated by the
Spirit, and is according to the mind thereof, and he who joins in that Prayer
has two Advantages, which he that joins with an Extempore Prayer has not.

First, He is not bound to Reflection upon the Expressions of the Minister,
which is necessary in the other Case.

1. To understand his Meaning. 2. To judge whether it be sit to join with him
in what he says. And,
Secondly, He that joins with a Scriptural Form has consequently greater
Liberty of Thought, and may, while the Prayer is Reading, enlarge in his own
Meditations, and receive with greater freedom whatsoever immediate Influences
the Holy Spirit may please to afford. But there are Multitudes who cannot use a
Form of Prayer, without Formality: And really the variety that is in the Temper
and Genius of Men makes all unnecessary Impositions grievances to the World,
Nitimur invetitum is a great Truth, though it be not an Article of Faith; but
the continual Fluctuation of Humane Affairs makes it necessary, that the
Minister use himself to a readiness of applying Extempore to the Throne of
Grace upon extraordinary occasions, which is a Liberty not denied by the Church
to their Clergy, and is used by many of them before their Sermons. And how far
the Spirit of GOD may influence the Heart and Tongue of the Ambassadors of our
Savior, by immediate Assistances, Romans 8.15, 26, 27.
I refer to the Texts in the Margent for satisfaction: Joh. 14.17.
For should I use the Language of Scripture otherwise, than by referring to the
Texts themselves, many pretended Protestant Readers would unwarily, or from a
worse Principle, call it Cant; and yet after all the Prejudices and Arguments
against a Form; they who attend constantly in the Congregations of the
Dissenters, do know that many of the Teachers in those Congregations come very
near to a Form in their Prayers, though called Extempore, and if the Minister
should vary every Word in every Prayer, yet it is still a Form to the
Congregation.

Of the Habits of the Clergy.
II. If the Habits of the Clergy were only used for Distinction and Decency,
and not made Sacramental, viz. To be an outward visible sign of an inward
spiritual Grace; I do not think any Man would be frighted out of the Church, by
seeing a Reader in White; and the convenience of a Gown would certainly carry
it for a Gown against a Cloak, (though we have an account of Paul's Cloak, 2 Timothy 4.18.
but not of his Gown) if it were once declared, That there is no more Holiness
in a Clergy Man's Gown, than in an Alderman's. And I do not believe that St.
Paul used to Preach in his Cloak; For if he did, being so constant a Preacher,
he would not have left it behind him at Troas.

Of Presentations.
III. As for Presentations and Patronages, it must be acknowledged, That in the
Primitive Times, the People did choose their own Pastors, and it seems most
reasonable that they should have a Negative Voice: For why should I have a
Pastor put on my Soul, any more than a Physician upon my Body, or a Lawyer upon
my Estate? But in Truth, there being no positive Divine Command in this Matter,
it is convenient in a depraved Age, that Patrons Nominate the Persons that the
People choose, and the Bishop Approve; for I doubt that in many Parishes the
Majority would not of themselves choose the most pious Divine, and the People
are not so well qualified for an Election, as they were in the Primitive Times.

The Cross in Baptism.
IV. No Man can give me any Reason for continuing the Cross at Baptism, if the
Practice was Ancient; yet from the beginning it was not so, and if Custom
without Reason make any Person fond thereof, it may be left Indifferent.

Kneeling at the Sacrament.
V. The same may be said of Kneeling at the Lord's Supper; that it was not used
in the First Ages is most evident; for Kneeling on the Lord's Days was
forbidden, and to this Day remains Condemned by the Twentieth Canon of the
Council of Nice; and consequently Kneeling at the Sacrament. Our Savior
Represents the State of Glory by an Allusion to this Sacrament, that his
Apostles should Eat and Drink at his Table in his Kingdom, and sit on Thrones:
That Posture which is the Eating and Drinking Posture by the respective Customs
of Nations, is the proper Posture for this Ordinance; but were no Posture
imposed, there would be no Quarrelling about this matter, and it is probable
that the Posture of Sitting, when we Sing, came from the Posture used in the
Eucharist.

As to the Matter of the Test, perhaps it may be used by the Divine Providence
to be a great Means of Reformation; for, if Discipline were Restored, (till
which Time only the Curses on Ash-Wednesdays are to be used, as the Rubric
informs us) and were Posture left Indifferent, and no Man admitted to the
Lord's Supper, who could not give a good Account of the Fundamentals of
Christian Religion; (viz.) those Articles which shall be the Terms of Union,
and who shall not also give Satisfactory Evidence to the Pastor of the
Congregation established or allowed with whom he desires to Communicate; that
he is not tainted with Vice of any kind, no serious Man would wish the Test
Abolished. Religion and Virtue would be promoted thereby, and the Kingdom would
soon enjoy a Pious Magistracy. But as it is, I have heard it called an
Outrageous Press of the Devils Servants to the most inward Rites of
Christianity, and many believe that to make the Sacrament a Test for Civil
Offices, where the Church is without Church Discipline, is unsuitable to the
Institution, Nature and Ends of the Sacrament, dangerous to the Government, and
to the Souls of Men; grounded on no solid Reason; insufficient to secure
against Popery; of Use only to Exclude good Subjects, and Destructive to the
true Interest of any Protestant Kingdom.

Of Godfathers and Godmothers.
VI. Godfathers and Godmothers were an useful sort of People in Times of
Persecution, and would be so now, if not made necessary to Baptism, but used as
they were at their first Invention: But if, instead of the Undertaking for the
Religious Education of the Child, in case of the Parents Neglect or Death, they
must Exclude the Parent from his proper Office, and never more take care of the
Child, which is the Case of most of the Church-Children now in England, Pudet
haec Opprobria nobis, sure no Man can desire to continue it as it is.

Of Holy Days.
VII. He that can find me out a Christian Holy Day in the New Testament,
besides the Lord's Day, or any mention made of them, except in such Texts as
Condemn them, shall have my Thanks, and I will not be wanting to acknowledge
the Favor to him who shall discover any other Original of them, than is
beforementioned in this Discourse. And if Men would be contented to give God
the first Day of the Week, being one in seven, I Am apt to believe the laying
aside all other Anniversary Holy Days for the whole Church, would neither
displease God nor good Men; and we need them not to oblige either Jews or
Gentiles. Indeed, were they declared, (as they are) of Humane Institution, and
only convenient for Relaxation from Labor, the Ease of Servants, and such
prudent Purposes, the great Objections against them would be Answered; and a
Law concerning them, like that of 5 Eliz. Cap. 5. concerning Lent, would do the
Business; and no Man would object against beginning such Days of Diversion,
with Solemn seeking the Divine Blessing in Public Assemblies. And yet, if any
Men or Church, desire to continue them as they are, without Imposition, the
Fourteenth of the Romans, perhaps, has made them a Toleration, though it must
be acknowledged, That the Days there intended had originally a Divine
Institution.

As to occasional Days appointed by Authority, for Fasting and Praying, or
Feasting and Thanksgiving, whether pro hac vice only, or Annual, with Respect
to some National Deliverance, they are not scrupled by any English Protestant,
and are Authorized by Presidents in the Jewish Church.

Of Ordination.
VIII. We read of Ordination, by laying on of Paul's Hands; 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy
1.6.
and also of Ordination by laying on the Hands of the Presbytery. The Primitive
Church joined together the Bishops and Presbyters in Ordination; and that will
Please and Unite the Episcopal and Presbyterian: And I don't know whether if
any Independent, or Antipoedobaptist be fond thereof, it should be any
Difficulty to the Church of England, to let them Admit their Pastor with what
Ceremonies they please, so as he be willing to submit thereto, perhaps they
will have the better Opinion of him, and he have advantage of doing more good.

And as for Reordination, it is but Confirming Ordinations, made by Presbyters,
by Act of Parliament (which is no new thing) and that Affair will be settled
without determining that difficult Point of Controversy.

Many of the Encumbrances on Conformity are removed, particularly that which
related to the Illegally Imposed Covenant, and the Oxford Oath; and if
Subscription to the Terms of Union, by all that shall receive Employment in the
Established Church, together with fit Qualifications, and a Sober, Religious,
and Godly Life, were accepted, instead of all other Subscriptions and Oaths,
how happy should we see the Church of England?

Lastly, These things would Answer the Objections, and Remove the Antipathies
and Prejudices of the Dissenters: And as for the Indecencies justly complained
of amongst some of them, by those of the Established Part of the Church, they
do already sensibly Decay, and would soon vanish away. Good Manners is
certainly as agreeable in Church, as out of it; and there is no necessity of
being Guilty of Irreverence to avoid Superstition.

The Apostle advised the Women in the Church to have a covering on their heads,
1 Cor. 11.10.
because of the Angels: And if the Angels gather the Devotion of our Souls from
the Posture of our Bodies, were it for no other Reason, Men would neither
Sleep, nor Loll, nor put on their Hats, in Public, or Allowed Assemblies,
especially they who keep them off all the Week besides. The Service of the
Body, as well as the Soul, is owing to him from whom the Glory of both is
expected: And the Apostle, as if he had foreseen the Folly of some People in
this Matter, expressly exhorts us to Present our Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy
and acceptable to GOD, which is our reasonable Service. But yet I Am not so
Sanguine as to believe it a Matter probable to be effected, to bring the
Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independent, and Antipoedobaptist, so near together
immediately, as that they should agree in one Mode of Worship, or Form of
Divine Service; and yet I conceive, they may be all United in the Church of
England, and under the Government of the Bishops, without hurting their
Consciences on the one side, or cutting a Hem off the Surplice on the other:
And to this purpose I would propose:

I. That by a New Act of Uniformity, Moderate Men may be comprehended, and the
Tolerable Tolerated.

II. That an Act of Parliament be passed for the more Positive Settling and
Limitting the Bishops Courts, and give them a Process suitable to their Civil
Constitution.

III. That the Power of Excommunication and Absolution be restored to the
Parish Pastor, for Matter of Immorality, or Gross Heresy; and the Proof
thereof be transmitted to the Court kept for that Diocese.

IV. That all the Teachers in Dissenting Congregations do make themselves
personally known to the Diocesan, and own his Civil Jurisdiction within his
Diocese, according to Law, and Enter the Places of their Assemblies with him:
And that all Dissenters submit to the Conusance of those Courts, if they are
accused of Immoralities, who may there have a Civil Punishment.

V. That because very many of His Majesty's Subjects are, and probably will
continue under the abovementioned Denominations, it might be advisable that
the several distinguished Parties choose their Representatives to Assist at a
Convocation in Matters of Manners and Good Life, and other things which are not
in Controversy.

VI. The Providence of God in the Instance of Londonderry, did show us that
all Endeavors of Agreement are blessed by Miraculous and Extraordinary
Appearances of the Divine Goodness. And though we are not Besieged in England,
yet I doubt we are under an equal necessity of Unity and Concord, in order to
preserve to our selves and Posterity, both the Commandments and the Creed. And
if the Episcopal Party, though they will be rendered much more Numerous by such
Comprehension (reserving to themselves both the Property and Profits of the
Church) would nevertheless allow the Dissenters the Morning and Evening Hours
for their Lectures and Assemblies, they Engaging not to meddle with those
Matters in Controversy which distinguish Parties amongst us, but only to
endeavor the Good of Souls, which is the Interest and Duty of all Parties,
they would grow together insensibly, and we should be, in a short time, the
Happiest Nation on the Earth.

FINIS.
Books Printed for J. Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultry.
MR. Pool's English Annotations, in Two Volumes. Folio.

The Works of the Reverend Mr. Stephen Charnock, B. D. in Two Volumes. Folio.

The Life of the Reverend Mr. Richard Baxter, with the History of the Times he
lived in. Written by himself. Folio.

A Sermon Preached at the Interrment of Mr. Samuel Stephens. Quarto.

A Sermon Preached at the Assizes at Buckingbam, July 5. 1692. by Mr. John
Howard, Rector of Marston-Trussel. Quarto.

The Evil of our Days, with the Remedy of it. A Sermon preached at a Visitation
at Rothwell in Northamptonshire, ^ctob. 12, 1697. By the same Author.

A Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, at
St. Mary-le-Bow, Jan. 30. 1693.

A Thanksgiving Sermon before the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens of London,
at St. Mary-le-Bow, April 16. 1696. Both by Will. Stephens, B. D. Rector of
Sutton in Surrey. Quarto.

Mr. Lorimer's Apology for the Ministers, who Subscribed to the Stating of the
Truths and Errors in Mr. William's Book, in Answer to Mr. Irail's Letter to a
Minister in the Country. Quarto.

Mr Lorimer's Remarks on Mr. Goodwin's Discourse of the Gospel. Proving that
the Gospel Covenant is a Law of Grace, and Answering the Objections to the
contrary. Quarto.

An Effort against Bigottry: and for Christian Catholicism; by Henry Chandler.
Quarto.

A Funeral Sermon, occasioned by the Death of the Eminently Pious Mrs Elizabeth
Williams, late Wife of the Reverend Mr. Daniel Williams. Octavo.

A Practical Discourse concerning Vows; with a Special Reference to Baptism and
the Lord's Supper. Octavo.

Dr. Burton's Discourses of Purity, Charity, Repentance and seeking first the
Kingdom of God. Published, with a Preface, by Dr. John Tillotson, late
Archbishop of Canterbury. Octavo.

Bishop Wilkins's Discourse of the Gift of Prayer and Preaching; the Latter
much Enlarged by the present Bishops of Norwich, and Chichester. Octavo.

A Free Discourse wherein the Doctrines that make for Tyranny are Displayed;
the Title of our Rightful and Lawful King William Vindicated. And the
Unreasonableness and Mischievous Tendency of the Odious Distinction of a King
de Facto, and de Jure, Discovered; by the Honorable Sir Robert Howard. 8 vo.

Mr. Addy's Stenographia: Or, the Art of Short-Writing Completed, in a far
more Compendious Way than any yet Extant. Octavo. Also the Whole Bible in the
same Shorthand; curiously Engraven on Copper Plates.

Cambridge Phrases, for the Use of Schools; by A. Robinson M. A. Octavo.

Orbis Imperantis, Tabellae Geographico-Historico-Geneologico-Chronologicae.
Curiously Engraven on Copper Plates.

Remarks on a late Discourse of William Lord Bishop of Derry, concerning the
Inventions of Men in the Worship of God. Also a Defense of the said Remarks
against his Lordship's Admonition; by J. Boyse. 8 vo.

A Preservative against Deism: Showing the great Advantage of Revelation above
Reason, in the Two Great Points, Pardon of Sin, and a Future State of
Happiness. With an Appendix in Answer to a Letter of Mr. A. W. against Revealed
Religion in the Oraracles of Reason; by Mr. Nathanael Tailor. 8 vo.

Mr. Woodhouse his Sermon preached to the Societies for Reformation of Manners,
in the City of London. Octavo.

Mr. Calamy's Sermon to the same Societies.

Mr. Shower's Sermon to the same Societies. 8 vo.

Mr. Williams's Sermon to the same Societies. 8 vo.

Mr. Alsop's Sermon to the same Societies. 8 vo.

Mr. Shower's Mourners Companion; being Funeral Discourses on many Occasions.
In Two Volumes. Octavo.

Mr. Shower's Sermons on Isaiah LV. 7, 8, 9. 8 vo.

A Plea for the late Accurate and Excellent Mr. Baxter, and those that speak of
the Sufferings of Christ as he does. In Answer to Mr. Lobb's insinuated Charge
of Socinianism against 'em, in his late Appeal to the Bishops of Worcester, and
Dr. Edwards. With a Preface directed to Persons of all Persuasions, to call 'em
from Frivolous and Over-eager Contentions about Word; on all sides. 8 vo.

A Funeral Sermon occasioned by the Death of Mrs Jane Papillon, late Wife of
Thomas Papillon Esquire preached July 24. School. and now published at his Request;
by John Woodhouse. 8 vo.

A Brief Concordance to the Holy Bible, of the most Useful and Usual Places
which one may have Occasion to seek for. In a new Method; by Samuel Clark, M. A.

Mr. Nathaniel Vincenes Funeral Sermon; Preached by Mr. N. Tailor.

A Sermon Preached at a Public Ordination in a Country Congregation, by Mr.
S. Clark.

London-Dispensatory, reduced to the Practice of the London Physicians: Wherein
are contained the Medicines both Galenical and Chemical, that are now in use:
Those out of use omitted, and those in use, and not in the Latin Copy, here
added. By John Peachy, of the College of Physicians in London:

Mr. John Shower's Discourse of Tempting Christ. His Discourse of Family
Religion, in 3 Letters. His Life of Mr. Henry Gearing.

Mr. George Hammonds and Mr. Matthew Barker's Discourses of Family Worship.
Written at the Request of the United Ministers of London.

Mr. Gibbon's Sermon of Justification.

Comfort in Death a Funeral Sermon Preached upon the Death of Mr. Timothy Cruso
late Pastor of a Church in London, who Died November. 26. 1697. by Matthew Mead.

Mr. Samuel Slater's Earnest Call to Family Religion; being the Substance of
Eighteen Sermons.

Mr. William Scoffin's Help to true Spelling and Reading: Or, a very easy
Method for the Teaching Children, or elder Persons rightly to Spell, and
exactly to read English.

Monro's Institutio Grammaticae.

Clavis Grammatica: Or, the ready way to the Latin Tongue; containing most
plain Demonstrations for the regular translating English into Latin.

Mr. Hamond's Sermon at Mr. Steel's Funeral.

Mr. John Mason's little Catechism, with little Verses, and little Sayings for
little Children.

Catholicism WITHOUT POPERY.

The Second Part.

In a LETTER to Sir Humphrey Mackworth, Occasioned By his late Discourse,
ENTITLED, Peace at Home.

By John Hook Sergeant at Law.

LONDON: Printed for J. Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's- Churchyard,
and J. Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultrey, 1704.

TO THE Christian Reader.
ABout the Year of our Lord 375, Themistius the Philosopher, who was also
Consul at that time, told the Emperor Valens, that there were 300 Opinions or
Sects among the Philosophers, far more than there were among the Christians,
and yet they never Persecuted one another. This he said to dispose that
Emperor, who was a Persecuting Arian to be favorable to the Orthodox.

And soon after the Emperor Theodosius being incensed by the Bishop of Rome
against Flavianus Bishop of Antioch, the good Bishop thus applied to tho
Emperor, as it is reported by Theodoret, Lib. 5. Cap. 23. O Emperor. if any Man
do blame my Faith as perverse, or my Life as unworthy, I am content to be
Judged by my Adversaries; but if the Disputation only be concerning
Principality, and eminent Places, I will not contend with any Man, but denude
my self of all Superiority, and commit the Chair of Antiochia to whom you like
best.

Had the Spirit of this Philosopher, and of this Partriarch prevailed in the
Christian World, how much Mischief and Misery had been prevented, which fill
the History of all Ages since that time.

It Is now more than 20 Years since I became most deeply affected with the State
of Christianity. I often stood in a Melancholy Amazement, that since the Blessed
Jesus had been in this World, 1 Jo. 3.5.8.
to take away Sin, and destroy the Works of the Devil, and although his
Commission to his Apostles was to disciple all Nations, 28. Mat. 19.
yet at the distance of above 1640 Years, not one fourth part of the World
should bear the Christian Name. That deducting from that part, the Churches
that lie in gross Ignorance, or gross Idolatry, and among the Reformed Churches
the Persecutors, the openly profane, the grossly ignorant, such as deny the
Fundamentals of Christianity, and the Ordinances of Christ, who yet will be
called Christians, I was tempted to abuse that Passage of the Apostle, 2 Gal.
21. Then Christ is dead in vain: But it was not long before I had framed in my
Thoughts a more pleasing Scene of Things, which I fancied I saw in the
Prophetic part of the Scripture, and if I be mistaken, I own my self
exceedingly beholden to the Mistake, having in the Years that are since past
enjoyed many a comfortable Hour in the prospect of the approaching Glory of the
Christian Church. Thus when Men in a Storm discover a safe Harbor, how
cheerfully do they cry all hands aloft, how diligent is every one to do his
utmost to recover the Port. I do not intend to trouble the Reader with any
account of my Endeavors to promote what I so much much desire, further than is
necessary to justify, or at least to excuse setting my Name to the following
Discourse. I have been long persuaded, that Christianity must recover it is
Primitive Purity, before it can obtain its promised Peace. I don't mean its
Primitive Poverty or Persecution, but its Comformity to the Scriptures, which
are the only Means of Union and Peace, and its being freed and delivered from
the Corruptions and Errors which have been introduced into the Christian Church
by Heretics, by the Ambition and Tyranny of Priests, and the Ignorance and
Folly of the Laity. At the late Revolution I presumed to present to the late
Queen of Pious Memory, some Thoughts on this Subject in Manuscript, the
Substance whereof was afterward Printed under this Title, Catholicism without
Popery, etc. In the Preface to which short Discourse the Reader may find this
Passage, viz. If this Attempt may stir up the Spirits of others, whose Parts
and Qualifications are equal to such an Undertaking to offer better Means to
the same End (In magnis voluisse sat est) I shall greatly rejoice to be
confuted by Proposals of better Expedients. But no Man having been stirred up
to the Undertaking, and my Practice agreeable to my Principles, having rendered
me Obnoxious to the Enemies of Peace, I could no longer forbear to publish to
the World what I judged necessary, at the same time to vindicate my own
Integrity, and to promote the Interests of Genuine Christianity. I need not any
other Excuse, than what I made to the Person who presented that former
Discourse to Her late Majesty. A Passage Recorded by all the Evangelists.
That it was a Lawyer that took care of the Body of our Blessed Savior, Matthew.
27.57. Mark 15.43. Luke 23.50. John 19.38.
when Crucified at the Instigation of the Priests: And while some Priests, of
all sorts, are Crucifying his Mystical Body, a Lawyer may have leave to Rescue
it, in hopes of its speedy Resurrection. I hope I may with great Assurance use
those words of Erasmus, in his Epistle to the Bishop of Trent, before Irenaeus.
Good hope possesses my Soul, Itaque bona quaedam spes habet animum meum fore,
ut hanc Ecclesiae tempestatem Dominus inscrutabili suo concilio vertat in bonos
Exitus, Excitetque nobis Irenaeos aliquot qui compositis dissidiis pacem orbi
restituant.
that God by his unsearchable. Council will give a good Issue to this Storm in
the Church, and will raise up for us such as Irenaeus, who by composing
Differences, may restore Peace to the World. (...) in Greek signifying Peace
that Father surely was Baptized very late, or his Name was given by Prophecy.

But alas! what possibility is there of Peace, if the Priests continue so fond
of their respective Parties, that they will venture to trespass against their
God, against their Sovereign, against Truth, Scripture, Charity and Reason to
maintain their own Follies: Of which we have a fresh and notable Instance in a
late Discourse before the Queen, Entitled, Of the Imitation of Christ, in
which the Author appears to be a Person of good Learning, and I hope serious
Religion, a Master of good Language, and well read in Scripture; yet has
offered that to his Sovereign in the Name of God, and as the Imitation of
Christ, which is false and Unscriptural, a Notion mentioned by Papists,
Irrational and uncharitable. The whole Passage runs thus.

Though one great end of his coming, Page 13.
was to take away the Ceremonial Part of the Law of Moses, yet as long as it
was to last, how careful was he to preserve in it Decency and Order. How
readily, in the mean time, did he comply with all indifferent and harmless
Rites; much more those that were instructive and significant? He Celebrated the
Passover but an hour before the Substituted his Holy Supper in its Place: He
observed all the Festivals of the Church, not only those that were of Divine
Appointment, but the Feast of the Dedication it self, a Feast purely of humane
Institution, and no older than Judas Maccabeus. It was sufficient to him that
it was ordained by the Church of the which he was then a Member, nor did he
take upon him to question the Authority in so innocent a Right. And what he
practiced himself, he expressly commanded his Disciples to imitate. The Scribes
and Pharisees, says he, sit in Moses's Seat, all therefore whatsoever they bid
you observe, that observe and do. Which by the way, is an unanswerable
Authority for the Churches Right in ordering Matters of Ceremony, and Things
indifferent. For surely the Jewish Church was at that time corrupt enough to be
denied that Privilege, If it were ever fit that such a Privilege should be
denied the Church. And if Christ thus taught and practiced Obedience to a
Corrupt Church, what must be thought of those who refuse it to a pure one? If
he submitted to all the Jewish Rites, so numerous, so dark and so burdensome,
what can they plead in their Excuse, who disdain to comply with the Ceremonies
of our Church, so few, so rational, and so discreet. They must not, they cannot
justly take it ill to be told that, however they may flatter themselves, they
do not abide in Christ, because they do not walk as he walked. The things
advanced in these words, with which I am so free, are these. That our Savior
complied with all the Rites of the Jews, which he calls indifferent and
harmless. That he observed a Festival of the Churches Institution, viz. the
Feast of Dedication. That he commanded his Disciples to imitate him therein,
and that therefore they who do not comply with the Ceremonies of our Church, do
not abide in Christ, because they do not walk as he walked. Now,

1. All this is false and Unscriptural, for he justified his Disciples, not
washing their Hands before Dinner, 15 Mat. 9.7 Mark 7.9. 11 Luke 38.39.
and told the Jews that in vain did they worship God, teaching for Doctrines
the Commandments of Men; many Passages of like import are found in the New
Testament; and surely no Rite could be more indifferent, or harmless than that.
It Is also false that the Feast of the Dedication was Ordained by the Church,
for the place which he quotes, tells us, that it was Ordained by Judas
Maccabeus, and his Brethren, with the whole Congregation of Israel, 1 Mac. 4.59.
which is rather the State than the Church, and so Josephus tells us, that
Judas succeeded to the Command of the Army, that he had the Public
Administration put into his Hands, and that the People appointed that
Anniversary. Nor does it appear that our Savior observed that Feast. Josephus
336.338 by Sir Roger L'Estrange.
The Text says, that he walked in the Temple in Solomon's Porch or Gallery,
which was without the Temple, Joseph. Lib. 8. Cap. 2. 3 Acts 11. 1 Kings 6.3.
or Place of Worship, but what then? Suppose a Dissenter, or an Occasional
Conformist, should on the Feasts of the Conversion of St. Paul or of St.
Barnabas, (which were added to the Holy Days of the Church at the Restoration
of King Charles the Second, to show the Parties Inclination to Unity and Peace)
walk in the Porch of St. Paul's, would this be taken for Conformity. It Is also
false that he commanded his Disciples to imitate him in any such matter. The
Text quoted must be understood only of the Doctrine of Moses, taught by the
Scribes and Pharisees; for our Savior elsewhere bids them beware of the Leaven
of the Pharisees and Sadducees, 16 Matt. 12. 8 Mark 15.
and explains his meaning to be their Doctrine. And all the Ceremonies
commanded by Moses himself were such as the Lord commanded Moses. It Is
therefore for these Reasons false, that those that submit not to human
Inventions, do not abide in Christ, or that they do not walk as he walked, and
the contrary appears by multitudes of Texts, and the Apostle was afraid of
those that observed Days and Months, and Times and Years, 4 Gal. 10.11.
least he had bestowed on them Labor in vain.

2. It Is of Popish Original, for though it is not the first time that I have met
with this wise Observation from that Party, yet I believe it will be first
found in the Exposition of the Popish Seminary of Rheems upon that Place, who
on the word Dedication say; This is the Feast of the Dedication Instituted by
Judas Maccabeus, Christ vouchsafed to honor and keep that Feast Instituted by
him. And our Heretics vouchsafe not to pray and sacrifice for the dead, used
and approved by him. The Dedication also of Christian Churches is warranted
thereby, with the Annual Memories thereof, and proves that such things may be
instituted without any express Commandment in Scripture. Now I will not be so
uncharitable as to say that Mr. Duke took his Notion from this Passage, yet I
must own that I do believe, it has been derived down to Mr. Duke in a true
Succession from this Rhemish Seminary: It is observed by another of the Party,
who proposes a Reunion with Rome, Case of the Regale, Page 257.259, 262.
that if the Terms of Communion were once so modelled as to heal our
Separations, the Disputes about the particular Points would soon dwindle, when
there was no Interest to be served by them. Now the particular Points to which
he refers are Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, half Communion, Prayers in an
unknown Tongue, Images, Transubstantiation, Adoration of the Host, and the
Pope's Supremacy, but notwithstanding these things, opening our Communion to
one another may be procured, (he says,) without any Crime at all. Alas, good
Reader, and will not these disputes hinder Communion? But the Papists must be
allowed Occasional Conformity, and must Disputes about Ceremonies exclude
Christians, whose Religion is all in the Bible, from being in Christ? These
things are Popish all over.

3. It Is irrational, for can any Man in his Wits, that is not strangely
infected with Priestcraft believe that one great end of our Savior's coming
was to take away the Ceremonial part of the Law of Moses, which was Instituted
by God himself, even so particularly that the Color of the Lace, the Tingling
of the Bells, 28 Ex. 28. 28 Ex. 35. 26 Ex. 5.6.
the number of the Loops and Taches of the Tabernacle were determined, and that
he yet should leave it to any Mortal Man or Men to Institute another Ceremonial
Law, and make Obedience to it necessary to Christian Communion. Suppose the
Jewish Church in our Savior's Time had made a Canon, that Circumcision should
not admit into the Church, but that after the Child was Circumcised he must be
received into the Church by Printing the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil
on his Forehead; can any Man believe that our Savior would have allowed such
an Addition to the Divine Institution? Besides, suppose that it were clear that
our Savior did observe the Feast of the Dedication, there is no reason for any
such Conclusion from such Premises, as this Author draws from them; if the
Dissenters scrupled to observe the 5th of November, the Cases might be
something paralled; it being an Anniversary appointed by the State to
commemorate a National Deliverance above 1500 Years after the Establishment of
the Christian Religion: But suppose the Jewish Church had besides the Sabbath,
appointed one Day to remember the Creation of the Light, another Feast to
Commemorate the making of the Firmament, a third to bless God for making the
Sun and Moon, and a fourth for the Creation of Man, and a fifth for the
Creation of Eve, a sixth to remember Abraham's going out of Ur, a seventh for
Noah's going into the Ark, and so forth; what can we think our Savior would
have said to such Institutions? Again, whereas at the Institution of the
Passover, 12 Ex. 11.
the People were to eat it with their Loins girt, their Shoes on their Feet,
and their Staffs in their Hands; suppose the Jewish Church had made a Canon,
that all should kneel when they eat the Passover, can we imagine that our
Savior would have approved of such a Canon, although it does not appear, that he
took the Posture to be any necessary part of the Institution.

4. Surely I need not use many words to show that this Censure is Uncharitable,
when the Papists in the Irish Rebellion had made the Protestants turn Papists,
they knocked them on the head, while (as they said) they were in a good Mood,
that they might send them to Heaven, but this Author turns Men out of Christ,
and consequently sends them to the Devil, though they comply with the Gospel in
every thing to be found from the beginning of St. Matthew to the end of the
Revelations. This is no part of the Imitation of Christ.

I think it an exceeding strange effect of Priestcraft, that ingenious Men,
should be thus grossly mistaken, but that when they have made whip Syllabub,
nothing will serve them but to present it to the Queen, this is rude and
ridiculous. I believe in my Conscience, that Her Majesty understands and
practices true Christianity, and imitates our Savior acceptably to God, and
much better than any one of Mr. Duke's Party; and I do not believe that she is
in any danger of being misled by such Guides. But Her Subjects are not so wise,
and it may make People Surfeit of a Dish, when they are told that it was at the
Queens Table, especially when every thing but the Sauce is really excellent. I
am abundantly satisfied that the true Reason that Christianity has lost ground
in the World, is the Priests pretending to be wiser their the Scriptures would
make them. All the Books of Irenaeus written in the 2d Century, are one
continued Proof hereof: He charges those against whom he wrote, that they
pretended to observe more then was commanded, which he Animadverts upon, as
preferring their own Diligence to God himself. It Is with him a concluding
Argument, that such things are not in Scriptures, and therefore no part of
Revealed Religion. Acoording to their Doctrine (says he) Peter was imperfect,
and so were the other Apostles, and it behooves them to rise again and become
these Men's Disciples; but this (adds he) is ridiculous. And says St. Hierom,
Omnia ea quae absque Testimonio Scripturarum quasi tradita ab Apostolis
asseruntur, percutiuntur Gladio, Dei. Hier. in Agg.
long after the 4th. Century, All those things which are asserted, as delivered
by the Apostles, without the Testimony of the Scriptures, are smitten with the
Sword of God. For it seems when Irenaeus, and the other ancient Fathers had
exposed all Vnrevealed Parts of Revealed Religion, the Lovers of Priestcraft
would have introduced some things as Revealed, though not written, but conveyed
down by Tradition.

But I must not enlarge, at least at this time on this Subject; only having
some Reason to know the Original of the Charter, granted by the late Glorious
King Willian, Establishing a Society for Propagating Christian Knowledge, I
earnestly entreat the Reader to consider the Consequence of these Additions to
Christianity, with respect to that Design. If I were now to apply my self to an
Indian, to instruct him in the Christian Religion, I would appeal to his
Experirience, that Nature is corrupted, and show him the History thereof in the
Scriplures. 3 Genesis 5 Romans 12.18.
I would appeal to his Reason, that Sin deserves Punishment, and that Justice
must be a Divine Attribute, and show him the same things in Scripture. 34 Ex.
7. 45 Is. 21. 3 Romans 26.
I would appeal to his Reason, and show him in Scripture what a loss Mankind
was at to find out an Atonement; that thousands of Rams, and ten thousands of
Rivers of Oil would not suffice, 6 Mic. 6.7, 8.
not the Firstborn, the Fruit of the Body for the Sin of the Soul. But that
notwithstanding all that Man could do, 49. Ps. 7.8.
the Redemption of the Soul was so precious that it must have ceased for ever.
Then I would show him only by Revelation out of the Word of God, That faithful
saying, and worthy of all Acceptance, 1 Timothy 1.15.
that Jesus Christ came into the World to save sinners, and so proceed to
Preach the Gospel to him, and to instruct him out of the New Testament. The
suitableness of such a Propitiation for our Sins, sufficient to satisfy.
Divine Justice, and the Cravings of a wounded Spirit, seeking Means to make
Satisfaction thereto, was in my Opinion the true Reason of the Progress of
Christianity in the first Ages of the Church, and will be so, when rightly
enforced to the yet Vuchristianiz'd Part of the World. And the Man by this time
would be very willing to believe those Scriptures to be the Word of God: And
the Proof thereof would be very agreeable to him, Account of the Proceedings of
the Society by Mr. Stubbs.
or as an Indian King lately expressed himself, that there was a Savior born for
Mankind. But when he had rejoiced in Christ Jesus, and hugged his Bible, and
read in the end of it, and elsewhere, Deuteronomy. 4.2. 22 Rev. 18.19. Prove. 30.6.
the Curses pronounced against those that diminish from it, or add to it, and
desired to be Baptized; with what Face could I tell him that he must not be
admitted to have any benefit thereby, unless he will constantly submit to
diverse things, not to be found there; and that unless he did so, he was both
for God and Baal? Would he think it a decent thing, to add to the Institutions
of such a Redeemer? But I will not enter into Particulars, if the Design of the
following Discourse do prevail, these Matters will be considered by wiser
Heads, but by none who wish more the Glory of the Christian Church, and
particularly of that part of it in England, than

Your Christian Friend, J. HOOK.

CATHOLICISM WITHOUT POPERY.
SIR,
IN your Preface to your late Discourse, Entitled, Peace at Home, you have
rightly observed, That the Controversy which is the Subject Matter of that
Discourse, ought not to be carried on with Heat and Passion, but fairly debated
with Reason and Moderation, not by unknown Persons, who may be Jesuits or
Deists, but by such as dare own their Principles, and will endeavor to
Reconcile our Differences, and not inflame them. I hope that an Acquaintance of
some Years has sufficiently convinced you that I am neither Jesuit nor Deist.
And I dare appeal to your Conscience, whether I have not given you undeniable
Evidence of an Affection to the Church of England, and a desire not to keep up,
but to reconcile our Differences, not to promote Parties and Factions, but
Peace and Unity, not for the sake of any private End or Interest whatsoever,
but for the sake of Truth, and for the general Good. Thus far therefore I
conceive my self to be such a Person as you wish your Answerer should be. But
because you, and the Writers of your Party have taken the liberty to accuse Men
of my Principles as Hypocrites, as unfit to be Guardians of Children, or
Executors of Wills, as dispensing with our Principles for the sake of an
Office, as setting up an Arbitrary Dispensing Power in our own Consciences, as
acting contrary to our Original Principles, as if Occasional Conformity were
such an Offense as in inconsistent with the Public Safety, and Occasional
Conformists, Persons, sit to be ranked with Papists, Deists, and Socinians. I
have thought it my Duty thus to acquaint you, that I have also that other
Qualification to become your Answerer, That "I dare own my Principles. But
alas, to what End were your Applications made to Her Majesty on Occasion of
the late Bill, since by your own Confession the Fears and Jealousies of those
who are Members of the Church of England, and of those who dissent from it. And
the Matters in Controversy arising from those Fears, seem in a fair way to be
determined to the Satisfaction of all Parties by Her Majesty's Gracious
Speeches from the Throne, That Her Majesty will always make it Her particular
Care to encourage and maintain the Church, as by Law Established, and to
maintain the Act of Toleration for the ease of Dissenters. Give me leave to
add, alas, to what end did you erect a Pompous Frontispiece before an Epistle
Dedicatory, a Preface, a Discourse, and a Postscript; and all these on a
Subject, of which you seem to know no more, than if you had lived in Turkey, or
under the Great Mogul: I mean the Principles of the Occasional Conformists; for
I had rather impute your unaccountable Mistakes concerning them to Ignorance,
than Insincerity. And unless they be understood, your Discourse in behalf of
the Established Government in Church and State, of Uniformity, Established
Religion, and Established Constitutions, seems Calculated, and may
indifferently serve for the Meridian of Edenburg, Geneva, Paris, Rome, or
Constantinople; and, with a small Variation of Names, may be published in
behalf of the Constitutions in Church and State in all those places.

I take leave therefore to inform you, That the Description of the Occasional
Comformists is true, which is given by the Author of a Letter to a Clergyman,
concerning the Votes of the Bishops in the last Sessions; who divides them into
two sorts, such as prefer the Worship of the Church of England for a Constancy,
but hold the separate Congregations to be Lawful Churches, and think themselves
obliged in Conscience sometimes to Communicate with them, though I had rather
call such Occasional Dissenters; and such as prefer the Worship of Dissenters
for a Constancy, but hold the Worship of the Church of England to be Lawful,
and think themselves obliged to testify their Charity by Communicating
sometimes with it, who are properly Occasional Conformists.

I take leave also to inform you, That both these sorts of Occasional
Conformists do believe the Apostle's Creed, and particularly the Holy Catholic
Church; or, as the Nicene Creed has it, They believe One Catholic and
Apostolic Church: They acknowledge the 19th Article of the Church of England,
That the Visible Church of Christ is a Congregation of Faithful Men, in which
the pure Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered,
according to Christ's Ordinance, in all those things, that of necessity are
requisite to the same: That neither sort of these Occasional Conformists find
any such Article in any Creed, as this, I believe the High Church-Party of the
Church of England. And thus believing, they thus Reason, He that believes the
Holy Catholic Church, takes himself to be a Member of that Church, and
consequently believes it his Duty to refuse Communion with no Party of
Christians, whose Communion does not necessitate him to Sin; and no Communion
of Christians, who are a Visible Church of Christ, within the said Description,
given by the said 19th Article, do necessitate him to Sin.

They make a great difference between the Use of a Ceremony, or any indifferent
thing about Religion, and the Imposition thereof, as necessary to Communion in
the Ordinances of Christ; and again, another difference between the Imposition
thereof by any particular Church, or Division of Christians, on those that
Communicate with them, and the Separation of that Division of Christians, by
such Ceremony, or indifferent Thing, from the rest of the Catholic Church. The
Use therefore of a certain Ceremony, is what they do not scruple, as wearing a
Gown or Surplice, Standing at the Creed, Kneeling, or Standing, or Sitting at
the Sacrament, according to the Usage of that Party of Christians, with whom
they Communicate. Again, They don't scruple the like Ceremony, though they be
imposed by the Government on any National Church, or Party of Christians, so as
they be not made Parties to the Imposition, or compelled to declare their
Approbation thereof by Word or Practice: It is their Judgment, That all
Religion is Natural or Revealed; That there is no Revealed Religion, nor any
part of it, which is not found in the Word of God; That nothing ought to be
imposed amongst Christians, as a Term of Communion, which has not its Warrant
from thence, according to the Sense of the Primitive Church, and the whole
Protestant Church at the first Reformation: And they think it absurd to talk of
Unrevealed Parts of Revealed Religion. It is therefore their Opinion, that if
any Party of Christians make a Law, That whoever communicates with them must
use such or such an Unscriptural Posture or Ceremony, and must not have
Communion with any other Christians, who use not the same, although true
Churches, according to the said 19th Article of the Church of England, and this
under the Penalty of being starved, or any other severe Penalty; they take that
Party of Christians to be such as the Psalmist speaks of, Psalm. 94.21.
who frame Mischief by a Law.

They think that such Party of Christians do thereby set up an unaccountable
Schism in the Catholic Church, and separate themselves from it, by setting up
their Posts by God's, and their own Thresholds by his, and their making a Wall
between him and them; so that the Schism lies at their Door, and not at theirs,
who, in Contradiction to such a Law, continue Members of the Catholic Church.
They are of Opinion, that the Roman Catholics are justly charged with the
greatest Schism that ever was in the Christian World, because they separate
themselves from the Catholic Church by their new Articles of Faith, and
Notorious Idolatries, which they impose as Terms of Communion; but they
pretending, that the things which they impose are necessary, and to be complied
with on Peril of Damnation, are not therefore so Self-condemned as that Party
would be, who should, by such a Law, concerning things indifferent, separate
themselves from all the rest of the Catholic Church. The Occasional Conformist
therefore, by his Communicating with the Church of England, declares, That he
takes it to be a sound Part of the Catholic Church; and his Communion with it,
is Communion, with the Catholic Church, and not with a Party: He Communicates
with it, because he Agrees with it in all the Essentials of Christianity, though
he Approves not of its Impositions: And his Communion with other Protestants,
is Communion with the Catholic Church, of which he takes them also to be a
sound Part. By the first, he declares himself an Enemy to Separation; by the
second, to unnecessary Impositions; by both, a Catholic Christian.

And he is the more confirmed in this Practice, because of the plain Tendency
of the Unscriptural Terms of Communion, which the High Church-Party would
establish, to a Reunion with Popery, as is obvious to any Person who shall
seriously consider them. And for satisfaction therein, I would refer you (to
avoid Repetition) to the Preface of a little Discourse, entitled, Catholocism
without Popery; where this Matter is particularly Considered. And the Notions
therein advanced have been effectually Justified, by the Oracle of your Party,
the Author of the Case of the Regale and Pontisicat; a Book written directly
against her Majesty's Supremacy, and which has received a Second Edition; which
asserts, That the Dissenter will neither take nor give quarter, will neither
propose nor accept any Terms of Reconciliation, Page 255.
and cannot for that (unless only for that) Reason, be angry at the
High-Party's seeking or offering Reconciliation with others, who may be better
disposed; and that the whole and only difference between that Party and the
Church of Rome, Page 244.
and which hinders Communion, is the Extents of the Pope's Supremacy, which the
Galliean Church have thrown off as well as they. But that all the difference
between the Popish French Church, and the Church of England, are so far
Reconcilable, as not to hinder Communion. And proposes (in the First Edition) a
Treaty between our Convocation, and the General Assembly of the Galliean
Bishops and Clergy; and complains in the Margin of the Second Edition, page
263. That the English Convocation not being suffered to sit, while that of
France lasted, rendered any Treaty betwixt them impracticable: And page 179.
proposes it (plainly as a means to this blessed End) that a Bill should pass,
to render all those that go to Meetings incapable of any Place of Trust or
Profit in the Government: And that this must be the Reason of the Zeal of a
certain Party therein, and nor a Conscientious Regard to the Act of Uniformity,
is further Evident, because Bowing at the Name of Jesus, and toward the Altar,
though contrary to the Act of Uniformity, but signifying an inclination toward
Popery, are as much practiced and defended by that Party, as any Ceremonies
established by that Law. The Occasional Conformist therefore thinks himself
bound in Conscience to make a Remarkable Difference in his Practice, between
the regard he shows to the Commandments of God, and to the Inventions of Men,
especially when those Inventions are manifestly defended with the utmost Vigor,
to keep a Correspondence with France and Rome.

I might here name many Things, which may be amended in the Church of England:
But I had rather Convince you, that you are in a great Mistake, when you
affirm, That there is no way to heal Divisions, but by such a Bill as that
against Occasional Conformity. And because Her most Sacred and most Excellent
Majesty, is, I trust, raised up by Almighty God to perfect that Reformation,
both at Home and Abroad, which was so much advanced by Her Predecessor, Queen
Elizabeth, of Blessed Memory; and because I take Her Reign to be a more proper
Season for such a Work, than that of the late King William, though of Glorious
Memory, for Reasons easily Occurring to Men of Thought, and some of which shall
be hereafter mentioned, I will venture to propose another Means to put an End
to Faction, to secure the Public Peace in Church and State, to remove the
Causes of all our Fears, and of all our Divisions, which is worth Ten Thousand
such Bills, as that against Occasional Conformity, and which the Promoters of
that Bill cannot refuse to approve of, if they be hearty Lovers of her Majesty,
and the Church of England.

It were easy to prove what has been before mentioned, that the Primitive Rule
of Reformation, and the Rule universally used at the Reformation, was, That the
Terms of Christian Communion ought to be only such as are found in the
Scripture. And perhaps in another Discourse, the World may see a full Evidence,
That all the Mischiefs that have happened to the Christian Church have been
occasioned by departing from that Principle; and an account may be given of the
gradual Growth of Priestcraft, from the days of Diotrephes, to the time of
Cardinal Woolsey at least.

But before I mention the said Means, of putting an End to Faction, I will only
observe, that notwithstanding by Stat. 31. H. 8. c. 14. Transubstantiation,
Communion in one Kind, Prohibition of Marriage to the Clergy, Monkish Vows,
Private Masses, and Auricular Confession, are also Established by Act of
Parliament; yet some time before, viz. 25 H. 8. cap. 21. the King and
Parliament did declare, That they did not intend to decline or vary from the
Congregation of Christ's Church in any thing, concerning the very Articles of
the Faith of Christendom, or in any other things declared by Holy Scripture,
and the Word of God, nec^ssary for their Salvation; and that this continued to
be the Opinion even of the Popish Church of England, appears from Stat. 1. Mar.
Ses. 2. c. 1. Wherein the Marriage of Queen Katherin to Henry the 8th is
declared Lawful, and all Sentences of Divorce between them Repealed. And lest
the Queen and Parliament should seem to enact any thing herein contrary to the
aforesaid Principle, It is thereby Enacted, That the said Marriage had and
solemnized between the Queen's most Noble Father King Henry, and her most Noble
Mother Queen Katherine, should be definitively, clearly, and absolutely
declared, deemed, and adjudged to be, and stand with God's Law, and his most
Holy Word: So sensible were the Parliament in those times, that God's Law, and
his most Holy Word, ought to be the Rule of all things relating to Christian
Religion. And though an Act of Parliament will not make that stand with God's
Law, and his most Holy Word, which does not stand therewith; yet the Wisdom of
the Nation at that time, and the Wisdom of all Nations, and of all Pretenders
to Establish a Revealed Religion, such as Numa, Mahomet, and others, have
thought it necessary to pretend Divine Authority for all Matters relating to
Revealed Religion. And had that seemed Good to the Governors of Church and
State in Christian Countries, which seemed Good to the Holy Ghost, and the
Apostles, Elders, or Presbyters and Brethren, met in the first Council of the
Christian Church at Jerusalem, viz. To impose nothing but necessary things. Had
they taken the Prophet's Advice, Isai. 55.14. Take up the stumbling Block out
of the Way of my People, instead of forcing them to use it, Popery had never
risen, but the Church had continued Pure to the Worlds end.

But this being premised, I desire you to remember, that when the Supremacy of
the Pope was thrown off by the Church of England, and the Crown restored to its
Ancient Rights, it was by Stat. 25. H. 8. c. 19. Enacted, That the Convocation
should be Assembled by the King's Writs, and should not Enact any Constitutions
or Ordinances without the King's Assent. And it was further Enacted as follows,
And for as much as such Canons, Constitutions and Ordinances, as heretofore
have been made by the Clergy of this Realm, cannot now, at the Session of this
present Parliament, by reason of shortness of Time, be viewed, examined and
determined, by the King's Highness, and Thirty Two Persons, to be chosen and
appointed, according to the Petition of the said Clergy, in form above
rehearsed. Be it therefore Enacted, by the Authority abovesaid, That the King's
Highness shall have Power and Authority to nominate and assign at his pleasure
the said Two and Thirty Persons of his Subject; whereof Sixteen to be of the
Clergy, and Sixteen to be of the Temporalty of the Upper and Nether House of
the Parliament: And if any of the said Two and Thirty Persons so chosen shall
happen to die before their full Determination, then His Highness to nominate
other from time to time of the said Two Houses of the Parliament, to supply the
Number of the said Two and Thirty; and that the same Two and Thirty, by his
Highness so to be named, shall have Power and Authority to view, search and
examine the said Canons, Constitutions and Ordinances, Provincial and Synodal,
heretofore made: And such of them, as the King's Highness, and the said Two and
Thirty, or the more part of them, shall deem an adjudge worthy to be continued,
kept, obeyed and executed within this Realm; so that the King's most Royal
Assent be first had to the same. And the residue of the said Canons,
Constitutions, and Ordinances Provincial, which the said King's Highness, and
the said Two and Thirty Persons, or the more part of them, shall not approve,
or deem and adjudge worthy, to be abolished, abrogate, and made frustrate,
shall from thenceforth be void, and of none effect, and never be put in
Execution within this Realm; provided always, that no Canons, Constitutions, or
Ordinance, shall be made, or put in Execution, within this Realm, by Authority
of the Convocation of the Clergy, which shall be contrariant or Repugnant to
the King's Prerogative Royal, or the Customs, Laws, or Statutes of this Realm,
any thing contained in this Act to the contrary hereof notwithstanding. And in
the close of the said Act it follows, Provided that such Canons, Constitutions,
and Synodals Provincial, being already made, which be not contrariant nor
repugnant to the Laws, Statutes and Customs of this Realm, nor to the damage or
hurt of the King's Prerogative Royal, shall now still be used and executed, as
they were before the making of this Act, till such time as they be viewed,
searched, or otherwise ordered and determined, by the said Two and Thirty
Persons, or the more part of them, according to the Tenor, Form and effect of
this present Act. But nothing being done in pursuance of this Power, vested in
that King, thereby, the same was again Enacted, by Stat. 27. H. 8. c. 15. But
the Power of Popery rendering that Law also Ineffectual, it was again, by Stat.
35. H. 8. c. 16. Enacted, That that King should still have the same Authority
during his Life. But still nothing was done, for the Priests chose rather to
continue the Canons, and Constitutions, and Laws Ecclesiastical, in the
uncertainty in which they were left by the said Stat. 25. H. 8. c. 19. than
that the King, and Sixteen of the Temporalty, should intermeddle in Matters
Ecclesiastical. But King H. 8. died, and left the Ecclesiastical Constitutions,
as the were unestablish'd by the last mentioned Statute.

And the Reformation having made a considerable Progress in the Reign of Edw.
6. the like Power and Authority was again given to that King, by Stat. 3. and
4. Ed. 6. c. 11. But still the Old Leaven remained, and nothing was done in his
short Reign; and Popery returning to its Vigor under the Reign of Queen Mary,
the aforesaid Stat. of 25 H. 8. c. 14. was Repealed, by Stat. 1. and 2, Phil.
and Mary, c. 8. And although that Act was Revived again, by the Act of 1 Eliz.
c. 1. yet that Authority, which had been given to King H. 8. and King Edw. 6.
seems not to be given by that Act to Q. Eliz. But by the same Act the High
Commission Court was created to Act under the Queen's Prerogative, which was
quite another sort of Authority, and left the Laws Ecclesiastical, as they were
left by the Stat. 25. H. 8. c. 19. And the High Commission being since found
inconvenient, and condemned by Law, it seems to me, that something remains to
be done, for the Establishment of the Church.

And therefore, though I impute it to the Prevalency of Popery, that all those
Statutes were of no Effect; yet I would hope, that the Divine Providence did
permit so many Laws of that Kind to be made with a design, that they might be
Presidents for the like Authority, to be vested in our most Gracious Sovereign
Queen Anne, whose Life has set a rare Example of Christian Piety, whose Reign
the Almighty has blessed with the best Bishops that ever filled the English
Sees; and whose Care of all her Subjects has been so often Expressed, with such
moving Accents from the Throne; of whose Affection to the Church of England no
Man can doubt, and who may easily render it a Means and Pattern of Union to all
the Protestant Churches, and in a short time to the whole Christian World. I
write not this without Ground, but with good Reason, and some Glimpse of Hope.

Had any of the said Statutes in the Reign of H. 8. been pursued, Popery had
been further established: And in the short Reign of Edw. 6. Things were yet in
great Confusion: Matters in Controversy had not been fully discust; Laymen-had
but just got the Bible, which is the Instructions left by our Blessed Savior,
into their Hands; and therefore could not so well judge, whether his
Ambassadors followed his Instructions or no. Humane Inventions had so long been
made Equal to Divine Institutions, that it was not easy at that time to
distinguish them: And considering the gross Ignorance that abounded among the
Clergy, when the Transition was made from Popery to the Protestant Religion by
Queen Elizabeth, it is wonderful, that the Reformation should have made so
great a Progress, as it did in her Reign. During the Reign of King James the
First, the Spanish and French Matches, the Cowardice, and yet the Ambition of
that King, diverted his Thoughts to other Matters, than the Establishment of
the Church; but yet a step was made toward it by the new Translation of the
Bible, which was made in his Reign. During the Reign of King Charles the First,
the Cassandrian Design of a Reunion to Rome, was pursued with great Industry;
and therefore no wonder, that a better Establishment of the Church was not
attempted in his Reign: And perhaps, till the Mischief of Enthusiasm had showed
us the necessity of a National Church, it would have been difficult to have
brought the Dissenters to any Reasonable Terms of Union; and therefore the
first Opportunity, which seems to me to have presented it self for such an
Attempt, was at the Restoration of the Royal Family, when it was in the Power
of King Charles the Second to have Established the Church on such Foundations,
as would easily have taken into her Communion almost all Denominations of
Christians, who had not cast often the Ordinances of Christ, and their Allegiance
to the Civil Government: But the foreign Education of the Royal Brothers had
sixth their Inclinations to a Union with France and Rome; and the Fear, under
which King Charles the Second labored, was not, lest the Dissenters should not
comply with the Act of Uniformity, but lest they should. One Party was to be
turned out, that another might be brought in: So that this time was not
improved toward our Union. But after that, Popery appeared barefaced, under
the late King James the Second, and Advances were made, both by the
Church-Party and the Dissenters, toward Union at the Revolution; that Season
was looked upon as a happy Juncture for such an Attempt. But to speak my Mind
freely, although I think no Man can give an Instance wherein his late Majesty
King William showed any want of Affection to this National Church; yet his
Education under another sort of Church Government, did, as I apprehend, cause
the Church Party to take Umbrage, as if he designed to bend the Constitution in
the Church too much toward the Dissenter: And might also occasion in the
Dissenter Expectations of greater Concessions, than are necessary to Peace and
Unity.

But the Mischiefs of Enthusiasm in the late Times, the Persecution of the
Episcopal Party then, and of the Dissenters in the Reign of King Charles the
Second, and the terrible Visage of returning Popery under the late King James,
have occasioned great Thoughts of Heart. All things are now set in the clearest
Light; a better Friend to the Church can never fill the English Throne; the
terms of Catholic Unity are well understood, both by the Clergy, and many of
the Laity; while the Church has stood upon Stilts, Ceremonies.
it has been sometimes bending toward Rome, and at other times toward
Enthusiasm; but by this means it may be unmoveably fixed upon the Foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner Stone.
And this in short is what I would offer on this Subject, that her Majesty may
receive the like Authority by Act of Parliament, as that so often given to King
H. 8. and after to Edw. 6. By this means, instead of our being cursed once a
Year, on Ash Wednesday, the Church may obtain the Benefit of that Godly
Discipline, which the Rubric wishes to be Restored. The Liturgy of the Church
of England may be made a Form to some, and at least a Directory, agreeable to
all the Protestant Churches, the Rights, Powers, and Privileges of an English
Convocation, would be better understood, and all the Attempts of the Factors of
Rome and France would be defeated for ever.

And therefore to use the Word of the Author of the Reasons for passing the
late Bill, with a very little Variation, they being as I conceive, much more
for my purpose than his. Since the Security of Particulars, that is the
Innocent, the Honest and Peaceable; for no body, I suppose, means to encourage
the wicked Seditions, or to protect them in their Crimes, ( Such as that High
Churchman, who has lately Published a Latin Treatise, to prove the present
Church of England Schismatical, At least this is not a Design that will bear
the Light,

since the Peace and Prosperity of the Nation in General, by the Encouragement
of Industry, and Increase of Trade, by the Benefit and Comforts of Society, by
Dutiful and Cheerful Submission to those whom God God has set over us in Church
and State, by a most Cordial and Loyal Obedience to Her Majesty, and Grateful
Sense of the Blessings we enjoy under Her Just and Prudent Government; since
the Wisdom and Piety of our Legislators, the Sagacity of their Judgments, the
Weight and Authority of their Deliberations, their Unanimity, and Firmness in
the Pursuit of fit and necessary Measures, and the Nobleness of their
Resolution in overcoming all Difficulties; since the Honor and Felicity of Her
Majesty's most Auspicious Reign, Her Reputation abroad, and Interest at home,
the Praise and Veneration that will be paid Her now, and that Renown that will
attend Her to all Succeeding Ages, for securing to all Posterity, that
unvaluable Blessing which was Established by Her famous Predecessor, Queen
Elizabeth, of truly Glorious Memory: And as Her Majesty was pleased to tell us
very lately, even Her present Satisfaction, and what she has most at Heart. And
above all, since the Interests of Religion, and the Glory of God, are so nearly
concerned in this Business, and that Temporal and narrow Aims may be cashiered,
Brotherly Love revived, and the little things that divide us, giving place to
the more Weighty that ought to unite us. We may henceforth only contend for the
Faith, which was once delivered, and that Purity of Manners which is the
necessary Effect of it. Let us unanimously agree, in enabling Her Majesty to
give all that Security and Perfection to our most excellent Constitution, which
it may justly require at our Hands.

Nor is it the Church only that requires this, it is the State likewise which
must stand or fall with Her. For the sake then of our most Wise and Constituted
Government, which all Strangers envy, and which we seem to pride our selves so
much upon, for the sake of our Most Gracious Sovereign, than whom never any
merited more at our Hands, and who so pathetically presses us to perfect Peace
and Union among our selves; and who declares She has nothing so much at Heart
as the Welfare and Happiness of Her Subjects, who manages that Treasure so
carefully, which we have seen formerly squandered away so profusely on French
Intrigues and Whores, loads her People with no Deficiencies, but even Taxes her
self to ease her Subjects; and if the most shining Virtue and Goodness placed
upon a Throne can affect us, if she be as worthy to be trusted as Hen. 8. for
the sake of our Country, for whose Welfare we profess such a mighty Concern,
and of which we would be thought such Zealous Patriots; for our own dear sakes,
that most powerful Motive with all Mankind, and lastly, even for God's sake,
for the Honor and Glory of his Holy Name, which ought to weigh with us above
all other Considerations.

Let us not after rejecting a Bill against Immorality be so fond of a Bill
which tends only to Establish Ceremonies, let us search the Scriptures, and not
French Presidents for the Means of Union, least we be judged by our Blessed
Savior for rejecting the Commandments of God, that we may keep our own
Tradition. Let us at last discern the things that belong to our Peace, and God
forbid that they should at any time, this especially be hid from our Eyes.

And now, Sir, having offered to your Consideration, such Principles as I my
self act by, and which I conceive are agreeable to the Opinion of most of the
English Occasional Conformists, and Occasional Dissenters, and proposed an
Expedient for the Establishment of the Church of England, which I conceive far
more likely to unite us, than the late Bill if it had past, and applied the
Pathetick Arguments of one of your Party to this Expedient. I shall next
consider what ever seems to me remain unanswered in your Discourse. And, first,
I cannot but admire that you who have pronounced that Her Majesty is none of
the three Estates of the Realm, but the Sovereign Head of that Great Body,
should in the very same Page allow Her no more than a Councurrence with what
Her Parliament should conceive to be reasonable; for methinks, conceiving what
is reasonable, should be at least as proper for the Head as the Members.

I must confess that I concur with you in believing that Her Majesty's Allies
would not have been offended at the Wisdom of that Bill, had it past into a
Law, because, perhaps they could not have discerned it, and it would probably
have been the more invisible to them, because it was so conspicuous to all the
Papists and Jacobites in England.

But as to the Prophetic Part of that Dedication, how much the Dissenter would
have been pleased to know the extent of his Privileges, or how contented he
would be, or what Advantage would accreue from such Gentle Methods, or in the
words of Maimburg to the French King, Moyens deux and voyes de Grace, Maimbourg
Epistle Dedicatory to the Life of Gregory the 1st.
or whether the first words of your Dedication do insinuate, that there are
some good Men who have no Sense of Religion, no concern for the true Interest
of their Native Country, nor any Duty or Gratitude to Her Majesty, I must beg
further time for Consideration.

I must also take time for further Thought, or desire, further Information,
what those Truths are, which in your Preface you say you do with Deference and
Respect to the House of Lords, and in a decent and respectful manner endeavor
to Establish; for as to your two main Pillars, other Hands have sufficiently
showed that they are far from being Pillars of Truth.

I am also, with great Submission, much surprised, to be told, Page 6. that the
same Arguments were made use of against this Bill, which were formerly insisted
on for Repealing all the Test-Laws whatsoever, for many of the Great and Wise
Men in the Kingdom, and more especially in Shropshire, Herefordshire, and
thereabouts, do well remember that the way to Peace at Home, was with much
Eloquence declared to be by Repealing those Laws, when to Repeal them, was
manifestly to serve a Popish Interest, and with no less Assurance, when the
late Bill was promoted, when the same End would have been served, though by quite
contrary Means; so that one at least of those Arguments would have been very
acceptable to me, who have always thought that the Reasons for Repealing those
Laws in a Popish Reign, were of the same Size with those that are urged for
rendering those Laws more strict and severe in the Reign of a Protestant Queen.
Concerning this Matter, therefore, Preface to Peace at Home.
there are some Mistakes and Misapprehensions I doubt that do still prevail
with some Persons, and seem to call for a further Explanation of it. And
perhaps that the same Arguments were used for both these Purposes, would be as
considerable a Truth, if it were made out, as any other of the Truths
endeavored to be established by your Discourse. But though I was against
Repealing the Test in a Popish Reign, I Published some Reasons for Repealing
some part of it in a Protestant Reign, which I have added to this Letter, No.
1. for your Consideration.

That the Bill affected only those particular Dissenters, who thought fit to
Conform for an Office, but would not Conform for the Unity of the Church, is
another of your Truths which needs to be established; because on the contrary,
it seems to affect my Occasional Conformist, or rather Occasional Dissenter,
nay to be principally levelled at him, who conforms merely for the Unity of the
Church, and not for an Office, who endeavors to preserve the Unity of the
Catholic Church, from being rent as often as a Whimsey shall take any Set of
Men, to be adding their own Inventions to Christianity; and then to call
themselves the Church; to make a parcel of Ceremonies, Articles of Communion;
whereas the 39 Articles of the Church are not so, if you believe your Oracle.

One Truth indeed you have taught, us out of the Preamble of the intended Bill
against Occasional Conformity, viz. That nothing is more contrary to the
Profession of the Christian Religion, and particularly to the Doctrine of the
Church of England, than Persecution for Conscience sake only.

It was therefore, it seems to be Enacted, to this effect, That whosoever being
in a Public Office would not join himself to the High Church Party, so as
never more to Communicate with any other part of the Christian World, although he
believed the Holy Catholic Churah, and endeavored to show his Faith by his
Works, should forfeit his Office and a Fine of 100 l. to the Prosecutor, etc.

Now if the Man did Communicate with other good Christians out of Conscience,
as is abovesaid, would not this be Persecution for Conscience only? And, pray,
Sir, was not the danger of Establishing the aforesaid Truth the true Reason why
that Truth was left out of the Preamble in the Second Edition of that Bill? And
this Question I ask you with the greater Freedom, though with great Submission,
because this Truth being once in the Preamble of that Bill, is used by you as
an Answer to the Objection, That they who think the being present at a Meeting
to be so high a Crime, can hardly think that Toleration of such Meetings ought
to continue, which by Reason of the said Truth, being in the said Preamble, you
argue to be an hard, not to say unwarrantable and uncharitable Censure on the
Representatives of the People.

I don't say, Sir, That going to a Meeting is now by the Toleration Act
Established, or made part of our Constitution thereby. But I say, that if the
Creed be part of our Constitution, if the Articles of the Church be another
part, and the Meeting be within the Description of the said 19th Article, going
to it is Established both by Law and Gospel.

But I apply to your Questions, which I am willing to take as the chief Points,
and to expect a good Issue, not from the Weakness, but Strength of the Reader's
Judgment.

First, Whether it be consistent with the Safety of the Established Government,
either in Church or State, with the Wisdom of the English Nation, with the
Practice of any Wise Government in the World, or with the true Intent and
Meaning of the Corporation and Test Acts, to admit any Person whatsoever into
Public Offices and Employments relating to the Government, either in Countries
or Corporations, who are not sincere Members of the National Church, and who do
not heartily approve of the Laws of the Land, and cheerfully pay Obedience to
them.

Secondly, And whether it is better to have the Administration of Public
Affairs, in the Hands of Persons of one and the same Persuasion in Matters of
Religion, or to have a mixture and confusion of Men of opposite Principles in
one and the same Administration, or in other words, whether it is better to
have all the Public Officers draw together the same way for the Public Good,
or to have some drawing one way, and some another, and thereby tearing the
Government between them in pieces. That is in short, and in effect, whether it
is fit that the Corporation and Test Acts should be Enforced or Repealed.

Now, that I may keep to the Subject Matter of the Debate, I must take leave to
divide these Questions into several Heads, because they seem to me too
perplexed as they are stated; and therefore seeing the Subject Matter is
Occasional Conformity, or Occasional Nonconformity.

First, Let us consider whether the Occasional Conformist, or rather the
Occasional Dissenter be not a sincere Member of the National Church, who
heartily approves of the Laws of the Land, and cheerfully pays Obedience to
them, and whether he and the Churchman be of opposite Principles, or of one and
the same Persuasion in Matters of Religion.

Secondly, Whether if the Occasional Bill had passed, it had secured the
Government from such, who are not sincere Members of the National Church, nor
heartily approve of the Laws of the Land, nor cheerfully pay Obedience to them,
but are of opposite Principles, and not of one and the same Persuasion in
Matters of Religion.

Thirdly, Whether the Administration of Public Astairs may not be in the Hands
of Persons who are not of one and the same Persuasion in Matters of Religion,
nay, of Men of opposite Principles, without Confusion or tearing the Government
in pieces between them, and whether they may not, notwithstanding draw together
the same way for the Public Good.

Fourthly, Whether it is sit that the Corporation and Test Acts should be
enfore'd or Repealed.

Fifthly, Whether upon the whole Matter the Occasional Conformist may not be
admitted into Public Offices and Employments relating to the Government,
consistently with the Safety of the Established Government, both in Church and
State, with the Wisdom of the English Nation, and with the Practice of some
wise Governments in the World.

And as to the first, I answer that the Occasional Conformist is a sincere
Member of the National Church, who heartily approves of the Laws of the Land,
and cheerfully pays Obedience to them, and he and the Churchmen are not of
opposite Principles, but of one and the same Persuasion in Matters of Religion.

If the Churchman, whom you suppose the only Person fit for an Office, be one
that troubles not himself about Religion, but believes as the Church believes,
and does as he sees others do. I neither can judge of his Principles nor his
Persuasion in Matters of Religion; but if he have espoused the Religion of the
Church of England with consideration, and can give a Reason of the Faith or
Hope that is in him; he knows that the Religion of this National Church is all
to be found in the Bible. He is taught by the sixth Article of that Church,
that Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to Salvation, so that
whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be
required of any Man that it should be believed as an Article of Faith, or be
thought requisite or necessary to Salvation. The Reason given by the 8th
Article, why the three Creeds ought thoroughly to be received and believed, is,
for that they may be proved by most certain Warrants of Holy Scripture. And as
to Creeds, so as to Councils, we are taught by the 21st Article, that things
Ordained by them as necessary to Salvation, have neither Strength nor
Authority, only as it may be declared, that they be taken out of Holy
Scripture. Now the Occasional Conformists are herein entirely of the same mind,
they agree entirely in the Creeds, the Lord's Prayer, the Ten Commandments, as
contained in the Decalogue, and as explained by our Savior. In the two
Sacraments, and every Part and Article that any Protestant can have any Color
to call a part of Christianity.

But I have not Inclination, nor can it be expected that I should particularize
every Head and Point of Religion, wherein they agree; but should be glad to be
informed by you of any Article of Religion, or Point of Doctrine wherein they
differ; for no Man ever called Rites and Ceremonies of humane Institution,
Principles or Matters of Religion. I must own that they are not fully satisfied
in the large Sense of that Passage in the 20th Article, That the Church has
Power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, nor that, as the 34th Article expresses
it, it is sufficient as to the Ceremonies, that nothing be Ordained against
God's Word, if the Opposition of God's Word be intended a particular express
Opposition; but they are of opinion, that to make any Rites or Ceremonies of
Humane Institution, necessary to Communion, especially as is aforesaid, to make
them Terms of Separation from the rest of the Catholic Church is against God's
Word, but they are extricated out of this Difficulty by the last Clause of the
34th Article, it being plain by long and pungent Experience, that the Ordaining
of such Rites and Ceremonies, is not among the Things that have been done so
edifying, or if this should fail, yet your said Oracle is express that the 39
Articles are required from no Layman, a License for which no Occasional
Conformist will thank him.

The Romanists by such Ordinance have indeed edified their Babel, and from
things not contrary have proceeded to ordain things destructive to
Christianity, and so in some Measure are all such Ordinances, which differ as
much from Religion as Christianity does from Priestcraft.

But to bring this Matter a little closer, I hope to make it plain, that not
only the Occasional Conformist, but the Presbyterian, and the Independent are
of the same Persuasion in Matters of Religion with the Churchman, and not of
opposite Principles, and that nothing but gross Ignorance, or a wilful blind
Prejudice has kept Men of either Party from being convinced of this Truth. And
to make this evident, I take leave to acquaint you with plain Matter of Fact.
You well know, that in the late times the Assembly of Divines at Westminster,
as also the Kirk of Scotland agreed in a Catechism, called the Assemblies
shorter Catechism. And this Catechism was also agreed to by the Synod of the
Independent Divines, met at the Savoy.

Now after the Restoration of King Charles the 2d. and particularly some time
before the Popish Plot, a mighty Zeal appeared against that Catechism in the
Men of your Party, and if I mistake not, this Catechism was publicly burnt at
Oxford. But it happened, that one Mr. Thomas Adams, formerly fellow of
Brazen-Nose-Colledge in Oxford, being convinced of the Truth of what I am
endeavoring to prove; he in the Year, 1675, wrote a Discourse, Entitled, The
Main Principles of Christian Religion, in 107 short Articles, or Aphorisms,
generally received, as being proved from Scripture, now further cleared and
confirmed by the Consonant Doctrine, Recorded in the Articles and Homilies of
the Church of England under 4 Heads.

Of things to be Explained. 1. Believed, comprehended in the Creed. 2. Done in
the Ten Commandments. 3. Practiced in the Gospel, particularly two Sacraments.
4. Prayed for in the Lord's Prayer,


Which Discourse was Licensed, Sold well, and received a Second Edition in
1677, (which I have) but alas it was at last discovered that the 107 Articles
were the Answers to the 107 Questions of the Assemblies Shorter Catechism, and
that hated Book was thus disper'd under the Patronage of the Articles and
Homilies of the Church of England. And if you will please to peruse this Book,
I suppose you will need no other Proof, that the Occasional Conformist,
Presbyterian, Independent, and the Churchman, are not of opposite Principles,
but of one and the same Persuasion in Matters of Religion; and the Acceptance
which that Discourse met with, puts me in mind of a like Passage relating to
the Sorbon, to whom your Oracle, abovementioned, desires that the Church of
England may be united; for when Abbas le Roy Published a Discourse in France,
without naming the Author, being a most Elegant and Pious Oration, or Prayer to
our Lord Jesus Christ, for obtaining the Grace of a perfect Conversion, the
Sorbon condemned it, because they believed it to be written by a Jansenist; but
some Years after a Spanish Bishop having Translated it into the Spanish Tongue,
and Published it with the Approbation of the Doctor's of the Holy Inquisition,
Pesonius ^ Hayer turned it into French, Dedicated it to the Queen, Published it
with the Royal Privilege, and the Approbation of the Doctors of the Sorbon.

And thus have I known a fierce Scotch Presbyterian sit with Reverence and
Attention for a long time, while one of my Acquaintance rend diverse parts of
the Common Prayer, but as soon as it was discovered how the Person was
entertained, my Friend, who was a tall Man, was glad to make the best use of
his long Legs. And here I will mention an Observation which I have frequently
made; That if you hear a Man declaring that no Man can be serious in the use of
the Common Prayer, nor worship God thereby with Fervency and Affection it is
forty to one, that the Man never tried? On the other hand, if you hear a Person
exclaiming against Extempore Prayer, calling it Cant and Nonsense, it is as many
to one that he never heard an Extempore Prayer in his Life; but now there is
one Occasional Conformist to my knowledge, and I believe some thousands that
have joined in worshipping God by the Common Prayer a thousand times, and have
also joined in Worshipping Him as often with those that use no invariable Form,
who can testify with great Assurance that both those sorts of People are
wretchedly mistaken, who can tell you that they know no reason why Christians
should not agree in a Form as to the Matter of Prayer, as well as of Belief, or
why those who make no scruple to sing the Psalms in Meter, by Sternhold and
Hopkins, which is for the most part but a wretched Form of the Matter of
Praise, should scruple the Common Prayer, which is much nearer Scripture
Language, than the aforesaid Version of the Psalms. That it is a very agreeable
Consideration, that many Thousands of Pious Souls are at the same time joining
in Adoring God in the same words, as well as Desires without Idolatry, and
without any of the Additions made by the Papacy to the Christian Religion, and
in the best Liturgy in the World. Especially when they consider that the 4
living Creatures, improperly called Beasts in our Translation, and the 24
Presbyters or Elders, which represent the Christian Church, are represented as
constantly using the same Form of Thanksgiving, and the like Forms are found, 5
Rev. 9, 12, 13. 7 Rev. 10, 12. 11 Rev. 17, 18. 15 Rev. 3. 19 Rev. 1, 2, 6, 7.

And the same Persons can at the same time assure you that they never heard
Cant or Nonsense among those who pray without a Form, but for the most part the
Expressions taken out of the Scripture, the Prayers generally Premeditated,
Methodical, Reverend and fervent, accommodated to the various Circumstances of
the Interests of Religion in the World, both at home and abroad, and the
various Dangers or Judgments under which the Nation may be, and to the
Blessings of Heaven received: They that so pray are never hindered from giving
Thanks for Victories, because it is Lent, nor from Humiliation under Judgments;
because it is Christmas. They usually have respect to the Subject Matter of the
following Discourse, which is a very good Preparation for Attention, and a
Means of ob^aining a Blessing on the Sermon. They can ingeniously and suitably
accomodate their Devotion to the Circumstances of Families, or Persons in
Matter of Prayer or Thanksgiving, for which it is impossible that any, or all
the Liturgies in the World can suffice. Again, these Occasional Conformists
sinding that the blessed Spirit, as a Spirit of Grace and Supplication, is to
convert the Jews, Zach. 12.10. that in the 8 Romans 26. The Assistance of the
Spirit in Prayer is expressed by a word alluding to a Person, who being to lift
at a Beam, has one that helps him to lift both at the end of which he has hold,
and at the other end too, or signifying such a help, as when one that is strong
takes up a Burden over against another who is too weak, and also sets his
Shoulders against the other to lift up the Burden (...), from these and other
places of Sacred Scripture, they are apt to gather that the Assistance of the
Spirit in Prayer ought not to be confined (I say, confined) to an invariable
set Form of Humane Composure, or only to enable the Minister to read a Prayer
Audibly and Reverently, nor are they willing to understand the Act of
Uniformity in such a Sense as this. That from, and after the 24th Day of
August, 1662, neither the Parts nor Learning of any Minister of the Gospel, nor
the Gift of Prayer, nor the Assistance of the Spirit in the Matter of Prayer,
should be of any further use in the Public Worship of God. They think it
possible that Men may make an Idol of Words as well as of Wood or Stone, and
they are afraid, that where the Spirit is rejected as a Spirit of Supplication,
he often refuses to act as a Spirit of Grace. And herein on Consideration, I do
verily believe that the good Churchman, and the Occasional Conformist are of
the same Mind.

But further, as to all the Matters in Controversy between the Churchman, and
the Presbyterian, and Independent, as well as between Him and the Occasional
Conformist, which concern Matters of Ceremonies, and Humane Additions, such as
the Sign of the Cross at Baptism, the Posture of Kneeling at the Sacrament, and
the Surplice; your Oracle abovementioned, has agreed, That it is lawful for
the Church to dispense with their Rites and Ceremonies and if lawful, then
necessary to heal the Schism of the Dissenters, Page 247, That if they would
all agree, which of the indifferent things would purchase their Reconciliation,
the Church would readily grant it for so good an End. Page 254.

Indeed in another Form, viz. As a Wolf stripped of his Shepherds Clothing, he
has been howling about the Streets for some time against the Dissenters, and
Occasional Conformists, Protestants, Jesuits, Hellish Doctrines, Diabolical
Seed, Fruit of Blood, Massacre, and all Wickedness, Wild Enthusiasm, Laodicean
Latitude which God abhors. Evil Beasts, always Liars, Hideous Blasphemy,
Furious Phanaticks, Impudence and Blasphemy, Grin of a Lion, Asses-ears,
Cloven-foot. (Thus in the compass of a few railing Pages, beginning with the
Jesuit, and ending with the Devil) and after all, Page 59, complains of it as a
heavy Charge against his Party, That they do not treat the Dissenters in the
Spirit of Meekness, yet he tells us in that very Treatise, Page 3. That the
High Church should have little Quarrel with the Dissenters, about all the
Objections they make as to Habits, Ceremonies, Liturgy, and even the Grand
Point of Ordination by Presbyters in case of Necessity, and where a Bishop
could not be had, if it were not for that fulsom word Schism. If they did not
gather separate Congregations, and set them up in Opposition to the Church,
they would be no Dissenters, notwithstanding their different Sentiments, as to
the Points before mentioned; for there are those in the Communion of the
Church, who may differ in Opinion about those things, and may Reason and Argue
them over with one another, without any Breach of Charity, or of the Unity of
the Church, which requires not that all Men should be exactly of the same
Opinion in Matters of Discipline, nor nof Faith, but of one Communion, this
preserves the Unity of the Church.

Well said, Wolf, when you speak of the Church, do but mean the Church in your
Creed, and fare-wel the Occasional Conformist; for he does none of those ill
things you complain of, but is Sir Humphrey your very humble Servant, and very
fit for an Office. Page 80. Occasional Conformity has no ill Consequence, and
is far from inferring of no Church, and no Religion at all. I acknowledge with
that Author, that settling the true Notion of the Church, and the Priesthood as
Instituted by Christ, is really of Consequence, and therefore in that little
Discourse, Entitled, Catholocism without Popery, I did earnestly request that
it might be done for the Reasons therein mentioned, Page 4.5, 6. And there is
the more Reason to desire it, because else it is hard to judge who are of
opposite Principles, and not of one and the same Persuasion in Matters of
Religion; especially since the aforesaid Oracle, alias High Church Wolf, tells
us that the 39 Articles are not so much as Articles of Communion, Page 16.
far less of Faith. He tells us that they are required from no Laymen, or any
other but the Clergy who are in Office. That there may be an Uniformity in the
Doctrine publicly Preached. So then Uniformity in Matters, that are neither
Matters of Faith nor Communion, Constitutes the Church, or is the Churchman
then the Hypocrite, instead of the Occasional Conformist, being obliged to
Subscribe and Preach a Doctrine in the Name of God, which he does not believe,
and are the Ceremonies and Humane Additions, more considerable in the
Constitution of the Church than the 39 Articles?

But in truth this Matter ought to be searched to the bottom, and I am led to
it by the same Author, who in the beginning of that Discourse, observes that
there is a Mistake about the word Moderation; for that it appears by the
Context, Page 1.
the Original Word means a Patient and cheerful Suffering of Afflictions. So
that instead of 4. Phil. 5. Let your Moderation be known unto all Men, being a
Text against Persecution, it seems it is a Text that supposes Persecution. I
must say that I never met with any Body that argued Indifferency as to Religion
from that Text, but surely it is violently screwed to make it favor
Persecution. Page. 1.
But it is observed, that this word is found but once in all our Bible; and the
word Clergy is found no oftener; Page 2.
and yet what work have we about that Word. Laymen are not obliged to the
Articles of the Church, but only the Clergy who are in Office; but how if the
Laymen be the Clergy, that is, I mean God's Clergy or Inheritance for the Word
(...), at least in that Sense is found no where in the Bible, but 1 Pet. 5.3.
where St. Peter having styled himself a fellow Presbyter, exhorts the
Presbyters to their Duty to feed the Flock of God, which was among them, as
Bishops thereof, not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy Lucre, but of
a ready Mind, neither as being Lords over God's Clergy (which we read Heritage)
but being Ensamples to the Flock. Now this Epistle being Written about the Year
of our Lord 64, it is remarkable, that he who was an Apostle, and a Partaker of
the Miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost above 30 Years before, calls himself a
fellow Presbyter, which for some Reason, or other, our Translation reads an
Elder, and Exhorts the Presbyters, which we read Elders, to Episcopize which we
read, taking the oversight: But the thing which I would here observe, is that
(...), or (...), as the late Learned Scholiast Gregory reads it out of
Oecumenius, is not the Priests but the People, however the Priests afterward
came to engross the Name. One thing I would therefore desire of the Priests
that they would let us in again for a Share at least, and not believe that they
only are God's Clergy or Inheritance. I would also entreat them, that they
would not be the Church, because though that word is used in the New Testament
about one hundred times, yet it is not once used for the Ministers without the
People. I know it is pretended that the Gospel of St. Matthew, where the word is
twice found, but no where else in any of the four Evangelists, it must signify
the Ministers; but not to enter now into that Controversy, it is strange that
in the other 99 Places it should signify no such thing, and therefore since
the People are 99 parts at least of the Church. I would not have the Priests
pass for the Church, and if these two things be granted me, I fancy we shall by
and by come into a fair way of delivering the World from that Controversy
about Episcopal and Presbyterian Government.

But I cannot here omit to give you a short hint of what may perhahs be more
fully discoursed elsewhere. The Apostle Paul, 2 These. 2.3. Tells us that the
Day of Judgment should not come till there had been an Apostasy, or falling
away, and that Man of Sin be revealed, and so goes on, describing the Papacy
most accurately. But I must own that till I read Irenaeus that best piece of
Primitive Christianity, I never understood the meaning of that Name (...). But
that Primitive Father acquaints us that the Primitive Heretics, of whom Simon
Magus was the Father, Lib. 1. Cap. 30.
invented a new sort of God's, called Aeons, of whom they imagined originally
but four, Lib. 1. Cap. 1.
but were still adding new ones, Lib. 2. Cap. 22.
till they came to be 4380, according to the number of the hours of the Days of
the Year, and to carry on this Generation, they began betimes to couple their
Aeons; as Man and Wife, and one of the first couple wore Anthropos and
Ecclesia, Lib 1. Cap. 34.
Vera and Sanct Ecclesia, so they called this same Goddess the Wife of
Anthropos. And his Anthropos they held to be above God. Irenaeus, Page 54,
which exactly agrees with the Anthropus mentioned by the Apostle Paul in the
aforecited Place. And hence also we may gather who that Whore is that we read
of in the Revelations, even this same Wife of Anthropos, which seems to me to
be the Reason why in that whole Book after the third Chapter you never meet
with the word Church, till after the end of the Prophecy, and this perhaps is
also the Reason why the Reformed Christian Church of the latter Days is called
the Bride, the Lamb's Wife: A Bride in opposition to the Whore, and the Bride
the Lamb's Wife in opposition to the Wife of Anthropos. But this, by the way,
only observe that Simon Magus the Father of these Aeons was, if you believe
Baronius, fetched down out of the Air by St. Peter's Prayers at Rome, Anno 45,
about 4 Years before St. Paul wrote the Epistle to the Thessalonians: And take
notice also that Irenaeus in his 33 d. Chapter of his first Book, observes,
that Ignorance and Impudence, False Zeal, Fury, Envy, and Lust, were said to be
born about the same time with this same blessed couple.

Now, Sir, you must excuse me if I have no kindness for any of the Offspring
of these Folk, and if I find any thing put upon me as part of Revealed
Religion, which appears to be begot by Anthropos on Ecclesia, and if you or the
Men of your Party Write as many Books as would fill the Tower of Babel in
behalf of such things, I shall still remember such Texts as these, to the Law,
and to the Testimony. If they speak not according to this Rule, it is because
there is no Light in them, 8 Is. 20. Thus it is written, etc. I must always say
of the Christianity contained in the Writings of the Sacred Penman, as Josephus
says of the Writings of Moses, Every thing that they wrote is yet extant, and
we must take it as they left it, Joseph. Page 92.
without any room for Ornament or Variation. And it was by this Principle which
runs throughout his whole Work, that Irenaeus routed all the Heretics, and all
their Army of Aeons, except this couple who have plagued, do plague, and will
plague the World till the total downfall of Antichrist; for as your aforesaid
Oracle in his New Association, Page 2. Page 17. observes, when once we leave
the Institutions of God, there is no stop, and our Imagination is our only
Rule. Magna est veritas and prevalebi^.

But it is high time, Sir, to stop, least after all you should think that I here
condemn the Church of England, as by Law Established, against which I don't say
one word, the late designed Act not being past. For I do declare I take no
Church to be a Whore, unless she be guilty of Idolatry; for that is Spiritual
Adultery in Scripture Language. I could wish that none but the Great Whore were
concerned with Anthropos, but some Churches that are not Whores, are a little
guilty of Jilting now and then, and are too apt to Paint, and to take some
parts of the Attire of an Harlot, though they are not so; and therefore I wish
all honest Churches would consider what it is that will be done, when it shall
be said, that the Marriage of the Lamb is come, 19 Rev. 7.
and his Wife has made her self ready.

The Case of the Regale makes the only considerable Matter in Controversy
between the Church and Dissenters to be Episcopacy, all other Matters being
easily accommodated, that Episcopacy was the Heir, which they said, come let us
kill him, that the Inheritance may be ours, Page 248, that he takes Episcopacy
to be no indifferent thing, but Instituted by Christ, and confirmed by the
constant Practice of the Universal Church of Christ in all Ages, Page 254. And
yet in the Shape of a Wolf, Page 27. He falls very fiercely upon his Brother
Wolf of Rome, and calls the Pope the Grand Schismatic, and why? even, because
Catholic Communion is broke by the Church of Rome in the Usurpation of her
Bishops, over all the rest of his Fellow Bishops, and confining the Catholic
Church to his own Communion, then it seems that is Schism in the Pope which
would have been Establishing Peace and Unity, and Settling our Constitution upon
a sure and lasting Foundation, if done by the Occasional Bill. Peace at Home,
Page 12. But if the Pope be in the wrong, what is this Episcopacy that is of
Divine Right? And what is a Diocese, and what Texts are there that prove an
Equality among Bishops, which do not also prove Presbyters to be Bishops? St.
Peter we just now read was a Fellow Presbyter, and would never have Exhorted
Presbyters to act the Bishop, if he had known that Presbyters and Bishops
differed in Order, Jure Divino. Nor would St. John, who Wrote his Gospel about
the Year 98, about 65 Years after he had received the Miraculous Gifts of the
Holy Ghost, and after he came out of the boiling Oil, have omitted so necessary
a Matter, nor would he in his 2 d. and 3 d. Epistles, just before his Death,
have misled the Church, by calling himself the Presbyter, which is the first
word in both those Epistles, especially in his Third Epistle, in which he
complains of Diotrephes, who loved the Pre-eminence (...), a lover of Prelacy,
for not receiving him, and for casting the Brethren out of the Church. He would
have been careful to have used the Style of a Higher Order, nay, it is plain he
did not think it a Disparagement to the surviving Apostle of Jesus Christ to be
styled a Presbyter; but hitherto the Church of Christ remained a pure Virgin.
Hegesippus in Eus. l. 3. c. 32. and Anthropos had not prevailed to, introduce
his Spouse in her stead. This Parity appears from diverse Places in Irenaeus in
the second Century, and the well known Place in St. Hierom, the Confession of
Binius in 1 Can. Apost. is remarkable, that the Names of Bishop and Presbyter
were promiscuously used, and not distinguished for above 200 Years. I will add
the words of the Learned Hales, in his Discourse of Schism, They deceive
themselves, and others who would persuade us that Bishops by the Institution of
Christ have any Superiority above other Men, except that which requires
Reverence, or That a Bishop is Superior by any other Law than Positivo, and by
the common Consent of Christians. Do I then, Sir Humphrey, say any thing
against the Constition of the Church of England? not at all Jure Positivo: The
Priests and People are Governed by the Queen, the Laws are made by Queen,
Lords, and Commons, there are as many Lord Lieutenants as Counties, and Bishops
as Diocesses, and Archbishops as Provinces; there are among the People, Dukes,
Marquesses, etc. and among the Ministers, Deans, Archdeacons, Prebends, etc.
But for God's sake, what Texts do you quote for the Jus Divinum, either of the
Monarchy limited by our Laws, and all the Subordinate Officers in the English
Form of Government, though the best in the World, or for the Hierarchy of the
Church of England, with all its Subordinate Officers, as described by Dr.
Cousius, in his Ecclesiae Anglicanae Politica.

Reprint that Book, and let us have the Scriptures, proving the Constitution
Jure Divino in the next Edition; but otherwise, let us not be bubled out of our
Senses, either by the Jus Divinum of Episcopacy, or of Presbytery, while by one
is meant the English Hierarchy, or the Seotch Church Government by the other.
Do not all Learned Men know that Pope Leo the Great, who began his Popedom
about the Year 440, in his 87th and 90th Epistles, is express for a pular
Election of Bishops. And although Pope Symmachus in the latter end of the Fifth
Century, about the Year 498, endeavored to exclude the People from the
Election, yet Pope Celestine the Second, in the Year 1143, was the first Pope
made without the Peoples Election, even in the Sea of Rome, where Priesteraft
did most prevail. And now in England the Dean and Chapter chose the Bishop in
Pursuance of an Act of Parliament, and by Authority from the Crown. Hierom and
Eutichius are express, that in Alexandria from Mark their first Bishop, one of
the Presbyters was chosen to be Bishop by the rest. So that the Presbyters
could make a Bishop; for we read of no Bishops that Ordained or Consecrated
Him, when so chosen, which is the Practice in England. The Learned Usher
acknowledges that the Presbyters Power, which I plead for is taken from Him in
England only by Law, and may by Law be restored. And yet because an Episcopacy
was early in the Church, the English Prelacy must be put upon us to be Jure
Divino. Take it as it is Jure Humano, and I have not one word to say against
it. And it is plain, that notwithstanding the noise now made about the Jus
Divinum of Bishops, as a Superior Order to Presbyters, that was not the Sense
of the Church at the Restoration of King Charles the Second; for if it had,
the Lords Spiritual, would never have agreed to the Stat. 12. Car. 2. Cap. 17.
which restores Ministers, Ordained by any Ecclesiastical Persons before the
25th of December, then last past. Alas, Sir, Christ himself, and not the
Apostles Ordained the Seventy. Philip the Deacon sent Christianity into
Abasinia, where it still is, by the Aethopian Eunuch, who was no Bishop that I
know of, and yet they had Ordained Ministers before they received an Abuna, or
Archbishop from the Patriarch of Alexandria. Let the Priests be Governed in all
Countries, as they are most Governable; it hinders not, but we may be all of
the same, and not of opposite Principles, but of the same Persuasion in Matters
of Religion. I don't pretend to determine how far the Civil Power may enforce
Revealed. Religion, but I hope all Christian Princes and States will take care
that the Priests add not to, or diminish from our Christianity in any Form, and
let them be Governed, as they may, but for God's sake let Discipline be
restored, and then it is no great matter in what Form the Priests are managed.

Let every Minister who has the Cure of Souls, be enabled to exercise
Disciplinam Christi, which I am sure is Jure Divino, and perhaps the Reduction
of Episcopacy to the Form of Synodical Government, by Archbishop Usher, though
not Jure Divine, would be found so agreeable to Reason, suitable to Primitive
Practice, and accomodate to the Ends of Discipline, that a due Consideration
thereof might in a while bring all Christian Churches into the same Form of
Government, without the Pretense of a Jus Divinum for it. Let us have no Laws
about the Matter of Revealed Religion, but what are at least plainly justified
by the Scripture, and not be hampered by the Priests Additions in any Form; and
Discipline will be easy and without Difficulty. But if the Parish Minister may
not Excommunicate a Notorious Convicted Atheist, Deist, Blasphemer, Idolater,
Profane Swearer, Sabbath-breaker, Abuser of Parents, Murderer, Adulterer,
Thief, Perjured Person, Extortioner, Barretor, and such like; but must complain
to the Diocesan, and an Appeal must lie to the Archbishop, the same Reason may
carry it to the Pope, though our Laws justly prohibit it. So in the other Form of
Government, if such a Criminal, after Conviction by Law, may appeal from his
Pastor to the Sessions, thence to the Presbytery, thence to the Synod, and
thence to the General Assembly, the same Reason will carry it to a General
Council, and I think there ought to be one Appeal more in such Cases, viz. to
the Day of Judgment. Indeed, if Priests may make us a Horse-load of Canons and
Constitutions Ecclesiastical, and load us with Ceremonies, of which St.
Augustine in his Second Epistle to Januarius, complains, that the Condition of
the Jews was more tolerable than of the Church in his Time, (which was the 5th.
Century,) and the Transgression of every one of them shall be a new Sin, there
may be need of Appeals, nor will it be sit to trust a single Person to teaze a
Parish for not submitting to Priestcraft.

But the Laws of God are plain, the Duties required by Christianity are well
known, and I am so far from Abridging the Ministers of the Gospel of their just
Power, that I think it is a horrid shame that they have not more. It Is an
excellent Passage, cited out of Mr. Chillingworth, by the late Author of a
Discourse called the Principle of the Protestant Reformation. I am fully
assured that God does not, and therefore that Man ought not to require any more
of any Man than this; to Believe the Scripture to be God's word, to endeavor
to find the true Sense of it, and to Live according to it; The Bible, the
Bible, I say the Bible only is the Religion of Protestants.

But though I agree with the Author, page 5. That a Person by Baptism is not
made a Member of any particular Church, but only of the Christian Church
Universal; yet I conceive that he is wretchedly out, when he insinuates, That
there is no Part of Primitive Church Communion, which might not have been
performed by a Woman, as well as a Man; and that a Woman's Narrative would have
been part of the Gospel: Because that Bible tells me not, that our Savior had
any She-Apostles or Evangelists. Indeed Priscilla, as well as Aquila, did
instruct Apollos; but so may any good Woman instruct her Friend, without being
a Church Officer. And the Context of that Passage, 1 Cor. 11.21. which he
quotes, seems to insinuate, as if this Fancy of a Female Officer had got
footing in the Church of Corinth; but the Apostle tells us, That the Head of
the Woman is the Man, ver. 3. and that she ought to have Power, or a Covering
on her Head: So far from being heard, that she was not to be seen. And in the
next Chapter, v. 28, and 29. he speaks of Church Officers, but of no She-Ones.
And again, Chap 14. v. 34. He is plain in the Case, Let the Woman keep Silence
in the Church, for it is not permitted to them to speak; and so 1 Timothy 2.12.
Again, I think he is strangely out, when he says, page 11. That there is no
absolute Necessity for Public Church Communion, since we can read the Gospel
at home; for I am really a Friend to the Apostle's Creed, and believe the
Communion of Saints, which is an Article founded on express Scripture, as well
as the other Articles of that Creed, and which must be had by joining to some
Church or Congregation, such as is described in the 19th Article of the Church
of England. But indeed, if you speak of National, or Provincial Churches, which
distinguish themselves by their own, or other Men's Inventions; I am of the Mind
of Diogenes, who would not be a Citizen of Athens, because they required some
separating Ceremonies, whereas, He took himself to be a Citizen of the World. A
Passage which the Pious and Ingenious Mr. Burscough, in his late Discourse of
Schism has Cited; (but whether to this Purpose let the World Judge) I will not
for the same Reason, confine my Communion to any such Party, because I am a
Member of the Catholick-Church. But, for Ordinary Communion, certainly every
Christian ought to be a Member of some Congregation, if he can so be, and that
which Consists of his Neighbors is most Agreeable to the Ends of Christian
Communion. And, then as to Church Officers, the Bible is Plain; the Epistles of
the Apostles Paul, are full of Evidence for Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons; He
left Tinus in Creet, to Ordain Presbyters in every City, Tit. 5. and 4.4 Ephesians.
11. He tells us, that our Savior gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and
some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the Perfecting of the
Saints, etc. The Words are all Masculine, and no Place Mentions a she Apostle
or Evangelist. But, here let the Clergy observe the Consequence of pretending
to Unscriptural Rights, jure Divino, which drives Men to Question, whether they
have any at all. But, let that Author and all Men know, that the Ministers of
the Gospel are Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God, 1
Cor. 4.1. They are (...). Presidents, Persons that Preside, or as it is
rendered, are over the Church in the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 5.1.2. We read 1 Timothy 5.17.
of Elders that Rule well (...) though Presiding Presbyters, a Passage one would
think, inconsistent with the Presbyterian Government, as Opposed by the
Episcopal. For I know no better Description of a Bishop, then a Presiding
Presbyter, and yet a Passage, that has been tortured to Prove Lay Elders, and
to make that Government Jure Divino. Indeed, I know no Text so much relied on,
except perhaps that, 1 Timothy 4. 14. Timothy's Gift was given Him by laying on of
the Hands of the Presbyters, which Place the Learned Calvin himself quits, as
proving no such Matter. Besides, it is Plain, that St. Paul's Hands were laid on
him too, 2 Timothy 1.6. And I cannot but Observe, that this Passage in this Second
Epistle, (which was Written about Eleven Years after the First) seems to fall
from that inspired Writer, to prevent the Mistake that Men might be led into,
by that other Text in the first Epistle, and at the same time Insinuate, that
in Ordination, the Bishop and Presbyters (where a Church has both) do best
together, so the same Apostle in his Second Epistle to the Corinthians,
Explains some Passages in his first, as also some Things in his first Epistle
to the Thessalonians, that occasioned Mistakes, are set right in the Second.

On the other Side, it is strange to see the Jus Divinum of Prelatical
Government is founded by some on Passages, that make most Strongly against it,
of which I shall Content my self at Present with one Instane, Acts 20. 17. St.
Paul from Miletus. sent to Ephesius, and called the Presbyters of the Church,
who v. 28. He says, were made Bishops by the Holy Ghost, this is a Place much
relied on against the Difference of Order: But, Mr. Maurice in his Defense of
Diocesan Episcopacy, endeavoring to Enervate Mr. Clarkson's Argument from that
Passage, Quotes Ireneus, L. 3. Cap. 14. Who he says, being Born in the End of
the First Century, might have Notices from Tradition of more of St. Paul's
Visitation, than is Recorded by St. Luke; and tells us, that St. Paul having
called together the Bishops and Presbyters of Ephesus, and the other
Neighboring Cities, etc. The Text is, the Presbyters, Irenaeus says, Bishops
and Presbyters; and Paul tells them, that the Holy Ghost had made them Bishops:
Now let the Reason of Mankind Judge, whether this Passage of Irenaeus be not
much Stronger against Diocesan Episcopacy, as it Imports a Difference of Order,
than the Text it self, for some Prelates have endeavored to avoid the force of
that Text, by affirming, that those Presbyters were all Bishops. But if
Irenaeus be in the right, both the Bishops and Presbyters were Bishops of the
Holy Ghosts making, i. e. Jure Divino. It seems the Apostles Rule, 1 Pet. 5.5.
was observed then, which was about Twelve Years before that Epistle was
Written, viz. The Younger Presbyters did submit themselves unto the Elder; though
at the same time, they were all Subject one to another, and were clothed with
Humility. And that this Ancient Father knew no other Difference, will appear to
the Impartial Reader, who will consult these Passages, Lib. 4. Cap. 43. Cap.
44. Cap. 52. Cap. 63. Lib. 5. Page 299. 322.

Surely Mr. Maurice had as good let that Father alone, and have wholly slid
away from the Objection, as he does in another Place; for Mr. Clarkson making
it his great Argument against Diocesan Episcopacy, that it was wholly
Impracticable, supposing the Bishop the sole Pastor of the Diocese, consisting
of many Churches, Page 226. and proving it irrefragably from Reason, and the
Testimony of Chrysostom and others, and having mentioned Gregory, Orat. 20. who
Applauds the Multiplying of Bishoprics as an Excellent Art. Souls being hereby
better looked after; he Observes, that others would have this less regarded, and
the Bishops Honor more: Now, what does Mr. Maurice say to all this; why in
Truth, just nothing at all? St. Chrysostom says, that a Bishop at the Peril of
his Soul, is to take exact Notice of the Spiritual State of all under his
Charge, and constantly to perform all Pastoral Duties to the whole Flock; he
had need of many Thousand Eyes, to look into the State of every Soul under him,
which of them can Digest bitter Remedies, and who for want of them grow
Careless. Though he Order his own Life well, if he does not exactly take Care of
thee, and of all that are under him, to Hell he goes with the Wicked. And in
another Place, it is very Burdensome to have the Charge of 150 Souls. Now, what
is to be done? These Matters are Plain. If a Bishop be the sole Pastor of
500000, and some of them live 3000 Miles from the Bishops Palace; as for the
Purpose, the distance of the West Indies from Fulham, how is Chrysostom to be
answered? Why, even by denying what he says. Bishops says Mr. Maurice, Page
438. are certainly accountable for those who Perish by their Neglect of their
proper Office; but will not be Condemned for not doing the Office of a
Presbyter, to all the Particulars of his Diocese. But pray, what is the Office
of a Presbyter, if those Passages of Chrysostom do not describe it. It were
much better, and Honester to say, the Bishop is the President of the
Presbytery, and not the sole Pastor of the Diocese; he may have the Care of
Souls in one particular Parish, but every Parish Presbyter is a Bishop of his
Parish; and as such, those Passages of Chrysostom concern him, and not the
Diocesan, who by the 71 Canon of the African Code, is forbidden to leave his
Cathedral Church, and go to any other Church in his Diocese to reside there.
This would be Plain Dealing, and a better Answer to the Charge of consulting
the Bishops Honor, more than the good of Souls, than to tell the Story of the
Cappadocian, whose Blood poisoned a Viper that bit him. Def. of Di. Epis. Page
107. This had made Mr. Maurice in the right, and Mr. Clarkson wholly in the
wrong in this Matter. For after all the Pains that Ingenious Independent has
taken, Diocesan-Episcopacy rightly Understood, is too hard for him; but taking
the Diocesan as the Sole Pastor of a Diocese, these Two Gentlemen do most
manifestly Confute one another, and neither of them in Truth, are for the True
Primitive Episcopacy. That Chrysostom was Bishop of Constantinople in this
Sense, which I give of Primitive Episcopacy, is very consistent with the
aforesaid Passages, and his Practice does no more Contradict his Doctrine, then
Dr. Usher, being the Archbishop Ardmagh, is an Argument, that he did not Write
the aforementioned Treatise, Entitled the Reduction of Episcopacy, etc.

I see no way of saving the Souls of either of Bishop or People without
Discipline; I see no Possibility of Discipline, without allowing many Pastors
in every Diocese, (too big for the Inspection of a single Pastor) who have the
Power of the Keys, and I do not diminish here by the Diocesans Grandeur, unless
it be Claimed by the Institution of Christ, who has forbid such a Claim in the
most Express Terms, and told us his Kingdom is not of this World, neither He
nor His Apostles would meddle with Government; and although I think the 13th Romans
which has been much urged for Arbitrary Power, and unlimitted Submission to the
worst of Rulers signifies no such thing, especially being Written in Neros
Quinquennium, when his Reign was suitable to, the Apostles Description of it,
in that Chapter: Yet that, and many such Texts show, that the Apostles thought
not of any such Hierarchy of Divine Institution, as the High Party pretend to;
it is not the Business of the Ministers of the Gospel to meddle with
Government, other than Pastoral, at least till the Apostles shall sit on
Thrones, judging the 12 Tribes of Israel, and when that will be, God only
knows. But of this I am sure, that there have been many Heretical Councils,
that the Councils of Rome held by Gregory the III. in the 8th Century,
consisting of 903 Bishops, almost Thrice the Number of the Fathers at the
Council of Nice; Decreed the Worshipping of Images, Excommunicated the Emperor
Leo, and deprived him of his Imperial Dignity, for Opposing Images. And whereas
the Councils of Nice in the 4th Century, appointed 3 Patriarchs, one in Rome,
another in Alexandria, and the Third in Antioch, with Power to Convocate within
their own Bounds, particular Councils for timely suppressing of Heresies, this
was so far from suppressing them, that many of those Patriarchs were most
Notorious Heretics, and the great Promoters of Heresy, Eulalius, Euphronius,
Placitus, Stephanus, Leontius, Spado, Eudoxius, all Patriarchs of Antioch were
Arians in the very same Century. So was Lucius Patriarch of Alexandria. And
though Julius Patriarch of Rome, and most of his Successors in that Age, were a
Refuge to the Orthodox; yer, Siricius in that Age, forbad Marriage to Priests,
and their affecting Supremacy, was very Visible. And Liberius one of them is
given up by Bellarmine himself as an Arian, and these Pretenses at last, issued
in the Papal-Empire.

But yet, in short, I know no Reason why a Minister of the Gospel, may not be
made by the Civil Government a Lord of Parliament; nor why, a Lord of
Parliament may not become a Minister of the Gospel. It were no Disparagement to
the Emperor, to be an Ambassador for Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20. And I was pleased
with a Story that I heard of, a certain Clergyman, on whom an Earldom
descended, who Wrote himself Minister of Jesus Christ, and Earl of K. He that
receives them receives Christ, and he that receives Him, receives Him that
sent Him. I have the same Expectations with the Author of the Case of the
Regale, that many of the Promises of the Glory of the Church, must be fulfilled
in this World; that there are Original, Fundamental and Divine Powers, with
which Christ has invested His Church; that there is a Discipline which Christ
has left in his Church, and which is absolutely necessary, with which Princes
cannot Dispense, and which they may not Overruled; that she has an Original
Independance from all Kings and States, who ought to be Subject to her
Discipline, if they Profess themselves Members of her; that Censures are still
in her Power, and that she cannot Recede from them; and that they would still
have their Effect upon all truly Conscientious, and restore the now well nigh
lost Notions of a Church and Religion; but then, all these things must be found
in the Bible; and Men may as well make an Act to Burn the Bible, Pres. Page 23.
as set Up for Rights, Powers and Privileges, Jure Divino, which are not to be
found there.

He is certainly in the right Page 25. that nothing can be believed to be
Religion by any People, but what they think to be Divine, and they can think
nothing can be so, that is in the Power of Man to alter or Transverse. I look
on every True Gospel Minister, as representing the Person of Jesus Christ, and
Reverence Him as His Ambassador; but I have his Instructions in my Hand, and he
must not expect that I show any Regard to his Demands, beyond those
Instructions: Suppose a Treaty of Peace between the Emperor and the Hungaeians
now in Arms, who Accept of the Terms offered them by His Imperial Majesty; but,
Prince Eugene would have Two or Three of his own Fancies complied with, or no
Peace should be, would not the Hungarians think him very Impertinent and Saucy,
would not the Emperor think Himself ill Served by him, and would not all the
World think him stark Mad? The Application is easy. And here Sir, I could
particularly show you, that Anthropos and his Wife did gradually Rob the Laity
of their Reason, the Bible of their Senses, by what Degrees Priest-crast grew,
and Christianity decayed, but I must not Enlarge, having been much longer on
this Head than I designed. But, I cannot Omit to give you, a Copy of a Letter
Written by Cardinal Woolsey to the Pope; when we of the Laity began to shake
our Ears, and look about Us as you may find it, Ld. Herb. Hist. H. VIII. No. 2.

And now Sir Humphry, what is there in all this that hinders; but that you a
High Churchman, and I an Occasional-Conformist, or rather if you please, an
Occasional-Dissenter are not of Opposite Principles, but of the same Persuasion
in Matters of Religion? Is there any particular Part of Religion, in what I
have Discourst under this Head, in which Consideration, you do not fully agree
with me in all Respects. Sure you cannot still think either English-Prelacy, or
Scotch-Presbytery, Jure Divino, though by the Civil Sanction, they be justified
in the respective Kingdoms, where they are Established. It Is a wonderful Thing,
considering, for how many Ages Prelacy prevailed in the World, and the many
Forgeries of Pieces of Antiquities, and the Indices Expurgatoriae that have
been made, that there are so many Things to be said against Jus Divinum out of
Antiquity; and on the other side, it is wonderful, that if Presbyterian
Government without a President Bishop had been Jure Divino that so Early, as
the Year 140. it should be Decreed over all the World, to change it to
Diocesan-Episcopacy, which the Presbyterians endeavor to Prove out of St.
Jerome; and that in no Age since, till of late, the Jus Divinum of it should be
Discovered. And I believe, it may be proved, that the Albegois and Vaudois
Churches, which have been pure Churches from the Apostles Days; have always
allowed of President Bishops, though not of Diocesans, being sole Pastors of a
Diocese, Jure Divino. But, this Question is no matter of either Natural or
Revealed Religion; and therefore hinders me not, to Conclude, that you and I
are not of Opposite Principles, but of one and the same Persuasion in Matters
of Religion; especially, since we are both Members also of the National Church,
heartily Approve of the Laws of the Land, and cheerfully pay Obedience to them;
though both you and I, would be Glad to see them altered, so as to restore
Discipline, to Establish the Church of England more firmly, to make a better
Provision for the small Vicarages and Curacys; to Unite our Differences and
heal our Breaches, to Provide for Employing the Poor, to Suppress Vice and
Immorality more Effectually, and to promote Christian Knowledge, both at Home
and Abroad.

2. And having been too Prolix, though far from Impoverishing the Subject of the
first Question; I shall be short in my Answer to the other; and as to the
Second, Whether if the Occasional-Bill had past, it had secured the Government
from such, who are not sincere Members of the National Church, nor heartily
approve of the Laws of the Land, nor cheerfully pay Obedience to them; but are
of Opposite Prinnciples, and not of one and the same Persuasion in Matters of
Religion.

I will only say, That it is plain, that although the Bill had passed, Atheists,
Deists, Socinians, those that Value no Religion, nor any Church, if wise enough
to avoid the late Act against Blasphemy, Adulterers, Common Swearers,
Extortioners, and all those truly Scandalous Occasional-Conformists, whose
Lives show, that they neither heartily Approve of the Laws of God, or of the
Land; and neither cheerfully nor otherwise, pay Obedience to them, would be
Capable of Public Offices and Employments, relating to the Government either
in Countries or Corporations, notwithstanding that Bill, and would have been no
way Affected by it; a Person of Sober Life, that had been in 5 or 6 Years, 5 or
600 Times at Church, and frequently received the Sacrament according to the
Usage of the Church of England, might have been removed out of an Office, though
he had also all that while, labored in doing Service to the Church, as by Law
Established, which will be of Everlasting Advantage to it; and a Person of a
Prosligate Life, who had Publicly owned, that he had not been at Church for as
many Years, might be Capable of a Wh. St. -- f. notwithstanding that Act; but
this is so Clear, That it needs no Proof, as to so much of this Question, as
relates to Religion; and if you intend any other Laws, the Defacto Men, such as
believe the Jus Divinum of Absolute Monarchy, that take the Oaths to Her
Majesty as an Ass eats Thistles, that neither heartily Approve of the Laws of
the Land, abjuring the pretended James the III. and Establishing Her Majesty's
Throne, and the Protestant Succession, nor the Law for Toleration, nor
cheerfully pay Obedience to them, would be all unaffected by this Bill; surely
the Promoters of it, thought there was no Sin, but going to a Protestant
Meeting, as one of the Characters in Timon of Athens thought there was no Sin
but Murder.

Thirdly, Whether the Administration of Public Aflairs may not be in the Hands
of Persons who are not of one and the same Persuasion in Matters of Religion,
nay, of Men of opposite Principles, without Confusion or tearing the Government
in pieces between them, and whether they may not, notwithstanding, draw
together the same way for the Public Good. Now certainly, Calvinists and
Arminians, High-Church and Low-Church, Sherlockians and Southians, such as take
the Articles of the Church to be Articles of Faith, and such as take them only
to be Articles of Peace; such as are for the Occasional-Bill, and such as are
not, such as hold the Pope to be Antichrist, and such as do not, are not of one
and the same Persuasion in Matters of Religion, but of opposite Principles; and
yet Sir Humphrey, you will not deny, that they may be all employed without
Confusion or tearing the Government in pieces between them; and may
notwithstanding draw together the same way, for the Public Good: but the truth
is this, Queens Coronation Sermon, p. 24.
Mixing of Heaven and Earth together, as his Grace the Lord Archbishop of York
expresses it, When Men for difference of Opinion, about the Methods of the
public Conduct, break out into Parties and Factions, sacrifice the Peace of
the Kingdom to their own private Resentments, and mingle Heaven and Earth for
the supporting of a Side. It Is this which tears the Government in pieces. It
were indeed desirable, that all the Subjects of England were good Christians,
for the sake of the Public and of their own Souls; for that Christianity gives
the best Rules of Morality, and the Name of Jesus Christ is the only Name under
Heaven, given among Men, whereby they can be Saved: Yet Faith is the Gift of
God, and Men may be of great Use in this World, who may be very unhappy in the
next.

It is a Notion long since exploded, That Dominion is founded in Grace: and
Honesty, Honor, Skill, and Imegrity, may consist with a mistaken Belief as to
revealed Religion; and in this respect no Religion but the Popish, or the
High-Church Party in England, or the High-Kirk Party or Cameronians in
Scotland, can make a Man otherwise honest to tear the Government in pieces.
Indeed Popery is inconsistent with Allegiance to all Protestant Kings and
States: For as Antonius de Dominis Archbishop of Spolato acknowledged above 80
years ago, The Church under the Bishop of Rome is no more a Church but a human
Government under the Monarchy of the Pope, which is wholly Temporal. And this
Assertion of his may be easily justified out of the Lateran and other Councils,
and their most celebrated Writers. So Thomas Aquinas tells us, That the Pope is
as much above Bishops as Bishops are above Kings and Princes; that the Secular
Power is subjected to the Spiritual, as the Body to the Soul; and that
therefore it is no Usurpation when a Prelate meddles with Temporal Matters. So
Bonaventure, his Contemporary, about the Year 1274 affirms, That the Pope may
depose Princes; and this after Edwardus Salburgensis, in his Oration to the
Diet at Ratisbon about the Year 1248, had thus expressed himself: There are now
175 Years elasps'd since Gregory the 7th laid the Foundations of an Empire,
under the show of Religion, which in the same Oration he calls the Empire of
Antichrist. But this is a matter so plain, that it cannot be denied by any
learned Protestant; and I wish that none who bear the Protestant Name were of
the Mind of Salmero, who teaches, that as well the Priestly as the Kingly Power
is placed in the Pastors of the Church, that so Christ may reign for ever: For
it is not long since the Judges of England were solemuly told in a Sermon, that
St. Paul was a mixed Person. Alas these, and such as these are the Principles
which work Confusion, and tear the Government in pieces; whether they got into
the Heads of Prelatists or Presbyterians, or of Men of any other denomination:
But although the Christian Profession with a suitable Conversation, ought to be
looked upon as an excellent Qualisication for an Employment, where the Person
has other Qualifications proper for such an Employment, and such a Man is
certainly preferable to another of equal Skill, who either makes no Profession
of Religion, or lives not according to his Profession: Yet the ancient Roman
Honesty with the Roman Courage, Loyalty, and Love to his Country, and largeness
of Soul may render a Man more sit for an Employment than a Selfish,
Persecuting, Cowardly, Arbitrary, narrow Soul Fellow, that oves none but his
own Party, though he believed his Creed never so firmly, and roared for the
Church never so boisterously; and much more if all the noise he makes be for
humane Inventions and Ceremonies. The Priests are now competently ashamed of
the pretended Jus Divinum of absolute Monarchy, and when they have been scouted
out of all their Pretenses under all Forms, to any Jus Divinum, not to be found
in the Scriptures: Then, and not till then will the Princes and States of
Christendom be secure and quiet.

The proof hereof would be too prolix, but I cannot forbear to present you with
a small sample. The Pope in the 13th Century sent the Christian Princes a
Pilgrimage to recover the Holy Land, which was in truth only to take an
Opportunity to usurp upon their Rights in their Absence, and to set up his
pretended Jus Divinum to be Monarch of the World. Thus after Gregory the 9th
had by Excommunication forced the Emperor Frederick the Second to an Expedition
into the Holy Land, he invaded Naples, and other parts of the Emperor's
Dominions, and stirred up Henry, the Emperor's Son to Rebellion, and called a
Council to depose him: Nor would he make Peace with him, though he sued to the
Pope for it; and though the Tartars carried all before them, the Emperor could
not obtain Liberty to assist the Christians, but was forced to fight it out
with the Pope, till the Antichristian Monster having the worst on it broke his
Heart. Some time after Pope Innocent the 4th blessed the French King Lewis
about the Year 1248, and sent him on the same Errand; but gathered a Council at
Lions against Frederick, and thereby hindered him from assisting Lewis, who
sought to make Peace between the Emperor and the Pope, that he might be
assisted; but the barbarous Pope, and his pretended Jus Divinum, left the poor
King and his two Brothers Captives to the Saracens, and the whole Christian
Army to be cut off. Some time after Pope Gregory the 10th engaged the Emperor
Rodulph to send an Army into Asia, and after the Ruin of that Army, and the
Captivity of the Prince of Meckleburg who commanded it, being the 7th Army in
this Century that was sent on the Pope's Errand: It happened that Cassianus
Prince of Tartary, turned Christian, and conquered Syria from the Saracens, and
left Governors in it with express Orders, that they should enter into a
Confederacy with the Christian Princes of the West: But Pope Bonisuce the
Eighth, to whom this Offer was made, was so busy in maintaining his pretended
Jus Divinum, against the French King Philip, whom he Excommunicated and his
Posterity to the Fourth Generation, that he wholly slighted this Offer, which
occasioned oned the loss of Syria, made Capeacus who governed in Damascus for
Cassianus, to revolt to the Sultan of Egypt, and gave occasion to the rise of
the Ottoman Empire in the beginning of the next Age.

Alas, Sir, were there no Princes in the Seventeenth Century, ruined by
Contests about those Jus Divinums? I pray God the Eighteenth Century may afford
no instances of any Prince undone by believing the Jus Divinum of Priestcraft.
These things considered, it is not strange that the National Synod or Council
of Gap, Anno 1604, just 100 Years ago, for the Reasons in their Acts mentioned;
and among others, for that the Bishop of Rome, with relation to Civil Affairs,
tramples on the lawful Authority of Magistrates, giving, taking away,
transferring Kingdoms; thus resolve, We Believe and Assert, that he is the true
and proper Antichrist, the Son of Perdition, foretold in the Word of God, the
Purple Whore that sits on the Seven Mountains in the Great City, that has
obtained Dominion over the Kings of the Earth, and we wait till God (as he has
promised, and already begun to do) shall break and conquer him by the Spirit of
his Mouth, and destroy him utterly by the brightness of his Coming. But we are
assured by a more infallible Authority, that the Kings of the Earth shall hate
the Whore and make her Desolate and Naked, Rev. 17.12, 16.
and eat her Flesh, and burn her with Fire. The Kings, and not the Priests are
to work this Reformation; and therefore though they had given their Power,
Strength, Verse 13.
and Kingdom to the Beast, which the Kings of the Earth never gave to any but
the Pope and his Church; yet by re-assuming their respective Rights, and
asserting their just Supremacy, God will some time or other utterly root out
Priestcraft; Revel. 11.15.
the Kingdoms of this World must become the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his
Christ; not by turning Kingdoms into Churches and Kings into Priests, or
setting up Imperium in Imperio. Our Savior at first indeed appeared to St.
John in the Habit of a Priest, and his Sword went out of his Mouth, a plain
Representation how his Gospel should at first prevail: But after that Anthropos
and Ecclesia had set up Antichrist, and the Kings of the Earth had been a long
time committing Fornication with the Great Whore, Revel. 18.3.
and the inhabiters of the Earth had been made drunk with the Wine of her
Fornication, when Babylon is to fall; when the Marriage of the Lamb is come,
and his Wife has made her self ready, and the Heavens open for the utter
destruction of the Beast and false Prophet, Revel. 19.11.
he then appears as a General in the Head of an Army; and though the Sword still
comes out of his Mouth, and his Name is called the Word of God, Verse 15.
that we may be sure to know Him, Verse 13.
and the true means of Reformation; yet his Name written on his Vesture and on
his Thigh, is not Bishop of Bishops, Verse 16.
or chief Priest of Priests; but King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, that we may
know also who they are, whom He will use as Instruments of Reformation. And I
dare appeal to the Reason of Mankind, whether it does not agree with this
Prophecy, that the Civil Powers must interpose, or the Priests will be
quarrelling about their pretended Jus Divinum, and tearing Christendom to
pieces till the Day of Judgment.

And here I rid my hands of all the lamentable Stories, that the abovementioned
Woolf tells of the Presbyterian Tyranny in Scotland; I have not one word to say
for it, if it be true which he relates, and others deny: I hope the Civil Power
will keep them in Order, as well as his Party in England. The Apologetick
Declaration annexed to that Discourse, says, That they cannot own Princess Ann
as their lawful chosen covenanted Princess, such as they ought to have, nor can
they have any Prince or Princess but a Covenanted one. Why, says another Party,
no Prince or Princess, without they maintain the Jus Divinum of Absolute
Monarchy, and maintain the Jus Divinum of Prelacy; is not this fine work Sir
Humphrey, and has not our most Religious and most excellent Queen, (whom may
the everlasting Arms support to the Age of her Predecessor Queen Elizabeth at
least, and with greater Glory and Happiness) a sine time of it amongst them;
for my part I most heartily wish, that now Re assumptions are in fashion, all
Princes and States in Christendom would enter into a solema League and
Covenant, to re-aslume the just Rights of the Civil Power, and to hold the
Noses of all the Priests in Christendom to the Bible, and to give them all the
Honor and Respect, Authority and Maintenance which is their due; as the
Stewards of the Mysteries of God, and as the Ambassadors of Christ, and to
continue or derive to them by express Laws; all such share of the Civil Power,
as the Wisdom of the Legislature shall see convenient in all Places, and that
all we Laymen, as they call us, would enter into the same solemn League and
Covenant, to support the Queen and all other Sovereigns therein, that so the
Christian World may be quiet, then the Priests may enjoy the Blessing of our
Savior's Presence, which is annexed to their teaching all things whatsoever he
has commanded, and we may have the Benefit of being so taught, otherwise many a
good Christian will be ready to say with poor Melancton, at his Death: I desire
to depart out of this Life for two Causes, that I may enjoy the desired sight
of the Son of God, and the Church Triumphant, and that I may be delivered from
the most barbarous and implacable hatred of Divines, and to believe that Eneas
Sylvius was more infallible when he pronounced, That all the Evil in the World
either arose from Ecclesiastical Persons, Omne malum in Mundo out exortum
aviris Ecclesiasticis aut ab illis patratum.
or had been perpetrated by them, than he was afterward, when about the Year
1458, he became Pope Pius the Second.

Those therefore who are Papists, or who desire a Reunion with Popery, and
those that have got the same Principles, though in an Aristocratical or
Democratical form, are dangerous to the Civil Government; but what is this to
most of the English Dissenters, and to all the Occasional-Conformists, who look
not Abroad for any Sovereign of any sort Ecclesiastical or Temporal, but
Acknowledge Her Majesty to be Rightful and Lawful Queen, who rejoice in the
Laws Establishing the Protestant Succession, and have no Interest to serve by
Embroiling the Government.

Fourthly, Whether it is sit that the Corporation and Test Acts should be
enforced or Repealed.

Now as to so much of this Question, as relates to the Test Act, I shall choose
to refer you to the Plea annexed to this Discourse, No. 1. only adding, that
since the Writing thereof, your Oracle in the same Place, where he Advises to
the late Bill against Occasional-Conformity, seems to give up the Point, as to
that Part of the Test, that enjoins the actual Receiving of the Lords Supper,
for Case of the Regale, Page 179. He sinds Faults with Bribing Men to Profane
the Holy Sacrament for an Office, that an Action should be against the
Minister, who should refuse it to them, though he Knows, Sees, and Hears them in
their Conversations and Principles to be never so much Unqualified.

And as to the Corporation Act, it is plain, that there have been vast
Alterations made in the Constitution of the Government, both Ecclesiastical and
Civil, since the making of that Act, which may justly Occasion a Review of that
Act, without any Danger to the Government; especially, if made by such Persons,
as Her most Excellent Majesty shall Commissionate for that Purpose; and in hope
of living to see such an Act of Parliament, as I have before mentioned; and
such a Commission, I will say no more on that Subject.

And now methinks, the Fifth Question is sufficiently considered already, that
Part of It, which relates to the Practice of other wise Nations, has been
Effectually answered by other Hands, in the Examples of most Wise Nations,
Heathen and Christian; and I don't find any Reply is offered, except a dry
Discourse just come to Hand at the Writing of these Lines. Indeed Sir Humphry,
I was comforting my Self with the thoughts of Subscribing your humble Servant,
when I was Interrupted by the Noise of one J -- S. who seems to be John at
Style, in whose Name we Lawyers use to put Cases, from whom I expected some
mighty Matter, for Peace and Union are Excellent Things: But alas, it is a poor
Creature, and I shall consider him in a few Words. All the Christian Acts of
Moderation in other Countries, he takes to be Acts of Necessity, not of Choice.
He seems to think, that there are no Laws in England, but those of Uniformity,
and the Corporation and Test Acts, or otherwise he shamefully belies the
Dissenters; for, no Men are more fond of the other Laws of England, made for
the Security of the Established Government. It Is a mighty Discovery that he has
made, that the Dissenters would Repeal those Laws. Surely, no Man ever doubted
it so far as concerns good Protestants, though it would be in Effect not a
Repealing, but rectifying those Laws. He has confirmed my Observation, that
there is a strange Bias on a certain Party of Men toward Popish and French
Presidents, or surely he would not have troubled the Reader with the Presidents
of Portugal, Spain, Italy, Peace and Union, Page 4.
and France, any more than of Muscovy, Turkey, Persia or China: And for
Holland, they are a Wiser People, than to Exclude those that Communicate with
their National Church, because they believe their Creed, and Communicate also
with other Protestants It Is no wonder, if Men that pretend to Infallibility,
and take the whole Web of Priestcraft to be as Sacred as our Saviors
Seamless-Coat, should Establish an Inquisition; but that Men, that pretend to
no Infallibility, but have rejected 19 Parts in 20, should be setting up an
Inquisition to secure the Fag-end of Priestcraft, from being torn off from
Christianity, this is wonderful; especially, when Constant Conformity, Page 10.
which as the Party would impose it, is Schismatical Separation from the
Catholic Church, is put on the same Foot with the Oaths of Allegiance and
Abjuration. I hope that I have showed that Author another way to Peace and
Union, than by Bribing Men by Offices to be Separalists; there needs no going
over of the Church to the Dissenters, or the Dissenters to the Church; but if
both will go over to the Bible it would be well, and Christendom in a little
while would go over with them. Let him take his Swing against all Parties, that
would undermine our Constitution; but the things he and his Party are so fond
of, are rather our Excrements, than our Constitution; and if only one thing is
to be done at once, Page. 16.
let me Advise the Party to take Care of a Commandment, an Article of the
Creed, or a Petition of the Lords Prayer, and put an incapacity on those that
trangress, let God be first served; at least, before a Humane Ceremony, or an
Addition to our Saviors Institutions; and as to his Controversy with D'foe. I
am not at all concerned whether your Offender, or your Defender are against
Occasional-Conformity upon the same, or different Principles. I hope the
Precedent Sheets give a quite different Account of, and defend that Practice
from the misrepresentations of them both.

But least the word Excrement should offend you, I think sit to acquaint you,
that I have it from that great Man and eminent Churchman, Dr. Henry Moor, who
among his Remains (which I have seen written with his own Hand) has this
Passage, That that which is good indeed should be generally relished by the
World is as unlikely as that dead Men in their Graves should call out for
Drink; but when Goodness is revived in the World, that which now goes for Food
and Delicacy shall then be left as Dung and Excrement. I hope, Sir Humphry,
that Goodness is reviving in the World, and I know that Sir Humphry Mackworth
has his Heart and Hands engaged in its Resurrection; and you know that there
are Occasional Consormists, who join entirely with you therein. I was heartily
sorry to find your Name to a Discourse which signifies to me, that you take
that for Food and Delicacy, which I think deserves the other Name. But there is
another Passage among those Remains in these words, There is a Natural kind of
Religiousness, which is but the Stamp or Character of this or the other Man's
disposition, some are given naturally to the magnificence of outward
Ceremonies; others do attend the inward motions of their Mind, and think at
ever moving of the Water, a good Angel at least, if not God himself is there.
But few Men are aware of their own natural Temper of Genius; but let every one
be assured, that wherever Humility, Upright-dealing, and Charity are wanting,
both Ceremony and Inspiration are but a ridiculous piece of Gullery. Humility
assures me, that the Oracles of God teach the true Terms of Christian Union; to
walk humbly with our God, Mic. 6.8.
is what the Prophet long since pronounced to be good, and what God required.
Upright dealing teaches the publicly to my own Principles, for which for some
Years past I have been almost daily reproached; and I thank God my Charity
extends to the utmost limits of that Promise, The Earth shall be full of the
Knowledge of the Glory of the Lord as the Waters cover the Sea. Isaiab 11.9.
Oh Sir Humphrey, Heb. 2.14.
consider of Peace on Earth, Luke 2.14.
as well as at Home. Not what will secure your Party, but what will unite the
Christian World; who all agree, that the Scriptures are the Word of God,
endeavor to render the Church of England a means of this glorious Peace, and
you will for ever oblige.

Your most, etc.

No. 2. Woolsey's Letter.
IT is not concealed from your Holiness, what are the various Effects of the
new Invention of Printing, that thereby Books and Learning are introduced and
restored; so that they have given rise to innumerable Sects and Schisms which
daily break out in the Christian World; especially in Germany, where Men now
begin to call into doubt the present Faith and Pleasure of the Church, and to
bring under Examination, how far the Roman Faith at this day differs from the
Primitive and Apostolical Institution. From whence (which is greatly to be
lamented) it comes to pass, that Laymen, and the Dregs of the People are
incited to read the Scriptures in the Vulgar Tongue: Which great Mischiefs, if
they be tolerated, not only greater will follow, but it will come to pass, that
the Vulgar will at length be brought to believe, that there is no such great
need or use of the Clergy; for if once there comes into the Minds of Men this
Persuasion and Opinion, that they can find a way for themselves to God in their
own Mother Tongue; which will enter Heaven as well as if it were in Latin,
plainly all Authority of the Mass, and the whole Ecclesiastical Order will be
ruined, Page 73.

A PLEA FOR THE Holy Sacrament being an Attempt to Rescue it from some late
Prophanations in Civil Matters. IN A LETTER TO A Member of Parliament.

By a Lay-Hand.

Licensed March 25, 1689. James Fraser.

A PLEA FOR THE HOLY SACRAMENT.
March 20. 1688/9. SIR,
IT has been one of the most successful Stratagems of the Apostate Prince of
Darkness, to ruin Men's Souls by those very means which were ordained for their
Salvation; and this Policy of his appears in no Instance more evident than in
the Methods he has taken to make the Eucharist a means of Destruction; while by
unworthily Receiving, 1 Cor. 11 29.
Men Eat and Drink Damnation to themselves.

Hence his faithful Servants, the Authors of that Mystery of Iniquity, Popery,
have made Transubstantiation a Test of their Catholicism, burning and damning
Men for being Men; that is, for using their Sense and Reason. With one hand
robbing us of the Holy Sacrament and its proper uses; and with the other
presenting us with a piece of Pageantry, and requiring our Adoration of a
senseless Idol.

The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was instituted by our Blessed Savior, in
Remembrance of Himself, and as a Bond of Union among his Followers. It Is the
peculiar Right of such, who by sound Faith, well digested Knowledge and some
Experience of the Comforts and Pleasures that result from a good Conscience,
and Holy Conversation, are made to long for further Degrees of Conformity to
the Will of God, clearer manifestations of the Divine Love, and more evident
signs of the Souls recovery from its fallen State.

The Motives to come to it ought to be from within, or else from above, and not
from beneath; and the things to be obtained by it ought to be increase of
Spiritual Blessings, and not of outward Emoluments.

Blessed is that Nation where the Government can find Men (otherwise fitted for
Public Employments) whose use of this Sacrament appears by their
Conversations, to proceed from such Principles: And surely he who loves the
Commemoration of the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, Revel. 1.5.
in this way of his own Institution, has an excellent Qualification to
recommend him to those Vicegerents of that Prince, who desire and design to
promote his Interest.

But, Sir, to give a plain Answer to your Question, I am of Opinion,

That it is at least inconvenient to impose the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper
on every Man that executes an Office in Public Administrations, and that among
others for these Reasons,

1. The Ordinance was instituted to other ends; and I know not when the Warrant
was signed by our Savior, to use it to such a purpose: It Is his great Seal, and
ought not to be put to any Commissions but his own.

2. No Man who is fit for it, needs a Law to bring him to it. Heb. 2.10.
All the Soldiers of the Captain of our Salvation are Volunteers; Psalm. 110.3.
and on the contrary it is certain, that he that needs a Law to bring him to
it, is not fit for it.

3. If this Test be established, it is the Duty of all Men in their respective
Places to keep from O^^^es; all that are guilty of Swe^^ing, Whoring, Drinking,
and the other parts of a profane Life, which are obvious to common Observation;
for those things evidently unfit Men to receive the Sacrament. And if the
Government should permit no Man to be in any Office that drinks to excess, or
mispends his time in Tippling, that uses to swear in common Discourse, or whose
Life otherwise appears vicious, what multitudes of Places would be empty, which
are now well filled for the Public Interest? And yet what Cruelty would it be
to any vicious Man, to put him under a Necessity of profaning the Sacrament, by
putting him into Office: for it is most certain, that not only every Man that
lives in the practice of any known Vice, but every Man that lives not in a
daily endeavor to perform his Covenant made in Baptism with the most Blessed
Trinity, ought to keep far off from the Sacred Table.

I know it is objected, that all Men ought to be fit for the Sacrament, and
that it will tend much to a good Life, that they be under a Necessity to
receive it. But let Experience speak; Men's Stomachs have scarce yet digested
the Sacraments, which they have profaned for some Years past, to keep their
Places. Men have taken the Sacrament and betrayed their Country, and ruined
their honest Neighbors: Taken the Sacrament and introduced Popery: Taken the
Sacrament and murdered Men by color of Law: And who is there (of a Subject)
among the Authors of the Grievances of the Nation, that took not the Sacrament
to enable him so to be: Not to mention Persons of a better Rank, how many
Vintners, Ale-housekeepers, and others of like Profession, have purchased their
Licenses at the Hazard of their souls? And I dare appeal to all Men, to whom
these Presents shall come, whether within their Knowledge any Reformation has
been wrought thereby. Five hundred have refused it for Conscience sake, for one
profane Person that has scrupled it. And who, and where is he whose Life has
been reformed by being under this Necessity.

But if the universal Depravity of Men's Manners be compared with the universal
Attendance that was paid of late at the Communion Table; what dreadful Prospect
is presented thereby to any considering Mind? If of the Corinthians who
received unworthily, 1 Cor. 11.30.
many were Sick and Weak, and some were punished with Death: What Desolations
would Divine Vengeance make in England, should the same Measure be meted out to
us. But Fifthly, The Kingdom of our Lord Christ, John 18.36.
is not of this World, Acts 3.21.
at least not before the time of the Restitution of all Things: And although the
good Christian must necessarily be a good Subject; yet a Man, whose fitness to
receive the Sacrament is known to God, his own Conscience, and to all good Men,
may be very unfit for an Office in the State, and he may be exceedingly fit for
a Public Employment, whose unfitness to receive the Sacrament is as^vious. It
is an Opinion in this sense justly exploded, That Dominion is founded in Grace;
Psalm. 15.16.
for God has given the Earth to those Children of Men whom he designs not for
Heaven. And those Children of this World who are wiser in their Generation than
the Children of Light, Luke 16.8.
are by reason of that Wisdom, fit to be employed therein.

6. The Generations to come shall call them Blessed, who instead of forcing Men
to the Sacrament, use all Means divinely Instituted to make them fit for it.
The Primitive Bishops kept Men Catechumens for a long time, and admitted none
to the Sacraments till they were approved and practical Christians. And if the
Inhabitants, and especially the Children of England were every where made
Catechumens by Public Authority, the next Generation may probably fill all
Public Employments with Men, who would approach the Sacrament both to the
Public Advantage and their own: For the Appearances of Divine Providence in
the World are now conspicuous, and at all times (but especially in those Days
wherein God is pleased more eminently to take to himself his great Power and
Reign) good Men are Public Blessings, Rev. 1.17.
Ten Righteous had saved Sodom at such a Day. Genesis 18.32.
Laban's Flock increased under Jacob's, Genesis 30.27.
and Potiphar's Affairs were best under Joseph's Care: Genesis 39.3.
But till the Manners of Men are greatly altered, nothing should be avoided
more carefully for the Public Interest, than ill Men's coming to the Sacrament,
least not only the Persons of Men, but the Public should suffer under the
Divine Displeasure. Jon. 1.12.
One Jonah may endanger a Ship; Genesis 19.21.
and one righteous Lot may secure a Town.

7. I must confess it is difficult to me to find out any plausible Reason for
this Device; sure it is not worth a while to make such a Test to secure a
disputable Posture, or to tempt all Hypocrites into the Church; for it is Ten to
One, that he that comes to the Sacrament because he cannot have an Employment
without it, is an Hypocrite: And it is as many to one, but the Protestant that
loses an Office, because he cannot so receive the Sacrament, is an honest Man,
is a true and useful Subject.

8. It cannot be an equivalent to the aforesaid Dangers, that hereby some
Papists may be kept from Employments; for he is greatly mistaken, that believes
the Sacrament to be the strength of the Test. Transubstantiation is the thing
which the Papists cannot renounce, (for Men are fond of Gods of their own
making) but he may well communicate with the Church, as by the Examples of the
late King Charles the Second, Obadiah Walker, and others, is plainly evinced:
And the Reason is as plain as the Fact; for he either believes, that we have no
Gospel Priests, and takes the Bread and the Wine as common Food: Or if he
allows our Priests Power to consecrate, he may adore the Bread very
conveniently upon his Knees.

9. Besides, Papists in disguise are no ways dreadful, when they have no
Protection or Favor from Court. They have been happily discovered in the short
time of Father Peter's Ministry, and must never expect to live unknown or
unhated in England any more; so that upon the whole matter the sum of what I
have offered is this

That to make the Sacrament a Test for Civil Offices, is unsuitable to the
Institution, Nature, and Ends of the Sacrament, dangerous to the Government,
and to the Souls of Men, grounded on no solid Reason, of use only to exclude
good Subjects, and wholly insufficient to promote the true Interest of England,
which is by all means consistent with Reason and Justice to promote Union among
Protestants, and to exclude Popery for ever.

I am sensible, that I have not impoverished this Subject, the Bounds of a
Letter allow me only to hint at things; but if you please to object in your
Answer against the Arguments here advanced, you will oblige me: For I am a
hearty Lover of the Blessed Sacrament, a well-wisher to England, easily and
willingly vanquished by Reason, a zealous seeker of Truth, an expecter, as well
as desirer of Peace among all true Christians, and

Your Humble Servant.

Printed for Jonathan Robinson at the Golden-Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.
THE Works of Bishop Hopkins, in one Volume. Expository Notes and Practical
Observations on the Four Evangelists. By William Burkitt, M. A.

The Living Temple; or, A designed Improvement of that Notion, That a Good Man
is the Temple of God. In Two Volumes. By John How, M. A.

Consolations against the Fears of Death; with Seasonable Directions how to
prepare our Selves to Die Well. By Mr. Drelincourt. The Fourth Edition.

Genuine Remains of the late Pious and Learned John Light foot, D. D.

The Christians Race and Patience. 14 Sermons on Heb. 12. By Matthew Sylvester,
V. D. M.

The New State of England, under our Present Sovereign Queen Anne; With an
Account of the Present Establishment both in Church and State, to September
1704.

The Worthy Communicant. Showing the due Order of Receiving the Lord's Supper.
By J. Dyke.

A Practical Exposition of the whole 53 Chapters of Isaiah. By the late
Reverend Thomas Manton, D. D. Published by Mr. Harris.

Holy Emulation urged; or, Arguments and Motives for Christians to excel in
Holiness. By R. Evans Minister in Devon.

An History of the Apostle's Creed, with Critical Observations on the several
Articles thereof. The Second Edition.

A Practical Discourse concerning VOWS. With a Special Reference to Baptism,
and the Lord's Supper. By Edmond Calamy. 120.

Books Printed for John Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultry.
THE Works of the Reverend Mr. Stephen Charnock, B. D. In Two Volumes Folio.

Mr. Stephens's Sermons before the House of Commons. and the Lord Mayor,
January the 30th. And his Thanksgiving Sermon before the Lord Mayor, on the
Discovery of the Assasination Plot. 4o.

Mr. John Howard now Rector of Kederminister, his Sermons on several Occasions,
viz. Assize-Sermon at Buckingham. Two Sermons on the Trinity; Preached before
the Lord Mayor at St. Mary Le Bow. In Quarto.

An Effort against Bigottry; and for Christian Catholicism. By Mr. Henry
Chandler, Minister at the Bath.

A Preservative against Deism: Showing the great Advantages of Revelation above
Reason; in the Two great Points. Pardon of Sin, and a Future State of
Happiness, etc. By Mr. Nath. Tailor.

A Discourse of the Nature and Necessity of Saving Faith in Jesus Christ. With
an Answer to the Pleas of our Modern Unitarians, for the sufficiency of bare
Morality, of mere Charity to Salvation. By Mr. Nath. Tailor. 8o.

Practical Discourses on several important Subjects, viz. A Discourse of the
Children of Holy Parents. Eight Discourses of the Covenant of Grace. A brief
Discourse of Infant Baptism. And a Sermon before the Lord Mayor. By the late
Reverend Mr. Nathan. Tailor. In 8o.

Mr. Palmer's Sermon on the Fast Day for the late Storm, Jan. 19. 1703. In 4o.

Mr. Thomas Freke's Sermon on the Fast Day for the late dreadful Storm, Jan.
19. 1703. In 4o.

A Practical Discourse concerning VOWS. With a special Reference to Baptism,
and the Lord's Supper By Edmond Calamy. 12o.


