THE LIBERTY OF AN Apostate Conscience DISCOVERED: BEING A Plain Narrative of
the Controversy long depending between Francis Bugg, an officious Agent in
William Rogers's Behalf and Quarrel, on the one part: And Samuel Cater and
George Smith, Prisoners for the Testimony of Jesus in Ely Goal, on the other
Part. With their Answer to his Painted Harlot, etc.

Whereby F. B's Liberty of Conscience is proved an Injurious Bondage.

Published for the Information of all Friends of Truth, and others concerned:
and for Caution to all such Agents as have Promoted or Spread the late Books of
Fr. Bugg and W. Rogers.

1 Thessalonians. 4.6. Let no man go beyond or Defraud his Brother in any Matter,
because the Lord is the Avenger of all such. London, Printed by John
Bringhurst, at the Sign of the Book in Grace Church Street. 1683.

AN Introduction TO FRIENDS AND Friendly Readers.
WHereas my self with others concerned have given account of the Unjust Actions
and Unrighteous proceedings of Francis Bugg, as hereafter mentioned; This I do
say, and in the Fear of the Lord testify, that it is not done out of Envy and
Ill will to the Man, or to insult over him, by laying open his Nakedness; but
do truly desire his sincere and unfeigned Repentance, even as we have done ever
since he began this his Unrighteous Work; and for that end we have waited long
upon him, and have labored much with him; for if wholesome Advice and Brotherly
Admonition could have prevailed with him, to have turned him from his Evil way,
which of late Years he has followed, a^ this Narrative and his Malicious Books
do plainly show, this had never been: But seeing he still follows his unruly
work, and will not be reclaimed to turn from this Evil Spirit which has led
him into these things; we do look upon our selves Conscientiously concerned for
the Glory of God, and the Honor of his Truth, and also for the good of all
honest and tender People, who have or may have better Thoughts of him than he
does deserve, and that so under the Profession of Truth, which he in some
measure has gone under, and may thereby deceive or betray any, and draw them
from the peaceable Truth, into that Spirit with him, into Strife and
Contention; which has been the work he has followed these several Years,
which is the work and fruit of an Evil minded Man; as says the Scriptures, An
Evil Man out of the Evil Treasure of his Heart brings forth Evil things. And
Christ says, By the Fruit ye shall know them; For Men do not gather Grapes of
Thorns, nor Figgs of Thistles. Whereby he shows how impossible it is that ^n
Evil minded Man should bring forth that which is Good.

And now having given a true and faithful account of the disorderly and unjust
Words and Actions of this Man; I with the rest concerned with me therein, do
leave it and commit it to the just Witness of God in all Consciences, to judge
of the wrong he has done to Truth, to me and others. And whether he has not
justly brought this upon his own Head, since we could not prevail with him to
forsake his unruly work. And if any be hereafter ensnared hy him and drawn
aside out of the way of the Lord, they must bear their own Burden. And I with
the rest concerned in this matter shall be clear, in which I rest, believing
God in his own time will clear my Innocence, and more fully manifest his guilt,
who has abused me (and others without any just cause given him by us) who am a
True Friend and Lover of all that truly Love and Fear God, and a wi^ness
against Envy and Deceit, where ever it does appear.

Ely Prison, 17. 12. 1682. S. C.

THE LIBERTY OF AN Apostate Conscience, etc.
THis may satisfy all into whosoever Hands it may come, that whereas there is
a Difference made by Francis Bugg of Mildenhall in the County of Suffolk with
Samuel Cater of Little-Port in the Isle of Eley; concerning a Fine, about which
the aforesaid F. B. has been so troublesome to me and other friends, both in
this County and elsewhere which there has been raised untrue Reports, and
therefore for clearing the Truth, and to satisfy all that desires a right
Information of proceedings therein, from the beginning thereof, I have
therefore taken care, with some other Friends, so far as they are concerned
therein, to give a true Narrative of the Business from the beginning to this
very Day, of the most material passages; that so the Truth being known, it may
thereby appear who has done the wrong in this matter, him, or my self, for
which I have been so long abused by him.

About the Year 1675, I being at a Meeting at Mildenhall, where Francis Bugg
dwells; there came one George Ereind of Lakenhoath, and desired me to have a
Meeting at his House, and before I promised him, he being a Stranger to me, and
Francis Bugg being there, I advized with him about it, he having knowledge of
the Man; and he told me, that a Meeting would do very well there, and desired
me to go; so after I had spoke further with the aforesaid George Ereind, and
found he desired the Meeting in a serious and weighty consideration, I found
freedom in my self to promise him to be at his House the next Day; and also
told him, he might let his Neighbors know it, and accordingly I went, and F B.
with me and several more belonging to Mildenhall Meeting, and when we came at
the Friends House, there came in several of his Neighbors; and after some time
spent in waiting upon the Lord, and calling upon his Name in Prayer, I was
moved by his Power to stand up and declare the Truth to all that were there
present, in which time whilst I was speaking, Two Priests with some other Men,
came into the Meeting, and one of those Men that came in with the Priests,
asked a Man that was in the Meeting before, what their Speakers Name was? who
said, he did not know; and a Woman Friend said, his Name was written in the
Book of Life, where he could not read; then they asked Francis Bugg, what is
your Speakers Name? His answer was in the hearing of the Officers and
Informers, Mark, Fran. Bugg was Informer here.
HIS NAME IS SAMUEL CATER, all which time I was declaring the Truth, and no Man
asked of me my Name; But after F. B. had told it, they all went away, and asked
no further after it. As also does appear by this following Certificate* and I
continued the Meeting until I had cleared my self of what the Lord laid upon me
at that time, and then we departed in Peace, being well refreshed with the Love
and Goodness of the Lord, whose Presence was with us to our comfort, yea, and
F. B. himself, said that he was glad we were there that Day what ever came of
it, for we had had a good Meeting. And now whereas F. B. or some of his
Abettors, have reported that I refused to tell my Name at the Meeting; here is
a Testimony under the Hands of these Honest Friends that were there present.

FOrasmuch as there has gone various Reports, relating to a meeting appointed
by Samuel Cater, together with the knowledge and consent of Francis Bugg, and
others of us the People called Quakers, held at Lakenheath, in the County of
Suffolk, at the House of one George Friend, in or about the Year 1675, which
Report goes abroad, as if some Person or Persons who came to that meeting with
an intent to give Information against the said People then and there met, (as
did afterward appear) did demand of S. C. to tell his Name, and that the said
S. C. did not declare his Name when so demanded.

This is therefore to certify all into whose Hands this may come, for the
preventing such false Reports to pass for true as much as in us lies; as also
to clear S. C. of the above recited charge against him: We whose Names are
hereunto subscribed, being Eye and Ear Witnesses to what past at the Meeting,
do testify, that no Person in the aforesaid Meeting did ask S. C. hi^ Name,
but one did ask another Man in the aforesaid Meeting what the Speakers Name
was? And he said he did not know; and a Woman Friend answered, his Name was
written in the Book of Life where he could not read; then it was asked F. Bugg
what is your Speakers Name? and F. B. answered in the hearing of the Officers
and Informers, HIS NAME IS SAMUEL CATER, then those that came in as aforesaid,
went out and came into the Meeting no more, leaving S. C. declaring the Truth
as he was before they came, and so continued the time they were there, and also
a considerable time after they were gone, after which he concluded the Meeting,
and we departed in peace having good unity with S. C. being sensible he was
enabled by the Power of God, to declare his Truth with an undaunted Spirit in
the Face of its Enemies.

Witness our Hands, this 9th Month, 1682.

William Handship, William Swaits, John Mason, James Burges, Robert Hibble,
John Burges, George Friend, Katherine Handslip, Frances Fincham, Mary Hogans,
Henry Hogans.
Now after this it appears, that the Priests with some others that came with
them to the Meeting, Informed against the meeting to the Magistrates who
Convicted the meeting, and fined F. B. as he says himself, Fifteen Pound for
me as a Speaker; whose Name and Habitation was not known; whenas F. B. had told
them my Name, and I have cause to believe, that the Priests, and they which
Informed against the meeting, were not without Knowledge of the Place of my
Habitations if F. B. did not tell them, that also the Town where I dwell, being
but about 10 or 12 computed miles from the place where the meeting was kept:
But they having fined F. B. for it (as he says) they issued out their
Warrants, and the Offices distrained him for the Fifteen Pound, and he not
being willing to lose his Goods, laid down so much money, and kept his Goods by
way of an Appeal as he pretended, but never went to Trial, but gave them his
money for his Fne, being afraid to try his cause, lest he should be Cast and
lose more Money to it, as he told me himself. Now mark this F. B's proceedings
in this matter, he was Fined and Distrained, and paid his money to redeem his
Goods; but never told me of it, nor spoke a word to me about it, until Five or
Six Months after, although he had Opportunities enough to have done it in that
time. Then after I being at London at the Yearly Meeting, F. B. came to me to
Westminster meeting, I seeing him there, asked him to go with me to the Friends
House were I lodged that Night, which he did* and when we were in Bed together,
he told me he suffered a Fine of 15 Pound for me, then I asked him how it was?
his Answer was, the Magistrates had fined him Fifteen Pound, and the Officers
took away much Goods for it, so he laid down the money by way of an Appeal, and
redeemed his Goods again, and before the time of Trial he was advised by
Counsel not to go to Trial, for there was danger in being Cast, and that would
cost him more Money; so he did not go on, but desired the Justices that he might
withdraw his Appeal, and that they might keep the Money for his Fine; whereby
said he I lost Fifteen Pound, but I expect thou should pay me it again,
whereat I was strangly surprised to hear his demand, to see what a strange
Temptation had entered the man; then I told him, I see no reason for that why he
should expect it of me, seeing he was Fined for his own Testimony, for his
being at the Meeting, (which he also encouraged) and 2dly he paid this money to
save his own Goods and not mine. 3dly, he paid it without my consent or
knowledge, neither could I have done it if it had been my own cause, and had
been Fine my self.

Neither did I ever pay money to Priest nor other Persecutors to save my self
from sufferings, whatever I suffered for my Testimony. And also I did look upon
this Demand of his, to be unjust and unreasonable, and therefore I could not in
Conscience pay it: And besides I then told him, he being far before me as to an
Outward Esta e, there was nothing of Charity in the case to obliege me
thereunto; and therefore I see no just or reasonable cause why he should demand
any thing of me upon this account, for I was no ways the cause of his being
Fined, more then any other faithful Friends must have been that ministers if
they had been there; then he said he suffered for my not telling my Name my
self.

I told him, for that he was to blame and not I,
for being so forward to tell my Name, he prevented the Officers of asking me,
whereby I had not an opportunity to tell them, for after he had told them they
went away and never asked me; for if they had, I am sure I had told them, for
it was ever my practice, both before and after that in the like cause, which is
well known both to him and other Friends where I have traveled since this Act
has been in force: Then he told me if I counted his Demand to be unreasonable,
he would put it to some Friends to judge whether I ought not to make him
satisfaction for that Fine; I told him, if he was not satisfied he might, then
he began to mention who to have to hear the cause and by whose judgment we
might sit down; I told him he might choose whom he pleased himself, so be they
were Honest Faithful Friends, and had a good sense of Truth, I would freely
give up my cause to them for my part, and stand by their judgment. Then after
some time he told me Giles Barnardiston he knew was my very good Friend, and so
he was his, and if he would he should have the hearing of the cause, and if the
said G. B. did not judge his Demand to be reasonable, he would desist and
proceed no further in it; so I was contented, and we appointed where to meet
next Day about it, which accordingly we did; and when we came together, F. B.
laid his cause before him, who when he had heard, he seemed much grieved at F.
B. and told him he see no cause why S. C. should pay his Demand, for it was
unjust, etc. But F. B. broke his promise made to me the day before, and would
not stand by G. B's judgment. Then he said he would lay it before the Yearly
Meeting, I told him if he did it would not make to his honor.

He said, he would propose a Question about it, I told him if he did state his
Question fairly as the thing was, I would be silent, and not only hear the
Meetings judgment, but would sit down by their judgment: But if his Question or
Words tended to that purpose as if I would not tell my Name, then I would give
the Meeting account how the matter was, for I knew my self clear, so when he
came into the Meeting, he proposed his Question according to his own mind, but
not according to the true state of our cause about which he differed with me;
then I told them plainly how the matter was, and the next day at Horsly-down, I
offered to stand by the judgment of the meeting, and desired F. B. to do the
like, and that what the meetings judgment was we might both agree to it: this
was the second time I gave it up, but F. B. stood silent at the time, and would
not say either that he would or would not, so the meeting could give no
positive judgment in the case. Then some time after I was gone into the Low
Countries, in which time he sent a Letter to my House, to meet him at our
monthly meeting, so after I was come home, I met him at a monthly meeting at
Chakes, the 4th of the 8th month, 1676. where he complained to the meeting that
he had suffered a Fine of Fifteen Pound for me, and I refused to make him
satisfaction, and he told the meeting that the cause he was fined was for my
not telling my Name, so when the meeting had heard us both, they gave their
judgment, and made a Record thereof in the Monthly Book, that I was not Guilty,
in not declaring my Name, it not being of me demanded and told by another,
which was himself, (viz) F. B. as I made it appear there, and which he did not
deny) after which the meeting accounted he would have been at quiet: then at a
Quarterly meeting at Hadenham in the isle of Eley; held in the 10th month 1676,
F* B. complained to the quarterly meeting, then some in that meeting, said that
bu^siness was ended before by the monthly meeting, therefore it ought not to be
spoken of at the quarterly meeting; then F. B. alleged that it was not ended,
for he did not give it up to the meeting to end it, whereupon I asked him if he
would give it up to this quarterly meeting to be ended by them, and would stand
by the end they made? he said he would, then the meeting heard us both
concerning the matter which we had to propound, and then desired us to go out
of the meeting until they called for us, which we did, and when they were
agreed we were called, and the meetings judgment was, they saw no cause of
blame in me for that which F. B. accused me, neither could they award me to
give him any money. But desired we should be Lovers and Friends as we had
formerly been, and if I had freedom in my self to give him any thing I might,
if not he ought to be content.

Then after this the next Yearly Meeting following, he went to London again,
and complained to W. Penn telling him he could not have a fair hearing by
Friends in the Country, concerning the difference between him and me S. C.
about the Fine, so William appointed him and I to come to Edward Man's, where
Geo. Fox with other Friends would be, which accordingly we did, and there he
was heard by G. F. and many other ancient Friends, what he had to say and I
also, where I again offered to give up my cause to G. F. or to all the Friends
there or to any part of them in order to decide the difference depending
between F. B. and my self, and to stand to their Judgment, and desired him to
do the like, that the business might be ended, he said, no he would not give it
up to them, but it shall be ended at our own Quarterly Meeting, and he would
put it to ^0 or 12 Friends that should be chosen neither by him nor me, but by
the meeting; and them he would commit his cause unto and would stand by their
Judgment, then Friends desired an Agreement should be drawn up, and we should
set our Hands to it, and they would witness it, that so it might be performed,
that there might be no more difference about this business, and one Friend
began to write, then F. B said, let me write the Order my self, for I know my
own mind best; so he took the Pen and Paper, and with his own Hand drew this
Order following, and set his hand to it and so did I and Nine Friends were
witnesses to this our agreement. (viz)

MEmorandum, that upon condition that Friends in the Quarterly Meeting in the
Isle of Eley, do choose and elect 10 or 12 Friends to hear and determine the
Controversy betwixt Francis Bugg and Samuel Cater, relating to the Fine which
the said F. B. was fined for the Speaker at a Meeting in Lakenheath; and all
other Controversies they the said Francis Bugg and Samuel Cater, do hereby
promise to stand to this final determination under their Hands, and for the
future to cease from all Controversy touching any matter now depending between
them.

Witness their Hands this 9th of the 4th mo. 1677. Fran. Bugg. Sam. Cater.


Witnesses to it, Giles Barnardiston John Burnyeat John Whitehead Ambrose Rigge
Leonard Fell William Whaley.


To the Friends at the Quarterly Meeting in the Isle of Eley.

Dear Friends, We desire you that when this business comes before you, that
there may be a final end put unto it, that there may be no more trouble about
it.

George Whitehead Stephen Crisp.

Then the aforesaid Agreement was delivered into a Friends hand by both our
consents to keep, and for him to deliver it to the Quarterly meeting, and F. B.
there himself took a Copy of it which he kept. Then at the Quarterly meeting
the Order was produced, and Friends discoursed the matter about choosing the
men, and would have had us to choose them our selves, that is 6 Friends each of
us; but I told them I was not free so to do, lest F. B. should not stand to
what they did, if they went contrary to the Agreement whereunto he had set his
hand: So the meeting desired us to go out, so we withdrew, and then they chose
the 12 Friends out of the meeting in manner following, viz. the Meeting chose
one Friend and agreed that he should choose whom he pleased next, and so the
last man chosen was to choose the next, until the 12 were all chosen; and when
they had chosen the 12, they sent for us into the meeting, and told us how they
had chosen them; and read their Names unto us; then I told them, I was well
satisfied with the Choice and what they did in the matter, wherein they were to
be concerned between F. B. and my self, I would be contented to stand-by their
Judgments; and F. Bugg promised he would do the like, then they withdrew to a
Friends house to draw up their Award; and F. B. asked me if I would not go and
open my Cause to them, I told him, He might do what he pleased in the matter
for himself, but I see no need for it, for it had been spoken of so often
before them, that they could not be without a Knowledge of it; but he went to
them and spoke what he pleased, and so left them to give Judgment; so when they
had agreed and drawn up their Award, they sent for us, and read their Award to
us; the substance thereof was.

THey found Samuel Cater clear of that Demand of Francis Buggs: Therefore
Awarded that he was to Pay F. B. Nothing, etc.

And that all Differences that have arisen between them about that and all
other things, be from this Day fully ended; and that they may be Lovers and
Friends as they were before the Difference happened.

These be the Arbitrators Names. John Ainsloe, Will. Brazier, John Web, Robert
Smith, John Prine, Peter Watson, Rich. Read, Sam. Fulbugg, Phillip Tailor,
Edward Firth, Jacob Baker, Edward Love.


Now when they read this Award, F. B. said they had given away his cause, but
however he would be quiet and meddle no more: But he soon broke his promise
again, and in a little time after he began to threaten the Arbitrators, and
wrote to them to that purpose, that they had given away his money, and thereby
had done him wrong, and although that by their Arbitration he had now done with
S. C. But now he intended to begin with them, for there was a Law in the
Nation, That if Arbitrators did not do that which is Equal and Just when so
Chosen, the Party Grieved might recover Damage of them; and they should have no
more favor then the Law would afford them: Then about this for a time he made
a great ado; and gave a Lawyer Brevitts,
whereby he instructed him how to plead against Friends, and of the state of
his cause, to come to our Quarterly Meeting to plead his cause; which said
Breviats the Lawyer showed to William Penn and Thomas Rudyard, after which the
matter fell, and the Lawyer never came to our Meeting; then he began again with
me, and sent to me to have another Arbritation, and Quarrelled with me again
for the Fifteen Pound: But I not having freedom to grant his desire, nor to
meddle with him any more so that he could not have his will of me: Then he
Threatened to prefer A Bill in Chaucery against me for his Money, and went to
William Penn, and showed him one that he had prepared, (as I was Informed) Then
William Penn being grieved that the Enemies of Truth should have such cause
given them to rejoice over us, by having such a cause as that brought before
them; he with another Friend wrote to me, that if I could, to get an end of
this Business it might be well, for although they believed that his Demands was
very unjust, and there was nothing due to him upon that account, and that he
was much to blame, yet for Peace sake, if it could be made an end of it might
be well, then I knowing he had desired another Arbitration, I condiscended to
it, and sent him word, that seeing he was yet disquiet about this money, if he
knew how to have another Arbitration which would please him amongst Friends, I
would condescend to it, and put my Innocent cause once more upon Trial, then he
seemed to be pleased, and came over to my House, and pretended all would be
ended, for whether he had any money or not he would be tcontented, so he said
he would choose 6, and I should choose 6 also, and withal he said he would be
bound with me to stand to the Award, which Bonds were made and sealed: But when
the Arbitrators came to meet, although they were near to Agreement, yet they
did not agree for after F. B. understood that they were like to agree, and his
will not answered, he said none should give away his Money for if it must be
given away, he would give it away himself: And when the Arbitrators were come
to an Agreement, and were drawing up the Award, then F. B. came in amongst
them, without being desired, and called Edward Neal one of the said
Arbitrators, to speak with him, and when he came in again from him, he would
not stand to what he had Agreed to before, then they could go no further, for
F. B. made the Bonds himself, and they were made, so that if all the 12, or so
many of them as there met were all to agree, or else their Award was not to
stand good, whereby it appears although he was willing to be bound to stand to
the Award, yet he had made such provision, that if he had not his will and end
Answered, he would have nothing done, for be having provided such a Man as
would do what he would have him or nothing, as it did plainly appear to all
honest Friends that were there present: Which thing was as wicked of F. B's
part and him that joined with him in his deceitful practice, as it was before
when he promised, and gave it under his hand to stand to* and abide by the
Award of the other 12 Friends chose by the Meeting, and after they had done it,
he promised to be quiet, and meddle no more in the matter so awarded, and so
foully and ungodly went from his Word, whereby all may see that reads this
Narrative of his Words and Actions, whether he has not proved himself a false
deceitful Man, both to God and Man, and whether he has not wickedly wronged
his own Conscience, by Covenant Breaking, Lying and Deceit, from time to time,
for the sake of Money, whereby all may perceive, that have any sense of truth
and honesty, how unfit he is to take upon him to treat about the Principles of
true Religion, and to plead for Liberty of Conscience, against Imposition, who
has thus wilfully abused and defiled his own Conscience for unjust gain. Then
after they could not end it, I was much grieved to see the trouble that Friends
and I had had, and yet the Business remained, I then took Fran. Bug aside, and
told him, that although I was well satisfied in my Conscience that I had never
done him wrong, and that I did not owe him one penny, and that his Demand was
unjust and unreasonable, yet for Peace sake, rather than this difference should
Remain, to trouble Friends, and diquiet our selves, I would give him of my own
free will, five Pounds toward his loss relating to the said Fine, his answer
was, that would not do, so we parted at that time, than I spoke to his Friend
and Abettor Edw. Neale aforesaid, and told him he had not done that day like an
honest Friend in his Place, nor like a man that feared God, whose work is to
make Peace, and pursue it with all men, and he and others of them, that Fran.
Bugg had Chosen, had an opportunity thereby to have made Peace in this matter,
that so long had been troublesome to the Church of God, but he more especially
I understood had hindered that day, by refusing to Join with the rest that
would have done it, which days work would certainly become his burden at one
time or other; his answer was, we might make an end of it between our selves,
if I would, for he knew Fran. Bugg's end was not for Money, but Justice in the
case, I told him, I never did see other by Fran. Bugg bu^ that his end was
wholly for Money, neither was there any Justice in the case, that he should
have 15 Pound of me for nothing, and besides his words was always to me, give
him so much Money, and he would be quiet, and when we were together alone at
that time he said the same; But I have not freedom to answer his unreasonable
dem^nds therein, knowing my self clear of any thing of guilt concerning the
matter whereof he charged me, now this was the seventh time that I had given up
the aforesaid case to the Judgment of Friends, and four of the 7 times Fran.
Bugg excepted of, and Joined with me, and promised, and became engaged, as is
before mentioned, to stand to the Award or Judgment of the Friends, to whom we
gave up our Cause, but went from his word every time. Now the next thing,
wherein like a Deceitful man, who shows himself void of any fear of God, as
has and yet will appear by his following actions, for he Surprised his Cousin
Geo. Smith of Littleport, through his Deceitful craft, and got the said 15
Pound of him, who is Fran. Bug's own Mothers Sisters Son, a man that has been
Convinced about 13 or 14 years, and ever since he came amongst us, has walked
uprightly according to his measure, and has been of a blameless Conversation
amongst Men from his Youth, and lives in good credit and reputation, a relation
whereof he has given, which hereafter follows under his own hand; Also how
far he was concerned in this matter by my Wife, under her Hand, whom Fran. Bug
calls my Wife her Agent, as sent by her, etc. And when Edw. Neale, Will.
Rogers, and Tho. Crisp, and others, whom Fran. Bug accounts of his party, who
has of late Joined and Combined together in a Spirit of discord and opposition
against the Godly and mutual care of faithful men and women in their distinct
Meetings, in several things which concerns our public Testimony before the
World, amongst whom the Lord has gathered us to bear Testimony against those
loose and unjust ways, that many, both Priests and People, lives in and
Practices in that weighty matter of Marryage, with several other things, comes
to read this relation of Fran. Bug's words and actions, and will yet own him as
a Brother amongst them, and as an Agent to Abet their cause without repentance,
and making satisfaction, both by word and deed, for the wrong he has done, as
aforesaid, its no great matter what they profess, neither will it be much to
the dishonor of honest and faithful men and women, to be reproached by them,
but yet this I do say, and so I shall conclude this Business, that if it please
God to give Fran. Bug, and Will. Rogers, and the rest of them, true and
unfeigned Repentance for that wherein they have done amiss, whereby they have
strengthened the hands of evil doers, and laid stumbling blocks in the way of
the simple, by their Writing and Printing in this wilful and unjust manner,
against the faithful Servants of the Lord, whose care has been to keep all
clean and savoury amongst the People of God, I say, I shall be truly glad
thereof, who am a friend to all that truly Love and Fear God.

Who am in strait Boreds for the Testimony of Jesus Christ in Ely Prison his
9th Month, 1682.

Samuel Cater.

Elizabeth Cater 's Testimony.
HEre follows a Testimony under Eliz. Cater's hand, how She came to encourage
G. Smith to Treat with Fran. Bugg about his differing with her Husband Sam.
Cater aforesaid, and how far she gave him order, which was thus. Geo. Smith
coming to my house one day when my husband was not at home, and told him that I
was very much grieved and, troubled at Fran. Bug's continuing so bad and
envious against my husband, and although I was satisfied, that what he so
furiously abused him for, was unjust, upon which account my husband has not
freedom to answer his unreasonable Demand, I could be glad it were some ways
ended; then Geo. Smith told me that he also was much grieved for the
difference, for said he, I Love thy husband well, and Fran. Bug also, and he is
my near Kinsman, for it does trouble me that there should be a difference
between them, but I do account my Cousin is much out of the way in this matter,
but if thou Please, I will speak with him, and see if I can get him to be
quiet, then I desired him he would, and I told him withal, that although I
knew that neither I nor my husband, owed Fran. Bugg one penny, neither was
there any due upon that account he Demanded, yet for Peace sake, rather then my
husband and friends should be any longer disquieted about it, I would part with
some Money, if it cannot be done without, although my husband knows nothing of
it, then Geo. Smith told me, he would take an opportunity, and speak with him,
and he did not question but to make an end of the business with little Money,
if any at all: This is the truth of the matter, to show how far I was
Concerned therein.

Eliz. Cater.

An Account given by George Smith, concerning the Money which Fra. Bugg
deceitfully obtained from him concerning Samuel Cater.
THese are to certify all into whose hands this may come, That whereas there
was a difference long depending, made by Fran. Bug with Sam. Cater, about a
Fine which the said Fran. Bug demanded of Sam. Cater, which he had not Freedom
to pay him, looking upon his demand therein to be unjust; and I coming to Sam.
Caters house, as is by his Wife before mentioned, was willing out of true Love,
which I had to them both, and for Peace sake, to concern my self about it,
hoping to have made Peace betwixt them. A true Account of what passed betwixt
my Cousin Fran. Bug and my self, is as follows.

There being a Fair at a Town where my Cousin Fran. Bug Lives, to which I had an
occasion to go; I took that opportunity to Speak with him about that difference
between him and Sam. Cater, where I desired it might be at an end, and he told
Me, it might, if Sam. Cater pleased, for he counted he had Right to the Money
he demanded of him, But I told him, I did believe he had no Right to it,
neither by the Law of God nor Man: And besides, I told him, I did find that
Friends are in General dissatisfied about thy demand in this matter, therefore
I would be glad thou would desist, and be at quiet, and not to Trouble Sam.
Cater nor his Friends any further about it: To which he said, it is my
Judgment, that I have a Right to the Money I demand of him: then in short I
told him, I could be glad I could Persuade him to desist, and be at quiet in
this Matter without any Money: But rather than the difference should continue
betwixt Sam. Cater and Him, for Peace Sake, I would give him 5 Pounds, though I
never have it of Sam. Cater, for he knows nothing of my Treating with thee at
this time, but that would not do, then I offered him 7 Pounds 10 Shillings, but
he was not willing to take it: Then I desired him to Consider of it, and
Proceed no further about Sam. Cater, and he told me, he would meet me at Ely
Fair about three Weeks hence, and if I and he could make an end of it, then we
would. And when I was at Ely Fair selling of goods, he came to me, and asked if
I had time to Treat about that I was speaking to him at his house lately, I
told him my occasion was in selling of my goods, he told Me we should soon have
done about that concern: Then we went to an Inn to Treat about it, and I told
him still I would give 7 Pound 10 Shillings rather than the difference should
continue between Sam. Cater and him, His Answer was, Cousin, I would have it all
Tendered, for my Words Sake, but thou shall see, my ends is not for Money, I
told him, I had not so much Money, I had not above 5 Pound about me, Then he
said, I might Borrow 10 Pound for half an Hour, or thereabouts, which Time
would serve for a Tender, then I told him, Cousin, I can Borrow so much of a
Tradesman in Town, to make thee a Tender, but if thou be minded to keep it all,
I will not do it. Rather than I will give the whole 15 Pound, I will leave the
Business as I found it: Then He said, He would have it all tendered, but said
he, I will Promise thee I will not Pocket a Penny of it, Then I went and
Borrowed 10 Pound and Tendered him the whole 15 Pound, and when he had it, he
took it, and put it all into his Pocket, whereby he broke his promise made to
me, before I tendered it, that he would not Pocket a Penny of it. Then after a
little time I desired to have the 10 Pounds that I Borrowed to carry the Man it
again whom I Borrowed it of for Half an Hour to make a Tender with, and which
Fran. Bug said, it would be long enough to Borrow it for. Then he began to make
Evasions, and said, he would have me let it alone till to Morrow Morning, and
he would Treat with Sam. Cater about it, with the Money in his Pocket. And then
he pulled out a Paper, and said, if Sam. Cater would Sign that Paper, he
should have the Money again, then I told him that was not our conclusion, for,
said I, thou said nothing of this Paper to me before I tendered the Money,
and when I had seen it, I told him, I did believe that Sam. Cater would not set
his Hand to it, neither do I see any Reason he should, Then he told me, that to
Morrow Morning, whether S. Cater would set his Hand to that Paper or not, he
would Pay the 10 Pound where I Borrowed it, or leave it with a Friend in Ely to
Pay him; and the 5. Pound to a Brother of Mine, as he went home, to whom I owed
the Money, which he did not do, but contrary to his Promise kept all the Money
to this day. This is a true Relation of this matter before Mentioned.

Witness my Hand. Geo. Smith.
Then after this came to be Spoke of abroad, and Friends came to hearof it,
Friends desired us to be both at a Monthly Meeting, that they might know the
certainty of it, how it was concerning the matter, so at a Monthly Meeting at
Chatteris the 7. day of the 2d. Month 1680, Friends heard us both what we could
say about this matter. And I gave them a true account of the Business, how he
obtained this Money from Me, and the Meeting were satisfied, that he got it
Unjustly. And made a Record in the Book to this effect, that Geo. Smiths
simplicity was betrayed, and he ought to have his Money again.



Edward Firth's Testimony.
THis is to satisfy all where this may come, that whereas Fran. Bugg has made
use of my Name, in a matter between his Cousin George Smith and him, wherein he
says, that I was a Witness for him against George Smith, which thing is not
so, but I am a Witness for G. Smith against Fran. Bugg. And he to make a Cover
for himself, would make void my Evidence against him, and through his Deceit,
would turn it from himself. Now the matter is this that I witnessed at Chattris
monthly Meeting that day that Friends had the hearing of them both, that I had
spoken with the Man, that G. Smith had borrowed the Money of, to make a Tender
with to Fran. Bugg, and asked him if he did remember G. Smith's borrowing 10
Pound of him about such a time, and he said, Yes, and it was to make a tender
of to some Body. Then it was asked him, if he could remember how long time he
lent it him for; he said, as near as he could remember, it was for about an
hour. This was all that I was a Witness for at that Meeting, and whereby the
Meeting was satisfied that the Money was borrowed. by G. Smith but to make a
bare Tender with, and not that G. Smith intended that Fran. Bugg should keep
the Money. Now the advantage that Fran. Bugg would take at this my evidence
against G. Smith, is this, that G. Smith had said, and does yet say, he
borrowed the Money for half an hour, and the Man he said, (as he Remembers) he
lent it for about an hour; which neither disproves G. Smith his Account, nor
clears Fran. Bugg.

Witness my Hand Edward Firth.

A Copy of a Letter sent by G. Smith to Fran. Bugg.
Cousin Fran. Bugg.
HAving seen a large Paper of thine, which thou did send to Friends of the 2d
days Meeting in London, in which thou have Revived the Old Business again, and
therein have abused Sam. Cater and my self, by Misrepresenting the Business
concerning the matter wherein I was concerned for Sam. Cater as formerly thou
usest to do. And thy Reviving it is altogether contrary to the agreement which
was made at the Quarterly Meeting in Hadenham the 10th Month 1680.

By which agreement, thou were to cease from any further Controversy concerning
this matter. At which time thou seemingly made some show of Repentance, for
what thou had written and done against Sam. Cater and my self; as appeared by
what thou said there to Friends that day, which begat some hopes in some
Friends, that thou would not only be quiet from being any more contentious
and troublesome to Friends and us, as thou had formerly been, for several
years: But that also thou would have Restored all the Money again, which thou
through thy Subtilty and wicked craft obtained of me, and which thou in measure
there confessed in the Meeting, Saying, that thou did believe that when I
tendered thee the Money, I did expect thou would have given it me again.
Whereby thou therein cleared my Innocence, and manifested thy own Guilt, and
Treacherous dealing with me in the matter. But now instead of answering the
expectation of the Meeting, by returning the Money again, and making
satisfaction for the wrong thou have done, thou have further Transgressed, and
added sin to sin with a Witness. For before thou flattered'st, and through thy
dissimulation wentest beyond me, and got the Money thereby, contrary to my
Freedom and expectation, as thou thy self confessedest in the Meeting. And now
through thy dissimulation, have abused the Quarterly Meeting, for when they
told thee than thou art to return the Money again that thou had so unjustly
obtained from thy Cousin G. Smith; thou desired the Meeting to leave that to
thee, for they did not know what was in thy Heart. Which words of thine, with
thy Dissembling Confession and carriage then, caused the Meeting to leave the
Repayment of the Money to thee at that time; telling thee, that they would not
have thee think that they would forgive thee the Money, or that they thought it
was not due from thee, but did account that thou ought to pay it, otherwise
it would become thy Burden if thou becamest not honest: But instead of paying
the Money, and making satisfaction for the wrong thou have done, thou art of
late sending thy wicked and malicious Papers abroad, to City and Country, in
which thou again abusest Samuel Cater, that is the sufferer and Me, whom thou
so unjustly betrayed in this manner, whereby thou endeavored to take away our
good Names and Reputations amongst Men. Oh Cousin, Blush, and now let Shame
cover thy Face, what? do so Treacherously by Me, as thou have done in this
matter; and abused Me besides! But I know my self clear of thy Lies and
Slanders, and so I shall make it appear to thy Shame, if thou have any
tenderness left in thee. Thou revilest and speak evil of G. F. and G. W. and
S. C. and others.

But I tell thee, that if I knew so much against them as I do of thee, I should
not only turn my Back upon them, but also declare against them, as I shall
against thee, and Manifest thy deceit. But I have cause to believe better
things of them all. And for Sam. Cater, whom thou so much abusest, I know his
conversation has been such among us, as becomes a Man that fears God, that it
is not thy Lies that can hurt him; for he has a Witness in our Consciences,
for his Faithful Service, and upright Conversation among us. And now seeing
thou will be not quiet, but have set the old business on Foot again, between
thee and Sam. Cater and my self, about which thou have given uncertain reports.
Now for the preventing all mistakes, that the Truth may be known, I have given
a true account of the business, so far as I have been concerned with thee in
the matter, how unjustly thou obtained the Money from Me, and as unjustly
keep it to this day. And of thy wickedly perverting and wresting my words
and true intention in my Letter which I sent thee, soon after thou had
defrauded me of my Money, which was in answer to a Letter, which thou sentest
Me, which was like thy words and actions, when thou gottest the Money of Me, in
which thou endeavourest to excuse thy self, and cover thy deceit, and would
have had Me excuse thee to Sam. Cater and his Wife, and have made some
deceitful cover for thee, and not have told them the plain Truth as it was,
which thing I abhor to do. And I praise God, Truth teaches Me better things
than to Lie, and make deceitful covers, either for my self or thee; Though thou
Wickedly and Falsely insinuatest in this thy Scandalous and abuseful Paper, as
if I was necessitated to give forth such a report, as was not true, to get my
Money again of Sam. Cater, which thou had deceitfully obtained from Me, which
insinuation and equivecation of thine is as wickedly unjust, as the Action and
deceitful work was before, and altogether untrue; for I never had any trouble
to obtain my Money again of Sam. Cater, though I do confess, if He nor his Wife
would not have given it Me, I must have lost it, neither could I have laid that
blame upon them, that is just upon thee, who betrayed Me out of my Money; for
Sam. Cater knew nothing of it, when I went about it, and his Wife but little:
And it was near Four weeks after thou had got the Money before I spoke one
word of it to Sam. Cater or his Wife. For indeed, I was ashamed to tell them,
how I was betrayed by thee, but when I did tell them, it was with much regret
and trouble, that of one so near related to Me, and whom I had once looked upon
to be before Me in the Truth, and had a great love for, both as a Friend and
Kinsman, I must now tell so bad a Story, if I told the whole Truth, which I
found my self bound in Conscience to do, otherwise I had been a partaker with
thee in thy wicked deed. So when I had told them the whole Truth of the matter
from the beginning, then Sam. Cater said to Me, thou have fallen into the Hands
of 2 deceitful Man, who by his subtilty has betrayed thee. But now thou shall
see, there is a difference between one that makes profession of the Truth, and
lives out of it, and them that desire with their whole Heart to obey it, and do
things answerable thereto. For seeing thou out of tenderness and true love to
Me and my Wife, and also to him, (though he has abused thy love) did concern
thy self thus in this matter, thinking to have peace, and thereby have lost thy
Money, I will pay thee it all again. So all the whole 15 Pound he did willingly
pay, with the 3 Shillings also, which thou tookest for use of the 10 Pound
(which I borrowed but for half an hour,) and thou keep it, and caused Me to
give thee Bond for it for 3 Months, with 3 Shillings use for it, or else I
could not have paid the Man his Money again, which I borrowed to make a Tender
of to thee, and promised he should have his own Money again in half an hour. All
which proceedings of thine, I have given a true account, and let the Reader
judge, into whose Hands it may come, whether thou have, done like a Man that
pretends so much to Christian Liberty and Honesty; or indeed like a Man that
has common Honesty; or rather in this matter, art a shame to both. For which I
can truly say, I am grieved to see and know, and could have been glad at my
Heart, if thou had never given me this cause thus to write of thee, neither
do I believe I should, what ever I had suffered by thee, were there not a true
concern of Conscience upon Me for the clearing of Truth, and the satisfying of
all that desires the certain knowledge of this matter, that so the Innocent may
not be blamed, and all mistakes may be prevented. And now I do yet say, what
can thou think of Me? I could be truly glad and I am sure, my Heart would
greatly rejoice in it, if yet thou may come to true Repentance of these
things of which thou stand guilty, and which the Enemy of thy Soul has led
thee into, without which thou can never hate true Peace with God.

Which is all at present from thy grieved and Abused Kinsman. George Smith.

Francis Bugg,
I Having lately received a Paper of thine, sent by thee to G. Whitehead, and
the rest of the Second days Meeting in London, a Copy of the same thou says
thou sent to me, and I returned it to thee back without opening it, and I am
glad I did so; for thereby all may see that comes to understand it, that this
old Controversy is on Foot again between, Geo. Smith, my self, and thee, and
also it will appear who is the cause thereof, and that it is not me nor Geo.
Smith, but thy self, that have revived it again, contrary to thy promise and
engagement made to the Quarterly Meeting at Hadenham, the 10th Month 1680.
Where thou made agreement with the Meeting, that from that day all defferences
betwixt thee and Me, and thy Cousin Geo. Smith, should cease, and all Papers by
all parties relating to the said difference, to be brought to Ely Prison, the
first of the 11th Month 1680. and there to be burnt, whereunto accordingly thou
came to Me, and brought a great bundle of writings, and further said, that
there was all that was in thy Hands so far as thou knew, that thou had
written about that Controversy, which thou there burnt, and withal promised,
that if thou did find any more, thou would burn them, and that also where
there was any in any friends Hands that thou knew of, thou would write to
them to do the same, and as to any thing of that Controversy that had been
between us, concerning the Fine and all other matters, should be fully ended
and done withal, according to the agreement and thy promise to the Quarterly
Meeting, which promise thou made before two witnesses then and there. But now
contrary to thy engagement made also before so many faithful Friends, without
any Regard to thy word, like a man that neither Regards Truth nor Honesty, thou
have in the aforesaid Paper abused us again, as formerly thou use to do, before
the said promise at that Meeting to be quiet, without any Provocation given
thee either by G. Smith or my self that I know of, although we have had cause
enough given us by thee, First in thy not answering the expectation of the
Meeting, which did believe thou would have Paid the Money again, which thou
obtained so unjustly from thy Cousin Geo. Smith, as several friends that came
from the Meeting told me they did believe thou would, and that it was the sense
of the Meeting, that thou ought to do it. And Secondly, when thou broughtest
forth thy envious Book in Print, so stuffed with Lies and ungodly Suggestions
and Reflections, against several Honest and Faithful Men, who truly fear God,
and are Serviceable in their Places wherein God has set them. And whom thou
did account such, before the Enemy of thy Soul filled thy Heart with envy
against the People of God, but thy end will be according to thy work if thou
repent not; and also thou says in thy aforesaid Paper, that I was Conscious to
my self of Guilt, (as thou supposes,) and therefore I would not open thy Paper,
but sent it to thee without looking in it, which supposition of thine is as
false as it is wicked, for I could not be Conscious of Guilt, knowing not what
was in it, neither had I ever done thee any wrong, but have suffered much wrong
by thee, as I shall make appear before I have done with thee, seeing thou have
broken thy promise again, made both in Public and also to Private Persons, of
being quiet with us, and art become a common Enemy to the People of God, and a
false Informer against them. And having detested thy folly in supposing Me
Guilty of thou know not what, because I did not bestow looking into thy
abusive Letter. Now I shall tell thee the reason why I did not unseal it to
look into it, I being truly sensible of thy restless state and Condition, and
how far thou art fallen and degenerated from the pure Divine Principle of Love
and Life, wherein my fellowship stands with the Children and Servants of God, I
did not believe that there was any thing in it that would Minister any Comfort
unto Me, but on the contrary, as it does appear, now through thy restless
attempts its come to my Hand, And I give thee to know that well knowing my own
Innocence in matters whereof thou Suggest evil against Me, in which I have true
Peace with the Lord, I should have been silent in making any reply thereunto,
until God that made thee stops thy Mouth, and makes thy folly Manifest to all
Men, as he has made it Manifest unto Me several years since, were it not for
the sake of them that desire a certain knowledge of the Truth of these things,
whereof there goes uncertain reports abroad, that so such may know the plain
Truth of the manner of thy dealings with Me in that matter, which thou so long
have been quarrelling with Me about. A plain Narrative of the whole matter I do
now intend to give forth, and leave it to the witness of God in all People to
judge, who has done, or who has suffered the wrong, either thee or I in this
matter. Thou also said in thy Paper, thy Cousin G. S. as my Wife's agent, made
the restitution for the Fine.

As to that thy Cousin G. Smith is able to give account what he did in that
Case, and I believe will. But if it be as thou says, what is the matter then
that thou still quarrelest with Me about the same thing again, for when
Restitution is made, Controversy amongst Honest Men use to be at an end. But
Francis, its to be feared that the Restitution thou got by thy Cousin G. Smith
thou did not come by it fairly, but like a Crafty deceitful Man, without
regard to Truth or Honesty, went beyond the Man, and Trap and him out of his
Money, as will be made appear, and now thou have thus unjustly got that 15 Pound
from thy Cousin, thou art uneasy with it for thy own Conscience (although thou
have taken this Liberty to do so wickedly) cannot be at ease with it, neither
is it possible thou should, thy proceedings have been so unjust and
unrighteous, from the first beginning of thy meddling with Me, unto this day.
And the first step thou set wrong in this matter, which thou so long have
abused Me about, was when thou turned Informer against Me, and told the
Officers and Informers my Name in the Meeting, which I might have done my self,
if thou had nor been so forward to have told them, and thereby prevented them
of asking Me, for it was ever my practice so to do, when I have been in the
like danger of sufferings.

And it is well known to Friends where I have Traveled, and which is also well
known to thee. And as that was wrong, so was every step thou have set since,
about getting Money of Me for thy work, and now thou have got this Money of mine
as unjustly as ever any Informer did, that I ever heard of, except thy Brother
Judas, who betrayed Christ Jesus for Money, who after He had got it, Torment and
Trouble was his Portion, as his end Manifested, and I wish thou may repent
of this thy ungodly work thou art in, before it be too late, for thou must
never expect true Peace in this unrighteous work of Darkness, which thou have
of late followed.

And now thou art writing to Me again, to have another Arbitration, when G. S.
nor I never wrote word to thee since the time thou speak of its being ended.
But Fran. I had Arbitrations enough with thee about this matter, yea too many,
except thou would have been truer to thy promises and engagements then thou
have been, as I sha;ll make appear to thy shame in an Narrative of the
business. Neither shall I trouble Friends nor my self any more with thee in
that kind, and whereas thou say in thy Paper, if another Arbitration I will
not admit of, then thou would have Me to Sign a Paper which thou have sent,
to which I answer, that I have learned better things of Christ since I believed
in his Name, who says, That not one Sparrow shall fall to the Ground without
his Fathers Providence, and that the very Hairs of our Heads are Numbered. Then
to join with thee, to make Laws and impositions to bind the Consciences of my
Brethren to serve thy will, who have Erred from the Faith, which stands in the
Power of Gods, as it appears by this thy new invented Cannon, that thou have
here Contrived, whereby it appears, that when thou go to a Meeting where
there is a Friend that Ministers, thou dare not trust God, whether he will
suffer the Enemies of his truth and People to lay a Fine upon thee for thy
Testimony, or not, for thou will make a provision to save thy self if thou can,
by imposing upon Ministering Friends, to tell their Names and Habitations to
Informers, whether they be asked or not, and what is this but to lay a Yoke
where God has laid none, and to Limit his Servants and Messengers, on whom he
lays a true necessity at such times, to declare and speak as he moves by his
Power, and gives them utterance by his Holy Spirit, and not to speak as Man
Teaches, but as the Holy Ghost Teaches, on such thou would lay a Bond that
they must leave speaking (as being moved by the Lord) and speak as Francis Bugg
has prescribed, or else they must be Noted as Transgressors of Francis Bugg's
new rule, which He has prescribed without sujection to, which nothing will
satisfy thee as it appears by this thy unruly work against Me, for although
thou pretends, that if the Friends in the Ministry do not tell their Names, yet
if they will make satisfaction it shall serve. But it is not so, for thou says
in thy Paper, that my Wife by G. S. has made thee Restitution, what is the
matter then that thou art so disquiet with Me, was it not enough for Me to
loose 15 Pound and 3 Shillings by thee, who never was Penny the better by thee
in my life, but wronged by thee before that* both by Word and Deed, but still I
must be thy object to vent thy wicked Poison at. What will nothing do except
Conformity to thy new Orders, which is of thy own inventing, and that
Unscriptural too, no where spoken of, neither in the Old nor yet New Testament,
nor practiced by Christ nor his Apostles. This Order I do not find to be
Apostolical.

Now this new invented prescription which thou have sent to Me to subscribe, I
have here set down in thy own words as follows.

MEmorandum, I S. Cater, do hereby Testify, that it is my Judgment, that all
Friends in the Ministry where they are Strangers, ought to tell their Names and
Habitations upon the apparent sight of Informers coming into a Meeting, taking
Friends Names in Writing or otherwise, in Order to convict the Meeting, that so
we all may stand in the like suffering Capacity; or if any have not Freedom
thus to do, that then they ought to make satisfaction to such who suffers for
them, through their Concealing their Names and Habitations. And that such as
refuse to perform his or their Place in either of these two particulars, ought
from thence forth to be Reputed blameworthy, and Noted as such.

Witness my Hand.

Now this is the Canon (or Order) that F. B. has contrived, and which he tells
Me, if I will Sign, I shall have all my Money again which He does unjustly
detain from Me. Which invented Order of his, I do in truth say, that for
Conscience sake I cannot nor dare not Subscribe, although I for refusing do
loose all my 15 Pound which He has gotten into his Hand for these Reasons
following. First* it is not my Judgment that all Friends in the Ministry are
bound, without being asked, to tell Informers their Names and Habitations,
being not thereunto required by the Lord, whose mind they then have, being
Ministering in the power of Christ Jesus, whose word they are to declare
Faithfully, and not their own nor F. B's. Secondly, it is my Judgment that all
Friends that Ministers in the Name and Power of the Lord, are to be left to do
in that, as in their Faith and Freedom they shall see Meet, they will answer it
to God, and are not to be Limited by F. Bugg, nor any other what to say, nor
what answer to make, when Informers and Persecuters come into a Meeting where
they are Ministering. Thirdly, I do believe that this new invented Order of
Fran. Bugg's tends to the exercising Rule and Lordship over the Faith and
Consciences of our Brethren, and therefore I cannot set my Hand to it.
Fourthly, I do account it a low and base thing of Fran. Bugg, to make such a
Law, and to proffer Me 15 Pound to make Me his Proselite, or to be an Abettor
of his evil Inventions, a thing altogether out of truth, and contrary to the
Ancient practice thereof, for Friends to make or to be made Proselites for the
love of Money, and I should Sin if I should condescend to his desires therein,
and therefore I deny to do it. Fifthly, I do know the 15 Pound that Fran. Bugg
pretends so freely to give Me, if I will sign his new Invented Order, he has
wrongfully, by defraud, got into his Hand of my Money, for which he prepares
this new Order, and Imposes upon Me to Sign, to keep Me out of the Money, as it
appears if I did not Sign it; And if I did Sign it, to make a Deceitful cover
for this his unjust Practice, and Deceitful Dealing with his Cousin Geo. Smith,
which I have not freedom to do, although he keeps Me still without my Money.

And now I Query of F. Bugg and his Abetters, if any he have, seeing he is
against new Orders, and all Impositions as he pretends, which have no Footing
in the Scriptures. Why I should not have my 15. Pound and 3. Shillings again,
seeing I cannot for Conscience sake Subscribe this his new Invented Order, that
he has prescribed for Me to Sign, and which I do say (as before) I have not
freedom to do, for the aforementioned reasons. And whether Fran. Bugg does not
appear a Persecuter of tender Consciences, contrary to what He pretends, if he
keeps my Money, because I have not freedom to Subscribe to this his new Rule.

And thou say if this be not a condescension sufficient, that is, either to
Sign this Order of thine, or a new Arbitration, thou then ask Me what will
Please Me, but that which will be well Pleaseing to God, that is, for thee to
Truly Repent of thy Lies and Deceitful Dealings, and acknowledge thy
infaithfulness both to God and Man, and make Satisfaction for the wrong thou
have done. This is that which I expect, and thou must do it before thou can
come to have Peace with God, and true Unity with his People; run whether thou will, and climb as High as thou can, the Hand of the Lord will find thee
out, and His Power will bring thee down, as he did the Angels of Old who kept
not their first Estate, but lost their own Habitations, which the Lord has
reserved in everlasting Chains of darkness, unto the Judgment of the great day,
such the Apostle calls raging Waves of the Sea, Foaming out their own shame,
wandering Stars unto whom is reserved blackness and darkness for ever. Now
Fran. notwithstanding all thy Malice that thou have shown against Me, and wrong
thou have done Me, both by word and deed, I could be glad I could perceive that
there were so much regard by thee to the Light of Christ Jesus, that thou
might come thereby to see how near thou dwells to these fallen Angels, and
how much thy state and condition now resembles theirs, for thou have left thy
Peaceable Habitation in the truth which the People of God injoys, and thy Life
is now in strife and contention, as appears by the Fruit thou brings forth.
Thou art gone from the Love that thinks no evil, into hatred and strife, in
which thou make and inventest all the evil thou can against the Servants of
the Lord, as is manifest by the Fruits thou have brought forth. How have thou
been Inventing Lies and Slanders, not only against Me, but many more of the
Servants of the Lord, whereby thou Foamest out thy Shame, for its a Shame for a
man to tell Lies and break Promises from time to time, as thou have done, both
before God and honest Men. And he that lives in the fear of God dare not do
it, but they who departs from the true fear and awe of God, what will they not
dare to do, as appears by this wicked Work of thine, and also by thy Book, by
which thy scoffing Rude Spirit is Manifest, and thy hard Heartedness against
the People of God, whom now in thy Envy thou Endeavors to render them to be
like the worst of Men, even such as formerly thou accounted good Men, and truly
serviceable in the Church of Christ, who are he same still. But Envy has
blinded thy Eye, so that thou can not see them in their Places, because thou
have lost the knowledge of thy own place, which thou shoulded have continued in,
even in low humility before the Lord, to have still waited upon him for his
Wisdom to have Guided thee, and to have felt his Power through the daily Cross,
to Crucify that Earthly wise comprehending part, in which thou comprehended
the Truth in thy Head, but never came to enjoy the life of Truth in thy Heart
and Soul, through the Death to thy own will, in which unruly will thou speaks
and Acts like an evil unruly Beast, whose Mouth God will stop in his own time,
to thy sorrow without unfeigned Repentance.

And Francis thou tells Me of giving Me 15 Pound to Sign this Paper of thine,
but where is the Liberty of Conscience thou Treats so much of in thy Book,
Dedicated to Hen. North. Knight.

Wherein thou pretendest that all ought to be left free to the Liberty of their
Conscience, and not to be compelled to any thing that they have not Freedom in
themselves to do. But in this Paper thou art far otherwise minded, for thou
speak nothing of leaving Me to my Freedom in that matter of the 15 Pound.
But I must either, contrary to my Freedom, set my Hand to that Paper that thou
have contrived, or else condescend to have another Arbitration about it, which
I cannot do for the Reasons aforesaid, otherwise I must unavoidably lose my
Money, which is far from leaving Me to my Freedom, which in the aforesaid Book,
thou pretendest all ought to be left unto. But Francis, tell us, when thou
make answer, was the Dedicating of thy Book according to our Ancient
principles which thou pretends to own, or did Friends in the beginning Dedicate
their Books in that manner, or is it not rather the making of a Man that has
lost his Habitation in the power of Truth, and now is creeping and Flattering
with Men of the World, and admiting Men's persons because of advantage, as is
spoken of in Jude, of them that fell from their first Habitation, and which
thou have given just cause to believe thou have done. For although thou never
were so much in Truth as thou would have People believe, by thy assuming to
take upon thee to Treat about the Principles of Truth, as received by us in the
beginning, whith thou never experimentally were a witness of, yet thou have
known more of Truth then thou have obeyed or lived in. And thou complainest to
H. N. of the mischief of imposition amongst the Quakers, what Redress thou
expected by complaining to him, is best known to thy self, but what plainer
imposition could ever be invented by a Man, then this new Order of thine is,
which thou has sent to Me, to have Me set my Hand to, and with as much
severity imposest it upon Me, as thy Capacity will afford thee to do. Whereby
it does and will appear to H. N. Knight and others, when they come to see what
thou have done, both before and also since thou wrote thy Book, that thou have
dissembled with them, and endeavored to delude the World, to make them believe
thou art against imposing new Orders, and Prescriptions upon tender
Consciences, when its no such matter, as appears by thy Practice. But a Liberty
to thy self to Lie and Dissemble, and abuse Honest Men, as is plainly
Manifested, both by thy Book and thy aforesaid new prescription, and thou art
got to thy old accustomed Work of thine, in abusing Me with Suggesting; that
since I was a Preacher and a Sufferer, through receiving Gifts and Rewards, I
am become Rich, but I never was counted a Rich Man by thee, until thou turned
Informer against Me, and demanded 15 Pounds of Me unjustly for thy work.

And I not having Freedom to satisfy thy unjust demand, and Friends blameing
thee for desiring it, thou then began to change thy Tale concerning Me, that
whereas thou used to speak of to whom thou pleased of my outward Condition,
below what it was, so now ever since, have spoke of it at a large Rate, and
what end can thou have in it, but to be get a belief in People that S. C. is
a Rich Man, that thereby thy Offense may seem the less, in that thou have
gotten 15 l. 3 s. of mine, for that which neither the Law of God nor Man allows
thee one penny. But Fran. what I have as to the outward, I came Honestly by,
and I wish that thou hadest no more in thy possession then thou came as truly
and as justly by as I have come by what I have, and then it would be better for
Me and mine by near 20 Pounds. And as to what I have, is best known to my self,
and I never complained to thee nor any other of want, neither have thee or
others ever heard Me Boast of what I had in this World, but am well contented
with such things as I have, I praise the Lord for it, and If than could have
been so, thou would never have troubled Me and others so much as thou have
done, for that which is none of thy own. And again, Fran. thou Suggests in the
aforesaid Malicious Paper of thine, as if since I was a Preacher, and a
sufferer, I am become Rich thereby, to that I answer, I have been a Preacher of
Truth, according to my Measure, and a sufferer for the same, before thou
knew any thing of the Truth or Me either, in all which time its well known
to God and to faithful Friends, both at Home and Abroad, my Conversation has
been without coveting any thing that was other Men's, but have from time to time
taken an Honest care for Me and mine, that we might not be Burdensome to any
(its known to the Lord) and all Honest Friends, who has known my Conversation
longer then thou have done, who can witness to the Truth of what I say in this
matter, and therefore what such railing Rabshecahs as thou say is little to
Me, who have forsaken the Truth, and art turned aside to Lies. And now in
answer to thy unjust charge and Slander in this kind, I do say, that I was
never enriched as to the things of this World, either by Preaching or Suffering
in that manner as is by thee Suggested, and I do say thy charge is false and
Scandalous, and proceeds from a Lying Spirits, clear thy self as well as thou
can, and if thou think thou can prove the contrary by Honester Men then
thy self, thou may go about it.

I ask no Favor at thy Hand, as thou know I have told thee before now, for
I have Truth and the witness of a good Conscience on my side in these things
whereof thou falsely accuses Me, wherein I have true Peace. And now whereas thou
asks if thou had no color of right to the Money before mentioned, (which
thou defrauded thy Cousin G. S. in the Gaining of.) Answer, that will appear by
the Narrative, whether thou hadest or not, to all that desire to know the
certainty of that business, when they come to know the Truth as it is, and then
I shall leave it to the witness of God in all their Consciences, to judge who
has done and acted like a Christian Quaker, or like an Honest Man, whether
thee or I in this matter, wherein thou have been so long troublesome to Me.

Which is all at present, but to let thee know, that I have given a full and
true Narrative from the beginning,

From him who is a Sufferer by thee, as I am under the Envious Priests for the
Testimony of a good Conscience, in which I have true Peace. Samuel Cater.
Ely Prison the 3d. of the 8th Month 1682. POSTSCRIPT.
FRan. Bugg, thou have falsely insinuated, as if thy Cousin G. Smith had hard
work to get his Money again of Me, notwithstanding (adds thou) thy Wife sent
him, as thou told Me thy self: Which insinuation of thine is false, and thy
Cousin G. S. will prove it so, and for thee to say, I told thee my Wife sent
him, is a lie of thy own making, which thou have put in to make out thy matter
as thou would have it, an evil thou art too much accustomed unto, for I
never told thee so, but do well remember still what I said, which was, that I
know nothing of G. S's. treating with thee, but my Wife did, as I understood
after thou hadest got the Money, as will appear in the Narrative, etc.

S. C.



S. Caters Letter to F. Bugg.
Thine I have received Dated the 8th of the 10th Month, 1682. Wherein thou
say thou did not send thy other Letter before this for controversy, not
to revive the old one: But Fran. that is false, and thy Letter and the use thou
makes thereof proves the contrary to any that have seen or may see the same,
for thou have not therein written to Me and thy Cousin Geo. Smith in order to
make us satisfaction for the wrong thou have formerly done us, but thou have
again therein abused us, and wrote Lies to exuse thy self about the old
concern; which is not a way to stop controversy, but to increase it, and
further, if thou hadest been minded that it should not have been revived again,
why did thou send thy mallicious Letter to Geo. Whitehead and to the 2d days
Meeting in London, who see and are satified it was to revive the controversy
again; and again, why did thou send the same Letter or a Copy of it to Ann
Dockwra, letting her know thou hadest sent that Letter to Me, and that I had
sent it back to thee again without opening of it, and She says that thou were
minded to make it Public, only She accounted She had persuaded thee to the
contrary by something She had wrote to thee, and withal She said, that I had
done well in that I did not look into thy Letter, and thereby have been stirred
up to enter into further controversy again with thee, so that She as well as
others that have come to the sight of thy Letter, do see that the tendency
thereof was, and is for controversy: but thou say thou Intends to Manifest
Me to be a reviver of the Old contreversy, because thou believes I have spoke
of it; and that thou may have wherewith to accuse Me, thou like one of the
Officers in th Star Chamber (when in force) Queries of Me in thy Letter,
whether at one time or other I have not spoke of it, since the agreement was
made between the Quarterly Meeting and thee? for say thou, if Sam. Cater
have spoke of it, then the agreement of the Quarterly Meeting is broaken, yet
also say, thou know not that ever thou Covenanted or promised not to
write a Letter to Me about it: to that I answer, if thou that were at the
Quarterly Meeting, and there made an agreement with the Meeting, and promised
to cease from all Controversy, and that all the writings thou had writ about
the Old Controversy in general, should be by thee brought to Ely Prison in the
11th Month following, and there be burnt, which thou said thou did, even
all that were in thy Hand, and what was in thy other Friends Hands, thou said
thou would send to them to do the like. Now (say I,) if thou were at the
Quarterly Meeting and made the promise and agreement with them thy self, do
not look upon they self at bound by that Order or agreement, from writing to Me
and others about the same Controversy again, how comes it to pass, that I, who
was not at the Meeting, could be bound by that Order and agreement not to speak
of it.

For of Sam. Cater has spoken of it, say thou, the Order of the Quarterly
Meeting is broaken on his part, but I never saw any such agreement, this is
strange Logic, yea, Confusion indeed, its like the rest of thy proceedings
about and concerning this matter and thou will have as hard work to prove this,
as thou have to prove that I refused to tell my Name in Laken-Heath Meeting,
which is false, and may be proved so. Thou also speaks as if the report of this
Controversy was in London, Bristol, Hartford, Lincoln, etc. whereby thou were
abused and mispresented: what then, if it were so that this business follows
thee, and thy malicious Book, if thou have done well in it, thou needs not be
ashamed of it, but if thou have done evil, why do thou not make
satisfaction, seeing thou pretends so much to be a Christian Quaker: But
Francis, I am apt to believe, that not any have abused thee therein, for who
can speak worse of thee then thou deserves? And besides, if it be spoken of in
those places aforesaid, must it needs follow, that it was through my speaking
of it? was it not public to the Nation? does not many Hundreds know how
unjustly thou demanded that Money of Me, and how restless thou were to obtain
it, and when thou had got it in that deceitful manner of thy Cousin G. S. did
not he give account thereof to the Monthly Meeting? and were not Friends
satisfied that thou went beyond him, and gave it as their judgment, that his
simplicity was betrayed, and that he ought to have his Money again? and did not
he give the same account again to the Quarterly Meeting, before Friends of five
several Counties, and could this be a private business to be kept from being
spoken of by Me? but I suppose thou thinks, I may have spoke of it to some body
or other that might ask Me, if F. B. had paid Me, or G. S. the 15 l. 3
Shillings he got so unjustly into his Hands, which the Meeting expected he
would have returned again, as well as burn his writings? As to that let Me know
when thou writes again* what thou would have me to say about it; when I am
asked, since I have not Freedom to tell a Lie to cover thy deceit, and whereas
thou offers in thine, to return Me 7 Pounds to Shillings, if I will accept it
as Token of thy condescension, which thou say, thou have told some Friends
of, and that thou would give Me so much Money as a Free Gift; To that I
answer, I have neither need nor Freedom to receive such Gifts of thee: But
that which I do expect and desire of thee, is to return to Me or thy Cousin G.
S. that 15 Pounds 3 Shilling, which thou so unjustly obtained from, him and
whereunto I have just right, and thou may keep thy Gifts for them that will
accept of them form I desire nothing of thee but my own, neither shall I
receive it, but as my own: and as to thy comparing Me to the Pharisees, who lay
Heavy Burdens upon the People, etc. its but one of the Slanders, and hard and
ungodly Speeches, which thou must give an account to the Lord for; so its known
to the Lord and to Faithful Friends my Innocence both in that and other things
whereof thou have unjustly accused Me and other Friends, who truly fears God,
and are clear and innocent in the sight of God, of those things tho^ chargest
them with, for which thou have a bitt^^ Cup to Drink at the Lords Hand, who
will n^^ acquit the workers of iniquity, who sin against t^^ light in their own
Consciences, as thou have do^^ for several years.

This is ^ll at present, from him who desires Repentance before Mercy be hid
from thy Eyes. Samuel Cate^
Ely Prison the 25th of the 10th Month, 1682.
Sam. Cater's Letter to F. Bugg, the 26th of the 10th Month, 1682.
THis is to let thee know, that if thou will not make thy Cousin G. Smith and my
self satisfaction for the wrong thou have done us, both by word and deed, and
also call in thy wicked Book, which thou have caused to be Printed, in which
thou have belied, abused, and misrepresented Friends to the World, then we
shall make thy ungodly Accounts, and fraudulent proceedings more Manifest then
ever we thought to have done, whereof we have a Narrative ready for the Press,
but if thou will call in thy Book, an as Publicly own thy Condemnation, as
thou have given the offense, and thereby clear Friends of the Reproaches thou
have cast upon them, then we shall stop any further proceedings against thee in
this matter: To this I desire thy speedy answer.

From him who has long been much wronged and Abused by thee. Samuel Cater.
F. B. this Sam. Cater desired should be given thee, desiring thy present
answer.

J. B.



Samuel Cater,
THis day I received thine, Dated the 26th of the 10th Month, and am not
sensible, Not sensible. No, for deceitfulness of Sin, Lying and Falsehood, do
produce Hardness, and Blindness.
that I have wronged thee or my Cousin G. S. neither have thou therein said,
wherein I have, so that in answer, I dare say, if either of you, can make it
appear, wherein I have wronged either of you, I will readily make you, or
either of you satisfaction; but if thou mean the Money that my Cousin G. Smith
paid me, as thy Wifes Messenger, G. S. had no Message from her, to pay the 15
Pounds.
or Ambassador, in satisfaction for the Fine I suffered for thee, Anno. 1675.
And art not willing to stand by the Agreement made at Quarterly Meeting in
Hadenham, the first of the 10th Month 1680. and then Recorded in their
Quarterly Book, that All Controversy betwixt thee, G. S. and my self should
cease. That was probably in hopes of thy amendment and making satisfaction for
the wrong done, but instead thereof, have not thou begun and renewed the
Controversy again against Sam. Cater.
I say, if thou art not willing to stand to the said agreement, but find thy
self uneasy under it, I will, as I wrote thee word in my Letter, dated the
10th of the 6th Month 1682. very willingly consent and agree, that thou shall
have a hearing De Novo by Persons indifferently How often have thou shuffled with
Arbitrators, and evaded their Judgments, and determinations in the case will
such Flams and Pretenses as these excuse thee.
Chosen by us both, viz. each others, 4, 6, 10, or 12 Persons, and be bound
again to stand to their award, etc. And as for the calling in my Book; this I
am willing to let the know: That on condition, the Orders upon Record in out
7th Book, which say, that for the time to come, no Marriages are to be either
suffered or permitted, (meaning amongst us) except the Parties, both Man and
Woman, Publish their intentions twice before Men's Meeting, and twice That was,
that both might be concerned in a Godly care to see things clear and to prevent
disorder and Scandal what in them is.
before the Women's Meeting, they being (thou know) distinct and apart each
from others, and the Record against J.A. Which was because of his Irregular
proceeding in Publishing his intention in the Woman's absence, to the Men's
Meeting, and that but once, and refusing to bring her to the next Meeting, as
desired by Friends for example and satisfaction, as Friends had not Union with
his Irregularity, it seems he had not Union with them, First, in that Orderly
Method of both Persons Publishing their Intentions twice before the time of
Marriage.
for not taking Wife according to the advice of Friends; be raced out, and made
void, that so those that have Freedom to publish according to the said Orders
Why should they then be Raced out, if a Freedom be granted to proceed according
to them, what evil or error is in them simply considered, as Reason to Race
them out, or would thou not have those Records Raced out that thou may
make new ones, and Rule in thy loose conceited Spirit?
may, and those that are otherwise minded, may be left to their Freedom, and
also the Book Entitled, The Accuser, and others against William Rogers, be
called in, No Reason nor Justice in that proposition, we allow no such bargain.
Those Books against Will. Rogers, were occasioned by his, which was first; and
ought to be called in, therefore thou art an unjust Judge and Partial.
I say, on condition that these things may be done, I am willing to call in
mine, and shall be willing to use any Christian means for a thorough
Reconciliation and healing of Breaches, How can thou be any fit Instrument
for such a Christian-work, who art in a Spirit of discord and Enmity thy self?
But whereas thou seems to threaten me with a further Publication of a
Narrative, etc. It does not frighten me, neither do I think it would have been
thus long detained from publishing in Charity or good will to me, had not
thee been Conscious If S. C. were so Conscious, by the same reason he would not
pulish a Narrative at all, therefore his Publication of a Narrative proves thee
Guilty of presumptuous and false Judgment in this matter.
to thy self, that Publication thereof would have been a further means to have
unmasked thee and such as thee art: This is my sense, and as speedy an answer
as I can well give thee who am thy well-wishing (though much abused) Friend,

Francis Bugg.

Joshua Bangs Letter to F. B.
I Sent F. B. a few Lines, to let him know, that if he had any thing to offer
in his own defense, etc. I gave him time to do it, whereupon he returned me a
great Letter, to which I have given something in answer, which is as follows.

F. B. thy great Letter Received, which is in Vindication of thy receiving the
5 l. of Justice Shelly which the Widow Root said, was part of the 15 l. thou
were Fined for S. Cater; and withal could not believe that thou had taken 15
l. of G.S. and that is it Edw. Swanton says, that Justices Shelly told him,
that 5 l. of the 15 l. was returned again to thee, forasmuch as but 10 l. could
be Levied upon one Person for the offense of any other Person, according to the
words of the Statute: But in thy introduction thou endeavourest to Invalidate
what he can say about it, by saying, he was an Informer, yes, he was an
Informer, and had 40 s. for so doing, but did not Pocket one penny of it, but
if being an Informer formerly, or violating Obligations, excludes a Man being
believed in any caused, who shall believed F. B. in his own cause, for was not
F. B. an Informer against S. C. in that Laken-Heath Meeting? And has he not
got 5 l. more then what he could be justly Fined for S. C. according to the
Statute, for the Act says, (speaking of one Person, being Fined for another
Offense,) that it shall be at the discretion of the said Justice, Justices or
chief magistrate respectively, so as the same to be Levied on any one Person,
in case of the Poverty of other offenders amount not in the whole to above the
Sum of 10 l. And again, provided always, and be it enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, that no Person shall by any clause of this Act, be liable to pay
above 10 l. for any one Meeting in regard of the Poverty of any Person or
Persons. What can be Plainer then this, but in Contradiction hereunto, says
F.B. Justice Shelly and his other Counselors told him, that for neglect of the
Speaker, a Preachers declaring his Name and Habitation, one Person may be Fined
15 or 20 l. for his offense, or to this Effect.

Francis, Justice Shelly was a Man I had no acquaintance with, but I have heard
he was a Judicious understanding Man, and I much question whether he spoke to
that purpose, but rather take it to be of thy own Hatching, yet since Justice
Shelly is Dead, if thy other Counselor be alive, let him give his Reasons
under his Hand; with his Name to it, that we may know where to find him; for
the time is coming thou will stand in need of the Assistance of such a
Counselor, that can make lies seem true, bring something out of nothing, and
make a foul false Cause look fairly. And what I have said, is not to Vindicate
or commend Edw. Swanton wherein he has done amiss; not yet condemn F. B. for
well-doing, neither do I know whether there will be any necessity to make use
of his Certificate, in Order to Manifest thy deceit, since thou have confessed
so much, but if there be, because the Statute Backs what he Certifies, the
Justice said, it will be as credible as any thing, thee and thy Counselor can
say, which so plainly Contradicts the Statute. And now, since thou have done as
thou have, how can thou Escape the just imputation of Folly, or Knavery? Thou
mentions much charge and cost thou have been at in Journeys and otherwise,
whose fault was that? Oh! but thou have a smooth turn for that too, because
thou could not have Arbitrators indifferently chosen, or to that effect: I
Query, were they not such as thou accepted of? And did thou not engage to
stand to their Award? Nay further, did thou not say, after thou knew their
Award, that thou would sit down by it, or stir no further in it, or to that
purpose. But to return, notwithstanding all thou can say for thy self, I take
notice what the Widow Root said of thee, and how confident she was of thy
Honesty, that thou would not take 15 l. having 5 l. returned thee again, see
how some honest Friends are betrayed into a conceitedness of thy Honesty; so
smooth and subtle have thy carriage been. I have also perssed the Act, to find
what colorable pretense thy Counselor can have to say, that 15 l. or 20 l.
may be Levied upon any one Person for the Preachers not declaring his Name and
Habitation, and the Act is worded thus; and if the said Preacher or Teacher so
convicted, be a stranger, and his Name and Habitation not known, or is fled and
cannot be found, or in the Judgment of the Justice, Justices or chief
Magistrate, before whom he shall be convicted, shall be thought unable to pay
the Sum, the said Justice, Justices, or chief Margistrate respectively, are
hereby empowered and required to Levy the same by Warrant as aforesaid, upon
the Goods and Chattels of any such Persons, who shall be present at the said
Conventicle, etc. Now had the word Persons been in the singular number, it had
made something to the purpose; but Francis, thy covering I do think will be too
scant to cover thy deceit, and I do believe it had been better for thee every
way, that thou had not so earnestly hunted after S. C's. 15 l. But since thou
have gone so far in it, there is little hopes of any better Service in thy
miscarriages, then that others may thereby beware that they enter not into the
like Temptations, and so be caught in the same Snare.

Joshua Bangs.
At Hallywell-Row in Mildenhall, the 13th of the 12th M. 1683.
Edward Swantons Certificate of F. B's. having 5 l. of the 15 l. Fine repayed
Him by the Justice.
THis may Certify all whom it may concern, that whereas Fran. Bugg of
Mildenhall in the said County, Avereth that he Paid 15 Pounds or above for his
being present at a Conventicle or Meeting in Laken-Heath, some years last past,
which I do believe to be true, but I do affirm, that Five Pounds of the
aforesaid Sum was Allowed and paid unto him back again by Justice Shelly, or
his order (as the said Mr. Shelly Informed Me,) and this I am ready to Testify
upon Oath at any time when by Lawful Authority thereto called:

Given under my hand this Ninteenth day of January, Anno Dom. 1682. Laken-Heath
in Suffolk. Edward Swanton.

Reader, By this Certificate thou may see Fran. Bugg has retained Five
pound to himself, and Edw. Swanton says, if he be so confident as to deny it,
notwithstanding what he has herein given forth, he can produce more if need
require, to Assertain the truth of it.

A short Reply to Francis Bugg's Foul Slanders cast upon me and his Cousin
George Smith, in his Book called the Painted Harlot Stripped and Whipped.
Printed 1683. Wherein not only his Folly, but also his bitter Envy, is
discovered against us and others, who never gave him just cause so Maliciously
to Abuse us.
First, I take Notice of F. B's saying, that I Revived the Controversy which
was formerly between him G. S. and my self, after (says he) It was ended by
Friends at Hadenham, the First of the 10th. Month, 1680. Which saying of his is
false, and his own Letter, Dated August 10th 1682. plainly proves the contrary,
and gives him the Lie; For before he sent me that Letter, nor some time after,
I never wrote a word to him nor any other Man from the time of that Hadenham
Meeting, whereby to stir up any thing of that Nature, neither was I willing to
have meddled with it any more, and that he himself very well knew,
notwithstanding, he thus says; for when he sent me that Letter Dated as
before, wherein he did not only Invite me to begin again about that
Controversy which he said was ended; but in that Letter used many Scurrillous
words, whereby to Provoke me and G. S. thereunto, as it plainly appeared
thereby when we came to see it; but I understanding it came from him, I never
opened it, but sent it him back again, not being willing to concern my self in
any Controversy, which was also the cause I did not meddle to answer any part
of his former Book, Entitled De Christiana Liberiate, wherein he much abused
me with the rest of Friends, in this Isle of Ely, and although I refused to
meddle with his Book and Letter, whereby he might have occasion to be
Quarrelling with me again, he sent the second Letter to London to Friends there
that he had sent to me, and a Copy also thereof to Cambridge, to A. D. and
complained to her that he had sent me the like, and I would not Read it, who
wrote to me and in her Letter, said, I did well in not opening F. Bs. Letter,
whereby to enter into farther Controversy with him; and yet he is so impudent
as to say in this Idle Ridiculous work of his, That it was* I that Revived the
Controversy again, which is as absolutely false, as Truth is Truth. But after
he had thus sent his malicious Letter about, and it came from London, whither
he had sent it, wherein he had Reviled me and his Cousin G. S. again, so that
his hard charge against us for breaking Covenant falls upon himself with his
Slanderous comparing of us to Berket the Papist, which will return upon his own
Head, for he broke the agreement made between him and the Meeting, and not I
nor G. S. for although I was not there, neither knew any thing of it until some
Friends came from the Meeting and told me what was done, yet for Peace sake,
and out of respect I had to the Meeting, I was willing to condescend to it, and
did abide by it until he broke it, but when came to see and hear how he had
abused us again, both it City and Country, we did then resolve to give a true
Narrative of the business, as it truly was, and leave it to People to judge,
Whether he has wronged us, or we him; Seeing his restless Spirit would not let
him be at quiet, which accordingly we did write to him to give him account
thereof, as by the Narrative does more fully appear.

The next passage I take Notice of, is, how F. B. has in effect Confessed
himself, Guilty of going beyond his Cousin G. S. in getting the Money aforesaid,
as by his own Tongue and Pen he has here Confessed, for says F. B. in Page 35,
(Treating about the Money he got of G. S.) He pretended Trouble or else he was
really Troubled in that he thought all I aimed at was, a bare tender, and upon
that, without any other terms, would have returned it. These words of F. Bs.
gives just cause to believe that he betrayed him by his Subtilty out of his
Money, as G. S. has given account, or else why should F. B. himself say, (who
is seldom wanting to make a deceitful cover, for this his work of Darkness) G.
S. might think than all he intended in having the Money all Tendered, was but a
bare Tender, and that he would have returned it again: which saying of F. Bs.
gives ground to believe that G. S. had some cause so to think, from something
that F. B. had spoke or promised to G. S. before he tendered him the Money, as
G. S. has declared, for he is not so weak a Man as to think of having all the
Money returned again, without some Grounds for it. But however, they that shall
say, That F. B. got this Money Fraudulently, or by over-teaching, or going
beyond his near Kinsman, them he seems to be much offended with, accounting
they Grate much upon his Reputation; But let F. B. give his getting the Money
what Name he please, I know it is a way that is not used by such as are
accounted Honest Morral-Men, setting Christianity aside; which brings Men not
only to Act and Speak justly, uprightly, and truly, and to walk inoffensively
both toward God and Men, but also Patiently to suffer Injuries, and to do good
against Evil, however it is commendable in its place to do justly between Man
and Man, which F. B. in this matter has fallen far short of, as does yet
farther appear from his own words, as may be seen in page 36, his words are
these, (Speaking about the said Money, he got of his Cousin G. S.) I did
proffer (says he) to Return 7 l. 10 s. which I had more then G. S. Voluntarily
proffered me, (Note, that F.Bs. offer of returning the said 7 l. 10 s. was
about three years after he had Received it of his Cousin G. S. and that not
until he was severely Reproved for his unfair dealings by Friends; and farther,
he did not offer the Money as Repenting him for his so unjustly obtaining it)
Therefore it may be very well questioned how F. B. came by the said 7 l. 16 s.
Seeing he says himself that G. S. Did not Voluntarily proffer it him, then does
it not follow, that without question G. S. tendered him the whole, thinking
thereby to have pleased him in his wilful humor, and thinking as F. B. himself
says; He would have been pleased with a bare Formal Tender thereof, and so
have returned the whole 15 l. again; but seeing F. B. did not return it all
again, according as he says, G. S. his thoughts might be that he would, yet to
keep the other half also, which was by him never Voluntarily proffered him, let
F. B. make what covers and excuses he can for himself, People that know what it
is to Live uprightly, and to deal justly between Man and Man, will account this
Deed of F. Bs. to Spring from a Covetous and Overreaching-Mind, and a Deed that
does not become such a Man as would be accounted a Christian Quaker, and one
that has taken upon him lately to complain of others, more Honest and Just
then himself, as appears; But it had been well for F. B. if he had better spent
this time. which he now spends, in Silly, Scornful, Scribbling and Printing
against his Ancient Friends, and such whom he used to speak very well off
before, the Enemy of his Soul thus filled him with Envy; It had been better (I
say) for him to have waited upon God in Humility, to have seen first the Beam
cast out of his own Eye (as Christ says) before he had so much concerned
himself to pull the Mote out of another Eye. But now mark, after F. B. had
thus got this Money of his Cousin G. S. the the next thing he endeavored to do,
was to quiet him that he might keep it, and to that end he first gave him a
paper, as he himself says, for me to sign, which he said, If I would Sign he
would Return all the Money again; But G. S. knowing that he had nothing to do
with papers, but the Money, which he had made him a tender of, seeing he never
spoke of any such paper before the Money was tendered, Slighted the paper, but
prest-hard upon him for the Money again, (as more at large appears in the
Narrative) that he might carry and Repay the 10 l. again to the Person of whom
it was borrowed; But F. B. would not part with the Money, but be thought
himself of another way, to try Salve the Sore which he had made in his Cousins
mind, by keeping the said Money from him, as himself says (in Page the 35 of
his Book) to his Cousin G. S. after he had got the said 15 l. his words are
these, However to comfort him, I told him that Samuel had 10 l. lately sent
him from London; and that he had taken 40 s. at one place when he went into
Scotland, toward his charges, and 3 l. at another place, on the account of his
Ministry, and so Cousin said I, there is no fear but Samuel will made whole.
These are F. Bs. own words to G. S. (as he himself says) But this will prove a
Deceitful Cure and Cover as hereafter will appear.

F. B. in some other places in his Book, accounts this as a great Evil, (he
taking it for granted that I received this Money he upbraids me with) or else
why is it so often spoken of in his Book, but it is not a greater Evil in him,
to use it as an Argument to persuade G. S. to let him alone quietly with this
15 l. he so unfeignedly obtained from him, that so he might have the benefit of
this Money which he blames me for Receiving, which 15 l. he had thus obtained
of G. S. he never offered Voluntarily but one half of it, then it must needs
follow that he got the other half by Craft, and kept it against G. S. his Mind,
which is doubtless a great Evil in the sight of God, and a just cause of the
breach of Friendship and humane Society betwixt Man and Man, thus to do.

And whereas in page 46 F. B. speaks something there as if R. S. with some
other Friends has given it as their Judgment that S. Cs. Wife betrayed G. S.
about this Money, which thing cannot stand with Truth nor found Reason, for let
it be considered whether it can be understood or believed by any Man to be as
he says, seeing F. B. was the Man that thus obtained the Money of G. S. as is
before mentioned: and S. C. and his Wife did freely and willingly repay the
aforesaid G. S. the whole 15 l. again, and besides, when it was debated in that
Monthly Meeting, it will appear that R. S. was not of that mind then (neither
was it ever the Judgment of the Monthly or Quarterly Meeting that it was S.
C's. Wife betrayed G. S. but on the contrary, that F. B. was the betrayer of G.
S. for at the said Monthly Meeting B. S. called out to Friends about the time
of the Record making to know where there was a Man in the Meeting that would
say that Francis had right to that Money, and that he came Honestly by it? And
indeed was the very Man that was Zealous against F. B. in that Meeting, which
caused F. B. to fall out with him in the Meeting, and reprove the said R. S.
for being the cause of his being so far Engaged in that concern, and instanced
some particulars.

And again, whereas F. B. makes no small stir (in this Slanderous piece of
confusion) about my being grown: Rich with Preaching, who says I was so Poor
that I could scatced pay my Debts, both which I return back upon him again as
Lies and De^amation, but his Tongue is no Slander, for first I never was so
Poor as not able to pay my Debts, but have always paid every Man his just due,
since I knew what it was to deal and Trade in the World, neither was any Man
ever burdened with my Debts, nor yet paid one penny for me, which those that I
have dealt with can witness for me; But now how I came to be so Rich, as he
pretends it was or is by Making advantage of People by my Preaching, of which
F. B. has threatened long to make a discovery of me and my Brethren. But I have
told him, he might do his worst, for I have both Faith and a good Conscience on
my side, and also Testimony in the Hearts of Honest Friends, where I have
Labored and Traveled, That I have not sought my self, nor to enrich my self,
by any thing of this, But have truly preferred the good of Peoples Souls,
before my own outward benefit, and this many can Witness to the Truth of what I
say: but now F. B. has brought forth this Monster, what does he charge me
with? With being Rich with Preaching; But I do not know what Ground any have to
believe that by any thing that he has brought to Light, except such as are as
full of Envy as himself, who if any such as he says it, it is enough for him to
believe it; but let any Rational Man consider what he tells People of that I
have Received, for near these 20 years he has known me, and I perceive has
been watching over me with an Evil Eye for some time. And what is it that he
says of the Sums of Money I have Received in this time, whereby (he says) I am
made a Rich-Man? Why, says he, Three Sums of Money, which in all amounts to 15
l. but let it also be considered, that if I had Received all the three Sums as
F. B. says, (which I says, I had not; let him prove it if he can) how much have
I left me, toward making me a Rich-Man, when I had paid G. S. the 15 l. which
he confesses he had of him, and which I paid again, although no more then half of
it was voluntarily proffered him by G. S. might not F. B. therefore be ashamed,
I am sure he would (if he were a tender Hearted Man and feared God) of this his
wicked work, who sometimes has called me Pensioner, and compares me to be like
to the hireling Priests, who are known to Preach for Money, either by the year,
or so much a Sermon, as they can get, and now tells the World of my Receiving
15 l. for near 20 years, for suffering Traveling (as he pretends) and
Preaching: might not People have thought that I have had some great Salary (by
such his Insinuations) for Preaching, for which I do say, that I never took
penny more nor less, directly or indirectly in my Life, but am wholly clear of
his Malicious and Scandalous thing, both in the sight of God and Honest People,
neither can F. B. prove it, although he has so Reproachfully Insinuated it
against me, expect he or any other Man will or can account that the 3 l. I
Received as part of the 20 l. given by the last Will and Testament of J. M. of
Whitlesea-Coles, which I Received with other Friends, according to the intent
and desire of the Giver, which no Impartial and unprejudiced Person will blame
me for, but such as are Levened with the Spirit of Envy, as F. B. has
Manifested himself to be both against me and others. He says he was our
Book-Keeper so many years, and thereby had opportunity to know what was then
done amongst us, but he to make the said 15 l. seem as big as he can, he has
brought it up several times in his Book, sometimes he says I Received it as a
Preacher, sometimes as a sufferer and as a Traveller; but still it is all but
15 l. some of which I never had.

Again he is hinting in an interlined Note, Page 40. as if I knew, that the
Widow Moor, nigh Bishop-Gate London, has understood what he means, who (says
he) was constrained to break up House, being (as he insinuates) so much oppressed
by me, and such as I am, as he has declared, which I know nothing of that she
would give over Housekeeping upon any such Account, neither was I burdensome
to her, but if I would have accepted it, (as she desired of me) I might have
been there to have Lodged when I refused, neither, did I ever here that she or
any related to her complain of any such oppression. Well, but F. B. does not
leave here, for in Page 54. he says, If all thy sufferings be attended with
such a plentiful reward, I do not know but that sufferings may be as beneficial
to thee as of Old they were to Bishop Worren. And for Instance, (he says) It
has been said that in Ely Prison by Treat^ and otherwise, they believe thou
fairest as well as some Persons of much Higher Degree. But if this be all thou
have to say about thy Foolishly comparing me to Bishop Worren in his
sufferings, I say it was well the Man in the time of his confinement, found
Friends in the midst of his Enemies, to take care of him, and show kindness to
him, and I praise the Lord, so have I in Measure, in the time of my close
confinement, although it be to my Enemies grief, which thou have appeared to be
none of the Ie^st, who has been abusing me from time to time, in the time of my
sufferings, by which thou manifests not only thy envy against me, but seem
to be troubled that any Loves me, but thou must run thy race, and make thy
folly manifest to all, till the Lord put a Hook in thy Nostrills before thou will be quiet, and thou may be ashamed, Nay, I am sure thou would, if
Envy did not Blind thee, how the Devil befools thee in thy undertakeings, to
make a Noise about my being grown Rich with Preaching, and now wanting proof
against me, makes thy appeal to my Neighbors and to the Parish Priest, whether
they have got so much as I have, but what if some Neighbors have gotten much
more in these 30 years time that I have kept House, as some of them have done,
and some less, and others spent what they have, what is that to the proof of thy
change against me? And I have told thee before, I have nothing but what I came
honestly and justly by, neither have thou proved the contrary, and therefore
there is none have cause to believe thee, nor will, that are not Learned with
that Spirit of Envy that thou art in, whose reproaches are little to me,
knowing it is the Portion of them that fear God to go through good report, and
evil report, as the Servants of God did before me.

Now whereas F. B. makes a great stir about a Lawyer meddling in my Case, and
calls me his Client, I do say, I never spoke or writ, neither directly or
indirectly employed T. R. about the said concern, whereof he so says, and if
the said T. R. did any thing in it, he did it of himself, and not by any Order
or Advice from me; and that I have told F. B. before now, only he is minded to
fill up his filthy Book with something, although it does and will return to his
own shame. Many things more might be spoken unto, to manifest his numerous lies
and falsehoods, and his wild Airy scoffing Spirit against my self and many
others, which at present I pass by, looking upon it not worth the spending time
about, nor questioning but impartial and unbiassed Readers will see that its
more Malice then Matter against us, as one lately told me, who is not of our
Society: Neither would I too much Treat him in his Folly, lest (as the wise Man
says) I appear like him, neither would I be altogether, silent lest he grows
Proud in his own conceit. And having given Account of Transaction in these
things before I saw his, and now made some reply in short, to what I thought
most needful in this, I shall commit my Innocent Cause to God and to his just
witness in the Consciences of all that Reads both his and mine, to Judge in
themselves who is in the wrong, or what cause he has thus to abuse me. And
rest a Friend to all that love Truth and Righteousness.

Samuel Cater.
Ely Prison the 17th of the 6th Month, 1683. Now the Controversy Rightly
considered, F. B. may apply the Title of his Book to himself, and his own
Mallicious Scornful Spirit.



George Smith's return to F. B.'s Scandalous report of him in his Book
Entitled, The painted Harlot, etc.
WHereas I have lately seen the said Book put forth by my Cousin F. B. wherein
he has Treated me as uncivilly, as he got the Money before of me unfairly: For
he has taken two passages out of a Letter of mine which I formerly sent him in
Answer to one he sent me, after he had the Money, wherein I much blamed him for
his unjust and unfair dealings with me about the 15 Pounds as I have given
Account of. And now I find he has taken out of that large Letter (which
contained almost three sides of a Sheet of Paper) only two passages barely from
what went before and follows after, and which is explanatory to that which he
has recited, whereby his unfair and Falacious dealing is manifest, for by that
way he makes my Letter seemingly speak what he would have it, and not what I
intended, and is thereby apparent; and when he had done so, then he paraphrases
upon it, and tells what lies he pleases, to abuse me. But God that knows the
Secrets of all Hearts, knows how much he has belied and abused me, and S. C.
and his Wife thereby, in Page 38. He brings me in speaking in my Letter to him
in this manner, viz, I am engaged to give an Account of this business, without
I would hear the loss of all the 15 Pounds aforesaid. And again, that I am
necessitated now to give such a report left the Parties concerned should think
I was too much biassed in joining with thee. Thus far he has Quoted me, by
which two Passages he pretends as if I told S. C. and his Wife some false story
of him to get my Money again; which is altogether false, and nothing true in it,
neither will my words bare such a construction in my Letter as he makes of
them, if they be Read as I have set them down, for his construction is contrary
to the intent of my mind, for my mind therein is to speak plainly and truly how
he got the Money of me, as may be seen in my Letter, and for that end, that the
Truth may be known, I have hereunto annexed that part of my Letter, out of
which he pretends to have taken them words, leaving out what made not for his
turn, as may appear to all that reads it. The other large part I leave out for
Brevity sake, and which I find not meddled with in his said Book.

These are the Words of the Letter Verbatim, viz.
OH Cousin, thy State is to be Lamented, I desire the Lord may give thee a true
sight of thy sins, least that Scripture be fulfilled upon thee, where the
Apostle says, the Love of Money is the Root of all Evil; whilst some have
covered after it, they have Erred from the Faith, and have Pierced themselves
with many sorrows, and fallen into many dangerous and hurtful Lusts, thou
seems to be much offended because I spoke of thy unjust dealings by me in this
matter, indeed thou may very well be ashamed to hear, that one so nearly
related to thee as I am, and have had so much Love for thee as I have had,
should have so just a cause as thou have given me, to give such a Report of
thee as I am necessitated now to do for the clearing of my own Innocence, that
so the Parties concerned, nor no others that hears of it, may think that I was
too much biassed in joining with thee in this matter, so that I am engaged to
give an Account of the business as it is, without I would bare the loss of all
this Money, to cover thy Deceit, and how unreasonable that is, I leave it to the
honest to Judge, for thou know that the business does not end in thee and I,
and therefore it must be known, and besides I do not find Freedom in my self
to cover such Deceitful dealings as thou have used in this matter, I perceive
that thou had been contented that I should have held my Tongue to have
covered thee, and bore the Money my self for my good will. So no more at present
but my hearty desire that thou may truly repent and forsake all such Actions as
^^^^re.

And so Remain thy Kinsman George Smith.
Littleport the 22d. of the 8th Month, 1679.

WHereas Francis Bugg, has falsely accused Samuel Cater, etc. with Growing so
Oppressive (when going on Truths Errand) that the Widows substance is
devoured, that some have been Constrained to Break up House. For which he
Quotes, our Deceased Mother, thus, viz. Sam. Cater knows, that the Widow More
at the Seven Stars nigh Bishops gate London, has understood what I mean, now
we her two Sons, (one of us living with her, when she Lived there,) do affirm
this to be an abusive Forgery, and foul Defamation and Scandal, for we know of
no such thing of our Deceased Mother, nor never did hear so much as the least
complaint thereof from her, and we are certain she did no^ leave off Shop upon
any such Account, as.

Witness our Hands, John and Joseph Moor.
London, the 30th of the 6th Month, 1683.
THE END.
Advertisement
THere is now in the PRESS a Book, Entitled, The Liberty of an Apostate
Conscience: being a plain Narrative of the Controversy long depending Between
Francis Bugg on the one part, and Samuel Cater and George Smith on the other
part: whereby F. Bugg's Liberty of Conscience is proved not only Unchristian,
but Immoral and Injurious.


