A CAUTION TO MARRIED COUPLES: Being a true RELATION How a Man in
Nightingale-lane Having beat and abused his Wife, Murdered a Tub-man that
endeavored to stop him from Killing her with a Half-pike.

For which he was carried to Newgate the 15th of May 1677.

Licensed

May the 16. 1677. To. L'Estrange.



LONDON: Printed for D. M. 1677.

A CAUTION To Married Couples, etc.
IF we consider the strict Obligations which both Nature and Religion lays upon
Man and Wife each to other, one would wonder such discontents, hatreds, and
cruelties should happen between them, as daily and in every place almost we see
practiced. But it is no miracle if we mind that the greatest part of men and
women take up that sacred Ordinance, and abuse that Divine Institution by
profaning it, and enslaving themselves out of particular and unjust designs:
So rate it is, but the Devil of covetousness for a good Portion, the unclean
Spirit of Lust for a pretty charming Face, or some other sinister Bias
interferes and chops in, whilst Virtue and Equality or Agreement, as well in
Fortune and Quality, as Humor (the great or rather only Cement that can
firmly knit the Matrimonial Bond) are slighted and neglected. From this
infected Spring do all the waters of Bitterness, which overflow so many
Families, originally arise: which beginning in railing, quarrelling, and
fighting, seldom conclude without destruction to both parties, or what at least
is equivalent, to the murder of one.

Of this we have just now a dreadful Example before our faces; which we desire
may be a warning to all men, not to abuse their Wives, nor in fury to violate
the Nuptial Laws, by acting the madmen in beating those whom God and Nature
have obliged them to cherish and maintain; it being certain that Whosoever
pretends just cause to beat his Wife, deserves severely to be cudgelled himself
for not cusing a better.

But to proceed to the too long expected Narrative of this too rashly executed
Fact, the Reader is given to understand, That on this 15th of May 1677, a
certain person, by Trade a Lighterman, living not far from the Armitage, took
some impertinent occasion to quarrel with his Wife; and after several words
(the common Bellows of Sedition) had passed, fell to blows: to avoid which, the
poor woman fled out of the house, hoping to escape her Husband's brutish fury;
but he seeing her fly, gets down an Half pike and violently pursues her; nor
could any body that saw him, judge otherwise than that he had an intention at
that time to have killed her, though Fortune directed the unhappy Pass another
way: For it happened at the same fatal moment a certain Tub-man, dwelling on
Salpeter bank near Rosemary-lane, a person frugal industrious, and (what is the
necessary product of those commendable qualities) pretty well thriving in the
world, passing by and wearied with his burden, sat down on his Tubs just
against this persons door; where observing the unnatural Cobat between two that
were (or at least should be) both one flesh, and that the Head was going to
spit the Rib, to prevent Murder, steps in between them, and with fair and
gentle words requested the man to forbear further beating or abusing his Wife;
who was so incensed thereat, that in the same ungovernable posture he made at
him, (I mean the Tub man that endeavored to part them) and with one Pass laid
him on the ground stone-dead; as well he might, having ('it is said) pierced part
of his very heart.

The woman by this luckly unluckly means made her escape, and the dead person
taken up, and all means endeavored for his recovery, but in vain: for he was
gone beyond the retrieval of Art; so frequent a thing it is for those that
endeavor to quench an unruly Fire to be scorched therewith; and those that
intermeddle in a Squabble to be more durtied and abused than such as originally
begun i^.

The person that did this wicked deed was so overcome with Passion, that at
first he could scarce be convinced he had committed it; but upon examination
before a Justice, did confess, he believed he had killed the man, but not
without provocation, hindering him to correct his Wife, etc. A very poor excuse!
because a Friend or Neighbor seeing me in an extravagant Passion, endeavors
to reclaim me to more quiet and sobriety, shall I therefore kill him? God
forbid; but rather thank him for his good advice and counsel.

But I conceive all sober and and discreet men will abhor so bloody a Fact, and
learn to live with their Wives in that love and tenderness that meekness and
condiscention each to other, as becomes persons under so strict a Vow, and so
many ties of Nature, Custom, Interest, and Religion; all which are violated
when man and wife live at variance: Nor did I yet (though I have above twenty
years curiously observed it) ever know a Couple that thrived in the world, who
nourished Debate at home between themselves; but rather that Loss, Beggary, and
Misery, and too often Murders and untimely Ends to some of the parties have
ensued, as in this lamentable Example is too sadly apparent; the Husband being
at this instant a Prisoner in Newgate, there to remain for his final Doom next
Sessions, according as the Law shall direct.

FINIS.

