AN EPISTLE TO King Charles the II SENT FROM AMSTERDAM IN HOLLAND, The 28. of
the 10. month, 1660. Wherein is contained certain Orders and Laws there,
concerning the Liberty granted to those which cannot take up Arms, nor Swear,
which Laws there do yet continue; As also several Arguments showing that the
People called Quakers are no Popish Recusants, who are cast into prison for not
Swearing. With Advice and Direction to KING CHARLES, that His tenderness may
appear likewise to tender Consciences, who keep to their Yea and Nay, that if
they break their Yea and Nay, they may be punished as for breaking an Oath.

William Caton.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the sign of the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate, 1660.

Carole Rex,
FOrasmuch as the Lord has been pleased to permit Thee to sit upon Thy Fathers
Throne, and to sway the Scepter in England, after Thy sojourning some years in
a strange Land, where Thou was environed with strangers, and sometimes
compassed about with many fears, and then did grief with sorrow of mind attend
Thee, when Thy Subjects had dissented from Thee, Thy enemies prevailed over
Thee, and Thy trusty Friends obstructed from communicating of their substance
to Thee, thereby to have done Thee a pleasure: Do Thou not yet remember how
Thou was in those days dejected and cast down in Thy Spirit, when there was
scarce hope remaining, of ever seeing such a day as this? And was there not
then also much commiseration in Thy heart (in the day of Thy affliction, when
Thou was a sufferer Thy self) toward suffering people? And did Thou not then
cry out against the oppression wherewith Thy Friends were oppressed, that could
not conform in all things to the powers that then were the Supreme in the
Nation of England? And was it not an evil, in Thy own judgment, in them then,
that would not let people have their liberty to worship God in that way of
which they were the most persuaded in their own hearts, that it was according
to the way of God; whether they desired to have the Common Prayer Book, or the
Directory, or to have their liberty to worship God without either of these, in
Spirit and in Truth, which were before these were made, and in which the Saints
worshipped God before these were framed or composed? Now certainly if it was an
evil in them to debar people of their liberty in things appertaining unto the
Worship of God, then must it also be an evil now in them that will not give
liberty to, tender consciences in matters of worship which tends not to the
breach of the peace of the Kingdom. And inasmuch (O King) as Thou Thy-self has
found by experience an excellency in the liberty that was afforded Thee with
Thy Friends in the time of Your exilement, in things appertaining unto your
Worship: It is therefore the more hoped by some that thou will yet excel other
Princes in this particular, considering Thy own condition: Surely if Thou, with
those that out of love to Thee, exposed themselves to the inconveniency of
exilement with Thee, had not been allowed to refide in any place, except You
had been conformable to their Religion, and by an Oath to have bound your
selves to have been true and fa^thful unto their Discipline, though it had been
contrary to your consciences, this would by You have been accounted hard
measure; nay moreover not only to have been debarred of your liberty in the
place, but also to have forfeited your goods, chattels and your whole substance
unto the Supreme Mag^strate of that place, except you would have acted contrary
to your consciences; surely you would not have approved well of this, neither
would you have had it thus done unto you.

And now be it known to Thee (O King) that the Lord God of Heaven and Earth
has a little Flock in that Nation (where the Lord has set Thee to sway the
Scepter* and they are exceeding dear unto him, and precious in his sight, for
they tender his Glory more than their natural lives, and his Commands more than
their liberty: wherefore if thou desire that it may be well with Thee, and that
Thy days may be prolonged in Thy Realm, be cautious how Thou lays Thy hand
upon them, as thereby to afflict them; or of suffering them to be oppressed by
the Laws of Thy Kingdom, for abiding in the Doctrine of their Lord, For it has
been upon me from Him to signify to Thee, That if thou suffer them to incurr
the danger of premunirae upon them for abiding in the Doctrine of Christ, Know,
from the Lord, that their Estates, their goods and their Chattels shall not
make Thee rich, neither will they be blessed to Thee; and moreover, if they be
excluded out of Thy protection for doing the will of their Master and for
obeying his Command, they shall not therefore be shut out of the Protection of
their God, who is both mighty to save, and mighty to deliver; And if thou
should exclude Thy self out of His protection by Thy sinning against Him, and
oppressing His people, then all Thy Forces under Thy Command within Thy
Dominions, would not be able to deliver Thee out of the hands of Thy enemies,
nor yet to preserve Thy Treasures out of the hands of spoilers.

It is well known already upon this side of the Seas, what a snare the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy are made unto the People of the Lord within Thy
Dominions, and how that many of them are already cast into the common Goals for
refusing to take them. Even as it was in the days of Oliver Cromwell; many of
them were cast in prison (by such as acted in his name) for not taking the Oath
of Abjuration, and other Oaths; And because they did not take it, therefore
were they deemed to be Jesuits, by such as made that a snare for this People,
even as they now that act in Thy Name make the Oaths before mentioned, a snare
to this People; and because they now take not these, therefore are they now
deemed to be Popish Recusants, as before they were supposed to be Jesuits,
when that some of them who was accused to be Jesuits had never learned the
Accedence; and so were far from being Jesuits; and now many of them are judged
to be Popish Recusants, who peradventure do not know what a Popish Recusant is:
Moreover it is well known that many Popish Recusants in the Nation go free, and
have not these Oaths tendered them, yet through the envy of many that are in
Authority, this People before mentioned are brought into external trouble about
this very thing, which they are clear of, as they may see, that do understand
the true intent and meaning of the Act, which was made Anno tertio Iacobi
Regis, chap. 4. For the better discovering and repressing of Popish Recusants,
in which Act the Oath of Allegiance is contained; and as for the other Act made
Anno primo Reginae Elizabethae in order to the restoring to the Crown, etc.
wherein the Oath of Supremacy is contained; This also is wrested, and made as a
snare to the people before mentioned, when no places of Office are conferred
upon them, neither do they nor none of them (that I know of) receive thy Fees
nor Wages, and therefore not of those to whom the Oath of Supremacy is to be
tendered; For they are known to be credible men that fears God, and are
absolutely against all Treasons, Plots and treacherous Conspiracies,
whatsoever, both against Thee and all men, whose Yea, is as much to them, yea
more than many men's Oaths are to them that will Swear; wherefore they might
well be confided in and credited, for of their fidelity and innocence the
Nation has had much proof already; So that if it were not more out of malice
to them, than out of love to Thee, or jealousy of them, these Oaths before
mentioned would not be so frequently tendered to them by those that act in Thy
Name, who might easily be prevented from troubling this peaceable people in
this matter, by a few lines from Thee, being issued forth as an Order to the
contrary by Thee, and thereby a stop might be put in part to the prosecution of
that wickedness which is in the hearts of many in Authority at this day
against this innocent people, who I do assure Thee are no Popish Recusants, and
this I shall endeavor to manifest clearly to Thy understanding by some few
plain and simple (yet sound) Arguments, as

First, If they were Popish Recusants, then would they own a mortal man to be
the head of the Church, and the Church to be under the obedience of the Pope of
Rome; but they own Christ Jesus only (who is immortal) to be the head of the
Church, and it to be wholly under his obedience, and not under the Popes of
Rome, and therefore are they no Popish Recusants.

Secondly, If they were Popish Recusants, then would they swear and take oaths
before Magistrates, if it were required of them; but they will not swear in no
wise, though thereunto required by Magistrates, though they suffer for it, but
do abide in the Doctrine of Christ, who said, Swear not at all, and him they
choose to obey rather than Magistrates that require to Swear, and therefore are
they no Popish Recusants.

Thirdly, If they were Popish Recusants, then would they how to Images, worship
them, and honor them that are the works of men's hands: but they bow to no
Image, neither do they worship or honor any Image which is made with men's
hands, in the likeness of any thing in heaven above, or in the earth beneath;
And therefore are they no Popish Recusants.

Fourthly, If they were Popish Recusants, then would they own a Purgatory after
this life; but they testify against such Doctrine, and do not believe any such
Fables, therefore are they no Popish Recusants.

Fifthly, If they were Popish Recusants, then would they own Temporal Bread and
Wine, after Consecration, to be the Body and Blood of Christ; but they believe
and know that his Body ( which is meat indeed, and his Blood which is drink
indeed) i^ Spiritual and Incorruptable, and so not external bread and wine
which will corrupt and decay after Consecration as before: and in this
particular also they differ from the Romish Catholics, and therefore are they
no Popish Recusants.

Sixthly, If they were Popish Recusants, then would they observe days, and
holi-dayes, and times, as Christmasse, Lent, Easter, etc. but these, do they
observe no more than other days and times; and therefore are they no Popish
Recusant^.

Seventhly, If they were Popish Recusants, then would they use Crosses and
Crucifixes with Beads and such like frivolous things; vide their little Catho.
Catechismus fol.5.
and they would also mark themselves with the sign of the Cross, upon their
foreheads, upon their mouths, upon their breasts, and from one side to the
other; but Crosses, Crucifixes and Beads they reject, as the works of men's
hands, which cannot make their worship any thing more acceptable unto God;
neither do they at all mark themselves with the sign of the Cross, as Popish
Recusants do, therefore are they no Popish Recusants.

Eighthly, If they were Popish Recusants, then would they pray for the dead,
and unto the Saints that are dead, that they might pray to God for them that
are alive in the flesh; but they do not pray for them that are outwardly dead,
nor unto the Saints that are dead, but unto the Lord alone, in the Name of
Christ, who gives life and breath; and therefore are no Popish Recusants.

Ninthly, If they were Popish Recusants, then would they once a year at the
least confess their sins unto a Popish Priest, upon their bended knees, before
the Virgin Mary, the Archangel, John Baptist, Peter and Paul, and before all
the Saints, as Popish Recusants imagine, and then would they pray unto these
before mentioned for them to pray unto God for their Absolution, Fol 15, 16. 17.
and after they had done thus would they receive an Absolution from the Priest,
etc. but they confess their sins unto God, who is able to remit and forgive
them, and not unto Priests before the Saints that are dead; neither do they
receive Pardons or Absolutions from any mortal man of, or for their sins, and
therefore are they no Popish Recusants.

Tenthly, If they were Popish Recusants, then would they observe the Commands
of the Church of Rome, which are chiefly these five, viz. First, That the
Saints days be sanctified and kept holy. Secondly, That they hear Mass.
Thirdly, That the Feast days be duly observed. Fourthly, That Confession of
sins be made at the least once a year to the Priest. And finally that the
Sacrament be received at or about the time of Easter: But these Commands and
Institutions of the Church of Rome they renounce as superstitious traditions of
men, with many more of their Ceremonies and Rudiments; And therefore are they
no Popish Recusants.

Eleventhly, If they were Popish Recusants, then would they respect men's
persons, as they Papists do, and have them in admiration because of advantage.

Twelfthly, If they were Popish Recusants, then would they wrestle with flesh
and blood, and would put such to death as they judged to be Heretics, that
were not of their mind; But the weapons of their warfare are not carnal but
spiritual; and therefore do not they wrestle with flesh and blood, but are
absolutely against the taking away of any man's life, for his judgment or
opinion in matters of Religion; And therefore are they no Popish Recusants.

Thirteenthly, and finally, if they were Popish Recusants then would they go on
pilgrimage, hold up Temples, Tithes, Altars, Nuneries, Relics, Indulgences,
Inquisitions, then would they, like unto the Romish Catholics, believe
whatsoever the Church of Rome believes; but in life and Doctrine, so well as
in matters of faith do they differ from the Church of Rome, and that not only
in the things before mentioned, but also concerning their seven Sacraments, and
their Baptizing of Infants, and in many more things; And therefore may we
safely conclude they are no Popish Recusants.

So that it clearly appears from what I have already said, that they are not
such men as the Authors of that Act (which was made Anno tertio Iacobi Regis
Chapter 4. wherein the oath of Allegiance is contained,) intended to have
discovered and repressed, etc. And therefore may we conclude that the
Magistrates that tendreth this Oath to them, and makes it a snare for them
(whom they know will not swear;) Do it rather out of malice and envy, then in
justice or equity. Now (O King) it is in thy Power to remedy this, if it were
but in thy heart to do (something in order to the amending of it) according to
the power thou have in thy hand, then might this yoke soon be broken off the
necks of the oppressed in thy Dominions.

Now if thou should desire to have a way perscribed thee, how such a thing
might be done, or would know where ever any Prince or Potentate did the like,
when they had a People in their Dominions that could not swear nor take up
Arms, etc.

Answer. I shall show thee how a Magistrate did beyond the Seas, to tender
consciences, that their Yea should be taken in place of an Oath, etc. But take
a view of the order it self, or a Copy of the substance of it, which is as
follows.

WHereas there has been an Adress presented unto his Excellency in the behalf
of certain Inhabitants of the City of Middlebrough, Rolw. Apo. fol. 100, 101,
102.
wherein complaint was made of the Magistrates of the said City* Who not long
since has caused the Shops of some Inhabitants to be shut up, and consequently
has forbid their trading, though it be their only means they have to maintain
their Families by* and that this has been the case (to wit) their refusing the
taking the accustomed Oath as others have done; Yet nevertheless it appears,
that for certain years past they have paid all taxes, Contributions and Customs
belonging to the City, even equal with other Citizens and Inhabitants of the
said City, though they had never taken the said Oath) and that willingly; And
therefore ought they now to have their liberty without being molested in this
particular, seeing they desire nothing else, then to live in the Inioyment of
the Liberty of their Consciences; In order to which this present war with the
King of Spain was raised by his Subjects, the which now by the help of God is
come so far, that the aforesaid Liberty of Conscience is obtained, and
therefore it would be an evil thing to take it a way from these people, who
through their paying of Taxes and Contributions and bearing of other burdens,
(besides the great hazard both of their lives and Liberties) has helped to
obtain it. And it appears that these people have declared that they are willing
to be ruled according to the Ordinances of the City, yet nevertheless the
Magistrates do and have striven with them about the Oath, which has not only
tended to the expelling of them out of the City, but consequently to the
forcing out of a numberless company of others in Holland and Zealand, with
their Wives and Children, to their utter ruin; And this would not tend to any
man's profit, but on the contrary it would be a great apparent hinderance to
these Lands, because thereby trading over all would greatly decrease.

And forasmuch as these people do proffer, that their yea shall stand instead
of an oath, and the transgressors thereof to be punished as perjured persons;
which thing his Eccellency having taken into consideration, does therefore with
the advice of the Governor and Counsel of Zealand, Ordain and confirm* and by
these presents be it Ordained, and confirmed, that the peoples yea aforesaid
shall stand in stead of a Oath, before the Magistrates of the aforesaid City,
and that the transgressors of the same shall be punished, as forswearers or
perjured persons; Moreover his Excellency do charge and command the Magistrates
of Middlebrough, with all others whom it does concern, for the future not to
burden the Consciences of these people aforesaid any further with the oath,
but that they should open their shops and follow their trading, as formerly
they have done, etc.

This was given forth in his Eccellencies Name, and under his Seal in the City
of Middlebrough in Zealand the 26. of January, Anno, 1577.

Here follows a Copy of another order which tends to the confirmation of
the former.

Noble, honest, honorable, wise, discreet and special beloved.
WHereas there are certain men, as it is said, dwelling in Middlebrough, Vide
(...)ligion(...) Vryhe(...) fol. 68*
who with complaints have at sundry times m ad known unto us, how that you are
daily molesting them, so that in q^ietnesse and peace they cannot follow their
trading, thereby to get a livelihood for themselves and their Famelies, they
being hindered from setting open their shops, under pretense of their Refusing
the taking of the Oath, in such a form as other Citizens have done, the which
we have already taken into Consideration; And seeing that the aforesaid people
do profer to bear their part of all reasonable burdens with other Citizens,
they themselves being excused from bearing of Arms, so that you may order that
for them at their charge or such as you shall appoint, howbeit not to exceed
equity and reason.

But however we think that you are to be blamed, that you suffer them not to
live in quietness and peace according to their mind and conscience, and
according to the Act, which with the advice of the Governor and Counsel we
have formerly granted them, which they have showed unto you, as they say, and
nevertheless we have understood, that to this present day you will not observe
it, nor our former Letters; We are therefore now finally necessitated to write
this, by the which we do manifestly declare unto you, that it belongs not unto
you in particular to trouble your selves about the consciences of any, if there
be nothing done by them, which tends to the scandalizing of any; And in that
particular we do not desire to respect or suffer any; and therefore we expressly
charge and require you, that from henceforth you forbear molesting these people
called Anabaptists, or from hindering them from following their Trades and their
Merchandise, whereby they may get a livelihood for their Wives and Children;
And see that henceforth you suffer them to open their shops, and to follow
their business, as heretofore they have done; and see that you take heed how ye
act contrary to this, o^ to the Act before mentioned, or of taking any Fines of
these people for the case aforesaid, while nothing is attempted by them, which
might tend to the scandelizing of any man, they bearing their reasonable share
of suchburthens as do belong to the City, as well as others, etc.

Written at Antwerpen the 26. of July, 1578.

Thus very Nobly did this Prince of Orange, undertake to procure these peoples
freedom from that which envious men made a snare for them, like as some do now
the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, as I have showed before, and not only in
this praticular, but sometimes in other cases is swearing made a snare for the
people of the Lord in thy Dominion, which snare thou might as easily break by
an Order to the same purpose, even as he did by the Order or Orders aforesaid,
by virtue of which, thousands at this day have their Liberty in this particular
concerning swearing, under the States of Holland; and their yea to this day is
as commonly taken before a Magistrate in the place of an oath, as an oath is
from others, in matters of differences or other occasions, when in the
Magistrates judgment there is need of an oath.

The Ho. Mo. Heeren Staten General of Holland and West-^ri^sland (So called)
did in this particular follow the footsteps of the beforementioned Prince, and
the Governor and Counsel of Zealand; For upon a certain time when they had
occasion for money, after their great and tedious war with Spain, they made an
order for to enjoin the Citizens and others, to pay them one Guldert out of a
thousand, or one pound of every thousand, and upon their oaths were they to
declare so near as they could, what their Estates were worth; But the Sta^es
excepted the Anabaptists aforesaid from swearing, and ordered that their word
should be taken for truth without an oath; yet if it could be proved that they
did not speak the truth, then were they to be punished like the rest that swore
falsely.

It is probable that thou thy self have had knowledge of these things before
now, being Thou have been a Traveller in these parts in Thy own Person; Now the
Anabaptists (so called) do not only enjoy this Privilege in these
Low Countries, but also Thy Kinsman C. Lodovicus Prince of Palatine, He
affords the same Liberty unto this People, who are neither constrained to
swear, nor yet to bear Arms within His Dominions, no more then they are here
in these united Provinces, where they are neither fined nor imprisoned for not
bearing of Arms, nor yet for refusing to Swear; But does not the common Goales
in England witness the contrary, which does make the hearts of the Righteous
sad, who have desired that Thou might so far have exceeded other Princes in
giving Liberty to the Lords People, as He has exceeded in mercy toward Thee,
even beyond what He has done or manifested for, or to other Princes? Oh
therefore let none of them excel Thee, in Nobility, or any Virtue, but strive
to be equal with them, if not to go beyond them, in every good work, and
especially that, ( viz.) in giving Liberty to tender Consciences.

Moreover (O King) if Thou be not satisfied in Thy self concerning the
conscientiousnesse of those People in thy Realm (that cannot swear) the Truth
of their Doctrines, and the equitablenesse of their Principles; then choose
forth some of Thy ablest Divines, and let them have a fair Dispute in Thy
Presence, and in the presence of judicious Men that fear God, and will judge
impartially of the things they shall hear discussed, that so the Truth may be
manifested and embraced, and Error and erroneous opinions discovered and
avoided. Have Thou not read how that Prince Frederick of Palatine in the year
1571. did grant forth an order for a Dispute betwixt a People called
Wederdoopers, or Anabaptists, and the Priests? and how He caused the aforesaid
Order to be published throughout His Dominion, in all Cities and Villages, that
all His Subjects might have timely notice of it, and He appointed two or three
men to take care that things were kept in good order, and that each Party had
free Liberty to speak, what they understood and thought good concerning the
things propounded; And He also caused ready writers to be appointed, to take
what was spoken in writing, and all was to have their Liberty to speak one by
one.

And that none of the Anabaptists might refrain coming, by reason of expenses,
or want of money to bear their charge; The Prince therefore undertook to take
care to provide lodging, with meat and drink, for them that were appointed to
manage the Dispute, during the continuance of it, which was 19. days; and
every one was to be admitted to hear, whether they were Anabaptists, or
whatsoever they were, and the Prince himself was present at much of it, as
appears by the Protocoll.

These People called Anabaptists, had suffered exceeding much persecution
before the Dispute beforementioned; and when the Prince saw that they could
not be well suppressed with violence, then did He grant forth the Order
aforesaid for the Dispute; and those were a sort of people that were not
conformable in many things to the generality of his Subjects, in that they
would not baptize their Infants, neither would they swear in any wise, neither
would they take up Arms, etc. So the Prince being in a strait concerning them,
did as aforesaid; And afterward came they to obtain Liberty and Freedom, not
only in the Paulz, but also in the Low Countries, where at this day here are
many thousands of them; And surely it has been for the States profit that they
have been suffered, and that they have given them that liberty which they have
afforded them; And so will it be for Thy benefit, to give liberty to that
People in Thy Dominion, who abide in the Doctrine of Christ, and cannot swear
at all; though I know some may endeavor to persuade Thee to the contrary, like
as Haman did persuade the King Ahasuerus against the Jews, Hest. 3. 8.
saying, There is a certain People scattered abroad, and dispersed among the
People in all The Provinces of Thy Kingdom, and their Laws are diverse from all
People, neither keep they the Kings Laws, therefore it is not for the Kings
profit to suffer them; even so may Thou be instigated against the Lords
People, who are as dear unto him as the Apple of his eye; These things lay upon
me to communicate to Thee, some of which may serve as Presidents and examples
for Thee, whereby Thou may in part see how to make a progess into that which
the Lord requires of Thee; Wherefore consider of them with Thy Counsel, and if
the Lord put it into your hearts to do good, do it quickly, before your glass
be run, and your day spent.

And though many of those Anabaptists did abuse their liberty, and so came to
suffer for it formerly, in breaking their yea, yet the Law remains still,
which thousands have the benefit of to this day, that keep to their yea, In the
united provinces and in Germany. And the people called Quakers, have had
opportunities and provocations enough to have taken up Arms, and to have
defended themselves, and who have suffered more then ever they did, that broke
their word, and that you know, and are convinced of; therefore have they chosen
sufferings by all the powers before you, knowing that their Kingdom and their
Glory is not of this World, therefore do they not fight for the Kingdoms of
this World.

THE END:

