THE CATECHISM FOR THE CURATS, Composed by the DECREE OF THE Council of Trent.

And Published by Command of Pope PIUS the Fifth.

Faithfully Translated into English.

PERMISSV SVPERIORVM.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty
for His Household and Chapel, for him and Matthew Turner.

M.DC.LXXXVII.

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE CATECHISM.
ARTICLE I. Why and When the Synod of Trent decreed that this Catechism should
be Published.
WHen all things were full of Hatred and Dissension (especially those Princes
to whom was committed of God almost the whole Government of things, Vide
Diploma in Bullario, p. 667.
differing among themselves) when the Unity of the Name of Christ was now
almost pulled and torn to pieces with Schisms and Heresies, Paul III. of Sacred
Memory, willing to put a stop to those so great Evils, in the Year of the
Incarnation of our Lord 1537. appointed a General Council at Mantua; but beyond
expectation, and by the suggestion of the Prince of Darkness, the City Mantua
could not be granted the Church for this purpose, unless upon certain
Conditions very far from the Reasons of Ecclesiastical Dignity and Liberty,
which for just Reasons being not yielded to, 'twas necessary to make choice of
another Place. Nor did any seem more fit and convenient than Vincentia, a City
large enough indeed, and under the Authority and Power of the Venetians, who
granted it, being both Safe and convenient to all: Wherefore thither a General
Council is called, to begin on the Kalends of May, 1538. in the mean while the
Pope endeavored to reconcile Charles the Emperor and Francis King of France;
and therefore He and both those Princes came to Nice, their Ambassadors being
sent before to Vincentia to prepare for the Council. There could be no Peace
concluded betwixt the Emperor and the King, but only a Truce was agreed upon
for ten years. Now hitherto the Council was once and again appointed, and put
off almost Three whole Years; which time being spent, the Holy Pope, impatient
at the loss of so many Souls, altering the Place, and having chosen the City of
Trent, at the Request of the Germans especially, there he anew denounces a
Council to be held on the Kalends of November, in the Year of the Incarnation
of our Lord 1542.

A Bull was no sooner sent to the Princes, but unhappily fresh War is
vigorously pursued between the Emperor and the French King, whence a thousand
Disturbances arising on every side, the Council could not be begun before the
Thirteenth day of December, Anno Dom. 1645. In the mean time it was wonderful
to behold how greatly Luther's Heresy crept abroad; and Impiety, the Child of
War, had overspread almost all Europe, and there scarcely remained so much as
the bare Shadow of Religion. Now to take away and reform these Evils, the
Fathers from all Parts hasten together to Trent; but, Good God! the Work
appears Infinite, and in the Lake Lerna, there is not only one Hydra to be cut
off, but the Work requires many Hands; which that the Fathers might furnish
with Arms, they undertake to inform the Curats, who at that time were almost
all void of both Learning and Religion; that thereupon the ignorant Vulgar
might the more easily be taught. Now concerning the Way and Manner of holding
this Divine Council, it was afterward long and diligently debated: The Fathers
met: There were made by the Heretics not only vast Volumes, Vid. Ind. Librorum
prohibit.
whereby they endeavored to overthrow the Catholic Faith; but also there were
written almost infinite Books by them, which carrying in them the Titles and
Shows of Piety and Religion, it is incredible how hard it was to discern the
good Seed of Christ from the Tares of the Enemy; and there were as many
Catechisms carried about, as there are Provinces in Europe, yea, and almost as
many as there are Cities; all which abounded with Heresies, and wherewith the
Minds of the Simple every where were deceived; and scarcely was there any one
well grounded in the Faith. Wherefore the Fathers of the General Council of
Trent, The Preface of the Catechism, p. 4.
being earnestly desirous to apply some wholesome Remedy to this so great and
dangerous Evil, thought it not enough to determine some of the Points of
Catholic Doctrine against the Heresies of our Times; but held it further
necessary, to appoint some certain Way and Rule of Instructing Christian People
in the Rudiments of Faith; which in all Churches they are to observe, to whom
is lawfully committed the Charge of Pastor and Teacher. Observe, O ye Pastors,
and own this your Book, forasmuch as it was not only undertaken and published
for your sakes; but also the Use of it, by the very Council, is thus appointed
you. That the Faithful may come with the greater Reverence and Devotion of Mind
to the Receiving the Sacraments, Sess. 24. de Reformat. c 7.
this Holy Synod commands all Bishops, That not only when the Sacraments are to
be ministered to the People by themselves, they first explain the Use and Virtue
of them, according to the Capacity of the Receivers; but also, if there be
need, and if it can conveniently be done, that they endeavor the same may be
piously and prudently observed by all Curats, even in the Vulgar Tongue,
According to a Form to be appointed by Holy Synod, in a Catechism concerning
all the Sacraments, which the Bishops shall take care to have faithfully
translated into the Vulgar Tongue, and by all Curats to be explained to the
People, etc. From whence it appears, for what Reason, and for whose sake, the
Holy Synod of Trent Decreed this Holy Work to be published: And from what was
before cited, it is not darkly hinted, that even from the very beginning of the
Council, the Fathers foresaw it to be very necessary, and decreed, or at least,
which is very certain, they appointed in the Eighteenth Session, which was the
Second under Pope Pius IV. That this Sacred Work should be composed, S. Charles
Borromaeus then procuring, and with incredible diligence promoting whatsoever
was profitable for Reformation of Manners: For when it was there decreed
concerning the Choice of Books, and certain Fathers were chosen for that
purpose, That all pernicious and suspected Books should be set aside and
prohibited by the Council, it is not to be doubted, that it was at the same
time decreed concerning the Remedy to be applied to that postiferous Doctrine,
i. e. concerning the publishing our Catechism; and that there were some Fathers
chosen, which we shall name by and by, to labor in so great a Work. This
plainly appears from the Constitution of the Twenty fifth Session, where it is
decreed concerning the Index of Books, and making our Catechism: For thus it
says;

The Holy Synod celebrated in the Second Session under our most Holy Lord Pope
Pius IV. has committed to certain Fathers chosen for that end, the
Consideration of what is fit to be done concerning diverse Censures and Books,
either suspected or pernicious, and to make Relation thereof to the Holy Synod.
Now understanding that the whole Work is finished, and yet that by reason of
the variety and multitude of Books, the Holy Synod cannot distinctly and
conveniently judge of them, She commands that whatsoever has been done by them,
be exhibited to his Holiness the Pope, that it may be determined and published
by his Judgment and Authority; and commands the same to be done about the
Catechism, by the Fathers to whom it was committed, and about the Missal and
Breviary. From these things it manifestly appears, first, Why the Synod of
Trent commanded this Form of Catechism to be published: Secondly, When it
Decreed it: Thirdly, That this Catechism is of so great Authority, that it
ought to be preferred before all others: Fourthly, That it ought never to be
out of the Hands of the Pastors; for to them it is a Storehouse of true
Divinity, and a Treasure sull of all Ecclesiastical Discipline.

ARTICLE. II. To what Fathers the Care of the Catechism was committed, and how
long they labored about it.
IT may be said, that the Fathers labored in this Catechism two several times:
First, While they were at Trent, in Council, i. e. for almost Two whole Years,
to wit, from the Eighteenth Session celebrated the Twenty sixth day of
February, 1562. till the end of the Synod, which was finished in the Month of
December, 1563. The last, i. e. when the Sacred Assembly was dismissed, at
Rome, whither certain Fathers chosen for this end, were convened together, and
continued in this Work above Three Years, to wit, from the Departure of the
Council, to the Year 1556. wherein the Work being finished, was offered to Pope
Pius V. of Sacred Memory, to be approved: Whence it was, that for Five full
Years the Fathers who among the rest were most Devout and Learned, and
therefore chosen by the Council, labored together both in Composing and
Perfecting this Catechism; which considering well of, verily we cannot judge
him by any means to be of a sound Mind, that thinks not such a Book as this
worthy of all esteem, and to be had in reverence in all Ages; and they that in
disputing of Matters of Divinity, if this Catechism be cited, reject it in
scorn, as fit for Children, we should think to be very unsound and in the dark.
But to come to the Fathers: It is certain from the Last Session, that for the
Two last Years of the Council, there were very many excellent Divines chosen
out of the whole Assembly of Fathers, that bestowed much Pains and great Labor
on this Catechism: For the Matter of it is divided into certain Articles, which
being then distributed amongst them, every one took care and labored in his
own, according to the Intent of the Council, and the Sense of the Church, as
the Spirit gave them utterance. That this was thus done, Christopher
Sanctorius, of the Order of Hermits of S. Austin, testifies, who says, That
this Particle of the Creed, [And in One Holy Catholic Church,] was committed to
Cardinal Seripandus, of the same Order, to be explained. But that the Fourth
Article of the Creed was assigned to Michael Medina, of the Order of Friars
Minors, appears from himself, who attributed it to himself, in the Preface to
his Opusculum concerning the same Fourth Article of the Creed: From Possevinus,
in Apparatu, Lit. P. we learn, that Peter Galesinus expounded in Latin that
part of this Catechism wherein are explained God's Commandments; and ibid. Lit.
I. he asserts, That Julius Spogianus expounded the last Head of this Catechism;
the same thing Castalio distinctly confirms in these Words: In Writing of the
Catechism which was made by the Decree of the Council of Trent, and published
by Command of Pope Pius V. there were many Divines and Learned Men that
labored. Delius Pasqualinus, a very grave Man, assured me, that the Creed, or
at least a part of the Creed, was given to Antonianus to be explained; which I
also found in his Adversaries.

Therefore, O ye Pastors, mark, I beseech you! Not only the Thomists took Pains
in this Work, as some have dreamed, that they might lessen the Authority of it,
as tho it were not the Work of the Universal Church, but of some peculiar
Theological Sect, wherein they cast no small Note of Infamy upon the Council
and Pope.

But passing by the Holy Council, which was over the whole Work, we deny not
that it was committed to some Fathers of the Order of Friars Preachers: But
from this very thing, that they undertook the doing of this Office by the
Churches Appointment, it is manifest, that they freely laid aside their own
proper and peculiar Sense and Opinion, if such they had; or that it was
enjoined them either by the Decree of the Council, or by the Command of the
Pope, by word of Mouth, to handle all things, not according to their own, but
according to the Churches Sense; otherwise it had been imprudently done; which
to assert, how wicked would it be? Now the said Fathers were these: I.
Leonardus Martinus of Genua, Archbishop of Lancia. II. Giles Fuscararius of
Bullen, Bishop of Mutinum. III. Francis Foretius of Lisbon, a Divine of the
King of Portugal's in the Council of Trent. All which, of how great Piety, of
how great Learning, and of how great Renown they were, for their very many
Ecclesiastical Gifts and Functions, both in the very Synod and out of it, S.
Charles Borromaeus, in his Epistle to Stanislaus Hosius Cardinal Vivarin. says
enough alone to satisfy me, that they were the most Learned among the Fathers
of the Council: And Joseph Ripalmontius confirms my Belief of the same thing,
when he says thus: He (he means S. Charles) conceived in his Mind that great
Work of the Roman Catechism, concerning the Performance of which Work, the
Fathers ( at Trent) made a Decree, and that Decree was extant among the rest;
and even the greatest Divines labored together in composing it, and disposing
the Heads of it. But this was S. Charles 's Design too, that the Divinity and
Height of the Matters and Sentences therein might be explained by like proper
Words; for that purpose making use of such Men as were most Excellent for the
Latin Tongue, by them to finish a Work which might seem to be made for some
better Age of Romans than the present Storm bonded. From which it is manifest,
that the Praise of this Work is in no small measure due to S. Charles himself:
Which is also plain from the Epistle of the same Saint to the King of Portugal,
of whom he begs leave, after the Dismission of the Council, to retain Francis
Foretius, because he would be very necessary to the Church, for the completing
of this Catechism. But tho the Glory of this whole Sacred Work seems to be due
to these Fathers, yet nevertheless we must truly and deservedly acknowledge,
that we have received it from Pope Pius V. of Sacred Memory, as from the First
Mover; and if there be need of Witness in this Case, we have Gabutin, who in
the Life of that Pope says thus: He took care that the Sacred Catechism for the
Curats, Gabut. in vita. P^i V. lib. 1. c. 2.
wherein are contained the Chief Heads of Catholic Doctrine, clearly explained
by Men famous for Christian Eloquence and Learning, should be made Latin, and
be published every where, first in Latin, and then rendered into the Italian,
French, German, and Polonian Language. Now since things, as to the Roman
Catechism, are so, what, I pray, are we to think? Of what worth is it? Of what
Authority is it? The General Council decreed it to be published, and
distributed to certain chosen Fathers, every part of the Matter of it to be
treated upon; and of all those Tracts by them made, by the Pope's Command and
S. Charles's Direction, the Work and Business is finished and perfected, by Men
best skilled in all kind of Learning, whose Virtue, Learning, and Piety was
well known to the Universal Church. Can we therefore find any other Book, next
to the Canonical Scripture, that we can hold more dear to us, and which
deserves to be more looked into?

ARTICLE. III. By whom this Catechism was approved.
BEfore this Catechism came forth into Light, tho there had labored in it so
Many and so Great Men, tho it had been read again and again, and completed by
the Care and Industry of S. Charles; yet being offered to Pius V. of Holy
Memory, that at last he should establish it by his Supreme Authority, that
Supreme Bishop would not have it go forth from him, before it should again be
reviewed by other Doctors, that this Universal Book being published with that
Maturity and Prudence which was fit, it might be universally received. The
Matter was committed to William Sirlet Cardinal, as one whose Learning and
Piety he very well knew; and which the Pope could not but be acquainted with,
by those other Cardinals, not a few, that were lately Assistants with S.
Charles. That so Great Man, by Command of Pope Pius V. took to him certain
Divines chosen out of the rest, who might sift and search narrowly into, not
only the Dogms or Doctrins of this Book, but also the very Words; which being
finished with singular Industry and Solicitude of that truly Admirable and
Faithful Pastor, the Pope approved it, and coming forth at Rome entire, that it
might pass every where else pure and incorrupt, he commanded it to be printed
by Manutius, to be perfectly purged from all Mistakes, and so to be published.
It is worth the while to consider the Popes own Words, and they are these, Of
our own Motion and Pastoral Duty desiring, as earnestly as we can, by the
Assistance of Gods Grace to perform and enjoin those things which were decreed
and provided by the Sacred Council of Trent, we have appointed that a Catechism
might be composed by chosen Divines in this fair City, whereby the Faithful
People of Christ, may by the diligence of their Curats, be taught concerning
those things which they must know, profess and observe: which Book, when by
Gods Assistance it was perfected, and to be brought forth into Light, we took
care to provide that it might be printed, with all the Diligence and
Faithfulness that could be. In this fair City therefore we would first of all
have it printed, by the Diligence of our beloved Son Paul Manutius, who is used
here to print other Ecclesiastical Books. Now because if it should be printed
elsewhere, it might happen that a Book of such an Argument might be printed with
less care and fidelity than is fit; for this Reason, etc. Dated at Rome at S.
Mark 7 of the Kalends of October, in the first Year, etc. From hence it is
plain how much the Pope made of this Book, and with how great Care it was to be
Printed; and indeed as often as hereafter it is to be Printed, the Bishops
ought to take Care from the Example of so great a Pope that it be not filled
with as many Faults as there are Lines in it.

First therefore Pope Pius V. not only by his own proper Motion approved this
Catechism, In Bull. ^ia p. 305.
but moreover he commended it, and commanded it to be used as often as any
thing was to be done about Amendment of Manners or Reformation of Orders. See
his 102 Bull published Anno 1580. for Reformation of the Cistercian Order;
Ibid. p. 307.
as also his 105 Bull published the same Year, about reducing the Congregation
of the Servants of the Blessed Mary to a better State; as also his 106
published the same Year also about the Amendment of the Missal.

The Second by whom this Sacred Work was approved, was Gregory XIII. Successor
to Pius V. who in a certain Breve of the Year 1583 declares, That by his
Command and Approbation, the Catechism was lately published; and this Pope
accounted this Book so truly profitable, that by his peculiar Mandate he
commanded it to be translated into the Sclavonian Language, as appears by the
Council of Algar, by and by to be cited, and moreover, as Possevine testifies,
this Catechism was to him as a certain Rule, whereby he thought that the Canon
Law it self may be reformed: For which cause he persuaded Francis Gracian, one
of the Treasurers and Canon of S. Vincent, to publish an Epitome of the Canon
Law; wherein he should pare away whatsoever had been abrogated either by the
Popes, or by the Council of Trent, or by the Roman Catechism.

The Third that approved this our Catechism was St. Charles Borromaeus, who not
only in his before cited Epistles; but also especially in this First Synod
which he had at Millan Anno 1565. where he commanded all Clerks, after that
they should attain to their Tenth Year, diligently to read this Catechism.

Fourthly, the same Catechism was approved in the Synod of Beneventum, Anno
1567. where it is enjoined to all, both Curats and Preachers of Gods Word, that
for the Discharge of their Office, they frequently have in their Hands that
Catechism, which was published by the Pope's Command, that they may be able to
teach all things according to sound Doctrine, and which the Chuch approves.

Fifthly, it was approved in the Synod of Ravenna 1568. and there under the
Title de Seminario c. 4. it wonderfully commends this Book, which it calls the
Catechism of the Council of Trent, and commands those that are in Seminaries to
have it always before them.

Sixthly, it was again approved by St. Charles in the Synod of Millan Anno
1569. and there it is commanded the Curats, that they frequently handle among
themselves some Reading of the Roman Catechism.

Seventhly, it was approved in the Synod of Meaux in Germany, which was held
Anno 1569. and thus decreed Constit. 26. The Curats in those things which
belong to their Ministry, even as the Bishops when they are to administer the
Sacraments to the People, ought to explain the Virtue and Use of them in our
vulgar German Tongue according to the Capacity of the Receivers, according to
what is contained in the Roman Catechism, a Book truly very profitable, and
very necessary for these Times.

Eighthly, it was approved again a Third Time by St. Charles in a Synod of
Millan Anno 1571. wherein it is commanded, that the Curats in the
Administration of the Sacraments make use of the Doctrine of the Roman Catechism.

Ninthly, it was approved in the Synod at Genua, Anno 1574. Tit. de Fidei
elementis a Parocho tradendis.

Tenthly, it was approved a Fourth Time by St. Charles in a Synod at Millan
Anno 1576. where among those Books which the Curat ought to exhibit to the
Bishop at Visitation, the Roman Catechism is appointed to be one.

Eleventhly, it was approved also a Fifth Time by the same St. Charles in a
Synod at Millan Anno 1579. where concerning the way of Examining, it is
commanded that enquiry be made concerning those that are to be Ordained,
Whether they have the Roman Catechism, and hold the Doctrine thereof.

Twelfthly, it was approved the same Year by the Clergy of all France, in a
Synod at Melun, wherein many places, but especially under those Four Titles, of
Baptism, Eucharist, Penance and Order, this Catechism, which there is
acknowledged to be of the Council of Trent, it is so commended to the Curats,
that by that Catholic Assembly of all the Clergy, it is judged altogether
necessary for them, and to be preferred before all others; for thus it is said
there, The Curats are bound to teach their Flocks according to the Prescription
of the Catechism of the Council of Trent, as purely and simply as may be. And
elsewhere, For the due Performance of which matter (to wit, in exhorting the
People, using the common Places of the Roman Catechism, and the Doctrine of the
Council of Trent, concerning all the Sacraments, which for that end is
studiously and accurately to be read by all Curats. Moreover, Let the
Confessors as exactly as may be, follow the Rules and Precepts of the Catechism
of Trent in things of this sort, and in exercising Works of Piety.

Thirteenthly, it was approved in the Synod of Roan in Normandy Anno 1581.
Where it was thus ordered. Now that every Curat may discharge his Office, let
him have the Roman Catechism in Latin and French, c. 10.

Fourteenthly, in the Synod of Bourdeaux Anno. 1583. where it is thus, Let the
Curats upon all Holy Days, teach the People somewhat out of the Catechism of
Trent, which by our Authority we enjoin them to have by them, both in Latin and
French, etc.

Fifteenthly, in the Synod of Tours Anno 1583. Tit. de professione and Fidei
tuendae curae.

Sixteenthly, in the Synod of Rhemes. 1583. Tit. de Curatis.

Seventeenthly, in the Provincial Synod of Aqueia in France Anno 1585. Tit. de
Parochis. Where it is thus, Now that every Curat may discharge his Office, let
him have the Roman Catechism, both in Latin and French, etc.

Eighteenthly, in the Provincial Synod of Tholous, Anno 1590. where it is thus,
We enjoin the Curats, that they have continually in their Hands the Catechism
of the Council of Trent. Tit. de Sacramentis.

Nineteenthly, in the Synod of Avignion Anno 1594. Tit. de Officio Parochi, Let
them diligently use the Roman Catechism.

Twentiethly, in the Synod of Aquileia Anno 1586. whereof before.

I omit very many Diocesan Synods, in which this our Catechism was approved.

I omit also those Doctors of very great Note, who assert, That next to the
Canonical Books, there is nothing can be read with more Safety and Advantage,
than this Catechism. Now these things, Friendly Reader, being premised, who can
endure the Boldness of them, that despising this sacred Work as a childish Toy,
scorn to meddle with it, and that for this only Reason; because it is called a
Catechism? O miserably blind Souls!

But to make those Men blush all over for Shame, I entreat them to hear
Augustine Valerius Cardinal and Bishop of Verona, a very dear Friend to St.
Charles Borromaeus, and the Glory of the Sacred College, in his First Book, Ad
Acolythos Veronense^.

This Catechism was published Three Year ago, by Command of Pope Pius V. which
we see to have been given of God, for the Benefit of the Christian
Commonwealth, and for the restoring to us the ancient D scipline of the
Church. A Work so excellent, if we regard the Gravity or Weight of the
Sentences, and the clearness of the Words or Expressions, that Learned Men judge
that there has nothing more excellent been published for these many Ages past.
For all things are explained, which belong to the Instructing of Souls, and
that in so good an Order, and with so great Clearness and Majesty, that our
Holy Mother the Church, taught by the Holy Ghost, seems to teach all, and Men
to hold their Peace. You that are somewhat aged, read this Catechism Seven
times over and more than seven times; for thereby you will get great Advantage;
for if in History it be delivered, that Demosthenes thoroughly to commend
Eloquence, described Thucidides Eight times, and for that end, committed to
Memory all his Orations so full of Arguments: how much fitter is it, that you,
who are employed in the Discipline of the Church, and ought to refer all your
Studies to Gods Glory, and your own and others Salvation, should diligently
read, yea, and even to copy out Eight times over this most excellent Book,
dictated by the Holy Ghost, written by the Decree of the Fathers that were
present in the Council of Trent, and published by the Authority of Christ's
Vicar?

ARTICLE. IV. The Advantages and Use of this Catechism.
THE Advantages of this Catechism of the Council of Trent are so many, as the
Necessities of the Church are; if Heresy is to be prevented, that the Devil
sow it not, and that it disturb not Catholics: Let the Curats often explain
this Catechism. If Heresy by an unlucky and ominous Birth, be already sprung
up and is to be stifled; let the Curats often explain this Catechism: If
Religion is to be preserved incorrupt and sincere; let the Curats often explain
this Catechism: If young Clerks, either in Seminaries, or privately, are to be
prepared for the undertaking of any Ecclesiastical Function; let this Catechism
be often read to them: If any one be minded to administer the Sacraments
devoutly, as is fitting, and to the Edification of his Neighbors; let him have
in his Hand this only Catechism: Lastly, if any Priest be minded to prepare
himself to hear Confessions, to make Sermons, to direct Souls; let them use
this only Catechism.

For it is useful not in one respect only, as may easily be observed from what
was before noted. I will here show some of the more profitable.

The First way of using this Catechism is enjoined in almost all Synods, both
Provincial and Diocesan, which were had after the Council of Trent, to wit, the
daily reading thereof, or at least so frequently, that whatsoever this Book
contains may be kept in Memory.

A Second way of using this sacred Work, is commanded by St. Charles in his
Second Synod at Millan before cited, to wit, that when the Curats of any
Neighborhood come to meet each other, they should frequently commune about some
part of this Catechism; which is now become a commendable Custom and Usage
every Week in the Famous Presbytery of S. Nicholas de Cardineto in Paris.

The Third way of using this Catechism is prescribed by the same St. Charles in
his Third Synod at Millan, where it is commanded, that as often as the Curats
are to administer any Sacrament, they teach and expound to the People the
Points and Doctrine of this Book, the same is appointed in the Synod of Roan in
Normandy.

The Fourth way of using this Book is proposed in the Synod of Bourdeaux before
cited, where it is appointed that on all Holy Days the Curats teach the People
out of this Catechism, some of those things which it concerns all Christians to
know.

The Fifth way is prescribed in the Synod of Cremona Anno 1603. Page 9. in
these words, By the Divine Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, those Fathers that
were in the Council of Trent commanded, that as soon as may be the Roman
Catechism might be written, out of which, as out of the most fruitful Breasts
of our Holy Mother, all the Clergy may suck the most sweet Milk of the Church's
Doctrine. That Custom therefore, which was holily introduced into our
Seminaries, for all the Clergy to explain the Roman Catechism, shall by all
means be henceforth observed daily, or at least thrice every Week by all Clerks
that teach School.

The Sixth way is prescribed by the Fathers themselves, in the very Preface of
the Catechism.

THE PREFACE OF THE CATECHISM FOR THE CURATES, By the Decree of the Council of
TRENT. Wherein the intent of the Council, the necessity and use of the whole
work are laid open.
SUch is the condition of the mind, and understanding of man, as that, I, The
weakness of the light of nature.
when of it self with great labor and diligence it has discovered and learned
many of those things, which belong to the knowledge of divine matters: Yet the
greatest part of those things whereby eternal salvation is to be attained, and
for which cause chiefly man was at first created, and made after the image and
likeness of God; it could never have discovered by the mere light of nature.

The invisible things of God (as the Apostle teaches) from the Creature of the
world, II. The necessity of supernatural revelation. Romans 1.20. Coloss. 1.26,
27.
are indeed clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even
his eternal power and Godhead. But that mystery which was hid from all ages and
generations, does so far surpass all humane understanding; that if it had not
bin manifested to the Saints, to whom it pleased God by the gift of faith to
make known the riches of the glory of this mystery, which is Christ, among the
Gentiles; it had bin impossible by any study or labor of man to aspire to that
wisdom.

But whereas faith is conceived by hearing; III. The necessity of Teachers.
Romans 10.14, 15, 16.
it is manifest how necessary the labor and ministry of a legitimate and
faithful teacher has always bin, to the attaining eternal salvation: For it is
written, How can they bear without a preacher, and how can they preach except
they be sent?

And indeed, IV. God has never bin wanting to those that are his. Heb. 1.1, 2.
Isa. 49.6. Heb. 12.25. 2 Pet. 1.17.
from the very beginning of the World, the most merciful and gracious God has
never bin wanting to those that are his: But by many and manifold ways, has
spoken to the fathers by the Prophets; and according to the condition of times,
has chalked them out a certain and direct way to celestial happiness. But
because he foretold, he would give a teacher of righteousness, for a light of
the Gentiles, and for salvation to the ends of the earth. He has last of all
spoken to us by his Son, whom also by a voice sent down from the most excellent
glory, Ephesians. 4.21.
he has commanded all to hear and obey his commands. And then the Son gave some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Pastors and Teachers, to preach the word of life;
that we may not be carried about as children, tossed to and fro with every wind
of Doctrine; but, sticking close to the firm foundation of faith, may be built
together in the house of God, in the Holy Ghost.

And lest any one should receiv the word of God from the ministers of the
Church, V. How the pastors of the Church ought to be heard.
as the word of men, and not as it is indeed, the word of Christ; our very
Savior himself has appointed so great an authority to be given to their
direction, that he says, He that bears you, bears me; and he that despises you,
Luc. 10.25.
despises me. Which yet he would not have to be understood of those only, to
whom he then spoke; but also of all those, who by a lawful succession, should
afterward be received to the office of Teaching, with whom he promised to be
always present, Matt. 28.20.
even to the end of the world.

But whereas the preaching of the divine word ought never to be intermitted in
the Church, VI. The necessity of preaching Gods word.
so at this time with much greater piety and industry ought it to be
endeavored, that with sound and incorrupt doctrine, as with the food of life,
the Faithful should be nourished and confirmed. For there are false Prophets
gone out into the world, 1 John 4.1.
of whom the Lord said, Jer. 23.11.
I sent not the Prophets, and yet they ran; I spoke not to them, and yet they
prophesi'd to corrupt the minds of Christians by diverse and strange doctrines,
wherein their wickedness, furnished with all the arts of Satan, has proceeded
so far, that it seems scarcely possible to be kept in any bounds. And, were we
not confirmed by that excellent and clear promise of our Savior, who affirms
that he had laid the foundation of his Church so sure, Matt 16.28.
that the gates of Hell should never be able to prevail against her: It might
at this time be very much feared, that being on every side beset by her
enemies, opposed and tried by so many engines and devices, she should utterly
perish.

For, VII. Heresy breaking forth.
to omit those most noble provinces and countries which heretofore have piously
and holily embraced and retained that true catholic religion, which they
received from their ancestors or forefathers, but now leaving the right way,
have gone astray, and do openly profess their greatest piety and religion to
consist in this, That they are departed, and gone far away from the doctrine of
their forefathers: There is no country, how remote soever, no place so well
fortified, there can no corner of Christ'ndom be found, whereinto this plague
has not endeavored secretly to creep.

For those who intended with themselves to corrupt the minds of the faithful,
VIII. By what arts she scattered her errors.
knowing well, that they could not have particular conference with all, to
whisper their venom into their ears; have gone another way to work, whereby
they have much more easily and diffusedly scattered the seeds of their impious
errors. For besides those vast volumes wherewith they have endeavored to
overthrow the Catholic religion; whereof to beware, there was no great need
perhaps of any great pains or circumspection, since they contained so manifest
heresy: they have also writt'n infinite books, which carrying in them a
pretense of godliness; it is incredible how easily they have deceived the
unwary minds of the simple.

Wherefore the fathers of the general Council of Trent, IX. Why the Council of
Trent commanded, Sess. 14. cap. 7. and Sess. 25. in the end, that this
Catechism should be published.
being earnestly desirous to apply some wholesome remedy to this so great and
dangerous evil, thought it not enough to determine the more weighty points of
Catholic doctrine, against the heresies of our times; but held it further
necessary to appoint some certain way and rule of instructing Christian people
in the rudiments of faith: Which in all Churches they are to observe, to whom
is lawfully committed the charge of pastor and teacher.

There have been many heretofore employed in this kind of writing, X. The
authority and scope of this Catechism.
very commendable both for piety and learning. But yet the Fathers thought it
would be very useful, That a book should be published by authority of the holy
Synod, whence the Curates, and all others to whom the office of teaching is
committed, many find and fetch certain precepts and rules for the edification
of the faithful; that as there is one God, and one faith; so also there may be
one common rule and prescript form of teaching Christian people, all offices
and duties of piety.

Now there being so very many things which seem to belong to this matter; XI.
What it is this Catechism treats of.
it is not to be supposed therefore, that it was the design of the holy Synod
to comprehend, and exactly explain all the dogms or opinions of Christian faith
in one book; which they are use to do, who profess to handle all the whole
doctrine and institution of religion: For that would be a labor almost endless,
and indeed not so very suitable to the purpose: But because the holy Synod
intended to instruct only the Curats, and those who have cure of Souls in the
knowledge of those things which most properly belong to the Pastoral office, and
accommodated to the capacity of the Faithful, she undertook to handle those
things only, which might assist the pious endeavor of the Pastors in this
matter, if they have not bin so conversant and well skilled in the more
difficult disputes of divine matters.

Which things seeing they are so; XII. What things are to be observed in
teaching.
before we come to handle those things severally, in which the sum of this
doctrine is contained; the order of our design requires, That some few things
which Pastors ought to consider and lay before their eyes, should be explained:
That they may know whither as to the end, all their aim, labors and studies are
to be directed: And by what means they may the more easily compass and effect
the thing they desire.

This therefore seems to be the chief, to remember, XIII. The first.
That all Christian knowledge or learning is contained in this point; or rather,
as our Savior says, Joh. 17.3.
This is life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent Wherefore the labor of a Preacher in the church, ought
especially to be employed in this, That the faithful may earnestly, and from
the very bottom of their souls desire to know Jesus Christ, and him crucified,
1 Cor. 2.2.
and most assuredly persuade themselves, and with the deepest affection and
devotion of heart believe, Acts 4.2.
That there is no other name under Heaven given to men whereby they must be
saved; For he is the propitiation for our sins.

But because hereby we know that we know him, XIV. The second. 1 John 2.3.
if we keep his commandments; the next thing, and, as we have already said,
very closely joined with it, is, That he also evidence, that the faithful ought
not to lead their life in sloth and idleness; 1 John 2.6.
but that we ought so to walk, even as Christ walked; and that with our utmost
endeavors we should follow after justice, godliness, faith, charity, meekness:
Tit. 2.14.
For, he gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify to himself an acceptable people, zealous of good works: Which the
Apostle commands the Pastors to teach and exhort.

But whereas our Lord and Savior has not only said, XV. T e third. Matt. 22.40.
1 Timothy 1.5. Romans 13 18.
but by his own example has also evidenced, That all the whole Law and Prophets
do depend on Love or Charity; and the Apostle afterward confirmed, That
Charity is the end of the commandment, and the fulfilling of the law; none can
doubt, but that this, as a principal duty, ought with all diligence to be taken
care of, That the faithful be excited to the sincere love of the immense
goodness of God toward us, and being inflamed with a kind of divine ardor, be
wrapped up to the supreme and most perfect good. To adhere to which, he
sufficiently feels it to be the most true and solid happiness, who can say with
the Prophet, Psalm. 72.25. 1 Cor. 12.^1. 2 Cor. 13.8.
What have I in Heaven but thee, and what on earth do I desire besides thee.
This indeed is that more excellent way, which the Apostle has shown, when he
directs all the course of his doctrine and teaching to charity, which never
fails. For whether any thing be proposed to be believed, to be hoped, to be
done; the love of our Lord ought always so to be recommended therein; that any
one might perceiv all the works of perfect christian virtue, to have their
birth or original from love only; nor are they to be referred to any other end
than to love only.

But whereas in teaching any thing, XIV. The four h.
it is of very great importance, whether you teach it in this or that way or
method; so especially is this to be reputed very useful in teaching Christian
people. For, the age, understanding, manners and condition of the hearers is to
be observed: 1 Cor. 9.19.
That he who teaches may become all things to all men: 1 Cor. 4.12.
and that he may gain all to Christ, and be able to approve himself a faithful
minister and steward; (...). 25.23.
and like a good and faithful servant, may be found worthy to be preserr'd by
his Lord over many things.

Nor ought he to think, that men of one temper only, are committed to his
charge: XVII. The fifth.
Or that one certain Rule or prescribed Form is suitable and sufficient to
teach and instruct all the faithful in Christian piety: But whereas some are,
as it were, 1 Pet. 2.2.
infants new born; others begin to grow to manhood in Christ, and some do grow
in a manner to full age: It is necessary to consider, who they are that have
need of milk; who, of more solid meat; 1 Cor. 3.2.
and so to provide for all, such food of doctrine, as may give spiritual
increase, Heb. 5.22, 13.
till we all come into the unity of the faith, into the perfect manhood of the
knowledge of the Son of God, into the measure of the stature of the fullness or
age of Christ. The Apostle yielded himself an example to be observed by all
herein, when he said, Romans 1.14.
That he was debtor both to the Greeks and to the Barbarians; both to the wise,
and to the unwise: to wit, That those that are called to the ministry might
know, that they ought so to accommodate their doctrine to the capacity and reach
of their hearers, in delivering the mysteries of faith and rules of life, that
when they have filled the souls of them, Heb. 5.14.
who have their senses exercised with spiritual meat; they suffer not, in the
mean time, the little ones to perish with hunger, who ask for bread, and there
is none to distribute it to them.

Nor ought it at all to discourage any ones endeavors in teaching, XVIII. The
sixth.
because it is sometimes necessary for the hearers to be taught the rules of
those things which are common and despicable; although frequently it is not
without some difficulty that they are handled by those, whose minds are taken
up with, and take a kind of pleasure in the contemplation of the more sublime
and lofty matters. For, 1 Thessalonians. 8.8.
if the wisdom of the eternal Father came down to the earth in the meanness of
our flesh, to teach us the rules of the heavenly life; who is there whom the
love of Christ cannot constrain to become little among his brethren, and as a
nurse fostering her little infants; so earnestly to desire and endeavor the
salvation of his neighbor, 1 Thessalonians. 2.8.
That, as the Apostle testifies of himself, he would not only deliver the
Gospel to them, but even his own life for them.

Now the Rule of all that doctrine which the faithful are to be taught, XIX.
Whence the Christian doctrine is to be fetched.
is contained in the word of God, and is divided into Scripture and Tradition.
The Pastors therefore should night and day be meditating on these things.
Always remembering S. Paul's admonition, which he wrote to Timothy, which also,
all that have cure of souls should reckon as belonging to themselves, and this
is the admonition, 1 Timothy 4.13. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
Attend to reading, exhortation, and doctrine; For all Scripture written by
divine inspiration is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness, that the man of God might be perfect, and ready
to every good work.

But because the things delivered of God are many and diverse, XX. Whence is had
the division of this Catechism.
that they cannot easily be comprehended in the mind; and being comprehended,
cannot be kept in memory: Therefore when there is offered an opportunity of
teaching; that the explaining of those things may be fit and easy; our
Ancestors have very wisely reduced the whole power and substance of the doctrine
of salvation into these four heads, viz. The Apostles Creed, The Sacraments,
The Decalogue or ten Commandments. And The Lords Prayer.

For all those things which are to be held by the discipline of Christian
faith, XXI. The First part.
or which belong to the knowledge of God, or to the Creation and Government of
the world, or to the Redemption of mankind, or to the Rewards of the good, or
Punishment of the wicked, are contained in the doctrine of the Creed.

But those things which are Signs and instruments, XXII. The Second part.
as it were, for the obtaining of divine grace; these the doctrine of the Seven
Sacraments contains.

But those things which have reference to the Law, XXIII. The Third part. 1 Timothy 1.5.
the end whereof is Charity, are set down in the Decalogue.

Lastly, Whatsoever may be savingly wished, XXIV. The Fourth.
hoped or prayed for by any man, is comprehended in the Lord's Prayer. Whence
it follows, that these four, which are, as it were, the common places of the
holy Scriptures, being explained; there can be nothing wanting in a manner for
the understanding of those things which are to be learned of a Christian.

It seemed good therefore to admonish the parish Curates, XXV. The manner of
dividing the Catechism into several Sundays.
that as often as it came in their way to interpret any place of the Gospel, or
any other place of holy Scripture, they may know the meaning of that place,
whatsoever it be, falls under one of these heads we have even now mentioned;
whither they may have recourse, as to the fountain of all doctrine, for
explanation of it. For example, If the Gospel of the first Sunday in Advent be
to be explained: Luc. 21 25.
There shall be signs in the sun and in the moon, etc. What is pertinent to the
explanation thereof, is handled under the article of the Creed [He shall come
to judge the quick and the dead] which being thence taken, the Pastor may with
the same pains instruct the faithful people, both in the Creed and in the
Gospel. Wherefore in all the parts of teaching and interpreting, he will do
well to hold to this practice of directing all things to those four chief
points, to which we thought fit to refer the whole power and doctrine of holy
Scripture; but yet to take that order in teaching, as will be most proper both
to the persons to be taught, and to the season.

We following the authority of the Fathers, XXVI. Why it begins with the
explication of the Creed.
who in bringing men to Christ our Lord, and in instructing them in his
discipline, began at the doctrine of Faith; have thought fit first to handle
those things which belong to Faith.

But because in the word of God, XXVII. What Faith is.
the signification of Faith is manifold; we here speak of that, by virtue
whereof we wholly assent to those things which are delivered by God. Now that
this Faith is necessary to the attaining everlasting salvation, no one can
justly doubt; especially seeing it is written, Heb. 11.6.
Without Faith it is impossible to please God. For, whereas the end proposed to
man for his happiness, is far higher than for him to attain to by any human
understanding, it was necessary, that he receive the knowledge thereof from God.
Now this knowledge is nothing else but Faith, by virtue whereof it comes to
pass, that we assuredly hold that for truth, which the authority of our most
holy mother the Church approves as delivered by God For the faithful can by no
means doubt of those things, whereof God, who is the very truth it self, is the
author. Whence we perceive how great a difference there is betwixt this Faith,
which we have toward God, and that which we bear toward the writers of human
stories. Now tho Faith extends very far, and disters both in greatness and
dignity (for thus we read in holy Scripture, Matt. 14.31. Luc. 17.5. Gal. 5.6.
Jam. 2, 14.
Wherefore did thou doubt, O thou of little Faith? and, Great is thy Faith:
And, Increase our Faith: So, Faith without works is dead: And, Faith which
works by charity;) Yet in kind it is the same thing: And the same definition or
description and reason does agree to the different Degrees of Faith. But how
fruitful and advantageous it is to us, will be said in the explication of the
Articles of Faith. Those things therefore which Christians ought chiefly to
hold, are the same which the Captains and Doctors of Faith, the holy Apostles
who were inspired by the holy Ghost, have distinguished in the twelve articles
of the Creed.

For when they received commandment from the Lord to go his Ambassadors into
all the World, XXVIII. Why the creed was composed. Mar. 16.15.
and to preach the Gospel to every creature, they thought fit to compose a form
of Christian Faith; to the end that all might think and speak the same thing,
and that there might be no schism or division amongst them, 1 Cor. 1.10.
whom they called to the unity of the Faith: But that they might be made
perfect in the same mind and in the same judgment. This profession of Christian
Faith and hope, composed by themselves, the Apostles called a Symbol; either
because it was made up of the various sentences which they severally cast into
the common stock; or because they would use it as a certain kind of note or
character, whereby they might easily discover those false brethren, who having
deserted and withdrawn themselves, corrupted the Gospel, from those who had
bound themselves by oath to fight under Christ's Banner.

THE CATECHISM FOR THE CURATES, BY THE DECREE OF THE Council of TRENT.
PART I. Of the twelve Articles of the Creed.
I Believ in God] There are in Christian Religion many things proposed to the
faithful, I. What the Creed contains.
whereof there must be had, either severally or universally, an assured and
firm Faith. But then This first of all and necessarily all are bound to
believe, which, as the very foundation of truth, God himself has taught us, to
wit, concerning the Unity of the divine Essence and Distinction of the three
Persons, and their actions, and for what special reason they are attributed to
them. The Curate is to teach that the doctrine of this mystery is briefly
comprehended in the Apostles Creed.

For as our forefathers, II. The division of the Creed.
who were both piously and learnedly skilled in this point, have observed; it
seems to be divided into Three principal parts; so as in one. The First person
of the divine nature, and wonderful work of the creation is described. In the
other, the Second person, and the mystery of man's redemption. In the third
part is concluded the doctrine of the Third person, the head and fountain of our
holiness, all in various and fit sentences. Now, those sentences by a kind of
similitude often used by our forefathers, we call Articles. For as the members
of our body are distinguished by joints: So also in this confession of Faith,
whatsoever is to be believed by us separately and distinctly from another
thing, we rightly and fitly call an Article.

ARTICLE. I.
I Believ in God the Father Almighty, I. What this article contains.
maker of Heaven and Earth.] The meaning of these words is this, I certainly
believ, and without any doubting, do profess God the Father, to wit, the first
person in the Trinity; who, by his Almighty power, created out of nothing, the
very Heavens and the Earth and all things contained in them; and having created
them, he defends and governs them all: Nor do I only in heart believ, or by my
mouth profess, but with my utmost endeavor, and strongest affection I reach
toward him as my supreme and most complete good. This then is a short account
of the first Article. But because in almost every one of these words, there
lies hid mighty mysteries; the Curate ought to weigh them more diligently, that
as far as God shall permit, the faithful may be brought with fear and trembling
to the contemplation of the glory of his Majesty.

The word [Believ] does not therefore in this place signify, II. What it is to
believ.
to think, to suppose, to be of opinion; but, as the holy Scriptures teach, it
signifies a most firm and sure assent, whereby the mind does firmly and
constantly adhere to God in the revelation of his mysteries. Wherefore he does
rightly believ (in the sense here meant) who is fully and certainly persuaded
of a thing without any doubt or wavering.

Nor ought any one to think that the knowledge of Faith is less certain, III.
The assurance of faith.
because those things which Faith offers to us to be believed, are not
presently beheld. For, the divine light, by which only we perceiv those things,
although it makes them not so very clear; yet it suffers us not to doubt of
them. For God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, 2 Cor. 4.6.
Ibid. 3.
he has shined in our hearts, that the Gospel might not be hid to us, as it is
to them that perish.

And now from what has bin already said, IV. Faith excludes curiosity.
it follows, That he that has this heavenly knowledge of Faith, is freed from
all curious enquiry. For when God commanded us to Believ, he did not require of
us to search narrowly into his divine judgments, or to pry into the reason or
cause of them, but commands us firmly and immutably to Believ. And this Belief
makes the mind contented in the knowledge of his eternal truth. And indeed,
since the Apostle witnesses, That God is true, but every man a liar; and since
none but an arrogant or impudent fellow will refuse to give credit to a grave
and wise person, when he affirms any thing for truth; but presses him further
to prove what he said by reason and witnesses: What rashness and folly must it
needs be for one that hears the very word of God himself, to demand reasons for
the heavenly doctrine of salvation? Faith therefore must be held free, not only
from all doubtfulness, but even from the very desire of more certain evidence
or demonstration.

The Curate is further to teach, V. The outward profession of faith necessary.
That he who says [I Believ;] besides that he declares the inward assent of his
mind, which is an interior act of Faith, ought also openly to confess and
declare that which he embraces and holds inwardly in his heart, by a free and
open profession of his Faith; and this with the greatest cheerfulness and
alacrity. For the faithful ought to have the same Spirit which the Prophet had,
when he said, Psalm 115.1.
I believed, and therefore did I speak: And to imitate the Apostles, who
answered boldly, even before the princes of the people, We cannot but speak
those things which we have seen and heard: Acts 4.20.
and be moved with the excellent saying of S. Paul, Romans 1.11.
I am not ashamed of the Gospel, for it is the power of God to salvation to
every one that believes. And again, Romans 10.11.
(that the truth of this sentence might sufficiently be confirmed) With the
heart man believes to righteousness, but with the mouth confession is made to
salvation.

[In God] Hence they, VI. How far faith excels the wisdom of the world.
to whom it is given, may learn what the worth and excellency of Christian
wisdom is, and thereby how much we are beholden to the goodness of God, and may
climb up, as by the steps or degrees of Faith, to the knowledge of the most
excellent and most desirable thing in the world. For, herein does the Christian
philosophy manifestly differ from the wisdom of the world; That the wisdom of
the world guided by the light of nature only, from the effects of these things
which are perceived by the senses, making very slow progress, and that not
without mighty toil and difficulty, at length hardly reaches to the
contemplation of the invisible things of God, and to acknowledge and perceiv the
first cause and author of all things: But on the contrary, the Christian
philosophy does so sharp'n the edge, and illuminate the understanding of the
mind of man, that without difficulty it can mount up to Heaven; and being
illustrated with the divine brightness, can truly behold first of all, the very
eternal fountain of light, and then those things which are below him: So that
with the greatest sweetness of mind, we can experimentally feel, 1 Pet. 2.9.
and with unutterable joy we can exult that we are called out of darkness into
unspeakable light, as the prince of the Apostles has it. Rightly therefore, in
the first place do the faithful profess to believ in God, Ibid. 18. Jer. 22.19.
whose Majesty we with the Prophet Jeremy, declare to be incomprehensible: For,
as the Apostle says, He dwells in light inaccessible, which no man ever saw,
and which no man is able to behold. For so he said to Moses, No man can see my
face and live. For there is need for that mind that will soar up to God, than
whom nothing is higher, to be altogether abstracted and withdrawn from sense:
And this by nature, in this life, we cannot attain to.

Now tho the case be really thus; VII. How God manifests himself Act. 14.16.
yet as the Apostle says, God has not left himself without a testimony of his
goodness, giving rain from Heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling men's hearts
with food and gladness; which was the reason why the Philosophers did not think
meanly of God, not attributing by any means any thing corporeal, any thing
gross, or mingled to him; to whom also they ascribed the perfect strength and
fullness of all good; so that from him, as from an eternal never-failing
fountain of goodness and bounty, does flow all that good, that all created
beings, and perfect natures do enjoy: Whom they called wise author of truth,
loving, just, bountiful, and by other names, signifying the supreme and most
absolute perfection: Whose infinite power and immense influence, they
confessed, fills every place, and extends it self to all things. But this is
far better and more clearly understood from the holy Scriptures; as in that
place, where it is said, Joh. 4.24. Matt. 5.48. Heb. 4.13. Romans 11.23. Romans
3.4. Joh. 14.6. Ps. 47.11. Ps. 144.16.
God is a spirit; and, Be ye perfect, even as your heavenly Father is perfect:
And, All things are naked and open before his eyes; and that, O the depth of
the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God! And, God is true: And, I am the
way, the truth and the life: And again, Thy right hand is full of
righteousness: And, Thou openest thy hand and fillest with thy blessing every
living creature: Lastly, Whither shall I go from thy presence? And, If I ascend
up into Heaven, thou art there; if I go down into Hell, thou art there also; if
I take wings in the morning and dwell in the utmost parts of the sea, etc. And,
Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, says the Lord? These are great and excellent
things, which even the Philosophers by searching into nature and the effects of
things, have consequently discovered concerning the nature of God, and
agreeable to the authority of holy Scripture.

And tho even hence we may learn how necessary this doctrine which came down
from Heaven, is, VIII. Faith is more easy and yet more excellent than
knowledge.
if we observe, that Faith is very excellent, not only in this, That those
things which only wise men, and that by long study and much labor can attain
to, do lie open and plain and become easy and familiar even to the unlearned,
as was said before; but that that knowledge of things, which is got by Faith is
much more certain, and much more frees the mind from error than any humane
knowledge can possibly do. But how much more excellent then is the knowledge of
God himself to be thought, to the attaining whereof, not the contemplation of
nature, but the light of Faith opens the way properly to believers. But this is
contained in the articles of Faith, which teach us the unity of the divine
essence, and the distinction of the three persons; as also that God is man's
ultimate end, from whom we are to expect the possession of heavenly and
everlasting happiness. For so S. Paul teaches us, That God is a rewarder of
them that diligently seek him. How great these things are, and whether they are
goods of this kind, to which mere humane wisdom can reach, the Prophet Isaiah
before the Apostle, Isa. 6.4.
shows in these words. From the very beginning they have never heard, nor has
any one told them; neither without thee, o God, has any eye seen, what things
thou have prepared for them that wait for thee.

From what has bin already said, IX. There is only one God.
we must confess. That there is but one God, not more Gods. For seeing we
ascribe the supreme good and perfection to God, it is not possible that what is
most absolute and supreme, can be in more than one. But if any thing be wanting
to make a supremacy to any one, he is thereby plainly confessed to be
imperfect: Wherefore such want is inconsistent with the nature of God. This is
proved by many places of holy Scripture; for it is written: Hear o Israel: The
Lord our God is one God: Deuteronomy. 6.4. Exodus 20.3. ^^. 41.9.44, 6 Ephesians. 4.5.
Besides God's commandment is, Thou shall have none other gods before me, or,
in my sight. And by the Prophet he often admonishes; I am the first and the
last, and besides me there is no God. The Apostle also plainly witnesses: There
is one Lord, one Faith, and one Baptism. Nor need we therefore wonder, because
sometimes even the holy Scripture it self seems to ascribe the name of God to
Creatures. For, that it so calls Prophets and Judges Gods, this is not done
after the same manner which the Gentiles used, which foolishly and wickedly
phanci'd that there were more Gods than one: But by a certain custom or form of
speaking, it would signify some excellent virtue or office which by the Grace
of God was bestowed upon them. Christian Faith therefore believes and confesses,
That God in his nature, substance and essence is but one: As, for the
confirmation of the truth it is declared in the Creed of the Council of Nice:
But rising yet higher, it so understands One, as it worships Unity in Trinity,
and Trinity in Unity: Of which mystery we are now to begin to speak; for it
follows in the Creed.

[Father] But because the word Father is attributed to God, X. How the name
Father is proper to God.
not for one reason only, it must therefore first be declared what is the most
proper signification of this place. Some even of those whose blindness Faith
never illuminated, did yet think God to be an eternal substance from which all
things had their beginning, and by whose providence they are governed, and kept
in their proper state and order. By a similitude therefore taken from humane
affairs, they called him Father, as they do him, from whom is sprung a Family,
and by whose counsel and command it is ruled: So for this it was, that they
called God a Father, whom they acknowledged the Maker and Governor of all
things. The same name also have the holy Scriptures used, when speaking of God,
they would show that the creation, power, and admirable providence over all is
to be ascribed to him. For thus we read, Deuteronomy. 32.6.
Is not he thy Father who bears thee, who made and created thee? And elsewhere:
Have we not all one Father? Has not one God created us?

But much more commonly, XI. God the Father of Christ in a special manner. Romans
8.15. 1 John 3.1. Romans 8.17. Heb. 1.21.
and by a kind of peculiar name, especially in the books of the new Testament,
God is called the Father of Christians, who have not received the spirit of
bondage to fear, but the spirit of adoption, to be the sons of God, by whom
they cry Abba, Father. For such love has the Father bestowed upon us, that we
should be called the sons of God, and be so. But if we be sons, then heirs,
heirs indeed of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ, who is the first begotten
among many brethren, and is not ashamed to call us brethren. Whether therefore
you regard the common reason of creation and providence, or that special one of
adoption, rightly do the faithful profess that they believ God to be a Father.
But besides those notions we have already explained, the Curates should teach,
that at the hearing the name Father, the mind is to mount up to higher
mysteries. For that which is hid and shut up in that inaccessible light, where
God dwells, and which humane reason and understanding could never attain to,
nor so much as suspect, That the divine oracles under this name Father begin to
unfold to us.

For this name shows us, XII. The name Father shows a plurality of persons.
That in the being of God, not one Person only, but a distinction of Persons is
to be believed. For there are three Persons in one Godhead. The Person of the
Father who is begotten of none. Of the Son, who was begotten of the Father
before all worlds. Of the Holy Ghost, who from all eternity also proceeds from
the Father and the Son. But the Father in this substance of the Godhead is the
first Person, who together with his only begotten Son, and holy Spirit, is one
God, and one Lord, not in the singularity of one person, but in the Trinity of
one substance. But now these three Persons are to be understood as distinct
only in their proprieties; for it would be a great wickedness but to imagine
that there is any thing unlike or unequal in them. For the Father is not
begotten: The Son is begotten of the Father: The holy Ghost proceeds from them
both. And thus we confess that the three Persons have the same being, and the
same substance. So that in the confession of the true and eternal Godhead, we
do holily and religiously worship both a propriety in the Persons, an unity in
the essence, and equality in the Trinity.

For when we say that the Person of the Father is First, XIII. How the First
person is a Father.
it it not so to be understood as if we thought any thing to be first or last,
greater or less in the Trinity. Far be it from all the faithful to think so
impiously, since Christian Religion teaches, that the same Eternity, the same
Majesty and Glory is alike in all the three Persons. But we truly and
confidently affirm, That the Father, forasmuch as he is the beginning without
beginning, is the first Person, which as it is very distinct by the propriety
of Father, so is it suitable to this one Person chiefly for this reason,
Because he begat the Son from all eternity: For it is plainly signified to us.
That he always was both God and Father together, whenever in this Confession
we pronounce these names together of God and Father.

But because we cannot be either more dangerously busi'd, XIV. That we should
not too nicely search into the Trinity.
or more miserably wander in the search or notion of any thing, than of this
point, which is of all others the most profound and difficult, the Curats ought
to teach, That the terms by which this mystery is signified, and which are
proper both to the Essence and Persons, are religiously to be retained, and let
the Faithful understand that there is both Unity in the Essence and distinction
in the Persons. But that they ought not more narrowly to pry into these things;
Prove. 25.27.
always bearing in mind that saying, He that is a searcher of Majesty shall be
oppressed with the glory of it. For this which our Faith assures us of, ought
to satisfy us, that thus we are taught of God, (whose Oracles not to give
credit to, would be the highest folly and misery in the world.) Go, says he,
and teach all nations, Matt. 28 19.
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost: Again, There are three which bear record in Heaven, 1 John 5.7.
the Father, the Word, and the holy Spirit, and these three are one: Yet let
him diligently pray and beseech God and the Father, who made all things of
nothing, and sweetly orders all things, who gave us power to become the sons of
God, who has revealed this mystery of the Trinity to the soul of man, let him,
I say, who by the gift of God believes these things, pray without ceasing, that
being at last received into everlasting Tabernacles, he may be found worthy to
see what the fruitfulness of God the Father is, whereby beholding and
understanding himself; he could beget a Son like and equal to himself: And how
of two the very same, and an equal love of Charity, which is the Holy Spirit
proceeding from the Father and the Son, knits together both the Begetter and
the Begotten each to other with an eternal and indissoluble Band. And thus
these is but one Essence and yet a perfect distinction of the Three Persons of
the divine Trinity.

[Almighty.] The Holy Scripture is used to express that supreme Power and
infinite Majesty of God by many names, XV. Why gloriou^l p the^^ are given God.
to show with how great religion and devotion his most holy name is to be
worshipped; but chiefly let the Curat teach that An Almighty Power is most
commonly attributed to him. For so he says of himself. I am the Lord Almighty.
Again, Genesis 17.1.
when Jacob sent his sons to Joseph, Genesis 43.14.
he thus prays for them, Now God Almighty give you favor before the man. It is
also written in the Revelations; Rev. 1.8.16.5.
The Lord God Almighty, who was, and is, and is to come; and elsewhere. The
great day is called the day of the Almighty God. Sometimes, also it is used to
signify the same thing in many words. Pertinent to this place is that which is
written, Act. 2.20. Numb. 11.23. ^^nd 12.8
There is no word impossible with God. Is the hand of the Lord weakend? Thou
can do^ whatsoever thou will. There are many other expressions of the like
kind. In all which various forms of speech any one may easily perceiv the same
to be understood, which is comprehended in this single word, [Almighty.]

Now by this Name of God we plainly perceiv, XVI. What the word Almighty
signifies
that there is nothing, nay that we cannot so much as conceiv any thing in our
mind or thought which God cannot bring to pass. For he has power to do, not
those things only which fall under our apprehension, tho they indeed are very
great, to wit, to reduce all things into nothing; and presently out of nothing
again to make many worlds; But he has power to do many mightier things than
these, and which our weak minds and understandings cannot conceive. And yet,
tho God can do all things, yet he cannot lie, deceiv, be deceived, or sin, or
be ignorant at all, or perish; for such things belong only to a Nature or
Being, whose actions are imperfect; but we say God cannot do these things,
because his actions are always most perfect; because to be able to do these
things, is a sign of weakness, and not of that supreme and unlimited Power
which God has. We therefore so believ God to be Almighty, that we abhor to
think or imagine any thing of him which is not most agreeable to the most
perfect Being.

The Curate may show it was well and wisely done to omit other names of God in
the Creed, XVII. Why in the Creed God is offered to be believed Almighty.
and only to offer this one to us to believ. For when we acknowledge God to be
Almighty, we must needs confess that he knows all things, and that all things
are subject to his Rule and Government. And when we doubt not in the least of
his Ability to do all things, it must needs follow that we must allow all those
other things, which if he should not have, we cannot understand how he is
Almighty. Besides there is nothing so powerful to strengthen our Faith and
Hope, as to have this always settled in our mind, that there is nothing which
God cannot do: For whatsoever we ought to believ, tho it be great, tho it be
wonderful, tho it exceeds the Order and Measure of things; yet humane Reason
easily and without any doubting, yields and assents to it, when once it owns
that God is Almighty. Yea rather by how much the greater those things are which
the Oracles of God teach, by so much the more readily does it account them to
be believed. And if any great good thing be promised and expected, the mind is
not discouraged although the thing it desires were too great. But it chears and
comforts it self, often calling to remembrance that there is nothing which
Almighty God cannot do.

With this Faith therefore we should especially fortify our selves, XVIII. The
profitableness of Faith in God Almighty.
either when we are required to do some wonderful works for the use and profit
of our Neighbors, or when we would beg any thing of God. The one, our Lord
himself has taught us, when reproving the Apostles for unbelief, Matt. 17.20
he said, If ye had Faith as a grain of Mustard Seed, ye might say to this
Mountain remove from hence to another place, and it shall remove, and nothing
shall be impossible to you. But of the other S. James testifies: Jam. 1.6, 7.
Let him, says he, ask in Faith nothing doubting: For he that doubts is like a
Wave of the Sea, which is moved and carried about with the Wind; let not that
Man therefore think that he shall receiv any thing of the Lord. This Faith does
moreover afford us many profits and advantages. It first teaches us all
humility and lowliness of mind: 1 Pet 5.6.
for so says the Prince of Apostles. Be ye humbl'd under the Mighty hand of
God. It also teaches us not to fear where no fear is, but to fear that One God
in whose power both we and all that belongs to us is, Luc. 12.5.
for so says our Savior, I will show you whom ye shall fear: Fear ye him, who
after he has killed has power to cast into Hell. This Faith serves us also both
to know and celebrate the infinite benefits of God toward us; for he that does
but think that God is Almighty, cannot be so ungrateful, as not oft'n to cry
out, Luc. ^.49
He that is Mighty has done great things for me.

But now when in this Article we call the Father Almighty, XIX In the Trinity
there are not three Almight s.
let no one be so far deceived as to think, that we so ascribe that name to
him, as tho it belonged not to the Son and Holy Ghost also: For as we say. The
Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God; and yet they are not
Three Gods, but One God. So we confess that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are
equally Almighty, and yet that there are not Three Almighties, but One
Almighty. But as for a kind of special reason we call the Father, because he is
the Fountain of all beginning, by this name; and as we attribute to the Son,
who is the eternal Word of the Father, Wisdom; so we ascribe Goodness to the
Holy Ghost, because he is the Love of them Both: Although according to the Rule of
the Catholic Faith, these and such like names may well be given in common to
all the three Persons.

Maker of Heaven and Earth.] How necessary it is to instruct the Faithful about
Gods Almighty Power will plainly appear from what is now to be spoken of the
Creation of all things. For the miracle of so great a work is more easy to be
believed, XX. Out of what, how, and when God made the World.
because there is no room left to doubt of the Infinite Power of the Creator.
For God made not the world out of any matter, but created it out of Nothing;
and that not throw any powerful constraint or necessity, but purely of his own
free will and accord. Nor was there any other cause which moved him to this
work of Creation, but only that he might impart his own goodness to those
things which should be made by him. For the Nature or Being of God being most
perfectly happy in it self, stood not in need of any thing. As David confesses,
Ps. ^^
I said to the Lord: Thou art my God, for thou have no need of my Goods. Now,
as being led by his own goodness, he did whatsoever he pleased: So when he made
all things, he had no Form or Pattern which was without himself, to go by: but
because in his divine Wisdom was contained the Pattern of all things; this
Pattern, I say, the great Creator beholding in himself, and imitating, as it
were, by his supreme Wisdom and Infinite Power which are proper to him alone,
he produced the whole universe of things in the beginning: For he spoke the
Word and they were made; Ps. 148.5.
he commanded and they were created. But then under the Name of Heaven and
Earth must be understood whatsoever the whole Heaven and Earth conteins. For
besides the Heavens, which the Prophet calls the work of his Fingers, Ps. 8.3.
He added moreover over the brightness of the Sun and of the Moon, and the
furniture of the other Stars, and appointed them to be for signs, and for
seasons, and for days, and for years, and has so disposed the heavenly Orbs in
a certain and constant course, that there is nothing can seem more swift in
their perpetual running round, and yet nothing can be more certain and regular
than their motion.

Furthermore, The Angels created, and in what state.
he created out of nothing the Spiritual Nature, and innumerable Angels, to
serve and wait upon him, and these he adorned and beautified with the admirable
gift of his Grace and Power: For seeing it is written in Holy Scripture, Joh. 8.
That the Devil kept not his first estate, it is plain, that he, and the rest
of the fallen Angels, in the beginning and at their creation were endu'd with
his Grace, of whom S. Augustine writes thus; He created the Angels, Aug lib. 12.
de Civit. Dei c. 9.
with a good will, that is, with a pure Love, whereby they cleav'd close to
him, at once giving them Being, and bestowing Grace on them. Whence it is that
we can never believ the Angels themselves to have bin holy without a good will,
i. e. without the Love of God. But then as concerning their Knowledge, we have
this Testimony in the holy Scripture: 2 Reg. 14 20
Thou, O my Lord the King, art wise, having Wisdom, as an Angel of God, to know
all things on the Earth. Lastly, Holy David ascribes Power to them in these
Words; Ps. ^^2.29.
Mighty in Power, fulfilling his Word; and for this Reason they are often
called in Holy Scripture the Powers, and the Hosts of the Lord. But although they
were thus adorned with all celestial Gifts; yet many of them, who fell from God
their Creator and Father, were thrown down from those most glorious Mansions,
and shut up in the dismal Dugeons and Prisons of the Earth, there to suffer
ever lasting Punishment for their Pride: Of whom the Prince of the Apostles
writes in this manner, 2 Pet. 2.4.
He spared not the Angels that sinned, but casting them down headlong to Hell,
he delivered them to be there tormented, and to be res^rv'd for the Judgment.

God also by his Word commanded that the Foundation of the Earth should be made
fast, XXI. The Earth established and adorned. Ps. 103.5.9.
and to stand in the middle of the World, causing the Mountains to rise up, and
the Fields and Valleys to sink down to the places which he had appointed for
them; and that the Waters should not overflow the Earth, he appointed them
their bounds, which they may not pass, nor turn again to cover the Earth. And
then he not only adorned and clothed it with Trees, and all the various kinds
of Herbs and Flowers, but he replenished it with all kinds of living Creatures,
even as before he had filled the Air and Waters.

Lastly, XXII. How Man was qualified in the Creation.
He formed Man, who was so made and constituted of the Slime of the Earth, that
he was immortal and impassible; yet not by the strength of Nature, but by the
divine Bounty. But then as to his Soul, he formed him after his own Image and
likeness, and gave him a Freedom of Will, and so temperd all the Motions and
Appetites of his Mind in him, that they should never disobey the government of
his Reason. He added also the admirable Gift of Original Righteousness, and
gave him Rule over all the other Creatures. Which things it will be very easy
for the Curates to learn, out of the sacred History of Genesis for the
instruction of the Faithful.

These things therefore we are to know concerning the Creation of all things,
XXIII. God the Creator of all. Psalm. 88.^^.
of Heaven and Earth; all which the Prophet has briefly comprehended in these
Words, The Heavens are thine, the Earth also is thine, thou have laid the
foundations of the World, and all that is therein. But the Fathers of the
Council of Nice have much more briefly signified the same by those two Words
added in their Creed, Of all things Visible and Invisible. For whatsoever
things have Being in the World, or were created by God, either fall under
Sense, and are called Visible, or else we may conceiv them with the Mind or
Understanding, and these are signified by the Word Invisible.

Nor may we believ that God so created and made all things, XXIV. God the
Preserver and Governor of all.
as to imagine, the Work being perfected and finished, the things made by him
could be able to remain, without his infinite Power to support them. For as the
Creator made all things by his supreme Power, Wisdom, and Goodness: So also if
his perpetual Providence were not always at hand with the things he created,
and preserved them by the very same Power he made them by, they would presently
fall back into their first nothing. And this the Scripture declares when it
says, Wisd. 11.25.
How can any thing continue, unless thou please, or that which thou call,
not be preserved? Now God not only defends and governs all things that have
Being, by his Providence; but also by a secret kind of Virtue, he moves those
things which are moved, and which act, to move and act, in such a manner, that
tho he hinders not the efficacy of second causes; yet he does prevent, and his
secret power reaches to all things, Wisd. 8.1.
and as the Wiseman witnesses, It reaches powerfully from End to End, and
sweetly orders all things. And therefore when the Apostle would declare that
God to the Athenians whom they ignorantly worshipped, Act. 17, 27, 28.
he said, He is not far from every one of us: For in him we live, move, and
have our Being.

And this is sufficient for the explication of the First Article, XXV. The
Creation to be ascribed to all the three Persons.
when we shall have given this Admonition, that the Work of Creation is common
to all the Persons of the Holy and Undivided Trinity. For in this place,
according to the Doctrine of the Apostles, we confess the Father to be the
Creator of Heaven and Earth: Job. 1.3.
Of the Son, we read in the Holy Scripture, All things were made by him: Genesis
1.2.
And of the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of the Lord moved upon the Waters: and in
another place, By the Word of the Lord, the Heavens were made, Ps. 32.6.
and all the Power thereof by the Breath of his Mouth.

ARTICLE II.
ANd in Jesus Christ his only S^on our Lord.] That the Benefit is wonderful and
satisfactory, I. The utility of this Article.
which throw the Belief and Confession of this Article redounds to Mankind,
this Testimony of S. John declares. He that confesses that Jesus is the Son of
God: 1 John 4.15.
God dwells in him, and he in God: And that commendation of Happiness which
Christ gave to the Prince of the Apostles, Blessed art thou Simon Bar-jona;
Mat. 16.17.
for Flesh and Blood has not revealed this to thee, but my Father which is in
Heaven. For this is the surest foundation of our Salvation and Redemption.

But because the Fruit of this admirable Benefit is best understood, II. Whence
the explication of this Article is to be begun. Come. Trent. Sess. 3. Can. 1,
and 2. Genesis 2.6.
from the ruin of that most happy State, wherein God at first placed Man; the
Curate is to take diligent heed, that the Faithful may come to the right
understanding of the cause of these common Miseries and Calamities. For when
Adam had fallen from his Obedience to God, and violated that Prohibition, Of
every Tree of the Garden thou may eat, but of the Tree of the Knowledge of
Good and Evil, thou may not eat, for in the day thou eatest thereof thou
shall surely dye: He fell into that most extreme Misery, that he lost the
Holiness and Righteousness in which he was created, and fell into the rest of
those Mischiefs which the Holy Council of Trent more largely has explained. But
besides this, Ibid. Sess. 6. Can. 1. and 2.
we are taught, That Sin and the Punishment of Sin remained not in that one
Adam only, but from him, as from the Seed and Cause, it justly flowed and
passed over to all his Posterity. Seeing therefore, that our whole Kind fell
from the highest pitch of dignity, not possibly to be restored to its former
station by any power of Men or Angels; there was this only Remedy left to
repair our miseries and ruins, that the infinite Power of the Son of God,
having first assumed the weakness of our Flesh, should himself bear the
infinite weight of our Sin, and in his own Blood reconcile us to God.

Now the Belief and Confession of this Redemption is, III. The confession of
this Article necessary.
and always was necessary to Men to Salvation, as God from the beginning has
shown: For in that first condemnation of Mankind, which presently followed
upon the Sin; there was also showed a Hope of Redemption in these Words, in
which he denounces the Devil his doom, which he was about to accomplish in the
deliverance of Men from his thraldom. I will put enmity between thee and the
Woman; Genesis 13.15.
betweeen thy Seed and her Seed, she shall break thy Head, and thou shall
bruise her Heel.

He moreover often confirmed the same Promise, IV. The promise of a Savior made
and confirmed.
and more plainly signified his purpose to those Men especially, whom he had a
singular love for; and among the rest, where both he had frequently signified
this Mystery to Abraham the Patriarch, and also more plainly declared it at
that time, when in obedience to Gods command, he was ready to offer up in
Sacrifice his only Son Isaac: For he says, Because thou have done this thing,
Genesis 22.17, 18.
and have not spared thy only begotten Son, I will bless thee, and will
multiply thy Seed as the Stars of Heaven, and as the Sand which is on the
Seashore: and thy Seed shall possess the Gates of thy Enemies, and in thy Seed
all the Nations of the Earth shall be blessed, because thou have obeyed my
Voice. From which Words it may easily be gathered, that it should be one of the
Seed of Abraham, who should bring Salvation to all them who are delivered from
the most cruel Tyranny of Satan: It was necessary therefore, that the very Son
of God, according to the Flesh, should be born of the Seed of Abraham.

Not very long after, V. The same Promise renewed. Genesis 28.12.
the Lord, to consecrate the memory of this Promise, made the same Covenant
with Jacob, Abraham's Grandson; for when in a Vision he saw a Ladder reaching
from Earth to Heaven, and the Angels of God ascending and descending upon it,
as the Scripture witnesses, he heard the Lord, Genesis 28.13.
standing upon the Ladder, saying, I am the Lord, the God of thy Father
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, the Land whereon thou sleep, I will give to
thee, and to thy Seed, and thy Seed shall be as the dust of the Earth. And thou
shall stretch forth thy self to the East, and to the West, and to the North,
and to the South, and in thee, and in thy Seed shall all the Nations of the
Earth be blessed.

Nor was God after this, VI. The memory of this Promise is renewed.
wanting in ^^hewing the memory of the same Promise of his, to stir up, both in
Abraham's Seed, and in many other Men, the expectation of a Savior. For when
once the Jewish Commonwealth and Religion became Settled* This began to grow
more common, and known to his people. For there were many things which
signified, and many Men which foretold, What and how great good things that
Savior, and our Redeemer Jesus Christ was to bring us. And indeed the
Prophets, whose Minds were illuminated with Light from Heaven foretold the
people of the Birth of the Son of God, Isa. 7.15 8.3.9.6.11.1.53. throughout.
Jer. 23.5.30.9. Dan. 7 13.9.24.
and the wonderful works which he should perform when he should be made Man,
his Doctrine, Manners, Kindred, Practice, Death, Resurrection, and other
Mysteries of him, and all this they taught so plainly, as tho they had bin done
before their Faces. So that excepting the difference of time only, we could not
discover any diversity between the Predictions of the Prophets, and the
preaching of the Apostles; between the Faith of the old Patriarchs, and our
own. But now we will speak of the several parts of the Article.

Jesus is his proper name, VII. What the name Jesus signifies, and by whom it
was given. Luc. 1.31.
who is God and Man, and it signifies a Savior; and this name was given him,
not by chance, nor by the judgment or will of Men, but by the counsel and
command of God: For so the Angel told Mary his Mother: Behold, thou shall
cenceiv in thy Womb, and bring forth a Son, and shall call his name Jesus; and
afterward he not only commanded Joseph the Husband of the Virgin, to call the
Child by that name; but also tells the reason why he was to be so called: For
he says, Joseph thou Son of David, Mat. 1.21.
fear not to take to thee Mary thy Wife, for that which is born in her, is of
the Holy Ghost: And likewise her Son, and thou shall call his name Jesus, for
he shall save his people from their Sins.

We read in Holy Scripture of many who were of this name: As the son of Nun,
VIII The name Jesus suitable to Christ especially.
who succeeded Moses, and led the people, whom Moses, delivered out of Egypt,
into the Land of Promise, which was denied to Moses. Josedech the son of a
Priest was called by the same name. But how much more truly ought we to believ,
That our Savior ought to be called by this name, who has brought light,
liberty, and salvation, not to one People or Nation only, but to all Men, of
all ages; oppressed, not with Famine, or with Egyptian or Babylonian Bondage,
but sittng in the shadow of Death, and miserably fetterd in Sin, and the chains
of the Devil, and has purchased for them a Right and Inheritance in the Kindom
of Heaven, and reconciled them to God the Father. In them we see Christ our
Lord shadowed, who heaps upon mankind those Blessings here mentioned. Now all
those names before spoken of, which by divine appointment were to be given to
the Son of God, are all to be referred to this one name Jesus. For whereas all
the other, in some measure, had only touched the Salvation, he was to give us;
this one conteins the whole weight and virtue of the complete Salvation of
Mankind.

And to the name of Jesus, IX. Why the name Christ added to the name Jesus.
this name of Christ is also added, which signifies Anointed, and is a name
both of Honor and Office, nor is it proper to one thing, but common to more.
For our old Fathers were used to call Priests and Kings, whom God had commanded
to be anointed for the dignity of their Office, Christ's. The Priests were they,
Reg 12 3.24.6.
who in their daily Prayers recommended the people to God, and offered
Sacrifice to God for them. Kings had the government of the people committed to
them, and to them chiefly belongs the power of the Laws, to protect the
Innocent, and to correct the boldness of the Wicked. Because therefore both of
these Offices seem to relate to the Majesty of God in the Earth, therefore
those that were chosen to the Office of King or Priest, were anointed with Oil.
It was customary also to anoint the Prophets, who as the Interpreters and
Ambassadors of the immortal God, opened to us the Secrets of Heaven, and by
wholesome Precepts, and foretelling things to come, warned Men to mend their
manners.

But when Jesus Christ our Savior came into the World, X. Christ a Prophet,
King, and Priest.
he undertook the Part and Office of all these three Persons, Prophet, Priest,
and King, and for these causes he is called Christ, and anointed for the
discharge of those Offices, not by the act of any mortal, but by the influence
and virtue of his Heavenly Father; not with earthly Ointment, but with
spiritual Oil, when the fullness of the Holy Spirit, and Grace, and a more
plentiful measure of all gifts was poured into his most Holy Soul, than the
Being or Nature of any other Creature was able to receiv, and this the Prophet
plainly shows, when speaking to the Redeemer himself, he said, Ps. 44.7.
Thou have loved Righteousness, and hated Iniquity, therefore God, even thy God
has anointed thee with the Oil of Gladness above thy Fellows. The same thing,
but much more plainly has the Prophet Isaiah showed in these Words: Isay. 61.1.
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because the Lord has sent me to preach to
the meek.

Jesus Christ therefore was that great Prophet and Teacher, XI. How Christ a
Prophet, Priest and King.
who taught us the Will of God, and by whose teaching the whole World has
received the knowledge of our Heavenly Father: and this name does much more
truly and excellently belong to him, because all whatsoever, that were honored
with this name of Prophet, were but his Disciples; and for this cause chiefly
were they sent, That they should prophecy of this Prophets coming to save all
Men. The same Christ was a Priest, not of the same Order as the Priests of the
tribe of Levi under the old Law were; but of that of which the Prophet David
sings; Ps 189.4^. Heb. 5.7.
Thou art a Priest for ever, after the Order of Melchisedech: Which Argument,
the Apostle writing to the Hebrews handles excellently. But we acknowledge
Christ to be a King also, not only as he is God, but as he is Man, and partakes
of our Nature: Luc. 1.33.
Of whom the Angel testifies: He shall reign for ever in Jacob, and of his
Kingdom there shall be no end.

Now this Kingdom of Christ is Spiritual and Eternal, XII. How and by whom
Christ's Kingdom is governed.
begun indeed on Earth, but perfected in Heaven. And by his wonderful
Providence performs the Office of King of his Church: He governs it, he defends
it from the snares and violence of its enemies, he gives it not only Holiness
and Righteousness, but also Power and Strength to persevere: And although both
good and bad Men are within the limits of this Kingdom, and consequently all
Men do belong to it; yet those chiefly, and above the rest experience the most
excellent Goodness and Bounty of our King, who lead their life innocently and
uprightly, according to his Laws: Not that this Kingdom came to him by any
humane Birthright or Inheritance, tho he came of the stock of the noblest
Kings: But he was a King in this respect, Because God bestowed upon that Man
whatsoever Power, Excellency, and Dignity the nature of Man was capable of. To
him therefore God delivered the government of the World, and to him he
subjected all things. He has already begun his reign, but in the day of
Judgment he shall enjoy it fully and perfectly.

His only Son.] In these Words are yet higher Mysteries proposed to the Belief
and Contemplation of the Faithful concerning Jesus, XIII. Christ the Son of
God, and true God.
to wit, that he is the Son of God, and true God, as the Father himself is, who
begat him from all Eternity: We moreover do confess him to be the Second person
of the Trinity, and in all respects equal to the other two: For there ought
nothing to be, no nor so much as phanci'd in the mind to be any thing unequal
or unlike in the divine Persons, since we acknowledge that they have only one
Being, one Will, one Power. This is plain from many Oracles of Holy Scripture,
but especially that Testimony of S. John does exceeding plainly show it: 1 John
1.1.
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.

But when we hear that Jesus is the Son of God, we ought not to imagine any
earthly or mortal thing of his Birth: XIV. The eternal Generation of Christ
ineffable.
But we ought constantly to believ, and with the greatest devotion and
affection of mind to honor that Birth, whereby the Father from all Eternity
begat the Son, which to comprehend by Reason, or perfectly to understand, we
can by no means do it: But as amazed at the wonderfulness of the Mystery, we
ought with the Prophet, to say, Who can declare his Generation? This therefore
we ought to believ, Isay. 53.8.
That the Son is of the same Nature, of the same Power, and Wisdom with the
Father, as we confess more largely in the Nicene Creed: For it says, And in
Jesus Christ his only begott'n Son, begott'n of the Father before all Worlds,
God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God, begott'n not made, being of
one substance with the Father, by whom all things were made.

But of all those things, which are made use of as Similitudes to show the
manner and way of his Eternal Generation, XV. A similitude
that seems to come nearest the matter which is taken from the Thought of our
mind, wherefore S. John calls the Son his Word: 1 John 1.
For as our mind, after a sort understanding it self, phancies its own Image;
which Divines call Word; so God, (so far as humane things may be compared with
divine) understanding himself, begets his eternal Word: although it is better to
contemplate what Faith proposes, and with a sincere Heart to believ and confess
that Jesus Christ is true God, and true Man, begotten indeed, as God, of the
Father, before all Ages and Generations; but as Man, born in time of his Mother
the Virgin Mary.

And tho we acknowledge his Twofold Nativity, XVI. Christ one person the only
Son of his Father.
yet we believ him to be but One Son. For it is One Person only in whom the
Divine and Humane Nature meet together. And as to his Divine Generation he has
no Brethren or fellow Heirs, he being the only Son of his Father, but we Men
the Potters-Clay, and the work of his Hands.

But if we consider his Humane Generations, he not only calls many by the name
of Brethren, Romans 8.17.
he uses them as Brethren, That they together with him may obtain the glory of
his Fathers Inheritance, who by Faith have accepted Christ as their Lord, and
do in truth show forth their Faith which they profess in his name, by works of
Charity. Wherefore he is called by the Apostle, The first begott'n among many
Brethren.

Our Lord.] Many are the things which in Holy Scripture are spok'n concerning
our Savior, XVII. Why diverse Epithets given to Christ.
whereof some, as appears plainly, agree to him, as he is God; Others, as he is
Man: For he has different Properties, according to his different Natures. We
therefore truly say, That Christ is Almighty, Eternal, Infinite, and this he
has from his Divine Nature: Again we say of him, That he suffered, was dead, and
rose again, and these things, no one doubts, but that they are agreeable to the
Nature of Men. But besides these, there are some things agreeable to both
Natures, as in this place, where we say, our Lord. If therefore this name be
suitable to both Natures, we may well surely call him our Lord.

For as he is eternal God, XVIII. Why Christ is called our Lord.
as the Father, so also is he equally Lord, and Father of all things. And as he
is not One, and the Father Another God, but One and the self same God; so also
is not he One Lord, and the Father Another Lord, but both One Lord. But rightly
also for many reasons, as he is Man, is he called our Lord. And first because
he is our Redeemer, and has delivered us from our sins, has he rightly got this
power both to be, and to be called our Lord. For so the Apostle teaches: He
humbl'd himself, and became obedient to death, Phil. 2.7.
even the death of the Cross, for which reason God has highly exalted him, and
given him a name which is above every name, that at the name of Jesus every
Knee should bow, V. 10.
of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the Earth; and that
every Tongue should confess that Jesus Christ, is in the glory of God the
Father. And after his Resurrection, he says of himself, Matt. 28.18.
All Power is given to me in Heaven and in Earth.

For this other Reason also he is called Lord, because in this one Person the
two Natures, Divine and Humane are joined together: For by this wonderful
conjunction he merited to be made our Lord, and Lord of all things that were
created, although he had not died for us; but especially of the Faithful, who obey
and serve him with the utmost intention of Mind.

What remains therefore, but that the Curate for this Reason persuade his
faithful people to consider, That it is most just, that above all men in the
World, we who have our very name of him, and are called Christians, and cannot
be ignorant what great Benefits he has bestowed on us, and this especially,
that by his Grace, We know all these things by Faith: It is most just, I say,
that we devote and consecrate our selv's forever to our Lord and Redeemer, no
otherwise than as his meanest Servants.

And indeed, when we were received into Baptism, XX. In Baptism we are devoted
to Christ.
we did before the Church Doors solemnly promise that we would do so. For we
declared that we renounced the Devil and the World, and gave up our selv's
wholly to Christ Jesus. But if to be enrolled in the Christian Camp, we devoted
our selves with so Holy and Religious a Prosession; what punishment shall we
deserv, if after our entrance into the Church, and have known the Will and Law
of God, if after we have received the Grace of his Sacraments, we shall lead
our Lives after the Rules and Commandments of the World and the Devil, as if
when we were washed in Baptism, we had given up our Names to the World and the
Devil, and not to Christ our Lord and Redeemer? But what Heart is there which
so great a Propensity, so great kindness, and good Will of so great a Lord
toward us, cannot inflame with ardent Love to him, who tho he has us in his
power and dominion, as Servants bought with his own Blood, yet embraces us with
such Love, that he calls us not his Servants, Joh. 15.14, 14.
but his Friends, yea his Brethren? This verily is a most just cause, and I
know not whether it be not the greatest, why we ought always to own and
reverence, and worship him as our Lord.

ARTICLE. III.
WHo was Conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary.] That God
bestowed a fingular Blefling upon Mankind, I. How great Gods Bounty toward us.
when he restored us to liberty from the slavery of the most cruel Tyrant, the
Faithful may perceiv by those things which have been already spoken in the
former Article; but then if we lay before our Eyes the counsel and way, by
which chiefly he would accomplish this. Verily there is nothing can possibly
shine more glorious and magnificent than the Bounty and goodness of God toward
us.

The greatness of this Mystery therefore, II. The sense of this Article.
which the Holy Scripture proposes to us to consider, as the chief point of our
Salvation, the Curat may begin to show in the explaining this Third Article,
the meaning whereof he may teach to be this. That we believ and confess, that
this very Jesus Christ our ohly Lord, Matt. 1.23. Joh. 1.36.
the Son of God, when for our sakes he took upon himself Humane Flesh in the
Womb of the Virgin, was not, as other Men, conceived of the Seed of Man, but
beyond all order of Nature, was conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost, so
that the same person remaining God, which he was from all Eternity, became Man,
which before he was not.

That these Words are so to be understood, does plainly appear by confession of
the Holy Council of Constantinople, for thus it says; Who for us Men, and for
our Salvation, came down from Heaven, and was Incarnate by the Holy Ghost of
the Virgin Mary, and was made man. And this S. John the Evangelist has also
explained, as being he who drew the Knowledge of this most profound Mystery out
of the Bosom of our very Lord and Savior himself. For when he had declared
the Nature of the Divine Word in these Words. In the beginning was the Word,
Joh. 1.1.
and the Word was with God, and the Word was God: At last he concludes, and the
Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us: For the Word, which was a Person of
the Divine Nature, did so take upon him the Humane Nature, that the Hypostasis
or Person, both of the Divine and Human Nature was but one and the same,
whereby it came to pass that so admirable a Conjunction preserved the Actions
and Properties of both Natures, and as that great and holy Pope Leo has it,
Sermon. 1. de Not.
That neither did the Glory of the Superior or Divine, destroy the Inferior or
Humane; nor the assuming the Inferior diminish or lessen the Superior.

But because the Explication of Words ought not to be omitted. It is requisite
that the Curat teach, IV. What works of God are attributed to the whole Trinity.
That when we say, That the Son of God was conceived by the Power of the Holy
Ghost, this one Person of the Divine Trinity did not make the Mystery of the
Incarnation. For tho the Son only took the Humane Nature upon him: yet all the
Persons of the Holy Trinity, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, were Authors of
this Mystery; for we must hold this Rule in our Christian Faith: That all those
things which God does (extra se) without himself in the Creatures, are common
to all the Three Persons, nor does one act more than another, or one without
another.

But that one One person proceeds from another; V. And what to the several
Persons.
this cannot be common to all; for the Son is begotten of the Father alone; the
Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son: But whatsoever (extra illas)
without them, comes from, or is done by them, the whole three Persons without
any difference do it, and of this kind we are to believ the Incarnation of the
Son of God to be.

Now tho these things are thus, VI. Why Christ is said to be conceived by the
Holy Ghost.
yet the Holy Scripture is used to attribute to any one of the Three Persons,
those things which are common to all the Three Persons; for example. It
ascribes, the Power of all things to the Father, Wisdom to the Son, Love to the
Holy Ghost. And because the Mystery of the Incarnation of God, does manifest
the special and infinite Good Will of God toward us, for this Reason therefore
is this work attributed to the Holy Ghost,

In this Mystery we are to observe, VII. The Mystery of Christ's Conception
declared
That there are many things done beyond the Order of Nature, and some again by
the Power of Nature. For in that we believ the Body of Christ to be made of the
most pure Blood of his Virgin Mother, we therein acknowledge his Human Nature,
it being common to the Bodies of all Men, to be formed of the Blood of the
Mother. But that which surpasses both the Order of Nature, and the reach of
Human Understanding, is this; That as soon as the Blessed Virgin, consenting to
the Words of the Angel, Luc. 1.38.
had said, Behold the Handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy
Word; immediately the most holy Body of Chrift was formed, and a Reasonable or
Human Soul joined with it, and so in that very moment of time, he became
perfect God, and perfect Man. Now that this was the strange and wonderful work
of the Holy Ghost, there is no one can doubt, since by the Order of Nature, no
Body can be informed by, or receiv a Humane Soul, but at the limited term of
time.

But this also is very wonderful, VIII. Christ not Man, before God.
That so soon as ever the Soul of Christ was joined with his Body, his very
Godhead or Divinity was also knit together with his Soul and Body: Wherefore
his Body was at once both formed and quickn'd, and his Divinity joined to his
Soul and Body.

Whence it came to pass, IX. The Virgin truly Mother of God and Man.
That in the same moment of time, he became perfect God, and perfect Man, and
the most Holy Virgin truly and properly called Mother of God, and of Man, in
the same moment wherein she conceived God and Man. This was signified by the
Angel, when he said, Luc. 1.31.
Behold thou shall conceiv in thy Womb, and shall bring forth a Son, and shall
call his name Jesus; he shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the most
High. By the event it was well proved what Isaiah foretold, Isa. 7.14.
Behold a Virgin shall conceiv and bring forth a Son. That Elizabeth also
perceived this to be the Conception of the Son of God, she being filled with
the Holy Ghost, declares in these Words. Whence comes this thing to me, Luc.
1.43.
That the Mother of my Lord comes to me?

Now as the Body of Christ was formed of the purest Blood of the purest Virgin,
X. Christ as soon as conceived had all Grace.
without the help of Man, as was said before, but by the only Power of the Holy
Ghost; so also, as soon as he was conceived, his Soul received an overflowing
plenty, and all abundance of the Chrism, or anointing of the Holy Spirit. For
God gave not his Spirit to him by measure, Job. 3.34.
as to other Men adorned with Grace and Holiness, as S. John testifies, but be
pouer'd plentifully into his Soul all Grace, Joh. 1.16
That of his fullness we might all receiv.

Nor may we call him The Adopted Son of God, Note.
tho he had the Spirit wereby holy Men obtain the Adoption of the Sons of God;
for he being the Son of God by Nature, we may not think that the Grace or name
of Adoption can by any means be proper or suitable to him.

These are the things which seem proper to be explained, XI. How the fruits of
the belief of this Article to be got.
concerning the wonderful Mystery of Christ's Conception; from whence that some
wholesome Fruit and Advantage might redound to us, the Faithful ought to fix
these things in their Memories, and frequently to consider in their Hearts,
That it is God who took Human flesh upon himself: Yet such a way did he become
Man, that we cannot comprehend in our Minds, nor express with Words. Lastly,
that for this end he would become Man, That we might be born again, and become
the Children of God. This when they have well considered, and all the Mysteries
contained in this Article, let them with humble and faithful Minds believ and
adore them, not seeking to search or pry narrowly into them, because they can
scarce ever do it without great danger.

Born of the Virgin Mary.] This is the other Part of this Article; XII. Christ
born of a Virgin.
in explaining whereof, the Curat should be very diligent, because the Faithful
are bound to believ, not only, That Christ our Lord was conceived by the power
of the Holy Ghost, but that he was born and brought forth into the World, by
the Virgin Mary. With how much sweetness, joy and satisfaction of Mind the
Belief of this mystery is to be entertained and meditated upon, the Angel
declares, who first brought this joyful news to the world, Luc. 2.10.
Behold I bring you glad tidings of great joy, which shall be to all People!
And from that Song of the Heavenly Host, Luc. 2.14.
Glory to God in the highest, and in Earth peace to men of good will. What the
Angels sung is easy to understand. Herein that most ample Promise of God to
Abraham began to be fulfilled, to whom it was said, Genesis 22.18.
that in his seed all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed. For That
Mary, whom we declare and worship as the true Mother of God, because she
brought forth that person which was both God and Man together, Mat. 1.39.
had her Offspring from David the King: but as that conception does quite
surpass the order and course of nature, so in that birth we may not contemplate
any thing but what is Divine.

And besides, XIII. How the Virgin brought forth Christ. Joh. 20.19.
than which nothing more wonderful can be either said or thought, he was born
of his Mother without any damage to, or lessening of his Mothers Virginity.
And, as afterward he went out of his Toom, tho it were shut and sealed, and
went in to his Disciples, the doors being shut; or, (to take a similitude from
things we daily see come to pass by nature) as the rays of the Sun penetrate
the concrete, hard substance of Glass, and yet neither break nor hurt it in the
least; after a like, but a higher sort, I say, Jesus Christ was brought forth
out of his Mothers womb, without any hurt to his Mothers Virginity, for we
celebrate her unstained and perpetual Virginity with the truest praises and
commendations. And this was wrought by the power of Holy Ghost, who was present
with the Mother in such a manner, at the conception of the Son, and birth of
her Son; that he gave her both Fruitfulness and perfect Virginity.

The Apostle uses sometimes to call Christ Jesus the new Adam, XIV. Christ
compared to Adam, Mary to Eve. 1 Cor. 15.21, 22.
and to compare him with the first Adam: for as in the first Adam all dye; so
in the second Adam all are called again to life. And as Adam, as to the natural
state is the Father of all mankind; so Christ is the Author of Grace and Glory.
After the same manner we may so compare the Virgin Mother with Eve, that the
second Eve, which is Mary, may answer to the first Eve: as we have already
showed, that the second Adam which is Christ, answers to the first Adam: For
Eve, because she believed the Serpent, brought death and a curse upon mankind;
and when Mary believed the Angel, it came to pass by God's goodness that, life
and a blessing came down upon men. Throw Eve we were born the children of
wrath, Ephesians. 2.3, 5.
but of Mary we have received Jesus Christ, by whom we are born again the
children of Grace. It was said to Eve, Genesis 3.16.
in sorrow shall thou bring forth Children. Mary is freed from this Law, as
being she who, having kept her Virgin Modesty safe and entire, brought forth
Jesus the Son of God without any feeling or sense of pain, as before was said.

When therefore the mysteries of this wonderful Conception and Nativity are so
many and so great, XV. Figures of Christ's conception and nativity.
it pleased the divine Providence, to signify them before hand by many Signs,
Oracles and Prophecies. The Holy Fathers therefore understood many of the
things we read in the Holy Scriptures to belong to this matter; but especially
where we read of that Gate of the Sanctuary which Ezekiel saw shut, also the
Stone cut out of the mountain without hands, (as we read in Daniel) which
became a great Mountain, and filled the whole Earth: And Aarons Rod, which only
of all the Rods of the Princes of Israel budded: Number. 17.8. Exodus 3.4.
and the Bush which Moses saw burn, Luc. 2.
and was not consumed. The Holy Evangelist has largely described the history of
Christ's Birth. Of which therefore there is no need that we speak more, since
it is easy for the Curate to read more there.

Great pains ought to be taken, XVI. In explaining this mystery, what the
people ought to be persuaded to. Romans 15.4. Job 26.11.
that those mysteries which were written for our learning, might be fixed and
rooted in the minds of the Faithful: And first of all in commemoration of so
great a benefit, that they be thankful to God the Author thereof; and next that
they always lay before their eyes, for their example to imitate, this so great
and singular pattern of Humility. For what can be more useful or profitable to
check the pride and haughtiness of our hearts, than often to think, that God
does so humble himself, that he communicates his glory with men, and takes on
himself their weakness and frailty; that God becomes Man, and gives that
supreme and infinite Majesty to Man, at whose Nod the very Pillars of Heaven
(as the Scripture says) tremble and quake for fear; and that he should be born
in earth, whom the very Angels adore in Heaven. What therefore, since God does
these things for our sake, what, I say, ought we to do in obedience to him? How
willingly and cheerfully ought we to love, embrace and perform all Offices of
Humility? The Faithful see how wholesome a Doctrine the Birth of Christ teaches
us, even before he began to utter his voice. He is born needy; he is born a
Stranger in an Inn: He is born in a vile Manger: He is born in the depth of
Winter; Luc. 2.6, 9.
for thus writes St. Luke, It came to pass, that while they were there, the
days were accomplished that she should bring forth, and she brought forth her
first born Son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes and laid him in a manger,
because there was no room for him in the Inn. Could the Evangelist include all
the whole Glory, and Majesty of Heaven and Earth in more bumble expressions?
Nor does he write, that there was no room in the Inn, Ps 49.12.
but none for him, who said. The whole earth is mine, and the fullness thereof.
Which also another Evangelist testifies, saying, He came to his own, and his
own received him not.

These things when the Faithful remember, XVII. How great grace and glory
redounds to us by the Incarnation.
let them also remember that God was contented to undergo the lowliness and
frailty of our flesh, that he might raise mankind up to the highest degree of
Dignity; for this one thing sufficiently discovers that excellent dignity and
worth, which he has by the divine bounty obtained, that He vouchsaft to become
Man, who also was true and perfect God: so that now we may boast, that the Son
of God is our bone, and our flesh; which those Blessed Spirits cannot do; for
as the Apostle says, He in no case took upon him the nature of Angels, but he
took upon him the seed of Abraham.

But then we ought to take heed, XVIII. A singular admonition.
that all this happ'n not to our extreme hurt; that as at Bethlehem, where he
was born they would allow him no room; so also since he is now born in our
flesh, he find no room in our hearts, where he may be spiritually born. For
this it is, he being most earnestly desirous of our salvation, that he
earnestly calls for. For as by the power of the Holy Ghost, he was, beyond the
Order of Nature, made Man, Joh. 1.13. Romans 64, 5. and 7.6.
and given to us, was Holy, yea Holiness it self, so it behov's us to be born,
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, but of God, and then as new
creatures, to walk in newness of Spirit, and to keep that holiness and
integrity of mind, which much becomes men regenerated by the Spirit of God. For
by this means we shall express in our selves a certain kind of image or
resemblance of the holy conception and Nativity of this Son of God, 2 Cor. 2.7.
which we believ with a faithful heart, and believing wisdom of God which was
hidd'n in a Mystery, we embrace and adore it.

ARTICLE IV.
SUffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified dead and buried.] How necessary
the knowledge of this Article is, and what diligent care the Curat ought to
take, that the faithful be often put in remembrance of our Lord's Passion, the
Apostle teaches who professes that he determined to know nothing else but Jesus
Christ, and him crucified. Upon this account therefore all care and diligence
ought to be used, that the faithful being stirred up with the commemoration of
so great a benefit, may turn themselv's wholly to the Love of God, and the
embracing of his goodness.

Faith therefore in the former part of this Article (for of the other shall be
spok'n afterward) offers this to our Belief, that when Pontius Pilate, II.
What is proposed to be believed in this Article.
by command of Tyberius Caesar, governed the Province of Judea, Christ our Lord
was fastn'd to a Cross, for he was Taken, Mocked, Suffered many kinds of
Injuries and Torments, and at last Crucified. Nor are we to think, that, as to
his Inward Part, his Soul was free from those torments; for since he truly took
the Humane Nature upon him, we must needs confess that in his Soul he felt the
most tormenting Grief, Mat. 26.38. Mar. 14.34
wherefore, he said, my soul is exceeding sorrowful, even to death. For tho his
Humane Nature was joined to his Divine Person; yet by reason of that very
conjunction, he no less felt the bitterness of his passion, than if that
conjunction had not been made; since in that one person of Christ Jesus the
proprieties of both natures, the Divine and Humane, were still preserved; and
therefore that which was passible and mortal, still remained passible and
mortal; and again, that which was impassible and immortal, such as we
understand the Divine Nature to be, still restain'd its own propriety.

And where in this place seems fit to be diligently observed, III. Why the Time
of his Passion was thus noted.
the Curat shall teach, that Jesus Christ suffered at that time when Pontius
Pilate governed the Province of Judea, and that this was done for this reason,
that the knowledge of so great and so necessary a thing might be more
remarkable to all, when the very certain Time was set down when the thing was
done, as we find it done by the Apostle; 1. Tim. 6.13.
and also because in those words it is declared, that the prophecies concerning
our Savior might be verified by the event; Mat. 20 19.
for they, says he, will deliver him to the Gentiles to be mocked, to be
scourged, and to be crucified.

But especially that he suffered death on the Tree of the Cross, IV. Why Christ
died on the Cross.
this also is to be ascribed to the council of God, to wit, that whence death
had its beginning, thence life should have its resurrection. For the Serpent by
the Tree seduced and overcame our first Parents, himself was vanquished by
Christ throw the Tree of his Cross. Many other reasons may be produced for this
matter, which the Holy Fathers have largely treated of, to show that i^ was
convenient, that our Redeemer should undergo that death of the Cross, rather
than any other. But the Curat may admonish that it is enough, if the faithful
believ, that that kind of death was chosen by our Savior, which seemed indeed
more proper and suitable to the redemption of mankind; for certainly there
could be none more odious and unbecoming: For the punishment of the Cross was
always, not only among the Gentiles, held accursed and full of shame and
disgrace, Deuteronomy. 21, 23. Gal. 3.13.
but also in the Law of Moses, he is called accursed that hangs on a tree.

Nor may the Curat omit the history of This Article, V. Why the explication of
this Article ought to be often repeated.
which the Evangelist took such diligent care to expound, but that the faithful
may learn and know the chief heads at least of this Mystery, which seem to be
most necessary for the confirmation of the truth of our Faith. For on this
Article, as upon a certain foundation, our Christian Religion and Faith is
established, and this being well grounded, all the rest will hold well
together. For if any thing prove difficult to the mind and understanding of
man, certainly the mystery of the Cross may deservedly be accounted the hardest
of all, and we can very hardly imagine that our Salvation can depend upon the
Cross, and on him who was crucified thereon; but in this, as the Apostle
teaches, we may admire the profound Providence of God; 1 Cor. 8.
for because in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased
God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believ. Wherefore we are
not to wonder, if the Prophets before the coming of Christ, and the Apostles
after his death and resurrection so strenuously labored to persuade men that
this is the Redeemer of men, and to bring them into the Dominion and Obedience
of him who was crucified for them.

Wherefore seeing there is nothing so strange to humane reason as the Mystery
of the Cross, VI. Figures and Prophecies of the mystery of the Cross.
immediately after the commission of sin, the Lord was not wanting both by
Figures and the Oracles of the Prophets to signify the death his Son was to
undergo. To touch a little upon the Figures Abel first who was killed by the
malice of his Brother; Genesis 4.8 Genesis 22.6, 7, 8.
then the sacrificing of Isaac; next, the Lamb which the Jews killed at their
going forth out of Egypt; Exodus 12.5, 6, 7.
then the Braz'n Serpent which Moses lifted up in the Wilderness, Number. 21.8, 9.
all these as Figures foreshew'd the Death and Passion of Christ our Lord. But
then as to the Prophets, Job. 3.4.
how many were there that propheci'd of it, is better known, than to need to be
told in this place. But above all others (to omit David, who in his Psalms, Ps.
2. 12, 66, 109.
has handled all the chief mysteries of our Redemption) the Oracls of Isaiah
are so plain and clear, Is. 53.
that it may well be said, Hier. Epist. ad Paulin. ante f^nem.
that he rather told the story of a thing already done, than foretold the
Prophecy of a thing yet to be done.

Dead and Buried] In explaining these words the Curat shall teach that we are
to believ, VII. Christ truly died.
that Jesus Christ, after he was crucified, was truly dead and buried. And
indeed it is not without cause that this is severally proposed to the faithful
to be believed, seeing there have bin some who have denied that he died on the
Cross; The ^nostics.
the Apostls therefore deservedly thought it fit that this point of Faith
should be opposed to that error; of the truth of which Article there is no room
left to doubt: Mat. 27.50. Mar. 15.37. Luc. 23.46. Joh. 19.30.
For all the Evangelists agree together in this, that Jesus gave up the Ghost.
Besides, whenas Christ was true and perfect Man, he also could truly dye. Now
man dies when his Soul is separated from his Body.

Wherefore when we say that Jesus was dead, VIII. God was united to the Soul
and Body of Christ (tho separated) when he was dead.
we mean, that his Soul was divided from his Body, and yet we do not grant that
his Divinity was disjoined from his body; but rather we constantly believ and
confess, that when his Soul was divided from his Body, his Divinity was always
joined both to his Body when it was in the Sepulcher, and to his Soul when it
was in Hell. But it became the Son of God to dye, Heb. 2.10, 14, 15.
that by death he might destroy him who had the power of death, i.e: the Devil,
and rescue them who by the fear of death, all their whole life were subject to
bondage.

But this was singular in Christ our Lord, IX. Christ's death was voluntary not
forced.
that he then did dye, when himself had purposed to dye, and he died a death
rather voluntary than by constraint; nor did he only appoint and determine his
own death, but likewise the Place and the Time when and where he would dye; for
so says Isaiah, He is offered a sacrifice because it was his will. And the same
our Lord, Isai. 53.9.
before his Passion, said of himself, I lay down my life, to take it up again;
Joh. 10 17.
no man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self: and I have power to lay
it down, and I have power to take it up again. But then as to the Time and
Place, when Herod sought his life, and to ensnare him, he said, Luke 13.32, 33.
Tell that Fox, behold I cast out Devils, and do cures to day and to morrow;
and the third day I am perfected; nevertheless I must walk to day and to
morrow, and the day following, for it cannot be that a Prophet should perish
out of Jerusalem. He therefore did nothing unwillingly or by force, but
willingly he offered himself: and going to meet his enemies, he said, I am he:
Joh. 18.5.
and of his own accord freely he underwent all those punishments, which
unjustly and unmercifully they threw upon him.

Than which, X. A strong motive to the love of Christ.
sure there is nothing in the World more powerful to move our compassion, when
we well consider in our minds all his sufferings and torments. For if for our
sakes any one should suffer all those sorrows, not which he voluntarily
underwent, but which he could not avoid, this indeed we should hardly account
as a benefit of any great regard: but if on our score only he freely endure
death, which he could have refused; verily this is such a kind of benefit, that
it bereaves even the most grateful person in the World, not only of the power
of paying due thankfulness, but even of having it; and hence the transcendant
and superlative love of Christ Jesus, and his divine and infinite deseits
toward us may be perceived.

But then when we confess that he was Buried, XI Why we are to believ that
Christ was buried.
this is not set down as a part of the Article, which thing seems to have some
new difficulty in it, besides what has bin already spok'n of his death. For if
we believ that Christ was dead, it is easy enough to persuade us, That he was
buried. But this was added; first that we may doubt the less of the Truth of
his death, it being the strongest proof that a person is dead, if we can prove
that his Body was buried: And then, that the Miracle of his Resurrection might
be the more apparent and illustrious. Nor do we believ this only, Mat. 27.60.
That Christ's Body was buried, but this especially is proposed to our Belief in
these Words, That God was buried, Mar. 15 46.
as by the Rule of Catholic Faith, we most truly say, Luc. 23.53.
That God was dead, was born of a Virgin; for since his Divinity was never
divided from his Body, no not even when it was laid in the Sepulcher, rightly
we confess, That God was buried, Joh. 19.38.42.
And that will be sufficient for the Curat concerning the manner and place of
Christ's burial, which is spoken by the Holy Evangelists.

But first of all, XII. Two things to be noted. Ps. 15 10. Act. 2.31.
two things are to be observed, the one is, That Christ's Body was in no part
corrupt'd in the Sepulcher, concerning which the Prophet thus prophecies, Thou
shall not suffer thy Holy One to see corruption. The other, which belongs to
all the parts of this Article, is, That the Burial, Passion, and Death of Jesus
Christ, have reference to him as Man, not as God; for to suffer and to dye are
incident to the human Nature only: Tho all these things are also attribut'd to
God, because, as it is manifest, they may rightly he said of that person, who
at once was perfect God, and perfect Man. These things being known, the Curat
may explain those things concerning Christ's Passion and Death, whereby the
Faithful may at least contemplate, if not comprehend the immensity of so great
a Mystery.

And First, XIII. What we are to meditate of the Passion of Christ. First. Joh.
1.1. Heb. 1.2, 3.
It should be considered, Who it is that suffers all these things. And here we
are not able by Words to relate, or even in our Hearts to conceiv his Dignity.
S. John says, he is the Word, which was with God. The Apostle with stately
Expressions describes him in this manner: That this is He, whom God has
appoint'd to be the Heir of all things, by whom also he made the Worlds, who is
the brightness of his Glory, and the Figure of his Substance, and the Image of
his Person, who supports all things by the Word of his Power. He therefore
having washed away our sins, sits at the Right Hand of the Majesty on High. And
to say all in a Word, He who suffers is Jesus Christ, God and Man: Romans 11.36.
The Creator suffers for those whom he created: The Lord for his Servants: be
by whom the Angels, Men, Heavens, and Elements were made: He, I say, in whom,
by whom, and of whom, are all things.

It is no wonder therefore, if when he was wounded with so many Torments and
Sufferings, the whole Fabric of the World trembled; for as the Scripture says,
Ma^t 27.51.
The Earth quaked, and the Rocks were rent, Luc. 23 44.
and there was Darkness over all the Earth, 1 Pet. 2.5.
and the Sun was dark'n'd. Now if even the dumb and insensible Creatures
bewailed the Sufferings of their Maker, let the Faithful consider, with how
great and bitter Lamentation, they as living Stones of this Building, ought to
evidence their Grief.

And now we come to show the Causes of his Passion, XIV. What Secondly.
that thereby the Strength and Greatness of the Divine Love toward us, may the
better appear: If therefore any one ask, What should be the Cause why the Son
of God would undergo such an extreme bitter passion, he will find it to be this
chiefly, besides the hereditary Contagion of our first Parents, namely, The
Vices and Sins which Men have committed from the beginning of the World to this
day, and which they will hereafter commit to the end of the World: For this was
it, That the Son of God our Savior intended in his Death and Passion, to
redeem, and to blot out the sins of all Ages, and richly, and abundantly to
make satisfaction to his Father for them.

Let this also be added to inhance the dignity of the thing, XV. What Thirdly.
that Christ did not only suffer for sinners, but also that those very sinners
for whom he suffered, were both the Authors and Inflicters of those Punishments
he endured. Of which the Apostle thus admonishes us, writing to the Hebrews
thus: Heb. 12.13.
Consider him who endured such contradiction of Sinners against himself, lest
ye be weary and faint in your Souls.

Of this Fault rightly may those be judged guilty, easily, and often fall into
sin: For since our sins drove Christ our Lord to undergo the punishment of the
Cross; verily they who run into Sin and Wickedness, do as much as in them lies,
crucisie to themselves the Son of God afresh, Heb. 6.6.
and put him to an open shame.

And this wickedness is by so much more insolent and heinous in us, Jews,
because they, as the same Apostle bears them Witness, 1 Cor. 2.8.
if they had known, they would never have crucified the Lord of Glory. But we
profess we have known him, and yet in our Deeds denying him, we seem in a
manner to lay violent Hands upon him.

Now the Holy Scripture teftifies, XVI. What Fourthly. Isay. 53.8.
That Christ Our Lord was delivered to Death, both by the Father and by
himself: For in Isaiahs Prophecy, he says, For the 'wickedness of my people
have I smitten him: And the same Prophet a little before, when being, full of
the Spirit of God, Isay. 53.6. Isay. 53.10.
He saw the Lord full of Sores and Wounds, All we like Sheep have gone astray,
every one after his own way, and the Lord has laid upon him the Iniquity of us
all. But of the Son it is written; When he shall have made his Soul an offering
for Sin, he shall see his seed longliv'd. But the Apostle, has expressed this
same thing in Words much more remarkable, when yet from the other part he would
show how we may advance our hope from the consideration of the infinite Mercy
and Goodness of God: For he says, Romans 8.32.
He who spared not his own Son, but delivered him up to Death for us all. how
shall he not also with him, give us all good things?

It follows now, XVII. What Fifthly. Luc. 22.44.
That the Curat teach, How great the bitterness of Christ's passion was, which
if we keep fresh in our Memory, That the Sweat of our Lord became like drops of
Blood trickling down to the Ground, when he but began to feel those Torments
and Agonies of Mind, which soon after he was to be loaded with, Ibid.
any one may easily understand, that nothing could be added to the weight of
his Sorrows: For if the very thought only of the Miseries approaching, were so
bitter, as the Sweat of Blood manifested it to be, what shall we think of the
Suffering it self?

And yet it is plain that Christ our Lord endured the most extreme Sorrows,
XVIII. What Sixthly.
both of Mind and Body. And first, There was verily no one part of his Body,
which felt not the most grievous Punishments, for both his Feet and Hands were
fastn'd to the Cross with Nayls, his Head scratched with Thorns, and buffeted
with a Kane, or Reed, his Face filth'd with Spittle, beat'n with Fists, and his
whole Body all over wounded with Scourging.

And besides all this, XIX. What Seventhly. Ps 2.2. Matt. 26.
Men of all ranks and conditions were gathered together against the Lord, and
against his Christ. For both Gentiles and Jews; were the Perswaders, the
Authors, and Ministers of his Passion: Judas betrayed him, Peter denied him,
and all the rest forsook and left him.

And now, XX. What Eighthly.
while he was on the Cross, shall we consider the bitterness of the Pains, or
the Shame, or both together? Verily there was no kind of Death, either more
shameful, or more tormenting, or spiteful, could be contrived; which none were
used to suffer, but the most pestilent and wicked Malefactors only, and in
which the continuance and tediousness of that kind of death, made them endure
the most exquisite Pains and Torments.

And yet the Habit and Constitution, XXI. What Ninthly.
or Frame of the Body of Jesus Christ much increased the greatness of his
Pains: Which by the Power of the Holy Ghost was formed much more perfect, and
was better tempered than the Bodies of other Men can be, and therefore had a
more quick faculty of Sense or Feeling, and endured all those Torments the more
heavily.

But then, XXII. What Tenthly.
As to the inward grief of his Mind, there is no one can doubt, but that in
Christ it was most extreme; for those Saints that have suffered Punishments and
Torments, wanted not Comfort in their Souls given them from Heaven, which so
cheered and refreshed them, that they were enabled patiently to undergo the
force of their Torments, yea even in the very midst of their Torments, many of
them were transport'd with inward Joy: Coloss. 1.24.
For the Apostle says, I rejoice in my Sufferings for your sakes: and I fulfill
those things which are yet behind of the Sufferings of Christ in my Flesh, for
his Body's sake, which is the Church: And in another place: 2 Cor. 7.4.
I am filled with comfort, and over abound with joy in all our Tribulation. But
Christ our Lord tempered the Cup of his most bitter Sufferings which he drank,
with no mixture of Sweetness: For he permitt'd the Human Nature which he had
taken, to feel all kinds of Torments, no otherwise than as if he had bin Man
only, and not God also.

It remains now, That the Curat explain also what the Profits and Benifits are,
which we partake of by our Lords Passion.

First therefore, XXIII. How great the Benefits of Christ's Passion are. The
First. Rev. 1.5. Col. 2.13, 14
The Passion of our Lord was our deliverance from Sin: For as it is in S. John,
he loved us, and washed us from our sins in his Blood; and said the Apostle, He
has quick'n'd us together with him, forgiving us all our Trespasses, blotting
out the Handwriting of the Decree that was against us, which was contrary to
us; and took it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross.

Besides, The Second. Joh. 12.31, 32.
He has snatched us out of the tyrannical Power of the Devil: For, said the
Lord himself: Now is the Judgment of this World: Now is the Prince of this
World cast out: and I, if I be lifted up from the Earth, will draw all things
to my self.

Besides, The Third.
He has discharged the punishment due to our sins.

And then, The Fourth.
because there could no Sacrifice be offered more grateful and acceptable to
God; he has reconciled us to his Father, and rendered him propitious and
favorable to us.

Lastly, The Fifth.
In that he bore our Sins, He has opened us a Way to Heaven, which before was
barred up by the common Sin of Mankind. And this the Apostle signifies in these
Words: Heb. 10.19.
We have boldness to enter into the Holiest by the Blood of Jesus.

Nor was there wanting a Figure and Image of this Mystery, XXIV. The Figure of
our Redemption. Number. 35.15, 28.
even in the Old Law; for those who were forbid to return into their own
Country before the death of the High Priest, did signify thereby, That there
was no entrance into the heavenly Country open for any, tho he led his life
never so justly and piously, before that most High and Eternal Priest Christ
Jesus had suffered death, which having done, immediately the Gates of Heaven
were thrown open to all them, who being cleans'd by the Sacraments, and endu'd
with Faith, Hope and Charity, were made partakers of his Sufferings.

All these passing-excellent, XXV. All good things redound to us by virtue of
Christ's Passion.
and Divine Benefits, the Curat shall teach, Come to us by the Passion of our
Lord. And first, Because the Satisfaction which after this wonderful manner
Jesus Christ has paid to God the Father for our Sins; is complete and perfect
in all respects: For the price he paid for us, was not even or equal only to
our Debt, but far out-weigh'd it. And besides, This Sacrifice was most
acceptable to God: Which when the Son offered to him upon the Altar of the
Cross, he quite mitigated his Fathers Anger and Indignation; and this Argument
the Apostle used, Ephesians. 5.2.
when he said, Christ loved us, and gave himself a Sacrifice and oblation for
us to God, for a sweet smelling Savor. Furthermore, this is the Oblation,
whereof we read in the Prince of Apostles: 1 Pet. 1.18.19.
Ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold from your
vain conversation of the Tradition of your Fathers, but with the precious Blood
of Crist, as of a Lamb without spot or blemish. And the Apostle teaches us,
Gal. 3.13.
That Christ was made a Curse for us, that he might redeem us from the curse of
the Law.

But besides these immense Benefits; XXVI. In Christ's Passion are examples of
all Virtues.
we have this very great one over and above, that in this only Passion we have
the most Glorious Patterns of all Virtues: For he showed forth his Patience,
Humility, the most profound Love, Charity, Meekness, and Obedience, and most
unshaken Constancy and Resolution of Mind, not only in suffering Injuries for
Righteousness or Justice sake, but also even in Death it self; and that in such
a manner, as we can truly say, That our Savior in the very height of his
Sufferings, did most lively express in himself all those Rules and Precepts of
Life, which throw all the time of his Preaching he taught by Words. And this
shall suffice to have bin spoken briefly of the most saving Death and Passion
of Christ our Lord. And would God these Mysteries were seriously impressed upon
our Souls and Hearts, and that we would learn to suffer, to dye, and to be
buried together with our Lord; that then every spot of Sin, being wiped away,
and rising with him to newness of Life, by his Mercy, we may be found worthy to
be made partakers of his Kingdom of Heaven and Glory.

ARTICLE V.
HE descended into Hell, the third Day He rose again from the Dead.] It is of
very great use to know the glory of the Burial of our Lord Jesus Christ, I.
(...) very useful o unde^^t^^^ this Article.
of which we have spoken last: But it more concerns the Faithful to know the
glorious Triumphs he bore away, by conquering the Devil, and spoiling the
Powers of Hell. Of which, and also of the Resurection, we are now to speak.
Which Point, although it may well be handled distinctly and by it self; yet we
following the Authority of the Holy Fathers, have thought fit to join it with
that of his descent into Hell.

In the first part therefore this is proposed to our Belief, II. What is
propes'd in the first Part.
That Christ being now dead, his Soul went down to Hell, and there continued so
long as his Body was in the Sepulcher. But in these words we also confess, That
the very same person of Christ, at the same time was both with the Spirits
below, and also lay in the Sepulcher. Which when we say, no one ought to
wonder, because, as we have often said before, That though his Soul departed
from his Body, yet his Divinity was never separated either from his Soul or his
Body.

But because it may bring much light to the Explication of this Article, III.
The various signification of Hell.
if the Curat teach what in this place is to be understood by the Word [Hell]
It is necessary to admonish, That in this place, by Hell is not meant the
Sepulcher, as some no less impiously than unskilfully have thought, for by the
former Article we are taught, That Christ our Lord was buried: neither was
there any Reason, why in the Creed the same thing should by the Holy Apostles
be repeated in another, and a more obscure form of Speech.

But the Word Hell signifies those hidd'n Receptacles wherein the Souls are
kept, IV. The First, The Receptacle of the damned. Phil. 2.10.
which have not attained to the Blessedness of Heaven. For so the Holy
Scriptures use this Word in many places. For thus we read in the Apostle, At
the name of Jesus every Knee shall bow, of those in Heaven, of those in Earth,
and those under the Earth. And in the Acts of the Apostles, S. Peter testifies,
Act 2.24.
That Christ the Lord was risen again, having loosed the Pains of Hell. Nor are
all those Receptacles of one and the same kind. For there is that worst and
most dismal place of all, where the Souls of the damned, together with the
unclean Spirits, shall be tormented for ever, and that with unquenchable Fire,
which is called the Bottomles-Pit, and by its own proper signification, Hell.

There is besides, V. The Fire of Purgatory.
The Fire of Purgatory, wherein the Souls of the Pious for a certain determined
time, are cleans'd by Sufferings, that so the entrance to the Heavenly Country
may be laid open, into which no polluted thing can be admitted. And of the
truth of this Doctrine, Apoc. 21 27. Con. Trent. Sess. 25.
which the Holy Councils declare to be confirmed both by Testimonies of
Scripture, and by Apostolic Tradition, the Curat shall discourse and argue by
so much the more industriously, and frequently, because we are fallen upon
those times, wherein Men will not endure Sound Doctrine.

Lastly, VI. Limbus where the Souls of the Father were.
The third kind of Receptacle is, that wherein the Souls of the Saints were
received before the coming of Christ our Lord, and there being refreshed with
the blessed hope of Redemption, and free from all sense of Pain, enjoyed a
peaceable Habitation. The Souls therefore of these Pious Persons, who in the
bosom of Abraham expected the Savior, Christ our Lord, descending to Hell,
delivered.

Nor are we to think that he so descended to Hell, VII. Christ's Soul truly
went down to Hell
as that only his Influence and Virtue, and not also his Soul went thither. But
we are verily to believ, That his very Soul indeed, and in presence descended
to Hell, Ps 15.10.
of which there is this most certain Testimony of David: Thou shall not leave
my Soul is Hell. But tho Christ went down to Hell, yet this was no damage to
his Supreme Power, nor was the Splendour of his Holiness stained in the least,
seeing that by thus doing, it rather was most evidently proved, that all those
things are most true, which are celebrated concerning his Holiness, and that he
is the very Son of God, as he had before made appear by so many prodigious
Miracles.

And this we may easily perceiv, VIII. Two differences betwixt Christ's and the
damned's going to Hell.
if we but consider the Causes, why Christ, and other Men came into those
places. For all others went thither as Captives, but he, as free among the
Dead, and Conqueror to Master the Devils, by whom they were there kept shut up
and imprisoned by reason of sin. Furthermore, All others who descended thither,
partly were tormented with most bitter pains; and partly, tho they wanted all
other sense of sorrow, yet being deprived of the sight of God, and withheld in
the Hope only of Bliss and Glory, which they waited for, they were in a kind of
Torment. But Christ our Lord descended not to suffer any more, but to free the
Saints and Righteous Men from the Misery and Trouble of that Imprisonment, and
to bestow upon them the Fruits of his Passion. That therefore he went down to
Hell, was no lessening of his supreme Dignity and Power.

These things being explained, IX. Why Christ went down to Hell.
it must be taught, that Christ our Lord went down to Hell, that after he had
spoiled the Devils, he might lead those Holy Fathers and other pious persons,
being now freed from Prison, with him to Heaven, which wonderfully and
gloriously he has accomplished. For immediately the sight of him, gave
transcendant Light to the Captiv's, and filled their souls with immense joy and
gladness: on whom he also bestowed that most desired Bliss, which consists in
the Vision of God: which done, it is manifest what it was he promised the Thief
in these words: Luc. 23.43.
This day thou shall be with me in Paradise. But of this deliverance of the
Godly, the Prophet Osee so long before propheci'd in this manner, O death! I
will be thy death; O Hell! I will be thy destruction. The Prophet Zachary
signified the same thing, when he said, Thou also by the blood of thy Testament
have sent them that are bound out of the lake wherein there is no water.
Lastly, the same thing the Apostle expresses in these words, Col. 2.15.
in taking the spoils of principalities and powers, he made a show of them,
openly triumphing over them in himself.

But that we may understand the force of this mystery the better, X. Who are
saved by the benefit of Christ's Passion.
we ought often to call to remembrance, that devout men, not only who were born
after the coming of our Lord, but those who after Adam were before him, or who
hereafter shall be to the end of the World, have, and shall attain Salvation by
the benefit of his Passion. Wherefore before he died and rose again, the Gates
of Heaven were never open to any: but the Souls of the Godly when they departed
this life were either carried into Abraham's Bosom, or as now it fares with
them, who have somewhat to be purged or satisfied, were cleans'd by the fire of
Purgatory,

There is besides, XI. Another Reason of Christ's going down to Hell. Phil.
2.10.
another Reason, why Christ our Lord went down to Hell, namely that he might
there show his Might and Power, as he had done in Heaven and Earth, and that as
every knee, both of things in Heaven and things in Earth, bowed at the name of
him, so also of things below, and under the Earth. At consideration whereof,
who is there, who admires not, and even stands not amazed at the immense bounty
of God toward mankind, who was willing not only to undergo the most bitter
Death for us, but also to go down to the very lowest parts of the Earth, that
he might carry with him the Souls so very dear to him, which he thence
victoriously bore away to bliss and happiness.

Now follows the other part of the Article, XII. The other Part of the Article
concerning the Resurrection. 2 Timothy 2.8.
in explaining whereof how painful the Curat ought to be, appears by those
words of the Apostle, Remember that the Lord Jesus Christ arose again from the
dead: For what he commanded Timothy, it is not to be doubted, but that it is
also commanded to all others that have the Cure of Souls.

And this is the meaning of the Article. After that Christ our Lord had given
up the Ghost on the Cross upon Friday, at the ninth hour of the day, and the
same day at Even he was buried by his Disciples, who by leav of Pilate the
President, laid the body of our Lord, when they had taken it down from the
Cross, into a new Tomb, in a Garden near at hand: the third day after his
death, which was the Lords day, early in the morning his soul was again joined
to his body, and so he who was dead those three days, arose again and returned
to life, out of which he departed by death; but by the word Resurrection we are
not to understand only that Christ was raised from the dead, which was a thing
common to many others, but that he rose again by his own power and virtue,
which was a singular thing, and proper to Him alone.

For it is contrary to Nature, XIV. No man can naturally rise again from the
dead. 2 Cor. 13.4.
nor was it even granted to any man to be able by his own power to rais'e
himself from death to life; but this belongs to the supreme power of God only,
as we learn from those words of the Apostle, Although he was crucified throw
weakness, yet he liv's by the power of God: which seeing it was never separated
from Christ's Body in the Sepulcher, nor from his Soul when it went down into
Hell, his Divine Power, was both in his Body, so that it could be joined again
to his Soul; and in his Soul, so that it could again be brought back to his
Body; so that by his own power he might revive and rise again from the dead.

And this thing, XV. The Resurrection soretold. Psa. 97.2.
David, being full of the Spirit of God, foretold in these words, His right
hand, and his Holy arm has gott'n himself the victory. And the Lord himself by
the divine testimony of his own mouth has confirmed it, I lay down my life, and
I will take it up again: Joh. 10.17.
and I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it up again. And
also to the Jews, for confirmation of his doctrine, he said, Joh. 2.19.
Dissolve this temple, and in three days I will raise it up again. Which tho
they indeed understood of that Temple magnificently built of Stones; yet he, as
is declared in the same place by the words of Scripture, Act. 1.24.
spoke of the Temple of his Body. Now although we sometimes read in Scripture,
that Christ our Lord was raised by the Father, this is to be understood of
Christ as Man; even as those things again relate to himself as God, whereby is
signified, that he rose again by his own Power.

And this also belongs specially to Christ, XVI. Christ first rose from the
dead. Apoc. 1.5. 1 Cor. 15.20.
that He was the First who enjoyed this divine benefit of the Resurrection: For
in Scripture he is called the First begotten among the dead, and the First
begotten of the dead. And as the Apostle has it, Christ arose again from the
dead, being the First Fruits of them that sleep: for verily by Man came death,
and by Man came the Resurrection of the dead, and as in Adam all dye; so in
Christ shall all be made alive, but every one in his own order, Christ the
First fruits, and afterward those that are Christ's. Which words are to be
understood of the complete Resurrection, because then we are raised to
everlasting life, all necessity of dying being wholly taken away. And in this
kind Christ our Lord obtains the First place: For if we speak of such a
Resurrection, or of such a Return to life, as after which there remains a
necessity of dying again; 3 Reg. 17.22.
there were many others so raised from the dead, 4 Reg. 4.34.
Christ: all which notwithstanding revived on this condition, that they were to
dye again: But Christ our Lord so arose again from Death, which he had subdued
and conquered, that he could dye no more: And this is confirmed by that most
plain Testimony: Romans 6 9.
Christ being now risen from the Dead, dies no more: Death shall no more
domineer over him. And now follows what is added to the Article.

The third Day.] The Curat must instruct the Faithful not to believ that our
Lord was all those three days in the Sepulcher: XVII. Christ rose again the
third day.
For because he lay in the Sepulcher a Whole Natural Day; and Part of the Day
before it, and Part of the Day after it; for this Reason it is truly said, That
he lay in the Sepulcher Three days, and that the Third Day he arose again from
the Dead.

Now that he might manifest his Divinity, XVIII. Why the third day.
he would not put off his Resurrection till the end of the World; and again,
that we might believ him to be truly Man, and to be truly dead, he did not
immediately after his death revive, but on the Third Day after his Death: Which
space of time seemed to be sufficient to prove he was truly dead.

The Fathers of the first Council of Constantinople have added to this place,
XIX. Why according to the Scriptures is added in the Creed. 1 Cor. 15.14.
ACCORDING TO THE SCRIPTURES. Which being received from the Apostle, they
therefore placed in the Creed: And that the Mystery of the Resurrection is very
necessary, the same Apostle has taught us in these words: If Christ have not
risen again, then is our preaching vain, and your Faith is vain: And, if Christ
have not risen again, your Faith is vain, and you are yet in your sins.
Wherefore S. Austin admiring the Faith of this Article wrote thus: De August.
in Ps. 120. v. 4.
It is no great matter to believ that Christ dyed, for this do the Heathens,
Jews, and all the wicked believ, This all believ that he died: But the
Resurrection of Christ is the Faith of Christians only: This we account a great
matter to believ that he rose again.

Hence it was that our Lord most commonly spoke of his Resurrection, Mat. 16.21.
The Son of Man shall be delivered to the Gentiles, and be mocked, and beat'n,
and spit upon, and after that they have beat'n, they will kill him: Luc. 18.32.
At last he added, And the third day he shall rise again; and when the Jews
required him to prove his Doctrine by some Sign or Miracle, Luc. 11.29.
he answered, There shall no other sign be given them than the sign of the
Prophet Jonas, for as Jonas was three Days and three Nights in the Whales
Belly, so he affirmed, Mat. 12.39.
That the Son of Man should be three Days and three Nights in the Heart of the
Earth.

Now the better to perceiv the Force and meaning of this Article, XX. Three
things to be explained here.
we must know and observe three things, First, Why it was needful that Christ
should rise again: Then, What the Scope and End of his Resurrection was, And
also what Profits and Advantages redound to us thereby.

As to the first, XXI. First. The necessity of Christ's Resurrection. Phil. 2.8,
9.
It was necessary for him to rise again that the Justice of God might be
manifest, by whom it was very meet that he should be raised up, who in
obedience to him, was cast down and loaded with all kinds of Disgrace. This
Reason the Apostle brings, when he says to the Philippians; He humbl'd himself,
and became obedient to Death, even the death of the Cross, wherefore God has
also exalted him. Besides, for confirmation of our Faith, without which Man can
attain to no Righteousness: For this ought to be a main Argument, That Christ
was the true Son of God, because by his own Power he raised himself from the
dead; and then to cherish and support our Hope. For since Christ rose again, we
have a sure Hope, that we also shall rise again, for it is necessary, that the
Members enjoy the same state and condition with the Head: For so the Apostle
seems to argue, when he writes both to the Corinthians and Thessalonians, and
Peter the Prince of the Apostles says: 1 Cor. 15.12. 1 These. 4.14. 1 Pet. 2.8.
Blessed be God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who of his great mercy
has begott'n us again to a lively Hope throw the Resurrection of Jesus Christ
from the Dead to an Inheritance incorruptible.

Lastly, XXII. The Second. The End of the Resurrection.
For this reason also it must be taught, That the Resurrection of our Lord was
necessary, That the Mystery of our Salvation and Redemption might be
completed. For Christ, by his Death, has freed us from Sin; but by Rising
again he has restored us to all those good things which we lost by our sins.
Wherefore the Apostle says, Romans 4.15.
Christ was delivered to Death for our Sins, and Rose again for our
Justification. That nothing therefore might be wanting to the Salvation and
Happiness of Mankind, as it behooved him to Die; so also it did to Rise again.

Now from what has bin said, XXIII. The Third. The Advantages. The first
we may perceiv, How great advantage the Resurrection of Christ our Lord brings
to the Faithful.

For by his very Resurrection, We acknowledge him to be God, Immortal, and full
of Glory, and conqueror of the Devil, which without all doubt we are to believ
and confess concerning Christ Jesus

Besides, The Second.
The Resurrection of Christ has produced the Resurrection of our Bodies also:
Because it was the efficient cause of this Mystery: And also because, after the
example of our Lord, we all ought to rise again: For as to the Resurrection of
the Body, the Apostle thus testifies, 1 Cor. 15.
By Man came Death, by Man came also the Resurrection of the Dead. For there is
use of Christ's Humanity, as of the efficient instrument, to all those things,
whatsoever they are, which God did in the Mystery of our Redemption. Wherefore,
his Resurrection was a kind of Instrument to bring to pass our Resurrection.
And it may be called a Pattern, because the Resurrection of Christ was of all,
the most perfect: And as the Body of Christ, rising to immortal Glory, was
changed; so our Bodies also, which before were weak and mortal, shall be
restored and adorned with Glory and Immortality. For as the Apostle teaches,
Phil. 3.20, 21.
We wait for the Savior, our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile Body,
that it shall be like to his glorious Body.

And this may be said concerning the Soul, The Third.
dead in Sins; to which, on what score, the Resurrection of Christ is offered
as an Example or Pattern to us, the same Apostle shows in these Words; Romans 6.4.
As Christ rose again from the Dead, by the Glory of the Father; so should we
also walk in Newness of Life: For if we have bin planted together with him in
the likeness of his Death, we shall be also in the likeness of his
Resurrection: And, a little after, he says; knowing that Christ being risen
from the Dead, now dies no more, Death shall no more domineer over him. For in
that he died to Sin, be died once; but in that he lives, he lives to God: So
reck'n ye your selves to be dead indeed to sin, but alive to God in Jesus
Christ.

Two Examples therefore we ought to seek from Christ's Resurrection. The one
is, XXIV. Two Examples from Christ's Resurrection.
That after we have wiped away the stains of sin, we lead a new kind of Life,
in which way clearly shine forth Uprightness, Innocence, Holiness, Modesty,
Justice, Beneficence and Humility. The other is, That we so persevere in that
kind of life, that by Gods help, we fall not off from the way of Righteousness,
whereinto we have once entered.

Nor do the Apostles Words show only, XXV. The Fourth Advantage of Christ's
Resurrection. Romans 6.6,
That the Resurrection of Christ is proposed to us as an Example of our
Resurrection; but they declare, That it gives us Power to rise again, and
bestows Strength and Courage, whereby we may continue in Holiness and
Righteousness. For as by his Death, we not only take Example of dying to sin,
but draw Virtue also, whereby we may dye to sin; So his Resurrection brings us
Strength to obtain Righteousness, that thenceforth worshipping God piously and
holily, we may walk in Newness of (...), to which we are risen. For this
especially did our Lord bring to pas's by his Resurrection; that we, who before
were dead with him to sin, and to the world, might also with him rise again to
a new way and course of life.

The Signs of this Resurrection, XXVI. The signs of Resurrection from sin.
Coloss. 3.1.
which are chiefly to be observed, the Apostle teaches us: For when he says: If
ye be risen with Christ seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at
the right hand of God, he plainly shows, That those who desire to have Life,
Honors, Rest, and Riches there, Phil. 4.8.
where Christ specially is, are truly risen with Christ. But when he adds:
Relish those things which are above, not those which are on the Earth; he has
given this as a kind of Note, whereby we may perceive whether we be risen with
Christ. For as the Taste or Relish is wont to discover the Temperature and
Health of the Body; so if Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
comely, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are holy, do relish with a
person, and if he can perceive with the inward sense of his Soul, the sweetness
of heavenly things, this is a good Argument, That he that is thus affected is
risen with Jesus Christ to a new and spiritual Life.

ARTICLE VI.
HE ascended into Heaven, sits at the Right Hand of God the Father
Almighty.] When the Prophet David full of Gods Spirit contemplated the blessed
and glorious Ascension of our Lord, I. What kind of Solemnity and Faith of
Christ's Ascension there ought to be. Ps. 46.1.6.
he exhorts all to celebrate that Triumph with the greatest joy and gladness,
in these Words; saying, Clap Hands for joy, O all ye Nations, sing to God with
the Voice of Rejoicing: God is gone up with a merry noise. Whence the Curat may
understand, That this Mystery is to be explained with the greatest study, and
that he ought to take diligent care, That the Faithful embrace it not only with
Faith, and with the Mind; but as far as may be, and with Gods help, they
endeavor in their Life and Actions also to express the same.

As to the Explication of this Sixth Article therefore, II. The former part of
this Article.
wherein chiefly is treated concerning this Divine Mystery, we must begin at
the former part thereof, and show what is the effect and meaning thereof.

For concerning Christ Jesus, III. What we are here to believe.
the Faithful must believe this also without any wavering, That the Mystery of
our Redemption being now perfected, he, as Man with his Soul and Body, went up
into Heaven: For, as he was God, he never was absent thence; because he fills
all things with his Divinity.

And let the Curat teach, that he went up by his own Power, First. Secondly. 4
Reg. 2.11.35 n 14. Thirdly. Act. 8.39.
and not by the Power of another, as Elias did, who was carried into Heaven in
a fiery Chariot: or Abaccuc the Prophet, or Philip the Deacon, who, by the
Divine Power, being carried through the Air, past through the remote parts of
the Earth. Nor did he ascend to Heaven, only by the mighty Power of his
Divinity, but also as he is Man.

For tho this could not be by any Natural Power, Fourthly.
yet that Power wherewith the blessed Soul of Christ was endu'd, could move his
Body as he li^^ed.

And his Body which was now glorified, Fifthly.
did readily obey the Government of his Soul moving it.

And in this manner, Sixthly.
We believe that Christ, as he was God, and as he was Man, went up into Heaven,
by his own Power. Now follows the other part of the Article.

He sits at the Right Hand of the Father.] In which place we may observe a
Trope, IV. The use and necessi y of Trope
that is, the change of a Word, frequent in Holy Scripture, when we attribute
to God Human Affections, and Members suitable to our Understanding; sor he,
being a Spirit, we cannot think any thing corporeal in him. But because in
Human Affairs we esteem a great honor done to him, who is placed at the
Right Hand: transferring the same thing to heavenly matters, to the explaining
of the Glory of Christ, which as he is Man he has merited above all others; we
confess him to be at the Right Hand of the Father.

But to sit, V. What is here meant by S^^ing.
in this place, does not signify the Gesture, and Figure of Body, but it shows
the firm and sure Possession of supreme Power and Glory, which he has received
of the Father: Of which the Apostle says: Arian. Ser. 1 cont. Arian Basil. lib
de Spirit. s^n^t. c. 6. Heb. 1.13.
Raising him up from the Dead, and placing him at his Right Hand in the
Heavens, far above all Principality and Power, and Virtue, and Domination, and
every Name that is Named, not only in this World, but in the World to come: And
has subjected all things under his Feet. From which Words it appears, That this
Glory is so proper and peculiar to our Lord, that it is not agreeable to any
other created Being. And therefore in another place it is said: To which of the
Angels has he at any time said: Sit thou at my Right Hand?

But the Curat prosecuting the History of the Ascension, VI. All Mysterys ^o ^e
^e^e^^^^ to the A^c^nsion. Act. 1.
shall more fully explain the sense of this Article, which History S. Luke the
Evangelist describes after a wonderful manner, in the Acts of the Apostles. In
explaining whereof, it is necessary chiefly to observe this, That all other
Mysteries have relation to the Ascension, as to their end, and that the
perfection and completion of all the rest is contained in This: For as all the
Mysteries of our Religion have their beginning from the Incarnation or our
Lord; so in his Ascension their progress is concluded.

Furthermore: VII. The ^^^t of Christ. Life compared with his Ascension.
The other Heads of the Creed, which belong to Christ our Lord, show his
exceeding Humility and Lowliness: Nor can there any thing be conceived more
abject and mean, than that the Son of God, for our sakes, should take upon him
the nature and weakness of Man, and be willing to suffer and dye for us. But
then, as in the former Article, we confess, that he rose again from the dead,
but is now ascended up into Heaven, and sits at the Right Hand of God the
Father; there can nothing be spoken more magnificently and wonderfully toward
the declaring of his supreme Glory and Divine Majesty.

These things being already explained, VIII. The causes of his Ascension. First.
we must diligently teach, for what Reason Christ our Lord ascended up into
Heaven.

For, First, he ascended, for this Reason, because in this earthly and obscure
habitation, there could be no place suitable to his Body; which in his
Resurrection was adorned with the glory of Immortality: None but the most high
and glorious dwelling of Heaven, could be suitable to him.

Nor did he ascend only to pssess the Throne of his Glory and Kingdom which he
merited with his Blood; Second.
but also to take care of those things which concerned our Salvation.

Besides, Third. Joh. 18.36.
He ascended to evidence in truth that his Kingdom is not of this World: For
the Kingdoms of the World are Earthly and Flitting, and are established by much
Wealth, and by Carnal Power: But the Kingdom of Christ is not Earthly, as the
Jews expected, but Spiritual and Eternal; his Riches also are Spiritual Riches,
as he shows when he placed his Seat in Heaven: in which Kingdom they verily are
to be accounted more rich, and flowing with plenty of all good things, who
diligently seek those things which are of God: For St. James testifies, Jam.
2.5.
that God has chosen the poor of this world rich in faith, and heirs of the
kingdom which God has promised to them that love him.

And this our Lord, Fourth.
ascending up into Heaven, was desirous to effect, that we with our mind and
desires might follow him ascending thither: For as by his Death and
Resurrection, he left us an example of Dying and Rising again in Spirit: So by
his Ascension he instructs and teaches us, that tho we are confined on Earth,
yet that in Thought and Desire we raise our selves up to Heaven, Heb. 11.63.
Confessng that we are but strangers and pilgrims on the earth, Ephesians. 2.19.
and that we are citizens of the saints and domestics of God, seeking our own
country. For, Phil. 3.20.
as the same Apostle says, our conversation is in heaven.

Divine David, IX. The advantages of Christ's Ascension. Ps. 67.19. Ephesians. 2.8.
First.
(as the Apostle interprets him) long before sang of the force and greatness of
those unutterable good things which the Love of God has shed upon us, in these
words; He ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, he gave gifts to men:
for in the tenth day after he gave his Holy Spirit, by whose power and plenty
he filled the whole multitude of the faithful then present.

And he truly fulfilled those so large promises of his: Second. Joh. 16.8.
It is expedient for you, that I go away; for if I go not away, the Paraclet or
Comforter will not come to you; but if go, I will send him to you,

And according to the sentence of the Apostle, Third.
he ascended into Heaven that he might now appear before God on our behalf to
discharge the Office of Advocate with the Father: Heb. 9.24.
My little children, 1 John 2.
says St. John, these things write I to you, that ye sin not; but if any man
sin, we have an Anvocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is
the Propitiation for our sins. Nor is there any thing, whence the faithful
should take more comfort and refreshing of mind, than that Jesus Christ takes
our part, and prays the Father for our salvation, who has the greatest favor
and regard with the Eternal Father.

Lastly, Fourth.
He has prepared a place for us, Joh. 14.2.
which also he promised he would do, and as our Head, in the name of us all,
Jesus Christ has taken possession of the glory of Heaven.

For at his going to Heaven, Fifth.
he opened those Gates which by Adam's sin were barred up, and has cleared us a
Way, by which we may come to Celestial happiness, as in his Supper he foretold
his Disciples he would do; which that the event of the matter might plainly
prove it, he carried with him into the regions of eternal happiness, the souls
of the pious which he had fetched out of Hell.

This blessed rank of Advantages followed upon that wonderful plenty of
heavenly gifts.

For first here is happened deservedly a great advantage to our Faith: X Other
Benefits of the Ascension. First.
for Faith is conversant about those things which we cannot see, and which are
far beyond the reason and understanding of men. If therefore the Lord had not
gone away, the Merit of our Faith had been much lessened: Joh. 10.24.
For they are said of Christ our Lord to be blessed, who have not seen, and yet
have believed.

Moreover Christ's Ascension into Heaven has a mighty influence to confirm Hope
in our Hearts, Second.
for since we believe that Christ as Man went up into Heaven, and has placed
the Human Nature at the Right Hand of God the Father, we conceive a strong
Hope, that there will be a time, when We also, that are his Members, shall
ascend thither, and be there joined with our Head; which thing our Lord himself
testifies in these words, Joh. 17.29.
Father, I will that those also whom thou have given me, should be where I am.

And then This also, Third.
as a very great benefit, we have obtained, that he has drawn up our love to
Heaven, and inflamed us with his Divine Spirit: For most true is that saying,
Mat. 6.21.
There our Heart is, where our Treasure is. And indeed if Christ our Lord were
dwelling on the Earth, all our thoughts would be fixed upon the face and
acquaintance of the Man; and we should behold him only as Man, who bestowed so
great benefits upon us; and we should affect him only with a kind of earthly
Good Will: But now being gone up into Heaven; he has rendered our Love
Spiritual, and makes us to love and reverence him as God, whom we now consider
as absent. And this we understand partly by the Example of the Apostles; Joh.
19.7.
with whom, while our Lord was present, they seemed to judge of him, in a
manner, according to Human Sense: And partly it is confirmed by the testimony
of our Lord himself, when he says, It is expedient for you that I go away. For
that imperfect Love wherewith they loved Jesus Christ when present with them,
was to be perfected by Divine Love, and that by the coming of the Holy Ghost:
Wherefore he presently adds, For if I go not away, the Paraclet or Comforter
will not come to you.

To this may be added, Fourth.
that he has enlarged his House, Ephesians. 4.22.
i.e. his Church in the earth, which was to be governed by the power and
guidance of the Holy Spirit: and he left Peter the Prince of Apostles, the
chief Pastor and Prelate of the whole Church among Men: and then he gave some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, and so
sitting at the Right Hand of his Father; he always bestows diverse gifts upon
diverse persons, for the Apostle testifies, Ephesians. 5.7.
That to every one of us is given grace, according to the measure of the gift
of Christ.

But lastly, Fifth.
The Faithful are to believe the same thing also concerning Christ's Ascension,
which we taught before concerning the mystery of his Death and Resurrection;
for tho we owe our Salvation and Redemption to the Passion of Christ, who by
his own Merit opened to the Just an entrance to Heaven; yet his Ascension is
not only proposed to us as an example, whereby we learn to look up on high, and
ascend up into Heaven in Spirit, but it has given us Divine Power whereby we
are enabled to do it.

ARTICLE VII.
FRom thence he shall come to judge the quick and the Dead.] There are three of
excellent Offices and Functions which our Lord Jesus Christ has for the
adorning and illustrating of his Church, I. The Three Offices of Christ.
Of Redemption, Patronage, or Defense, and Judgment. But whereas from the
former Articles it is manifest, that he has redeemed mankind by his Passion and
Death, and that he has undertak'n sorever to defend and patronize our cause by
his Ascension into Heaven, it remains that in this Article we declare his
Judgment.

The reason and force of which Article is this, II. What we must believe
conc^^^nig the last judgment.
That in the last day Christ our Lord will judge all mankind. For the Holy
Scriptures testify, that there are Two comings of Christ: The One, when for
our salvation he took flesh, and was made Man, in the Womb of the Virgin: The
Other when he shall come to judge all men, at the end of the World. This Coming
of his, in Holy Scripture is called, The Day of the Lord, whereof the Apostle
speaks, 1 These. 5.2.
The day of the Lord so comes as a Thief in the night: Man. 24.20.
and our Savior himself, Man. 23.32.
But of that Day and Hour no man knows. 1 Cor. 5.10.
Concerning which last judgment, the authority of the Apostle is sufficient: We
must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may give an
account of what he has done in the body, whether good or evil. For the Holy
Scripture is full of testimonies, which the Curat may find scattered up and
down, not only for proof of this matter, but to lay before the eyes of the
Faithful; that as from the beginning of the World, that Day of the Lord, wherein
he put on Human Flesh, was always much longed for of all; because in that
Mystery they had the hope of their deliverance placed: So from thence forth
after the Death of the Son of God, and his Ascension into Heaven, we might most
earnestly desire that Other Day of the Lord, waiting for that blessed Hope, and
the coming of the Glory of the great God.

But for the explication of this matter, the Curat shall observe and teach that
there are Two times wherein every one must needs come in presnce before the
Lord, and give an account of all his particular Thoughts, Actions and Words,
and must abide the present Sentence of the Judge.

The First is, when every one of us goes out of this life, for immediately he
is placed before the Judgment Seat of God, and there is a most just examination
made of all things whatsoever he ever did, spoke, or thought, and this is
called The Private Judgment.

But The Other is, when in one day, and in one place, All men shall stand
together before the Seat of Judgment; that in the sight and hearing of all men
of all ages, every one may know what is judged and decreed concerning
himse;lf. The very Pronouncing of which Sentence to Ungodly and Wicked men,
will not be the least part of their punishments and torments: And on the other
side, the Godly and the Just will from thence receive no small Reward and
Profit, when it shall truly appear what kind of persons every one of them was
in this life: And this is called the General Judgment.

Concerning which it must needs be showed what the Cause is, V. Why a General
Judgment to come.
why besides the Private Judgment concerning every one in particular, there
will also be held another Judgment concerning all men in general.

For since, First Cause.
even when men are dead, they sometimes leave behind them some surviving
persons to imitate them, as Children to imitate Parents, Dependents and
Scholars, who are lovers and favorers of their Examples, Discourses, Actions,
whereby it must needs come to pass, that the rewards and punishments of the
dead shall be increased; and whereas this, either Advantage or Calamity, which
belongs to so very many, cannot have an end before the coming of the last day
of the World: It was but meet, that there should be a perfect examination of
this General Account of good and evil Words and Actions: And this could not be
done, except at one General Judgment of all men.

And besides, The Second
forasmuch as the Fame of the Godly is often times unjustly wounded, and the
wicked commended as innocent, the justice of God required that the godly
should, even in the Public assembly and judgment of all mankind, recover that
esteem, which, by injustice, they were deprived of among men.

And then whereas both the Good and the Bad did, The Third.
not without their bodies, whatsoever they did, on all accounts it is just,
that whatsoever was well or ill done, belongs also to their Bodies, which were
the Instruments of those Actions: It was therefore very convenient, that the
due rewards of eternal glory or punishment should be difpens'd to the Bodies
and Souls together; which verily could not be done, without a Ressurrection of
all men, and without a General Judgment.

Lastly, The Fourth.
Because in men's adversity and prosperity, which sometimes happen alike, both
to the Good and Bad; it was to appear that nothing was done or overruled.
without the Infinite Wisdom and Justice of God; it was meet, not only that
Rewards should be appointed to the Good, and Punishments to the Wicked in the
world to come, but also that this should be determined in a Public and General
Judgment, whereby they might be more known and conspicuous to all, and that
praise might by all be given to the Justice and Providence of God, instead of
that unjust complaint, which even sometimes the Saints themselves as men have
been used to make, when they observed wicked Men prospering in Wealth and
flourishing in Honors. For, Ps. 72.2,3.
says the Prophet, My feet were amost moved, my treadings had well nigh slipped,
because I was grieved at the unjust, seeing the peace of sinners: And a little
after, Behold the very sinners, and the wealthy of the world, they get riches;
and I said. Then have I cleans'd my heart in vain; and have washed my hands in
innocence: I was punished every day, and chastn'd every morning. And this was
the frequent complaint of many. It was needful therefore that there should be a
General Judgment, Joh. 22.14.
lest happily men should say; That God indeed takes care of the motions of the
Heavens, but regards not what is done on the Earth. This word of Truth
therefore is rightly made One of the Twelve Articles of our Christian Faith;
that, if the minds of any should doubt concerning the Providence and Jultice of
God, by means of this Doctrine they may be confirmed.

Besides, The Fifth.
at the apprehension of the Judgment, it is fit that the Godly be comforted,
and the Wicked terrified, that, considering the Justice of God, the Good should
not be dejected, and the Evil may be recalled from their wickedness, by the
fear and expectation of Eternal Punishment. Wherefore our Lord and Savior,
speaking of the Last Day, has declared that there will sometime be a General
Judgment, Mat. 24 29.
and has described the Signs of the approach of the Time thereof, that when we
shall see those Signs come to pass, we may know that the End of the World is at
hand; and then, at his Ascension into Heaven he sent Angels, who comforted the
Apostles, grieving for his absence, in these words, Act. 2.11.
This Jesus which is taken from you up into Heaven, shall so come as ye have
seen him go into Heaven.

But that this Judgment is given to Christ, VI. Christ as Man also is Judge of
all.
not only as God, but as Man, the Holy Scriptures declare. For tho the power of
Judging be common to all the persons of the Holy Trinity, yet we specially
attribute it to the Son: Because we say that Wisdom suits to him. But that as
Man he will judge the World, our Lord's testimony assures us, who says: Joh.
5.26.
As the Father has life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have life in
himself; and has given him power to Judge as he is the Son of Man.

And it was very meet, VII. Why Christ a^ Man will be Judge.
that this Judgment should be exercised by Christ our Lord, that when the
Judgment was concerning Men, they might see the Judge with their Eyes, and with
their Ears hear the Sentence which should be pronounced, and truly perceive the
Judgment with their Senses. And it was moreover mosl just, that That man who
was condemned by the most unjust sentences of Men, should be seen to sit
afterward as Judge of all; wherefore the Prince of Apostles, when in the House
of Cornelius, Act. 10.24.
he was expounding the chief heads of Christian Religion, and had taught, that
Christ was by the Jews hanged on a Tree, and killed, and the third day rose
again to life, he subjoined: And he has commanded us to preach, and to testify
to the people, that This is he who was appointed of God to be the Judge of
quick and dead.

And the Holy Scriptures declare, VIII. Signs foregoing the Judgment. Damase.
de fide Or^hod. lib. 4.7.27.
that these Three principal Signs will go before the Judgment, The Preaching of
the Gospel throughout the world; a Departure from the Faith, and Antichrist:
For our Lord says, This Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached through the
whole world for a testimony to all the Gentiles, and then shall the End come:
And the Apostle warns us, that we be not seduced by any, as tho the Day of the
Lord were at hand; Mat. 22.14. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. Dan. 7.9.
For unless there first come a departure, and that Man of sin be revealed, the
judgment will not come. But what will be the Manner and Way of the Judgment,
the Curate may easily know from the Oracles of Daniel, and from the Doctrine of
the Evangelists, and of the Apostles.

Moreover, IX. The Pronouncing and Exposition of the Sentence of the last
Judgment. Mat. 24.34.
the Sentence to be pronounced by the Judge, should be in this place more
diligently considered: For Christ our Savior, beholding with a cheerful
countenance the Godly at his Right hand, shall with the greatest love and
good will thus pronounce Sentence concerning them: Come ye the blessed of my
Father, possess the Kingdom which is prepared for you from the foundation of
the world. Than which words, they will know that there can be nothing heard
more sweet, who but compare them with the Sentence of Condemnation of the
Wicked, and when in their mind they shall have considered, that by those words,
Pious and Just men are called from their Labors to Rest, from a Valley of
Tears, to the highest Joy, and from all their Miseries to everlasting
Happiness, which they by their Duties of Charity have deserved: And then
turning to those who stand at his Left hand, he will pour forth his Justice
upon them in these words, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

In those former words, X. The Sentence of the Reprobate considered. Chrysostom.
in Mat. Hom. 23. August. Ser. 181 de Temp. Greg. lib. 9. Moral. c. 46. Mat.
25.4^.
Depart from me: is signified that most extreme punishment wherewith the wicked
shall be tormented, when they shall be cast out far from the sight of God; nor
can they receive any comfort from any Hope, that they shall ever enjoy so great
a Good. And This by Divines is called the Pain of Loss, viz. That the Wicked in
Hell shall for ever want the Light of the Vision of God. But that which is
added, ye Cursed, does wonderfully increase their misery and calamity. For if
when they are to be driven out from the presence of God, they might be thought
worthy of some small Blessing, this might truly be some considerable comfort to
them. But for as much as they must expect nothing that can alleviate their
misery; when they are cast out, the Divine Justice will rightly follow them
with every Malediction and Curse. And then follows, Into everlasting-fire,
which other kind of Pain, Divines call the Pain of Sense, because it can be
felt by the bodily Senses, as in Stripes, Buffetings, and other more grievous
kinds of punishments, among which, there can be no doubt, that the torments of
Fire do cause the most exquisite sense of Pain; to which evil, when it is
added, that all this wilt be For ever; it is thereby showed that the pains of
the Damned will be loaded with all kinds of punishments. And This, those words
which are placed in the latter part of the Sentence, more fully declare, Which
is prepared for the Devil and his Angels: For whereas so it is, that we can
more easily endure all troubles if we have some Companion and Consort of our
Calamity, by whose prudence and humanity, we may in some measure be relieved:
what at last will be the Misery of the Damned, who tho loaded with so great
Torments, shall notwithstanding never be delivered from the company of the most
accursed Devils? And this indeed is the Sentence that shall most justly be
denounced by our Lord and Savior upon the Wicked, as being they, who neglected
all works of true Piety, and gave neither Meat nor Drink to the Hungry and
Thirsty, took not in the Stranger, clothed not the Naked, and visited not the
Sick and Imprisoned.

These are the things which the Curats ought often to inculcate into the ears
of the Faithful: XI. Discourse of the last Judgment should be frequent, and
why? Eccles. 40. Aug. Ser. 120. de Temp. Greg. Hom. 3 9. in E^^^ng. Berna^^
Sermon. 1. in sesto omnium sanctorum.
For the Truth of this Article being rightly believed, will have great force to
bridle the wicked desires of the mind, and hold men back from sinning.
Wherefore in Ecclesiasticus it is said, In all thy works remember thy latter
end, and thou will not sin forever. And indeed hardly will any one be carried
headlong into wickedness, whom this Consideration cannot recall to the study of
Piety: That sometime or other he must give an Account before the most just
Judge, not only of all his Actions and Words, but also of his most hidden
Thoughts, and must suffer Punishment according to his desert. But it must needs
be that the Just will be more stirred up to do Justice, and to rejoice
exceedingly, tho he here lead his life in Want, in Disgrace and Afflictions,
when he thinks in his mind of that Day, when after the combat of this
troublesome life, he shall in the hearing of all Men be proclaimed a Conqueror,
and shall be received into his heavenly Country, and adorned with Divine
Honor. What remains therefore, but that the Faithful be exhorted to take the
best manner of life, and exercise themselves in the study of all Piety, that so
they may, with the greater Joy, and Security of Mind, wait for and expect the
coming of that great Day of the Lord, and so, as becomes Children, with the
greatest Earnestness to desire it.

ARTICLE. VIII.
I Believ in the Holy Ghost.] Hitherto those things have bin expounded, I. Fith
in the Holy Ghost necessary.
so far as the Reason of the Argument seemed to require, which belonged to the
First and Second Person of the Holy Trinity; Now it follows, That those things
also which in the Creed are delivered concerning the Third Person, that is the
Holy Ghost, should be explained. In treating of which matter, the Pastors
should use their utmost Endeavor and Diligence, Act. 19.2.
seeing it is to be supposed, That a Christian Man may no more be ignorant of
This part, or not believe rightly concerning it, than of the other former
Articles. Wherefore the Apostle would not suffer certain of the Ephesians to be
ignorant of the Person of the Holy Ghost: Of whom, when he asked, Whether they
had received the Holy Ghost, and when they answered. That they knew not whether
there was an Holy Ghost, he presently asked them; In whom therefore were ye
baptized? In which words he signified, That the distinct knowledge of this
Article is necessary to the Faithful, from which they have this Fruit;
especially, that when they consider attentively, That whatsoever they have,
they have it of the Gift and Bounty of the Holy Ghost; then do they begin to
think more modestly and humbly of themselves, and to place all their Hope in
Gods Protection, which ought to be the First Step of a Christian to the highest
Wisdom and Happiness.

We must therefore begin the explanation of this Article from the Force and
Notion which here is included in that Name of the Holy Ghost (or Holy Spirit)
for the very same may indifferently and rightly be said both of the Father and
of the Son, II What the Holy Ghost properly signifies.
(for either of them is a Spirit, and Holy;) for we confess that God is a
Spirit: and besides that the Angels, and the Souls of the Pious are signified
by this word, there must care be taken, lest the people by the ambiguity of the
Word, be led into Eror. In this Article therefore it must be taught, That the
Third Person of the Trinity is understood, by the name of the Holy Ghost, after
which manner in the Holy Scriptures, both of the Old Testament sometimes, and
of the New Testament very frequently, he is taken; for David prays: Ps. 50.12.
Wisd. 9 17. (...). 1.9. Matt. 1.20. Luc. 1.35.
And take not thy Holy Spirit from me. In the Book of Wisdom we read, Who has
known thy counsel, except thou give Wisdom, and send thy Holy Spirit from
above? And elsewhere: He created it by his Holy Spirit. And in the New
Testament, we are commanded to be baptiz d, In the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And we read, That the most Holy Virgin did
conceive by the Holy Ghost, and we are also sent by S. John to Christ, Joh.
1.15.
who baptizes us with the Holy Ghost; and in many other places besides, in
reading we may meet with this Word,

And no one ought to wonder, III. Why the H ly Ghost h^s no proper name.
That a proper name is not given to the Third Person as there is to the First
and Second; for the Second Person has therefore a proper name, and is called
Son, because his eternal Birth of the Father is properly called Generation, as
has bin explained in the former Article. As therefore that Birth is signified
by the name os Generation: So that Person which flows, we properly call Son,
and him from whom he flows, we properly call Father. Now whereas there is no
proper name given to the production of the Third Person, but is called
Spiration and Procession, it follows, That the Person also which is produced,
want his own proper name. Now his Emanation has no proper name, because we are
forced to borrow from creat'd things, those Names which are given to God.
Wherein, because we know no other way of communicating of Nature and Being but
by virtue of Generation; for this cause it is, that we cannot express by any
proper word, the way whereby God communicates his whole self by virtue of his
Love. Wherefore the Third Person is called by the common name of Holy Spirit,
which verily we understand very well to suit with him from hence, because he
pours spiritual Life into us, and without the inspiration of his most Holy
Deity, we can do nothing worthy of eternal Life.

And now the signification of the Name being explained, IV. The Holy Ghost
proved God equal with the Father and Son.
the people are first of all to be taught, That the Holy Ghost is equally God
with the Father and the Son, that he is equal with him, equally Almighty,
Eternal, and of infinite Perfection, the supreme Good, and most Wise, and of
the and same Nature with the Father and the Son.

Which also the propriety of the word [In] sufficiently shows, First.
when we say, I believe in the Holy Ghost, which is fitted to express the force
of our Faith in the several persons of the Trinity.

And this also is confirmed by plain Testimonies of Holy Scripture; Secondly.
for when S. Peter, in the Acts of the Apostles had said: Act. 5.
Ananias, why has Satan tempted thy Heart to lie to the Holy Ghost? he
presently says, Thou have not ly'd to Men, but to God. Whom before he called
Holy Ghost, the same he presently after calls God.

And the Apostle to the Corinthians interprets him to be the Holy Ghost,
Thirdly. 1 Cor. 12.6.
whom he had called God. There are, says he, divisions of operations, but the
same God, which works all in all; and then he subjoyns: But all these things
works that One and the selfsame Spirit, dividing to every one severally as he
will.

Besides, in the Acts of the Apostles, Four^hly.
that which the Prophets attribute to God only, he ascribes to the Holy Ghost.
For Esayah had said: Isay. 6.8.
I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send? and he said to me:
Go thou, and say to this people. Harden the heart of this people, and make
heavy their ears, and close up their eyes, lest happily they see with their eyes,
and bear with their ears. Which words when the Apostle had cited: Act. 28.25.
Well, says he, did the Holy Ghost speak by Esayas the Prophet.

And then, Fifthly.
when the Scripture joins the Person of the Holy Ghost with the Father and the
Son, that when he commands, That the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
should be mentioned in Baptism, there is no room left us to doubt of the Truth
of this Mystery. For if the Father be God, and the Son God, we must be forced
to confess that the Holy Ghost, who is joined with them in the same Degree of
Honor, is God also.

And this may be added, Sixthly.
That he who is baptized in the name of any created thing, can reap no fruit
thereby. Were ye, 1 Cor. 13.
says he, baptized in the name of Paul? to show that this could profit them
nothing to the attaining Salvation. When therefore we are baptized in the name
of the Holy Ghost, we must needs confess that he is God.

And we may observe this order of the Three Persons in S. John's Epistle also,
Seventhly.
whereby is proved the Divinity of the Holy Ghost: 1 John 5.7.
There are Three which bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost, and these Three are One. And also in that famous Elogy or Hymn or
Praise of the Holy Trinity, wherewith the Divine Lands and Psalms are
concluded, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

Lastly, Eighthly.
And which most of all belongs to the confirmation of this Truth, whatsoever we
believe to be proper to God, the same the Holy Scriptures testify to agree to
the Holy Ghost. And therefore they attribute to him the honor of Temples: 1
Cor. 6.19. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. Joh. 6.63. 2 Cor. 3.6. 2 Cor. 2.10.
As when the Apostle says: Know ye not that your Members are the Temple of the
Holy Ghost? so also, Sanctification and Vivification or quickening, and to
search into the Depths of God: And to speak by the Prophets, and to be every
where: All which things are to be attributed only to the Divine Deity.

And this moreover is carefully to be explained, V. The Holy Ghost a distinct
person from the Father and the Son.
That the Holy Ghost is God so, as that we must confess him to be the Third
Person in the Divine Nature, distinct from the Father and the Son, and produced
by their Will: For to omit other Testimonies of Scripture, the Form of Baptism
which our Savior has taught, most plainly shows, Matt. 28.19.
That the Holy Ghost is the Third Person, which in the Divine Nature, stands of
it self, and is distinct from the rest. Which also the words of the Apostle
declare, when he says, 1 Cor. 13.15.
The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the Communication
of the Holy Ghost be with you all, Amen. The same thing, but much more plainly
do those things evidence, which the Fathers in the first council of
Constantinople have added in this place to confute the impious madness of
Macedonius: And in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of Life, who proceeds
from the Father and the Son, who with the Father and the Son, together is
worshipped and glorified: Who spoke by the Prophets. That therefore they
confess the Holy Ghost to be Lord, they declare in this, how much he excels the
Angels, which yet are most noble Spirits, created of God: For S. Paul
witnesses, That they all are ministering Spirits, Heb. 1.14.
sent forth to minister for them who receive the Inheritance of Salvation.

And they call him the Giver of Life, VI. Why the Holy Ghost called the Giver
of life.
because the Soul being joined with God does more truly live, than the Body,
when it is nourished and sustained by conjunction with the Soul. And because
the Holy Scriptures attribute to the Holy Ghost this Conjunction of the Soul
with God; it appears plainly, that he is most truly called Spirit, that gives
Life, or quickening Spirit.

And now what follows, VII. How the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the
Son.
Who proceeds from the Father and the Son, the Faithful are to be taught, That
the Holy Ghost, by eternal procession, proceeds from the Father and the Son, as
from One Principle: For this the Rule of the Church, from which a Christian may
not wander, proposes to us to believe; and it is confirmed by the authority of
Holy Scripture, and Councils: For Christ our Lord, speaking of the Holy Ghost,
said: Joh. 16.14
He shall glorify me, because he shall receive of mine. This same thing is
gathered hence, that in Holy Scripture the Holy Spirit is sometimes called the
Spirit of Christ, sometimes the Spirit of the Father: One while he is said to
be sent by the Father, another while by the Son, that it may be plainly
signified, that he does equally proceed from the Father, Romans 8.9.
and the Son. He that has not the Spirit of Christ, Gal. 4.6.
says S. Paul, he is none of his. And the same he calls the Spirit of Christ,
when he says to the Galatians: God has sent the Spirit of his Son into your
Hearts, crying, Abba, Father. In S. Matthew he is called the Spirit of the
Father: Mat. 10.20.
It is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father: Joh. 15.25.
And our Lord at his Supper said, the Paraclet or Comforter whom I will send to
you, even the Spirit of Truth, which proceeds from the Father, he shall bear
witness of me: And elsewhere, That the same Holy Ghost should be sent from the
Father, Joh. 14.21.
he affirms in these words: Whom the Father will send in my name. From whence,
when we understand the Procession of the Holy Ghost, it is plain. That the same
Holy Ghost proceeds from Both. And these are the things which must be taught
concerning the Person of the Holy Ghost.

It is needful moreover to teach, VIII. Of the Attributes of the Holy Ghost.
that there are certain wonderful Effects, and some bountiful Gifts of the Holy
Ghost, which are said to spring and flow front him, as from the everlasting
Fountain of Good. For tho the works of the most Holy Trinity, which are done
extrinsically, are common to the Three Persons; yet many of them are ascribed
as proper to the Holy Ghost, that we may know that they come to us of the
immense Love of God: For seeing that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Divine
Will, as being inflamed with Love, it may be perceived, That those Effects
which are properly referred to the Holy Ghost, do spring from the exceeding
Love of God toward us.

Wherefore, IX. Why the Holy Ghost is called a Gift.
hence it follows, That the Holy Ghost is called a Gift: For by the word Gift
is signified that which is kindly and freely given, without any hope of Reward.
And then whatsoever good things or benefits are bestowed on us from God (for
what have we, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 4.7.
which we have not received of God? those things we ought with a pious and
thankful Heart to acknowledge were given us by the grant and gift of the Holy
Ghost. But there are other effects of his: For to omit the Creation of the
World, and the Propagation and Government of created things, of which we have
made mention in the First Article; it was a little before showed, That the
giving of Life is properly attributed to the Holy Ghost, and it is so confirmed
by the Testimony of Ezekiel: Ezekiel. 31.6.
I will give you Spirit, says he, and ye shall live

And yet the Prophet reckons up the principal Effects of the Holy Ghost, X. The
Gifts of the Holy Ghost. Isa. 11.3. Aug. lib. 15. de Trin. c. 18, and 19.
and those which are most especially proper to him: The Spirit of Wisdom and
Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and Fortitude, the Spirit of Knowledge and
Piety: and the Spirit of the Fear of the Lord. Sometimes also the name of the
Holy Ghost is given to those things which are called the Gifts of the Holy
Ghost. Wherefore wisely does S. Austin admonish us to observe, when in Holy
Scripture there is mention made of this word Holy Spirit, that we may discern
whether it signifies the Third Person of the Trinity, or his Effects and
Operations: For these two are to he distinguished with the same difference,
wherewith we believe also that the Creator differs from the things he created.
And these things are by so much the more diligently to be explained, because
from these Gifts of the Holy Ghost we draw Rules of Christian Life, and may
know whether the Holy Ghost be in us.

But above all other his bountiful Gifts, XI. Justifying Grace the Gift of the
Holy Ghost.
that Grace is to be valued, which justifies us, and signs us with the Holy
Spirit of Promise, which is the Earnest of our Inheritance; for this joins our
Mind to God in the most strict bond of Love; whence it comes to pass, That
being inflamed with the most ardent study of Piety, we begin a new Life, and
being made partakers of the Divine Nature, we are called, and truly are, the
Children of God.

ARTICLE IX.
J Believe the Holy Catholic Church.] With how great diligence the Pastors
ought to take care to explain the truth of this Ninth Article to the Faithful
I. Why this Article is diligently to be explained. S Aug. in Ps 30. v. 15.
, it may easily be understood, if two things chiefly be considered. For first,
as S. Austin witnesses, The Prophets have spoken more plainly, and openly of
the Church, than of Christ, forasmuch as they foresaw, That many more might
err, and be deceived in this point, than in the Mystery of the Incarnation. Nor
will there be wanting wicked Men, who after the imitation of the Ape, which
fancies it self a Man, would profess that they are Catholics, and no less
wickedly than proudly would affirm the Catholic Church to be only with them.
And then, he who has this Truth settled in a sound Mind, shall easily avoid the
horrible danger of Heresy.

For not every one, II. Who is truly to be called a Heretic.
so soon as he has erred in Faith, is to be called a Heretic: But he who
neglecting the Authority of the Church, stiffly defends his impious Opinions.
Since therefore it cannot be, that any one can defile himself with the Plague
of Heresy, if he believe those things which in this Article are proposed to be
believed; let the Pastors be very careful, That the Faithful knowing this
Mystery, and being fortified against the Wiles of the Adversary, persevere in
the Truth of the Faith.

Now This Article depends upon the Truth of the Former: Fountain and Giver of
all Holiness, we now confess, That it is He who bestows Holiness on the church.

And because the Latins have borrowed the Name Ecclesia Church, III. What is
properly to be understood by the name Church.
from the Greeks; after the publishing of the Gospel, they transferred it to
Sacred Matters: But what the Meaning of this word is, is to be showed. The word
Ecclesia Church signifies a Calling forth: Act. 19.39.
But: Writers afterward used it for a Council and Assembly. Nor is it much to
the matter, whether that people worshipped the true God, or a false Religion:
For, in the Acts it is written of the Ephesians, That when that Scribe had
appeased the Rabble, he said, If ye enquire of any other matter, it may be
resolved in a lawful Church (or Assembly.) He calls the Ephesians, who were
worshippers of Diana, a lawful Church. Nor are the Gentiles only which knew not
God, but the Councils also of Evil and Wicked Men sometimes called a Church: I
have hated, says the Prophet, Ps. 25.5.
the Church of the Wicked, and I will not sit with the Ungodly. But then by the
common custom of the Scriptures, This word is taken to signify the Christian
Commonwealth, and the Congregations of the Faithful: To wit, those who are
called to the light of Truth, and the knowledge of God, that casting away the
darkness of ignorance and error, they may worship the living and true God with
Piety and Holiness, and, to say all in a Word, The Church, as S. Austin says,
S. Aug. in Ps. 49.
is the Faithful People dispersed throw the whole World.

Nor are they trivial Mysteries which are contained in this Word: IV. What
Mysteries are contained in the word Church.
For in Calling forth, which Ecclesia or Church signifies, at first sight
shines forth the Benignity and Splendour of Gods Grace: and we understand, That
the Church differs very much from Other Commonwealths: For They are
established by Human Reason and Prudence: But This by the Wisdom and Counsel of
God: For he has Inwardly called us, by Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, but
Outwardly by the Ministry and Labor of the Pastors and Teachers.

Besides, from this Calling, V. How the Church differs from a Synagogue.
what ought to be our end, to wit, the knowledge and passession of things
Eternal, he will best perceive who shall have considered, why in old times the
Faithful People under the Law were called a Synagogue, i. e. a Congregation, or
flocking together: For, as S. Austin teaches. They had this name given them,
because after the manner of Cattle, to which it is more suitable to flock
together, they looked only at earthly and transitory things. And therefore
rightly is the Christian People called, not a Synagogue, but a Church, because
despising earthly and mortal things, it follows after those things only which
are heavenly and eternal.

There are besides many other Names which are full of Mysteries, VI. Other
Names of the Church. 1 Timothy 3.13.
delivered to signify the Christian Commonwealth: For it is called by the
Apostle, the House and Building of God, but if I tarry long, says he to
Timothy, that thou may know how to behave thy self in the House of God, which
is the Church of God, the Pillar and Ground of Truth.

And the Church is therefore called a House, First.
because it is, as it were, one Family, which one Father or Master governs, and
in which is a communion of all spiritual good things.

It is also called Christ's Flock of Sheep, Second.
whereof he is the Door and Shepherd.

It is called the Spouse of Christ, Third. 2 Cor. 11.2.
I have betrothed you as a chaste Virgin to one Husband, which is Christ, says
the Apostle to the Corinthians. And the same Apostle to the Ephesians, Men,
love your wives, even as Christ loved the Church: Ephesians. 2.5.
And of Matrimony, This is a great Mystery, says he, but I speak in Christ, and
in the Cburch.

Lastly, Fourth. Ephesians. 1.23. Col. 1.24.
The Church is called the Body of Christ, as may be seen in the Epistle to the
Ephesians, and that to the Colossians. And all these severally avail very much
to stir up the Faithful to behave themselves worthy of the immense goodness and
mercy of God, who has chosen them to be his people.

These things being explained, VII. The Church Militant and Triumphant Aug.
Ench. c.
it will be necessary to reckon up the several Parts of the Church, and to
teach the differences of them, whereby the people may the better understand the
Nature, Properties, Gifts and Graces of the Church, so much beloved of God, and
for that cause never intermit to praise the most holy Name of God. Now of the
Church there are especially Two Parts, whereof the One is called Triumphant,
the Other Militant.

The Triumphant is that most glorious land happy company of the blessed
Spirits, VIII. Which is Triumphant
and those who have triumphed over the World, the Flesh and the Devil; and
being delivered and safe from the Troubles of this life, enjoy eternal Bliss.

But the Church Militant is the company of all the Faithful, IX. Which Militant
Aug. lib. 12. de Civ. Dei. c. 9.
which yet live in the earth: Which therefore is called Militant, because she
has continual War with those most implacable Enemies the World, the Flesh and
the Devil. Nor is it yet to be thought that there are Two Churches, but that of
the same Church, as was said before, there are Two Parts, whereof the One is
gone before, and has already obtained the Heavenly Country: The Other daily
follows, till at last being joined with our Savior, she shall rest in
everlasting Happiness.

Now in the Church Militant there are two sorts of Men, Good and Bad; X. In the
Church Militant are both Good and Bad Men. 2 Timothy 2.19. Council. Trid. sess. 6.
c. 12. Mark this.
the Wicked being indeed partakers of the same Sacraments, profess the same
Faith as the Good do, but in their Life and Manners are far unlike. Now these
in the Church are called Good, who are conjoined and knit together, not only in
profession of Faith and communion of Sacraments, but also in the Spirit of
Grace and Bond of Charity; of whom it is said, The Lord has known who are his;
and Men also may think and conjecture who they are that belong to this number
of Pious Men; but no one can certainly know.

And therefore it is not to be thought that Christ our Savior spoke of This
Part of his Church, when he remitted us to his Church, and commanded us to obey
Her: For since She is out of our knowledge, who can be assured, to whose
Judgment we are to fly, and whose Authority we must obey? The Church therefore
includes both the Good and Bad, as both the Holy Scripture, and the Writings of
Holy Men Testify: according to which Sentence is written that of the Apostle,
Ephesians. 4.4.
There is One Body and One Spirit.

Now this Church is known, XI. By what Figures and Similitudes the Church was
signified Mat. 13.17. Mat. 13.24. Luc. 3.17. Mat. 15.12.
being compared to a City built upon a Mountain, which may be seen every where;
for seeing that all must obey her, it is necessary that she be known. Nor does
she contain the Good only, but the Bad also, as the Gospel in many Parables
teaches, as when it commemorates that the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, the
Church Militant, is like to a Drawnet let down into the Sea, or to a Field, in
which Tares were over-sown: or to a Treshing-flore, in which is contained the
Corn with the Chaff: or to the Ten Virgins, whereof some were Wise, some
Foolish: Genesis 7.
And long before also, in Noah's Ark, in which not only those living Creatures
which were Clean, but the Unclean also were shut up together, we may behold the
figure and similitude of this Church. But tho Catholic Faith, truly and
constantly affirms that both the Good and Bad do belong to the Church, yet from
the same rules of Faith, the Faithful ought to be taught, that there is a far
different reason and account of either part: For as the Chaff upon the
Threshing-flore is mingled with the Corn, or as sometimes dead members remain
joined to the Body, Ephesians. 4.4.
so also are Wicked Men contained in the Church.

Whence it comes, XII. Who are shut out of the Church.
that there are but three sorts of men only sut out of her. First, Infidels,
and then Heretics and Schismatics, and lastly Excommunicate persons. The
Ethnics, because they never were in the Church, nor ever knew her, nor were
made partakers of any Sacrament in the Christian Society: and the Heretics and
Schismatics, because they have fallen off from the Church, nor do they belong
to the Church any more, than Vagabonds or Renegadoes belong to an Army, from
which they ran away. Yet it is not to be denied, but that they are in the power
of the Church, as those who may be judged by her, and condemned with an
Anathema. Lastly, The Excommunicate persons also, in that by the judgment of
the Church, they are turned out of her, they belong not to her Communion till
they repent. But as concerning the rest, even the Wicked and Ungodly persons,
it is not to be doubted but that they yet continue in the Church. And this is
diligently to be taught the Faithful, that if it chance the life of the
Prelates to be wicked, yet the Faithful are to assure themselves that they are
in the Church, that therefore they lose nothing of the power.

And then the Parts of the Universal Church are used to be signified by the
name of the Church, XIII. Private Families, Pastors and Sacred Places also
called the Church. 2 Cor. 1.1 1 Cor. 16.19. Col 4.16. 1 These. 1.1. Romans 6.4.
Mat. 18.17.
as when the Apostle names the Church which is at Corinth, Galatia, Laodicea,
Thessalonica, and he also calls the Private Families of the Faithful, Churches:
For he commands the Church in the House of Priscilla and Aquila to be saluted:
And in another place, Aquila and Priscilla, says he, salute you much in the
Lord, with his domestic Church. Also writing to Philemon, he uses the same
word. Sometimes also by the name Church are signified the Prelates and Pastors
thereof: If he bear not thee, says Christ, tell it to the Church; in which
place are designed the Rulers of the Church: And the Place also where the
people meet together, either to the Sermon, or for the sake of any other sacred
matter, is called the Church. But especially in this Article, the Church
signifies the Multitude of Good and Bad together, and not those only who
govern, but those also who ought to obey.

And then the Properties of this Church are to be opened to the Faithful, XIV.
The Properties of the Church.
whereby they may know, how great a Benefit God bestows on them who happen to
be born and brought up in her.

Her First Property therefore is described in the Creed of the Fathers, First,
That she be One. Cant. 6.8.
that she is One; My Dove is One, says he, my Beautiful One is One. But now so
great a multitude of Men as is scattered far and wide, is called One, for those
reasons which are written by the Apostle to the Ephesians, for he preaches that
there is only One Faith, One Lord, One Baptism: Ephesians. 4.4.
and there is also One Ruler and Governor Invisible, which is Christ, Ephesians.
1.21.
whom the Eternal Father has made Head over all his Church, which is his Body.

But the Visible Governor is He, XV. A Visible Head necessary for the Churches
Unity.
who by Lawful Succession, possesses the Chair of Peter the Prince of Apostles;
of whom this was the approved Sentence and Judgment of all the Fathers, that
this Visible Head was necessary, both to settle and preserve the Unity of the
Catholic Church.

Which thing St. Hierom well saw, and wrote against Jovinian in these words:
There is One elected, that a Head being constituted, the occasion of Schism
might be taken away: And to Damasus, Let Envy slack, let the ambition of the
Roman Pride be gone, I speak to the Successor of the Fisher, and the Disciple
of the Cross, following no Chief but Christ, I am consociated to your Holiness,
i. e. in Communion of Peter's Chair. I know that the Church is built upon that
Rock. Whosoever shall have eaten the Lamb without This House, is profane; If
any one be not in Noah's Ark, he shall perish by the prevalence of the Flood.

Which also was long before proved by Irenaeus and Cyprian, Iraeu. lib. 3.
contra Haeres. c. 3. B. Cypr. de Simpl Prelat. in principio fere.
who speaking of the Unity of the Church, says, The Lord says to Peter, I, O
Peter, say to thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my
Church. He builds his Church upon One: And tho after his Resurrection he gave
part of this Power to all the Apostles, and said, As the Father sent me, I also
send you; receive ye the Holy Ghost, yet that he might manifest Unity, He by
his own Authority disposed the Original of that same Unity, which was to begin
in One, etc.

And then Optatus of Milevis says, Optatus initio lib. 2. ad Farmen.
It cannot be charged upon you as of ignorance, seeing you know that in the
City of Rome was first placed by Peter, the Episcopal Chair, in which Peter,
the Head of all the Apostles, sat: In which One the Unity of the Church has
been kept of all, lest the other Apostles should challenge every one his own
severally, so that now he is a Schismatic, and a Prevaricator, who puts up
another Chair in competition with this single one.

And afterward St. Basil has left in writing thus, Basil. hom. 29. quae est de
poenit.
Peter is put in the Foundation, for he said, Thou art Christ the Son of the
Living God, and he received this Answer, that he was a Rock; for though he
might be a Rock, yet he was not a Rock, as Christ was; for Christ was a Rock
truly immovable, but Peter only by virtue of that Rock. for God bestows his
own dignities upon others: Mark this
He is a Priest, and he makes Priests; He is a Rock, and he makes a Rock; and
what things are his, he bestows on his Servants.

Lastly, St. Ambrose.
St. Ambrose says, If any one object that the Church is content with One Head
and Husband Jesus Christ, and needs no other, the answer is ready; For as we
account Christ our Lord, not only the Author, but the Bestower also of all the
Sacraments (for He it is that Baptizes and absolves, and yet he makes Men the
outward Ministers of the Sacraments): So he has placed over his Church, which
he governs inwardly with his Spirit, a Man to be the Vicar and Minister of his
Power: For seeing the Visible Church wanted a Visible Head, our Savior
accordingly appointed Peter the Head and Pastor of all the Faithful, when in
most ample expressions he commended to him the feeding of his Sheep, that he
would have him, who succeeded, to have plainly the same power of ruling and
governing the whole Church.

Besides, XVI. The way to preserve Unity for time to come. 1 Cor. 12.11, 12.
Ephesians. 4.34.
there is One and the same Spirit, says the Apostle to the Corinthians, who
bestows Grace on the Faithful, even as the Soul does Life on the Members of the
Body. To preserve which Unity, when he exhorts the Ephesians, he says, Be
earnest to preserve the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace. For as the
Body of Man is made up of many Members, and all are nourished by one Soul,
which gives Seeing to the Eyes, Hearing to the Ears, and diverse Faculties to
the other Senses: So the Mystical Body of Christ, which is the Church, is made
up of many Faithful People. There is also One Hope, Ephesians. 4.4.
as the Apostle testifies in the same place, to which we are called for we all
hope for the same thing, to wit, Eternal Life and Happiness. Lastly, There is
One Faith, which all must hold and profess; 1 Cor. 1.10.
Let there be no Schisms among you, says the Apostle. And there is One Baptism,
which is a Sacrament of the Christian Faith.

Another property of the Church is, XVII. The Second. That she be Holy. 1 Pet.
2.9. First.
that she is Holy; which thing we have learned from that place of the Prince of
Apostles, But ye are a chosen generation, a Holy Nation. But she is called
Holy, because she is consecrated and dedicated to God; for so other things of
this kind, though they are corporeal, are used to be called Holy, when they are
given and dedicated to divine worship. Of which kind, in the Old Law, were the
Vessels, Vestments, and Altars: In which sense, the Firstborn also, who were
dedicated to the Most High God, were called Holy.

Nor should any one wonder, Holy, although within her are contained many Sinners.
For the Faithful are called Holy, because they are made the People of God, and
by receiving Baptism and Faith, have consecrated themselves to Christ, although in
many things they offend, and perform not the things they have promised: even as
they who profess any Trade or Art, tho they observe not the rules thereof, are
yet called Tradesmen. Wherefore S. Paul calls the Corinthians Sanctified and
Holy: 1 Cor. 1.2.
amongst whom it is manifest there were some, whom he sharply reproves as
Carnal, and charges with many other Crimes.

She is also to be called Holy, Secondly.
because, as the Body, she is joined with her Holy Head Christ the Lord, who is
the Fountain of all Holiness, from whom are poured forth the anointings and
riches of Divine Goodness. Excellently does St. Austin interpret those words of
the Prophet, S. Aug. in Ps. 85.8.
Keep thou my soul because I am Holy: He dares, says he, and the Body of Christ
dares, and that one Man crying out from the ends of the Earth, with his Head,
and under his Head, dares say, I am Holy: For she received the Grace of
Holiness, the Grace of Baptism, and of Remission of sins. And a little after,
If all Christians, and all the Faithful being baptized in Christ, have put him
on; as the Apostle says, Gal. 3.27.
As many of you as have been baptized, have put on Christ, if they are made
Members of his Body, and yet say that they are not Holy, they do wrong to the
very Head, whose Members they are made.

Add to this, Thirdly.
That the Church alone has the legitimate worship of Sacrifice, and the saving
use of the Sacraments, by which as by the efficacious instruments of Divine
Grace, God works true Holiness in us: So that whosoever are truly Holy, cannot
be out of this Church. It is plain therefore that the Church is Holy, and Holy
indeed, because she is the Body of Christ, by whom she is sanctified, and
washed in his Blood. Concerning the Holiness of the Church, see Justin Martyr
in both his Apologies. Tertul. in his Apology. August. against Fulgen. c. 17.
Greg. Moral. b. 37. c. 7.

The Third Property of the Church is, The Third. That she be Catholic. S. Aug.
Ser. 131. and 181. de Tempore.
that she be styled Catholic, to wit, Universal, which appellation is truly
given her; because, as S. Austin testifies, From the East to the West the
Brightness of one Faith is spread abroad: For the Church is not as in the
Public Affairs of Men, or in the Conventicles of Heretics, bound to the limits
of One Kingdom only, or to One sort of Men: But she embraces in the Bosom of
her Charity all Men, whether they be Barbarians or Scythians, Servants or
Freemen, Male or Female. Wherefore it is written, Apoc. 5.6, 10.
Thou by thy blood have redeemed us, O God, out of every tribe, and language,
and people, and nation, and have made us a kingdom to our God. And of the
Church, says David, Ps. 2.
Ask of me, and I will give thee the nations for thine inheritance, and the
utmost parts of the earth for thy possession. And, I will remember, Ps. 86.
Rahab and Babylon, who shall know me; and, A man was born in her. Besides, all
the Faithful which have ever been from Adam to this day, or who shall be while
the World endures, and profess the true Faith, belong to this very Church, Ephesians.
2.20.
which was built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, all which
were constituted and founded upon that One Cornerstone Christ, who made Both
to be One; who has proclaimed Peace to them that are near, and to them that are
afar off. And she is called Universal for this reason, Because all that desire
everlasting Salvation, are bound to lay fast hold of, and to embrace her, no
otherwise than they who went into the Ark, to escape drowning in the Flood.
This is to be taught, as a most certain rule, whereby the true Church may be
discerned from the false.

And we may also know the true Church from its Original, XVIII. Another Rule yo
know the True Church from the False.
which it has from the Grace revealed by the Apostles: For her Doctrine is
True, not New, not lately sprung up, but long ago delivered by the Apostles,
and dispersed through all the World; and hence it is, that none can doubt, That
the impious Doctrines of Heretics are far different from the Faith of the
Church, seeing they are against that Doctrine of the Church, which has been
preached from the Apostles to this day. And therefore, that all may understand
which is the true Catholic Church, the Fathers, by Divine Inspiration, have
added this word APOSTOLIC. Of the marks of the True Church, see August. contra
Epist. Fundamenti, c. Tertul. lib. toto de Praescript.

For the Holy Ghost who presides in the Church. governs it by no other than
Apostolical Men. Which Spirit was first given to the Apostles. and afterward
by the infinite goodness of God has always continued in the Church. But as this
One Church cannot err in the delivery of Faith and Discipline of manners, XIX.
Why the Church is called Ap^stolic. Aug. contra Crescen. lib. 1. c. 33.
seeing she is governed by the Holy Ghost; so it must needs be, that all
others, which falsely claim to themselves that Name, and being also led by the
Spirit of the Devil, are most dangerously out of the way, both in Doctrine and
Practice.

But because the Figures of the Old Testament have a great influence to stir up
the minds of the Faithful to call to remembrance those excellent things, XX.
Two figures of the Church.
for which cause chiefly the Apostles used them The Curat may not pass over
that part of Docrine also which is so profitable.

And amongst these, The First. Genesis 6.
Noah's Ark has an excellent signification, which for this reason only, was made
by Gods command, that there might be left no room to doubt, but that it
signifies the Church. Which God has so constituted, That whosoever by Baptism
enters therein, may be safe from all danger of eternal Death: But they who were
out of it, as it happened to them who were not received into the Ark, were
overwhelmed with their own wickedness.

Another Figure, is that great City Jerusalem, The other.
under the Name whereof many times the Holy Scriptures understand the Holy
Church: to wit, That in her alone it is lawful to offer Sacrifice: Because also
in the Church of God only, and no where else the true Worship, and the true
Sacrifice, which can any ways be pleasing to God, may be found.

And now in the last place, XXI. The Church to be believed by Faith, and bow.
concerning the Church it must be taught, After what manner that we are to
believe the Church, belongs to the Articles of Faith. For tho any one perceives
by reason and sense, That the Church, i. e. that Company of Men, is in the
World, which are dedicated and consecrated to Christ our Lord: Nor does there
seem any need of Faith to conceive this, when neither Jews nor Turks do at all
doubt of it: Yet those Mysteries which, as has already been declared in part,
and partly will be said further in he Sacrament of Orders, are contained in the
Holy Church of God, that mind which is illuminated by Faith only, and not
convinced by any reasons, can understand. Seeing therefore that this Article,
no less than the rest, quite surpasses the strength and reach of our
understanding: We very rightly confess, That we come not to know the Church's
Original, Gifts and Dignity, by Huaman Reason, but behold them with the Eyes of
Faith.

For neither were Men the Authors thereof, XXII. Who the Author of hte Church
Ps. 89.5.
but the very Immortal God, who has built it upon a most firm Rock, as the
Prohet witnesses; The most High has sounded it. For which reason it is, called
Gods Inheritance, and the people of God: And the Power it has, is not of Man,
but given her by the gift of God. Wherefore as by the mere Power of Nature, we
cannot attain to her; so also by Faith only we understand, That in the Church
are the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and that to her is given Power to
Forgive Sins, to Excommunicate, and to consecrate the true Body of Christ; and
then that the Citizens which belong to her, Heb. 13.14.
have not here a lasting City, but seek one to come.

It is necessary therefore to believe, XXIII. We must believe the Church, but
not in the Church. Aug Ser 1.31. de Temp.
That there is One Holy and Catholic Church: For so we believe the Three
Persons of the Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, as to place
our Faith In them. But now changeing the manner of speaking, we profess to
believe the Holy, not [In] the Holy Church: That by this different way of
speaking. God, who is the Author of all things, may be distinguished from the
things which were created, and to acknowledge that all those excellent benefits
which are bestowed on the Church, were received of the Divine Goodness.

The Communion of Saints.] When S. John the Evangelist wrote to the Faithful,
XXIV. This part of the Article to be diligently explained. 1 John 1.13.
of the Divine Mysteries, why he taught them therein, he gives this Reason:
That you also, says he, might have Fellowship with us, and our Fellowship is
with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. This Fellowship is placed in
the Communion of Saints, of which we are to speak in This Article. And would to
God in explaining hereof, Aug. in Joan Tr^act. 32.
the Teachers of the Church would imitate the diligence of Paul, and the other
Apostles. For it is not only a kind of Interpretation of the former Article,
and a Doctrine full of profit and advantage; but it also shows what the Use of
those Mysteries is, which are contained in the Creed: For we are to search
into, and learn all those things for this end, that we may be admitted into
this so blessed and glorious a Fellowship of the Saints, and being once
admitted, consequently to persevere, Coloss. 1.12.
giving Thanks with Joy to God the Father, who has made us worthy to partake of
the Lot of the Saints in Light.

Firft therefore, XXV. Wherein is placed the Communion of Saints.
the Faithful are to be taught, That This Article is as it were a kind of
Explication of that which goes before concerning One Holy Catholic Church: For
the Unity of that Spirit by which she is governed, causes that whatsoever the
Church has, is Common: For the Fruit and Benefit of all the Sacraments belongs
to all the Faithful; by which Sacraments, as by Sacred Bands, they are coupl'd
and joined with Christ, and above all, by Baptism, by which, as by the Door,
Aug. lib. 9. contr. Faust. c. 11.
we enter into the Church. Now that by this Communion of Saints, we ought to
understand the Communion of Sacraments, the Fathers signify in this Creed by
these words, Damasc. lib. 4. de Fide Orthodox. c. 12.
I confess one Baptism. But after Baptism, first follows the Eucharist, and
then the other Saraments: For tho this name be suitable to all the other
Sacraments, since they join us to God, and make us partakers of him whose Grace
we receive; yet it is more proper to the Eucharist, which makes this, Communion.

But there is another Communion in the Church, to be considered. For whatsoever
things are piously and holily perfom'd by One, these things belong to All, and
by Charity, which seeks not her own, they are made profitable to them. This is
well proved by the Testimony of S. Ambrose, S. Ambros. in Ps. 118. Sermon. 1 v. 69
who explaining that place of the Psalm: I am a Partner of all them that seek
thee, says thus: As we say, that the Member is a Partaker of the whole Body, so
is he that is a Partner with them that fear God. Wherefore Christ has taught us
this Form of Prayer, Matt. 6.
to say, Our Bread, not mine; and the rest after the same manner, not taking
care for our selves only, but for the salvation and profit of all.

But now this Communication of good things is, XXVI. A singular Similitude.
in Holy Scripture, often represented by a fit Similitude taken from the
Members of the Body of Man; for in the Body there are many Members: But tho
they are Many, yet they make but One Body, in which all the Members discharge
each their own proper Office, and not all the same Office: (...) 12.15.
Nor have they all the same Dignity to execute alike the useful and comely
functions, nor do they seek each its own profit, but the commodity and
convenience of the whole Body. And then they are all so fitly knit together
among themselves, that if one be grieved, the rest also by Consent and Nearness
of Nature, do grieve; and on the contrary, if one be well disposed, all the
rest rejoice with it. The same thing we may contemplate in the Church, in
which, tho there be diverse Members, to wit, various Nations, of Jews, and
Gentiles, Bond and Free, Poor and Rich, yet when by Baptism they are initiated,
they are made one Body with Christ, whereof he is the Head.

Moreover in this Church is assigned to every one his own Office, all for the
public benefit, so it is the Office of some to Rule and to Teach, and of others
to Obey and to be Subject.

But then they only reap the Benefit of those so many and so great Functions,

But the dead Members, XXVII. What benefit of the Communion of Saints they are
deprived of, who are in mortal sin. Aug. in Ps. 70. Sermon. 2.
to wit, those who are as it were bound in wickedness; and estranged from the
Grace of God, are not deprived of this Good, so as to cease to be Members of
this Body; but being dead they perceive not that spiritual Fruit and Advantage,
which just and pious Men have; and yet seeing that they are in the Church, they
are assisted toward the recovery of that Grace and Life which they had lost,
by those who live spiritually, and receive those benefits, which there can be
no doubt, that they are void of, who are altogether cut off from the Church.

Nor are those Gifts common only which render men just and dear to God, XXVIII.
Grace fro Grace are common Gifts.
but there is also given Grace for Grace, among which is reckoned Knowledge,
Prophecy, and the Gift of Tongues and Miracles, and the rest of that sort;
which Gifts are also granted to the Wicked, not for Private, but Public
Advantage to the Edification of the Church: For the Gift of Healing is given,
not for his sake who has the Gift, but for the Sick Man's sake, who is to be
healed. And indeed a Christian has nothing in possession, which he ought not to
reckon as common to himself and all others: And therefore they ought to be
ready, and prepared to relieve the Miseries of the Needy; for he that has such
kind of Goods, and sees his Brother in want, 1 John 3.17.
and will not help him, he is plainly convin'd to have none of the Love of God
in him. Which things, seeing they are so, it is manifest enough, that those who
are in this Holy Communion, enjoy a kind of Happiness, and can truly say: Ps.
83. Ps. 33.
O how lovely are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts, my Soul longs and even
faints for the Courts of the Lord! and, Blessed are they which dwell in thy
House, O Lord!

ARTICLE X.
The Forgiveness of Sins.] There is no One, I. The Belief of this Article
necessary to Salvation.
who when he sees this Article Of the Forgiveness of Sins, numbered among the
other Articles of Faith, can doubt, not only that there is some Divine Mystery,
but also that there is something very necessary to the attaining Salvation
contained in it: For as was said before, Without a certain belief of those
things which in the Creed are proposed to be believed, there can be no entrance
to any Body to Christian Piety. But if that which of it self ought to be known
of all Men, seems fit to be confirmed by some Testimony; that surely will be
sufficient, which our Savior, a little before his Ascension into Heaven,
witnessed concerning this matter, when he opened the Understanding of his
Disciples, that they might understand the Scriptures: Luc. 24.46.
It behooved, says he, Christ to suffer, and to rise again the third, day from
the dead, and that in his name Penance and Remission of sins should be preached
to all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

Which words if the Curats consider, II. The Curats Duty in explaining this
Article.
they will easily perceive, That there lies upon them a great Necessity and
Charge from the Lord, of diligently explaining this Article, especially, when
the other things which belong to Religion are to be taught. It is the Curats
Duty therefore, as to this Point, to teach, not only that Forgiveness of Sins
may be had in the Catholic Church, of which Esayah prophesi'd: Isa. 33.24. Aug.
Hom. 49. c. 3.
Iniquity shall be taken away from the people which dwell in her; but also that
in her there is a power of Forgiving Sins.

Which if the Priests use aright, Let the confessors observe this.
and according to the Laws prescribed by Christ our Lord, it must be believed,
That Sins are truly forgiven and pardoned.

But this Pardon, III. In Baptism there is remission both of Sin and Punishment
Trid. Sess. 5. Can. 5. Aug. 12. de ^eccat. Me^^. c. 28.
when, at our first profession of Faith, we are cleans'd by Holy Baptism, is so
fully given us, that nothing either of Sin, whether contracted by Birth, or
Wilfully committed remains to be wiped away, or of Punishment to be endured.
But yet by the Grace of Baptism, no one is wholly freed from the Infirmity of
Nature: But rather, whereas every one ought to strive against the motions of
Concupiscence, which forbear not to provoke us to sin, hardly can there be
found any one who resists either so stoutly, or guards his own safety so
watchfully, as to be able to shun all miscarriages.

Since therefore it was needful that in the Church there should be a power of
Forgiving Sins, IV. The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven delivered to the Church.
Matt. 16.19.
and also by some other way than by the Sacrament of Baptism, the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven were committed to her Trust, whereby sins might be forgiven
to every penitent person, although he had sinned to the last day of his Life. Of
this matter we have most clear Testimonies in Holy Scripture: Matt. 18.18.
For in S. Matthew the Lord says thus to Peter: I will give thee the Keys of
Heaven, and whatsoever Thou shall bind on Earth, shall be bound also in Heaven;
and whatsoever thou shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed also in Heaven. So
also, Whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth, shall be bound also in Heaven; and
whatsoever ye shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed also in Heaven. And then S.
John testifies, That the Lord, when he breathed upon the Apostles, said; Joh.
20.23.
Receive ye the Holy Ghost, whose Sins soever ye remit, they are remitted to
them; and whose soever Sins ye retain, they are retained.

Nor are we to think that this Power is restrained to some certain kinds of
Sins: For there is no Sin so heinous can be either committed or imagined, for
pardoning whereof the Holy Church has not a Power; even as there is no one so
vile and wicked, to whom, if he truly repent him of his Errors, a certain hope
of Pardon ought not to be offered. But neither is this very Power so limited,
as that it may be used at some appointed Time only: For at what hour soever a
sinner will return to Health, he is not to be rejected, as our Savior has
taught, when, to the Prince of Apostles, asking him how often we must pardon
those that offend, whether seven times, he answered; Matt. 18.11.
Not to seven times only, but even to seventy times seven.

But if we consider the Ministers of this Divine Power, VI. This Power
committed to the Bishops and Priests. Trid. Sess. 14. c. 6. Hieron. Ep. 1 p^st
med. Amb de Can and Abet. c. 4.
it will seem not so large. For the Lord gave not the Power of this so Holy a
Gift to All, but only to the Bishops and Priests. The same thing is to be
believed, as to the Way or Manner of exercising this Power: For by the
Sacraments only, so that the Form of them be kept, sins may be forgiven; but
otherwise there is no Power of absolving from sin, given to the Church: Whence
it follows, that as well the Priests, as the Sacraments are as it were
Instruments to the forgiveness of Sins, by which Christ our Lord, who is the
very Author and giver of Salvation, works in us Forgiveness of Sins and
Righteousness.

But that the Faithful may with the deepest thankfulness lay hold of and
embrace this heavenly Gift, VII. How great a Grace the Remission of Sins is.
which by the special Mercy of God is given to his Church, Trid. Sess. 6. c. 7.
and Sess. 14. c. 1.
and that they may come to the use and practice thereof, with the more ardent
study of Piety; the Curat shall endeavor to evidence the dignity and largeness
of this Grace; and this may be seen chiefly from hence, if he shall have well
expounded, of what efficacy it is that sins are forgiven, and that unjust men
are made just. For it is manifest that this is done by the infinite and immense
Power of God, which we must needs believe to be the very same with that of
raising up the Dead, and creating of the World. But if, Aug Tract. 72. in Joan.
Aug. lib. 1. de p^ccat. merit. c. 23. lib. 50. Hom. 23. Amb. de Abel. c. 4.
as is confirmed by that saying of S. Austin, it be to be thought a harder work
to make a wicked Man Good, than to create Heaven and Earth out of nothing,
since that creation cannot be but by an Infinite Power; it consequently
follows, That the Forgiveness of Sinners is much more to be attributed to an
Infinite Power. Wherefore we own that those sayings of the ancient Fathers are
most true, wherein they confess that Sins are pardoned to Men by God only: Nor
is so wonderful a work to be referred to any other Author, Isay. 43.
than to his supreme Goodness and Power. I am He, says the Lord himself by the
Prophet, I am he that blot out your Iniquities. For there seems to be the same
Reason in the forgiving of Sins, as ought to be observed in a Debt of Money. As
therefore Money which is owing cannot be forgiven by any but the Creditor, so
when we are bound to God only by reason of Sin (for we daily pray, Forgive us
our Debts) it is manifest, our Debts can be forgiven us by no body but by
himself.

But this admirable and divine Gift, VIII. Christ first of all had the Power of
forgiving Sins. Matt. 9.6. Mar. 2.9.
before God was made Man, was never imparted to any created Nature. Christ our
Savior first of all, as Man, tho he was true God also, received this Gift of
his Heavenly Father. That ye may know that the Son of Man has power on Earth to
forgive Sins, says he to the lame Man, Rise, take up thy Couch, and go to thy
own Home. When therefore he was made Man, that he might bestow this Forgiveness
of Sins upon Men, before he ascended up into Heaven, there to sit forever at
the righthand of God, he granted this Power to the Bishops and Priests in the
Church: Although, as before we said, Christ forgives sins by his own Authority,
but all the rest only as his Ministers.

Wherefore if we ought to admire and receive those things chiefly which are
done by an Infinite Power; IX. The Power of forgiving Sins the greatest of
Christ's Gifts. 1 Pet. 3.18.
we may well enough perceive that this Gift which by the bounty of Christ our
Lord is given to his Church, is the most precious. Yea, very Reason also will
powerfully stir up the minds of the Faithful to contemplate the greatness of
this benefit, whereby God, our most merciful Father has determined to blot out
the Sins of the World: For he was willing to expiate our Wickedness by the
Blood of his only begotten Son, so that he freely endured the Punishment, which
for our sins we had deserved, and the Just was condemned for the Unjust, the
Innocent was put to a most bitter death for the Guilty. Wherefore when we
seriously consider with our selves, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
That we were not redeemed with corruptible things as Silver and Gold, but with
the precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without spot or blemish, we shall
easily conclude that nothing could possibly come to us more advantageous than
this power of forgiving sins, which shows the unutterable of Providence of God,
and his exceeding Love toward us.

And from this consideration it must needs be, X. Mortal Sin how great an Evil.
that a mighty advantage redound to us. For he that offends God by any mortal
Sin, whatsoever Merits he before had by the Death of Christ and his Cross, he
straightway loses all, and the Gate of Paradise, which before being shut, our
Savior by his Passion has opened to all, he has shut again against himself.
Which when we remember, we cannot choose, but that the consideration of Man's
Misery will extremely grieve us, But if we bend our mind to this admirable
Power which God has given to his Church; and being confirmed in the Faith of
this Article, believe that this Power is offered to every one, so that being
assisted by Gods help, he may be restored to his former state of dignity; then
are we forced with the highest joy and gladness to exult and give immortal
Thanks to God. And truly, if those Medicines are used to seem welcome and
pleasant which the skilful and careful Physician prepares for us when we are
sick; how much more pleasant ought those remedies to be, which the Wisdom of
God has appointed for the cure of our Souls, and consequently for the recovery
of Life; and especially when they carry with them not a weak doubtful Hope of
Health, as those Medicines do, which are applied to the Body; but when they
bring most certain Health to those who desire to be healed.

The Faithful therefore are to be admonished, XI. The Benefit of Remission of
Sin diligently to be used.
after they have known the dignity of so ample and so excellent a Gift, that
they study religiously to convert it to their own advantage. For it can hardly
be, that he who makes no use of a thing that is profitable and necessary, can
be supposed, not to despise it; and specially seeing the Lord has delivered to
his Church this Power of forgiving sins, to this end, that all might use this
wholesome remedy. For, as no one without Baptism can be expiated or cleans'd; so
whosoever is minded to recover the Grace of Baptism which he lost by mortal
sin, must necessarily betake himself to that other kind of expiation, to wit,
the Sacrament of Penance.

But here the Faithful are to be warned, XII. The Easiness of obtaining Pardon
not to be abused. Aug. in Joan. Tract. 33. and lib. 50. Hom. 41. Amb. lib. 2.
de poenit c. 1.2. and 11.
that hearing of so large a Power of Pardon, and that it is not to be limited
to any term of Time, not to take encouragement either to sin the more readily,
or to repent the more slowly: For since by the one they are manifestly
discovered to be injurious to, and to affront this Divine Power, they are
unworthy that God should bestow any Mercy upon them; and by the other it is
much to be feared, lest being overtaken by Death, in vain they confess the
Forgiveness of Sins, which by their sloth and putting off, they have deservedly
lost

ARTICLE. XI.
THe Resurrection of the Body.] That this Article has a great influence to
establish the truth of our Faith; I. How necessary the Belief of this Article.
This does abundantly evidence, that it is proposed to the Belief of the
Faithful, not only by the Holy Scriptures, but is confirmed by many reasons
also. Which since we see it not done in the other Articles of the Creed, we may
perceive that the Hope of our Salvation is grounded herein, as on a most
foundation, as the Apostle argues, 1 Cor. 15.14.
If there be no Resurrection of the dead, then is not Christ risen again; but
if Chrst be not risen again, then is Our Preaching vain, and your Faith is
vain. In explaining hereof therefore the Curat shall take no less pains and
care, than the wickedness of many has labored to overthrow it. For that great
and excellent advantages redound to the use of the Faithful by the knowledge
hereof, will by and by be showed.

But first of all this is to be noted, II. Why the Resurrection of Men called
the Resurrection of the Flesh.
That in this Article the Resurrection of Men is called the Resurrection of the
Flesh. And this is not done without good reason: For the Apostles would teach
what is necessarily to be supposed, That the Soul is, immortal. Wherefore lest
any one might think that the Soul dy's together with the Body, and that Both
were to be restored to life again, seeing that by many places of Holy
Scripture, it is plainly manifest that the Soul is immortal, for this reason,
in this Article, there is mention made of the Resurrection of the Flesh only:
And tho frequently in Holy Scripture the word Flesh signifies the whole man, as
in Esaias, Isay. 40.8.
All Flesh is grass; and in S. John, The word was made Flesh: Yet in this place
the word Flesh signifies the Body; that we may understand that of the Two
Parts, Soul and Body, of which Man is made, the One only, to wit, the Body is
corrupted and returns into the Dust of the Earth, out of which it was made;
that the Sout remains incorrupt.

But then whereas none can be restored to Life, III. The Soul not said to rise
again. 2 Timothy 2.14.
unless he had been first dead; the Soul is not properly said to rise again.
And there is mention made of the Flesh, to confute that Heresy, which, during
the Apostles life, was Hymenaeus and Philetus's, who taught, that when in Holy
Scripture mention was made of the Resurrection, it was not to be understood of
a Resurrection of the Body, but of the soul, whereby we rise from the death of
sin, to an innocent life. From these words, therefore it is plain, that this
error is taken away, and the true Resurrection of the Body is confirmed.

But it is the Curates Part to illustrate and clear this Truth by Examples
taken out of the Old and New Testaments, IV. How the Resurrection of the Flesh
is to be proved.
and out of all other Church Histories: For some were restored to life by
Elilijah and Elisha, in the Old Testament; others, besides those which Christ
our Lord raised from death, by the Holy Apostles and many others: 3 Reg. 17.19
4 Reg. 4.34
which Resurrection of many, confirms the Doctrine of this Article. For as we
believe that many were raised from death, so must we believe that all shall be
called again to life. But that singular fruit which we ought to gather from
Miracles of this kind, Mat. 9.24.
is this, that we give the most certain belief to this Article. There are many
testimonies which even those Curates which are but indifferently skilled in the
Holy Scriptures, may easily meet with; but those places which are more clear,
in the Old Testament, Job 19.25.
are those we read in Job, when he says, that in his Flesh he shall see God:
and in Daniel, concerning those who sleep in the dust of the earth, Dan. 12.2.
That some of them should awake to life everlasting, and others to everlasting
disgrace: And in the New Testament, Mar. 22.31.
what S. Matthew relates of the dispute our Savior had with the Sadducees,
besides what the Evangelists tell us of the last Judgment: And hither is to be
referred what the Apostle has exactly discoursed in his Epistle to the
Corinthians and Thessalonians.

But tho to Faith this thing be most certain, V. Similitudes where by the
Resurrection is cleared.
yet it will be very profitable, both by Examples and Reasons to show, that
That which Faith offers to be believed, is not strange, to Nature or Humane
Understanding, and therefore the Apostle to him that asks, how the dead should
rise again? answers, 1 Cor. 13.36
Thou Fool! that which thou sowest is not quickn'd, except it dye first; and
that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body which shall be, but bare
grain, perhaps of wheat or some other grain; but God gives it a body as it has
pleased him: And a little after, he says, it is sown in corruption, it shall
rise in incorruption. There may be many other similitudes of the like kind,
added, S. Greg. lib. 14. moral c. 21, 29, 30.
as S. Gregory shows; For the Light, says he, is daily, as it were by Dying,
withdrawn from our Eyes, and as by Rising again, it is recalled again; and that
Trees lose their greenness, and again as by a kind of Resurrection they are
repaired; and the Seed by putrefying dies, and again by springing it rises
again.

Besides, VI. The Resurrection proved by Reason. The First.
Those reasons which are brought by Ecclesiastical Writers, seem to be
sufficiently accommodated, or suited to this matter.

And first, since the Souls are immortal, and as a part of Man have a natural
propensity or inclination to the humane Bodies, it may be thought
praeternatural that they should for ever remain separate from their Bodies.

But because that which is against Nature, The Second
as being Violent, cannot last long, it seems agreeable that at last they
should be joined with their Bodies. Whence it also follows, that there will be
a Resurrection of the Bodies. Which kind of argument our Savior seems to have
used, Mat. 22.32.
when disputing against the Sadducees, he concluded that there would be a
Resurrection of the Body, from the Immortality of the Soul.

And seeing that there are Punishments proposed by the most just God to the
Wicked, The Third. Damasc. l 4. de fide Orthod. c. 28. Amb. lib. de fide Resur.
S. Chrisost. hom 49. and 50.
and Rewards to the Good; and that of the one sort very many depart out of this
world before they have suffered, their due punishments; and of the other sort,
in a great measure without the rewards of their virtues; it must needs be, that
the Soul be again joined with the Body, that so either for the wickedness
committed, or for the good they have done, the Body, which man uses as a
Companion in sin, may together with the Soul be either punished or rewarded.
Which Point has been excellently handled by S. Chrysostom, in his Homily to
the People of Antioch. Wherefore the Apostle discoursing of the Resurrection, 1
Cor. 15.19
If, says he, in this life only we had hope in Christ, we were of all men most
miserable. Which words none has thought applicable to the Soul, which being
immortal, tho the Body should not rise again, might nevertheless enjoy
Happiness in the life to come; but they are meant of the whole Man. For unless
the Body were to be rewarded for her labor, it must needs follow that those
who, as the Apostles did, have endured so many afflictions and calamities in
this life, would be of all men most miserable: The same thing he much more
plainly teaches in these words to the Thessalonians: 2 Thessalonians. 1.4.
We glory in the Churches of God, for your patience and faith in all your
persecutions and tribulations, which ye endure for an example of the just
judgment of God, that ye may be counted worthy of the kingdom of God for which
ye suffer: if yet it be just with God to recompense tribulation to them which
trouble you, and to us who are troubled, rest with you, at the revelation of
the Lord Jesus from Heaven, with the Angels of his power in a flame of fire,
taking vingeance on them who have not known God, and who obey not the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

Add also, The Fourth.
that men cannot, so long as the Soul is separated from the Body, enjoy
complete Happiness, and full fraught with all good things. For as every part,
being separated from the whole, is imperfect, so also is the Soul which is
disjoined from the Body. Whence it follows, that the Resurrection of the Body
is necessary to make the Souls Happiness complete.

It will be further necessary diligently to teach from the Apostles Doctrine,
VII. The different condition of those that rise again. 1 Cor. 15 22. Joh. 5.20.
who they are that shall be raised to life: For writing to the Corinthians, he
says, As in Adam, all dye, so in Christ shall all be made alive. All difference
and distinction therefore of Good and Bad being laid aside, All shall shall
rise again from the dead, tho the Condition of All will not be alike: those
that have done Good shall rise to the Resurrection of Life; and they that have
done Evil to the Resurrection of Judgment.

But when we say All, VIII. We shall all rise again. S. Hier. Ep. 152. Aug. de
Civit. Dei lib. 20. c. 20. 1 These. 4.16. in 1 Epist ad These. c. 4.
we mean as well those, who shall be dead before the coming of the judgment, as
those who shall then dye. For that the Church does acquiesce in this Sentence
or Opinion, which affirms that All shall dye, none excepted; and that this
sense is most agreeable to Truth, S. Hierom has written, and S. Austin conceives
the same. Nor are the Apostles words, which he wrote to the Thessalonians,
against this sense, The dead which are in Christ shall rise first, and then we
that are left alive, shall be caught up with them in the Clouds to meet Christ
in the air: For. S. Ambrose, explaining this place, says thus: In that very
rapture Death shall seize us, and as it were by a deep Sleep, so soon as the
Soul goes out, it shall return in a moment; for when they shall be carried up,
they shall dye, that coming to the Lord, at the Lords presence they may receive
their Souls, because with the Lord they cannot be dead. And the same Opinion is
approved by the Authority of S. Austin, lib. 20. c. 20.
in his Books concerning the City of God.

Seeing therefore it much concerns us to be thoroughly persuaded that this very,
and therefore the same Body which is each of our own, tho it be corrupted and
reduced to Ashes, yet that it shall be raised to Life, the Curate shall
diligently undertake to teach this point. This is the Apostles meaning, when he
says, This corruptible must put on incorruption; 1 Cor. 13.25.
plainly showing by the word [This] every ones own proper Body. Job also has
most clearly propheci'd hereof; Job ^9.26.
And in my flesh, says he, shall I see God, whom I my self shall see, and my
Eyes shall behold, and not another. This very thing is gathered from the
Definition of the Resurrection: Damas^n. l. 4. de Fide O^^h. ^. 28.
For the Resurrection, as Damascen defines it, is a Recalling back to the state
from which you fell. Lastly if we consider, for what reason there will be a
Resurrection, as a little before has been showed, 1 Cor. 5.10.
we shall have no ground to doubt of this matter. For therefore as we have
taught, will the Body be raised again, that every one might give an account of
his own works done in the Body, whether Good or Evil. Man therefore must rise
again with that very Body, with the help whereof he has served God or the
Devil, that with the same Body he might either receive his reward and Crown of
Victory, or else endure the most miserable pains and punishments.

Nor will the Body only rise again, IX. In what state the Body shall rise
again. S. Aug. l 22. de Civit. Dei. c. 19, 20, 21. and ^^ch c. 86, 87, 88, 89.
Hier. Ep st. 59. and 6^.
but whatsoever does belong to the Truth of its Nature, and to the comeliness
and ornament of Man, shall be restored. Very excellent is the Testimony of S.
Austin in this matter. There shall then be no deformity or fault in our Bodies;
if any have been loaded or grown unweildy with Fat, he shall not assume that
Load of his Body; but whatsoever exceeds the true measure thereof, will be
accounted supertiuous: And on the contrary, whatsoever either Sickness or Old
Age has done in the Body, shall by Christ's Divine Power be repaired, as, if
any have been overpin'd, and made thin by Leanness; baecause Christ not only
has repaired our Body, but whatsover elses has been taken from us through the
Miseries of this life. And in another place, S. Aug. En^h. c. 89.
"Man shall not have again that Hair which he had, but that which would best
become him, according to that, The hairs of your head are all numbered, which
according to the Divine Wisdom shall be repaired.

And first, X None m^^'d after the Resurrection.
All the Members, because they belong to the Truth of Humane Nature, shall be
restored together: for those who were Blind even from their very Birth, or by
any Disease had lost their Sight, the Lame and the Creeples, and those who were
impotent in any of their Members, shall rise again with entire and perfect
Bodies; for otherwise the Desire of the Soul, which is prone to conjunction
with the Body; would be dissatisfied, whose desire notwithstanding in the
Resurrection, we believe without doubt shall be fulfilled. Besides, it is
sufficiently apparent, that the Resurrection, no less than the Creation, is to
be reckoned among the Special works of God. As therefore in the beginning of
the Creation all things were made perfect by God; so also we must affirm that
it will be in the Resurrection.

Nor ought this to be allowed concerning the Martyrs only, XI. Scars of the
Martyrs wounds will remain after the Resurrection to their Glory, but of the
Wicked to their Msery. S. Aug. lib. 22 de Civit. Dei. c. 20.
of whom S. Austin thus testifies, They will not be without their Members, for
Martyrs that Dismembring which they suffered, can be no blemish to the Body;
otherwise, they who are Beheaded, should rise again without a Head; but yet in
the parts of those Members shall remain the Scars of the Sword; shining far
above the Gold and Precious Stones, even as do the Scars of Christ's Wounds.
And this also is truly said of the Wicked, tho their Members were cut off by
their own fault: for by how much the more Members they shall have, with so much
the more bitter Torment of Grief shall they be loaded: Wherefore this
restitution of Members will redound not to their Happiness, but to their
Calamity and Misery; when their Merits will not be ascribed to the particular
Members, but to the Person to whose Body they were joined: For to those who
have done Penance, they shall be restored to be Rewarded; but to those who
neglected it, to be punished. Now if these things be seriously considered by
the Curats, they will never want Sentences and matter enough to stir up and
inflame the minds of the Faithful to the study of Piety; that considering the
Troubles and Afflictions of this Life, they may earnestly long for that blessed
Glory of the Resurrection which is proposed to the Just and Pious.

Now it remains that the Faithful understand, XII. The Body will rise again
immortal.
in the consideration of those things which constitute or make up the substance
of the Body, although that very same Body shall be raised from the dead, which
before died; yet the Condition thereof shall be far different: For to omit
other things; all the Bodies at the Resurrection shall differ from themselves
very much in this thing: that whereas before they were subject to Death, after
their Resurrection to Life, they shall all be Immortal without any difference
of Good and Bad.

And this admirable Restitution of Nature Christ's famous Victory has merited,
XIII. Whence our Bodies made immortal. Esa. 25.8. O^c. 13.14. 1 Cor. 15.26.
Apoc. 21.4. Apoc. 9.4.
which he got over Death, as the Holy Scripture testifies; for it is written:
He shall throw down Death headlong for ever: And elsewhere: O Death, I will be
thy death. Which the Apostle explaining, says, In the last place, The enemy
Death shall be destroyed: And we read in S. John: Death shall be no more. For
it was very fit, that by Christ's merit whereby the power of Death was
overthrown, the Sin of Adam at the long run should be overpowered: And it was
agreeable to the same Divine Justice, That the Good should for ever enjoy a
blessed Life: And the Bad suffering eternal Torments, should seek for Death,
but should not find it: Should wish to dye, but Death should fly from them.
This Immortality then is common to the Good and to the Bad.

Furthermore, XIV. Four Gifts of the Glory of our Bodies.
the revived Bodies of the Saints will have some signal and excellent Oraments,
whereby they shall be rendered much more Noble than ever they were before, and
specially these Four which are called Dowers or Gifts, and have been observed
by the Fathers from the very Doctrine of the Apostles. Of these see S. Austin,
Sermon 99. de Temp. Ambr. in Com. in 1. ad Cor. c. 15.

The First of these is Impassibility, Impassibility.
to wit, a Dower or Gift, which makes them that they cannot suffer any trouble
nor be affected with any grief or inconvenience: For the force of Cold, the
heat of Fire, or the violence of Water cannot hurt them. It is sown, says the
Apostle, in Corruption, but it shall rise in Incorruption. But the Schoolmen
call this Impassbility rather than Incorruption, for this reason, to show that
it belongs properly to the Glorious Body: For Impassibility is not common to
them with the Damned whose Bodies, tho they be incorruptible, yet they can
burn, and freez, and be afflicted with diverse Torments.

After this follows Brightness: Brightness. Matt. 13.33. Matt. 17.2. Phil.
3.21. 1 Co. 13.4.
wherewith the Bodies of the Saints shall shine as the Sun, for so testifies
our Savior in S. Matthew: The Just, says he, shall shine as the Sun in the
Kingdom of their Father. And lest any one may doubt thereof, he has declared
the same by the example of his own Transfiguration. This the Apostle sometimes
calls Glory, Exodus 34.9.
and sometimes Brightness: Exodus 34.9.
He will reform, says he, the Body of our Humility, that it be made like to the
Body of his Brightness. It is sown in Dishonor, it rises in Glory. Of this
Glory the people of Israel in the Wilderness saw a kind of resemblance, when
Moses's Face, 2 Cor. 3.7.
by talking with God, and being in his presence did so shine, that the Children
of Israel could not steadfastly look upon it. Now this Brightness is a kind of
shining Glory redounding to the Body, from the most transcendent Happiness of
the Soul, so that it is a kind of Communication of that Bliss which the Soul
enjoys, after which manner also the Soul herself is made happy, because on her,
part of the divine Happiness is derived. But with This Gift, we are not to
believe, That all are alike adorned as they are with the former. For all the
Bodies of the Saints shall be indeed equally impassible, but the same Splendour
they shall not have: For as the Apostle Testifies: 1 Cor. 15.41
There is one Brightness of the Sun, and another Brightness of the Moon, and
another Brightness of the Stars; for Star differs from Star in Brightness, so
also is the Resurrection of the Dead.

With this Gift is joined that which they call Agility or Swiftness, Agility.
whereby the Body shall be freed from that weight wherewith it is now pressed:
And may with the greatest ease be so moved into what part soever the Soul would
have it, that there can nothing be swifter than that motion, Aug. de Civit Dei
l. 13. c. 18. and 20. l. 22. c. 11. Hier. in Enc. c. 40. Subtilty.
even as S. Austin in his book De Civitate Dei, and Hierom in Esaiam, have
taught. Wherefore the Apostle says; It is sown in Weakness, it is raised in
Power.

And to these is added that which is called Subtilty: by virtue whereof the
Body is wholly made subject to the government of the Soul, serves her, and is
ready at her commands. And this is showed by the Words of the Apostle, 1 Cor.
15.44
It is sown an Animal Body, it is raised a Spiritual Body. These are in a
manner the chief heads, which are to be taught in the explaining of this
Article.

But that the Faithful may know what Fruit they may gather from the knowledge of
so many, XV. How many and what Fruits may be had from this Article. The First.
and so great Mysteries.

First, we must declare, That we must give the greatest Thanks to God, who has
hid these things from the Wife, and revealed them to little ones. For how many
Men have there been exceedingly commendable for Prudence, or furnished with
singular Learning, who yet as to this most certain Truth have been stark blind?
That therefore he has made known these things to us, who could not aspire to
that understanding, there is reason enough that with perpetual praises we
celebrate his good will and Mercy.

And then this great Fruit will follow from the Meditation of this Article, The
Second.
to wit, That in the Death of them who are joined to us, either by kindred or
friendship, we can easily comfort both our selves and others, which kind of
comfort it is manifest the Apostle used when he wrote to the Thessalonians
concerning those that slept.

And also in all other afflictions and calamities, 1 Thessalonians. 4 13. The Third.
the thought of the Resurrection to come, brings us the greatest ease of our
grief, Job 19.24.
as we have learned by Jobs example, who by this only Hope bore up his
afflicted and troubled mind, that there would be a Time when at the
Resurrection he should behold the Lord his God.

Besides this will very much prevail with the Faithful, The Fourth
to take great care to lead an upright and a just life, and wholly clean from
all pollution of sin: For if they but consider those exceeding great riches,
which at the Resurrection shall be given, and now are offered them, they will
easily be drawn to the study of virtue and piety.

And on the contrary, The Fifth. Joh. 5 29.
There is nothing will have a greater force, to bridle the Lusts of the mind,
and restrain Men from wickedness, than to be often put in mind with what
mischiefs and torments the wicked shall be punished, who at that last day shall
come to the Resurrection of Judgment.

ARTICLE XII.
THe Life everlasting.] The Holy Apostles our Leaders would conclude and shut
up the Creed, I. Why this is the last Article of the Creed.
wherein the sum of our Faith is contained, with the Article of Life
Everlasting; both because after the Resurrection of the Flesh, the Faithful are
to expect nothing else but the reward of Everlasting Life; and also that that
perfect Happiness, and which is full of all good things, should be always
before our Eyes, and to teach us to fix our whole mind, and all our thoughts
thereupon. Wherefore in teaching the Faithful, the Curats shall never intermit
to inflame their minds with the proposed rewards of Eternal Life, and shall
teach them that all things, yea even the most difficult are to be endured for
the Christian names sake; are to be esteemed as easy and pleasant, and that
they should be rendered more ready and cheerful to obey God.

But because under these words, II. What the Discipline of this Article is.
which in this place are used to declare our Happiness very many Mysteries lie
closely hid, they are so to be opened, that according to every man's capacity,
they may be cleared. The Faithful therefore are to be admonished, That in these
words Life Everlasting, is signified as well, that Blessedness which satisfies
the desire of the Blessed, as the Perpetuity of Life, which the Devils and
Wicked Men shall 1 also have; Luc. 18.27. Matt 19.29. and 25.46. Aug. de Civ.
Dei l. 19. c 11
and so that Lawyer conceived, who in the Gospel asked of our Lord and Savior,
What he should do to possess everlasting Life; as if he had said, What must I
do, that I may come to that place where I may enjoy perfect felicity? In this
sense the Holy Scripture understands these words, as may be gathered from many
places. But by This name especially, that most excellent Blessedness is called,
lest any one should think that it consists in corporeal and transitory things,
which cannot be Everlasting.

For neither could this word Blessedness sufficiently express what was
designed, especially seeing there have not been wanting Men, puffed up with an
opinion of a vain kind of Wisdom, who have placed the Chiefest Good in those
things which are perceived by the Senses: For these things perish and grow old.
But Blessedness is to be limited by no term of Time, yea rather these earthly
things are farthest from true Happiness, from which he is gone far away, who is
held with the Love and Desire of the World; for it is written: 1 John 2.15.
ibid. 17. 1 Pet. 2.11.
Love not the World, nor the Things of the World; if any one love the World,
the Love of the Father is not in him. And a little after; The World passes
away, and the Concupiscence thereof: These things therefore the Curats shall
take diligent care to impress upon the minds of the Faithful, that they may
resolve to despise mortal things, and know that in This life where we are not
Citizens but Strangers, they can have no Happiness. Tho here also we may
rightly be said to be Happy in Hope, Tit. 2.13.
If denying Ungodliness and worldly Desires, we live soberly, justly, and godly
in this World, waiting for that blessed Hope, and the coming of the Glory of
the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. These things when many who seemed
very wise, understood not, and thought that in This Life Happiness was to be
sought, they became Fools, Romans 1.2.
and fell into the greatest Calamities.

But besides, IV. Bliss must needs be Everlasting.
by Virtue of these words [The Life Everlasting] we perceive, that Happiness
once gotten, can never be lost, as some falsely have supposed; for Happiness is
made up of all kinds of Good, without any mixture of evil: Which seeing it
satisfies the desire of Man, it must necessarily consist in Eternal Life. For
neither can a Blessed Man choose but greatly desire forever to enjoy those good
things which he has gotten. Wherefore, unless that Possession be sure and
settled, it must needs be troubled with an exceeding torment of Fear. See S.
Austin de Civit. Dei lib. 12. c. 20. lib. 22. c. 29. and 30. de libero arbit.
c. 15. de verb. Domini sermon. 64. and sermon. 37 de Sanctis.

But how great the Happiness of the Blessed who live in their Heavenly Country,
V. Everlasting Bliss cannot be expressed by Words.
is, and that it can be comprehended, (unless merely in name,) by themselves
only, these very words which we name when we say, The Blessed Life,
sufficiently show: For if when to express any thing, we use that name which is
common to many other things, we easily perceive that we want a proper name,
whereby plainly to express the thing. When therefore Happiness is there
signified in words, which suit no better with the Blessed, than with all the
rest that live for ever; this is an argument to us, That there is some higher
and more excellent thing which passes our Reason, to signify it perfectly by
any proper name. For tho in Holy Scripture there are very many other names
given to this Heavenly Happiness, such as are, The Kingdom of God, of Christ,
of Heaven, Paradise, the Holy City, the New Jerusalem, the House of our Father:
Yet it is plain that there is none of them all sufficient to explain the
Greatness of it.

Wherefore the Curats may not pretermit the occasion offered them in this
place, VI. The force of this Article to persuade to Piety.
of inviting the Faithful, by so ample rewards as are signified in these words,
Life Everlasting, to Piety, Justice and all Offices of Christian Religion. For
it is manifest that Life is used to be reckoned. among the greatest Goods of
Nature, and in this Good chiefly, when we say, The Life Everlasting, is
Blessedness said to be. Now if we love nothing more, if there be nothing more
dear or more sweet to us, than this slender and miserable Life, which is
subject to so many and so manifold Miseries, that it may more truly be called a
Death; with what intention of mind, with what earnestness ought we to seek
after that Everlasting Life, which being freed from all evils, has a perfect
and absolute supply of all good things? For as the Holy Fathers have taught,
Chrysostom. in 30 c p. ad Theo. l. lapsum. Aug. de Civit. Dei. lib 22. c. 30.
A^se'm. Ep. 2. and de simil. c. 47. and seq. Apoc 7.16. Ibid. 21.4. Sermon. 64.
de verb. Domini and de S^mb. ad Catech.
The Happiness of Eternal Life is to be defined, A Freedom from all Evil, and
an enjoyment of all Good. Of the Evil these Testimonies of Holy Scripture are
very clear. It is written in the Apocalypse or Revelation, They shall hunger and
thirst no more, nor shall the Sun or the Heat fall upon them. And again, God
shall wipe away every Tear from their Eyes; and there shall be no more Death,
nor Sorrow, nor Crying, nor Grief, because the first things are past away. But
then the Glory of the Blessed will be boundless, and the kinds of solid joy and
pleasure will be innumerable. The greatness of which Glory, since our
Understandings cannot conceive, and since they can by no means enter into our
Minds; it is needsul that we enter into it, to wit, into the joy of our Lord,
that being every way compassed about with it, we may abundantly satiate the
desire of our Heart. But tho, lib. 3. ult.
as S. Austin writes, it seems more easy to number up the Evils we shall want,
than the Goods and Pleasures we shall enjoy; yet it must be endeavored briefly
and clearly to explain those things which may inflame the Faithful with the
desire of getting this most excellent Happiness.

But first it is necessary to use this distinction; VII. Bliss twofold
Essential and Accidental.
which we have learned from the gravest Divines: For say they, There are Two
sorts of Good things, whereof the one belongs to the very Being of Bliss, The
other follows upon that Bliss. Wherefore for the better understanding thereof,
the First may be called Essential Goods, and the other Accessory. And indeed
that solid Bliss, which we may call by the common name Essential, is placed in
the Vision of God, and enjoyment of his Beauty, who is the Fountain and
Principle of all Goodness and Perfection. This is Life Eternal Joh. 17.3.
says Christ our Lord, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent. Which Sentence S. John seems to interpret when he says: 1 John
3.2.
Behold! now we are the Sons of God: But it does not yet appear what we shall
be, because we know, when he shall appear we shall be like him, because we
shall see him as he is. For he shows, that Bliss consists in these two things,
both that we shall behold God near at hand, as he is in his own Nature and
Substance, and also, because we our selves shall be made as Gods.

For they who enjoy him, VIII. What kind of Persons the Blessed shall be, in
Glory.
tho they retain their own proper substance, yet do they put on a kind of
admirable and almost divine Form, so that they may seem rather Gods than Men.
But why this is so, appears plainly from hence, That every thing is known
either by its own Being, or else by a similitude and resemblance thereof.

But because there is nothing like God, by help of which resemblance we can
come to a perfect knowledge of him, it follows that no one can see his Nature
and Being, unless his very Divine Being be pleased to join it self with us: And
this the Apostles words show. We now see as through a Glass, darkly, but Then,
face to face: 1 Cor. 23.12. Aug. lib. 15. de Civ. c. 9. D^on. Areop. de di^vin.
nom. c. 1.
For that he says darkly, S. Austin interprets of a Resemblance fitted to know
God by, which also S. Dennys plainly shows, when he affirms, That the things
above cannot be perceived by any resemblance of things below; for neither can
the Being and Substance of that which is incorporeal, be known by the
resemblance of any corporeal things; Especially when it is necessary that the
Resemblance of things be less gross, and more spiritual than those things,
whose resemblance they bear, as experience teaches us in the knowledge of all
things. Now because it cannot be, that the resemblance of any created thing can
be found equally pure and spiritual, with God himself, hence it comes, that we
cannot perfectly understand the Divine Essence by any resemblance. We may add
also, that all created things are restrained within certain limits of
Perfection: But God is Infinite, nor can the resemblance of any created thing,
reach his Immensity. Wherefore there is left this one way only of knowing the
Divine Substance, that he join himself with us, and by some way beyond our
Belief, raise our Understanding higher, and so we may be fitted, to contemplate
the Beauty of his Nature. But this in the Light of Glory we shall have, when
being illustrated with that splendour, we shall see God, who is the true Light,
by his own Light.

For the Blessed shall behold God always present, X. The Fountain of Bliss. 2
Pet. 1.4.
by which superlative and most excellent Gift, being made partakers of the
Divine Essence, they shall enjoy true and solid Bliss: Which we ought so to
believe, as that with a sure Hope, we may expect it of the goodness of God for
our selves, as is said in the Creed of the Fathers: For it says, I expect the
Resurrection of the Dead, and the Life of the World to come. These things are
plainly Divine, nor can we by words express, or so much as in thought conceive
them.

But some small resemblance of that Bliss we may perceive by sensible things, A
Similitude out of Anselm. l. de Simil. c. 1^.
for as Iron put into the Fire, receives fire into it; and tho the substance
thereof be not changed, yet something may be seen in it of a different
substance, to wit, the Fire: After the same manner they who are admitted into
the glory of Heaven, being inflamed with the Love of God, are so wrought upon,
that tho they cease not to be that which they are; yet they may deservedly be
said to be much more different from those which are in this life, than Iron
which is red hot, from that which has no force of heat in it.

To speak the whole matter therefore in few words, XI. Wherein Essential Bliss
consists.
That superlative and absolute Bliss, which we call Essential, consists in the
possession of God: For what can he want, to make his Happiness; perfect, who
enjoys the most perfect and gracious God?

Now to this Bliss there are some Ornaments to be added, XII. The Accessories
of Bliss. Aug de Civ. Dei. l. 22. c. 30. Romans 2.18.
which are common to all the Blessed. Which because they are less strange to
human Reason, will be the more likely to influence and stir up our minds the
more earnestly. Of this kind are those of which the Apostle seems to mean in
his Epistle to the Romans.

Glory, Honur and Peace to every one that does good: The First.
For the Blessed shall indeed throwly enjoy Glory, but not that glory only
which we have showed to be Essential Bliss, or very nearly related to the
nature thereof; but that also which consists in the clear and plain knowledge
which every one shall have concerning the great and excellent dignity of
another. But then how great must that Honor be accounted, which is given them
by the Lord himself, when they shall no longer be called Servants, but the
Friends, the Brethren and Children of God? Wherefore our Savior will thus
salute them with the most kind and courteous expressions: Luc. 12.4.
Come ye blessed of my Father, possess the Kingdom prepared for you: That we
may deserv'dly cry out; Matt. 25.34.
Thy Friends, O God, are too much honored. But they shall also be highly
praised and commended by Christ our Lord, Ps. 138.17.
before his Heavenly Father and the Angels.

Besides, The Second.
if Nature have planted the desire of Honor in the Hearts of all Men, and
especially of the Honor of those Men, who are most excellent for Wisdom,
because they look upon them as the most commendable Witnesses of their virtue;
how much may we think will this add to the glory of the Blessed, when they
shall every one exceedingly honor and reverence one another?

It would be endless to reckon up all the Delights which the Glory of the
Blessed shall be crowded with: The Third.
And indeed neither can we in Thought conceive them. But yet the Faithful ought
to be assured, That whatsoever delights happen to us in this life, or can but
be wished for, whether they belong to the knowledge of the Mind, or to the
perfect disposition of the Body, the Blessed Life of the Saints in Heaven,
shall flow with plenty of all such things; 1 Cor. 2.9.
although all this will be in a higher degree than Eye can see, Ear hear, or the
Heart of Man conceive, as the Apostle affirms.

For the Body which before was thick and burly, The Fourth.
when in Heaven, Mortality being taken away from it, it shall be made tenuious
and spiritual, shall want no more sustenance,

And the Soul with the greatest contentment shall be exceedingly satisfied with
the Eternal Food of Glory, The Fifth. Luc. 12.37.
which the presence of the Master of that great Feast will minister to all,

And now who can desire costly Clothes or Royal Ornaments for the Body, The
Sixth.
where there will be no use of such things, but all shall be clothed with
Immortality and splendour, and adorned with the Crown of Everlasting Glory?

And if to the happiness of Man, The Seventh
there be wanting a large and stately House, what can be imagined either more
large or stately, than Heaven it self, which shines every where with the
Brightness of God? And therefore the Prophet, when he put before his Eyes the
beauty of this dwelling, and grew warm with the desire of coming to those
Seats: Ps. 83.1.
How lovely, says he, are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! my Soul longs, yea
even faints for the Courts of the Lord: My Heart and my Flesh have greatly
rejoiced in the living God. And that this might be the desire of all the
Faithful, That this may be the common voice of all, as the Curats ought
earnestly to wish, so ought they with diligent study to endeavor it: Joh. 14.2.
For in my Fathers House, says our Lord, there are many Mansions, in which
shall be given greater or lesser rewards, according to every ones desert; 2
Cor. 9.6.
For he that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly, and he that sows in
Blessings shall reap of his Blessings.

Wherefore they shall not only excite the Faithful to that Bliss, XIII. The
sure way of getting Bliss.
but also they shall frequently admonish them that this is the way to obtain
it; that being furnished with Faith and Charity, and persevering in Prayer, and
in the due use of the Sacraments, they exercise themselves in all offices of
kindness toward their Neighbor; and so by Gods mercy who has prepared that
blessed glory for them that seek him, it shall come to pass, that at length
that shall be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet: Isa. 32.28.
My people shall sit in the beauty of peace, and in the Tabernacles of Safety,
and in wealthy Rest.

THE CATECHISM FOR THE CURATES, BY THE DECREE OF THE Council of TRENT.
PART II.
Of the SACRAMENTS.
SInce every Part of Christian Doctrine stands in need of the knowledge and
diligence of the Pastor: I. The Knowledge of the Sacraments necessary for the
Curats. See the Council of Trent. Sess. 17.
Then surely the Discipline of the Sacraments, which even by Gods command is
necessary, and very full of profit, requires the skill and industry of the
Curat; and that by the diligent and frequent use thereof, the Faithful may be
fitted worthily and savingly to be made partakers of these most excellent and
most holy things; the Priests should stick close to the rule of that Divine
Prohibition: Give not that which is holy to dogs, Mat. 7.6.
neither cast ye your pearls before swine.

In the first place therefore, II. The Word Sacrament taken diversely.
because we must treat in general of all the kinds of Sacraments, we must begin
with the Signification and Notion of the word Sacrament, and explain the
dubious meaning thereof, that it may more easily be understood what the proper
sense of the word in this place is. Wherefore the Faithful are to be taught,
that the name Sacrament, as to our purpose, is taken by Profane, By Profane
Authors.
otherwise than by Sacred Writers; for some Authors by the word Sacrament would
signify that Obligation, when we are bound by Oath to some Service of which
kind is that Oath wherewith Soldiers promise to do faithful service to the
Common Wealth; and this is called a Military Sacrament or Oath; and this seems
to be the most usual acceptance of the word amongst them. But among the Latin
Fathers, And by the Fathers.
who have written Divinity, the word SACRAMENT is taken to signify some Holy
Thing which lies close hid; as the Greeks, to signify the same thing, used the
word Mystery. Now in the same sense we understand the word Sacrament is to be
taken, when it is thus written in the Epistle to the Ephesians, That be might
make known to us the Sacrament of his will: Ephesians. 1.9.
And to Timothy, Great is the Sacrament of Godliness: 1 Timothy 3.6. Wisd. 2.22.
And in the Book of Wisdom, They understood not the Sacraments of God. In which
places, and many more, may be observed, that the word Sacrament signifies
nothing else, but some Holy Thing kept hid and secret.

Wherefore the Latin Doctors have thought that the Sacraments might
conveniently be called certain Sensible Signs, III. What the Name Sacrament
here properly signifies.
which work or effect that grace which at the same time they signify, and, as
it were, put before our Eyes. Tho S. Gregory thought, that they may therefore
be called Sacraments, because the Divine Power under the Veils of corporeal
things, secretly works Salvation. D. Greg. in I Reg. c. 16. v. 13.

Nor can any one suppose that this name Sacrament has lately been brought into
the Church; IV. The ancient use of the word Sacrament.
for he that shall have read S. Hierom and S. Austin, will easily see, that the
ancient Writers of our Religion, have very frequently used the name of
Sacrament, and sometimes also the name of Symbol, or Mystical Sign, or Sacred
Sign, to signify that thing whereof we are speaking; and let this be spoken
concerning the Name of a Sacrament; which also indeed agrees to the Sacraments
of the Old Law; to teach which, the Pastors have no need, seeing they are taken
away by the Law and Grace of the Gospel. See Hieron. in Amos c. 1. v. 11 and
Tren. c. 1. v. 15. Aug. in Joan. Tract. 80. in fine: and contra Faust. lib. 19.
c. 12. Cypr. Epist. 15. and lib. de Bapt. Christi.

But besides the reason of the Name, V. What a Sacrament is.
which hitherto has bin declared, the Nature and Virtue of the thing is
diligently to be inquired into; and it must be taught* the Faithful, what a
Sacrament is. For there is no one can doubt, but that a Sacrament is One of
that kind of Divine Things, whereby Righteousness and Salvation is obtained.
But tho there are many ways or reasons which may seem fit and accommodated to
explain this matter; yet there is none shows it more fully and clearly than S.
Austins Definition, which all the School Doctors after him have followed, D.
Aug. lib. 10. de Civit. Dei. c. 5. and Ep. 2.
A Sacrament, says he, is a sign of a Holy Thing: Yet in the same sense it is
said, A Sacrament is a Visible Sing of an Invisible Grace, instituted or
appointed for our Justification.

Which Definition that it may be the better understood, VI. The Definition of a
Sacrament explained.
the Pastors shall explain the several Parts of it. And first they must teach,
that all sensible things are of two kinds, some are therefore invented that
they may be Signs; others are made choice of, not to signify any other thing,
but merely for their own sakes. Of this number may be reckoned almost all
things which are in nature. But of the first sort are to be accounted the Names
of things, Writings, Ensigns, Images, Trumpets, and many other things of the
like kind; for if you take away from Words the virtue of Signifying, then the
Cause also why those words were made use of, seems to be taken away. These
therefore are Signs properly so called. For as S. Austin testifies, That is a
Sign, Aug l. 2 de Doct. Christi. c. 1.
which, besides the thing it offers to the Senses, it causes also, that by it
we come to the knowledge of something else, as by a Footstep which we see made
upon the ground, whereby we easily know, that somebody, whose Foot-step
appears, has passed there.

Which being so, VII. A Sacrament proved to be a Sign. Aug de doct. Christi l.
7. c. 9. Et Epist. 23. and de Catec. rud. c. 26. Tertul. de Res^^rect. carnis.
c 8. and Greg. in ^ Reg. l. 6. c. 8. post i. it.
it is plain, that a Sacrament is of that kind of things which are used for
signication's sake: For by a kind of Resemblance and Likeness, it declares to
us that thing which God by his Power works in our Souls, which Power cannot be
perceived by Sense. For Baptism (that what is taught, may be better known by an
example) when we are outwardly washed with water, with the Use of Certain and
Solemn words, signifies this to us. That by the Power of the Holy Ghost, all
Pollution and Filthiness of Sin is washed away, and our Souls enriched and
adorned with that excellent Heavenly Gift of Righteousness And at the same
time, that very Washing of the Body, as shall be said in its proper place,
works or causes that thing in the mind, which it signifies. But it is also
clearly gathered from Scripture, that a Sacrament is to be reckoned among
Signs. For the Apostle concerning Circumcision, a Sacrament of the Old Law,
Genesis 17.10.
which was given to Abraham, Genesis 17.10.
the Father of the Faithful, in his Epistle to the Romans, writes thus, Romans
4.11.
And he took the Sign of Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith.
And in another place, when he affirms, that we all, who are baptized in Jesus
Christ, Romans 6.3.
are baptized in his Death. We may know, that Baptism has this signification,
to wit, as the same Apostle says, Romans 6.4.
That we are buried with him by Baptism into Death. And this will be no small
profit to the Faithful, to understand that the Sacraments are Signs; for by
this means it will come to pass, that they will more easily believe those
things to be Sacred and Holy, which are signified and contained in, and wrought
by them: And knowing the Holiness of them, they will be the more moved to
worship and reverence the Divine Bounty toward us.

It now follows, VIII. How many kinds of Signs there are. l. 1. de doct.
Christ. c. 1. Natural. Aug. de doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 1. and seq.
to explain these words Of a Holy Thing, which is the other part of the
Definition, which to do well, must be a little further repeated, what S. Austin
accurately and subtily has disputed concerning the truth of Signs.

For some Signs are called Natural, which beget in our minds the knowledge of
some other thing besides it self; (and this, as was before showed, is common to
all Signs): as Smoke, whereby presently is understood that there is Fire. And
this Sign, for this Cause is called Natural; because Smoke does not in the Will
signify Fire; but the Use of things causes, that when any one sees Smoke only,
he presently in his mind and thought perceives that there is also the nature
and virtue of Fire underneath, which as yet lies hid.

Now there are some Signs, Appointed by Men. Aug. ibid. c. 3.
which are not by Nature made Signs, but invented and appointed by men for that
purpose; as to talk with one another, and to tell freely to each other the
sense of their minds, and to be able to undestand each others Opinions and
Counsels. But how various and manifold these are, may be understood by this,
that some of them belong to the Sight, others to the Hearing, and the rest to
the other Senses. For when we Nod to any one, and, for example, signify any
thing by removing a Flag, it is plain that that signification belongs only to
the Sight: As the Sound of Trumpets, Pipes and Viols, which is made not only
for Delight, but sometimes also for a Sign, belongs to the judgment of the
Hearing, by which Sense especially are words conceived, which have the greatest
virtue to express the inward thoughts of our mind.

But besides these things which we have hitherto spoken of, ^^ven of (...).
(...). de doct. (...). 3. c. 9.
and which are appointed by the Will and Consent of Men to be Signs, there are
others given of God, of which yet that there is more than one kind, all do
agree.

For there are some Signs which are of God commended to men for this reason
only, Signi^ying onl^ Ex^d. 12.15.
to signify or to admonish: Of which kind were the Purificatoons of the Law,
the Show-bread, and many other things which belong to the Ceremonies of the
Mosaical Worship.

But God appointed others, Both signifying and effecting. Council. Trid. Sess.
de Sacr.
which had not only the virtue of signifying, but of working also; and amongst
this later kind of Signs, it manifestly appears that the Sacraments of the New
Law are to be reckoned, for they are Signs given of God, not invented by Men,
which we verily believe to contain in them the efficacy of that Holy Thing
which they signify. But as we have showed that there is a very great variety
of Signs; so also the Holy Thing is not to be thought to be of one manner only.

But as to the aforesaid Definition of a Sacrament, IX. What the Holy Thing is,
which a Sacrament signifies.
Divines show, that by the Name Holy Thing is signified the Grace of God, which
makes us Holy, and adorns us with the Habit of all Divine Virtues; for, to this
Grace they have deservedly thought, that the proper Name Holy Thing is to be
given, because with the benefit thereof our Soul is consecrated and joined to
God.

Wherefore to show more fully what a Sacrament is, X. A more full explication
of a Sacrament.
it should be taught, that it is a thing subject to Sense, which by Gods
appointment has virtue both to signify, and to work holiness and
righteousness: Whence it follows, that any one may easily understand, that the
Images of the Saints, Crosses and such like things, tho they are Signs of Holy
Things, yet they are not to be called Sacraments. Now the truth of this Doctrine
it will be easy to prove, by the example of all the Sacraments, as before we
observed of Baptism, when we said, that That solemn washing of the Body is a
Sign, and has the efficacy of a Holy Thing, which is inwardly wrought by the
power of the Holy Ghost, any one may do the same thing in the other Sacraments.

But then this also specially belongs to these mystical Signs, XI. Every
Sacrament signifies at least three things, Present Grace, the Passion of
Christ, and Life Everlasting.
which are instituted of God, that by Gods appointment they signify not any
one thing only, but more things together. Which thing may be seen in all the
Sacraments, which show not only our Holiness and Righteousness, but declare two
other things besides, very nearly joined with that Holiness, to wit, Christ our
Redeemer's Passion, which is the cause of our Holiness: and Life Everlasting,
and the Bliss of Heaven, to which our Holiness ought to be referred as to the
End. And this may be observed in all the Sacraments. Rightly have the Holy
Doctors taught, that every Sacrament has in it a threefold virtue of
signifying; both because it brings to remembrance something already past; and
because it points at and shows another thing present; and also because it
foreshews something yet to come. Nor is it to be supposed, that these things
have been thus taught of them, as that it cannot be proved by testimony of Holy
Scripture: For when the Apostle says, Rom 6.3.
As many of us as have bin baptized in Christ Jesus, have bin baptized in his
death; he plainly shows, that Baptism is therefore to be called a Sign, because
it puts us in mind of the Death and Passion of our Lord. And then when he says,
We are buried together with him by Baptism into Death; that as Christ rose
again from the dead, by the glory of the Father, so also should we walk in
newness of life: From these words it is plain, that Baptism is a Sign, whereby
the Divine Grace is showed to be poured into us, by verture whereof, is given
to us, that leading a new life, we can easily and cheerfully perform all
Offices of true Piety. Lastly, Romans 6.5.
when he adds, For if we are planted together in the likeness of his Death, we
shall be also of his Resurrection, it appears that Baptism, has no dark
signification of the Life Everlasting also, which through it we shall obtain.

But besides these, XII. A Sacrament ^ometimes signifies not one thing only
present.
diverse kinds and ways of signifying, which we have mentioned, it often happens,
that a Sacrament shows and notes not One thing only as present, but more. This
is easy to be observed by any that consider the most Holy Sacrament of the
Eucharist. Wherein is signified the presence of the true Body and Blood of the
Lord, which those who receive those Holy Mysteries not impurely, do perceive.
From what has been said therefore, the Pastors cannot want Arguments, whereby
to show, How great a Divine Power, how many hidden Miracles are in the
Sacraments of the New Law, to prevail with all to revernce them, and receive
them with the greatest Devotio^

But to teach the true use of the Sacraments, XIII. for what reason the
Sacraments were instituted.
there can nothing seem more proper than diligently to explain the Reasons, Why
it was needful the Sacraments should be instituted. Of these there are many.

Whereof the First is, The First.
The weakness of Human Understanding, which by nature we see to be so framed,
that no One can aspire to the knowledge of those things, which are comprehended
by the mind and understanding, unless by those things which are perceived by
some sense. That therefore we might the more easily understand those things
which are wrought by the hidden power of God, the same supreme Maker of all
things has most wisely ordered; that of his Good Will toward us, he declares
that very Power by some Signs which fall under some Sense: For as S. Chrysostom
excellently says, Chrysostom. hom. 83. in Matt. and hom 60. ad pop. Antioch.
If Man were but free from the conjunction of the Body, those goon things would
be offered him naked, and not wrapped up in coverings: But because the Soul is
joined with the Body, it was altogether needful to use the help of sensible
things, to understand them.

Another Reason is, The Second Aug l. 4. de Baptis. con: tra c. 24.
Because our Minds are not easily wrought upon to believe those things which
are promised us. And therefore from the very beginning of the World, God has
bin used very frequently to show by Words what he intended to do: and sometimes
also when he intended any work, the Greatness whereof might shake the Belief of
the Promise, he add'd to the words some Signs alsso, which had a kind of
miracle in them sometimes. For when God sent Moses to deliver the people of
Israel; Exodus 3.10. Exodus 3.42.
but he not being assured of Gods assistance who sent him, feared lest too
heavy a burden should be laid upon him, which he could not be able to hear, or
lest the people would not give credit to the Divine Oracles and Sayings; The
Lord confirmed his promise by a great variety of Signs. As therefore in the Old
Testament God so ordered it, that the Constancy or Truth of some great Promise
might be testified by Signs: so also ^n the New Law, our Savior Christ, when he
promised us Forgiveness of Sins, Heavenly Grace, the Communion of the Holy
Ghost, instituted some certain Signs subject to our Eyes and Senses, by which,
as by pledges, we might esteem him, as it were, obliged, and so for the future
might never doubt of the Faithfulness of the Promise.

A Third Reason was, The Third. ^ m^..^ de Sa^^. ^. 4.
as S. Ambrose writes, That the Soul might have ready at hand the remedies, and
medicines, as it were of the Evangelical Samaritan, for the recovery and
preservation of her Health. For the virtue which flows from Christ's Passion,
i. e. the Grace which he merited for us upon the Altar of the Cross, must be
derived upon our selves by the Sacraments, as it were by certain Pipes;
otherwise no one can have any hope of Salvation. Wherefore our most merciful
Lord would leave in his Church, Sacraments firmly established by his Word and
Promise, by which, without all doubt we believe that the Fruit of his Passion
is truly communicated to us, only if on our part each of us will piously and
religiously apply that Cure to himself.

And now follows a Fourth reason why the Institution of the Sacraments may seem
necessary, The Fou^ h.
to wit, That they may be Notes and Characters whereby the Faithful might be
kmown to each other. Especially since, D. Aug. l. ^ 9. ^^tra Faust. c. 11. and
de ^era Re^^g. c. 17 Basil in Exhort ad Bapt.
as S. Austin observes, There can be no Society, or Company of Men, whether of
the true or of a false Religion, which can be, as it were, consolidated into
one Body, unless they be mutually joined together by some hand of visible
signs. Both these do the Sacraments of the New Law perform, which both
distinguish Christians from Infidels, and by that very Holy Bond knit the
Faithful to one another.

It may further be showed, The Fifth.
That there was an other very just cause of Instituting the Sacraments, from
these Words of the Apostle, Romans 10.10.
With the Heart we believe to Righteousness, but with the Mouth confession is
made to Salvation. For in the Sacraments we seem openly to profess, and make
declaration of our Faith before Men. Wherefore in coming to Baptism we openly
testify that we believe, That by virtue of that Water wherewith we are washed
in that Sacrament, our Souls are Spiritually cleans'd. And then the Sacraments
have a great power, not only to kindle and exercise Faith in our Souls, but
also to inflame us to that degree of Charity, wherewith we ought to love one
another, when we remember, that by communion of those Holy Mysteries we are
tied together with the strictest Bond, and made Members of one Body.

Lastly, The Sixth.
and which in the exercise of Christian Piety ought to be esteemed very much,
the Sacraments do tame and restrain the Pride of Man's Heart, and make us
become Humble, while we are forced to submit our selves to sensible Elements,
that we may become obedient to God, from whom we fell wickedly before, now to
serve the Elements of this World. There are the things which seem chiefly
necessary to be taught the Faithful, concerning the Name, Nature, and
Institution of a Sacrament. Which after that the Pastors shall diligently have
explained, it will then be necessary to teach of what things the several
Sacraments consist, and what are the Parts thereof; and lastly, what Rites and
Ceremonies are to be used in them.

First therefore it must be taught, XIV. Every Sacrament consists of Matter and
Form.
That the sensible Thing, which, as was said before in the Definition, belongs
to a Sacrament, is not only One, tho we must believe the Sign to be One. For
there are Two things of which every Sacrament is made; of which the One has the
reason of Matter, and is cali'd the Element, and the other has the virtue of
Form, and is commonly called The Word: For thus we are taught by the Fathers.
Concerning which matter, that testimony of S. Austin is sufficiently known and
received of all, S. Aug. in Joan. Tract. 80.
The Word is joined to the Element, and so the Sacrament is made. By the name
Sensible Thing, therefore they understand both the Matter or Element, as the
Water in the Sacrament of Baptism, the Chrism in that of Confirmation, and the
Oil in that of Extreme Unction, all which things fall under the Sense of
Seeing, and also the Words, which are as the Form, and belong to the Sense of
Hearing. Both these the Apostle plainly shows, Ephesians. 5.26. Aug. de duct. Chrst.
l. 2.^3.
when he says: Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for her, that he might
sanctify her, washing her with the laver of Water in the Word of Life. In
which place are expressed both the Matter and Form of that Sacrament. But the
Words were to be added to the Matter, that the signification of the thing done,
might be made more plain and clear. For it is plain that of all Signs, Words
have the greatest virtue, and if They are wanting, it must needs be very hard
to know, What is signified and showed by the Matter of the Sacraments. For, as
may be seen in Baptism, since Water, has no less the virtue of Refreshing, than
of Cleansing, and may well be a Sign of both; unless the words be added, any
one may easily conjecture either of these to be signified in Baptism; but no
body will dare certainly to affirm any thing of it: But then when the Words are
added, we straitway understand, that it has the virtue and signification of
Cleansing.

But herein it appears, XV. The Sacraments of the New Law excel those of the
Old.
That our Sacraments far excel the Sacraments of the Old Law, that in
administering those of the Law, there was no Form observed that we know of,
whence it came to pass that they were uncertain and obscure: But ours have such
a certain prescribed Form of Words, that if by chance it be not closely
observed, the virtue of the Sacrament is lost; and for this reason they are
most clear, and leave no room to doubt. These then are the Parts which belong
to the Nature and Substance of a Sacrament, and of which every Sacrament
necessarily consists.

To the Sacraments are added certain Ceremonies, XVI. Every Sacrament is to be
administered with certain Ceremonies, and why.
which tho they may not be omitted without sin, unless extreme necessity force
it: yet if at any time they should be omitted, since they reach not to the
Nature of the thing, we must believe that the true reason of the Sacrament is
not at all lessened thereby. And it has always very well bin observed, even
from the very infancy of the Church, that the Sacraments were administered with
certain solemn Ceremonies. For First, First.
it was very fit to give that Reverence and Worship to the Holy Mysteries of
Religion, that we might seem to handle Holy Things in a Holy manner. Besides,
Secondly.
those Ceremonies do more clearly show forth, and put before our Eyes, Thirdly.
as it were, and make a deeper impression in our Hearts of the Holiness of
those things which are done in the Sacrament: And then they raise up the Minds
of them who look upon, and diligently observe them, to the thought of the more
sublime and lofty things, and excite their Faith and Love toward them. For
which reason there should the more care and pains be taken that the Faithful
may be made rightly to know and understand the Meaning of the Ceremonies which
are used in each of the Sacraments.

Now it follows, XVII. Why the Number of Sacraments is to be explained.
That we teach the Number of the Sacraments, the knowledge whereof brings this
profit, that the people may with so much the greater devotion, bend all the
powers of their Soul to praise and magnify the singular goodness of God
toward us, by how much the more assistances or helps they shall understand God
has furnished us with, for our Salvation and Happiness.

The Sacraments of the Church then, XVIII. There are only Seven Sacraments.
Trid. S ss. 7. c^n. ^. de S cr in genesis Con. Fl rent. in Doc. ad Arm.
as may be proved by Scripture, and by the constant Tradition of the Fathers
down to our times, and by the Authority of Councils, are Seven in number. But
why they are neither more nor fewer, may be probably showed from those things
which by a Similitude are transferred from the Natural to the Spiritual life.
For these Seven things seem necessary to a Man to live, and to preserve his
life, and to be made profitable to the Commonwealth: To wit, A notable Simil
tude. D. Thom. 3. p q 63. art. 1.
that he be Born, Grow, and be Nourished: If he fall into Sickness, that he be
recovered; that the weakness of strength be restored: And then as to the
Commonwealth, that the Magistrates be not wanting on their part to rule him by
their Authority and Government: And lastly, that by a lawful propagation of his
Family, he preserve both himself and mankind. All which things, seeing they
answer well to that life which the Soul lives to God, from hence it may easily
be gathered what the number of Sacraments is. For the First is Baptism, Baptism.
the Gate as it were of all the rest, Confirmation.
whereby we are born again in Christ: Then Confirmation, by virtue whereof we
grow bigger and stronger in the grace of God. For as S. Austin testifies, D.
Aug. Ep. 105. Luc. 24.49.
It was to the Apostles already baptized, that the Lord said, Stay ye in the
City, till ye shall be endu'd with power from above. Then the Eucharist, The
Eucharist.
wherewith, as with the Food of Heaven, our Spirit is nourished and sustained.
For of this our Savior speaks, Joh. 6.55.
when he says: My Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed. In the
Fourth place follows Penance, Penance.
by help whereof our lost Health is restored after we have bin wounded by Sin.
Then Extreme Unction, Extreme Unction. Isa. 5.14.
by which the remains of sin are taken away, and the powers of the Soul
refreshed: for S. James writing of this Sacrament, testifies thus: Orders.
And if he be in sins, they shall be forgiven him. Then follows Orders, by
which the public ministration of the Sacraments is exercised in the Church, and
a power given to discharge or perform the Sacred Functions. Lastly, Matrimony.
is added Matrimony, that by the lawful and holy Conjunction of the Man and the
Woman, Children may be begotten and religiously brought up to the Service of
God, and the Conservation of Mankind.

But This is specially to be observed, XIX. The necessity of all the S craments
not alike.
That tho all the Sacraments contain in them a Divine and Admirable Virtue; yet
all have not a like and equal necessity, or dignity, or One and the same
signification. But there are Three of them which are more necessary than the
rest, Trid. 1. Sess. 7 can. 3.4. de Sacr. in en. D. Tho. 3. p q. 65. ^r.
4.7.3.5.
tho not for the same reason. For Baptism is necessary for every one without
any exception at all, as our Savior shows in these words: Except a Man be born
again of Water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. And
Penance is necessary to them only who after Baptism have intangl'd themselves
with some mortal sin; nor can they escape eternal Destruction, unless they
truly do Penance for the sin admitted. And Orders is altogether necessary, tho
not to all the Faithful in particular, yet to the whole Church in general.

But then if we consider the Dignity of the Sacraments, XX. The Eucharist
excels the other Sacraments in Dignity.
the Eucharist far excels all the rest, in Sanctity, in the number of
Mysteries, and in Magnitude: All which things will be better understood when we
shall come to handle, in their proper place, those things which belong to the
particular Sacraments. Dionys. lib. de Eccles. Hier. c. 3.

We must next see Whence it is we receive these Holy and Divine Mysteries: XXI.
Christ the Author of the Sacraments. Amb. l. 4. de Sacr. c. 6. D. Tho. 3. p.
4.62. Trid. Ses. 7. can. 1. de Sacr. in genesis l. de Eccles. dog. and Cassian.
Col. 7.18.
For there is no doubt but that the value of any excellent Gift is much
increased by the worth and excellency of him from whom it came. But that
Question is not difficult. For seeing it is God which justifies Men; but the
Sacraments are the wonderful Instruments of obtaining Righteousness, it is
plain, that one and the same God in Christ must be acknowledged to be the
Author both of Justification, and of the Sacraments. Besides, the Sacraments
have such a and Efficacy, as to penetrate into the inmost Soul; since therefore
it is the Property of Gods Power alone to search into the Hearts and Souls of
Men; from This also it is easy to see, That the Sacraments are instituted of
God himself throw Christ; even as we must firmly and constantly believe, that
they are inwardly dispensed by him: For S. John affirms that he received this
Testimony from him, when he says, He that sent me to baptize in Water, the same
said to me: Upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending and remaining upon
him, that same is he that baptizes in the Holy Ghost.

But tho God be the Author and Dispenser of the Sacraments; XXII. Men only are
Ministers of the Sacraments.
yet he would have them administered in the Church, not by Angels, but by Men:
For to the making the Sacraments, there is no less need of the Office of
Ministers than of Matter and Form, as is confirmed by the constant Tradition of
the Holy Fathers.

And because these Ministers in that Holy Function carry or represent not their
own, XXIII. The unworthiness of Ministers hinder not the efficacy of the
Sacraments. Trid Sess 7. de Sac. in genesis ca. 11 and 12. Greg. Naz. in Orat. in
S. Bap. Amb. de bis qui mist. init. c. 5. Chrysostom. hom 8. in 1 Cor. Aug.
contra Donat. l. 1. c. 4. and l. 2. cont. lit. Patil. c. 47. 1 Cor. 3.6. A
similitude S. Aug. Tract. in Joan. Act. 19.5.
but the person of Christ, for this reason it is, that whether they be Good or
Bad, so they use the Form and Matter, which by Christ's Institution the Catholic
Church has always held, and intend to do the same thing which the Church in the
ministration does, they truly make and confer the Sacraments: So that nothing
can hinder the Fruit of Grace, unless those who receive them, wilfully defraud
themselves of so great a good, and resist the Holy Spirit. That this was always
the constant and undeniable sense of the Church, S. Austin in his Disputations
he wrote against the Donatists, most clearly shows. And if we require
Testimonies of Scripture, we may hear the very Apostle speaking in these Words:
I, says he, have planted, and Apollo has watered, but God gave the Increase:
For neither is he that plants, any thing, nor he that waters: But God, that
gives the increase. Whence it may sufficiently be understood, that as in
planting of Trees, the naughtiness of those that planted them, is no hindrance
to the Trees: So there can no hurt light upon them, by another fault, who were
planted in Christ by the Ministry of Bad Men. Wherefore, as from S. John's
Gospel, our Holy Fathers have taught us, Judas Iscariot baptized many, of whom
nevertheless we read not that any were baptized again; so as S. Austin has
excellently written: Judas baptized; and yet after Judas, none baptized whom he
baptized: John baptized; and yet after John's Baptism, they were baptized
again; because the Baptism given by Judas, was Christ's Baptism, but the Baptism
which John gave. was his own: And yet we rightly prefer not Judas before John,
but Christ's Baptism, tho given by the hands of Judas; before John's Baptism,
tho given by the hands of S. John himself.

Nor may the Pastors, XXIV. It is a great wickedness to administer the
Sacraments with as evil Conscience. Aug. in Joan. Tract. 5. and contra Cresc. l
3. c. 6. D. Thom. p. 3. q. 93. art. 4.
or other Ministers of the Sacraments when they hear this, think it enough,
taking no regard to the uprightness of their Manners, and purity of their
Consciences, to take care only, how rightly to minister the Sacraments: for tho
they ought to be very careful therein, yet all those things which belong to
that Function are not placed in this one thing. But they ought always to
remember, That the Sacraments indeed never lose that Divine Virtue which is in
them; but yet that they bring eternal Death and ruin to those that minister
them impurely. For Holy things, as once, and again, and oftentimes over and
over we ought to admonish, should be handled Holily, Ps. 49 16. Con Trid. ibid.
Can. 6.
and Religiously. To the Sinner, as the Prophet has it, God has said, Why do
thou declare my Righteousness, and take my Testament into thy Mouth? whereas
thou hate Discipline. Now if it be unlawful for a man polluted with sin, to
Treat only of Divine Matters: How great wickedness must we needs judge him
guilty of, who being conscious to himself of many crimes, is yet not afraid,
with his polluted mouth to make those Holy Mysteries, or to take into his foul
hands, and handle, and to reach them forth, and minister them to others?
especially since it is written by S. Denis: To the wicked, the Symbols (for so
he calls the Sacraments) it is not permitted so much as to touch them. The
Ministers of Holy things therefore, S. Dyon. de Eccles. Hier. c. 1.
are first of all to follow Holiness, and come purely to minister the
Sacraments, and let them so exercise themselves in Piety, that through the
frequent handling and use of them, by Gods help, they may attain a greater
plenty of Grace thereby.

And now these things being explained, XXV. The effects of the Sacraments.
it must be taught what the Effect of the Sacraments is, for this seems likely
to afford no small light to the Definition of the Sacraments before mentioned.
The principal of those Effects are reduced to Two.

And that Grace which of the Holy Doctors we have learned usually to call
justifying, XVI. The first. Justifying Grace common to all. Ephesians. 25.26.
deservedly takes the chief place; for so the Apostle has most plainly taught,
when he said, That Christ loved his Church, and gave himself for her, that he
might sanctify her, cleansing her by the laver of water in the Word. But by
what means so great and admirable a thing is wrought by the Sacrament, that, as
S. Austin says, S. Aug. in Joan. Tract. 80.
The Water cleanses the Body, and touches the Heart; this verily connot be
comprehended by human reason and understanding. For it is certain, that no
sensible thing of its own nature is endu'd with such a Power as can penetrate
to the Soul. But by the Light of Faith we know that the Power of the Almighty
God is in the Sacraments, because they effect that which the natural things
themselves by their own power cannot do. Of this Efficacy of the Sacraments,
see Trid. Sess. 7. Can. 6.7, 8. De Sacram. Aug. Tract. 26. in Joan. and cont.
Faust. c. 16. and 17. and in Psalm. 77. v. 15, 16.

Wherefore that there might never any distrust or doubt of this Effect, XXVII.
The Receiving of Grace in the Sacraments, why of old proved by Miracles.
arise in the minds of the Faithful; When the Sacraments began to be
administered, it pleased the most merciful God by the evidence of Miracles to
show what the Sacraments inwardly effected, that we might most constantly
believe, the same things to be always inwardly wrought, tho they were far
enough distant from our Senses. Therefore to omit, Aug l. quart. Vet. and Nov.
Test. q. 93. Mat. 3.16. Mar. 1.10. Luc. 3.22.
that when our Savior was baptized in Jordan, the Heavens were opened, and the
Holy Ghost appeared in the shape of a Dove, to admonish us, that when at the
Saving Font we are washed, he pours his Grace into our Souls. To pass by this,
I say, (for this belongs rather to the Signification of Baptism, than to the
Ministration of the Sacrament) Do not we read, that on the day of Pentecost,
when the Apostles received the Holy Ghost, whereby they were thenceforth made
more cheerful and courageous to Preach the Truth of Faith, and to undergo many
hazards for the glory of Christ, Act. 2.3.
then a noise from Heaven being made all of the sudden, as it were of a mighty
rushing wind, there appeared cloven tongues, like as of Fire: Whence it is
understood, that in the Sacrament of Confirmation, the same Spirit is given to
us, and the same strength bestowed on us, whereby we stoutly resist and
encounter. those irreconcilable Enemies to us, to wit, the Flesh, the World
and the Devil; and these Miracles, as often as the Apostles minister'd those
Sacraments in the infancy of the Church, were for some time to be seen, till
the Faith, being confirmed and strengthened, they began to cease.

From those things therefore which have bin showed concerning the former effect
of the Sacraments, XXVIII. How great the Difference of the Sacraments of the
Old and New Law is. Aug. lib. 19. cont Fault. c. 13. and in Ps. 83. Amb. lib.
de Sacr. c. 4. Heb. 9.14.
to wit, Justifying Grace, it plainly appears, that there is in the Sacraments
of the New Law a better and more excellent virtue, than the Sacraments of the
Old Law had: which seeing they were weak and beggarly Elements, did sanctify
the Polluted, to the cleansing of the Flesh, but not of the Soul: Wherefore
they were instituted only to be Signs of those things which are effectually
wrought in our Services. But the Sacraments of the New Law flowing from
Christ's side, who through the Holy Ghost offered himself to God, cleanse our
Consciences from dead.works. to serve the Living God, and so by virtue of the
Blood of Christ, they work that Grace which they signify. Wherefore if we
compare them with the Old Sacraments, besides that they have a greater
Efficacy, they will be found to be much more full of profit, and more reverend
and holy. August. lib. 2. de Symb. c. 6. and in Joan. Tract. 15. and lib. 15.
de Civit. Dei. c. 26.

Another Effect of the Sacraments, XXIX. Another Effect whch is of Three
Sacraments only, is a Character. 2 Cor. 1.21.
not common to all, but proper to Three only, is the Character of Baptism,
Confirmation and Holy Order, which they imprint upon the Soul: For when the
Apostle says, God has anointed us, who has also sealed us, and given us the
pledge of his Spirit in our hearts; by that word [has sealed,] he clearly has
described the Character, whose property it is to Sign and Mark a thing.

Now this Character, XXX. What this Character is. Trid i^id. Can. 8.
is as it were some remarkable thing impressed upon the Soul, which can never
be blotted out, but remains forever in it: Of which S. Austin has thus written:
Can the Christian Sacraments happily do less, than this corporal Mark, wherewith,
to wit, the Soldier is Signed? For that Mark is not impressed anew upon the
Soldier at his return from the War where he had served; but the old one is
known and observable. Of this Character see Aug. lib. 2. contra Episc. Parm. c.
33. and Epist. 50. circa medium, and Tract. 5. in Joan. and lib. 1. contra
Crescen. c. 30. item D. Thom. 3. p. q. 63.

Now this Character has this virtue, XXXI. To what purpose a Character is
impressed. In Baptism.
that it can both make us fit to receive or perform some Sacred thing, and also
that by some Mark one man may be distinguished from another. Both these we have
in the Character of Baptism: Both that we are made fit to receive the other
Sacraments, and besides this, that thereby the Faithful may be distinguished
from Infidels. The same thing may be observed in the Character of Confirmation
and Holy Order; by the One of which we are armed and prepared as Christ's
Soldiers to make public confession and defense of his Name, and against the
Enemy set against us, and the Spiritual Wickednesses in High Places. And also
we are discerned from them who are but newly baptized, In Order.
and as it were Infants newborn. But the Other has both a conjunct power of
making and ministering the Sacraments, and also distinguishes those persons, who
have this power from the rest of the Faithful. We must therefore hold the Rule
of the Catholic Church, which teaches us, that these Three Sacraments impress a
Character, and are never to be iterated.

These are the things generally to be taught concerning the Sacraments, XXXII.
By what Motives the Faithful are to be excited to the use and reverence of the
Sacraments.
in explaining of which Point, the Pastors shall diligently labor to do Two
things especially. First to make the Faithful understand, how much honor,
worship and veneration these Divine and Heavenly Gifts deserve: And the other,
because the most merciful God has offered them for the common Salvation of all,
that they use them piously and religiously, and be so inflamed with the desire
of Christian Perfection, that they reckon it as a mighty Loss to them if at any
time they want the most wholesome use of Penance, and especially of the
Eucharist. These things the Pastors may do with ease, if they often inculcate
into the ears of the Faithful, what has before bin said of the Divinity and
Benefit of the Sacraments. First, First.
That they were instituted by the Lord our Savior, from whom nothing can come,
but what is most perfect: Secondly.
Besides, when they are ministr'd, the influence of the Holy Ghost is ready at
hand to make them effectual in our hearts: Thirdly.
And then they have in them an admirable and sure virtue to cure our Souls: and
also to draw down upon us the immense riches of the Passion of our Lord. And
Lastly, Fourthly.
They show that the whole Christian Edifice is founded upon a Cornerstone: But
were it not propp'd up on every side by the Preaching of the Word, and by the
Use of the Sacraments, it might greatly be feared, that a great part of it
would tumble down: For as by the Sacraments we are admitted to Life so thereby,
as with Food we are nourished, preserved and increased.

Of the SACRAMENT of BAPTISM.
FRom what has bin spoken before of the Sacraments in general, I. How
frequently Men should be taught concerning the Sacrament of Baptism.
we may easily perceive how necessary it is, both for the understanding of the
Doctrine of Chrstian Religion, and for the exercise of Piety, to know those
things which the Catholic Church requires us to believe concerning the
Sacraments in particular; for he that carefully reads what the Apostle has
written, will without all peradventure find, that it is greatly required of the
Faithful perfectly to know and understand their Baptism; and therefore he not
only very frequently, Romans 6.1.
but with cogent arguments, and full of the Spirit of God, renews the
remembrance of this Mystery, commends the Divinity of it, and therein puts
before our eyes the Death, Burial, and Resurrection of our Redeemer, for our
Contemplation and Imitation. Wherefore the Pastors can never think they have
taken pains and care enough in the handling of this Mystery: But besides those
days, wherein, after the manner of our Forefathers, the Divine Mysteries of
Baptism are used to be explained, to wit, in the Great Sabbath of Easter and
Whitsuntide, at which time the Church has bin used to celebrate this Sacrament
with the greatest devotion and solemnity; they may at other times also take
occasion to discourse of this Point.

And for this end That Time seems most proper, II. How profitable it is to
explain the several things done in administering Baptism.
when at the ministration of Baptism to any one, they shall observe a fit
number of the Faithful to be met together; for then it will be much more easy
and convenient, though they cannot handle all the points that belong to this
Sacrament, to teach at least one or other of them, when the Faithful with a
pious and attentive mind think upon the Doctrine of those things, which at the
same time they both hear with their Ears and see with their Eyes expressed in
the Holy Ceremonies of Baptism. From whence it will come to pass, that every
one being admonished by those things he sees done in another person, will call
to mind how he has by solemn promise obliged himself to God, when he was
initiated in Baptism, and will also consider with himself, whether in his Life
and Conversation he has behaved himself in such a manner, as the very
Profession of Christianity obliges and undertakes.

That therefore what is to be taught, III. What the Name Batism signifies.
Eight kinds of Baptism. See Damass. lib. 4. de fide Orthod. 10
might be made the more intelligible, it must be declared what the Nature and
Substance of Baptism is, after that the signification of the word [Baptism]
shall have bin explained. There is none who know not that [Baptism] is a Greek
word; which tho in Holy Scripture it signifies not only that Washing or
Cleansing, which is joined with this Sacrament, but even all other kinds of
Washing; yea, and sometimes is extended to signify Suffering also: Yet, among
Church-Writers, it signifies not every, kind of Washing of the Body, but that
which is annexed to the Sacrament, and is not ministered without the prescribed
Form of Words, which signification the Apostles, by the Institution of Christ,
frequently made use of.

Now the Holy Fathers made use of other names also to signify the same thing.
For S. Austin testifies that it was called the Sacrament of Faith, IV. By what
other names the Sacrament of Baptism is called. D. Aug. Epist. 25. in sin. Heb.
10.15.
because they who received it, made profession of the Faith or Belief of the
whole Christian Religion. Others called this Sacrament Illumination, because
the heart is illuminated by the Faith we profess in Baptism. For thus says the
Apostle, Remember the former days, wherein being illuminated, ye underwent a
great fight of sufferings, to wit, signifying when they were Baptized. Besides,
S. Chry. 10.5.
Chrysostom in his Oration to those who were baptized, calls it both a
Purgation, whereby through Baptism we purge away the Old Leven, that we may be
a New Lump, and a Burying, and a Planting, and Christ's Cross. The reason of
all which Names may be gathered from the Epistle to the Romans: And why S.
Denis called it the Beginning of the most Holy Commandments, S. Dionys. de
Eccl. Hier. c. 2.
is evident, seeing that this Sacrament is the Gate as it were, through which
we enter into the fellowship of Christian Life, and from thenceforth begin to
obey Gods commands; and this will suffice briefly to be taught concerning the
Name of Baptism. Of the various Names of Baptism, See Greg. Naz. Orat. in
Sancta Lumina, and Clem. Alex. lib. 1. Paedag. c. 6.

But as to the Definition of the Thing. Tho there may many others be gathered
out of Sacred Writers, V. The Definition of Baptism.
yet That seems more fit and suitable which we may learn from our Lords own
words in S. John's Gospel, and from the Apostle in his Epistle to the
Ephesians, Joh. 3.5.
Except a man be born again of Water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. And the Apostle when he spoke of the Church, Ephesians. 5.26.
Cleansing her in the Laver of Water in the Word. For through Adam by nature,
we are born the Children of Wrath, but by Baptism we are born again in Christ,
the Children of Grace. For he gave power to men to become the Sons of God, Joh.
1.13.
even to them that believe in his Name, who are not born of blood, nor of the
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.

But in what words soever the nature of Baptism chances to be explained, VI.
How the Sacrament of Baptism is made.
the people are to be taught, That this Sacrament is made by Washing, with
which, according to the institution of our Lord and Savior, must needs be used
certain and solemn words, as the Holy Fathers have always taught, as is showed
by the plain testimony of S. Austin, The Word is added to the Element, and so
the Sacrament is made. But the Faithful must be carefully taught, An Error to
be marked
not to fall into that Error, not to think, as it is vulgarly used to be said,
that That Water which is kept in the Holy Font to make the Sacrament, is the
Sacrament. For then only is it to be called the Sacrament of Baptism, when in
truth we use Water to wash any one, adding those words which were instituted by
our Lord. Of this, see Chrysostom. hom. 24. in Joan. Aug. l. 6. contra Donatist.
c. 25. Conc. Florent. and Trid. item August. Tract. 80. in Joan.

Now because in the Beginning when we spoke of Sacraments in general, VII. The
Matter of Bap ^^m is natural Water.
we said that every Sacrament consists of Matter and Form, therefore what each
of these is in the Sacrament of Baptism, must be declared by the Pastors. The
Matter therefore, or the Element of this Sacrament, is any kind of natural
Water, whether of the Sea, or the River, or a Pond, or a Well, or a Fountain,
that is used to be called Water, without any adjunct: Joh 3.5.
For our Savior has taught, Except a man be born again of Water and the Spirit,
he cannot enter into the kingdom of God: ^ h. 2.26
and the Apostle says, That the Church was cleans'd by the Laver of Water. And
we read in the Epistle of S. John, 1 John 5.8.
There are Three which bear record in Earth, The Spirit, the Water, and the
Blood^; this may be proved also from other testimonies of Holy Scipture. But
that which S. John the Baptist said, Man. 3.
that the Lord was coming that would baptize with the Holy Ghost and with Fire;
this can by no means be understood of the Matter of Baptism but ought to be
applied either to the inward working of the Holy Ghost, or at least to the
Miracle which appeared on the day of Pentecost, Act. 2.3.
when the Holy Ghost came down from Heaven upon the Apostles, in the likeness
of Fire; whereof in another place Christ our Lord foretold, Act. 1.5.
John indeed baptized with Water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost,
not many days hence.

But this we may observe from the Holy Scriptures to have bin signified
beforehand by the Lord, VIII. The Matter of Baptism figured in the Old
Testament. Genesis 6.5. 2 Pet. 3.10.
both in Figures, and in the Oracles of the Prophets. For the Flood whereby the
World was cleans'd, because the wickedness of man was great in the Earth, and
all the thoughts of his heart wholly set upon evil, carried the Figure and
Resemblance of This Water, as the Prince of Apostles in his former Epistle
shows. And the Passage through the Red Sea signified this Water, 1 Cor. 10.1.
as S. Paul writing to the Corinthians expounds it, 4 Reg 5.24.
to omit the cleansing of Naaman the Syrian, and the admirable virtue of the
Pool of Bethsaiday, Job. 5.2.
and many others of the like kind: Wherein it plainly appears, that there is a
Symbol of this Mystery.

And of Prophesies none can doubt but those Waters to which the Prophet Esaias so
freely invites all that thirst, IX. The Matter of Baptism foretold by the
Prophets. Isa. 55.1. Ez^k. 47.20. Zac. 13.1.
and which Ezekiel in Spirit saw come forth out of the Temple, and that
Fountain which was opened for the house of David, and inhabitants of Jerusalem,
for the washing away of sin, and of uncleanness, which Zachary propheci'd of,
have relation to this saving Water of Baptism.

Now S. Hierom writing to Oceanus, X. Why Water the Matter of Baptism. D.
Hieron. Ep. 85.
shows by many reasons, how suitable it was to the nature of Baptism, that
Water should be made choice of to be the proper Matter thereof. But as to this
Point, the Pastors may teach first of all, that this Sacrament is very
necessary to all without exception, to the attaining Life Everlasting; and
therefore that the Matter of Water, The Reasons The First. The Second.
which can easily be bad any where, and is no where wanting, was most proper:
And then Water very excellently signifies the Effect of Baptism; for as Water
washes away spots and dirt, so also it very well demonstrates the power and
efficacy of Baptism, The third.
by which the spots of sin are done away. To which may be added, That as Water
is very fit to refresh the Body, so by Baptism the Heat of our Lusts in a great
measure is abated. Of the Matter of Baptism, see Conc. Florent. and Trid. Sess.
7. can. 2. and de consecrat. did. 4. Item D: Thom. 3. p. q. 56. art. 5.

But this is to be noted, XI. Why Chrism to be used in Baptism. Amb. l. 1. de
Sacr. c. 2 and Innocent. l. 1. decretal. tit. 1 c. 3.
That tho Simple Water that has no mixture in it, be the proper Matter for this
Sacrament, to wit, whenever there happens a necessity of administering
Baptism; yet by Tradition from the Apostles, it has always bin observed in the
Catholic Church, That Baptism is conferred with solemn Ceremonies, and Holy
Chrism added, whereby it is manifest, that the Effect of Baptism is the better
declared. And the people are to be taught, This or That be true Water, such as
the Perfection of the Sacrament requires, yet this must be held as a certainty,
That the Sacrament of Baptism, can never be made of any other Matter than of
the liquor of Natural Water, upon any account whatsoever.

Now after that One of the two Parts of which Baptism consists, XII. The Form
of Baptism why diligently and frequently to be explained.
that is, the Matter of it has bin expounded: The Pastors shall take the same
diligence and care to explain the Form of it, which is the other part of this
Sacrament, and is very necessary. But in the explanation of this Sacrament,
they must labor with so much the more care and diligence, because the
understanding of so Holy a Mystery does of it self not only exceedingly delight
the Faithful, which delight commonly arises from the understanding of all other
Divine Matters, but it is much to be sought after, because of the daily use and
necessity of it. For seeing that it often happens (as in its proper place will
be said more fully) that Baptism must be ministered by other people, and very
often times by Women: For this Reason, those things that belong to the
Substance of this Sacrament, ought to be known and well understood
promiscuously of all the Faithful.

And therefore in plain and familiar words which all may easily understand the
Pastors shall teach that this is the perfect and absolute Form of Baptism. [I
baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.]
For so our Lord and Savior appointed, XIII. The Form of Baptism instituted and
explained.
when according to S. Matthew, he commanded the Apostles: Mat. 28.19.
Go ye and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. By that word [Baptizing,] the Catholic Church,
which is taught of God, rightly understood, that in the Form of this Sacrament,
the Action of the Minister is to be expressed, which is done indeed, when it is
said, [I baptize thee]. And because, besides the Ministers, it is necessary to
signify both the person of him who is baptized, and the principal Cause which
makes Baptism; therefore the Pronoun [Thee] and the Distinct Names of the
Divine Persons are added, that so the absolute Form of the Sacrament might be
concluded in the words even now mentioned, Joh. 1.33.
I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. For it is not the person of the Son only, of whom S. John writes. This
is he that baptizes. But all the Persons of the Holy Trinity work together at
the Sacrament of Baptism. But that it is said in the Name, and not in the
Names: This plainly shows, That there is but One Nature and Divinity in the
Trinity. For in this place the Name is not referred to the Persons; but
signifies that Divine Substance, Virtue, and Power, which is One and the same
in all the Three Persons. See Aug. cont. Donatist. lib. 6. c. 25. D. Thom. 3.
p. q. 66. Art. 5.

Now in this Form, XIV. The more Essential parts of the Form of Baptism.
which we have showed to be full and perfect; it is to be observed, that there
are some things exceeding necessary, which if they should be omitted, there can
be no Sacrament: and there are other things not so necessary, but that if they
should be omitted, the Sacrament is made notwithstanding, of which kind is the
word [Ego, l.] the virtue whereof is contained in the word. [Baptizo, I
Baptize:] Yea, and in the Greek Churches, changing the order of words, they
used to omit it, because they thought it not fit to make any mention at all of
the Minister. Hence it is that they, used this Form in Baptism: [Let this
Servant of Christ be baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost;] And yet it appears by the Sentence and Decree of the Council
of Florence, That this Sacrament was perfectly administered by them: Since by
those words is declared what belongs to the truth of Baptism: to wit, Washing
or Cleansing, which at that time is verily performed.

But if we may say that once there was a time, XV. Why anciently the Apostles
baptized in Christ's name. Act. 2.38. Act. 8.20.
when the Apostles baptized only in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ: We ought
to be assured that they did this also by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
that in the Infancy of the Church, their preaching in the Name of Jesus Christ
might be the more remarkable; and that his Divine and immense Power might be
the more celebrat'd. And then, if we look more closely into the matter, we may
easily perceive, that there was wanting in that Form, none of those things
which our Savior commanded to be observed. For he that but names [Jesus Christ]
signifies at the same time the Person of the Father also, by whose appointment
he was anointed; and the Holy Ghost, who anointed him.

And yet it may seem doubtful. Whether or no the Apostles did at all baptize
any in this kind of Form, XVI. Not certain that the Apostles baptized Christ's
name. Ambr. l. 1. ^^ S^^^^^. S^^^ct. c. ^. Pasi^. l. 1. de ^p^^. S^^ct. c. 12.
G^l. 3.27.
if we will follow the Opinion of those Holy and Grave Fathers Ambrose and
Basil, who interpret Baptism in the name of Jesus Christ, so, as they say by
those words is signified Baptism, not that which was given of John, but of our
Lord Christ; although the Apostles departed not from that common and usual Form
wherein are express,'d the distinct names of the Three Persons. Now this kind
of speech, S. Paul seems to use in his Epistle to the Galatians, when he says;
As many of you as have bin Baptized in Christ, have put on Christ: To signify
that they were baptized in the Faith of Christ, but yet that they used no other
Form, than that which the same our Lord and Savior cammanded to be observed.

Thus much therefore, XVII. Three manners of Washing.
it will be sufficient to teach the Faithful concerning the Matter and Form
which chiefly belong to the Substance of Baptism. Now because in celebrating
this Sacrament, we ought to observe the right way of Washing, therefore the
Pastors must teach how that Part also ought to be done, and briefly let them
understand, that the Church has bin used to celebrate Baptism, after any one of
these three manners: For those that are baptized, Plunging, Pouring,
Sprinkling. Ephesians 5.26.
are either plunged into the Water, or Water is poured upon them, or they are
sprinkled with Water. Now whichsoever of these three ways is observed, we ought
to believe Baptism to be valid. For Water is used in Baptism, to signify the
Washing of the Soul, which it performs: And therefore the Apostle calls Baptism
a Laver. But he cannot be more properly said to be washed, who is plunged into
Water, which fashion was long observed in the Primitive times of the Church,
Act. 2.41. Greg. l. 1. Regist. Ep. 41.
than He who has water poured on him, which is the manner now adays; or than He
who is sprinkled with Water, as it may be supposed S. Peter did, when in one
day he convert'd and baptized Three Thousand Men. But whether Baptism be
performed with One single Washing, or with a threefold pouring of Water on the
Baptized, is not to be thought of any moment. For that by any of these three
ways Baptism was formerly rightly performed in the Church, and may be so again,
does plainly enough appear from the Epistle of S. Gregory the Great, written to
Leander. Yet the Faithful are to retain that Custom or Rite, which they observe
to be used in their own Church.

But it is fit to give them this warning especially, XVIII. Three things
chiefly to be noted.
that in Baptism not any part of the Body, but the Head, where all both
internal and external Senses have their strength, is to be washed; and that he
that baptizes, ought at the very same time of the Washing with Water, and not
either before or after it, to pronounce the words which are the Form of the
Sacrament.

These things being explained, XIX. When Baptism was instituted and commanded.
it will be convenient to teach the Faithful, and to put them in mind that
Baptism, as all the other Sacraments were, was instituted by Christ our Lord.
This therefore the Pastors shall frequently teach and explain. That there are
Two different Times of Baptism to be noted, The One, when our Savior instituted
it: The other when the receiving of it became a settled Law and Obligation. As
for the First, It is plain that this Sacrament was then Instituted of our Lord,
when himself being baptized of John, gave Power of Sanctifying to the Water.
For S. Gregory Nazianzen and S. Austin testify. That at that time, Greg. Orat.
in Not. Salv. ci ca sinem Aug. Sermon. 29, 36, and 37. de Temp. Matt. 3.26. Marc.
1.10. Luc 3.21.
the virtue of begetting in us the Spiritual Life, was bestowed on Water. And
in another place he writes; From the time that Christ was plunged in Water,
Water washes away all sins. And in another place: "The Lord is baptized, not as
wanting to be cleans'd, but by the Touch of his pure Body, cleansing the
Waters, that they may have power of cleansing. And to this purpose, This may
well serve for an argument that the most Holy Trinity, in whose name Baptism is
performed, have manifested their divine presence at it: For then was heard the
Voice of the Father, then was present the person of the Son, and then descended
the Holy Ghost in likeness of a Dove; besides all This, the Heavens were
opened, whither by Baptism we also may now ascend.

But if any one desire to know, XX. The Waters sanctified by the touch of
Christ's Body
by what means so great and so divine a virtue was bestowed on the Waters by
our Lord. This indeed exceeds Man's understanding; yet this we understand well
enough, that when our Lord received Baptism, the Water was consecrated to the
saving use of Baptism, by the Touch of his most Holy and Pure Body; yet so, as
that tho this Sacrament were instituted before the Passion, yet it must be
believed, that of the Passion, which was as the End of all Christ's Actions, it
took its virtue and Efficacy. See Hieron. in com. in 3. cap. Mat. Aug. Sermon 36.
de Temp.

And now of the Other, XXI. When Baptism began to be of Obligation. Mar. 16 10.
Matt. 28.19.
to wit, at what time, the Law of Baptism began to be obligatory, there can be
no doubt. For the Holy Fathers agree, That after the Resurrection of our Lord,
when he commanded his Apostles, saying, Go ye and teach all Nations, baptizing
them it the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; from
that time forward all Men that were to attain everlasting Salvation, began to
be obliged by the Law of Baptism. And this is gathered from the authority of
the Prince of Apostles, when he says, 1 Pet. 1.3^
He has begotten us again to a lively Hope, through the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the Dead. As also we may learn from that place of S. Paul, Ephesians.
5.2^.
He gave himself for her, that he might sanctify her, (he speaks of the
Church) cleansing her with the laver of Water in the Word. Both which places
seem to refer the Obligation of Baptism to the time immediately following our
Lords Death. So that it can by no means be doubted, that those words of our
Savior, Joh. 3.5.
Except a Man be born again of Water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God, have relation to the time after his Passion. If therefore the
Pastors diligently handle these matters, there can be no doubt, but that the
Faithful will come to understand, and with truly devout Souls, will reverence
the excellent dignity of this Sacrament; and especially when they consider that
those excellent and rich Gifts, which, when Christ was baptiz d, were
manifested by the signification of Miracles, to be given and bestowed by the
secret influence of the Holy Ghost upon all those that are baptized. For as if
our eyes were opened, as Elisha's servants were, that we could but be able to
behold those heavenly things, 4 Reg. 6.17.
there can no body be thought to be so void of common sense, as not to be
carried into the greatest Admiration of the mysteries of Baptism: Why then
should we not think it will be so, when the Pastors shall have laid open the
Riches of this Sacrament in such sort, that tho the Faithful cannot behold them
with their bodily Eyes, yet with the Eye and sharpness of their Soul,
illuminated with the splendour of Faith they may be able to contemplate them?

And now it will seem to be not only profitable, but necessary also to show by
whom this Sacrament is to be ministered, XXII. The Ministers of this Sacrament
of three Ranks.
both that they to whom chiefly this Office is committed, may labor to
discharge it holily and devoutly, and also that none stretching beyond their
own limits, might rashly seiz upon another possession, or proudly enter upon
another Office, 1 Cor. 15.
seeing the Apostle admonishes to keep a due Order in all things. The Faithful
therefore may be taught, That there are three degrees of those who may minister
Baptism: And in the first place are to be reckoned the Bishops and Priests, to
whom it is given, by Right of their Office, and not by any extraordinary
dispensation or power, to exercise this Function. For to Them in the Apostles
the Lord gave commandment, Matt. 28.19. Isi^ l. 2. de Offic. Eccles: c. 4.
saying, Go ye and Baptize: Tho the Bishops, that they might not be forced to
leave the more weighty charge of instructing the people, are used to leave the
Ministry of Baptism to the Priests. And that the Priests have in themselves a
Right to exercise this Function, so that even in presence of the Bishop, they
may minister Baptism, is manifest both by the practice of the Church, and the
Doctrine of the Fathers: For since they are instituted to consecrate the
Eucharist, which is the Sacrament of Peace and Unity; it is but requisite that
they should have power of administering all those things by which necessarily
any one may be made partaker of that Peace and Unity. And if at any time the
Fathers have said, That the Power of Baptizing has not bin permitted to the
Priests, but by leave of the Bishop, it seems that it should be meant of that
Baptism only, which was accustomed to be ministered, with great and solemn
Ceremony on some certain days of the year. In the next rank of Ministers are
the Deacons. to whom, The Deacons by concession Distinct 93. c. 13. Any other
person in necessity.
without the consent of the Bishop or Priest, it was not allowed to minister
this Sacrament, as is witnessed by many Decrees of the Holy Fathers. The lowest
rank, is of those who in a forcible necessity, may baptize, but without the use
of the solemn Ceremonies; of this sort are all persons, yea even of the
Lay People, whether Men or Women, what Sect soever they profess; for this power
is permitted even to Jews, Infidels and Heretics, when necessity compels;
provided that in so doing they intend to do what the Catholic Church does in
that kind of administration. These things both many Decrees of the ancient
Fathers and Councils have confirmed, and there is also an Anathema decreed by
the Holy Council of Trent against those who presume to say, That Baptism, tho
given by Heretics, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, with an intention of doing what the Church does, is not true Baptism.
Trid. Sess. 7. Can de consec. did. 4. c. 24. Aug. l. 7. cont. Donatist c. 53.
and Ibid. l. 3. c. 10. and. l. 2. cont. Parmen. and Conc. Later. c. 1. and
Conc. Florent. in Decret. Eugenii.

Wherein verily we may admire the exceeding Goodness and Wisdom of our Lord;
XXIII. Why lawful for all to Baptize.
for seeing this Sacrament must necessarily be received of all, as he appointed
Water to be the Matter thereof, than which nothing can be more common: so also
would he have no one excluded from the Administration thereof, although, as was
said before, it be not lawful for all to use the solemn Ceremonies; not as tho
the Rites or Ceremonies are of more Dignity, but that they are of less
necessity than the Sacrament.

Nor may the Faithful suppose that this Office is permitted promiscuously to
all, in such a manner, as that it is not very fit to appoint some Order and
Degree of Ministers: For if Men be present, a Woman ought not; if a Clerk be
present, a a Layman ought not; if a Priest be present, a Clerk ought not to
take upon himself the administration of Baptism. Although Midwives which have bin
used to baptize, are not to be disallowed, tho sometimes in the presence of a
Man, who is unskilful in performing this Sacrament, which otherwise seems more
properly to be the office of a Man, they should perform it.

To these Ministers, who, as has bin already said, The Ancient use, various
Names, and necessity of Godfathers. Tertul. lib de Baptis. c. 18. and de
Coron. milit. c. 3.
do administer Baptism, may be added another sort of Ministers, who by the most
ancient practice of the Church have bin wont to be made use of at the sacred
and saving celebration of Baptism. These we now call Godfathers and
Godmothers, tho formerly they were commonly called by Sacred Writers
Undertakers, Answerers, Sureties. Concerning the reason of whom, because the
Office belongs to all Lay People in common, the Pastors shall exactly teach,
that the Faithful may understand what things are most necessary for the right
discharging thereof. And first he must show what the cause is, why at Baptism,
besides those that Minister the Sacrament, there are also required Godfathers
and Vndertaters, which indeed will appear to all to be exceedingly well done,
if they consider that Baptism is a Spiritual Regeneration or New Birth, 1 Pet.
2.2.
by which we are born the Children of God; for of this New Birth speaks S.
Peter, Even as Newborn Infants, desire you the reasonable milk without
hypocrisy. As therefore when any one is born into the world, he presently
wants a Nurse and a Schoolmaster, by whose assitance and labor he is educated
and instructed in good learning and liberal Arts; so also is it necessary, that
those who at the Font of Baptism begin to live a Spiritual Life, should be
committed to the trust and prudence of some one, of whom they may learn the
precepts of Christian Religlon, and be taught the whole Practice of Piety, and
so by little and little to grow to Manhood in Christ, till at last, by God's
help they come to be perfect Men: Especially seeing the Pastors, who have the
public Cure and Charge of their Parishes, can scarcely have so much spare time,
as to undertake that private care of instructing Children in the Faith. Of this
most anocient practice, S. Dionis. de Eccl s. Hier. c 7. part. 3.
we have the clear testimony of S. Dennys. It was, says he, the Invention and
determination of our Divine Captains and Leaders (for so he calls the Apostles)
to receive Infants according to that Holy Manner, and as the natural Parents of
a Child, deliver him to one learned in Divine Matters, as to a Schoolmaster,
under whom, as under a Divine Father, and undertaker of his Holy Salvation, the
Child might lead the rest of his life. The same Sentence does the Testimony of
Higinius confirm. As may be seen de Consec. did. 5. c. 100. and Leapp. ibid.
cap. 181. and Conc. Mogunt. ibid. c. 101 and 30. q. 1.

Wherefore it has bin very wisely decreed by Holy Church, XXVI. What kind, and
between whom Affinity is contracted in Baptism.
that not only be that Baptizes is affianc'd with him that is baptized by him,
but the Godfather and God-mother are also affianc'd with the God-child, and
with his true Parents: So that amongst all these there can be no lawful
Marriage, and if they should be married, such marriage becomes void.

Moreover the Faithful must be taught what the Duty of Godfathers is. For this
Office is so carelessly undertaken, that there is only the Name of this Office
remaining; but that there is any thing Holy contained in it, Men seem not to
have the least apprehension. This thing therefore in general let all
Godfathers always consider, That they are strictly obliged always to account
those who are committed to them as their Spiritual Children, and to take very
great care of them, concerning those things which belong to the institution of
a Christian Life; that through all the course of their life they behave
themselves in such a manner, and be such kind of persons as they in most solemn
manner promised, that they should be. Let us hear what S. Dennys, writes
concerning this matter, expressing the words of a Godfather, I promise to
train up this Child, when he shall come to understanding of sacred things, with
my careful exhortations, that he may renounce all things contrary to his
profession, and that he may profess and perform those divine things which he
promised. And S. Austin, D. Aug. ser. 163. de t^m^. and ser. 215.
You who undertake for others in Baptism, as well Men, as Women, I admonish
before all things to consider, that you stand as Sureties before God, for those
whom you were pleased to undertake for, at the Holy Font. And indeed it very
much becomes him who undertakes any Office, never to grow slack or weary in the
diligent discharge of it, and he who has professed himself to be another Guide
and Teacher ought not to suffer him to be destitute, whom he has once received
into his charge and protection, while he sees him stand in need of his help and
defense. Now those things which Spiritual Children are to be taught, Ser. 165.
de t^mp. de conec. did. 4. c. 120.
S. Austin has comprehended in few words, speaking of this very Office of
Godfathers; for, says he, They ought to admonish them to keep Chastity, to
love Justice, to preserve Charity; and above all things they ought to teach
them the Creed, and the Lords Prayer, as also the Decalogue or ten
Commandments, and those things which are the first Rudiments of Christian
Religion.

Which things being so; XXVIII. Who not to be taken as Godfathers
we may easily perceive, to what sort of Men the administration of this Holy
Tuition is not to be committed, to wit, to them who either will not discharge
it faithfully, or cannot perform it wisely and diligently. Wherefore besides
the Natural Parents, who may not undertake this charge, that thereby it might
appear, how far this Spiritual Education is different from the Carnal: First of
all, Heretics, Jews and Insidels are altogether to be prohibited from this
Office, because they are always contriving and studying to blacken the truth of
our Faith with their Lies, and to overthrow all Christian Piety.

It has bin decreed by the Council of Trent, XXIX. how many Godfathers to be
taken.
That there shall not be many Godfathers to one person baptized, but one only,
either Godfather or God-mother, or at most, one Godfather, and one Godmother.
Both because the order of teaching and instructing might be disturbed, or
hindered by a multitude of Masters; and also because it was necessary to
provide that such kind of Affinities might not be made amongst so very many
which might streighten the society of people, that they cannot lawfully enter
into Wedlock on^ with another.

Now if the knowledge of those things which have bin already explained, XXX. The
Law of receiving Baptism laid upon all by the Lord.
is to be esteemed so very profitable to the Faithful: Then surely there can
nothing seem more necessary, than to be taught that the Law and necessity of
Baptism was prescribed by our Lord himself to all Men; so that unless by the
Grace of Baptism they are born again to Godward, they are begotten of their
parents, whether Faithful or Infidel it is no matter, to eternal misery and
Destruction. The Pastors therefore ought often to explain what is read in the
Gospel: Except a Man be born again of Water, and the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God. Hereof see Clem. Epist. 4. in med. Aug. in Joan.
tract. 13. and de Eccles. dogm. c. 24. Amb. de iis qui Mist. initiantur, c. 4.
Conc. Lateran. c. 1. Trid. Sess. 7. can. 51.

Which Law or Necessity that it is not meant of those only who are of ripe age,
but of Children and Infants also, and that the Church has received this by
Apostolical Tradition, the common consent and Authority of the Fathers
confirms. Besides, it must needs be believed, That Christ our Lord would not
deny the Sacrament of Baptism and Grace to Infants, of whom he said; Matt.
19.14. Mar. 10.10.
Suffer ye, and forbid not the little Children to come to me: For of such is
the Kingdom of Heaven, whom he embraced laid his Hands upon them, and blessed
them. And then when we read, Thirdly.
that a whole Family was baptized of Paul; It sufficiently appears that
Children also, who were in the number of them, were baptized. And then,
Circumcision which was a Figure of Baptism, much commends this custom. For
there is no body ignorant that Children were used to be circumcised on the
eighth Day. Now if the Circumcision made with Hands in taking away the Body of
Flesh could profit them, it is evident then that Baptism, which is the
circumcision of Christ, not made with Hands, must needs profit them. Lastly,
Fifthly. Romans 5.17.
as the Apostle teaches: If by the sin of One, Death reigned through One, much
more they that receive an abundance of Grace, and of the gift of Righteousness,
shall reign in life, through One, even Jesus Christ. Since therefore by the sin
of Adam, Children by their very birth, contract hurt, much more by Christ our
Lord may they obtain Grace and Righteousness to reign in life, which verily
without Baptism can by no means come to pass. Conc. Trid. Sess. 5. decret. de
peccat. origin. and Sess. 7. de Baptis. c. 12, 13, and 14. Dionys. de Eccles.
Hier. c. 7. Cypria. Ep. 59. Aug. Ep. 28. and lib. 1. de peccat. merit. c. 23.
Chrysostom. Hom. de Adam and Eva. Council. Mil. vit. c. 2. and de consec. did. 4.
passim.

Wherefore the Pastors shall teach, XXXII. How Children baptized are to be
educated.
That by all means Infants are to be baptized, and then that by little and
little their tender age is to be instructed to true Devotion by the Precepts of
Christian Religion: For as it is excellently said of the Wiseman; Train up a
Youth in the way he should go, and when he grows old, he will not depart from
it.

Nor is it to be doubted, XXXIII. After what manner Infants baptized receive
Faith. Epist. 23. ad Bon.
but, when they are baptized, they receive the Sacraments of Faith: Not that
they believe with the assent of their mind; but because they are established in
the Faith of their Parents, if their Parents were Faithful, but if not, (to use
S. Austin's words) they are armed with the Faith of the whole company or the
Saints. For we rightly confess that they are offered in Baptism by all those
Saints, who were pleased to offer them, and by whose charity they are joined to
the communion of the Holy Ghost.

And the Faithful are earnestly to be admonished to take care that their
Children be brought to the Church so soon as may be without danger, XXXIV.
Infants to be baptized as soon as may be.
to be baptized with the Solemn Ceremonies. For since there is no other way
left for Infants to attain Salvation, unless they are baptized: We may easily
perceive how great a guilt they bring upon themselves, who suller them to want
the Grace of that Sacrament, longer than necessity requires; especially since
by reason of the weakness and tenderness of their age, they are in continual
danger of their life. Aug. lib. 3. de Orig. animae. c. 9. and lib. 1. de
peccat. merit. c. 2. and Epist. 28.

But then the custom of the primitive Church declares that there is a different
reason for those who are of ripe Years, XXXV. Adult persons to be invited and
prepared for Baptism.
and have the perfect use of Reason to wit, who are born of Infidel Parents;
for the Christian Faith is offered them, and with all earnestness they are to
be advised persuaded and invited to embrace it: And if they are converted to
our Lord God, then they must be admonished that they defer not the Sacrament of
Baptism beyond the time prescribed by the Church: For seeing it is written:
First.
Delay not to be converted to the Lord, and put not off froam day to day; they
are to be taught that perfect conversion is placed in the new Birth by Baptism:
Secondly.
And besides, by how much the later they come to Baptism, by so much the longer
must they want the grace and use of the other Sacraments of Christian Religion
because none can be admitted to them without Baptism. And then, Thirdly.
that they are also deprived of that excellent benefit we receive by Baptism;
for the Water of Baptism not only washes off and takes away every spot or
blemish of all those sins, which before were commiteed: But it adorns us with
Divine Grace; by the aid and assistance whereof. we can also avoid sin for the
future, and secure righteousnefss and innocence, in which thing consists the
sum of the Christian Life, as all may easily perceive. Tertul lib. de Poenit.
c. 6. and de praescript. c. 41. Cypr. Epist. 13. de consecrat. did. 4 c. 64.
and 65. Aug. lib de fide and operib. c. 9.

But tho these things are so, yet the Church has not bin used presently or
hastily to bestow this Sacrament of Baptism upon this sort of Men, XXXVI. Why
the Church is wont to defer the Baptism of those of ripe Age. The First Reason.
but has decreed that it should be deferred for a certan time. For this delay
has not joined with it the same danger, as was noted before to impend over
Infants; because the purpose and resolution, that they, who are endu'd with the
use of Reason, have of receiving Baptism, and their Penance for their sorepast
evil life, will be available for Grace and Righteousness to them, if any
sudden accident should happen to hinder them from being Baptized. But on the
contrary, The Second. The First Advantage.
this delay seems to be somewhat advantageous. For first, because the Church
ought to be very provident that none come to this Sacrament through Hypocrisy
and Dissimulation, the Dispositions of those who desire Baptism, will be more
thoroughly tried and discovered. For which cause we find it decreed by ancient
Councils, that those Jews who come to the Catholic Faith, before Baptism was
administr'd to them, were to be for some Months amongst the Catechumens; The
Second.
and then, thereby they are more perfectly instructed in the Doctrine of that
Faith, which they ought to profess, The Third.
and in the Rules of Christian Life. Besides, there is a greater and more
religious veneration given to the Sacrament, if with solemn Ceremony they
receive Baptism only on the appointed days of Easter and Whitsuntide.

But notwithstanding the Time of Baptism, XXXVII. When Baptism of the Adult is
to be deferred. Act. 8.38.10.48.
sometimes it is not to be deferred for some just and necessary cause; as when
there seems to be a present danger of Life, and especially if the persons to be
baptized do fully understand the Mysteries of Faith, which it is manifest that
Philip and the Prince of Apostles did, when the One baptized Queen Candace's
Eunuch; and the other, Cornelius, and that without delay, and as soon as ever
they profefs'd that they embraced the Faith.

Furthermore, XXXVIII. They who are baptized ought to desire Baptism.
it must be taught and, explained to the people, how they that are to be
baptized, ought to be affected. First of all therefore, they must of necessity
be willing and resolved to receive Baptism. For since every one in Baptism dies
to sin, and undertakes to lead a new way and manner of Life; it is but just,
not to grant Baptism to any one that is unwilling to receive it, or that
refuses it, but to them only who cheerfully and freely receive it. Wherefore by
Holy Tradition it has bin received, Aug. de poen. Medi^. c. 2. D. Thom. 2. p.
q. 68. sect. 7.
and always observed, Not to administer Baptism to any, before he be asked
whether he wills it. Nay even in Children and Infants it must be supposed that
that Will is not wanting: Since the Will of the Church, which answers for them,
is not obscure.

Besides Madmen and Furious, XXXIX. Wheter Mad persons ought to be baptized,
and when, D. Thom. 3.3 p. q. 86. art. 12.
who being sometimes in their Wits, and then falling again into Madness, have
at that time no Will to receive Baptism, are not to be baptized, unless there
be danger of Life. But when they are in such danger of Life, if before they
began to fall mad, they gave any Tokens of their Will to be baptized, they are
to be baptized: not, we must abstain from administering it to such. The same
thing ought to be judged of them that sleep. But if they never were in a sound
mind, so that they had no use of Reason, they are to be baptized in the Faith
of the Church, no otherwise than Children are, who want reason, as both the
Authority and Practice of the Church sufficiently declare.

But besides the Will of Baptism, XL. Three things required in Adult persons to
be baptized. Faith, Penance, and a Purpose to forsake sin. Marc. 16.19
Faith also is very necessary to attain the Grace of that Sacrament, for the
same reason as was said concerning the Will. For our Lord and Savior has
taught, He that believes and is baptized shall be saved. And then there is need
that every one repent of his Sins, and of his ill-spent life, and resolve for
the future to abstain from all sin: For otherwise he that desires Baptism so,
as that he will not amend his custom of sinning, is by all means to be
rejected, for there is nothing so contrary to the Grace and Virtue of Baptism,
as the Mind and Purpose of those is, who never put to themselves an end of
sinning. Seeing therefore that Baptism is to be desired for this end, that we
might put on Christ, and be joined with him; it is plainly manifest, that he is
deservedly to be rejected from Holy Baptism, who purposes to persevere in sin
and Vice: especially because none of all those things which belong to Christ
and his Church are to be undertaken in vain. And we know well enough, if we
consider the Grace of Righteousness and Salvation, that Baptism will be in vain
to him, who purposes to live according to the Flesh, Romans 8.1.
and not according to the Spirit: Although, as to the Sacrament it self, without
all doubt he does receive the perfect Reason thereof, only if so be, when he is
rightly baptized, he purposes to receive what by Holy Church is administr'd.
Wherefore the Prince of Apostles answered to that great multitude, which as the
Scripture says, being pricked at the Heart, Act. 2.50.
asked of him and the rest of the Apostles, what they should do: Do Penance,
says he, and be baptized every one of you. And in another place, Do Penance and
be converted, that your sins may be blotted out. And S. Paul writing to the
Romans, plainly shows him, who is baptiz d, that by all means he ought to dye
to sin; and therefore he warns us not to yield our members as weapons of
iniquity to sin, but to yield our selves to God, as those that are risen from
the Dead.

Now if the Faithful often meditate on these things, XLI. How profitable this
Doctrine of Baptism is
they will be compelled earnestly to admire that infinite goodness of God, who
being led by his own mercy only, has bestowed so singular and so divine a
benefit upon them who deserved no such matter: And then, when they put before
their Eyes, how free their life ought to be from every crime, who are adorned
with so great a gift: They will easily understand that this is first of all
required of Christians, to study to lead every day of their Life so holily and
religiously, as if that very day they had received the Sacrament and grace of
Baptism. Although to inflame their Souls with the study of true Piety, there can
be nothing more profitable, than for the Pastors diligently to explain what the
Effects of Baptism are.

Of these things therefore because it must often be treated, XLII. The Effects
of Baptism. The fi st, Rem^ssion of sins.
that the Faithful may the better perceive that they are placed in the highest
degree of dignity, and never suffer themselves at any time to be cast down
thence by any wiles or violence of the adversary: it is necessary to teach them
this thing first of all, that sin, whether contracted by birth from our
first-parents, or committed of our selves, (although it is so necessary, that it
seems not able to be imagined) by the admirable virtue of this Sacrament is
remitted and pardoned. This was long before prophesi'd by Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 36.25
by whom our Lord God says thus: I will pour clean Water upon you, and ye shall
be cleans'd from all your filthithiness. And the Apostle to the Corithians,
after a long reckoning up of sins, 1 Cor. 6.11.
subjoined: And these things ye were, but ye are Washed, but ye are sanctified.
And it is manifest that this Docttine has bin always delivered by the Catholic
Church. For S. Austin in his Book which he wrote of the Baptism of Infants,
testifies thus: Lib. 1 de peccat met. and remiss. c 15 Ephesians. 85 ante medium
Sess. 5. can. 5.
By carnal generation we contract only original sin, but by regeneration of the
Spirit there is Forgiveness, not only of orginal, but also of wilful sins. And
S. Hierom to Oceanus: All sins, says he, in Baptism are forgiven. And that no
one may doubt any more of this matter, after the Definition of other Councils,
the Council of Trent has declared the same thing, when she decreed an Anathema
against those who presumed to think otherwise, or who doubted not to assert,
That tho in Baptism, sin were forgiven, yet it is not wholly taken away or
pulled up by the Roots, but rac'd or scarr'd in a manner, so that the roots of
sin yet remain fastened in the Soul. For, to use the words of the same Holy
Synod: God hates nothing in the Regenerate, because there is no condemnation to
those who are truly buried with Christ by Baptism into death, who walk not
according to the Flesh; But putting off the Old man, and putting on the New,
which is created according to God, they are made innocent, spotless, pure,
without hurt, and loved of God. Of this effect of Baptism, See Aug. lib. 1.
contra duas Epist. Pelag, c. 13. and lib 3. c. 5, in Ench. c. 64. and lib. 1.
de nupt. and concupisc. c. 25. Item. Greg. lib. 9. Epist. 39. Conc. Vien. and
Florent. in Matter. de Sacram.

It most be confessed indeed, XLIII. Concupiscence remaining in those that are
baptized is not sin. Aug^st.
as in the same place by authority of That Holy Synod has bin decreed, that
even in those that are baptized there does remain Concupiscence, or a kind of
scum* But that has not truly the Reason or Nature of sin: For according to S.
Austin, In little Children baptized, the guilt of Concupiscence is absolved,
tho the Concupiscence it self remain till Death: And elsewhere he testifies, The
Guilt of Concupiscence in Baptism is loosed, but the Infirmity remains. For
Concupiscence which proceeds of sin, is nothing else, but an Appetite of the
mind by its own nature repugnant to Reason: Which motion notwithstanding, if it
have not the Consent of the Will, or Negligence joined with it, is far from the
true nature of sin. But when S. Paul says, I had not known Concupiscence to be
sin, Romans 7.7.
if the Law had not said, Thou shall not covet: By these words he means, not
the very Concupiscence it self, but the Corruption of the Will. The same
Doctrine S. Gregory taught, writing thus: Lib 9 Regist Epist 39.
If there be any, who say that in Baptism sin is forgiven only superficially,
or as to the outward commission of it, what can be spoken more like an Infidel
than this? since by the Sacrament of Faith, the Soul is absolved from sin, even
to the very Roots thereof: And to prove this he uses the testimony of our
Savior, when in S. John he says, Joh. 13.10.
He that is washed needs not, but to wash his Feet, but is clean throughout.

Now if any one would see an express Figure and resemblance of this matter,
XLIV. A Figure of Bapti m. 4 Reg. 9.14.
let him contemplate the History of Naaman the Syrian's Leprosy, who when he
had washed himself seven times in the Water of Jordan, he was so cleans'd from
his Leprosy, as the Scripture witnesses, That his Flesh became like the Flesh
of a little Child. Wherefore the proper Effect of Baptism, is the Forgiveness
of all sins, whether contracted by Original Corruption, or by our own Fault:
For which cause it was instituted by our Lord and Savior, as to omit other
Testimonies, the Prince of Apostles showed in most clear words, Act. 2.38.
when he said, Repent, and let every one of you be baptized in the name of
Jesus Christ, for the r^mission of sins. Of concupiscence remaining in those
that are baptized, See Aug. lib. 1. de peccat. merit. and remiss. c. 39. Item
lib. 1. cont. duas Epist. Pelag. c. 13. l. 3. c. 3. in medio. and lib. 1. de
nupt. and concupisc, c. 23. and 25. Item lib. 6. cont. Julian. q. 5. and de
verb. Apost. Sermon 6.

But now in Baptism not only sins are remitted; XLV. The Second effect of
Baptism, The remission of the Punishment due to sin. Romans 9.3.
but also all the Punishments of sins and wickedness are graciously pardoned of
God. For tho it be common to all the Sacraments, that by them is communicated
the virtue of Christ our Lords. Passion; yet of Baptism only is it said by the
Apostle, that through it we dye, and are buried together with Christ. Whence
Holy Church always understood, that without exceeding great wrong to this
Sacrament it could not be, that those Offices of Piety or Devotion, which by a
usu^^ name the Fathers called works of Satisfaction, could be enjoined to him
that was to be cleans'd by this Sacrament. That the Punishments due to sin are
remitted in Baptism, See Ambros. in cap. 11. ad Romans Aug. lib. 1. de nupt. and
concupisc. c. 33. and in Ench. cap. 4. D. Thom. 3. Art. p. q. 69. art. 2. unde
nec nulla est imponenda penitentia, Greg. lib. 7 regist. Epist. 24. and habetur
de consecrat. did. 4. cap. Ne quod absit. D. Thom. p. q. 68. ar. 5.

Nor are the things which we here teach contrary to the practice or custom of
the Ancient Church, XLVI. Works of Penance before Baptism, to what purpose.
which anciently required the Jews, when they were to be baptiz d, to fast
forty days together. For that was not ordained for satisfaction: For those that
received Baptism, were by that means admonished that for the more reverencing
of the Dignity of that Sacrament, they should for some time, without
intermission give themselves to Fasting and Prayer.

But tho we ought to be assured that in Baptism the Punishment of Sin is
pardoned, XLVII. What Punishments are not remitted in Baptism.
yet no one is freed from that kind of punishment which is deserved of the
Civil Judgment for any grievous Crime: So as that he that deserves to dye
should be freed by baptism from the punishment appointed by the Laws. Religion
and Piety of those Princes is highly to be commended, who, that the Glory of
God in his Sacraments might be made the more illustrious, do at the Fonts remit
and pardon that punishment also. Besides, Baptism procures us after the stage
of this life, a freedom and discharge from all those punishments which follow
Original Sin, for by merit of our Lord's Death it is, that we obtain these
things. But, as was said before, Romans 5.6.
by Baptism we dye with him. For if, as the Apostle says, we are planted
together with him in the likeness of his Death, we shall be also in the
likeness of his Resurrection.

But if any one ask, XLVIII. Why after Baptism we are not freed from all Misery
of Life.
why immediately after Baptism, and even in this mortal life we are not freed
from these inconveniences, and are not carried by virtue of this Sacred Washing
into that perfect state of life, in which Adam, the first Father of Mankind was
placed before he sinned; we must answer, that this is thus done for Two reasons
especially.

The First of which is, The First Reason.
That we who by Baptism are knit to the Body of Christ and are made his
Members, might not receive greater dignity than our Head. Since therefore
Christ our Lord, tho from his first birth, he had the Fullness of Grace and
Truth, yet he laid not down the Frailty of Humane Nature, which he took, before
he had endured the torments of his Passion and Death it self, and then he rose
to the Glory of Life Everlasting: who can wonder, when he sees the Faithful,
who have already by Baptism got the grace of the righteousness of Heaven, to be
notwithstanding, yet clothed with weak decaying Bodies, that afterward having
gone through many labors for Christ's sake, and last of all even through Death
it self, they may be called again to life, and be found worthy to enjoy an
everlasting Age with Christ?

Another cause why after Baptism there remain in us the infirmity of the Body,
The Second Reason.
Diseases, sense of Grief and the motions of Concupiscence, is This, to wit,
that we may account them as the Husbandry and Matter whereupon our virtues are
to exercise themselves, whence we may get a more plentiful Harvest, and larger
Rewards: For when with a patient mind we endure all the inconveniences of this
life, and by the Divine Assistance, bring all the evil affections of our Hearts
under the government of Reason, we ought assuredly to hope, that the time will
come, 1 Timothy 4.7.
when if with the Apostle, We have fought the good fight, and finished the
course, and kept the faith, the Lord, the righteous judge in that day will give
us also the crown of righteousness which is laid up for us. And thus the Lord
seemed to do also with the children of Israel, whom tho be delivered from the
bondage of the Egyptians, and drowned Pharaoh, A Figure.
and his armies in the Sea, yet he did not immediately bring them into that
blessed Land of Promise ^ but first exercised them with many and various
fortunes, and then when he put them into the possession of the Promised Land,
he put the other Inhabitants out of the possessions of their Fathers; and some
other Nations, which they could not destroy, were left remaining, that God's
people might never want occasion of exercising their Warlike Virtue and Courage.

To these may added, The Third Reason.
that if through Baptism, besidse those heavenly gifts wherewith the Soul is
adorned, there were given Bodily endowments also, it might well be suspected,
that many would come to Baptism, seeking rather the advantages of This Life,
than the Glory which is to be hoped for in the Future. Whenas yet what is seen,
is not false and uncertain; 2 Cor. 4.
but those good things, which a Christian ought always to propose to himself,
and, which are not seen, are true and eternal.

But yet in the mean time the condition of this Life which is full of Miseries,
XLIX. Christians are not without comfort when they suffer.
wants not its pleasures and joys. For what can be more pleasant or desirable
to us, who now by Baptism are grafted into Christ as branches, than to follow
him our Captain with the Cross on our Shoulders, and not to be tired by any
labors, nor hindered by any dangers, so as not to press forward with all
diligence to the reward of the high calling of God; Some to receive of the Lord
the Laurel of Virginity, others the Crown of Teaching and Preaching, others the
Palm of Martyrdom, and others the other Ornaments of their Virtues? Which
excellent Badges of Renown and Tokens of Honor, would not be given to any,
unless first we exercised our selves in the Stage of this troublesome Life, and
stoutly kept our ground in the Battle.

But to return to the Effects of Baptism: I. The Third Effect of Baptism,
Infusion of Grace.
It must be explained, that by virtue of this Sacrament, we are not only
delivered from those evils which are truly said to be the greatest of all, but
also We are enriched with the best and most excellent endowments. For our Souls
are filled with Divine Grace, whereby being made just and the children of God,
Mar. 16.17. Ephesians. 5.26. Sess. 6. c. 7. de justify.
we are trained up to be heirs of eternal Salvation also. For, as it is
written, he that believes and is Baptized, shall be saved; and the Apostle
testifies, The Church is cleans'd by the Laver of Water in the Word. But Grace,
as the Council of Trent has decreed to be believed of all under pain of an
Anathema, is not only that by which we have Remission of Sins; but it is a
Divine Quality inherent in tho Soul, and as it were a kind of Splendour and
Light, which wipes away all the Stains and Spots of our Souls, and makes our
Souls more beautiful and glorious; and this is plainly gathered from Holy
Scripture, when it says, that Grace is poured out, and it is used to call that
Grace the Pledge of the Holy Ghost.

And to This is added a most noble Train of all Virtues, LI. The fourth Effect
of Baptism, Infusion of Virtues. Tit. 3. D. Aug. 23.
which, together with Grace is poured of God into the Soul: Wherefore when the
Apostle to Timothy says, He has saved us by the Laver of Regeneration and
Renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he has poured abundantly upon us, through
Jesus Christ our Savior. S. Austin expounds those words, Abundantly poured, to
wit, says he, For the Remission of Sins and for an abundance of Virtues. Of
this Effect of Baptism see Chrysostom. hom. ad Neoph. and Baptiz. Damasc. lib. 2.
de fide Orthod. cap. 36. Lactant. lib. 3. Divin. Instit. c. 25. Aug. Epist. 23.
ad Bonifac. item. l. 1. de peccat. meritis and remiss. cap. 29. Prosp. l. 1. de
vocation. gent. cap. 9.

And then by Baptism we are joined and knit to Christ as Members to the Head.
As therefore from the Head flows Virtue and Spirit, LII. The fifth Effect,
Connection to Christ our Head.
whereby all the several parts of the Body are fitly moved to perform their
proper functions; so also of the Fullness of Christ our Lord is shed, upon all
those who are justified, Divine Grace and Virtue, which renders us fit and
ready for all Offices of Christian Piety. That by Baptism we are knit to Christ
as Members to the Head, See Aug. Ep. 23. item. l. 1. de peccat. meritis and
remiss. c. 16. Prosp. de vocat. Gent. lib. 1. c. 9. Bernard. Sermon. 1. in Coena
Dom. D. Thom. 3. p. 7.69. art. 5.

Nor ought it to seem strange to any, LIII. Whence the Difficulty of doing
well, even in those that are Baptized.
if, tho thus we are furnished and adorned with plenty of virtues, yet we find
a great deal of difficulty and pains in the very beginning, or at least before
the completing of pious and honest actions. For it so happens, for this
reason, not as though those virtues from which those pious actions spring, are
not given us of the Divine Bounty; but because after Baptism there remains a
sharp struggling of the carnal Desire against the Spirit: in which contest
notwithstanding it would ill become a Christian either to faint or grow
cowardly: Phil. 4.8.
Since being encouraged with the goodness of God, we ought to strengthen our
selves with an assured Hope, that time will be, when by daily use and exercise
of living well, 2 Cor. 3.11.
Whatsoever things are comely, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things
are holy, all these will seem easy and pleasant. These things let us willingly
consider, these things let us cheerfully, perform, that the God of Peace may be
with us.

Besides, LIVE. The sixth Effect of Baptism, A Character.
by Baptism we are signed with a Character which can never be blotted out of
our Soul: of which there is no need to speak more in this place, seeing any one
may transfer hither matter enough pertinent to this point, from what has bin
spoken before, when we treated of the Sacraments in general, See Aug. lib. 6.
contra Donatist. c. 1. and in Ep. Joan. Tract. 5. Trident. Sess. 7.

But because from the Nature and Virtue of this Charater, LV. Baptism not to be
iterated and why.
it has bin defined by the Church, that the Sacrament of Baptism is for no
reason in the world to be iterated; for this cause the Faithful should be
admonished often and diligently by the Pastors, that they suffer not themselves
at any time to be led into error. For this thing the Apostle has taught us,
Romans 6.10.
saying, There is One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism. And then when he exhorts
the Romans, that being dead with Christ by Baptism, they beware that they lose
not the life they had received from him, when he says, for in that Christ died
to sin, be died once, he seems plainly to signify This, that as he cannot dye
again, so may not we dye again by Baptism. Wherefore also Holy Church openly
professes, that she believes One Baptism. Which that it is extremely agreeable
to the Nature and Reason of the thing, is understood from hence, that Baptism
is a kind of Spiritual Regeneration or Birth. As therefore by the power of
Nature we are born and brought forth into the world Once only: and as S. Austin
says, In Joan. Tract. 11.
"The Birth of the Womb cannot be repeated: So also is there only One Spiritual
Birth; nor is Baptism at any time ever to be repeated. Of this matter see Trid.
Sess. 7. de Baptismo Can. 11. and 12. item. Council. Cartha. Can. 1. Vien. ut
habetur in Clem. 1. lib. de Sum. Trinit. D. August. Tract. 11. in Joan. Beda in
cap. 3. Joan. Leo Magn. Ep. 37. and 39. D. Thom. 3. p. q. 66. a 9.

Nor let any one think that Baptism is iterated by the Church, LVI. Baptism not
iterated when ministered with a Condition.
when she washes any one of whom it is uncertain whether he were before
Baptized using this Form of Words, If thou art already Baptized, I Baptize thee
not again; but if thou art not yet Baptized, I Baptize thee in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. For so Baptism is not to be said
to be wickedly iterated, but to be administered holily with the Adjunct.

In which case notwithstanding there are some things diligently to be heeded of
the Pastors, LVII. How cautiously Baptism is to be administered with a Condition.
wherein almost daily offense is committed, not without great wrong to this
Sacrament. For there are not wanting some that think that no sin can be
admitted, if although without differencing, they Baptize with this Adjunct.
Wherefore if an Infant be brought to them, they think they ought to make no
question whether it were Baptized before, and forthwith they proceed to give it
Baptism: but tho they are confident, that that Sacrament had bin administered
at home, yet they doubt not to repeat with the Adjunct this Holy Washing in the
Church, Lib. 1. decretal. tit. de Baptism. de quidam.
together with the Solemn Ceremony, which yet without Sacrilege they cannot
do; and so bring upon themselves that blot, which Sacred Writers call
Irregularity: For by authority of Pope Alexander, That form of Baptism is
permitted to them only, of whom, after diligent enquiry, it remains doubtful,
whether they rightly received Baptism; but otherwise it is never lawful to
administer Baptism again, no not even with the Adjunct. Of the Irregularity
here mentioned. See Apostat. and rett. Baptis. c. Ex Literarum, and Consecr.
did. 4. cap. Eos qui, and l. 3. decretal. de. Baptismo and ejus effectu, c. de
quibus.

But besides the other things which we obtain by Baptism, LVIII. The seventh
Effect of Baptism, The Opening of Heaven. Beda in 3. c. Luc. Mat. 1.16. Mar.
2.10. 3 ^a. 3.21.
This is, as it were the Last, whither all the rest seem to be referred, to
wit, that it opens to every one of us the Gate of Heaven, which before through
sin was shut. Now these things which by virtue of Baptism are wrought in us,
can in us perform plainly the same things which we read in the Gospel to have
happn'd in the Baptism of our Savior: For the Heavens were opened, and the Holy
Ghost appeared descending upon Christ our Lord, in the likeness of a Dove:
Whereby is signified to them that are baptized, that Divine Gifts are bestowed
on them, and Heaven Gates, opened to them; not indeed that so soon as they are
Baptized, but at a more fit opportunity, they may enter into that glory, when
being freed from all their miseries, which in that blessed state can have no
place, for their mortal life, they shall have Immortality.

And these truly are the Fruits of Baptism, LIX. Whence the inequality of Grace
in Baptism.
which fruits, as to the virtue of that Sacrament, that they equally belong to
all, there can be no doubt: But if we consider with what mind and affection
every one comes to receive it, it must needs be confessed that one receives
more, and another less of this heavenly Grace and the other fruits of Baptism.

It remains now that we plainly and briefly explain, LXX. The Prayers, Rites
and Ceremonies of Baptism to be explained
what is fit to be handled concerning the Prayers, Rites and Ceremonies of this
Sacrament: For what the Apostle admonished concerning the gift of Tongues, that
it is unprofitable to speak what the Faithful understand not: The same thing
may be said concerning Rites and Ceremonies; for they carry in them the Image
and Signification of those things, which are done in the Sacrament. Now if the
Faithful know not the meaning and virtue of those signs, it will seem that the
profit of those Ceremonies cannot be very great. The Pastors therefore are to
take pains to make the Faithful understand them, and to assure themselves, That
tho they are not so exceeding necessary, yet that they are to be much accounted
of, and had in great Honor. And this, both the Authority of those that
appointed them, who without all dispute were he Holy Apostles, and also the End
for which they would have those Ceremonies used, sufficiently teaches; for so
it is plain, That the Sacrament is administered with the greater Devotion and
Holiness, and those excellent and transcendent Gifts which are contained
therein, are put before our Eyes as it were, and Gods immense bounty the more
impressed upon the Souls of the Faithfulh. Of these Rites see Dionys. c. 2. de
Eccl. Hier. Clem. Epist. ^ 3. Tertul lib. de Corona milit. and de Bapt. passim.
Origin. hom. 12, in number. Cyp. Epist. 70. item vide de consecr. did. 4.

But all the Ceremonies and Prayers which the Church uses in the administration
of Baptism, LXI. The explication of the several Rites of Baptism.
are to be reduced to Three Heads. That in explaining of them, a certain order
may be observed by the Pastors, and that those things they teach, may the more
easily be kept in the memory of their Auditors.

And the First sort is of those which are observed before they come to the Font
of Baptism. The Second is of those which are used at the Font: And the Third of
those that are used to be added when Baptism is perfected or finished. First
therefore, Water.
Water must be prepared which must be used at Baptism.

For the Water of Baptism is consecrated, Consecration of the Water. Cypr.
Epist. 70. Basil. de Spirit. San. c. 17 and de Consec. did. 4. c. in Sabb.
the Oil of Mystic Unction being added: And this may not be done at any time,
but after the custom of our Ancestors, there are certain Festival days, which
are worthily to be reckoned most Solemn and holy, waited for, in the Vigils
whereof, the Water of this Holy Sacrament is prepared, in which days only,
unless necessity require to do otherwise, it was the custom of the ancient
Church, to administer Baptism. But tho the Church at this time, by reason of
the peril of common life, thought not fit to retain that custom; yet has she
hitherto observed these solemn days of Easter and Pentecost, at which time the
Water of Baptism is to be consecrated with the greatest Religion and honor.

After the consecration of the Water, Standing at the Church doors.
the other things which then go before Baptism, must be explained: For they who
are to be initiated by Baptism, are either carried or led to the Church doors,
and are by all means forbid to enter therein, as being altogether unworthy to
enter into the house of God, before they have cast off the yoke of their most
loathsome servitude from themselves, and dedicated themselves wholly to Christ
and to his most just Government. Tertul. de Corona milit. c. 3. Cyril Hyerosol.
Catech. 8.

And then the Priest asks them, The Catechism. Clem. Romans Epist. 3. Aug. de
fide and oper. c. 9. Mar. 16.15. Matt. 28.19.
What they desire of the Church, which being made known, He instructs them
first in the Doctrine of Christian Faith, which they ought to profess in
Baptism, and this is done in the Catechism. Which manner of teaching, that our
Savior appointed, there is none can doubt, seeing he commanded his Apostles,
saying, Go ye into all the World, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. Whence we may know that
Baptism is not to be administered, before the chief Heads at least of our
Religion be expounded. But because the way of Catechism consists of many
Interrogations, if he who is instituted be of ripe age, he answers by himself
to those things that are asked: But if he be an Infant, his Godfather rightly
answers, and makes solemn promise and vow for him.

Then follows the Exorcism which is made of holy and religious Words and
Prayers, The Exorcism.
to drive out the Devil, and to weaken and destroy his Power. To the Exorcism
are added other Ceremonies, whereof every one, as being mystic, have their
proper and clear signification. Of Exorcisms see Tertul. de Praescript. c. 41.
Cypr. Epist. 2. August. lib. 2. de Gratia Dei, and peccato Orig. cap. 40. and
lib. 2. de Nupt. and concupis. cap. 26. Optat. lib. 4. contra Permenianum.

For when Salt is put into the Mouth of him that is brought to be baptized, The
Salt.
hereby is plainly signified, that by the Doctrine of Faith and gift of Grace,
he shall attain to a freedom from the corruption of sin, and relish the taste
of good Works: and be delighted with the Food of Divine Wisdom. Beda ^^ l. 1.
Esdras. c. 9. Isid. l. 2. de Offic. Eccles. c. 20. and Aug. l. 1. Confess. c. 11.

And then his Forehead, Eyes, Breast, Sboulders, Ears, are signed with the sign
of the Cross: Sign of the Cross.
All which things declare that by the mystery of Baptism, his senses are opened
and strengthened, that he may be able to receive God, and to understand and
keep his Commandments. Of the sign of the Cross see Tertul. lib. de Resur.
carn. Basil. lib. de Spiritu Sancto Chrysostom. cont. gent. and alios.

Afterward his Nostrils and Ears are smeer'd with Spittle, The Spittle, and
coming to the Font. Joh. 9.7.
that as that Blind-man in the Gospel, whom the Lord commanded to wash his
Eyes, smeer'd with Clay, in the Water of Siloam, recovered his sight: So also
we may understand that such is the power of Holy Baptism, that it gives Light
to the Mind, to perceive the Heavenly Truth. Of the Spittle Ambr. lib. 1. de
Sacram. 1. and de iis, qui mist. init. c. 1. and de consecr. distinc. l. 4. c.
postea.

Those things done, The Abrenunciation.
they come to the Font of Baptism, and there other Ceremonies and Rites are
used, by which may be understood the sum of Chritian Religion. The Priest,
thrice in conceived words interrogates him that is to be baptized. Do thou
renounce the Devil and all his Works, the World, and all his Pomps? Then He, or
the Godfather in his name, answers to every demand: I renounce them. He
therefore that is about to give his name to Christ, ought first of all tp
promise holily and religiously, that he forsakes the Devil and the World, and
that from thenceforth he will ever account and detest them both, as his most
deadly enemies. Tertul. lib. de Coron. mil. c. 13. and de spectac. c. 4. and de
Idol. c. 6. Cypr. Epist. 7.54.

And then, The Prosession of Faith. Cyril Himos. Ca^^ch. 2, and
standing together at the Font of Baptism, he is interrogated by the Priest in
this manner: Do thou believ^ in God the Father Almighty? To whom he answers;
I believ^: And so being asked onwards concerning the other Articles of the
Creed, he solemnly and religiously professes his Faith; in which Two Answers is
contained all the Discipline and Power of the Law of Christ.

But when Baptism must now be administered, The will of Baptism.
the Priest asks of him who is to be baptized: Whether it is his Will to be
baptized? Who consenting either by himself, or by his Godfather in his name,
if he be an Infant, he presently washes him with that saving Water, In the Name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. For as Man of his own
will obeying the Serpent, was justly condemned: So the Lord will have none to
be enrolled as a Soldier of his against their Wills. That by a willing
obedience to his commands, they may at last attain to everlasting Salvation.

And now after that Baptism is perfected, The Chrism.
the Priest anoints with Chrism the crown oh his Head that is baptized, that he
may understand, that from that Day forward he is joined to Christ the Head, as
a Member, and grafsed into his Body, and that a Christian is so called from
Christ, and Christ so called from Chrism. But what Chrism signifies, is well
enough understood by what the Priest then prays, Lib. 2. de Sacram. c. 27.
as S. Ambrose testifies. Dionys. Eccl. Hierar. cap. 3. Cyril. Hieros. Catech.
3. Basil. l. de Spirit. Sanct. c. 27.

Afterward, the Priest puts upon the baptized person a White Garment, The
White Garment.
saying, Receive the white Garment, which do thou keep free from any Spot,
before the Tribunal of our Lord Jesus Christ, that thou may have Eternal Life.

But to Infants who use not Apparel, is given a white Kerchief, with the same
words. By which Symbol the Holy Fathers teach, is signified both the Glory of
the Resrrection, which he is born to by Baptism: And that neatness and beauty
wherewith the stains of sin being washed away in Baptism, the Soul is adorned:
And also that innocence and integrity which throughout all his whole life the
baptized person ought to keep. Dionys. loc. citato, Ambr. de iis qui mist.
init. c. 8.

And then a burning Wax-Light is given into his Hand: The burning Wax-light.
Which shows that Faith being inflamed with Charity which he received in
Baptism is to be nourished and increased with the study of good works, Of this
Wax-light, see Greg. Naz. sermon. de Baptis. Greg. Turon. lib. 5. c. 11. Niceph.
inst. Eccl. l. 3. c. 11.

At Last a Name is given to the person baptized, which name is to be taken from
some one, The Imposing of the Name.
that for his excellent Piety and Religion is reckoned in the number of the
Saints: for so it will easily come to pass, that he will be stirred up by the
Likeness of his Name to the Imitation of his Sanctity: And besides when he
prays, he may hope that he whom he studies to imitate, will be his Advocate for
the health and protection both of his Soul and Body.

And therefore they are to be reproved, who so diligently search for, LXII.
What names to be rejected by Christians.
and then put upon their Children the names of Heathens, and especially of
those who were eminently wicked: Since thereby it may be understood, how little
account they make of the study of Christian Piety, who seem so much delighted
with the memory of wicked Men, that they will fill the Ears of the Faithful
with such kind of names.

If these things be explained by the Pastors concerning the Sacrament of
Baptism, LXIII. A repetition of the whole Doctrine of Baptism.
there will seem nothing in a manner pretermitted that may be thought very
pertinent to the knowledge thereof. For it has bin showed, what the Name of
Baptism signifies, what the Nature and Substance of it is, and also of what
parts it consists. It has bin said, by whom it was instituted, who are the
Ministers necessary to make this Sacrament, and Who ought to be made use of as
Schoolmasters, to help the weakness of the baptized persons. It has bin show d
also, to Whom and what kind of disposed persons Baptism ought to be
administered; what the Virtue and Efficacy thereof is. Lastly, it has bin
largely enough explained, as to their design and purpose, what Rites and
Ceremonies are observed. All which things the Pastors shall remember, are to be
taught for this cause especially, That the Faithful may always be employed in
this Care and Knowledge: That in those things which they have so holily and
religiously promised, when they were initiated by Baptism, they might keep
their Faith and Charge, and lead such a kind of Life, as may answer to the most
holy Profession of a Christian.

Of the SACRAMENT of CONFIRMATION.
IF ever the diligence of the Pastors were required to explain the Sacrament of
Confirmation, I. The time and necessity of explaining of the Sacrament of
Confirmation.
certainly there is Now the greatest need to make it as clear as may be, since
This Sacrament is wholly omitted by some in Gods Holy Church; and very few
endeavor to receive that fruit of Grace thereby, which they ought. Wherefore
the Faithful are to be so taught, concerning the Nature, Virtue and Dignity of
this Sacrament, both on Whitsunday, and also on other days, when the Pastors
judge it convenient to be done, that they may know, not only that it is not to
be neglected, but that it is to be received with the greatest Religion and
Devotion, lest by their fault, and to their extreme damage it happen, that this
divine benefit may seem to be bestowed on them in vain.

But to begin with the Name: II. Why this Sacrament is called Confirmation.
Conc. Aur. c. 3. item Florent.
It must be taught this Sacrament is therefore of the Church called
Confirmation: Because he that is baptized; when by the Bishop he is anointed
with Holy Chrism, with these solemn Words added; I sign thee with the Sign of
the Cross, and Confirm thee with the Chrism of Salvation, in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: If nothing else hinder the
efficacy of this Sacrament, he will begin to grow stronger by receiving new
Virtue, and so to be a perfect Soldier of Christ.

III. Confirmation is a Sacrament.
Now in Confirmation the Catholic Church always acknowledged that there is the
true and proper Nature or Reason of a Sacrament. Which thing both Pope
Melchiades and many other very Holy and Ancient Popes plainly declare. And S.
Clement could not prove the Doctrine of this Truth, Epist. ad Episc. Hisp. c. 2.
ep. antefinem: habes decreta horum Ponticum de Consecr. dis^. 5.
with a more grave or weighty Argument, than when he said: All must make haste
without lingering to be born again of God, and then to be consigned by the
Bishop, i. e. to receive the sevenfold grace of the Holy Ghost: Seeing that
otherwise He cannot be a perfect Christian, that injuriously and wilfully, and
not forced by necessity, omits this Sacrament, as we have learned of S. Peter;
and the other Apostles, by command of our Lord, have taught. And this very
Faith the Roman Bishops Urban, Fabian, Eusebius, who being full of the same
Spirit, poured out their Blood for Christ have confirmed by their Doctrine, as
may be seen by their Decrees. Hereto may be added the concurring Testimony of
the Holy Fathers, amongst whom Dennys the Areopagite Bishop of Athens, S.
Dionys. de Eccl. Hier. 6.2.
telling how to make this holy Ointment, and how to use it, said thus: The
Priests cloth the person baptized with a Garment suitable to their cleanness,
to bring them to the Bishop. And he, i. e. the Bishop signing the baptized with
the Holy and truly Divine Ointment, makes him partaker of the most holy
Communion. And Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea, Lib. 6. histor. c. 43. lib. de iis
qui mist. ini^ientur c. ^. l. 2. c. 104.
ascribed so much to this Sacrament, that he doubted not to say, That Novatus
the Heretic could not receive the Holy Ghost, because when he was baptized, he
was not signed with the Seal of Chrism in his great Sickness. But of this
matter we have most clear Testimonies, both from S. Ambrose, which he wrote
concerning those who are initiated; and also from S. Austin, in his Books which
he wrote against the Epistles of Petili^^ the Donatist; both of which were so
confident, that there could be no doubt of the truth of this Sacrament, that
they taught and confirmed it by many places of Scripture. Wherefore the One
testifies that those words of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.30. Psalm. 132. Romans 5.5.
Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed: And the Other, that
which is read in the Psalms, As the ointment on the Head, which went down to
the Beard, even Aarons Beard; as also that of the same Apostle; The love of God
is shed abroad in our Hearts through the Holy Spirit which is given us, are to
be applied to the Sacrament of Confirmation. That Confirmation is a Sacrament,
see it proved, Ambr. de Sacr. lib. 3. c. 2. l. de Spiritu Sancto, c. 6. and 7.
Item Aug. de Trinit. lib. 15. c. 26. and in Epist. Joan. Tract. 3. and 6. and
in Psalm. 26. And above all these Tertul. lib. de Resurr. carn. Cypr. Epist. 7.
Origin. hom. 9. in Levit. Hieron. contra Lucifer. Cyril. Hierot. Catech. 2.

But although by Melchiades it be said that Baptism is very nearly joined to
Confirmation; IV. The difference of Confirmation and Baptism.
yet it is not to be accounted the same Sacrament, but far disjoined from the
other. For it is manifest that the Truth of Grace which all the Sacraments do
severally give, and the Truth also of the sensible thing which signifies that
Grace, do make them to be various and different Sacraments. Epist. ad. Episc.
Hisp. in medio.

Since therefore by the Grace of Baptism Men are begotten to a new life; The
First difference
but by the Sacrament of Confirmation, those who are already begotten, grow to
be Men, and put away Childishness; 1 Cor. 12.11
it is well enough known how much difference there is in the natural life
betwixt Generation and Growth in stature; the same difference there is between
Baptism, which regenerates us, and Confirmation, by virtue whereof we increase
and receive perfect strength of Mind.

Besides, The Second.
because there ought to be a new and distinct kind of Sacrament, when the Soul
runs into any new difficulty, it may easily be perceived, that as we want the
Grace of Baptism to reform the Soul by Faith; so also it is very expedient that
the Souls of the Faithful be strengthened or confirmed, that they may not be
terrified by the fear or danger of any pains, punishments, or death, from the
Confession of their Faith. Which being done by the sacred Chrism of
Confirmation, it is thence plainly gathered, that the Reason or Nature of this
Sacrament, Loc. citato.
is plainly diverse from that of Baptism. Wherefore Pope Melchiades accurately
prosecutes the difference betwixt them, writing thus, In Baptism Man is lifted
into the Camp, but in Confirmation he is armed for the Battle. In the Font of
Baptism the Holy Ghost gives Fullness of Innocence, but in Confirmation, he
gives perfection of Grace: In Baptism we are regenerated to Life: Regeneration
by it self saves those that receive Baptism in Peace; but Confirmation adorns,
and prepares for the encounters. But these things have not only been delivered
by other Councils, but especially decreed by the Sacred Council of Trent, so
that we may not now, not only be of another opinion, but neither may we by any
means doubt hereof. Laod. can 48. Meli. c. 6. Florent. and Constant. Trid.
Sess. 7.

But because it was showed before how necessary it was to teach of all the
Sacraments in common, V. Christ the Author of the Sacrament of Confirmation.
of whom they had their beginning: We must therefore teach the same thing here
of Confirmation; that the Faithful may be more affected with the Sanctity of
this Sacrament. The Pastors therefore must teach, that Christ our Lord was not
only the author thereof, as S. Fabian Bishop of Rome witnesses, Epist. 2.
initio.
but appointed the Rite of Chrism, and the words which Holy Church uses in the
administration thereof: which thing is easily allowed by them who confess
Confirmation to be a Sacrament; seeing that all Sacred Mysteries are above the
reach of humane nature, nor can they be instituted by any but by God himself.

And now we must speak of the Parts thereof, VI. The Matter of the Sacrament of
Confirmation is Chrism.
and first of the Matter of it, which is called Chrism, which Name being
borrowed from the Greeks, although thereby Profane Writers signified any sort
of Ointment: yet Sacred Writers have made use thereof by a common custom of
speech, to signify that Ointment only which is made of Oil and Balsom, with
the Solemn Consecration of the Bishop. Wherefore the Two aforesaid corporeal
things make the Matter of Confirmation: Which composition of diverse things, as
it declares the manifold Grace of the Holy Ghost, which is given to those that
are confirmed; so does it also show the excellency of this Sacrament. Now that
This is the Matter of this Sacrament, both Holy Church and Councils have always
taught, and also it has bin delivered by S. Dennys, and very many others of the
gravest Fathers, but chiefly by Pope Fabian, Epist. 3. (...) Episc. Orient.
who witnesses that the Apostles received of the Lord the Confection of Chrism,
and left it to us. See Aug. in Ps. 44. verse. 9. and lib. 13. de Trinit. cap.
27. Greg. in 1. cap. Cant. Conc. Laod. c. 48. and Carth. 2. c. 3. and 3. cap.
39. Dionys. de Eccl. Hierar. c. 2. and 4. Of the Oil, See Amb. in Ps. 118. and
lib. de Spirit. Sanct. cap. 3. Cypr. Epist. 70.

Nor could any other Matter than that of Chrism, VII. Why Chrism appointed the
Matter of Confirmation.
seem more proper to declare that thing which is wrought by this Sacrament. For
Oil which is fat and is naturally durable, and spreads it self, does lively
express that fullness of Grace which through the Holy Ghost runs down from
Christ the Head, and is poured upon his Members, as the Ointment which ran down
Aarons beard, even to the skirts of his garments: Psalm. 132 2. Psalm. 4.48. Joh.
1.16.
For God anointed him with the Oil of gladness above his fellows: And of his
fullness have we all received. Now what else does Balsom (whose smell is most
pleasant) signify, but that the Faithful, when by the Sacrament of
Confirmation they are perfected, send abroad such a sweetness of all virtues,
as that they can say with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 2.
We are the sweet savor of Christ to God? Balsom has this other property or
virtue, that whatsoever is covered therewith, it keeps it from corruption or
rottenness: And this seems excellently well suited to signify the virtue of
this Sacrament, since it is plainly manifest that the souls of the Faithful
being well disposed or prepared by that heavenly Grace which is given in
Confirmation, can easily be secured from the contagion of Sin.

Now the Chrism is consecrated by the Bishop with solemn ceremonies. For that
our Savior so taught at his last Supper, VIII. Why Chrism consecrated only by
Bishops.
when he left with his Apostles the way or manner, of making Chrism, Pope
Fabian, a man very famous for his Sanctity and glory of Martyrdom, S. Fab. Papa
ubi supra.
has delivered; although why it ought to be so, may be showed even from Reason it
self. For in most of the other Sacraments, Christ so appointed the Matter of
them, that he gave Holiness to it: For he willed not only that Water should be
the Element of Baptism, when he said, Joh. 3.5.
Except a Man be born again of Water, and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God: But when himself was baptized, he caused that thenceforth the
Water should be endu'd with a power of Sanctisying. And therefore S. Chrysostom
said: Hom. 4. oper. imperf. and habetus de Consecr did. 4. nunquid.
The Water of Baptism could not purge away the sins of Believers, unless it
self had bin sanctified by the touch of the Lords Body. Because therefore the
Lord himself did not hallow this Matter of Confirmation by the very use and
handling thereof; it is therefore necessary that with Holy and Devout Prayers
it be consecrated: Nor can this Confection belong to any other but a Bishop,
who is appointed the ordinary Minister of this Sacrament.

And now is to be explaln'd the other Part whereof this Sacrament consists, IX.
The Form of the Sacrament of Confirmation.
to wit, the Form and the Words which are to be used at the anointing: And the
Faithful are to be admonished, That in the receiving of this Sacrament, they
then especially, when they hear them pronounced, apply their minds to Piety,
Faith and Devotion, that there may be nothing to hinder the Heavenly Grace. In
these words therefore the Form of Confirmation is perfom'd [I sign thee with
the sign of the Cross, and I confirm thee with the Chrism of Salvation, in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost] But yet if to the
Truth hereof we also add the Reason, it is easy to prove the same. For the
Form of the Sacrament ought to contain all those things, which explain the
Nature and Substance of the Sacrament. But especially these three things ought
to be observed in Confirmation. The Divine Power which as the principal cause
works in the Sacrament, and then the strength of Soul and Spirit which is given
to the Faithful for Salvation: And lastly the Sign wherewith he is marked, that
is entering into the Combat of the Christian Camp. And first these words, In the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, which are put in the
last place. Secondly these: I confirm thee with the Chrism of Salvation, which
are placed in the middle. Lastly, those which are placed in the beginning of
the Form; I sign thee with the sign of the Cross, sufficiently declare. Although
if it could not by any reason be proved that this is the true and perfect Form
of this Sacrament, the authority of the Catholic Church, by whose Rule we are
always taught, suffers as not to doubt in the least concerning this matter.

The Pastors ought to teach also to whom the administration of this Sacrament
is committed; X. The Bishop the ordinary Minister of Confirmation.
for seeing that there are many, as the Prophet complains, that run and yet are
not sent; it is needful to teach who are the true and lawful Ministers thereof,
that the Faithful may have the very Sacrament and Grace of Confirmation. The
Holy Scriptures therefore show that the Bishop only has the ordinary power of
making this Sacrament. For we read in the Acts of the Apostles; Trid. Sess. 23.
c. 4. and. can. 7. Act. 8.14.
When Samaria had received the word of God, That Peter and John were sent to
them, who prayed for them, That they might receive the Holy Ghost, for as yet
he had not come upon any one of them, but they were baptized only. In which
place we may see, that he who baptized, for as much as he was a Deacon only,
had no power of Confirming; but this Office was reserved for the more perfect
Ministers, i. e. the Apostles. And besides, wheresoever the Holy Scriptures
make mention of this Sacrament, the same thing may be observed, nor are there
wanting the most clear testimonies of Holy Fathers and Popes, Urban, Eusebius,
Damasus, Innocent, Leo, as may be seen in their Decrees. And S. Austin
grievously complains of the corrupt custom of those of Egypt and Alexandria,
where the Priests presumed to administer the Sacrament of Confirmation. That a
Bishop is the ordinary Minister of Confirmation, these do teach, Vrbanus Papae
Epist. ad omnes Christianos in fine. Eusebius. Papa Epist. 3. ad Episcop. Tusciae
and Campaniae. Damasus Papa Epist. 4. ad Pros. and caeteros Epis. Orthod. circa
med. Innocentius Pap. Epist. ad Episc. Hispaniae. Clemens item Pap. Epist. 4.
Council. Wormaciens. c. 8. and Florent. de Sacram. Horum summorum Pontificum
Epistolae habentur in Tomis Conciliorum fere omnes in primo juxta cujusque
aetatem. Vide insuper Aug. in Quaest. Novi Testam. quaest. 42.

And that this is well and rightly done, XI. Why a Bishop the Minister
Confirmation.
to defer this Office to the Bishops, the Pastors may show by this similitude.
For as in the building a House, although the Workmen who are the inferior
Servants, prepare the Mortar, Lime, Timber, and the other Materials, and make
them fit; yet the perfecting of the work belongs to the Architect or chief
builder; So also this Sacrament, whereby the Spiritual Building is perfected as
it were, is fit to be administered by no other person, but by the Chief Priest
or Bishop.

There is also to be a Godfather, XII. Why Godfathers added.
as has bin showed to be done at Baptism. For if they who are to fence, have
need of a Fencing-Master, by whose skill and counsel they may be taught what
strokes to make to wound the Enemy, and yet to save themselves harmless: How
much more will the Faithful want a Captain and Monitor, when covered and
secured with the Sacrament of Confirmation, as with the strongest Armor, they
enter into this Spiritual Fight, the reward whereof is eternal Salvation?
Rightly therefore are Godfathers to be had at the Administration of this
Sacrament, Trid. Sess. 24. c. 2 ^ ^es^r. matrim
with whom there is such an Affinity contracted, as hinders the contracts of
Matrimony among them to be lawful, as before was said, when we treated of the
Godfathers that are to be used at Baptism.

But because it comes often to pass, XIII. What the Curats are to teach those
that are to be confirmed.
that the Faithful in receiving this Sacrament, are either too hasty, or too
dissolutely negligent and trifling, for we have nothing to say of those that
contemn and despise it; the Pastors must show who, of what Age, and how
religiously they ought to be disposed to whom Confirmation ought to be given.

And first they must teach, XIV. How justly the Church desires that all be
confirmed.
That this Sacrament is not of so great necessity, as that without it a Man
cannot be saved. But tho it be not necessary, yet it is not to be pretermitted
by any: But rather very great care ought to be taken, lest in a matter so full
of Holiness, and through which the divine gifts are so liberally bestowed on
us, any negligence should be committed. For that which God has offered to all
in common for their Sanctification, De consec. did. 3. c. 2. and 1. item Conc.
Aurel. c. 3. Hugo de S. dict. de Sacram l. 2. p. 7. ca. 39. Act. 2.2.
is to be desired of all, with the sincerest affection. And indeed S. Luke
describing this admirable effusion of the Holy Ghost, says thus: And suddenly
there came down from Heaven, a sound as of a rushing mighty Wind, and it filled
the whole House. And then, a little after: And they were all filled with the
Holy Ghost. Whence we may understand, that because that House bore the Figure
and representation of Holy Church, that the Sacrament of Confirmation which
took its beginning from that day, belongs to all the Faithful. And this is
easily gathered also from the very Reason of that Sacrament. For they ought to
be confirmed with Holy Chrism, who have need of Spiritual Increase, and who are
to be brought to a perfect Stature of Christian Religion: But there are none
which this is not proper for. For as Nature designs that those who are born
into the World, should thrive and come to perfect Age, although sometimes she
misses of what she designed: So the Catholic Church, the common Mother of us
all, earnestly wishes, that in those whom by Baptism she has regenerat'd, the
Form of a Christian Man might be perfectly completed: But because this is done
in the Sacrament of this mystic Unction, it is manifest that it equally belongs
to all the Faithful.

Wherein this is to be noted, XV. What Age is require'd in those that are to be
confirmed.
That after Baptism the Sacrament of Confirmation, may indeed be administered
to all, but yet this is not expedient to be done before Children shall come to
the Use of Reason. Wherefore if it seem not convenient to stay to the twelfth
year of age; yet it is very convenient to deferr this Sacrament at least to the
seventh year: For Confirmation is not instituted as of necessity to Salvation;
but that by virtue thereof, we may be found prepared and in a good readiness,
when we are to fight for the Faith of Christ, to which kind of Fight, no one
sure can judge Children to be fit, who as yet want the use of Reason.

Hence therefore it comes, XVI. With how great reverence we must come to
Confirmation. D. Tho. 3. p. q. 7^ a. 8. ad 2. Council. Aur. c. 2.
that those of ripe Age that are to be confirmed, if they desire to have the
Grace and gift of this Sacrament; must not only bring with them Faith and
Devotion; but they must blot out of their minds all the more grievous sins they
have committed. To which purpose, the Pastors must persuade them first to
confess their sins, and then stir them up to Fasting, and other Exercises of
Devotion, and admonish them to renew that laudable practice of the ancient
Church, that none should receive this Sacrament but fasting. And it must needs
be thought no hard matter to persuade the Faithful to these things, if they
rightly understand the gifts and admirable effects of this Sacrament.

Therefore the Pastors shall teach, XVII. The Effects of Confirmation. The
First.
that Confirmation has this thing common with the other Sacraments, that unless
there be some hinderance on his part who receives it, it gives new Grace: For
it has bin showed that these Sacred and mystic Signs are of that sort, which
both declare and work Grace.

The Second.
But besides those things which are to be thought common with this and the
other Sacraments, these things are proper to Confirmation. First, that it
perfects the Grace of Baptism. For those who by Baptism are made Christians; as
Infants newborn, have yet a kind of Tenderness and Softness; but then by the
Sacrament of Ghrism they are made stronger against the utmost violence of the
Flesh, the World, and the Devil, and their Souls are confirmed to confess and
glorify the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom also that that very Name is
invented, there is none can doubt.

For neither, XVIII. A certain error refuted.
as some no less unlearnedly than impiously have phanci'd, is the Name of
Confirmation derived hence, that in former times Infants that were baptized,
Trid. Sess. 7. can 1. de Cons.
when they were now grown Men, were brought to the Bishop, that they might
confirm the Christian Faith, which in Baptism they undertook. So that
Confirmation seems pot (in this Notion) to differ from Catechizing. Of which
practice there can be brought no proof: But from hence it was that it received
this name: That by virtue of this Sacrament, God confirms that thing in us
which by Baptism was begun to be wrought, and brings us to the Perfection of
Christian Solidity.

Nor does it Confirm only, The Third Effect. De Consce. did. 5. c. Spiritus.
Eusebius. Emiss. hom. in die Pent.
but it gives Increase also, of which Melchiades witnesses thus: The Holy
Ghost, who by his saving descent came upon the Water of Baptism, in the Font,
gave a Fullness Sufficiency, to Innocence; but in Confirmation he gives Increase
to Grace: And then it not only increases, but increases after a wonderful sort.
This the Scripture has very elegantly signified and expressed by the wearing of
a Coat. For says our Lord and Savior, when he spoke of this Sacrament, Luc.
14.4^.
Stay ye in the City, till ye shall be clothed with virtue from on high.

Now if the Pastors will show the divine Efficacy of this Sacrament, XIX. The
efficacacy of Confirmation declared by an Example^
(and that this will have a great influence on the minds of the Faithful, there
can be no doubt) it will be sufficient to explain what happened to the Apostles
themselves. For they either before the Passion, or at the hour of the Passion,
were so weak and remiss, that when our Lord was apprehended they all ran away:
But Peter who was designed to be the Rock and Foundation of the Church, and
bore the highest constancy and greatness of a generous Soul, was so terrified
at the voice of one poor silly Woman, that he denied not once and again only,
but even a third time also, that he was Jesus Christ's Disciple: Yea, and after
the Resurrection, for fear of the Jews, they kept themselves close shut up in a
House. But then on the day of Pentecost they were all filled with so great a
power of the Holy Ghost, Act. 2.
that while they freely and boldly planted the Gospel which was committed to
them, not only in the Region of the Jews, but all over the World, they thought
nothing could be a greater happiness to them, Act. 5.
than to be counted worthy to suffer Disgrace, Bonds, Torments, and crucifyings
for the name of Christ.

Besides, The Fourth Effect.
Confirmation has this virtue, that it imprints a Character: Whence it comes to
pass, that for no reason whatsoever is it to be iterated, as was before
observed in Baptism, and will be more fully explained in the Sacrament of
Order, in its proper place. If therefore these things be diligently and often
explained by the Pastors, it can hardly be, but that the Faithful knowing the
dignity and profitableness of this Sacrament, will use their utmost endeavors
to receive it holily and religiously. That Confirmation is not to be iterated,
See Consec. did. 5. c. dictum est, and cap. de hom. D. Thom. 3. p. q. 72. art.
5.

It remains now that some of the Rites and Ceremonies, XX. The Rites and
Ceremonies of Confirmation explained.
which the Catholic Church uses in administrating this Sacrament be briefly
considered. The explication whereof how profitable it will be, the Pastors will
understand, if they look back to those things which were said before, when they
are to treat of this Point.

Those therefore that are confirmed, Chrism and Unction.
are anointed in the Forehead with Sacred Chrism. For in this Sacrament the
Holy Spirit pours himself into the Souls of the Faithful, and increases
Strength and Courage in them, that in the Spiritual Combat they may fight
manfully, and resist their most deadly enemies.

Wherefore it is declared, Why in the Forehead.
That they are not to be terrified from the free confession of the Name of
Christ with any fear or bashfulness, the tokens of which affections are used to
appear most in the Forehead. Rhahan. l. 1. de Instit. cleric. c. 30. and
habetur de consecr. did. 5. c. novissime. Aug. in Psalm. 141. D. Thom. 3. p.
9.71. ar. 9.

Besides, The Sign of the Cross.
that Note whereby a Christian is distinguished from others, and as it were a
Soldier by certain honorable Badges, is distinguished from the rest, is given
him in the most observable part of his Body.

This also has bin solemnly and religiously observed in the Church of God, Why
at Whitsontide
That at Whitsontide especially this Sacrament is administered, because
specially on that day the Apostles were confirmed and strengthened by the Power
of the Holy Ghost. By the remembrance of which divine work, the Faithful might
be admonished what, and how great mysteries were to be considered in that
Sacred Unction.

And when he that is anointed and confirmed, The Stroke.
that he may be put in mind that he ought as a valiant Champion to be ready
prepared to endure all adversities with an unconquered and resolute Soul for
the name of Christ, is lightly struck upon the Breast by the Bishop.

And lastly the Peace is given him, The Peace.
that he may understand, that he has the Fullness of heavenly Grace, and that
Peace which passes all sense or understanding. And let this be the sum of those
things which are to be taught of the Pastors concerning the Sacrament of
Chrism; and that not so much by naked Words and Arguments, as with an ardent
study and endeavor for true Piety, that they may be seen to plant these things
in the inmost Souls and Thoughts of the Faithful.

Of the SACRAMENT of the EVCHARIST.
AS there is none of all those Holy Mysteries, I. The Dignity of the Eucharist
often to be explained, that it may not be used irreverently. Dionys. de Eccl.
Hier. c. 6. and de Conse^. did. c. 2. Nihi i^ 1 Cor. 11.30.
which our Lord and Savior has commended to us as the certain Instruments of
Divine Grace, that can be compared with the most Holy Sacrament of the
Eucharist: So also is there no greater Punishment to be feared from God for any
sin whatsoever, than if This thing which is full of all sanctity, or rather
which contains the Author and Fountain of Sanctity, be not holily and
religiously used by the Faithful. And this the Apostle both plainly saw, and
has plainly warned us about it: For when he had declared under how grievous a
guilt they were bound, who discerned not the Lords Body; he presently subjoyns;
Therefore are there many sick and weak among you, and many sleep. That
therefore the Faithful may understand, both that divine Honor is to be given to
this heavenly Sacrament, and may gather a plentiful increase of Grace, and may
avoid the most just indignation of God; all these things are very diligently to
be explained by the Pastors, which seem proper the more to illustrate the
Majesty thereof.

To which purpose there will be need, II. The Institution of the Eucharist,
first to be explained.
that following S. Paul's method, who professes that he delivered to the
Corinthians what he had received of the Lord; they first of all explain to the
Faithful, the Institution of this Sacrament. For that the thing was thus done,
plainly appears from the Evangelist.

For, III. Why, when, and how Christ instituted the Eucharist. Joh. 13.
When the Lord loved his own, he loved them to the end; of which Love that he
might give them some divine and admirable pledge, knowing that the hour was now
come, that he must go from this World to the Father, and that he might at no
time ever be wanting to those that are his, he in his unsearchable wisdom
perfected the thing which quite surpasses all the Order and Course of Nature.
For, celebrating the Supper of the Paschal Lamb with his Discipes, that the
Figure might give place to the Truth, and the Shadow to the Body; Mat. 26.20
Mar. 14.22. Luc. 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.24
He took Bread, and giving Thanks to God, he Blessed it, and Brake, and Gave it
to his Disciples, and said, Take and Eat; This is my Body, which shall be given
for you, This do in Commemoration of me. In like manner he took also the
Chalice, after he had supped, saying, This Chalice is the New Testament in my
Blood: This do, as often as ye shall drink it in Commemoration of me. Of the
Institution of the Eucharist, see Trid. Sess. 13. c. 2. de Euch. Leo. Sermon. 7.
de Pas. c. 3. Eusebius. Emiss. hom. 4. and habetur in consec. did. 2. 1. Quin
Corpus.

When therefore Sacred Writers found that they could by no means show in one
Word, IV. Why this Sacrament called the Eucharist.
the Dignity and Excellence of this admirable Sacrament, they endeavored to
express it in more Words or Names: For sometimes they called it the Eucharist,
which word we may render in English [The Good Grace] or [the Thanksgiving]. And
indeed rightly is it called the Good Grace; both because it foreshews the Life
Everlasting, Romans 6.23.
whereof it is written, Eternal Life is the Grace of God: And also because it
contains in it Christ our Lord, who is the true Grace and the Fountain of all
Gifts. Nor do we less fitly interpret it a Thanksgiving: For when we offer this
most pure Host or Sacrifice, we daily give God infinite Thanks for all his
benefits toward us; and especially, for so excellent a benefit of his Grace
which he gives us in this Sacrament. But that very Name also is very agreeable
with those things which we read were done by Christ our Lord at the instituting
this Mystery. For, Mat. 26.16. Mar. 14 22. 1 Cor. 11.24. Luc. 22.19. Ps. 110.5.
taking Bread he brake it, and gave thanks. David also, when contemplated the
greatness of this Mystery, before he would pronounce that Verse; The merciful
and gracious Lord has made a remembrance of his Wonders, he has given Food to
them that fear him; thought it good, first to give Thanks: Confession or
Thanksgiving and Magnificence is his work. Chrysostom. hom. 24. in 7. ad Cor. ad
haec verba, Calix Benedictionis Cypr. l. de lapsis. Ambr. lib. 5. de Sacram. c.
3. D. Thom. 3. p. q. 73. a. 4.

It is also often called a Sacrifice, of which Mystery shall be spoken more
largely afterward.

It is also called a Communion, V. Other names given to the Eucharist.
Sacrifice. Communion. 1 Cor. 10.16. Damasc. l. 4. ^ l. Orthod. c. 4.
which name is taken from that place of the Apostle, where he says: The Chalice
of Blessing which we Bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? and
the Bread which we break, is it not the participaton of the Body of Christ? For
as Damascen has explained it; This Sacrament couples us to Christ, and makes us
Partakers of his Flesh, and of his Deity, and reconciles us to one another in
the same Christ, and consolidates us as it were into one Body. See Iren. lib.
5. cap. 7. Chrysostom. hom. 44. and 45. in Joan. Cyril. in lib. 7. in Joan. c. 13.
Cyril Hier. Catech. 4. Aug. Tract. 26. in Joan. Trid. Sess. 13. de Euch. in
Praefat. Conc. Nicaen. 21. Carth. 4. c. 77. and 26. q. 6. passim.

Whence it comes to pass that it is also called the Sacrament of Peace and
Charity, The Sacrament of Peace and Charity.
that we may know how unworthy they are of the name of a Christian, who
practice enmity; and that Hatred, Strife and Discord are by all means to be
rooted out, as the most odious plague of the Faithful. Especially seeing that
in the daily Sacrifice of our Religion, we profess not to be so studious and
careful of any thing as of Peace and Charity.

It is also by Sacred Writers commonly called a Viaticum, Vlaticum.
or Travelers Bait on his Journey: Both because it is our Spiritual Meat
wherewith we are sustained in the Pilgrimage of this life, and because it gives
us strength to attain to eternal Glory and Happiness: And therefore according
to the ancient appointment of the Catholic Church, none of the Faithful were to
depart this life without this Sacrament.

And the most ancient Fathers following the Authority of the Apostles, A
Supper. 1 Cor. 11.24. Cypr. de Coena. Domini.
sometimes called the Holy Eucharist by the name of a Supper, because in that
saving Mystery of the Last Supper, it was institued by Christ our Lord.

Not that we ought therefore after our Meat or drink to consecrate or receive
the Eucharist, VI. The Eucharist to be consecrated and taken fasting.
since that wholesome practice introduced by the Apostles, as the ancient
Writers have noted, has always bin kept and observed; namely, that it should be
received fasting. Aug. Ep. 188. c. 6.

And now the Reason of the Names being explained, VII. The Eucharist truly a
Sacrament.
it must be taught that this is truly a Sacrament, and that it is one of those
seven which Holy Church has always religiously observed and reverenced. For
when the Consecration of the Chalice is made, it is called The Mystery of
Faith. Besides, to omit almost infinite Testimonies of Sacred Writers, who have
ever thought, That this ought to be reckoned among the true Sacraments, it is
manifestly proved from the very Reason and Nature of a Sacrament; for therein
are outward and sensible Signs. And then it has both the Signification and
effectual working of Grace. And besides all this, neither the Evangelists, nor
the Apostles leave any room to doubt that it was instituted by Christ. All
which things coming together to confirm it to be a true Sacrament, it is
evident that all arguments to prove it to be so, are needless. August. l. 3. de
Trinit. c. 4. and l. 20. contra Faust. c. 13. Ambr. l. 1. de Sacram. c. 2.
Trid. Sess. 13. de Euch. c. 5. D. Thom. 3. p. q. 73. art. 1.

Now this is diligently to be observed of the Pastors, VIII. The name Sacrament
given to many things in the Eucharist.
that there are many things in this Mystery to which sometimes Sacred Writers
have attributed the Name of a Sacrament. For sometimes the Consecration and
Receiving, but frequently the very Body and Blood of our Lord, which is
contained in the Eucharist, is used to be called the Sacrament. For S. Austin
says, That this Sacrament consists of two things, De Cate. rud. l. 5. c. 16.
viz. the Visible appearance of Elements, and the Invisible Flesh and Blood os
our very Lord Jesus Christ. August. hic ad sensum potius quam ad verba citatus;
sed lege hac de materia librum Lanfranci contra Berengarium, constat 23. tantum
capitibus. Vide de Consecr. did. 2. fere tota.

And after the same manner we affirm, adored, Trid. Sess. 15 de Euch c 5. and
can. 6.
to wit, understanding the Body and Blood of the Lord. But it is plain that all
these are not so properly called Sacraments: But the Species of Bread and Wine
have the true Reason of this name Sacrament.

But how much this Sacrament differs from all the rest, is easily perceived;
for the other Sacraments are perfected in the use of the Matter, to wit, while
they are administered to any one.

For Baptism then takes the Nature of a Sacrament, IX. The Eucharist differs
from the other Sacraments. First. Secondly.
when a person is indeed washed with Water: But to the perfection of the
Eucharist, the Consecration of the Matter is sufficient: For each of them
ceases not to be a Sacrament, though it were laid up in the Pyx. And then in
the making of the other Sacraments, there is no change of the Matter and
Element into another nature. For the Water of Baptism, or the Oil of Chrism,
when those Sacraments are administered, lose not their former nature of Water
and Oil. But in the Eucharist, that which was Bread and Wine before
Consecration, the Consecration being made, is truly the substance of the Body
and Blood of the Lord.

Now although there be Two Elements, X. The Eucharist ^ut one Sacrament, tho
double in Matter.
to wit, Bread and Wine, of which the whole Sacrament of the Eucharist is made;
yet, being taught by the Authority of the Church, we confess that there is not
many Sacraments, but one Sacrament only. Otherwise the Number of Seven
Sacraments, which number has always bin held, and was determined in the
Councils of Lateran, Florence and Trent, cannot stand. For seeing the Grace of
this Sacrament makes us one mystic Body, that the Sacrament it self might agree
to the thing it makes, it must needs be but One; and One too, not as tho it
were individual, but because it has the signification of One thing. For as Meat
and Drink, which are two different things, but serve only to One purpose, to
wit, to refresh and strengthen the Body; so it is fit that those two different
Species of the Sacrament should answer to them, since they signify the
spiritual Meat wherewith our Souls are sustained and refreshed. Wherefore it is
said by our Lord and Savior, Joh. 6.^
My Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed. Ex Conciliis citatis
Lateranense generale sub Innocent. II. non numerat quidem distinct septem
Sacramenta, sed ex variis Canonibus satis clare colliguntur: Florent. in doct.
de Sacram. Trid. Sess. 7. can. 1.

But it is diligently to be explained what the Sacrament of the Eucharist
signifies, The Eucharist signifies Three things.
that the Faithful beholding with their Eyes the Sacred Mysteries, may also at
the same time, feed their Souls with the Contemplation of the Divine things.
Now there are Three things which are showed in this Sacrament.

The First is the Passion of Christ, The Passion of Christ. Luc. 22.19. 1 Cor
11.
which is now past; for he taught: Do this in Commemoration of me: And the
Apostle testified: As often as ye shall eat this Bread and drink this Chalice, ye
will show the Death of the Lord, till he come.

The second is the Divine and Heavenly Grace, Divine Grace.
which being present in this Sacrament, is given to feed and preserve the Soul.
For as in Baptism we are begotten to a New life, Tertul. de R^sur Carnis c. 8.
and in Confirmation, we are strengthened to resist Satan, and openly to
profess the name of Christ; so in the Sacrament of the Eucharist we are
nourished and sustained.

The Third, Eternal Glory.
which foreshews somewhat to come, is that Fruit of eternal Glory and Delight,
which we shall receive in Heaven by the promise of God. These three therefore
which are plainly distinguished by the variety of time past, present and to
come, are so signified in Holy Mysteries, that the whole Sacrament, although it
consists of diverse Species, may be applied to show any of all these, as it were
to the signification of one thing.

But first of all, XI. The Double Matter of the Eucharist Bread and Wine.
the Pastors must know the Matter of this Sacrament, both that they themselves
may know how to consecrate it; and also that the Faithful may be admonished, of
what thing it is a Symbol; and also may be inflamed with the love and desire of
that thing which it signifies: The Matter therefore of this Sacrament is
double: The one part is Bread made of Wheat; of which we will speak first; of
the other will be spoken afterward. For as the Evangelists Matthew, Mark and
Luke do teach, Mat. 26.20. Mar. 14.22. Luc. 22 19. Joh. 11.
Christ our Lord took Bread into his Hands, Blessed and brake it, saying: This
is my Body. And in S. John, the same our Savior called himself Bread, when he
said: I am the living Bread which came down from Heaven. Vide de Consecr. did.
2. c. 1, and 2. and 55. ubi habes de hac materia decret. Alexand. Pap. in 1.
Epist. ad omnes Orthodoxos and Cypr. lib. 2. Epist. 3. and Ambr. l. 4. de
Sacram. l. 4. vide etiam Iren. l. 4. c. 34. and l. 5. c. 2.

Now since there are diverse kinds of Bread, XII. Wheaten Bread the true Matter
of the Eucharist. D. Tho. 3. p. q. 74. a. 3.
either because it is made of different matter; as when some is made of Wheat,
some of Barley and some of Peace, and other Fruits of the Earth; or because it
has different Qualities (for some is leven'd, and some is unleven'd.) As to the
first, our Saviors words show, that the Bread ought to be made of Wheat; for by
a common custom of speaking, when Bread is absolutely named, it is plain enough
that Wheaten-Bread is meant. And this is declared by a Figure of the Old
Testament; Levit. 24.5.
for the Lord commanded, that the Loaves of Shewbread, which signified this
Sacrament should be made of the like Matter.

Now as no Bread but Wheaten Bread can be thought fit to be Matter for this
Sacrament, XIII. Unleven'd Bread the Matter of the Eucharist Ma. 26.17 Mar
14.12 Luc. 22.7.
(for so the Tradition of the Apostles teaches us, and the authority of the
Catholic Church has confirmed:) so also it may easily be gathered from what our
Lord Christ did, that it ought to be Vnleven'd: For on the first day of
Vnleven'd bread, when it was unlawful for the Jews to have in their Houses any
leven'd Bread, he made and instituted this Sacrament. Vide lib. 3. decretal.
tit. de celebrat. Missarum c. ul^. ubi habes Auctoritatem Honorii Papae 3.

But if any one hereto oppose the Authority of John the Evangelist, XIV. An
Objection answered.
who says that all these things were done before the day of the Passover, that
reason may be easily solved. For that day which the other Evangelists call the
first day of unleven'd Bread, because on the fifth day of the week at Evening,
the feast days of unleven'd Bread began, at which time our Savior celebrated
the Passover; John 13.1.
that same day S. John calls the day before the Passover, as judging the space
of a natural day, which is begun at Sunrising, was chiefly to be observed.
Wherefore S. Chrysostom also, In Mat. hom. 38.
interprets the first day of Vnleven'd Bread to be that day whereon at Evening
Vnleven'd Bread was to be eaten. But how suitable the Consecration of Vnleven'd
Bread is to that Integrity and Cleanness of the Soul, which the Faithful ought
to bring to this Sacrament, we are taught by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.7.
when he says, Purge out the old Leven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye are
unleven'd. For Christ our Passover is sacrificed, therefore let us banquet, not
with the old Leven, nor with the Leven of malice and wickedness, but with the
unleven'd Bread of Sincerity and Truth.

Not that this Quality is to be thought so necessary, XV. The Eucharist may be
made of Leven'd Bread.
that if the Bread have it not, the Sacrament cannot be made: For either kind
of Bread has the true and proper nature and name of Bread. Although no one ought
by his own private authority, or rashness rather, alter the laudable Rite of
his Church. And by so much the less is it permitted to the Latin Priests to do
it, Conc. Floren. Sess ult. and lib. 3 decret. de cel b Miss. c. final.
whom the Popes have moreover commanded to perform the Sacred Mysteries with
unleven'd Bread only. And let this suffice for the explication of One part of
the Matter of this Sacrament. Where notwithstanding it is to be noted, that it
is not determined how much Matter ought to be used in making this Sacrament;
since the certain number of them who either may or ought to receive the Sacred
Mysteries cannot be defined.

It remains now that we speak of the other Part of the Matter and Element of
this Sacrament, XVI. Wine of the Grape the other Matter of the Eucharist.
And that is Wine, pressed out of the fruit of the Vine, wherewith a little
Water is mixed: For that our Lord and Savior used Wine in the Institution of
this Sacrament the Catholic Church has ever taught, seeing he himself said, Mat
26.29. Mar. 14.25.
I will not drink henceforth of the fruit of the Vine, until that day. In which
place S. Chrysostom, Hom. 83. in Mat.
Of the fruit of the Vine, says he, which surely brought forth Wine, not Water,
that so long beforehand he might be seen to pluck up by the roots the Heresy
of them, who thought that Water only was to be used in these Mysteries.

Yet the Church of God always mingled Water with the Wine; XVII. Water to be
mingled with Wine. Cypr. lib. 2. Epist. 3. Trid. Sess. 22. de Sa^ris. Miss. c.
7. and Can. 9. Apoc. 17.15.
First because our Lord Christ himself did so, as is proved by the authority of
Councils, and by the testimony of S. Cyprian: And then, that the memory of the
Blood and Water which came out of his Side, might be renewed. And then as we
read in the Apocalypse. Water signifies the People. Wherefore Water mingled with
Wine signifies the Conjunction of the Faithful with Christ their Head. And
this, by Apostolical Tradition, Holy Church has always observed.

But although the Reasons for mingling the Water with the Wine are so weighty,
mortal sin, yet tho it should be wanting, the Sacrament remains.

But the Priests ought to take care, XVIII. A little Water to be mingled.
that as in the Sacred Mysteries they ought to mingle Water with the Wine, so
also that they pour but a little thereinto. For by the Opinion and Judgment of
Ecclesiastical Writers, That Water is turned into Wine. Wherefore Pope Honorius
writes thus concerning it, There has bin for a long time in your parts a
pernicious abuse, to wit, that there is used a greater quantity of Water in the
Sacrifice, Habetur lib. 3. Decretal. d^. celeb. Miss. c. 13.
than of Wine; when according to the reasonable practice of the general Church,
there ought to be used a far greater quantity of Wine than of Water. Of this
Sacrament therefore there are only these Two Elements, Et vide de consec. did.
2. c. 1, 2. and seq.
That none may offer any thing but Bread and Wine, notwithstanding which there
were some presumed to do so.

But now we must see how sit these two Symbols of Bread and Wine are, XIX. How
convenient this Matter of the Eucharist is. First. John 9.
to declare those things whereof we believe and confess them to be Sacraments.

And first they signify Christ to us, as he is the true life of Men. For the
Lord himself says, My Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed.
Seeing therefore the Body of Christ our Lord yields nourishment of eternal Life
to them who do purely and holily receive the Sacrament thereof; rightly is it
made of those things, wherein this Life is contained; that the Faithful may
easily understand that by the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, their
mind and Soul is fed.

These Elements also are somewhat available to this end, Secondly. Damasc. lib.
4. de fide Orthod. c. 14.
that Men may learn and know that the Truth of Christ's Body and Blood are in
the Sacrament; for when we observe that Bread and Wine is daily changed into
human Flesh and Blood by the strength of Nature: We may the more easily be led
by this similitude to believe that the Substance of Bread and Wine by the
Heavenly Benediction, is converted into the true Flesh and true Blood of
Christ. Thirdly.
This admirable Change of the Elements helps also to shadow what is done in the
Soul. For as tho there appears outwardly no change of the Bread and Wine, yet
their substance truly passes into the Flesh and Blood of Christ; so also, tho
nothing seems to be changed in us, yet inwardly we are renewed to life, while
we receive the true life in the Sacrament of the Eucharist.

Add hereto, Fourthly.
that since the Body of the Church is composed of many Members, this
conjunction is not by any thing more cleared than by the Elements of Bread and
Wine. For Bread is made of many Grains, and Wine is pressed out of a Multitude
of Grapes: And so we, tho we are Many, yet they show us to be strictly held
together by the bond of this Divine Mystery, and as it were made One Body.

Now it follows that we treat of the Form which ought to be used at the
consecrating the Bread: XX. The Form of the Eucharist as to the Bread defined
and proved.
Not that the faithful people need to be much taught these Mysteries, unless
there be necessity: (for it is not necessary to instruct those persons in these
matters who are not initiated in Sacred Things): But lest by ignorance of the
Form, the Priests in making this Sacrament may make any foul mistakes.

We are taught therefore by the Holy Evangelists Matthew and Luke, By
Scripture. Mat. 26.26. Mar. 14.22. Luc. 26.19. 1 Cor. 14.22.
and by the Apostle, that This is the Form, [This is my Body,] for it is
written, when they had supped, Jesus took Bread and blessed it, and brake it,
and gave it to his Disciples, and said, Take and eat, This is my Body. Which
Form of consecration, seeing it was observed of Christ our Lord, the same has
bin always used in the Catholic Church.

We might here forbear the Testimonies of the Holy Fathers, By Fathers and
Councils.
which to reckon up would be endless, and the Decree of the Council of
Florence, which is open and ready for all to see; especially since by those
words of our Savior, Do this in commemoration of me, we plainly see the same
thing. In Decret. de. Sacram. Item Trid. Sess. 13. cap. 1.

For what the Lord commanded to be done, he did, but also to what he said: And
we must know that indeed it chiefly belongs to the Words, which were uttered no
less for the sake of Effecting, than for the sake of Signifying. As to the
Fathers, see Amb. lib. 4. de Sacram. c. 4. and 5. Chrysostom. hom. de Prodit. Judae.
Aug: lib. 3. de Trinit. c. 4. Iren. lib. 4. cont. Haer. c. 34. Orig. lib. 8.
cont. Celsum. Hesich. lib. 6. in Levit. c. 22. Cyril. Alex. Epist. ad Calosorum
Episcop. Tertul. lib. 4. contr. Marc. in Hier. Epist. 1.

But this may easily be persuaded by Reason: By Reason.
For the Form is that whereby is signified that thing which is wrought in this
Sacrament: Now when these words signify and declare that thing which is done,
i. e. the conversion of the Bread into the true Body of our Lord, it follows,
that the Form is to be put in those very Words; in which meaning we may take
that which is written by the Evangelist, [He Blessed]: Mat. 26.
For he seems to mean, as if he had said, Taking Bread, he. Blessed it, saying,
This is my Body.

For tho the Evangelist placed these words [Take and Eat] before; Matter, but
the Use only. Wherefore they ought indeed by all means to be pronounced by the
Priest, but to the making the Sacrament they are not necessary.

As also that Conjunction [For] is pronounced in the Consecration of the Body
and Blood; Bread, although it may then chance that the Holy Eucharist be not
administered to any body at all.

And now as to the Consecration of the Wine, XXI. The Form of the Eucharist as
to the Win^ defined and proved Decretal. lib. 3. de celeb. Miss. c. 6.
which is the other Matter of this Sacrament, for the same reason before
mentioned, there is need that the Priest rightly know and understand the Form.
That therefore we must certainly believe is comprehended in these words; This
is the Chalice of my Blood of the New and Eternal Testament, the Mystery of
Faith, which shall be shed for you, and for many, for the remission of sins. ^

Of which words there are many gathered from Sacred Scripture: By Scripture.
Luc. 22.20. 1 Cor. 11.25. Mat. 26.28.
But some have bin preserved in the Church by Apostolical Tradition. For that,
which is said, [This is the Chalice] is written by S. Luke, and by the Apostle:
But that which follows, [ Of my Blood, or my Blood of the New Testament, which
shall be shed for you, and for many for the Remission of sins.] was partly said
by S. Luke, and partly by S. Matthew.

But those words [Of the Eternal] and [Mystery of Faith] Holy Tradition, By
Tradition.
the interpreter and keeper of Catholic Unity has taught us.

But of this Form no one can doubt, And Reason.
if he mind in this place also, what was said before of the Form of
Consecration, which is used over the Element of Bread: For it is manifest that
by these words, which signify the substance of the Wine to be converted into
the Blood of our Lord, the Form of this Element is changed. Wherefore since
those words plainly declare this thing, it is plain, that there is no other
Form to be made.

But they express besides, XXII. Three Effects of Christ's Blood.
certain admirable Fruits of Christ's blood shed in his Passion, which
specially belong to this Sacrament. One is an Entrance to the Eternal
Inheritance, which comes to us by right of the New and Eternal Testament.
Another is an Entrance to Righteousness by the Mystery of Faith. For God has
offered Jesus, through Faith in his Blood to be our Reconciler, that he might
be just, and the justifier of him who is of the Faith of Jesus Christ. The
Third is the Forgiveness of Sins.

But because these very words of Consecration are full of Mysteries, XXIII. The
words of the Consecration of the Wine explained. Decretal lib. 3. de celeb.
Miss. c. 6.
and are very suitable to the matter, we must consider them more carefully. Now
that it is said, [This is the Chalice of my Blood] it must be thus understood
[This is my Blood which is contained in the Chalice]. Rightly therefore and
very fitly here whilst the Blood, as it is the Drink of the Faithful, is
consecrated, there is mention to be made of the Chalice or Cup: For neither
would Blood seem to signify sufficiently this kind of drink, unless it were in
some Vessels: It then follows, [Of the New Testament] which for this reason is
added, that we may understand that the Blood of Christ our Lord is not now
given to Men in a Figure, as it was done in the Old Testament, (for we read in
the Epistle to the Hebrews, Without Blood a Testament is not dedicated;) Heb.
9.16.
but really and truly, which properly belongs to the New Testament. Wherefore
the Apostle says, Therefore Christ is the Mediator of the New Testament, that
by means of Death, those who are called, might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance. But the Word [Eternal] is to be referred to the eternal
inheritance, which of right comes to us by the death of Christ our Lord, the
eternal Testator. That whit follows [The Mystery of Faith] excludes not the
Truth of the thing; but that which lies close hid and farthest off from the
sight, signifies that it is to be believed with a steady Faith. But these words
in this place have another meaning, than they have, when they are attributed to
Baptism, sor it is called the mystery of Faith, because by Faith we perceive
Christ's Blood hid under the Species of Wine. But we properly call Baptism the
Sacrament of Faith, as the Greeks call it the Mystery of Faith, because it
contains the whole profession of Christian Faith. Although for another reason also
we call the Blood of our Lord the Mystery of Faith, to wit, because therein
especially, human reason finds much difficulty and labor, when Faith offers to
us to believe, that the Son of God, both God and Man, suffered Death for us:
which Death is indeed signified in the Sacrament of the Blood. Wherefore fitly
in this place, rather than in the Consecration of the Body, is the Passion of
the Lord commemorated in these words [Which shall be shed for the remission of
Sins]. For the Blood being separately consecrated by it self, with relation to
the Passion of the Lord, has greater force and power to lay before the eyes of
all, Mat. 26.28. Luc. 22.20.
both the Death and kind of suffering. But those words which are added [For you
and for many] are taken severally from S. Matthew and S. Luke, which
notwithstanding Holy Church, taught by the Spirit of God, has joined together:
but they belong to the fruit of the Passion, and show the profitableness
thereof: For if we look at the virtue of it, it must be confessed, that our
Savior shed his Blood for the salvation of all men. But if we look at the fruit
which men gather from thence, we may easily understand that it comes not to all
to advantage, but only to some. When therefore he said, [For you] he signified
either them that were then present, or those whom he had chosen out of the
Jewish people, such as were his Disciples, except Judas, with whom he spoke.
But when he added, [For many] he would have the rest that were elected either
Jews or Gentiles, to be understood. Rightly therefore was it done, that it was
not said for all, seeing that in this place the design of the discourse extends
only to the fruits of the Passion, which brought the Fruit of Salvation only to
the Elect. And hither do belong those words of the Apostle, Christ was once
offered to take away the sins of many: Heb. 9.
and that which our Lord himself said in S. John, I pray for them, I pray not
for the World; Joh. 17.8.
but for those whom thou have given me, because they are thine. There are many
other Mysteries wrapped up in these words of the Consecration, which the
Pastors by the daily meditation and study of Divine Matters, and God assisting
them, may easily discover.

But now to return to the explication of those things which the Faithful must
by no means be ignorant of. And because the Apostle admonishes, XXIV. We must
judge of the Eucharist by Faith, not by Sense. 1 Cor. 11.29.
that they are guilty of a most heinous sin, who difference not the Lords Body;
let the Pastors chiefly teach, that the Mind and Reason is here to be called
off from sense. For if the Faithful persuade themselves, that those things only
are contained in this Sacrament, which are perceived by the senses; they must
needs be led into the greatest impiety, when with their Eyes, their Feeling,
their Smell, their Taste, perceiving nothing at all, but the Species of Bread
and Wine, they will judge that there is only Bread and Wine in the Sacrament.
There must be care taken therefore, that as much as may be, the minds of the
Faithful may be abstracted or withdrawn from the judgment of sense, and stirred
up to contemplate the immense Power and Virtue of God.

Now there are three wonderful and stupendous things, XXV. Three things done
in the Eucharist by Consecration.
which in this Sacrament, Holy Church without all doubt believes and confesses
to be wrought by the words of Consecration.

The First is, The First
That the true Body of Christ, that very same which was born of the Virgin, and
now sits in Heaven at the Right Hand of the Father, is contained in this
Sacrament. See Dionys. de Eccl. Hierarch. c. 3. Ignat. Epist. ad Smyr. Just.
Apol. 2. Iren. lib. 4. c. 34. and l. 5. c. 2. Trid. Sess. 13. c. 1. de Euch.

The Second is that no substance of the Elements remains in it: The Second.
Although nothing seems more strange and distant to the senses. Cyp. de coena
Domini. Eusebius. Emiss. hom. 5. de Pasch. Cyr. Hier. Catech. 1, 3, and 4. Ambr.
l. 4. de Sacra. c. 4. Chrysostom. hom. 83. in Matt. and 60. ad Pop. Antioch.

The Third, The Third.
which is easily gathered from both the former, tho the words of Consecration
fully express it, is that what is beheld by the Eyes, or perceived by the other
Senses is in a wonderful and unspeakable manner, without any subject matter.
And one may see indeed all the Accidents of Bread and Wine, which yet are
inherent in no substance, but they consist of themselves; because the Substance
of the Bread and Wine is so changed into the Body and Blood of the Lord, that
the substance of the Bread and Wine altogether ceases.

But that the first may be first handled; XXVI. The true Body of Christ proved
to be in the Eucharist. Mat. 26.26. Mar. 14.20. Luc. 22.19.
Let the Pastors endeavor to show how plain and clear the Words of our Savior
are, which show the Truth of Christ's Body in the Sacrament; for when he says,
This is my Body: This is my Blood: There is no one in his right mind, can be
ignorant, what we are to understand: Especially seeing the design of the
discourse is concerning the human Nature which the Catholic Faith suffers none
to doubt that Christ truly had: As that very holy and learned Man Hilarious has
written concerning the Truth of Christ's Flesh and Blood, S. Hilar. l. 8. de
Trinit. super illa verba velut unum. 1 Cor. 11.28.
when according to the very profession of our Lord, and our Faith, his Flesh is
truly our Food, that there is no room left us to doubt thereof. But there is
another point to be opened by the Pastors, whence it may plainly be known, that
the true Body and Blood of the Lord is contained in the Eucharist. For after
that the Apostle had remembered, That the Bread and Wine was consecrated by our
Lord, and the Sacred Mysteries administered to his Apostles, he subjoyns; But
let a Man prove himself, and so let him eat of that Bread and Drink of that
Chalice, for he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to
himself, not differencing the Lords Body. But if, as Heretics say, that nothing
else were to be venerated in the Sacrament, besides the memory and sign of
Christ's Passion, what need was there that the Faithful should be exhorted with
such weighty words, to prove themselves? For by that weighty word, Judgment,
the Apostle has declared, that some horrid wickedness is committed by him, who
impurely taking the Lords Body, which lies hid in the Eucharist, does not
difference it from other kinds of Meat. Which also before, in the same Epistle
he more fully explained in these words: 1 Cor. 11.26.
The Chalice of Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communication of the
Blood of Christ? and the Bread which we break, is it not the participation of
the Lords Body? Which words verily show the true substance of the Body and
Blood of Christ our Lord.

These places of Scripture therefore shall be explained by the Pastors, XXVII.
The same confirmed by consent of Fathers.
and first it must be taught, that there is nothing doubtful or uncertain in
them: Especially since the authority of Gods Church has thus interpreted them.
To the knowledge of which sense, we may come by a twofold way and means. The
first is, by consulting the Fathers, who flourished both in the beginning, and
so down through every Age of the Church, and were the best Witnesses of the
Doctrine of the Church. But all these by an exact consent and agreement have
most plainly taught the truth of this Opinion. Of which to bring the several
Testimonies, because it would be a most tedious labor, it shall be sufficient
to mark, or rather to show a few things, whereby a judgment may easily be made
of the rest. S. Ambrose therefore first produces his Faith, who in his Book of
those that are initiated in the Mysteries testifies, Lib. 4. de Sacra. and de
it is qui Myster. init c. 9. vide and de consec. did. 2. plutib. in locis.
Chrysostom. ad. Popul. Antioch. homil. 60, and 61.
"That the true Body of Christ is taken in this Sacrament, as his true Body was
taken of the Virgin: and this is to be held with most certain Faith: And in
another place he teaches, That there is Bread, before the Consecration; but
after the consecration, the Body of Christ. Another witness hereof is S.
Chrysostom, one of no less Fidelity and Gravity, who professes and teaches this
Truth, both in many other places, and especially in his 60th. Homily, of those
who unworthily receive the Sacred Mysteries, as also in his 41, and 45.
Homilies upon S. John. For he says: Let us obey and not contradict God, tho
that which is spoken, seem to be contrary to our Reason and our very Eyes: for
his Word is infallible, our Senses are easily deceived. To these, exactly
agrees what S. Austin, the vigorous defender of Catholic Faith, always taught.
And first, expounding the Title of the 33. Psalm, he writes: To carry himself
in his own hands, is to Man an impossible thing, and is proper to Christ alone:
For He was carried in his own hands, when giving that Body of his, he said,
[This is my Body]. And besides, Cyril, Justin, and Irenaeus in his fourth Book
upon S. John so plainly affirm the true Flesh of Christ to be in this
Sacrament, that his words cannot be rendered obscure by any sallacies or
captious interpretations. But if the Pastors want any other Testimonies of the
Fathers, it is easy to add more, as S. Dennys, Hilary, Hierom, Damascen, and
innumerable others, The grave Sentences of whom concerning this matter, we may
read collected and gathered, together by the Labor and Industry of learned and
pious Men. Divus Augustinus in Ps. 33. Conc. 1. a medio ad finera usque. Cyril.
l. 4. in Joan. c. 33. and 14. and l. c. 13. Just. Apolog. 2. sub finem ad
Antonium. l'ium. lren. l. 5. cont. haeret. c. and l. 5. in Joan. c. 34. Dionys.
Eccles. Hier. c. 3. Hilar. l. 8. de Trinit. Hierom Epist. ad Damasum. Damasc.
l. 4. de Orthod. fid. c. 14. There remains another way, whereby we may find out
the judgment of Holy Church in those things which belong to Faith, to wit, the
contrary Doctrine and Opinion being condemned.

And it is manifest that the Truth of the Body of Christ in the Holy Sacrament
of the Eucharist was so scattered and spread abroad through the whole Church,
XXVIII. The same further confirmed by Decrees of Councils.
and willingly embraced by all the Faithful, that when Berengarius five hundred
years ago presumed to deny it, and asserted, That there was only a Sign, he was
forthwith condemned by the Sentence of all in the Council of Verceils, which by
Authority of Leo IX. was convened, and himself retracted his Opinion, and
condemned it with an Anathema. Who afterward returning to the same impiety,
was condemned in three other Councils, one at Tours, and two at Rome, whereof
the one was called together by Pope Nicholas II. and the other by Pope Gregory
VII. And afterward the Faith of the same Truth was more fully declared and
settled in the Councils of Florence and Trent.

If therefore the Pastors shall diligently have explained these things (not to
say any thing of those, XXIX. And by Reason.
who being blinded and hardened in their Errors, hate nothing more than the
Light of Truth) they will be able to confirm the weak, and to affect the Souls
of the devout with the greatest joy and delight: Especially since the Faithful
may not doubt, but that the Belief of this Persuasion is to be reckoned among
the other Articles of Faith.

For when they believe and confess God's Power to be supreme over all things,
The First.
they must needs believe, that he wants not Power to effect this great Work
which we admire and worship in the Sacrament of the Eucharist.

And then, The Second.
when they believe the Catholic Church, it must needs follow that they believe
also that this is the truth of this Sacrament, as we have explained it.

And indeed there can be no greater sweetness and profit to the Faithful, XXX
How great the Churches Dignity by reason of the Sacrament of the Eucharist.
than to contemplate the dignity of this most profound Sacrament. For first,
they perceive, how great the Perfection of the Law of the Gospel is, which has
the privilege, to have that thing in Truth and Reality, which in the time of
the Mosaical Law was only shadowed by Signs and Figures. Wherefore it was
divinely said of S. Dennys, De Eccl. Hier. c. 3 p. 1.
That our Church is in the middle, between the Synagogue and the upper
Jerusalem, and participates of both. And indeed the Faithful can never
sufficiently admire the perfection of Holy Church, and the height of her Glory,
seeing there seems to be but one step or degree only betwixt her and the Bliss
of Heaven. For This we have common with those in Heaven, that both of us have
Christ God and Man present with us: But we are below them this one step, They
being present there, enjoy the blessed Vision: But We with a firm and constant
Faith worship him, being present with us, but hiding himself far from the sense
of our Eyes, under the admirable clothing of the Sacred Mysteries. Besides, in
this Sacrament the Faithful experience the most perfect Love of our Savior
Christ: For it highly became his goodness, never to withdraw from us that
Nature which he took of us, but, as much as may be, to be, and to be conversant
among us: That at all times that might seem to be truly and properly said;
Prove. 8.
My delight is to be with the Children of Men.

And now in this place the Pastors must explain, XXXI. Whole Christ, as God and
Man contained in the Eucharist.
not only that the true Body of Christ, and whatsoever belongs to the true
Nature of a Body, as Bones and Sinews, but also that whole Christ is contained
in this Sacrament. For they ought to teach, That Christ is the name of God-Man,
to wit, of one Person, wherein the Divine and Human Nature are joined together;
how it conteins both Substances, and whatsoever are the consequences of each
Substance, the Divinity, and the whole Human Nature, which consists of all the
parts of a Body and of Blood also; all which we must believe to be in the
Sacrament. For since in Heaven the whole Humanity is joined to the Divinity in
one person and Hypostasis; it would be wicked but to imagine that the Body,
which is in the Sacrament, is disjoined from the same Divinity. Vide de
Consecr. did. 2. multis in locis, Item Ambr. de iis qui mist. init. c. 9. D.
Thom. 3. p. q. 76. a. 1.

Where it will be necessary notwithstanding, XXXII. Whatsoever things are
Christ's, are not all contained in the Eucharist after the same manner.
that the Pastors observe that all things are not contained in this Sacrament
after the same way, or with the same virtue. For there are some things which we
say are in the Sacrament, by the virtue and Efficacy of Consecration. For
seeing those Words effect what they signify, Sacred Writers have bin used to
say, That that Thing is in the Sacrament, by virtue of the Sacrament, which is
expressed in the Form of Words: So if it should happen, that any thing should
be wholly disjoined from the other things, That only is in the Sacrament, which
the Form signifies, but the rest they have taught not to be so. But there are
some things contained in the Sacrament, because they are joined with the
things, which are expressed in the Form. For seeing that the Form, which is
used at consecrating the Bread, signifies the Lords Body, when it is said, This
is my Body, the very Body of Christ our Lord is in the Eucharist by virtue of
the Sacrament.

But because his Body, Blood, Soul and Divinity are joined together, XXXIII.
What things are in the Eucharist by concomitancy.
all these will be also in the Sacrament, not indeed by virtue of the
Consecration, but as those things which are joined with his Body. And these
things are said to be in the Sacrament by concomitancy: For which reason it is
plain, that whole Christ is in the Sacrament. For if any two things are indeed
knit together, where the One is, the other must needs be there also. It follows
therefore, that whole Christ is so far contained as well in the species of the
Bread as of the Wine; that as not only the Body, but also the Blood, and whole
Christ is truly in the species of the Bread: So on the contrary, not only the
Blood but the Body also, and whole Christ is truly in the species of Wine.

Now tho all the Faithful ought to be fully and assuredly persuaded of these
things; XXXIV. Why the Bread and Wine separately consecrated.
Yet it was very fitly ordered, That two Consecrations should be severally
made. First, That the Passion of our Lord, in which the Blood was divided from
his Body, might more lively be represented; for which cause in the Consecration
we make a memorial that Christ's Blood was poured out. And then it was most fit,
that because we are to use the Sacrament for the Nourishment of our Souls, it
should be appointed as Meat and Drink; of which two it is evident that the
perfect nourishment of the Body does consist.

Nor ought this to be passed over, XXXV. Whole Christ in every particle.
that whole Christ is contained, not only in either species, but in every
particle of each species. For thus S. Austin writes, All severally receive
Christ our Lord, and he is whole in the several parts, nor is he made the less
by being distributed severally to many: But he gives himself whole to all: But
this may easily be gathered from the Evangelists also. Citatur Aug. de Consecr.
did. 2. c. singulis.

For we are not to believe, XXXVI. Many particles of Bread not consecrated
separately.
that the several Loaves of Bread were consecrated by our Lord with the proper
Form of words, but that all the Bread then used at the Sacred Mysteries, and
enough to be distributed among the Apostles, was consecrated together with the
same Form: 'The same thing which appears to have bin done by the Chalice: For
he said: Luc. 22.17
[Take and divide it among you.] What has hitherto bin explained, is intended,
that the Pastors may show, that the true Body and Blood of Christ is contained
in the Sacrament of the Eucharist.

Now as to the Second thing proposed, XXXVII. After the Consecration that the
substance of the Bread and Wine remain not, proved. First by Reason.
they shall teach also, that the Substance of Bread and Wine remains not in the
Sacrament after Consecration. Now tho this deservedly requires a very great
admiration, yet it is necessarily joined with that which before was showed.

For if after Consecration there be the true Body of Christ under the species
of Bread and Wine, it is altogether necessary, that seeing it was not there
before, this be done either by change of place, by Creation, or by Conversion
of another thing into it. But it is manifest that it cannot be, that the Body
of Christ in the Sacrament be that which came out of one place into another:
For so it would come to pass that he must be absent from Heaven; because
nothing is moved, unless it leave the place from which it moved. But it is less
credible that the Body of Christ is created, and this we cannot so much as
conceive: It remains therefore, that in the Sacrament there is the Body of our
Lord, and that the Bread is changed into it. Wherefore it must needs be, that
no substance of Bread remains.

Being led by this Reason, Secondly by the decrees of Councils.
our Ancestors and Forefathers in the great Council of Lateran, and that of
Florence, by evident Decrees confirmed the truth of this Article. But in the
Council of Trent it was more fully defined thus: If any one shall say, that in
the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, there remains the Substance of Bread and
Wine, together with the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
Anathema. Lat. Con. c. 1. Flor. in Ep. Eugenii IV. data ad Arm. and a Concilio
approbata. Trid. Sess. 13. Can. 4.

And it was easy to gather these things from testimonies of Scripture: Thirdly
by the Authority of Scripture.
First that in the Institution of this Sacrament the Lord himself said: This is
my Body: For this is the force of the word, [This] to show all the Substance of
the thing present; but if the Substance of the Bread remained, it would seem by
no means to be truly said, Matt. 26.26. Mar. 14.2. Luc. 22.28. 1 Cor. 11.24.
Joh. 6.61.
This is my Body. And then Christ our Lord in S. John says, Which I will give,
is my Flesh, for the Life of the World, to wit, calling the Bread, his Flesh.
And a little after he subjoyns: Unless you shall eat the Flesh of the Son of
Man, and drink his Blood, ye will not have Life in you. And again, My Flesh is
Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed. When therefore in so plain and clear
words he called his Flesh, Bread, and true Meat, and his Blood, true Drink: It
might well seem sufficient do have declared, That there remains no Substance of
Bread and Wine in the Sacrament.

And that all the Holy Fathers, Fourthly, by the Authority and consent of
Fathers. Lib. 4. de Sacr. c. 4. etc. 5.
always agreed in this Doctrine, He that is so minded, may easily understand.
For thus writes S. Ambrose, Thou say perhaps my Bread is used: But that Bread
is Bread before the words of the Sacraments: But when the Consecration is
added, of Bread it is made the Flesh of Christ. Which that he might the better
make appear, he thereupon brings diverse examples and Similitudes. And
elsewhere, De Cons. did. 2. c. omnia.
interpreting those words: [All things whatsoever the Lord pleased he has done
in Heaven and in Earth]. For tho, says he, the Figure of Bread and Wine be
seen; yet after consecration, nothing is to be believed to be there, but the
Flesh and Blood of Christ. The same sense St. Hilary has taught, and almost in
the same words: Although outwardly Bread and Wine appear; yet there is truly the
Body and Blood of the Lord. Hill. de Trin. l. 8. and de Consec. did. 2. c. 28.

But let the Pastors admonish, XXXVIII. Why after the Consecration of of the
Eucharist it is called Bread.
That in this place it is not to be wondered at, if even after Consecration it
be called Bread. For the Eucharist is used to be called by this name, both
because it has the species or Resemblance of Bread, and also because it still
retains the natural virtue of feeding and nourishing the Body, which is proper
to Bread. Now that it is the usual manner of the Holy Scripture to call things,
as they appear to be; that plainly shows, which is written in Genesis, Genesis
18.2. Act. 1.10.
That three Men appeared to Abraham, which yet were truly three Angels. And
those Two that appeared to the Apostles at the Ascension of Christ our Lord
into Heaven, tho they were Angels, yet are they called Men. See D. Thom. 3. p.
q. 75. art. 3, and 4.

The explication of this Article is altogether extreme difficult; XXXIX. How
cautiously the Conversion which is in the Eucharist is to be explained to the
people.
but yet the Pastors shall endeavor to instruct those who are more skilled in
the the Contemplation of Divine Matters (for it may be feared that those who
are yet more weak, may be oppressed with the Greatness of the thing) they shall
endeavor, I say, to teach the Manner of this admirable Conversion; which is so
done, that the whole Substance of the Bread and Wine, by the divine power, is
changed into the whole Substance of Christ's Body, and the whole Substance of
the Wine into the whole Substance of Christ's Blood, and this without any
change of our Lord. For Christ is neither begotten anew, nor changed, nor
increases, but remains whole in his own Substance. Which Mystery when St.
Ambrose had declared, D. Amb. lib. 4. de Sacr. c. 4.
Thou see, says he, how operative Christ's Word is. If therefore there be so
great a power in the Word of the Lord Jesus, that those things began to be,
which were not, to wit, the World; how much more operative is it to make those
things to be, which were before, and to change them into another thing?
According to which sense, other very grave and ancient Father have written:
Citatur de Consec. did. 2 c. Nos Autem. Lib. 4. de Orthod. fid. c. 14.
St. Austin thus: We faithfully confess that before Consecration it is Bread
and Wine, which Nature has formed; but after Consecration it is the Body and
Blood of Christ, which the Blessing has consecrated. Damascen: The Body
according to Truth is joined to the Divinity, that Body which came of the Holy
Virgin: Not that that Body which he took, comes down from Heaven; but that this
Bread and Wine are changed into the Body and Blood of Christ.

This admirable Change therefore is conveniently and properly called by the
Catholic Church Transubstantiation, XL. This Conversion called
Transubstantiation.
as the sacred Council of Trent has taught. For as the Natural Generation, when
the Form is changed in it, may rightly and properly be called a Transformation;
so also, because in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, the whole Substance of One
thing, passes into the whole substance of another thing, the word
Transubstantiation was rightly and wisely invented by our Forefathers. See
Trid. sess. 13. c. 4. and de can. and de Consec. did. 2. cap. Panis.

But the Faithful are to be admonished, LXI. We are not too narrowly to enquire
into Transubstantiation.
that though this be very often repeated by the Holy Fathers, yet that they
enquire not too curiously by what means this Change is wrought; for neither can
it be perceived by us, neither have we any example of this matter in natural
Changes, or in the very Creation of things. But whatsoever is here done, it is
to be known by Faith: but how it is done, must not too curiously be searched
into.

The Pastors ought also to give them no less a Caution in explaining that
Mystery how the Body of Chritt our Lord is contained whole in the least
particle of Bread: XLII. The whole Body of Christ contained in the smallest
particle.
for scarce ever are there any disputations of this kind to be allowed; but yet
when Christian Charity requires it, let them first of all remember, to fore-arm
the minds of Faithful with this word: Luke 1.37.
There is no word impossible with God. Vide D. Thom. 3. p. q. 76. Trid. sess.
13. c. 5. and can. 3. and Florentin. Decret. Eugenii.

And then let them teach, XLIII. After what manner Christ is in the Eucharist.
it is not in the Sacrament as in a Place; for Place belongs to those things
that have Magnitude. But we say not that Christ is in the Sacrament after that
manner, as he is Great or Little, because that belongs to Quantity, but as he
is a Substance. For the Substance of Bread is changed into the Substance of
Christ, not into Magnitude or Quantity. But no one doubts that a Substance is
equally contained in a Little as in a Great space. For it must needs be that
the Substance of the Air, and its whole Nature, is the same in a little, as in
a great part of the Air: so also the whole Nature of Water, is no less in a
little Pitcher, than in a River. When the Lords Body succeeds the Substance of
the Bread; we must confess that it is in the Sacrament just after the same
manner, as the Substance of Bread, before Consecration. But to confess whether
it be under a Great, or under a Little Quantity, is nothing at all to the
purpose.

Now follows the Third thing which in this Sacrament seems very great and
wonderful, XLIV. The Accidents remain in the Eucharist without the Subject.
which after the other two being explained, must be supposed may be handled by
the Pastors with more Ease, to wit, that the species of Bread and Wine in this
Sacrament remain without any subject Matter. For seeing it was showed before,
that the Lords Body and Blood are truly in the Sacrament, so that there
subsists no more any Substance at all of Bread and Wine: because those
Accidents cannot be inherent to the Body and Blood of Christ; it remains, that
beyond all the order and course of Nature, they uphold themselves without any
other thing to suport them. This has bin the perpetual and constant Doctrine of
the Church: which will be easy to confirm by the Authority of those
testimonies, by which it was before made evident, that there remains no
Substance of Bread or Wine in the Eucharist, Vide de Consecr. did. 2. c. Nos
autem. and Decretal. lib. 1. tit. de celeb. Miss: c. Cum Matt. and D. Thom. 3.
p. q. 75 a. 3. and q. 77. a. 1.

But nothing is more suitable to the Devotion of the Faithful, XLV. The Duty of
the Faithful toward the Eucharist.
than passing by all more nice and subtle questions, that they adore and
reverence the Majesty of this admirable Sacrament. And then, that therein they
embrace the supreme Providence of God, that he has instituted these Holy
Mysteries to be administered under the species of Bread and Wine.

For since it is the most horrid thing in the world to the Nature of Man to be
fed with Man's Flesh, XLVI. Why under the species of Bread and Wine the
Eucharist was instituted.
or to drink his Blood; he most wisely ordered it, that his most Holy Body and
Blood should be administered to us under the species of those things, of Bread
and Wine, I say, by whose common and daily use and nourishment we are mostly
delighted. And there are adjoin'd these two Conveniences; whereof the first
is, that we are freed from the reproach of Infidels, which we could not easily
have avoided, if we should be seen to eat our Lord under his own species. The
other is, that while we thus take the Body and Blood of the Lord in such a
manner as notwithstanding, what is truly done cannot be perceived by the
senses, this avails very much to increase Faith in our Souls, which verily, as
Gregory's known sentence is, Faith has no Merit, where Human Reason gives the
Experiment. Hom. 26. super Evangelia.
Vide Cyril. lib. 4. in Joan. c. 22. Cypr. de Coena Domini. Ambr. de Sacram.
lib. 4. c. 4. Aug. Tract. 27. in Joan. D. Thom. 3. p. q. 74. a. 1. and q. 75.
a. 1. But these things which have hitherto been expounded, are not to be
explained without great caution used, according to the Capacity of the Hearers,
and the Necessity of Times.

But those things which may be said concerning the Influence and Fruits of this
admirable Sacrament, XLVII. The Virtue and innumerable advantages of the
Eucharist.
we must know that there is no sort of the Faithful, to whom the Knowledge of
these things belongs not, and to whom it ought not to seem very necessary. Now
that the Faithful may understand the Vtility of the Eucharist, for this cause
chiefly, those things which are with so many words discoursed concerning this
Sacrament, are to be known. But because the immense Advantages and Fruits
thereof can never by Words be expressed, there may One or Two Points be handled
by the Pastors, to show what a plenty and abundance of all good things are
included in these Mysteries. Vide Trid. Sess. 13. c. 3. and can. 5. Iren. lib.
4. c. 14. Cyril. lib. 4. in Joan. c. 11. and 14. Chrysostom. hom. 45. in Joan. D.
Thom. 3. p. q. 79.

And this in part they will thus perform, XLVIII. The Eucharist the Fountain of
all the Sacraments.
if the virtue and nature of all the Sacraments being laid open, they compare
the Eucharist to the Fountain, and the other Sacraments to the smaller streams;
for we must needs call it, and that truly, the Fountain of all Graces: because
after an admirable manner it contains in it the very Fountain of Heavenly Gifts
and Endowments, and the Author of all the Sacraments Christ our Lord: from
which, as from the Fountain, is derived or drawn to the other Sacraments,
whatsoever Goodness or Perfection they have. From hence therefore, the most
ample endowments of Divine Grace, which are bestowed on us in this Sacrament,
may easily be collected.

It may seem profitable also to consider well the Nature of Bread and Wine,
XLIX. What Food is to the Body, that the Eucharist is to the Spirit.
which are the Symbols of this Sacrament. For see of what Use Bread and Wine is
to the Body, of the same, but in a far better and more perfect manner is the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, to the Health and Delight of the Soul. For neither
is This Sacrament changed into our substance, as the Bread and Wine is; but
after a certain sort it changes us into its own Nature: So that rightly may
that of St. Austin be transferred hither: Lib. 7. Consess. c. 10.
I am the Meat of Great ones, grow great, and thou shall eat me: nor shall thou
change me into thee, as thou do thy Bodily meat, but thou shall be changed
into me. Vide Ambr. lib. 5. de Sacram. c. 4. and Chrysostom. hom. 45. in Joan.

Now if Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, L. Grace flows into the Soul through
the Eucharist. Joh. 6.56, 57.
it must need flow into thy Soul, when thou take him purely and holily, who
said of himself: He that eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I
in him, for those who being affected with the study of Piety and Religion, take
this Sacrament, no one ought to doubt, but that they so take into themselves
the Son of God, as that they are grafted into his Body as living Members: for
it is written: He that eats me, even he shall live by reason of me. And: Lib.
4. in Joan. c. 12.14. and Epist. ad Nester. 10.
The Bread which I will give, is my Flesh, for the life of the World. Which
place Cyril interpreting, says, "The Word of God uniting himself to his own
Flesh, made it quickening. It therefore became him after a wonderful manner to
be united to our Bodies through his sacred Flesh and precious Blood, which we have
received in the Bread and Wine by his quickening or enlivening Benediction.

But forasmuch as it is said, I.I. When the Eucharist does not profit.
that Grace is given in the Eucharist, the Pastors ought to admonish, that it
is not so to be understood, as though it were not necessary that he who will
indeed profitably received this Sacrament, should not before obtain Grace. For
it is manifest, that as natural Food does nothing at all profit a dead Body; so
also the sacred Mysteries profit not that Soul which lives not in Spirit.

And therefore they have the species or show of Bread and Wine to signify,
dead Soul to Life again, but to preserve Life.

But this is therefore spoken, LII. By the Eucharist is given the first Grace,
and why.
because even the First Grace (which All ought to have, before they presume to
receive the sacred Eucharist in their mouth, lest they eat and drink judgment
to themselves) is not given to any, except in Wish and Desire they receive this
very Sacrament. For This is the End of all the Sacraments, and the Symbol of
Ecclesiastical Unity and Conjunction: neither can any one out of the Church
obtain Grace.

And then, Body is not only served by Natural Food, but also increased, and the
Taste daily receives new pleasure and sweetness from it; so also the Meat of
the sacred Eucharist does not only keep the Soul alive; but it also adds
strength to it, and causes that the Spirit be more and more moved with the
Delight of divine things: Sap. 16.20.
for this cause it is, that Grace is rightly and most truly said to be given in
this Sacrament, for it may well be compared to Manna, wherein every sweetness
of Taste was perceived.

Now that in the Eucharist are remitted and pardoned the lesser sins, LIII.
Lesser sins remitted through the Eucharist.
which are commonly called Venial, there is no one ought to doubt; for
whatsoever the Soul has lost by the heat of desire, while she committed some
small offense in some light matter, all That the Eucharist restores, wiping
away all those lesser faults: even as (for there seems no reason why we may not
make use of the common similitude) that which is daily lost and decays by the
force of the innate Heat, we feel to be refreshed and renewed, by little and
little, by natural Sustenance. Wherefore rightly was it said by St. Ambrose
concerning this heavenly Sacrament. Lib. 4. de sac. c. 6. and lib. 5. c. 4.
This daily Bread is taken for a Remedy of our daily Infirmity. Innocent. 111.
lib. 4. de Mist. Miss. c. 44. Cyril. lib. 4. in Joan. c. 17. and lib. 3. c. 36.
Inter opera D. Bernardi habetur cujusdam Sermo Domini qui incipit, Panem
Angelorum, and singularis est de Euch. videatur and D. Thom. 3. p. q. 79.

Mark well.
But this is to be understood of those sins with the Sense and Pleasure whereof
the Soul is not much moved.

There is moreover such Virtue in the sacred Mysteries, LIVE. The Eucharist
strengthens against harms.
that it keeps us pure and clean from sin and safe from the violence of
Temptations, and prepares our Soul as it were with a heavenly Medicine or
Antidote, that it be not easily infected, Aug. Tract. 26. in Joan. l. 1. op. 2.
ad Cornel.
or hurt with the Poison of any deadly Contagion or Disease. And for this Cause
also, as S. Cyprian testifies, when in old times the Faithful were haled away
by the Rabble to slaughter and Torments for the Confession of the name of
Christ, lest happily they being overcome with the bitterness of their Pains,
should faint in the Sacred Combat, it was an old custom in the Catholic Church
for the Bishops to give them the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of the Lord.

And it also restrains and suppresses the Lust of the Flesh. LV. The Eucharist
restrains Lust.
For while it more and more inflames our Souls with the Fire of Charity, it
must needs quench the Heat of Concupiscence.

Lastly, LVI. The Eucharist clears the way to eternal Glory. Joh. 6.53.
That we may comprehend all the Advantages and Benefits of this Sacrament in
one word. The Sacred Eucharist has a mighty force to gain eternal Glory; for it
is written: He that eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood, has eternal Life, and I
will raise him up at the last day. Vide Chrysostom. de Sacerdotio dialogo. 6. D.
Thom. 3. p. q. 79. art. 2.

By the Grace of this Sacrament also, the Faithful, while they live here in
this World, enjoy the highest Peace and Tranquillity of Conscience: And then by
the virtue hereof, being strengthened, even as Elias was, 3 Reg. 19.8.
who in the strength of his Cakes baked on the Ashes, walked as far as to
Horeb, the Mount of God; when the time shall come for them to pass out of this
Life, they shall ascend to eternal Glory and Bliss.

All these things will be very largely explained by the Pastors, if they will
but handle the sixth Chapter of S. John, wherein are laid open the manifold
Effects of this Sacrament, or running through the admirable works of Christ our
Lord, shall show, since we rightly and deservedly account them blessed who
received him into their Houses while he lived in this mortal life, or who by
the very Touch only of his Garment, or of his Sleve, recovered Health, that we
are much more happy and blessed, into whose Souls he disdains not to enter,
clothed now with immortal Glory, to heal all their Wounds, to adorn them with
the most excellent endowments, and to unite them to himself.

But it must be taught by Whom these mighty Fruits of the Eucharist, LVII. A
threefold way of receiving the Eucharist. De Consecr. did. 2. c. 46. Sess. 13.
c. 8.
now mentioned, may be perceived: Nor is there One only way of Communicating,
that the Faithful may learn to emulate the better Gifts: Rightly therefore, and
wisely have our Ancestors, as we read in the Council of Trent, distinguished
three ways of taking this Sacrament.

For some receive the Sacrament only, Sacramentally.
as those sinners who are not afraid to take the sacred Mysteries with an
impure Mouth and Heart; 1 Cor. 11.19.
who, as the Apostle says, Do eat and drink the Lords Body unworthily. Aug. in
Joan. tract. 16. and contra Dom. l. 5. c. 8.
Of these S. Austin writes thus. He that abides not in Christ, and in whom
Christ abides not, without all doubt he eats not Christ's Flesh, although carnally
and visibly he press with his Teeth the Sacrament of his Flesh and Blood. Those
therefore that being thus affected, receive the Sacred Mysteries, not only
hereby receive no fruit, 1 Cor. 11.19.
but, as the Apostle himself testifies, they eat and drink judgment to
themselves.

But others are said to receive the Eucharist Spiritually only, Spiritually.
Gal. 5.6.
and they are those who being kindled with a lively Faith, which works by Love,
eat that heavenly Bread in desire and wish, which is offered them; from whence,
tho they get not all the Fruits of the Eucharist, yet without doubt they have
those which are very great.

Lastly, Sacramentally and Spiritually.
there are some who receive the Sacred Eucharist both Sacramentally and
Spiritually: who when, according to the Apostles Doctrine, they shall first
have proved themselves, and being adorned with the wedding Garment, come to
this Divine Table, receive most plentiful Fruits from the Eucharist, as we said
before.

Wherefore it is plain, they bereave themselves of the greatest celestial Good
things, who when they may come prepared even to take the Sacrament of the Lords
Body, think it enough to receive the Sacred Communion spiritually only.

And now it must be taught how the Souls of the Faithful ought to be prepared,
before they come to the Sacramental receiving of the Eucharist.

And first, LVIII. Who come to the Eucharist ought to be prepared, and why.
First. John 13.5.
that it may appear that that preparation is very necessary, the Example of our
Savior ought to be proposed. For before he gave his Apostles the Sacraments of
his Body and Blood, although they were already clean, he washed their Feet, that
he might declare that all diligence is to be used, that there be nothing
wanting to us, to the highest integrity and innocence of Soul, when we go about
to receive these sacred Mysteries.

And then the Faithful may understand, Secondly.
that if any one receive the Eucharist with a Soul well disposed and prepared,
he is adorned with the most ample endowments of celestial Grace: So on the
contrary, if he receive it unprepared, he not only receives no advantage
thereby, but also he takes exceeding great damage and hurt. For this is proper
to the best and most wholesome things, that if we use them in season, they
mightily profit us, but if we use them in a wrong season, they hurt and destroy
us. Wherefore it is not to be wondered at, that those mighty and transcendent
Gifts of God, when they are received by a Soul, well disposed, are very helpful
to us to get the Glory of Heaven, but when we offer to receive them unworthily,
they bring eternal Death.

This is proved from an Example of the Ark of the Lord: An example
For the Ark of the Covenant, than which the People of Israel had nothing more
excellent, to whom also by it the Lord gave very great and innumerable
Benefits, and yet it carried with it calamity joined with eternal reproach: So
also to those who having by the Mouth received, and so let fall into a well
affected Stomach, they nourish and sustain the Body, but to those who use to
pour them into a Stomach full of vicious humors, they cause grievous diseases.
De praeparatione ad Euch. requisita, vide Trid. Sess. 13. c. 7. and can. 11.
Basil. q. 172. regul. hrev. and Sermon. 2. de Bapt. Cypr. toto fere lib. de
Lapsit, agendo de Poenit. Aug. Sermon. 1. de Temp. Chrysostom. hom. 44, 45, 46. in
Joan. and in Matt. hom. 83.

Let the Faithful therefore use this First Preparation, LIX. Preparations of
the Soul to the Eucharist. The First.
To discern Table from Table, This Sacred Table, from other profane Tables,
This Bread of Heaven from Common-bread. And this is done, when we certainly
believe that the true Body and Blood of our Lord is present, whom the Angels
adore in Heaven, at whose Nod the Pillars of Heaven tremble and shake for fear,
1 Cor. 11.19.
of whose Glory the Heaven and Earth is full. This is to difference the Lords
Body, which the Apostle admonishes us to do: the greatness of which Mystery
notwithstanding, we must reverence rather than curiously search into the Truth
of it in subtle Disputations.

But another Preparation exceeding necessary is, The Second.
that every one examine himself, whether he have peace with others, Matt. 5.24.
whether he love his Neighbor truly and with all his Soul. If therefore thou
offer thy Gift at the Altar, and there shall remember that thy Brother has any
thing against thee, leave there thy Gift before the Altar, and go thy way,
first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then come and offer thy Gift.

And then we ought diligently to search our Conscience, The third.
lest happily we may be polluted with any deadly sin, for which it is necessary
to do Penance, that first by the Medicine of Contrition and Confession it might
be done away: Sess. 13. can. 21.
For it has bin defined by the Holy Council of Trent, That no one may receceive
the Sacred Eucharist, whom the Conscience of any mortal sin pricks, if a Priest
is to be had, before he shall have purged himself by Sacramental Confession;
no, not tho he seem to himself to be contrite. Chrysostom. hom. 30. in Genes. and
20. in Mat. Cypr. in lib. de Lapsis.

Fourthly, The Fourth.
Let us think with our selves, how unworthy we are that the Lord should bestow
on us this divine Benefit. Wherefore let us say from our Hearts that of the
Centurion; of whom our Savior himself testifies, Matt. 8.10.
That he found not so great Faith, no not in Israel: Lord I am not worthy that
thou should enter under my roof.

Let us also examine our selves, The Fifth. Joh. 21.15.
whether we can truly take up that of S. Peter to our selves: Lord thou know
that I love thee. For we must remember, that he that sat down at the Lords
Feast without a Wedding Garment, was cast into Prison, and condemned to eternal
Punishment.

Nor is there need of the Souls preparation only, LX. The Preparations of the
Body for the Eucharist.
but of the Body's also: For we ought to come Fasting to that Sacred Table; so
that at least from the midnight of the day before, even to that very point of
Time, wherein we receive the Eucharist, we should not either eat or drink any
thing at all. See Aug. Epist. 118. c. 6. and lib. 1. ad in quisit. Januarii, c.
6.

And the Dignity of this Sacrament requires, LXI. 1 Reg. 21.5.
that married people abstain from mutual embraces for some days, being
admonished by David's Example, who when he was to receive some Show-Bread of the
Priest, professed that he kept himself and his Servants clean from the
communication of their Wives for those three days. These are in a manner the
things the Faithful are to observe, to prepare themselves before hand
profitably to receive the Sacred Mysteries: For the rest which may seem fit to
be taken care for in this matter, may easily be reduced to these very Heads.

But lest any grow more sluggish or backward to the receiving this Sacrament,
bacause they think it a very weighty and hard matter to make so great a
Preparation; The Faithful are often to be admonished, That the Law obliges all
to receive the Sacred Eucharist. Besides it has been decreed by the Church,
that he that will not at least once every year communicate at Easter, shall be
driven away from the Church. Council. Lateran. c. 28. and habetur l. 5.
decretal. tit. de Poenis. and remiss. c. Omnis utriusque sexus. Trid. Sess.
13.9.

Neither let the Faithful think that this is enough, LXIII. The Faithful to be
exhorted to the frequent use of the Eucharist.
that obeying the authority of this Decree, they only once a year receive the
Lords Body, but let them know, that they ought oftener to receive the Communion
of the Eucharist. But whether it be more expedient so to do every Month, or
every Week or every Day, Aug.
there can be no certain Rule prescribed for all. But yet this is S. Austins
most sure Rule: So live, that thou may receive every Day. Wherefore the
Curats shall be ready to exhort the Faithful diligently, that as they think it
necessary to afford nourishment to their Bodies every Day; so also that they
cast not off the care of feeding and nourishing their Soul every day with the
Sacrament: for it is plain that the Soul no less wants her Spiritual Meat, than
the Body her natural Food. And it will be extremely profitable in this place to
repeat those exceeding great and divine Benefits, which, as was before showed,
we obtain by Sacramental Communion of the Eucharist: And this figure also shall
be added, that every day the Israelites ought to refresh the strength of their
Bodies with Manna: Exodus 16.
And also the authorities of the Holy Fathers, which greatly commended the
frequent receiving of this Sacrament. Neither was it the Opinion of that one
only Holy Father, S. Austin, "Thou daily sinnest, daily receive; but whosoever
diligently observes, will easily find that the same was the sense of all the
Fathers that have written of this matter. To frequent Communion do exhort, Aug.
de verb. Dom. sermon. 28. sed hic sermon. cum non sit. Aug. sed Ambr. l. 5. de
Sacram. c. 4. rejectus est in apendicem tomi 10. Item vide eund. Aug. Epist.
118. c. 3. Item Ignat. ad Ephesians. satis ante fin. Basil. Epist. ad Caesar. patr.
Ambr. lib. 3. de Sacram. c. 4. Chrysostom. hom. 61. ad pop. Antioch. Cypr. de Orat.
Domin. ad haec verba, Panem nostrum quotid. Hieron. Epist. 28. ad Lucin. verse.
finem. Cyril. lib. 3. in Joan. c. 34. de consec. did. 2. per multa capita hac
de re.

And in former days there was a time when the Faithful daily received the
Eucharist, LXIV. Anciently the Faithful communicated every day. Act. 2.42.
as we understand from the Acts of the Apostles: For all who then professed the
Christian Faith, did so burn with true Christian Charity, that when without
intermission they were at leisure for Prayers and other duties of Piety or
Devotion, they were always found ready prepared daily to receive the Sacred
Mysteries of the Lords Body. The most holy Martyr and Pope Anacletus in some
measure renewed this: De consec. did. ^. c. 1^.
For he commanded, That the Ministers who performed Mass, should communicate:
Which thing he affirmed to have bin ordained by the Apostles. And it was a long
while a Custom in the Church, that the Priest, as soon as the Sacrifice was
ended, when he took the Eucharist, turning to the people that were present,
invited the Faithful to the Sacred Table in these words: "Come, Brethren, to
the Communion. Then those that were prepared, took the Sacred Mysteries with
the most profound Devotion. Of daily Communion, See Dionys. de Eccles. Hierar.
c. 3. part 2. Hieron. Epist. 28. ad Lucin. Greg. l. 2. dialog. c. 23. Item
lib. de Ecclesiast. dogmat. c. 53. and citatur de de consec. did. 1. c. 23.

But when Charity and Devotion grew so cold, LXV. Thrice a year anciently,
appointed to communicate.
that the Faithful very rarely came to the Communion, is was decreed by Pope
Fabian, That all should receive the Eucharist thrice every year, at the
Nativity of our Lord, at Easter, and at Whitsuntide; and the same thing was
afterward confirmed by many Councils, and especially by the First Council of
Agath. Fabiani decretum habes de Concer. did. 2. c. 16. and ibid. citatur
Council. Agathem. sec. 18. c. Saeculares.

But when the matter grew to that pass, LXVI. When commanded to communicate
once a year.
that that holy and wholesome precept was not observed; but the Communion of
the Eucharist was put off for many years together it was decreed in the Council
of Lateran, That all the Faithful should once a year at least receive the
Sacred Body of the Lord: But those who neglected to do so, were forbid to enter
into the Church. Citatur. lib. 5. decret. tit. de Poenit. and remiss. bap.
Omnis utriusque sexus.

Now although this Law, LXVII. Before the use of Reason none may communicate.
established by the Authority of God and his Church, belong to all the
Faithful: Yet it must be taught that they are excepted, who by reason of the
tenderness of Age have not yet the use of Reason; for these know not how to
make a difference betwixt the Sacred Eucharist and Profane and common Bread.
Nor can they bring that devotion of Heart and Religion to the receiving thereof
as is fit, and it also seems very disagreeable to the Institution of Christ our
Lord, Mat. 26.26.
for he says, Take and Eat, LXVIII. The Eucharist anciently given to Infants.
but it is manifest enough that Infants are not capable to take and eat.

In some places it was indeed an ancient custom to give the Sacred Eucharist
even to Infants, but yet both for the reasons before mentioned, and for Others
also, very agreeable to Christian Piety; the same has long-a-go, Churches
Authority bin forborne. Cypr. de Lapsis post med.

But at what age the Sacred Mysteries are to be given to Children, no one can
better determine, than the Father and Priest, to whom they confess their sins,
for it belongs to Them to try, and examine the Children, whether they have
learned the knowledge of this admirable Sacrament, and have any relish to it.

Moreover to Madmen, LXIX. When the Eucharist ought not to be given to Mad
people. Con. Carth. 4.76.
who then are far from the sense of Devotion, the Sacraments ought not to be
given. Although, if before they fell into madness, they evidenced a pious and
religious disposition of mind, the Eucharist may be administered to them at the
end of their Life, as was decreed by the Council of Carthage, so that there be
no danger to be feared of Vomitting, or other Indignity and Inconvenience.

But now as to the Rite or manner of Communicating, LXX. The Priests only may
communicate under ^o^h Species.
the Curats may teach, That by the Law of the Church it is prohibited that any
one without the Authority of the Church, except the Priests, who consecrate the
Lords Body in the Sacrifice, should take the Sacred Eucharist in both kinds:
Sess 21. de co^^. sub u^raque specie. can. 1, 2, 3.
For, as has bin explained by the Council of Trent, although Christ at his last
Supper instituted and delivered to the Apostles this most profound Sacrament in
the Species of Bread and Wine: Yet it does not follow from hence, That this was
made by our Lord and Savior to be a Law, that the Sacred Mysteries should be
administered to all the Faithful under both kinds. For, the same our Lord when
he spoke of this Sacrament, frequently made mention but of One Species only:
Joh. 6.51.
as, when he says, If any one shall eat of this [Bread] he shall live forever:
and the [Bread] which I will give, is my Flesh, for the Life of the World: And,
He that eats this [Bread] shall live forever: That the use of One species only
is sufficient to a perfect Communion may be gathered ex Tertul. lib. 2. ad
Vxor. Cypr. de. Lapsis. Orig. Hom. 13. in Exodus Basil. Epist. ad Caesar. patr.
Aug. Epist. 86. Hier. in Apol. ad Pammach. Chrysostom. hom. 41. operis impers. in
Matthew.

It is evident that the Church was led by very many, LXXI. Why the use of both
species is not permitted to the Lay people.
and indeed by very weighty Reasons, not only to approve, but also to establish
by the Authority of a Decree, this Custom of communicating chiefly under one
species.

For first, The first Reason.
great heed was to be taken lest the Blood of our Lord should be spilt on the
Ground, which thing seemed not easy to be avoided, if it should be
administered in a great multitude of people.

Besides, The second.
when the Sacred Eucharist ought to be in a Readiness for the Sick, it was much
to be feared, lest if the species of Wine were to be kept somewhat longer, it
might grow sower.

Besides there are very many who can by no means endure the Taste, The third.
nor so much indeed as the very smell of Wine.

Wherefore lest that which was given for spiritual Healths sake, The fourth.
might hurt the Health of the Body; it was very wisely established by the
Church that the Faithful should receive only the species of Bread.

And this may be added to the other Reasons, The fifth.
that in very many Countries they have a very great scarceness of Wine, nor can
they procure it from elsewhere, but with very great charges, and very tedious
and difficult travel.

And then, The sixth.
which is most of all to the purpose, the Heresy of them was to be rooted up,
who denied that whole Christ is in each species, but asserted that the Body
only without the Blood is contained in the species of Bread, and that the Blood
was contained under that of the Wine. Now therefore that the Truth of Catholic
Faith, might the more evidently be put before our eyes; the Communion of One
Species, i. e. of Bread was wisely brought in. There are other Reasons also
collected by them who treat of this Argument, which if it shall seem needful,
the Curats may make use of.

And that nothing might be passed by, LXXII. The Minister of this Sacrament is
only a Priest.
that seems to belong to the Doctrine of this Sacrament: we are now to speak of
the Minister, although there can be no body in a manner ignorant hereof; it must
be taught therefore, that the Power to make and to distribute this Sacrament to
the Faithful, is given only to the Priests. Now that this Manner has always bin
kept in the Church that the Faithful People receive the Sacraments from the
Priests, and that the Priests who consecrate, communicate themselves, the Holy
Synod of Trent has explained, and showed, Sess. 13. c. 10.
that This custom has bin always religiously observed, as being sprung from
Apostolic Tradition: Mat. 26.26.
especially seeing that Christ our Lord has left us a clear Example hereof, who
both consecrated his own most Holy Body, Mar. 14.22.
and did reach it forth to his Disciples with his own Hands.

But that by all means the Dignity of so great a Sacrament might be consulted,
LXXIII. Lay people prohibited, to touch the Sacred Vessels and Linen.
not only the Power of Administering it is given only to Priests, the Church by
Law has also forbid every one that is not consecrated to presume so much as to
handle or to touch, the Sacred Vessels, Linen, and other Instruments, that are
necessary to the consecration thereof: unless there be some very great
necessity. Whence both the Priests themselves, and the rest of the Faithful may
understand, with how great Religion and Holiness they ought to be qualified
that come to the Eucharist, either to consecrate, to administer, or to take it.

Although (as was before said of the other Sacraments) they are no less truly
administered by Evil men, LXXIV. The wickedness of the Minister diminishes not
the Holiness of the Eucharist.
provided, that those things which belong to the perfect reason or nature of
them, be duly observed, the same thing avails in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist: for neither are we to believe that all these things are done by the
merit of the Ministers, but by the Virtue and Power of Christ the Lord: These
are the things which are to be explained concerning the Eucharist, as it is a
Sacrament.

Now what remains to be spoken must explain it as it is a Sacrifice, LXXV. Of
the Eucharist as it is a Sacrifice.
that the Curats may understand what chiefly they are to teach the Faithful
people upon Sundays and Holy Days concerning this Mystery, according as Holy
Synod has decreed. For this Sacrament is not only a Treasure of heavenly
riches, Sess. 22. princip.
which if we use well, we may reconcile the Grace and Love of God toward us;
but there is in it also a kind of special Mean, whereby we return him some
thanks for his immense benefits bestowed on us. But this Victim or Sacrifice if
it be rightly and legitimately offered, how grateful and acceptable it is to
God, is gathered from hence: If the Sacrifices of the Old Law, whereof it is
written: Psalm. 39.7.
Sacrifices and Oblations thou would not: Psalm. 50.8.
And again, If thou would have Sacrifice, I would give it thee accordingly,
but thou delightest not in burnt Offerings, so pleased the Lord, that God, as
the Scripture testifies, Genesis 2.
smelt a sweet savor, i. e. were grateful and acceptable to him: what may we
hope for from this Sacrifice, wherein he himself is sacrificed and offered; of
whom that voice from Heaven was twice heard, Mat. 3.17^
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased? Let the Curats therefore
diligently explain this Mystery, that when the Faithful come together to Divine
Service; they may learn attentively and religiously to meditate on those
things, at which they are present.

And first let them teach, LXXVI. The Eucharist instituted for Two causes.
that the Eucharist was instituted of Christ our Lord for Two causes. The One
is, that it might be the heavenly Food of our Souls, wherewith we might
preserve and sustain our spiritual Life: The Other, that the Church might have
a perpetual Sacrifice, whereby our sins might be expiated, and our heavenly
Father, who has often times bin grievously offended by our wickedness, might be
turned from his Anger to his Mercy, and from the severity of his just Revenge
to Pity. We may observe the Figure and Resemblance of this thing in the Paschal
Lamb, which was used to be offered as a Sacrifice, and eaten as a Sacrament by
the Children of Israel. Vide Trid. de Sacrif. Missae, c. 1.3. Dionys. l. 17. de
Eccl. c. 3. Ignat. Epist. ad Smyrn. Tert. lib. de Orat. Iren. l. 4. c. 32. Aug.
lib. 10. de Civit. Dei c. 10. Et lib. 17. c. 20. and lib. 18. c. 35. and lib.
19. c. 23. and lib. 22. c. 8. and alibi passim.

Nor indeed when our Savior was about to offer himself to God the Father upon
the Altar of the Cross, LXXVII. How great the Benefit of the Eucharist is.
could he give any more illustrious signification of his immense Love toward
us, than when he left us a visible Sacrifice, whereby might be restored that
which was a little after to be sacrificed once in Blood on the Cross, and the
memory thereof might every Day be honored by the Church spread abroad over all
the World, to her exceeding advantage, even to the end of the World.

Now these Two ways are very different in themselves: LXXVIII. The Difference
between a Sacrifice and a Sacrament.
for a Sacrament is performed or perfected in the Consecration: but the force
or virtue of a Sacrifice consists in this that it be Offered. Wherefore the
Sacred Eucharist while it is kept in the Pyx, or carried to the Sick has not
the Nature of a Sacrifice, but of a Sacrament: and besides, as it is a
Sacrament, it gives them that receive the Divine Host or Sacrifice, cause of
Merit, and all those other advantages which were before remembered: but as it is
a Sacrifice, it has not only the Efficacy of Meriting, but of Performing also.
For as Christ our Lord in his Passion merited and satisfied for us: so they
that offer this Sacrifice, wherein they communicate with us, do satisfy and
merit the fruits of our Lord's Passion.

Now concerntng the Institution of this Sacrifice, LXXIX. By Whom and when the
Sacrifice of Mass was instituted.
the Holy Synod of Trent has left no more room to doubt, for she has declared
that it was instituted by Christ our Lord at his last Supper: and has condemned
those with an Anathema that assert, that a true and proper Sacrifice is not
offered to God; or, that to Offer is nothing else, than that Christ is given to
be eaten. Sess. 22. de Sacrificio Missae, c. 1. and can. 1. and 2.

Nor did she omit, LXXX. Sacrifice to be offered to God only, and not to the
Saints.
but diligently explained that Sacrifice is done to God only; for although
sometimes the Church uses to celebrate Masses in Memory and Honor of the
Saints, yet she never taught to offer Sacrifice to them, but to One God only,
who has crowned them with immortal Glory. Wherefore neither is the Priest wont
at any time to say "I offer Sacrifice to Thee Peter, or Paul: but while the
sacrifices to God only, she gives thanks to him for the signal Victory of the
blessed Martyrs, and so implores their Patronage, that they would vouchsafe to
intercede for us in Heaven, whose Memory we celebrate on Earth. Now these
things which have bin delivered by the Catholic Church concerning the Truth of
this Sacrifice, she received from our Lords own Words, when in that last night
commending to his Apostles these Sacred Mysteries: 1 Cor. 10.24.
Do this, says he, in Commemoration of me.

He then, Priests, and appointed that both they, and those who were to succeed
them in the Priests Office, should Sacrifice and Offer his Body: And this the
Words of the Apostle written to the Corinthians, evidently show, when he says:
1. Cor. 10^
Ye cannot drink the Chalice of the Lord and the Chalice of Devils, ye cannot
be partakers of the Table of the Lord, and of the Table of Devils. For as by
the Table of Devils is to be understood the Altar whereon Sacrifice was done to
them: so also (that what the Apostle proposes, may by probable Argument be
concluded) the Table of the Lord can signify nothing else but the Altar on
which Sacrifice was done to the Lord.

Now if from the Old Testament we would have some Figures and Oracles of this
Sacrifice: LXXXI. Figures and Prophecies of the Sacrifice of the Eucharist.
first then Malachias has most plainly prophesied of it in these words: From
the rising up of the sun to the going down thereof, my name is great among the
Gentiles, and in every place a clean oblation is offered to my name, because my
name is great among the Gentiles, says the Lord of Hosts. Besides, this Host
or Sacrifice was foreshew'd as well before, as after the Law was given, in
diverse kinds of Sacrifices: for this one Sacrifice, as the Perfection and
Fulfilling of all the rest, contains in it all those good things which were but
signified by those other Sacrifices. But yet we cannot see the Figure of This
better expressed in any thing, thah in Melchizedechs Sacrifice: for our Savior
himself declaring himself to be a Priest forever according to the Order of
Melchizedech, at his last Supper offered his own Body and Blood to God the
Father, under the species of Bread and Wine.

We therefore acknowledge it to be, LXXXII. The Sacrifice of the Mass and of
the Cross is one and the same Sacrifice.
and it ought to be accounted but One and the same Sacrifice, which is done in
the Mass, and which was offered on the Cross: even as it is One and the same
Host, to wit, Christ our Lord, who once only offered himself in his Blood upon
the Cross. For the Bloody and Unbloody Host is not Two Hosts, but one Host
only: Luc. 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.24.
the Sacrifice whereof is renewed daily in the Church, after that our Lord had
commanded thus: Do this in Commemoration of me.

And there is One and the same Priest, Christ the Lord: LXXXIII. Christ and the
Priests are but One Priest.
For the Ministers that make this Sacrifice, undergo not their own, but the
Person of Christ, when they consecrate his Body and Blood, as is evident from
the words of the very Consecration; for the Priest says not: This is Christ's
Body; but This is my Body: to wit, bearing the Person of Christ our Lord, he
changes the substance of the Bread and Wine, into the true Substance of his
Body and Blood. Chrysostom. hom. 2. in 2. ad Tim. and hom. de Prod. Judae. Amb. lib.
4. de Sacram. c. 4.

Which things, LXXXIV. Mass is a Sacrifice both of Praise and of Propitiation.
since they are thus, without all doubt it may be taught, what the Holy Synod
has explained, that the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass is not a Sacrifice of Praise
and Thanksgiving only, or a bare Commemoration of that Sacrifice which was done
on the Cross: but it is also truly a Propitiatory Sacrifice, wherewith God is
appeased and rendered propitious to us. Trid. Sess. 22. de Sacr. Missae, c. 2.
and can. 3.

Wherefore if with a clean heart, LXXXV. Who offers Mass as he ought, obtains
Mercy.
and ardent Faith, and truly affected with inward grief for our wickedness, we
sacrifice and offer this most Holy Host: It is not to be doubted, but we shall
obtain of the Lord Mercy and Grace to help us in due time. For with the sweet
savor of this Sacrifice the Lord is so delighted, Heb. 4 19.
that bestowing upon us the gift of Grace and Penance, he pardons us our sins.
Wherefore This also is the solemn Prayer of the Church. As often as the
Commemoration of this Host is celebrated; so often the work of our Salvation
is exercised, to wit, those most plentiful Fruits of that bloody Host, flow
upon us throw this Unbloody Sacrifice.

And then the Curats shall teach that the Virtue of this Sacrifice is such,
LXXXVI. Mass profitable both in the Living and the Dead.
that it profits not the Offerer and the Receiver only, but all the Faithful
also, whether they remain alive with us on the earth, or being already dead in
the Lord, are not as yet fully expiated. For according to the most certain
Tradition of the Apostles, Trid. Sym.
it is no less profitable to offer for These, than it is for the Sins,
Punishments, Satisfactions or any other Calamities and Necessities of the
Living.

Whence it is very evident, LXXXVII. Mass never to be cal'ld Private.
that All Masses are to be accounted Common, as pertaining to the common
profit, and Salvation of all the Faithful.

Now this Sacrifice has many Rites or Ceremonies, LXXXVIII. Why so many
Ceremonies in Mass.
and those very remarkable and solemn, whereof none may be thought to be
superfluous or vain, but all tend to this End, that the Majesty of so great a
Sacrifice may shine the more gloriously, and that the Faithful in beholding
those saving Mysteries, may be excited to the contemplation of those divine
things, which are hidden in that Sacrifice. But of these there is no need that
we speak more^ Both because this Argument seems to require a larger
explication, than is suitable to our intended purpose: And also because the
Priests will have in readiness almost innumerable Books and Commentaries which
have bin written concerning this Matter, by the most Pious and Learned Men.
Thus far therefore shall suffice, with Gods assistance, to have explained the
more weighty Heads of those things, which belong to the Eucharist, both as it
is a Sacrament, and also as it is a Sacrifice.

Of the SACRAMENT of PENANCE.
AS the Frailty and Weakness of Human Nature is known to all Men, and every one
easily feels it by experience in himself; I. The necessity of the Sacrament of
Penance.
so how necessary the Sacrament of Penance is, no one can be ignorant. But if
we ought to weigh the diligence which is to be used by the Pastors in every
point, by the Greatness and Weight of the Thing they handle, we must by all
means confess, that they will never be diligent enough in the Explication of
this Point. But yet by so much the more diligently must they treat of this
Sacrament, than of Baptism, because Baptism is only once administered, and may
not be iterated; but there is room for Penance, and there is a necessity of
repeating it so often, as we happen to sin after Baptism: for thus it is said by
the Council of Trent, Sess. 6. de Just. c. 14. and Sess. 4. de Poenit. c. 3. in
c. 3. Isai. ad haec verba Ruit Jerusalem. and Ep. 8.
That the Sacrament of Penance is necessary to Salvation to those who Slip or
Fall into sin after Baptism, no otherwise than Baptism is to those who are not
yet Regenerated. And that known sentence of St. Hierom, is greatly approved by
all, who, from his time downwards, have treated of Divine Matters. That Penance
is a second Table or Plank. For as in a Ship-wreck, there is one refuge for
saving of life left, if happily one may lay hold of a broken Plank of the
Ship-wreck: So after the loss of the Innocence of Baptism, unless a man make
have to lay hold of the Plank of Penance, without doubt there can be no Hope of
his Salvation. but these things are spoken not to the Pastors only. but to all
the rest of the Faithful also, to stir them up, lest happily they may be
reprehended justly for their carelessness of a Matter of all the most necessary.
For first, being mindful of their common Frailty, they ought with their utmost
endeavors to wish, that being assisted with Divine help they may proceed
forward in the way of the Lord without any Fall or Slip.: but if at any time
they should offend, then having regard to the infinite kindness of God, who as
the good Shep-herd is used to bind up the wounds of his Sheep, and to heal
them, they shall consider that this most wholesome Medicin of Penance is never to
be put off to another time. Of Penance have wrote among the ancient Fathers,
Tertul. one Book, S. Cyprian many Epistles, and one Book de Lapsis. Pacianus
one Book and two Epistles to Sympronianus. And of Penance and Confession, see
paraen. ad Poenit. S. Ambrose two Books of Penance. S. Chrysostom ten Homilies
and a Sermon of Penance. Ephrem, a Book and a Sermon of Penance. S. Fulgentius
two Books to Euthymius of the Remission of sins. Gregory Nyssen a discourse of
Penance. Basil one Homily postrema variarum. S. Austin one Book of true and
false Penance, and one remarkable Book of the Medicin of Penance. Add to these,
Mark the Hermit, who has one Book extant of Penance, but cautiously to be read.
De eo vide Bellarmin. de Script. Eccles. He that has not the Fathers above
cited may see in the Decree of Gratian concerning Penance seven Distinctions.

Now that we may come to the Matter: II. The manifold acceptance of the name
of Penance.
The various Force and Notion of the Word is first to be explained, lest any
body should be led into Error by the Ambiguity of the Word. For some take
Penance for satisfaction. Others very far distant from the Doctrine of Catholic
Faith, supposing that Penance has no relation to the time past, define it to be
nothing else but a New Life. It must be taught therefore that the signification
of this Name is manifold.

For first, The First.
Penance is spoken concerning those things which somewhat displease, which
before pleased, without any Consideration whether they be Good or Bad: So all
repent whose sorrow is according to the World, 1 Cor. 7.10.
and not according to God. Such kind of Penance brings not Salvation but Death.

Another Penance is, when any one for the sin he has committed, The Second.
which yet before delighted him, conceives Grief, not for Gods but for his own
sake.

The Third is, The Third.
when not only for the sake of the sin committed, we grieve with an inward
sense of the Soul, or show some outward token also of that grief, but are in
that grief for God's sake only. And indeed to all these kinds of Penitence the
word Penance properly agrees.

For when we read in Holy Scripture that God did penance, III. How God does
Penance.
it is evident that that is done by translation. For the Holy Scriptures use
that kind of speech, which is accommodated to the manners of Men, when they
declare that God had determined to alter any thing; Genesis 6.6.
which he may seem to do no otherwise than Men, 1 Reg. 15.11.
whom if they repent of any thing, labor with their utmost endeavors to change
or alter it. Psalm. 105.45.
It is thus written therefore, Jer. 26.3.
That it repented him, that he made man: And in another place, that he had made
Saul King.

But among these significations of Penance, IV. The true Acceptance of Penance,
we ought to observe a great difference. For the first, is to be accounted
vicious: The second is a kind of Commotion and Affection of a disturbed mind:
The third we say is both virtuous, and also a Sacrament, which signification is
proper in this place.

And first we will treat of it as it is a Virtue: V. Why we begin with Penance
as it is a Virtue.
Not only because the Faithful ought to be instructed by the Pastors to every
kind of Virtue, but also because the actions of this Virtue, do, as it were,
afford matter wherein the Sacrament of Penance is employed, and unless it be
rightly understood first what the Virtue of Penance is, it must needs be that
the Force of the Sacrament cannot be known.

Wherefore in the first place, VI. Penance internal and external.
the Faithful are to be admonished and exhorted to labor with all earnestness
and study for the inward Penance of the Soul, without which that which is
performed outwardly will profit them but very little. Vide Amb. in sermon. de
poenit. and citatur de poenit. did. 3. c. poenitentia. Aug. lib. de vera and
falsa poenit. c. 8. and habetur de poenit. 3. c. 4. Greg. hom. 34. in Evang.
and lib. 9. Regist. Epist. 39.

But the inward Penance is this, VII. What internal Penance is.
When from our very Soul we turn to God, and detest and hate the wickedness
committed by us: and also steadfastly purpose and resolve with our selves to
amend the evil custom and naughty manners of our life, not without Hope of
obtaining Pardon of Gods Mercy. Now after this there follows, as the companion
thereof, Grief and Sorrow, which is a Disturbance and Affliction, and by many
is called a Passion joined with the Detestation of sin. Wherefore according to
many of the Holy Fathers the Definition of this kind of Penance is declared in
the grief of the Soul.

But in him that does Penance, VIII. How Faith belongs to Penance.
it is necessary that Faith go before Penance: For neither can any one turn
himself to God, that wants Faith, whence it comes to pass that Faith can by no
means be called a Part of Penance. Vide Trid. Sess. 14. de poenit. c. 3. and
can. 4.

But that this inward Penance, IX. Penance is a Virtue.
as before was said, belongs to Virtue, many Rules or Precepts which have bin
delivered concerning Penance plainly show. For the Law gives Rule concerning
those things only which are begun with Virtue. Besides, no one can deny, but
that to grieve, when, how, and so far as one ought, belongs to Virtue; but the
Virtue of Penance performs this: For sometimes it comes to pass that Men grieve
less for their sins, Prove. 2.4.
than is meet; as Solomon says: There are some that rejoice when they have done
ill: And again there are some, that so give themselves over to grief and
disorder of mind, that they even altogether despair of their Salvation: Such a
one Cain perhaps may seem to be, who said: Genesis 4.13.
My iniquity is greater than that I can obtain pardon for: And such a one happily
was Judas, Matt. 3.27.
who being led by Penance, and hanging himself, lost both Life and Soul. That
therefore we may keep a measure in sorrow, we are helped by the Virtue of
Penance.

But the same may be gathered from these things, X. The Motives of the Virtue
of Penance.
which he proposes to himself as his End, who truly does Penance for his sins.

The First is, The First.
That he purposes to abolish sin, and to wipe away every fault and spot of the
Soul.

The Second is, The Second.
That he make satisfaction to God for the sins he has committed, and that this
is to be referred to Justice is evident: For tho betwixt God and Men there can
be no proper Measure of Justice, since there is so great a distance betwixt
them; yet it is manifesf, there may be some kind of Justice, such as is betwixt
a Father and his Children, betwixt a Lord and his Servants.

The Third is, The Third.
That a Man return into the Grace of God, into whose displeasure and hatred he
has run by reason of the Filthiness of sin. Now all these things sufficiently
declare that Penance has relation to Virtue.

But it must be taught also, by what degrees we may ascend to this divine
Virtue.

First, XI. Five Degrees of Penance. The First. Thren. 3.1. The Second. Heb.
11.6.
therefore, the Mercy of God prevents us, and converts our Hearts to him. Which
when the Prophet Prayed for, he said, Convert us, O Lord, and we shall be
converted.

And then, being enlightened with this Light, we tend toward God in Soul by
Faith. For he that comes to God, as the Apostle testifies, must believe that He
is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that seek him.

Then follows the Motion of Fear; The Third.
and the Bitterness of Punishment being proposed, the Soul is called back from
sin; and hither those words of Isayah seem to have regard: Isa. 26.17.
As a Woman which has conceived, when she draws near to her travel grievously
laments: So are we fallen in her Pains.

And then comes Hope of obtaining Mercy from God, The Fourth.
wherewith being encouraged, we resolve to amend our Life and Manners.

Lastly, The Fifth.
our Hearts are kindled with Charity; whence that liberal Fear, worthy honest
and ingenuous Children, arises: And so fearing this one thing only, lest in any
thing we may offend the Majesty of God, we wholly forsake the custom of sinning.

By these Steps or Degrees therefore we come to this most excellent Virtue of
Penance; XII. Heaven promised to Penance.
which may well be accounted a divine and heavenly Virtue: Because to it the
Holy Scripture promises the Kingdom of Heaven. For in S. Matthew it is written,
Do Penance, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand: Matt. 4 17.
And in Ezekiel: Ezekiel. 18.21.
If a wicked Man do Penance for all the sins which he has done, and shall keep
all my commandments, and do justice and judgment, he shall live. And also in
another place: Ezekiel. 33.11.
I will not the Death of a sinner, but that the wicked Man be converted from
his evil way and live. Which, that it is to be understood of that blessed and
eternal Life, is plainly evident.

But of External Penance it is to be taught, XIII. External Penance which is
the Sacrament.
that it is That wherein the Reason or Nature of the Sacrament consists, and
that it has some external things subject to the senses whereby those things are
declared which are done inwardly in the Soul.

And First, XIV. Why Christ instituted this Sacrament. The First Cause.
it seems necessary to be explained to the Faithful, Why it was, that Christ
our Lord would have Penance in the Number of the Sacraments. And hereof this
was certainly the cause, That we might doubt the less, concerning the Remission
of sins which God had promised us, when he said: Ezekiel. 18.12
If the wicked man do Penance, etc. For it must needs be that we be very
dubious in our minds of our inward Penance, seeing every one deservedly ought
to fear concerning his own judgment of those things he does himself. Now
therefore that the Lord might relieve our solicitude, he instituted the
Sacrament of Penance, wherein through the Absolution of the Priest, we may
consider that our sins are forgiven us, and our Consciences, by the Faith which
justly ought to be given to the virtue of the Sacraments, are more quieted. For
neither are the words of the Priest legitimately pardoning our sins, to be
received otherwise than of Christ himself, Mat. 6.22
who said to the Lame-man: Son be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee.
Vide Council. Trid. Sess. 14. c. 1. Innoc. 1. Epist. 91. inter Epist. Aug.

And then, The Second Cause.
seeing that no one can obtain Salvation, but through Christ, and the benefit
of his Passion, it was fit, and very profitable to us, that such a kind of
Sacrament as this should be instituted, by the Virtue and Efficacy whereof
Christ's Blood flowing to us, might do away our sins committed after Baptism,
and that we might acknowledge with due thankfulness that we owe the Benefit of
our Reconciliation to Christ our only Savior.

But that Penance is a Sacrament, XV. Penance proved to be a Sacrament.
the Pastors may easily show thus: For as Baptism is a Sacrament, because it
blots out all our sins, and especially that which was contracted by our Birth:
For the same reason Penance must truly and properly be called a Sacrament,
because it takes away all sins done after Baptism in the Will or in the Act.
And then, which is the chief, seeing those things which are done outwardly both
by the Penitent and by the Priest, do declare those things which are inwardly
wrought in the Soul, who is there can deny that Penance is endued with the true
and proper reason or nature of a Sacrament. For a Sacrament is a sign of a
Sacred thing: But a sinner that does Penance, by the Notes of Words and Things
plainly expresses. That he has withdrawn his mind from the Filthiness of sin:
And also from those things which are done and said by the Priest, we easily
understand the Mercy of God forgiving those sins. Although those words of our
Savior plainly show this thing: Mar 16.19.
I will give thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall
loose in Earth, shall be loosed also in Heaven. For the Absolution of the
Priest, pronounced by words, signs that Remission of sins which it works in the
Soul.

Nor are the Faithful to be taught only that Penance is to be reckoned in the
number of the Sacraments, XVI. The Sacrament of Penance may be iterated.
but also that it is One of Those that may be iterated. For to Peter asking,
Whether Forgiveness of sin might be given seven times? Our Lord answered, Matt.
18.22.
I say not to thee, till seven times, but till seventy times seven. Wherefore
if we have to do with such men as seem to distrust the supreme Goodness and
Mercy of God, the Souls of such are to be confirmed, and to be supported with
the Hope of Divine Grace. Which they will easily do, by the handling of this
Point, and of very many others, which they meet with in the Holy Scriptures;
and also with those Reasons and Arguments which they may find in S. Chrysostoms
book de Lapsis, and S. Ambrose's books of Penance, Chrysostom. 5. lib. de Laps.
repar. and habetur de Poen. did. 3. c. talis. Ambr. de poen. lib. 1. c. 1, and
2. vide and Aug. lib. de vera and falsa poen. c. 5. citatur de poen. did. 3.
c. adhuc instant.

Now since the Faithful ought to know nothing more than the Matter of this
Sacrament: XVII. The Matter of Penance what.
it must be taught, that herein chiefly this Sacrament differs from the rest,
that the Matter of the other Sacraments is some natural thing or made by Art.
But that which is as the Matter of this Sacrament of Penance, are the Actions
of the Penitent, to wit, Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction* as has bin
declared by the Council of Trent; S ss. 24 de poenit. c. 3. and can. 4.
because so far as by Gods institution they are required in the Penitent to the
Integrity of the Sacrament, and to the full and perfect Remission of sins, for
this reason they are called Parts of Penance.

Nor are these Acts said by that Holy Synod to be as the Matter, Reason of
Matter: But because they are not Matter of that kind, which is used
extrinsecally, as Water in Baptism, and Chrism in Confirmation.

But then, XVIII. In What sense sin is the Matter of Penance.
As to what is said of Others, that the sins themselves are the Matter of this
Sacrament, there will seem to be no difference therein, if we consider well.
For as we say that Wood is the Matter of Fire, which by the force of the Fire
is consumed: So sins which are blotted out by Penance, may rightly be called
the Matter of this Sacrament.

Now the explication of the Form also is not to be omitted by the Pastors, XIX.
The Form of the Sacrament of Penance.
because the knowledge thereof will stir up the minds of the Faithful to receive
the Grace of this Sacrament with the greatest Devotion. Now the Form is: [I
absolve thee.] Which we may gather, not only from these words: Matt. 18 16.
Whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth, shall be bound also in Heaven; but we
receive the same as delivered by the Apostles from the same Doctrine of Christ
our Lord. And because the Sacraments do signify that which they effect: Those
words, I absolve thee, show that Remission of sins is wrought in the
Administration of this Sacrament, it is evident that This is the perfect Form
of Penance; For sins are as it were Bands wherewith the Soul is held bound, and
from which by the Sacrament of Penance it is discharged.

that Man also, who by virtue of a most ardent Contrition; yet so as that he
has the Wish of Confession, has obtained from God the Pardon of his sins.

There are added moreover many Prayers, XX. Why Prayers added to the Form of
Penance.
not as necessary to the Form, but that those things may be removed, which may
hinder the Virtue and Efficacy of the Sacrament, through his Fault to whom it
is administered. Wherefore let sinners give great thanks to God, who has given
so large a Power to the Priests in his Church.

For neither, XXI. The Priests of the New, more excellent than those of the Old
Law. Lev. 13.9.
as in old times, and under the old Law, declared only by the Priests Testimony
that some one was freed from Leprosy, is there now a Power in the Church given
to Priests only to declare any person to be absolved from sin: But they do as
the Ministers of God truly absolve them: the same thing which God himself does,
who is the Author and Father of Grace and Righteousness.

Now the Faithful shall diligently observe the Rites also, XXII. What must be
observed in coming to Penance.
which are used at this Sacrament; for so it will come to pass, that they will
have those things better in their mind, which they get in this Sacrament. That
as Servants they are reconciled to their most merciful Lord; or as Children
rather to their most dear Father; and they will also more easily understand,
what they ought to do, who are willing; for all ought to be willing to approve
themselves grateful for, and mindful of so great a Benefit, for he that does
Penance for his sins, will cast himself down with an humble and dejected mind
at the Feet of the Priest; that behaving himself so humbly, he may plainly
acknowledge that the Roots of Pride are to be plucked up, from whence all those
sins he bewails, spring and had their beginning. But in the Priest, who sits
over him as his lawful Judge, he venerates the Power and Person of Christ the
Lord. For the Priest, as in other Sacraments, so in the ministering of the
Sacrament of Penance, discharges the Office of Christ. And then the Penitent so
reckons up his sins, that he confesses himself worthy of the greatest and
severest punishment, and humbly begs pardon of his sins. All which things have
most sure Evidence and Testimony of their Antiquity from S. Dennys. In Ep. ad
Demoph. vide and Tertul. lib. de. Poenit. c. 9.

But nothing verily so much profits the Faithful, XXIII. What wholesome F^ui s
may be taken by Penance.
and nothing gives them a greater cheerfulness to undergo Penance, as for the
Pastors often to explain, how great profit we may gather thence; for they will
understand that it may truly be said of Penance, That the Roots thereof ore
bitter indeed, but the Fruits are most sweet.

All the Virtue therefore of Penance lies herein, The First.
that it restores us to the Grace of God, and joins us with him in the greatest
Friendship. Con. Trid. Sess. 14. can. 3. and c. 1. de Poenit.

Now after this Reconciliation, The Second and Third.
follows sometimes in devout Men, who receive this Sacrament holily and
religiously, the greatest Peace and Tranqu^lity of Conscience together with the
sweetest spiritual Delight.

For there is no wickedness, The Fourth.
how grievous and heinous soever, which the Sacrament of Penance blots not out
once and again, and ost-times. Of which matter the Lord by the Prophet says:
Ezekiel. 18 21
If the Wicked Man do Penance, for all his sins which he has done, and will
keep my Precepts, and do my Judgment, and Justice, he shall live and not dye; I
will not remember all his iniquities which he has done. And S. John: If we
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins. And a little
after: If any man sin, says he, we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus
Christ the righteous; and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours
only, but also for the sins of the whole World.

some have not obtained Mercy of the Lord, although they earnestly implored it;
This we understand to have bin so, because they did not do Penance truly and
from their Heart for their sins.

When therefore such Sentences occur, XXIV. How it is to be understood that
some sins are unpardonable.
either in Holy Scripture or in the Writings of the Holy Fathers, wherein they
seem to affirm that some certain sins cannot be pardoned: We must interpret
them so, as that we understand the Procureing of Pardon to be very difficult.
For as some diseases are therefore said to be incurable, because the Sick
person is so affected that he loathes the virtue of the Medicine that should
cure him: So there is a kind of sin which is not remitted nor forgiven, for
this reason, because it repels the proper Medicine of Salvation, which is the
Grace of God. In this sense it is said by S. Austin: Aug. l. 1. de Sermon. Dom.
in monte c. 42. and 44. and Retract. li. c. 8, 19.
So great is the pollution of that sin, when after the knowledge of God, through
the Grace of Christ, any one opposes himself to the fellowship thereof, and
maliciously acts against that Grace, that he cannot undergo the Humility of
begging Pardon, although by his evil Conscience he be forced to acknowledge and
declare his sin. Vide Aug. Sermon. 1. de verb. Dom. and Epist. 50. ad Bonif.

But to return to Penance, XXV. Without Penance there is no Remission of sins.
Luc. 13.3.
This is so much the Property thereof, to blot out sin, that without Penance we
can by no means get, or so much as hope for Pardon of sin; For it is written:
Except you have Penance, ye shall all likewise perish; which indeed was spoken
by our Lord, of grievous and deadly sin; although the Lesser sins also, which are
called Venial, do need some kind of Penance: For S. Austin says: Since there is
a kind of Penance, which is daily done in the Church for Venial sins, That
verily would be vain, if Venial could be forgiven without Penance. Aug. lib.
50. Hom. ^0. item Epist. 168. and Ench. cap. 71.

But because it is not enough to speak of those things which in a manner
proceed into Act, XXVI. What the Three entire Parts of Penance are.
the Pastors shall take care to teach those things severally, by which the
Reason and Nature of true and saving Penance may be perceived by the Faithful.
For it is proper to This Sacrament only, that besides the Matter and Form,
which are common to all the Sacraments, it has also those Parts, as we said
before, which do as it were make Penance whole and entire, to wit, Contrition,
Confession, and Satisfaction. Of which S. Chrysostom speaks in these words: Hom
2. quae est de Poenit.
Penance forces the sinner to endure all things willingly; for in his Heart
there is Contrition, in his Mouth is Confession, and in his Actions a perfect
Humility, and fruitful Satisfaction. Vide Council. Trid. 14. de Poenit. c. 3.
can. 4. Item Council. Floren. in doctrine. de Sacram.

But these Parts are said to be of that kind of Parts, XXVII. The Quality of
the Parts of Penance explained.
which are necessary to make up some Whole: Because as the Body of Man consists
of many members, as Hands, Feet, Eyes, and other such like Parts, whereof if
any be wanting, he deservedly seems to be imperfect; but perfect, if no Part be
wanting: After the same manner also Penance is made up of these Three things,
so, that although, as to the Nature thereof, Contrition and Confession be
sufficient to justify a Man; yet unless the Third Part also, which is,
satisfaction, be added, it must needs be, that something be wanting, to make it
perfect.

Wherefore these Parts are so knit together, XXVIII. The conne^ion of the Parts
of Penance.
that Contrition has included in it the Counsel and Purpose of Confessing and
Satisfying. Contrition and the Will of making Satisfaction goes before
Confession: But they both go before Satisfaction.

But of these Three Parts we may give this Reason, XXIX. Why Penance consists
of these three Parts.
that in Mind, in Word, and in Deed, we commit sin against God. Wherefore it
was fit, that subjecting our selves to the Keys of the Church, by those very
things wherein the most holy name of God was violated by us, we should endeavor
also to appease his Anger, and to procure of him the Pardon of our sins. But
the same thing may be confirmed by another Reason also. For Penance is as it
were a Compensation or Recompense for Offenses proceeding from the Will of him
that offended, and appointed by the Will of God, against whom the sin was
committed. Wherefore the Will of making recompense is also required, about
which chiefly Contrition is conversant: And it is necessary that the Penitent
subject himself to the judgment of the Priest, who b^ars the Person of God:
That according to the Greatness of the sin, he may appoint him his Punishment:
From whence both the Reason and the Necessity of Satisfaction is perceived.

Now because the Faithful must be taught the Virtue and Nature of these Parts,
XXX. Contrition defined and explained.
we must begin first with Contrition, and diligently explain That, for neither
at no Instant of Time, when we remember our past sins, or whenever we offend,
ought the Soul to be free from Contrition. Now the Fathers of the Council of
Trent define it thus. Ead. Sess. 14.
Contrition is the Grief of the Soul, and a Detestation of sin committed, with
a Purpose to sin no more for the time to come. And a little after, concerning
the Motion of Contrition, it is subjoined: And so at last it prepares us for
Remission of sins, if it be joined with a Confidence of the Mercy of God, and
an earnest desire of performing the rest of those things which are required to
the due performing of this Sacrament.

By this Definition therefore the Faithful understand, XXXI. Wherein the Power
and Efficacy of Contrition is placed.
that the Force of Contrition is not placed in this only, That a Man cease to
sin, or that he purposes to lead a New Life, or has already begun it; but he is
first of all to hate, and to expiate his former ill-spent Life. This thing do
those bitter cries of the Holy Fathers which we read scattered about in Holy
Scripture abundantly confirm: Ps. 6.7.
I have labored, says David, in my mourning: I will every night wash by Bed.
And, The Lord has heard the voice of my Weeping: Ezekiel. 38.15
And Another, I will recount to thee all my years, in the Bitterness of my
Soul. Which, without doubt, and many other such like expressions, some vehement
hatred of a fore-past-life, and detestation of sin uttered.

But whereas Contrition has bin defined a Grief, XXXII. Contrition is a Grief
of the Soul, not of the Body. Hom. ^0.
the Faithful are to be warned not to suppose that that Grief belongs to the
Bodily Senses. For Contrition is an Act of the Will. And S. Austin testifies,
That Grief is not Penance, but the Companion of Penance. But the Fathers
signified the Detestation and Hatred of Sin by this word Grief: Both because
the Sacred Scriptures so use it, for David said: Psalm. 12.2.
How long shall I put Counsel in my Soul, and Grief in my Heart daily? And also
because from that Contrition, arises Grief in the lower part of the Soul, which
has the Force of desiring. So that Contrition was not improperly defined in
Grief, because it causes Grief; Matthew, Mat^. 11.21.
Woe to thee Chorazin, Woe to thee Bethsaida, because if the mighty works had
bin done in Tire and Sydon, which have bin done in you; they had done Penance
long ago in Sackcloth and Ashes.

Rightly therefore is this name Contrition given to the Detestation of sin,
XXXIII. How properly this Part of Penance is called Contrition.
of which we speak, to signify the Force of Grief, taken from a Similitude
drawn from corporeal things, which are broken by little and little by a Stone
or some harder Matter, that by that Name it might be declared, that our Hearts
which by Pride are hardened, by virtue of Penance might be beaten and made soft.

Wherefore no other Grief,

Now the same thing is used to be called by other Names; XXXIV. Contrition
called by other Names.
for it is called Contrition of Heart; because the Sacred Scriptures do
frequently use the Word Heart for the Will: For as from the Heart the Bodily
Motion has its beginning; so the Will governs and rules all the other Powers of
the Soul. It is also called by the Holy Fathers Compunction of Heart, Chrysostom.
de Compunct. co^dis. Isidor. de summo bono. l. 2.12.
who were pleased to entitle the Books they wrote of Contrition, to be of
Compunction of the Heart rather. For as swelling Ulcers are cut with a Knife,
that the poisonous Corruption may be let forth: So our Hearts are cut as it
were with the Penknife of Contrition, that the deadly Poison of Sin might run
out: And therefore it is called by the Prophet Joel, Joel. 2.21.
A cutting of the Heart: Be ye converted to me, says he, with all your Heart,
in Fasting, and in Weeping, and in Mourning, and cut your Hearts.

But that the greatest and deepest Grief is to be taken for sin committed;
XXXV. Contrition ought to be the greatest Grief.
so that no greater can be imagined, will be easy to evidence by these Reasons.

For whereas perfect Contrition is an Act of Love, The First Reason. 1 John 3.
which proceeds from a filial Fear, it is plain that there ought to be the same
measure both of Love and Contrition; hence it comes, That Contrition has joined
with it the most vehement Grief of Mind; for as God is to be loved above all
things; so those things which estrange us from God are to be hated above all
things.

Wherein this is also observable; Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
Heart. And again, as to Contrition, the Lord cries out by the Prophet: Be ye
converted with your whole Heart.

Besides; The Second Reason.
if as God is the supreme Good among all the things that are to be loved, and
so Sin, the greatest evil among all the things that Men ought to hate: This
follows, that for what cause we confess that God is above all things to be
loved, for the same cause again, we must needs hate Sin above all things: But
that the Love of God is to be put before all other things, so that we may not
sin, tho it were to save out very Lives; those words of our Lord plainly teach
us: Matt. 10.27 Mar. 16.25. Mar. 8.35.
He that loves Father or Mother more than me, is not worthy of me: And He that
will save his Life shall lose it.

But This also must be observed, The Third Reason.
that as there is no End or Measure prescribed to Charity, as S. Bernard
testifies, Lib. de di^^gendo Deo circa inod.
(For, says he, The measure of loving God, is to love him without Measure) so
there is no measure defined to the Detestation of Sin.

Besides, XXXVI. Contrition ought to be most vehement. Deuteronomy. 4.27. Hierem.
2^.13.
it ought to be not only the Greatest but also the most Vehement, and therefore
Perfect, and excludes all slothfulness and laziness: For in Deuteronomy it is
written: When thou shall seek the Lord thy God; thou shall find him, if
notwithstanding thou shall seek him with thy whole Heart, and in the
tribulation of thy Soul: And in Jeremy: Ye shall seek me, and shall find me,
when ye shall seek me with your whole Heart, and I will be found of you, says
the Lord.

Now although we cannot get to make it perfect; XXXVII. Contrition tho imperfect,
yet it may be true.
yet our contrition may be true and efficacious, for it often comes to pass,
that those things which are subject to sense, more affect us than spiritual
things. Wherefore sometimes some Men are more sorrowful for the Death of their
Children, than for the Filthiness of their sins.

The same judgment is to be made, XXXVIII. Tears tho to be desired, yet not
necessary. Sermon. 41. de Sanctis.
if Tears follow not the Bitterness of Grief; which yet in Penance are much to
be wished and commended. For S. Austins sentence in this case is very
excellent, The Bowels of Christian Charity, says he, are not in thee, if thou
lamentest the Body from which the Soul is departed, but do not lament the
Soul from which God is departed. And hither tend those words of our Savior
before recited: Mat. 11.21.
Woe to thee Chorazin, woe to thee Bethsaida! for if the mighty works which have
bin done in you, had bin done in Tire and Sydon, they had done Penance long ago
in Sackcloth and Ashes. Yet for the proof of this, those most famous examples
of the Ninivits, of David, of the Harlot, of the Prince of Apostles, will be
sufficient: All which sought pardon of their sins, imploring the Mercy of God,
with very many Tears.

But the Faithful are specially to be exhorted and admonished, XXXIX. All
Mortal sins to be detested with Contrition.
that they study to apply the proper Grief of Contrition to their several
Mortal Sins: For so Ezechias describes Contrition; when he says, I will recount
to thee all my years in the bitterness of my soul. For, to recount all his
years, is severally to examine his sins, to be sorry in mind for them. And we
read in Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 28.21.
If the wicked man do Penance for all his sins, he shall live. And agreeable
hereto S Austin says, Let the sinner consider the Quality of his sin at that
Time, in what Place, against what Light, and against whom. Lib. de vera and
falsa Religione, cap. 14.

Let not the Faithful notwithstanding in this Case despair of the infinite
Goodness and Mercy of God: desirous of our Salvation, he will not delay to
pardon us, but will embrace the sinner with a Fatherly Love, as soon as ever he
shall have recollected himself, and detested all his sins, which thencesorth at
any time according to his ability, he can bring to remembrance, and resolves in
his mind to hate, and converts himself to the Lord: Ezekiel. 33.12.
for so by the Prophet he commands us to ho e, when he says: The wickedness of
the wicked shall not hurt him, at what day soever he will be converted from his
wickedness.

From hence therefore may be gathered what' things are most necessary to true
Contrition, XL. How many things necessary to True Contrition.
concerning which the Faithful must be accurately taught, that every one may
know, by what means he may get it, and may have a certain Rule whereby he may
judge how far he is from the Perfection of this Virtue.

For first, The first.
it is necessary to hate and to gri ve for all the sins we have done: Lest if
we blot out some only, the Penance we do may seem dissembled and counterfeit,
and not saving. For, as S. James says; He that shall have kept the whole Law,
but Offends in One thing, he is guilty of all.

The second is, The second.
that This Contrition has a Will to Confess and to Satisfy for Sin, joined
with it, of which shall be spoken afterward, in its proper place.

The third is, The third.
That the Penitent do firmly and certainly resolve with himself to amend his
Life. And this the Prophet has plainly taught us in these words: If the wicked
will do Penance for all his sins which he has committed, and keep all my
precepts, and do judgment and justice, he shall live, he shall not die; I will
remember none of his iniquities which he has done: Ezekiel. 18.21.
And a little after: When the wicked man will turn himself from his wickedness
which he has done, and will do judgment and justice, he shall quicken his own
soul. And a little after, Be ye converted, says he, and do Penance for all your
iniquities, and iniquity shall not be your Ruin: Cast away from you all your
Prevarications wherein you have prevaricated, and make you a new heart. The
same thing also Christ our Lord prescribed to the Woman taken in Adultery; Go
thy way, Joh. 8.11.
says he, and now sin no more. And to the Lame man that was cured at the Pool
of Bethesaida. Behold, Joh. 5.14.
says he, thou art made whole, now sin no more.

But Nature it self also and Reason plainly show, XLI. These proved by an
Example.
that these Two things are chiefly necessary to Contrition, to wit, Grief for
sin done, and a Purpose and Caution not to do the like for the time to come.
For he that is desirous to be reconciled to a friend, whom he has wronged, must
both be sorry that he has done him injury or contumely, and must take diligent
care for the time to come not to hurt his friendship in any respect. For it is
fit that a man obey that Law he is under, whether it be Natural, Divine or
Human. Wherefore if a Penitent has taken any thing from another by Force or
Fraud, he must restore it, and also satisfy with the recompense of some profit
or service, him whose credit or life he has any ways hurt either by Word or
Deed: For that saying is sufficiently approved of all, which we read in S.
Austin: Ep. 54.
The sin is not forgiven, unless the thing taken away be restored.

Nor among the other things chiefly belonging to Contrition, The fourth.
are you to take less diligent or necessary care that whatsoever Injury, you
have received from another, you wholly forgive and pardon it: For so our Lord
and Savior admonishes and denounces: Mat. 6.14.
If ye forgive men their offenses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you
your sins: but if ye forgive not men, neither will your heavenly Father forgive
you your sins. These are the things to be observed of the Faithful in
Contrition: the other things which may easily be gathered by the Pastors,
belonging to this matter, will indeed make Contrition to be more perfect and
absolute in its kind; but are not to be accounted so necessary, as that without
them the Reason of true and saving Penance cannot consist.

But because it ought not to be enough for the Pastors to teach those things
which seem to belong to Salvation, XLII. The Fruits of Contrition.
unless also they labor with all care and industry that the Faithful may direct
their Life and Actions after that very manner which is prescribed; it will be
very profitable very often to propose the Power and Profitableness of
Contrition. For whereas very many other works of Piety, as Alms to the Poor,
Fastings, Prayers, and other Good and Holy Works of that kind, are sometimes
rejected of God; certainly this Contrition can never be ungrateful or
unacceptable to him: Psalm 50.19.
For says the Prophet: A contrite and an humble heart, O God, thou will not
despise. But as soon as ever we have conceived This in our minds, those words
of the same Prophet in another place, declare, that Remission of Sins is given
us of God: Psalm. 3.15.
I said, I will confess against my self my injustice to the Lord, and thou
forgav'st the wickedness of my sin. And hereof we may see a Figure in the ten
Lepers, Luc. 17.14.
who being sent by our Savior to the Priests, before they came to them, they
were freed from the Leprosy. Where we may perceive, that such is the Power of
true Contrition, whereof we have before spoken, that by Benefit thereof we
presently get Pardon of God for all our Offenses.

It will very much avail to stir up the minds of the Faithful, XLIII. How the
Faithful are to be induced to the Practice of Contrition.
if the Pastors will teach them some Methods whereby every one may exercise
himself in Contrition.

They ought therefore to admonish that frequently examining their Consciences,
First.
all men would see whether or no they have observed those things which by God
and by the Ecclesiastcal Laws are required.

And if any one shall find himself to be guilty of any wickedness, Secondly.
he presently accuse himself, and humbly beg pardon of the Lord.

Thirdly.
And desire time both to confess and to make satisfaction.

And first of all let him pray, Fourthly.
that he may be assisted with the help of the Divine Grace, that for the time
to come he commit not the same sins, which he earnestly does Penance for having
committed.

Moreover the Pastors must take care, XLIV. The Hatred of sin how to be stirred
up.
to stir up the Faithful to the greatest Hatred of Sin; both because the
Foulness and Baseness thereof is most extreme, and also because it brings upon
us the most grievous Losses and Calamities. For it estranges the Good will of
God from us, from whom we have received our greatest good things, and might
have expected and had far greater, and exposes us to eternal Death, and to be
forever tormented with the most extreme pains and sorrows. Thus far, of
Contrition.

Now we come to Confession, XLV. Confession how profitable.
which is another Part of Penance. But how much Care and Diligence the Pastors
ought to use in explaining thereof, they easily understand from hence, because
almost all devout persons have held, that whatsoever Holiness, Piety and
Religion has to this time by the great benefit of God, bin preserved in the
Church, is in a great measure to be ascribed to Confession: That none may
wonder that the Enemy of Mankind, when he endeavored utterly to overthrow the
Catholic Faith, by the Servants and Vassals of his wickedness* has labored with
all his Power to oppose this Point, which is, as it were, the Fortress of
Christian Virtue.

First therefore, XLVI. How necessary the Institution of Confession is.
it must be taught, that the Institution of Confession is very profitable to
us, and consequently very necessary. For that we may grant that by Contrition,
sin is done away, who knows not that it ought to be so vehement, bitter and
hot, that the sharpness of Grief may equal and bear comparison with the
Greatness of the Sin; but because very few come to this Degree, it came so to
pass also, that Pardon of Sins should be denied but to a very few. Wherefore it
was needful, that the most merciful Lord should ^rder the common Salvation of
Mankind after an easier way, which by his admirable Counsel he has done, when
he delivered to his Church the Keys of the Kindgom of Heaven.

For by the Doctrine of Catholic Faith, XLVII. Confession perfects Contrition.
All must believe and constantly affirm: If any one be so affected in mind, as
to bewail his sins, and also to sin no more for the future, although he be not
affected with such a kind of sorrow as may be sufficient to get him Pardon; Yet
when he has rightly confessed his sins to a Priest, by Virtue of the Keys, all
his wickednesses and sins are remitted and forgiven him: That worthily by the
most Holy Men our Fathers, was it celebrated, That an Entrance into Heaven is
opened by the Keys of the Church: Whereof it is not fit for any one to doubt,
since we read it decreed by the Council of Florence, "That the Effect of
Penance, is Absolution from Sins. Amb. Sermon. 1. de Quadrag. citatur de Poenit.
did. 1. c. ecce nunc August. lib. 2. de adult. conjug. 59. Chrysostom. de
sacerd. lib. 3. in Decreto Eugenii IV.

And we may further learn from hence, XLVIII. Confession a most sure way of
amending manners.
how much advantage Confession brings, because we find by experience, that
there is nothing so profitable for the amendment of manners to those whose
custom of Life has bin corrupt, as if they lay open to some Prudent and
Faithful Friend, who can help him with his pains and counsel, all the secret
Thoughts of his Heart, his Actions and Words. Wherefore according to the same
Reason it must be thought very wholesome for those who are conscious of the guilt
of Sin, to open the Sicknesses and Wounds of their Souls to a Priest, as to the
Vicar of Christ our Lord, who is under the most severe Law of perpetual
silence: For they presently find Remedies prepared for them, D. Poenit. did 6.
c. Sacerdot.
which have such a heavenly Virtue of curing, not only the present Sickness,
but also of disposing the Soul in such a manner, that thenceforth it will not
be easy for the future to fall into the like kind of Disease and Vice.

Nor is this advange of Confession to be pretermitted, XLIX. Confession
exercises the Bad.
which is very pertinent to the society and conjunction of Life: For it is
evident, that if you take away Sacramental Confession from Christian
Discipline, all things will be full of hidden and horrid wickedness: Which
afterward, and many others also much more heinous, Men depraved by the custom
of Sin, will not fear to commit openly: For the modesty and shame of
Confessing, calls a Bridle, as it were, upon the desire and liberty of
offending, and restrains Dishonesty.

And now the advantages of Confession being laid open, L. The Description of
Sacramental Confession.
the Pastors must teach, what the Nature and Virtue thereof is. They therefore
define it to be an Accusation of sins which belongs to a kind of Sacrament,
done to this End, that by virtue of the Keys we may get Pardon.

And it is rightly called an Accusation, LI. With what mind sins are to be
declared in Confession.
because sins are not so to be commemorated, as tho we boasted of our
wickedness, as they do who are glad when they have done mischief; nor are they
altogether to be told, as if for divertisement or sport to some idle Hearers,
we were telling some matter that had bin done; but they are so declared by a
mind accusing it self, as that we desire also to revenge them in our selves.

But we confess our sins to the End that we may get pardon, LII. We must
confess to get Pardon. Chrysostom 20. in Genes.
because this Judgment, is far unlike those Courts which make inquisitions of
Capital Causes, where the Pain and Punishment of Confession, is not made to be
a Discharge of the Fault, or a Pardon of the Offense. In the same sense in a
manner, although in other words, the most holy Fathers seemed to have defined
Confession, as when S. Austin says: Aug. Sermon. 4. de Verbis Domini. Greg hom.
40. in Evang.
Confession is that by which the Disease which lay hid, is laid open by the
Hope of Pardon: And S. Gregory, "Confession is the Detestation of sins: either
of which, because it is contained in the definition above mentioned, may easily
be referred to it.

And now, LIII. Confession instituted of Christ.
which is above all, the Curats shall teach, and without any doubtfulness
deliver to Faithful, that this Sacrament was instituted by Christ our Lord, who
did all things well, and for the sake of our Salvation. For after his
Resurrection, the Apostles being gathered together into one place, he breathed
upon them, saying: Joh. 20.22.
Receive ye the Holy Ghost; whose sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; and
whose sins ye retain, they are retained. Vide Trid. Sess. 14. de poenit. c. 5.
and can. 6. Aug. lib. hom. 64. and citatur de poenit. did. 1. c. agite. Orig.
hom. 1. in Ps. 37. Chrysostom. de Sacerd. lib. 3.

When therefore the Lord gave power to the Priests of Retaining and Remitting
sins, LIVE. Confession to be made to the Priest.
it is plain that they were made Judges of the Matter. And the Lord seemed to
signify the same thing, when he gave his Apostles that employment, to loose
Lazarus, Joh. 11.
when he was raised from the Dead, from those Bands wherewith he was bound. For
S. Austin explains that place thus: Aug. de vera and falsa poenit. ^tia, c 16.
and Sermon. 8. de verb. Domini.
They, says he, (the Priests) can now profit more, they can spare more those
that confess, to whom they forgive sin, to wit, the Lord by the Apostles
delivered Lazarus whom he had raised from the Dead, to his Disciples to be
loosed, showing, that the Power of Loosing was now granted to his Church.
Whither also belongs, that which he commanded those who on their journey were
cleans'd of their Leprosy, that they should show themselves to the Priests,
and undergo their judgment. Since therefore the Lord has given to the Priests a
Power of Remitting and Retaining sins, it is evident that they are appointed
Judges of that Matter, and because, as the Holy Synod of Trent has wisely
admonished, Sess. 14. c. 5. and can. 7. de Poenit.
that a true judgment cannot be made concerning any thing, and in appointing
punishments of sins, there can be no Measure of Justice held, unless the Cause
be truly known and searched into; from hence it follows, that by the Confession
of Penitents, all sins are severally to be laid open to the Priests. That the
Priests are Judges of sins, S. Austin teaches, lib. 20. de civit. Dei, c. 9.
Hieron. Epist. 1. ad Heliod. Chrysostom. lib. 3. de Sacerd. and Hom. 5. de verbis
Isaiae. Gregor. Hom. 26. in Evang. Amb. lib. 2. de Cain. c. 4. Trid. Sess. 14.
de Poenit. c. 5. Can. 7.

The Pastors therefore shall teach these things which have bin decreed by the
Holy Synod of Trent, LV. The Confirmation of what was said before.
and always delivered by the Catholic Church. For if we attentively read the
most Holy Fathers, we shall every where meet with most plain testimonies,
whereby it will be confirmed that this Sacrament, and the Law of Sacramental
Confession, which they called in Greek Exomologesis and Exagoreusis, as
received from the very Gospel, was instituted by Christ our Lord. But if we
desire Figures of the Old Testament also, without doubt those various kinds of
Sacrifices, which were made by the Priests for the expiating of diverse kinds of
sins, do seem to belong to the Confession of sins.

But because the Faithful are to be taught that Confession was instituted by
our Lord and Savior: LVI. Ceremonies used at Confession.
It is fit that there should be also some Rites and solemn Ceremonies added by
the Authority of the Church, to admonish them, which tho they belong not to the
virtue of the Sacrament; yet they put more plainly before men's Eyes, the
dignity thereof, and dispose the Souls of them that Confess, being already
kindled with devotion, the more easily to obtain the Grace of God. For when
with uncovered Head cast down at the Priests feet, with countenance down
toward the Earth, and hands stretched forth in a beseeching posture, and
giving other such like signs of Christian Humility, which are not indeed
necessary to the Reason or Virtue of the Sacrament, we confess our sins; from
these things we may evidently understand, both that there is a Heavenly Virtue
in the Sacrament, and also that the divine Mercy is to be sought and procured
by us with the greatest study.

And now let no one think that Confession was indeed instituted of the Lord,
LVII. The Necessity of Confession.
but yet so, as tho he had not told us that the Use of it is necessary. For let
the Faithful be assured of this, that he who is oppressed by any Mortal Sin,
ought to be called back to Spiritual Life by the Sacrament of Confession. Which
thing indeed by a very fair Tradition from our Lord we see plainly signified,
when he called, the Power of administering this Sacrament, the Key of the
Kingdom of Heaven. For as no one can go in to any place, Mat. 16.19.
without the help of him, to whom are committed the Keys: so we understand,
that no one is admitted into Heaven except the Doors are opened them by the
Priests, to whose Trust the Lord has committed the Keys. Otherwise there will
plainly seem to be no Use at all of the Keys in the Church; and in vain will
he, to whom the power of the Keys is given, prohibit any one the entrance of
Heaven; if notwithstanding some other way to enter in there may be opened. Now
this was excellently observed, by S. Austin, when he said; Lib. 50. hom. 49.
Let no one say to himself, I do Penance secretly before God; God knows, who
pardons me, what I do in my Heart: Mat. 18.
Is it therefore without reason said, What ye loose on Earth, shall be loosed
in Heaven? Were the Keys therefore without cause given to the Church of God?
And to the same sense S. Ambrose in the Book he has left written concerning
Penance, where he would root up the Heresy of the Novatians, Lib. 1. de
Poenit. c. 12.
who asserted, that the Power of forgiving sins was reserved to the Lord alone:
And who, says he, reverence God more? those that obey, or those that resist his
Commandments? God has commanded us to obey his Ministers: whom when we obey, we
give honor to God only.

But seeing it cannot be doubted, LVIII. At what Age we are bound to confess.
that the Law of Confession was made and established by the Lord himself, it
remains that we see at what time of Age and Years men ought to obey it. First,
therefore by the Canon of the Council of Lateran, Lateran Council. c. 21.
whose, beginning is Omnis Vtriusque sexus, it is evident that no body is bound
by the Law of Confession, before that Age wherein he may have the Use of
Reason: Nor yet is that Age by any certain number of years defined. But this
seems to be held in general, that Confession ought to be enjoined to a Child,
from the time when he has the power of discerning betwixt Good and Evil, and
when his mind is capable of sorrow. For when any one comes to that time of his
Life, when he can consider of his eternal Salvation, then ought he to begin to
confess his sins to a Priest, when otherwise no one can hope for Salvation, who
is loaded with the Conscience of wickedness.

But at what time especially Confession ought to be made, LIX. At what time
Confession must be made.
Holy Church has decreed in that Canon before mentioned: For it commands all
the Faithful to confess their sins at least once a year. But if we consider
what the Reason of our Salvation requires, verily as often as the danger of
Death hangs over us, or that we set about any thing, the doing whereof does not
suit with a person polluted with sin; as when we administer or receive the
Sacraments, so often Confession is not to be pretermitted. And the same thing
we ought strictly to observe, when we fear, or are likely to forget any sin we
have done. Neither can we confess sins which we remember not. Neither can we
get Pardon of God for those sins, unless the Sacrament of Penance by Confession
blot them out.

But because in Confession, LX. Confession only to be entire.
many things are to be observed, whereof some belong to the Nature of the
Sacrament, and others are not so necessary; concerning these things it must be
carefully treat'd: For neither are there Books and Commentaries wanting, from
whence it is easy to fetch the Explication of these things. But first of all
let the Curats teach this, that in Confession there must be care taken that it
be entire and absolute.

For all Mortal sins must be revealed to a Priest: LXI. All Mortal sins although
hid must be confessed.
For Venial Sins which do not pluck us away from the Grace of God, although
rightly and profitably we confess them, as the practice of devout men shows;
yet they may be pretermitted without Fault, and may be expiated many other ways.

But deadly sins, as was said before, must be reckoned up, although they were done
never so secretly and undiscovered, and were of that sort which are forbid in
the Two last Heads of the Decalogue. For, it often happens, that they wound the
Soul more than those which men are use to commit plainly and openly. For so it
has bin defined by the Holy Synod of Trent, and has always bin delivered by the
Catholic Church, even as the Testimonies of the Holy Fathers declare. For in S.
Ambrose it is declared after this manner: Sess. 14. de Poenit. c. 5. and can. 7.
No one can be justified from his sin, unless he confess his sin. And S. Hierom
upon Ecclesiastes says: Lib. de Parad. c. 4.
If the Serpent the Devil have secretly bit any one, and no one know of it, he
had infected him with the Poison of sin: C. 1. Super illud si mord^at s^rpens
circa finem.
If he hold his Peace and do not do Penance, and is not willing to confess is
wound to his Brother or Master, his Master who has a Tongue to cure him, cannot
profit him. Furthermore S. Cyprian in his Sermon de Lapsis most plainly teaches
this in these words: Although they are fettered by no such heinous crime as
Sacrificing to Idols or Libelling, yet because they had thoughts of doing so,
they ought with grief to confess it to the Priests of God. Lastly, This is the
common voice and sentence of all the Doctors of the Church, That all Mortal
sins ought severally to be confessed, do teach. Aug. lib. de vera and falsa
Poenit. cap. 10. Greg. hom. 10. super Ezekiel, Ambr. lib. de parad. cap. 14.
Hieron. in Ecclesiast. cap. 10. Cypr. de Lapsis circa finem. Vide and de
Poenit. did. 3. cap. sunt plures, etc. pluit and ibid. did. 1. cap. quem
poen. and ibid pass.

But in Confession that very great Care and Diligence is to be used, LXII. How
by Confession sins are plucked up by the Roots.
which we are wont to use in the weightiest Matters; and all our study ought so
to be employed herein, that we may cure the Wounds of our Souls, and destroy
the very Roots of Sin. Nor ought we only by a Declaration of them to explain
our grievous sins, but also all the several Circumstances of every sin which
either greatly increase or lessen the sins.

For some Circumstances are so weighty, LXIII. The Circumstances which increase
the sin must be confessed.
that the Nature of the Deadliness of the sin consists only in them: wherefore
all these things must always be confessed. For if any one shall have killed a
Man, it must be explained whether he were a Clerk or a Lay man. As also it is
necessary that he declare if he lay with a Woman, whether she were free from
the Law of Marriage, or were another Man's Wife, or of his Kindred, or
Consecrated to God, by the Betroathing of any Vow. For these things make the
kinds of sins different. So that the first by the Doctors of Holy things is
called simple Fornication; The Second, Adultery; The Third, Incest; The Fourth,
Sacrilege. Also Theft is to be reckoned among sins: But if any one shall steal
a piece of Gold, he certainly sins less than he that steals away a hundred or
two hundred pieces, or a great quantity of Gold, and of especially who stole
the Sacred Money. And this Reason belongs also to Place and Time, Examples
whereof are more known in the Books of many, than that we should make mention
of them in this place.

These things,

But to Confession it is so necessary, LXIV. To conceal sin in Confession, a
great Crime, and the Confession to be iterated.
as we said before, that it be entire and absolute, that if any one in
Confession pass over some of those things which ought to have bin explained,
and confessed only some of them; he not only by that Confession reaps no
advantage, but also fetters himself in a new wickedness. Nor is such a kind of
reckoning up of sin, to be called by the name of Confession, in which is the
Virtue of a Sacrament; but rather it is necessary for the Penitent to repeat
again his Confession, and to acknowledge himself guilty of that sin, that he
violated the Holiness of that Sacrament, by a counterfeit Confession.

But if for any other cause there may seem to be any defect in the Confession;
LXV. Confession not to be iterated by reason of sin forgot.
either because the Penitent has forgot some sins; or because he has not so
narrowly searched into the secret corners of his Conscience; yet because he had
it in his mind, entirely to confess all his sins, he has no need to iterate his
Confession: But it will be sufficient, if, when he remembers the sins before
forgot, he confess them to a Priest at another time.

Wherein care must be taken, LXVI. Negligence in examining must be avoided.
that we do not happily search our Consciences too dissolutely and remissly, and
so negligently study to bring our sins to remembrance, that we may deservedly
seem to be willing indeed not to remember them: For if we do so, we must by all
means iterate our Confession.

Moreover we must take heed, LXVII. Confession must be naked, simple and plain.
that our Confession be Naked, Simple, and Plain, not artificially composed, as
is done by some, who seem rather to lay down the Rule of their Life, than to
confess their sins. For such ought to be our Confession, as it may show us to
the Priest to be such Persons as we know our selves to be, and may show things
certain for certain, and doubtful for doubtful.

But if sins are not disclosed or recited,

They also are much to be commended who use Prudence and Modesty in explaining
things, LXVIII. Prudent and Modest.
for neither ought there too many words to he used; but those things which
belong to the Nature and Reason of every sin are to be opened in a short Speech
which is joined with Modesty.

But this must be endeavored both by the Confessing Person, LXIX. Secret.
and by the Priest, that their speech in Confession be secret.

For which cause it is not lawful for any by any means,

But nothing so much requires the Care of the Faithful, LXX. Frequent.
as to study to cleanse their Soul by a frequent Confession of their Sins. For
when any one is tempted with any deadly sin, there can be to him nothing more
wholesome or saving, by reason of the many dangers which hang over our life,
than presently to confess his sins. For it is a foul thing for any one to
promise himself a long time to live, when we are so diligent in cleansing the
spots of our Body, or of our Clothes, and not to use at least the same
diligence, that the splendour of our Soul grow not rusty with the most filthy
stains of sin.

And now we must speak concerning the Minister of this Sacrament. And that he
is a Priest, LXXI. An ordinary Priest the lawful Minister of Confession.
who has the Ordinary or Delegated Power of Absolving, sufficiently appears
from the Ecclesiastical Laws. For he must have, not only the Power of Order,
but of Jurisdiction also, that discharges this Office: A clear testimony of
this Ministry we have from our Lords words in S. John: Joh. 20.23.
Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted; and whose sins ye retain, they are
retained. And it is manifest that this was spoken not to all, but to the
Apostles only, to whom the Priests succeeded in this Office: And this is very
consentaneous; for whereas every kind of Grace which is given in this
Sacrament, is derived to the Members from Christ the Head; rightly ought they
to administer this to Christ's mystic Body, i. e. to the Faithful, who only
have power of consecrating his true Body; especially seeing the Faithful by
this Sacrament of Penance, are made fit and well disposed for receiving the
Sacred Eucharist.

But with how great Religion in old times, That no Bishop or Priest shall
presume to act any thing in another's Diocese or Parish, either by his
authority who is over him, or unless a great necessity seems to compel it. And
it was so decreed by the Apostle, when he commanded Titus, Tit. 1.5.
That he should appoint Priests in every City, to wit, who might feed and
educate the Faithful with the Heavenly Food of Doctrine and of the Sacraments.

Although if there be imminent danger of Death, LXXII. At the Point of Death,
every Priest is the Minister of Confession.
and the proper Priest cannot be had, that by this occasion none might perish,
the Council of Trent teaches, That it has bin observed in the Church of God,
that it is lawful for any Priest, not only to remit all kinds of sins, to whose
jurisdiction soever they belong, but even to absolve them from the Bond of
Excommunication also. Sess. 14. c. 6. de Peonit.

Now besides the Power of Order, LXXIII. The Qualities of the Minister of
Confession.
and of Jurisdiction, which are very necessary: It is first, Necessary that the
Minister of this Sacrament be indu'd both with knowledge, and Learning, and
Prudence: For he bears the Person both of a Judge, and of a Physician.

As to the First, That he be Learned.
It is evident enough, that it is not a common Knowledge which is necessary, and
which enables him to discover sins; and of the diverse kinds of sins to judge
which are weighty, which are lighter, according to the Rank and quality of the
Person.

But as he is a Physician, Prudent. Ex Basilio in reg. br^vib. q. 229.
he has need of the greatest prudence also: For great care must be taken that
those Remedies be applied to the sick person, which seem to be proper to heal
his Soul, and to strengthen it for the future against the force of the
Distemper.

Whence the Faithful may understand, Of upright Life.
that every one ought to take extraordinary care to choose himself a Priest,
whose Integrity of Life, Learning, and prudent Judgment may commend him: Who
understands well, of how great weight and Moment the Office is, wherein he is
placed, and what Punishment is suitable to every offense, and who are to be
absolved, and who to be bound.

But because there is no one who does not earnestly desire, LXXIV. Most
strictly forbid to reveal the sins of the Penitent.
that his Wickedness and Shame might be hid: The Faithful are to be admonished,
that there is no reason to fear, lest those things which they reveal in
Confession, shall ever be made known to any one by the Priest, or lest he may
at any time fall into danger thereby. For the Sacred Laws will most severely
revenge it upon those Priests, who shall not have concealed, with perpetual and
religious silence, all sins which any one shall have confessed to them.
Wherefore in the great Council of Lateran we read thus: Cap. 21.
Let the Priest take special heed, that neither by Word, or Sign, or by any
other way, he at any time betray the sinner.

And now the Order of the Matter requires, LXXV. The Negligence of sinners
reproved.
since we have spoken of the Minister, that some special Heads should be
explained, which are not a little suitable to the Use and Practice of
Confession. For a great part of the Faithful, to whom commonly nothing seems
more tedious, than the passing away of those days, which by Ecclesiastical Law
are appointed for confession, are so far from Christian Perfection; that
scarcely do they remember those sins which are to be revealed to the Priest,
nor yet do they diligently take care of those things, which it is plain have a
very great Power to reconcile the Divine Grace to them.

Wherefore since all endeavor must be used to further their Salvation. The
Priest shall carefully observe in the Penitent, LXXVI. It must be well
observed, whether the Penitent be contrite.
whether he have a true contrition for his sins, and be steadfastly resolved for
the time to come, to leave them off.

And if they shall observe him to be so affected, LXXVII. When the Penitent is
found contrite, what he is to be exhorted to
they shall earnestly admonish and exhort him, that for so great and singular a
benefit, he give God his greatest thanks, and never cease to seek of him the
protection of his Heavenly Grace: Wherewith being armed and secured, he may
easily resist and oppose his evil lusts. He is also to be taught, that he
suffer no day to pass without meditating somewhat of the Mysteries of the
Passion of our Lord, and stir up and inflame himself to imitate him, and to
love him with the greatest Charity; for by this Meditation he will obtain this,
that he will feel himself every day more and more safe from all the Temptations
of the Devil.

For neither is there any other cause why we yield both our courage and our
strength so soon, and so easily to be overcome by the Enemy, than that we labor
not by the Meditation of heavenly things, to conceive the Fire of divine Love,
whereby our Mind might be refreshed and supported.

But if the Priest shall understand, LXXVIII. If he seem not to be contrite,
what is then to be done.
that he that is willing to confess, does not so bewail his sins, as that he
may truly be said to be contrite, he shall endeavor to affect him with an
earnest desire of Contrition, that thenceforth being inflamed with the desire
of this excellent Gift, he may resolve with himself to beg, and beseech it of
the mercy of God.

But first of all, LXXIX. What is to be done with one who excuses or lessens
his sins.
the Pride of some is to be reproved, who endeavor either to defend their
wickednesses by some excuse, or to lessen them. For, for example, when any one
confesses, that he was somewhat overmuch moved with Anger, he presently charges
another with the cause of that Disturbance, who as he complains, first did him
the Wrong. He is therefore to be admonished, That this is the sign of an
exalted or proud mind, and of a Man that either despises, or else is ignorant
of the greatness of his sin. And also that such kind of Excuse does rather
increase than lessen the sin. For he that strives thus to approve his Fact,
seems to profess, that he then will use Patience, when no body hurts nor wrongs
him, than which nothing can be more unbecoming a Christian. For whereas he
ought very much to bewail the condition of him who did the Injury; yet is not
moved with the naughtiness of the sin, but is angry at his Brother: And when a
fair occasion was offered him, to honor God with his Patience, and amend his
Brother with his Meekness, he turns the matter of his Salvation, to his Hurt.

But more pernicious is the Fault of those to be thought, LXXX. What to be done
with those who are ashamed to confess.
who being hindered by a foolish kind of Bashfulness, dare not confess their
sins. They must by Exhortation be encouraged therefore, and admonished, That
there is no cause why they should be afraid to reveal their Vices, and that no
one ought to wonder if he knows that Men sin, which is indeed the common
Disease of all, and is properly incident to Human Weakness.

There are others, LXXXI. What with the slothful, and those that neglect
Conscience.
who, either because they are used very seldom to confess their sins, or
because they take no care and thought to find out their sins, and know not well
how to begin that Office, and having begun Confession, know not how to dispatch
it; There is need certainly that such as these, be more sharply chid, and to
teach first of all, that before any one go to a Priest, there must be great
care and diligence used, that he be moved with contrition of his sins; but This
can by no means be done, unless he study to recollect and remember them
severally.

Wherefore if the Priest find such Men as these, LXXXII. See what is to be done.
wholly unprepared, he shall with kind expressions send them away, and exhort
them, that they take some longer time the better to think upon their sins, and
then they may return again: But if happily they affirm, that they have used all
their Diligence and endeavor therein already, (because that they have
endeavored, as they affirm, it is very much to be feared, lest being once sent
away, they return no more) they are to be heard, and especially if they show an
endeavor of amendment of Life, and can be wrought upon to accuse their own
negligence, for which they promise another time to make amends by diligent and
exact Meditation: But in this Case, there is great caution to be used.

For if,

But because it sometimes happens that Women, LXXXIII. The remedy to be used
for the Bashfulness of some.
having forgot some sin in their former Confession, dare not return again to
the Priest, because they are afraid, lest they may be suspected by the people,
of some very great dishonesty, or else may be thought to look for the praise of
bein singularly religious, it must often both publicly and privately be
taught, that no one is of so excellent a memory as to be able to remember all
his Actions, Words and Thoughts: Wherefore the Faithful are in no case to be
frighted so as not to return to the Priest, if they afterward remember any
sin, which before they pretermitted. These therefore, and many other things of
this kind shall in Confession be observed by the Priests.

LXXXIV. Of Satisfaction.
And now we come to the Third Part of Penance which is called Satisfaction.
First therefore the Name and Virtue of Satisfaction is to be expounded. For,
from hence the Enemies of the Catholic Church have taken a large occasion of
Difference and Discord, to the exceeding great Damage of Christians.

Now Satisfaction is a full Payment of a thing that is due, LXXXV. What
satisfaction is.
for nothing seems to be wanting to that which is satisfactory or enough.
Wherefore when we speak of Reconciliation to Grace; To satisfy signifies the
same thing, as to give another so much as may be suffictent to an angry mind to
recompense the injury: And so Satisfaction is nothing else than a Recompense
for an Injury done to another. But as to this place, the Doctors of Divinity
have used the word Satisfaction to signify that Recompense, when a Man pays
something to God for the sins he has committed.

In which kind, LXXXVI. The various degrees of Satisfaction.
because there may be many Degrees, hence it is that Satisfaction is taken
differently.

And the First and most excellent is that whereby, The First is Christ's
Satisfaction.
according to the nature of our sins, is paid abundantly to God, whatsoever is
owing to him from us, although he would deal with us according to the utmost
Justice. Now this is said to be of that kind, which renders God appeased and
propitious to us. And This we have received from Christ our Lord only, who upon
the Cross having paid the price for our sins, most fully satisfied God: Nor
could there be any created thing of so great worth, as to free us from so
grievous a debt; and as S. John testifies; 1 John 2.2.
He is the Propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the
sins of the whole World. This Satisfaction therefore is full and complete,
equally answering to the Nature of all the sins which are committed in the
World, by the virtue whereof, the Actions of Men prevail very much with God,
and without him they would be accounted worthy of no regard. And hither the
Words of David seem to have respect; who considering with himself, after that
he had said thus, Ps. 11.52.
What shall I give to the Lord for all the things which he has given me? He
could find nothing but this Satisfaction, which he expressed by the name of a
Chalice, worthy so many and so great Benefits: Wherefore he subjoyns: I will
take the Chalice of Salvation, and will call upon the Name of the Lord.

Another kind of Satisfaction is called Canonical, LXXXVII. The Second is
Canonical satisfaction.
which being defined is perfected in a certain space of Time. Wherefore it has
bin received by the most ancient usage of the Church, That when Penitents are
absolved from sins, some Punishment is required of them, the undergoing of
which Punishment is used to be called Satisfaction.

By the same Name also is any kind of Punishment signified, LXXXVIII. The Third
is any Punishment freely undertaken.
which for sins we endure, not as appointed by any Priest, but of our own free
accord undertaken and laid upon our selves, by our selves for sins.



For so some define it: LXXXIX. What it is to satisfy.
To satisfy, is to pay due Honor to God: But it is sufficiently evident that
no one can give due Honor to God, but he that resolves to avoid sin by all
means. And to satisfy, is to cut often the Causes of sins, and not to indulge
any entrance to their Suggestions.

According to which Sentence, Mark this Definition.
some have thought that Satisfaction is a Cleansing, whereby whatsoever
Uncomeliness by reason of Stain, remains in the Soul, is washed away, and we
are absolved from the Temporal Punishments wherewith we were held.

Which things seeing they are so, XC. How Satisfaction is proved necessary.
it will be easy to persuade the Faithful, how necessary it is for Penitents
to exercise themselves in this study of Satisfaction. For they are to be taught
that there are two things which follow sin, to wit, Stain and Punishment: And
although together with the Fault committed, the Punishment of Eternal Death with
the Damned be forgiven: Yet it does not always happen, as has bin declared by
the Council of Trent, Sess. 14. c. 8. Can. 12. and 15. Genesis 3.17. Number. 12.21. 2
Reg 12.23.
That the Lord remits the Relics of sin, and the temporal Punishments which are
due to sin. Of which thing there are plain Testimonies in Sacred Scripture.
Genesis chapter 3. Numbers 12, and 22. and in many other places: But we will see
that most clear and illustrious place of David, To whom although Nathan said, The
Lord also has took away thy sin, Thou shall not dye: Nevertheless he freely
underwent very grievous punishments Night and Day, imploring the Mercy of God
in these Words, Psalm. 50.4.
Wash me further from my iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin, because I
acknowledge my Iniquity, and my sin is ever against me. In which words is begged
of God, that he would pardon, not only the Crime, but also the Punishment due
to the Crime; and that he would restore him, being purged from the Relics of
sin, into his former state of Excellency and Integrity. And this he begged with
most earnest Prayers: Yet the Lord afflicted him, Both with the Death of the
Child gotten in Adultery, and with the Rebellion and Death of Absalom, whom he
dearly loved, and with other Punishments and Calamities, which he had before
threatened him with. In Exodus also: Exo. 32.8.9.
Although the Lord were entreated by the Prayers of Moses to spare the people for
their Idolatry, yet he threatens, That he will recompense them with grievous
Punishments for so great a Wickedness: And Moses himself testifies, That so it
will be, that the Lord would most severely revenge it even to the Third and
Fourth Generation. Now that these things have bin always delivered by the Holy
Fathers in the Catholic Church, i^ most evidently proved by their authority.
Vide Aug. lib. 2. de peccat. merit. and remiss. cap. 34. and contra Faust. lib.
22. cap. 66. and praesertim in Joan. tract. 124. paulo ante med. Greg. lib. 9.
Moral. cap. 24. Chrysostom. hom. 8. ad Popul. Antioch. Iterum Aug. Ench. cap. 30.
Amb. de Poenit. lib. 2. c. 5. Vide item Canones Poenitentiales apud Anton.
August. vel in Actis Eccl. Mediolan.

But for what cause it is, XCI. In Penance, as in Baptism, the Punishment of
sin is not remitted.
that all Punishment is not equally forgiven in the Sacrament of Penance, as in
the Sacrament of Baptism, is excellently explained by the Holy Synod of Trent
in these words: The Nature or Reason of the Divine Justice seemed to require,
that they should by him be received into Grace after one sort, who before
Baptism sinned through Ignorance; and those after another sort, who being once
freed from the slavery of Sin and the Devil, and after having received the Gift
of the Holy Ghost, do violate the Temple of God, and are not afraid to grieve
the Holy Ghost. And it becomes the Divine Mercy, that our sins should not be
forgiven us without any Satisfaction: That taking that occasion, thinking our
sins to be more light than they are, as those that are injurious and
contumelious to the Holy Spirit, we fall into greater sins, treasuring up to
our selves Wrath against the day of Wrath.

For without all doubt, XCII. Canonical Satisfaction profitable.
these Satisfactory Punishments do greatly restrain Penitents from sin, and
hold them back as with a Bridle, and make more cautious and watchful for the
future.

And besides, First Secondly. Ezekiel. 6.
they are as it were certain Testifications of the Grief we take for having
committed sin: By which means we satisfy the Church, who by our wickedness is
grievosly offended. For, as S. Austin affirms: God despises not a Contrite and
humble Heart; but because for the most part the Grief of one Man's Heart is hid
from another Man, nor does it come forth into the knowledge of other Men, by
Words or any other Sign; rightly are the Times of Penance appointed by those
who preside in the Church: That so the Church might be satisfied, in which sins
are remitted.

Besides, Thirdly.
The Examples of our Penance, teach others how they ought to order their life,
and to follow Piety: For seeing other Men behold the Punishments laid upon us
for our sins, they will perceive that they are to use the greatest caution
through all their Life, and that their former Manners are to be corrected and
amended.

Wherefore it is most wisely observed by the Church, XCIII. Public Penance
wisely instituted.
That when a Heinous Wickedness has bin publicly committed by any one, he must
undergo public Penance also, That others being affrighted with Fear, might
thenceforth more warily avoid sin.

Which thing also has bin used sometimes to be done even in hidden sins, which
have bin great. Vide Aug. lib. 5. de Civit. Dei, cap. 26. and Epist. 54. and l.
50. hom. hom. 49. and de vera and falsa Poenit. passim. Ambr. lib. 2. de
Poenit. c. 10. and citatur de Poenit. did. 3. cap. reperiuntur. Cypr. de
Lapsis multis in locis. Conc. Agathense, cap. 35. and citatur did. 50. cap.
poenitentes.

But, XCIV. The manner of the Churches dealing with public sinners.
as we said, in Public sins, this was always held, that they who had committed
them, before they had performed Public Penance were not absolved. But in the
mean time, the Pastors besought God for their Salvation, and ceased not to
exhort the Penitents themselves also to do the like. In which kind the Care and
Solicitude of S. Ambrose was very great, Paulinus i^ ejus Vita.
by whose Tears it is reported, That very many who came hard-hearted to the
Sacrament of Penance, were so softn'd, that they conceived the Grief of a true
Contrition.

But afterward there was so much abated of the severity of ancient Discipline,
XCV. How cold alas is Charity grown?
and Charity grew so cold; that now very many of the Faithful do think no
inward Sorrow of Mind, no lamenting of the Heart necessary: But think it
enough, if they have only the appearance of one that is sorry.

And then by this kind of suffering Punishments we obtain to our selves, XCVI.
By Penance we are made like to Christ. Heb. 2.18. Ser. 5. de Omn. sanct. Rom
8.27. 2 Timothy 2.11
that we bear the resemblance and Image of Jesus Christ our Head, wherein he
suffered and was tempted: For nothing can seem so ugly, as S. Bernard says, as
to be a delicate nice Member under a Thorny Head. For as the Apostle witnesses:
We are Coheirs with Christ, if so be we suffer with him, and as he has written
in another place: If we are dead together, we shall live together, if we suffer
together, we shall also reign together.

S. Bernard also affirms, XCVII. Two Evils in the Soul from sin. Sermon. 1. in
Coena Dom.
That in sin are found Two things, the Blemish and the Plague of the Soul; and
that that Foulness is taken away by the Mercy of God, but that to heal the
Plague of sin, that Care is very necessary, which for a Remedy is used in
Penance. For as when a Wound is healed, some Scars remain, which also are to be
cured; so in the Soul, after the sin is pardoned, the Relics of sin remain to
be purged away. The same thing the sentence of S. Chrysostom plainly confirms,
when he says: Hom 80. ad Pop. Antioch.
It is not enough that the Arrow be drawn out of the Body, but the Wound also
made by the Arrow is to be healed; so also in the Soul, after the Pardon of sin
received, the Plague or Sore remaining is to be cured by Penance. For very
frequently we are taught by S. Austin, That in Penance, In Psalm. 50. ad haec
verba Ecce enim venit.
these Two things are to be observed; the Mercy and the Justice of God: His
Mercy, whereby he pardons the Eternal Punishments due to sin: His Justice
whereby he punishes a Man with Temporal Punishments.

Lastly, XCVIII. By Penance we escape those Punishments that are prepared of
God for us. 1 Cor. 3, 1.
the Punishment of Penance, which we take upon our selves, turns away God's
Revenge and his Punishment intended against us: For so the Apostle teaches when
he says: If we judge our selves, we shall not be judged, but while we are
judged we are corrected of the Lord, that we may not be condemned with this
world. Which things when they are explained to the Faithful, it can scarce be,
but that they must needs be stirred up to do works of Penance.

But how great the Force and Virtue of it is, XCIX. Whence the Virtue of
Penance to satisfy and merit, is. Mat. 10.42.
may be gathered from hence, that it wholly depends upon the merit of the
Passion of Christ our Lord. From whence also we get these Two very great
advantages by our honest Actions: The One is, That we merit the Rewards of
Immortal Glory: So that even a Cup of cold Water, which we give in his Name
wants not a Reward: The Other is, That we satisfy for our sins. Vide de
Poenit. Sess. 14 cap. 18. and can. 13, 14. and Sess. 6. de Justific. cap. 16
Conc. Trid.

Nor does this obscure the most perfect and full Satisfaction of Christ our
Lord, C. Our Satisfaction hinders not Christ's but illustrates it.
but on the contrary it comes to pass, that it renders it much more clear and
bright. For by so much the more full does the Grace of Christ appear to be;
because not only those things are communicated with us which he only merited,
but those things also, which as the Head over the Members, he has merited and
performed in the Saints and Just men: By which means it is plain, that it
comes, that the Just and Honest Actions of pious Men have so much Weight and
Dignity in them.

For Christ our Lord, CI. Because by Grace we merit and satisfy.
as the Head over the Members, and the Vine to the Branches, continually pours
forth his Grace upon them, who by Charity are joined with him. Which Grace
always goes before, accompanies and follows our Works, and without which we can
by no means merit, or satisfy God.

And so it comes to pass that to the Just nothing seems to be wanting, CII.
Being assisted by the Grace of God, all can work their Salvation.
when with their Works, which they do by the Power of God, they can satisfy
the Divine Law, as far as their Human and Mortal Condition is capable, and get
eternal Life, which, to wit, if they depart out of this Life adorned with the
Grace of God, they may merit: For, it is a noted saying of our Savior. He that
shall drink of this water that I shall give him, shall not thirst forever; Joh.
4.
but the water which I will give him, shall be in him a fountain of water,
springing up to eternal life.

Now there are Two things, CIII. Two things required to satisfaction.
especially required in satisfaction. The first is, that he who satisfies be
Just, and a Friend of God. For these Works which are done without Faith and
Charity, can by no means be acceptable to God: The other is, that such kind of
works be undertaken, which of their own Nature bring some grief and trouble:
For seeing they are in recompense for past sins, and as Cyprian the Martyr
says, The Redeemers as it were of sin: It is altogether necessary that they
have some bitterness in them; Lib. 1. Ep. 3. post. med.
although it do not always follow, that those who exercise them in these
troublesome Actions, have sense of grief thereby.

For often times either the custom of enduring,

But the Pastors shall teach, CIV. The works of Satisfaction are Prayer,
Fasting, Alms.
that every kind of satisfaction is to be referred to these three especially,
Prayer, Fasting, Alms, which indeed answer to those three sorts of Goods, of
the Soul, of the Body, and those which are called outward Goods, all which we
have received of God. But there can be nothing more fit and convenient to pluck
up the very Roots of sin.

CV. Three Remedies for the Three Sicknesses of the Soul.
For whereas every thing that is in the world, is either the Lust of the Flesh,
the Lust of the Eyes, or the Pride of Life, there is no one who sees not, that
to these three Causes of Sickness are very rightly opposed so many Medicines, to
wit, Fasting to the First, Alms to the Second, and Prayer to the Third.

Moreover, CVI. By Prayers we satisfy to God, by Fasting to our selves, by
Alms to our neighbor.
if we consider those who are offended by our sins, we shall easily understand
why to these Three especially all satisfaction is referred: Now these are, God,
our Neighbor, and our Selves, wherefore we appease God by Prayer, we satisfy
our Neighbor by Alms, and we chastise our selves by Fasting.

But because many and diverse Afflictions and Calamities press us while we are
in this Life, CVII. A good use of the Afflictions of this Life.
the Faithful are chiefly to be taught, that they who with a patient mind
endure whatsoever Labor and Inconvenience God sends upon them, have gotten full
Matter of Satisfaction and Merit: But those who against their Will, and
resisting as much as they can, are forced to bear this kind of punishment,
deprive themselves of all the Fruit of Satisfaction, and bear only the Revenge
and Punishment of God revenging their sins by his just judgment.

But herein the immense Goodness and Mercy of God is to be celebrated with the
highest Praises and Thanksgivings, CVIII. One can satisfy for another.
who has granted this to Human Frailty, that One can satisfy for another: And
this indeed is very proper to this Part of Penance.

But then as to Contrition and Confession, CIX. None can be Contrite or Confess
for another.
as there is no one can Grieve or Confess sor another; so those that are indu'd
with divine Grace, can pay in another man's name what is owing to God.
Wherefore, it comes to pass that after a certain sort one may seem to bear
another Burden.

Nor is there any place left for any of the Faithful to doubt of This, CX. How
it comes that one can satisfy for another.
seeing that in the Apostles Creed, we confess the Communion of Saints. For
since we all are born again to Christ, being cleans'd by the same Baptism, and
are partakers of the same Sacraments; but above all since we are strengthened
with the Meat and Drink of the same Body and Blood of Christ our Lord: This
most evidently shows, that we all are Members of the same Body.

As therefore neither the Foot performs its Office for its own Profit, A
similitude.
but for the profit of the Eyes also; and again, that the Eyes see, is not to
be limited to their own advantage only, but for the common advantage of all the
Members: So among us, the Offices of Satisfaction ought to be esteemed common.

Nor yet is this true without an Exception, CXI. Medicinal Satisfaction cannot
be fulfilled by another.
if we consider All the Advantages which are received hereby: For the Works of
Satisfaction, are a kind of Medicin and Cure, which is prescribed the Penitent
for curing the corrupt Affections of his Mind: Which kind of Fruit of Advantage
it is evident that they altogether want, who satisfy not for themselves. These
things therefore shall be largely and clearly explained concerning the Three
Parts of Penance, Contrition, Confession and Satisfaction.

But this ought specially to be observed by the Priests, CXII. When Absolution
is to be denied.
that having heard Confession, before they absolve the Penitent from his sins,
they are to take diligent Care, that if happily he has taken away any thing,
either of the Goods, or of the Credit of his Neighbor, let him make full
recompense for the sin, whereof he seems deservedly to be condemned: For no one
is to be absolved, unless he first promises to restore every one his own.

But because there are many, That he who stole, now steal no more: Ephesians. 4.10.
but rather let him labor, working with his hands that which is Good, that he
may have wherewith to give to him that suffers need.

But in appointing the punishment of Satisfaction, CXIII. How great
Satisfaction is to be imposed.
the Priests will consider, that nothing is to be appointed by them for their
own pleasure, but that all things are to be directed by Justice, Prudence and
Piety.

And that sins may seem to be measured, CXIV. The Old Canons of Penance to be
proposed.
and Penitents may the better know the weight of their sins, it will be worth
the while sometimes to signify to them what punishments have bin appointed for
certain Faults,



But of all kinds of Satisfaction, CXV. What kind^ of satisfaction especially
is to be imposed.
it will be most suitable to appoint Penitents, to give themselves to Prayer
upon certain determined days, and that they make Prayers to God for all men,
and especially for them, who are gone out of this Life to the Lord.

And they must also be exhorted, CXVI. The Virtue of Voluntary Penance to be
added to the virtue of Sacramental.
that they often take upon themselves freely, and of their own accord, to
repeat those services of Satisfaction which were appointed by the Priest: And
that they so order their manners, that when all those things which belong to
the Sacrament of Confession are diligently performed, yet that they never
intermit the studies of the Virtue of Penance.

But if sometimes also Public Penance is to be prescribed for Public Offense,
CXVII. Public Satisfaction to be imposed upon public Offenders.
although the Penitent may refuse and pray to be excused, yet he is not easily to
he heard: But he must he persuaded, that those things which are wholesome or
saving both to himself and others, he accept with a free and cheerful mind.
These things concerning the Sacrament of Penance, and the several Parts
thereof, shall be so taught, that the Faithful may not only understand them
perfectly, but also, by Gods help, they may resolve indeed to perform them
devoutly and religiously.

Of the SACRAMENT of EXTREME UNCTION.
SInce the Holy Oracles of Scripture teach us thus, I. Why this Sacrament is
often to be treated of.
In all thy works remember thy last end, and thou shall not sin forever: The
Curats are tacitly admonished, that no time is to be pretermitted of exhorting
the Faithful, Eccl. 7.40.
to be daily conversant in the Meditation of Death. But how can the Sacrament
of Extreme Unction choose but have the Memory of that Last day joined with it?
Hence we may easily understand, that this Sacrament must often be treated of,
not only for this Reason, because it is very convenient to open and unfold the
Mysteries of those things which belong to Salvation: But also because the
Faithful will restrain their evil Lusts, when they consider in their minds,
that there lies upon all a Necessity of Dying; wherefore also it will so come
to pass, that they will feel themselves less troubled at the Expectation of
Death.

But let them give immortal thanks to God, II. Thanks to be given to God, for
the Institution of this Sacrament.
who, as in the Sacrament of Baptism, he has laid open to us an entrance to the
true Life; so also when we depart out of this mortal life, that we might have a
more ready way to Heaven, he has instituted the Sacrament of Extreme Unction.

That therefore those things which are more necessary to explain it, III. Why
this Sacrament called Extreme Unction.
may be opened almost in the same Order which has bin observed in the other
Sacraments: It shall first be taught, that This Sacrament is therefore called
Extreme Unction, because this of all the Sacred Unctions, which our Lord and
Savior commended to his Church, is last to be administered.

Wherefore this very Unction was also called by our Ancestors, IV. Other Names
of this Sacrament.
the Sacrament of the Unction (or Anointing) of the Sick, and the Sacrament of
them that go out of the world. By which Names, the Faithful may easily be
brought to the remembrance of their last End. Vide Hugon. de Sacr. part. 15. c.
2. Pet. Dam. Sermon. de Dedicat. Eccles.

But this will be made evident, V. Extreme Unction proved to be a Sacrament.
if we attend to the words wherewith St. James the Apostle has declared the Law
of this Sacrament: Is any one sick among you, says he, Let him call for the
Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with Oil in the
Name of the Lord: First.
and the Prayer of Faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall ease him,
Isai. 5.14.
and if he be in sins, they shall be forgiven him.

For, Secondly.
because the Apostle affirms, that sins are forgiven, therein he declares the
Force and Nature of a Sacrament.

Now that This was the perpetual Doctrine of the Catholic Church concerning
Extreme Unction, Thirdly.
both many other Councils testify, and by the Council of Trent it has bin
declared in such a manner, Sess. 43. de Extrema Vnct. c. 1. and can. 3.
that she has decreed the Pain of an Anathema against all those who presume to
teach or think otherwise. And Innocent the First also very much commends this
Sacrament to the Faithful. Innocent. Epist. 1. ad Decent. cap. 8. and citatur
did. 95. c. illud superfluum: Item Conc. Cabilon. cap. 48. Wormaciense. c. 72.
Constan. and Florent.

It is therefore constantly to be taught of the Pastors, VI. Extreme Unction is
a Sacrament.
that it is a true Sacrament: and not many, but One: although it be administered
with many Unctions (or Anointings) to every one whereof are used proper
Prayers, and a peculiar Form.

It is One; VII. How Extreme Unction is One Sacrament.
not in continuation of the Parts which may not be divided; but in perfection,
of which sort are all other things which consist of many parts. For as a House
which is composed of many and diverse things, yet is but One only in perfect
Form: So the Sacrament, although it be made up of many Things and Words, yet it is
but One sign, and has the Efficiency of One thing only which it signifies.

Moreover, VIII. This Sacrament has Matter and Form. Isai. 5.14.
the Curats shall teach, what the Parts of this Sacrament are, The Element, I
say, and The Word: For these things are not passed over by S. James; in every
one whereof we may observe their own Mysteries.

The Element or Matter whereof, IX. What the matter is? In the place before
cited.
as the Councils and especially that of Trent has decreed, is Oil consecrated
by a Bishop, to wit, the Liquor, not pressed out of any fat and thick Nature,
but out of the Buries of the Olives only.

Now this Matter very fitly signifies that thing which by Virtue of this
Sacrament, X. How fit this matter is.
is inwardly wrought in the Soul; for as Oil is very profitable to mitigate the
Pains of the Body: So the Virtue of the Sacrament lessens the sorrow and grief
of the Soul.

Besides, Oil restores sweetness, makes cheerful, and feeds our Lights, and
also it is very suitable to refresh and strengthen a weary Body. All which
things declare, what by the Divine Power is wrought upon a sick man through the
Administration of this Sacrament.

And This concerning the Matter is sufficient: XI. What the Form of this
Sacrament is.
But the Form of this Sacrament, is the Word and that solemn Prayer which the
Priest uses at every Anointing, when he says; God indulge (or pardon) thee by
this Holy Unction whatsoever offense thou have done through the fault of thy Eyes,
or Nostrils, or Touch.

Now that This is the true and proper Form of this Sacrament, XII. This proved
to be the proper Form.
the Apostle S. James signifies, when he says, Let them pray over him, and the
Prayer of Faith shall save the sick: Whence we know, that the Form is to be
used in manner of a Prayer: although with what Words chiefly it is to be conceived
the Apostle has not expressed.

But This we have from the Tradition of the Fathers: XIII. This Form used every
where.
So that all Churches retain this manner of Form, which the Roman Church, the
Mother and Mistress of all Churches uses.

For though some change some few Words, as when for, God indulge thee: They put
Remit or Spare, and sometimes also Heal whatsoever thou have committed: But yet
because there is no alteration of the sense, it is evident that the same Form
is religiously observed of all.

Nor let any one wonder why it is so, XIV. Why this Form is in the manner of a
Prayer.
that the Form of other Sacraments either absolutely signifies what it effects,
as when we say, I Baptize thee, or I Sign thee with the sign of the Cross, or
is pronounced, as it were, by commanding; as when in administering the Sacrament
of Orders it is said, Receive thou Power: But this One Form of Extreme Unction
is performed in a kind of Prayer; but this is very properly and rightly done,
for seeing this Sacrament is therefore used, that besides the spiritual Grace
that it gives, it also restores Health to the Sick: yet because it does not
always follow, that the Sick are made whole of their Disease; for this cause
the Form is made in a Prayer, that we may beg that of Gods Bounty, which the
Power or Virtue of the Sacrament is not used to effect in a constant and
perpetual course.

Now there are proper Rites used in the administration of this Sacrament also.
But the greatest part of them contains Prayers, XV. Why so many Prayers used in
administering this Sacrament.
which the Priest uses, to obtain Health for the sick Person* For there is no
Sacrament which is made with more Prayers: and indeed rightly; because at that
time especially the Faithful are to be assisted with Pious Devotions: Wherefore
also all the rest who then happen to be present, and specially the Curat, ought
from their heart to beseech God for the sick Person, and with all their study
and affection to commit his Life and Health to Gods Mercy.

Now seeing it has bin showed that Extreme Unction is truly and properly to be
reckoned in the number of the Sacraments: XVI. The Sacrament of Extreme Unction
instituted by Christ.
This also follows, that the Institution thereof came from Christ our Lord,
which afterward was proposed and published to the Faithful by the Apostle S.
James. Although the same our Savior seemed to have given the First Draught of this
Unction, when he sent his Disciples by two and two before his Face; for, it is
thus written of them by the Evangelist; Mar. 6.13.
They went and preached, that Men should do Penance, and they cast out many
Devils, and Anointed many that were sick, with Oil, and healed them.

Which Unction must indeed be believed to have bin not invented by the
Apostles, Dennys, S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, and S. Gregory the Great assert;
that it is by no means to be doubted, but that with great Religion we ought to
receive This, as One of the Seven Sacraments of the Catholic Church.

So the Faithful are to be taught; XVII. To Whom this Scarament is to be
administered.
although this Sacrament belongs to all, yet there are some sorts of Men to be
excepted, to whom it is not to be administered. And first they are excepted who
are of a sound and healthy Body: For, that Extreme Unction is not to be given
to them, the Apostle teaches, when he says; Ja. 5.14.
Is any one Sick among you? And Reason shows, For, for this cause was it
instituted, not only to be a Remedy to the Soul, but to the Body also. Seeing
therefore that they only who are Sick, want cure; therefore ought this
Sacrament to be given to them, who seem to be so dangerously Sick, that it may
be feared that the last day of their life is at hand.

In which case notwithstanding they grievously sin, XVIII. The Sick are to be
anointed before they lose their Senses.
who use to observe that time for the anointing of the Sick, when all Hope of
Health is gone, and the Person begins to grow dead and senseless; for it is
manifest, that to the more profitable receiving of the Sacrament; it is very
available that the sick be anointed with the Sacred Oil, when his Mind is yet
whole in him, and his Reason strong, and when he can make use of his Faith, and
a Religious Will or Disposition of Soul. Wherefore the Curats are to observe,
that at such time chiefly they apply that Heavenly Medicin, which by its own
virtue is always very wholesome; but they will understand that it will be more
profitable when joined with the pious Devotion of them that are to be healed.

The Sacrament of Unction therefore may not be given to any one that is not
grievously sick, XIX. To whom this Sacrament is not to be administered.
although he go about any thing that may be dangerous to his Life, either because
he is a going some dangerous Sea-Voyage, or because he is entering into Battle,
where certain Death hangs over him, or even being condemned to Death, he is
carried away to suffer it. Furthermore all those that want the use of Reason,
are not fit to take this Sacrament: And Children that do not sin, the Relics
whereof there is no need to heal by the Remedy of this Sacrament. Also Madmen
and Phrenetic, unless they sometimes have the Use of Reason, and at that time
especially, give some signification of a pious Soul, and desire to be anointed
with the Sacred Oil: For he who from his Birth never had the Use of Reason and
Right-Mind, is not to be anointed; but not so, if the sick person, when being
in his Right-mind, he would be made Partaker of this Sacrament, afterward fell
into Madness and Raving.

Now all the Parts of the Body are not to be anointed, XX. What parts of the
Body to be anointed.
but those only which Nature gave to Man, to be as it were the Instruments of
Sense. The Eyes, for Sight, The Ears for Hearing, The Nostrils for Smell, The
Mouth for Taste or Speech, The Hand for Feeling, which tho it be equally spread
abroad through the whole Body, yet it is most vigorous or lively in that Part,

Now this Rite of Anointing, XXI. Why these Parts are to be anointed.
the Universal Church retains, and it very well agrees also to the Nature of
this Sacrament; for it is as a Medicin. And because in the Diseases of the
Body, although the whole Body be ill affected, yet the Cure is applied to that
Part only, from whence, as from the Fountain and Original, the Disease flows:
Therefore not the whole Body, but those Members are anointed, in which chiefly
the strength of Sense is most eminent, as also the Reins, being the seat as it
were of Pleasure and Lust; and the Feet which move and carry us from place to
place.

And here it must be observed, XXII. This Sacrament may be iterated, and when.
That in one and the same Sickness, when the sick Man is in the same danger of
Life, he is to be anointed once only. But if after this Unction received, the
Sick Person recover; so often as he shall afterward fall into the same danger
of Life; so often may the help of this Sacrament be given him. Whence it
plainly appears, That this Sacrament belongs to the number of those that may be
iterated.

But because all diligence ought to be used, XXIII. With what Preparation
Extream-Unction is to be received.
that nothing may hinder the Grace of this Sacrament; and yet that nothing is
more contrary to it, than the Conscience of any mortal sin, the perpetual
Practice of the Church Catholic is to be observed; That before Extream-Unction,
the Sacraments of Penance, and of the Eucharist are to be administered. And
then let the Curats endeavor to persuade the Sick Person, to yield the same
Faith to the Priests anointing him, as those of old times were used to give,
when they were to be healed by the Apostles.

But first of all, XXIV. The intention of him that desires Extream-Unction.
the Health or Salvation of the Soul is to be prayed for; and then, the
Recovery of the Body, with this Adjunct, if it may be for his Eternal Glory.

Nor ought the Faithful to doubt, XXV. This Sacrament to be received with very
great Trust.
but that those Holy and Solemn Prayers are heard of God, which the Priest, not
bearing his own, but the Person of the Church, and of our Lord Jesus Christ,
uses. Who in one thing especially are to be exhorted, That they will take care
Holily and Religiously to administer this Sacrament of the Oil of Health and
Salvation, when a sharper Fight seems to begin, and the strength both of Soul
and Body seems to decay.

And now who the Minister of Extream-Unction is, XXVI. A Priest the Minister of
this Sacrament.
we have learned of the same Apostle, who has published the Law of our Lord:
For he says, Let him call for the Elders. By which name he means not those who
are elder in Age, as by the Synod of Trent has wisely bin expounded; or those
who have chief place among the People; but the Priests, who are rightly
ordained by the Bishops, by the Imposition of Hands. Ja. 5.14. Sess. 14. c. 3.
To the Priest therefore the Administration of this Sacrament is committed.

Nor yet, XXVII. Of whom this Sacrament to be received.
according to the Decree of Holy Church, is this power given to every Priest;
but to the proper Pastor who has Jurisdiction, or to some other to whom he has
given the Power to discharge his Office.

But this is specially to be observed,

The Advantages also of this Sacrament are diligently to be explained: XXVIII.
The Fruit of this Sacrament.
That if nothing else would draw the people to the use thereof, they may be led
by the very advantage of it; seeing it is so ordered as that we may turn almost
all things to our own profit.

The Pastors therefore shall teach, The First.
that in this Sacrament Grace is given, which forgives sins, and specially the
Lesser, and as they are commonly called, Venial: For Deadly Sins are taken away
by the Sacrament of Penance, For neither was this primarily instituted for the
Remission of Greater Sins: but Baptism only, and Penance, effect This.

There is another Advantage of Sacred Unction; The Second.
that it frees the Soul from Sickness and Infirmity which it has contracted by
Sin, and from all the other Relics of Sin. But that time is to be thought most
seasonable for this Cure, when we are afflicted with any grievous Sickness, and
our Life is in danger. For it is natural to Man, to fear nothing in the World
so much as Death. Now the Remembrance of former sins very much increases this
Fear, especially when the Conscience most sharply accuses: For as it is
written: Sap. 4.21.
The Fearful shall come into the Consideration of their Sins, and their
Iniquities shall stand up against them. And then the Care and Thought
grievously presses them, that shortly after they must stand before the Tribunal
of God, from whom we must receive a most just Sentence, according as we have
deserved. But it often happens, that the Faithful being strick'n with this
Fear, feel themselves wonderfully puzzled.

But there is nothing conduces more to the Tranquillity of Death, The Third.
than to cast away sorrow, and cheerfully to wait for the Lords coming, and to
be ready willingly to restore what he has entrusted us with, whenever he
pleases to call for it from us. That therefore the Minds of the Faithful be
freed from this Trouble, and that the Soul be filled with a pious and Holy Joy,
The Sacrament of Extream-Unction brings to pass.

Besides, The Fourth.
from hence we get another, which may well seem the greatest of all: For tho
the Enemy of Mankind, never ceases as long as we live, to endeavor our Ruin and
Destruction; yet that he might destroy us, and if he could possibly bring it
about, that he might take from us all Hope of God's Mercy, he never uses his
utmost might and main more violently than when he perceives we draw toward our
End. Wherefore there is Strength and Weapons minister'd to the Faithful in this
Sacrament, wherewith they may break the Force and Violence of the Adversary,
and stoutly fight against him. For the Soul of the Sick is eased and encouraged
with the Hope of Gods Goodness; and being confirmed therewith, she lightly
endures all Inconveniences, and more easily escapes the Wiles and Subtilties
of the Devil, endeavoring treacherously to ensnare her.

Lastly, The Fifth.
follows Health of Body also, if it be good for him.

But if at such Time, XXIX. Why this Sacrament not so effectual as ir might be.
the Sick Recover not their Health, this comes not by the Fault of the
Sacrament; but it must be believed to come to pass for this Reason, because in
a great part The Faith either of those, who are anointed with Sacred Oil, or of
those by whom it is administered, is weak. For the Evangelist testifies, Mat.
13.38.
That the Lord did not do many mighty works among his own Countrymen, because
of their Unbelief. Although it may truly be said, That Christian Religion, by how
much the deeper it has taken Root in the Souls of Men does stand in less need
of the proof of such Miracles as these, than formerly in the Infancy of the
Church it seemed to do.

But yet our Faith is here to be excited. For, XXX. The Faith and Hope of the
Sick to be encouraged.
Howsoever, by the Will and Counsel of God, it shall happen to the Health of
the Body; yet the Faithful ought to be strengthened with an assured Hope, that
by virtue of the Sacred Oil, they shall get Spiritual Health; and that it shall
be, that if it chance that they go out of this Life, they shall have the
benefit of that excellent Word; Apoc. 14.13
Blessed are the Dead, which dye in the Lord. Thus much has bin spoken briefly
concerning the Sacrament of Extreme Unction. But if these Heads of Matters be
more largely explained by the Pastors, and with the diligence as becomes them;
it is not to be doubted but the Faithful, from this Doctrine may gather very
much Fruit of Piety and Devotion.

Of the SACRAMENT of ORDER.
IF any one consider the Nature and Reason of the other Sacraments, I. Why the
Sacrament of Order ought to be treated of before the People.
he will easily perceive that all the Rest so depend upon this Sacrament of
Order, that without This, partly the other can by no means be made or
administered: And partly they will seem to want the Solemn Ceremony, and ^ kind
of Religious Rite and Honor. Wherefore it is necessary that the Pastors
prosecuting the intended Doctrine of the Sacraments, suppose themselves obliged
to treat so much the more diligently of the Sacrament of Order.

For the explication hereof will be very profitable, First.
first to themselves, and then to others, who are entered into the Rule of
Ecclesiastical Life, and lastly to the Faithful People also. To Themselves,
That while they are employed in the handling of this Point, they may be moved
the more to stir up that Grace which they have obtained in this Sacrament.

To others, Secondly.
who are called into the Lot of the Lord: Partly that they may be affected with
the same study of Piety; and partly that they may get the knowledge of those
things, wherewith being furnished, they may the more easily prepare themselves
a way to the higher Degrees.

To the rest of the Faithful, Thirdly.
first that they may understand, what Honor the Ministers of the Church are
worthy of.

And then, Fourthly.
because it often happens, that many are present, who either have designed
their Children, being yet but Infants, to the Ministry of the Church; or who
of their own Choice and Will, are minded to follow that kind of life; for whom
to be ignorant what things chiefly belong to that Course of Life, is very
unfit. What belongs to the Manners of those that are in any Ecclesiastical
Order, is to be seen, yea and must be known, in the later part of every Session
of the Council of Trent, which is of Reformation. But what belongs to Order as
it is a Sacrament, See idem Conc. Sess. 13. and de singulis Ordinationibus.
Vid. Council. Carthag. IV. sub Anastatio Pontifice, Anno 398.

First therefore the Faithful must be taught, II The Dignity of this Sacrament.
how great the Nobility and Excellency of this Sacrament is, if we consider the
Degree thereof, i. e. the Priesthood.

For seeing the Bishops and Priests are as it were the Interpreters and
Ambassadors of God, First. Let the Priests consider this.
who in Gods name teach Men the divine Law, and the Rules of Life, and
personate God himself in the Earth: it is evident, that their Function is such,
as a greater cannot be conceived. Wherefore they are worthily called not only
Angels, but Gods also, because they hold the Power and the Name of the immortal
God among us.

Now although in all Ages the Priests have had the highest Dignity; Secondly.
yet the Priests of the New Testament far excel all the rest in Honor. For
Power both of consecrating and offering the Body and Blood of the Lord, and
also of remitting sins, which is given them, far excels all Human Reason and
Understanding, nor can there be found any thing like it in the whole world.

And then even as our Savior was sent by the Father, Thirdly.
and the Apostles and Disciples were sent by Christ into all the World; Let the
Priest observe this.
so the Priests, being indu'd with the same Power as they, are sent for the
Perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, Ephesians. 4.22.
for the Edification of the Body of Christ. Of the Dignity of the Priesthood,
see Ignat. Epist. ad Smyrnen. Ambr. lib. 5. Epist. 32. and lib. 10. Ep. 82.
Chrysostom. hom. 60. ad Pop. Antioch. and in Matthew. hom. 83. Nazian. Orat. 17. ad
suos cives.

The weight of this so great an Office therefore is not rashly to be laid upon
any one, III. Who are to be Ordained, ought to be called, and what kind of
Persons. Heb. 5.4.
but upon them only who by their holiness of Life, Learning, Faith, Prudence,
are able to bear it, Nor let any one take this Office to himself, but he who is
called of God, as Aaron. But they are said to be called of God, who are called
by the lawful Ministers of the Church.

For they who arrogantly plant and intrude themselves into this Ministry, I
sent not the Prophets, and yet they ran; Hier. 23.21.
than which kind of men nothing can be more unhappy, nothing can be more
miserable and calamitous to the Church. Vide did. 23, multis in capitibus.

But because in the undertaking of every Action, IV. The Intention of those
that are to be Ordained, to be directed.
it is of very great moment, What End every one appoints to himself (for a
good, Intent, will have a good Event.) Of This in the first place they are to
be admonished who will be initiated into Sacred Orders, that they propose
nothing to themselves unworthy of so great an Office; which Point is indeed by
so much the more diligently to be handled, by how much the more diligently at
this Time the Faithful are used to offend in this Matter.

For some apply themselves to this way of Living, V. An ill Intention. (...).
with this design to get themselves necessaries for Meat and Clothes: So that
they seem to respect nothing at all in the Priesthood but Gain, as commonly all
others do in any kind of base Trade. For tho according to the Apostles
sentence, both the Law of God and Nature commands that he that serves the Altar
should live of the Altar: 1 Cor. 9.9.
yet to come to the Altar for Gain and Lucres sake,

Others will be ordained, VI. Another ill Intention.
that they may abound with Riches: Whereof this is an Argument, that unless
some wealthy Ecclesiastical Benefice be bestowed on them, they have no Thought
of Sacred Order. But those are they, Joh. 10.17.
whom our Savior called Hirelings: And who, as Ezekiel says: Ezekiel. 34.8.
Feed themselves and not the sheep. Whose Baseness and Dishonesty, not only
brings a thick darkness and reproach upon the Priesthood, so that now nothing
can be by the Faithful people accounted more contemptible and mean: But it
causes also, that they themselves get nothing more by the Priesthood, than
Judas did by the Office of Apostleship, which turned to his everlasting
destruction.

But those are worthily to be said to enter into the Church by the Door, VII.
The right Intention of them that are to be Ordained.
who being lawfully called of God, do undertake the Ecclesiastical Functions
for this one cause only, that they may bring honor to God.

Nor yet is this to be taken,

But those who will be initiated in the Sacrament of Order, VIII. The Intention
of those to be Ordained, ought to be higher than of others.
must needs propose This to themselves, not only to seek the Glory of God in
all things, which thing is common to all, but especicially to the Faithful; but
also that some being dedicated to any Ministry of the Church, might serve him
in holiness and righteousness.

For as in an Army all the Soldiers do indeed obey the command of the General:
But among them One is a Colonel, and another a Captain, and others have other
Offices: So although all the Faithful ought to follow Piety and Innocence with all
their study, with which things God is most worshipped; yet they who are
initiated in the Sacrament of Order must perform some special Offices and
Functions in the Church.

For they perform Sacred things both for themselves and for all the People, IX.
Wherein those that are initiated Sacred Orders excel others.
and teach the Efficacy of the Divine Law; and exhort and instruct, the
Faithful, readily and cheerfully to observe it; and administer the Sacraments
of Christ the Lord, whereby all Grace is bestowed and increased; and to say all
in a Word, being separated from the rest of the people, they exercise
themselves in the far greatest and most excellent Ministry of all.

These things being explained, X. Ecclesiastical Power, double, viz of Order
and Jurisdiction.
the Curats shall come to the handling of those things, which are proper to
this Sacrament, that the Faithful who desire to be received into Ecclesiastical
Order, may know, to what kind of Office they are called, and how great a Power
is given of God to his Church, and to the Ministers thereof. Now this Power is
double. Of Order and of Jurisdiction. The Power of Order is referred to the
true Body of Christ the Lord in the Holy Eucharist; But the whole Power of
Jurisdiction is in the Mystic Body of Christ; for to this Power belongs the
Rule and Government of Christian people, and to direct them to eternal and
heavenly Bliss.

Now the Power of Order does contain not only the power of Consecrating the
Eucharist, XI. To what things the Power of Order extends it self.
but fits and prepares the Souls of men to receive it, and contains all those
other things which may any way be referred to the Eucharist.

And hereof many testimonies may be brought out of Sacred Scripture: XII. This
Power proved.
But those are very clear and weighty, which we find in S. John and S. Matthew;
for the Lord said: Jo^. 21.22.
As the Father sent me, even so send I you: Receive ye the Holy Ghost: whose
sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; and whose sins ye retain, they are
retained. And: Verily, I say to you, whatsoever things ye shall hind on earth,
shall be bound in heaven; Matthew. 18.18.
and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Which
places being by the Pastors explained from the Doctrine and Authority of the
Holy Fathers, may bring very much Light to this Truth.

But this Power very much excels that, XIII. How great this Power of Order is.
which in the Law of Nature, is given to other Men, who took care of Sacred
Matters. Vide de Consecr. did. 2. cap. Nihil in Sacrific. Conc. Trid. Sess.
22. c. 1. Iren. lib. 4. c. 34. Aug. lib. 19. de Civit. Dei. cap. 23.

For it must needs be that that Age, XIV. There were Priests by the Law of
Nature.
which was before the Law was written, had her Priesthood and her spiritual
Power, since it is sufficiently manifest that she had a Law. For these Two are
so closely joined together, as the Apostle testifies that the One being taken
away, it must needs be, that the other must be taken away also. Seeing
therefore that by natural Instinct Men know that God is to be worshipped; it
consequently followed, that in every Commonwealth, some should be placed over
the charge of Sacred Things and the Worship of God, whose Power in some sort
might be called Spiritual.

This Power the Israelites had, XV. Christ's Priesthood higher than that of
Moses. Let the Priests mark.
which tho it were higher in Dignity, than that wherewith the Priests were
indu'd by the Law of Nature; yet is it to be thought far below the Spiritual
Power of the Gospel.

For this is Heavenly, and excels even all the Power of Angels.

For it has its beginning not from the Mosaical Priesthood, XVI. This Power is
derived from Christ.
but from Christ the Lord, who was a Priest, not according to the Order of
Aaron, but of Melchizedech. For he it is that being indu'd with the supreme
Power of Giving Grace, and Forgiving sins, has left this Power, although definite
in Virtue, and tied to the Sacraments, to his Church.

Wherefore to exercise or perform this Matter, XVII. The Consecration of the
Ministers of the Church called the Sacrament of Order.
certain Ministers are appointed and consecrated in a solemn religious manner,
which Consecration is called, The Sacrament of Order, or Sacred Ordination. But
it pleased the Holy Fathers to use This Word, because it has a very large
signification to show the Dignity and Excellency of the Ministers of God.

For Order, XVIII. What Order is.
if we take the proper Force and Notion of it, is the Disposition of Superior
and Inferior things, which are so suited among themselves, as that One may be
referred to another.

Whereas therefore in this Ministry there are many Degrees and diverse
Functions; XIX. Why this Sacrament called Order.
but all things distributed and placed in a certain Rule: rightly and
conveniently does the name of Order seem to be given to it.

But that Sacred Ordination is to be reckoned among the other Sacraments of the
Church, XX. Order is a Sacrament Sess 23. de Ordine.
the Holy Synod of Trent has proved by that reason which has often bin
repeated: For whereas a Sacrament is a sign of a Sacred Thing, but that, which
in this Consecration is outward, signifies Grace and Power, which is given to
him that is consecrated; it very plainly follows, that Order is truly and
properly to be called a Sacrament, That Order is a Sacrament; see Trid. Sess.
23. de Ordine. c. 1. and 3. and can. 3, 4.5. Conc. Florent. in decret. de Sacr.
Aug. lib. 2. contra. Epist. Parmen. c. 13. de bono conjug. c. 24. and lib. 1.
de Bap. contra Donat. c. 1. Leo Epist. 18. Greg. in c. 10. lib. 1. Reg.

Wherefore the Bishop reaching forth a Chalice with Wine and Water, XXI. When
and by whom this Power is conferred.
and a Paten with Bread, to him that is to be Ordained a Priest, saying: Take
thou power of offering Sacrifice, etc. by which words, the Church has always
taught, while the Matter is exhibited, that the Power of Consecrating the
Eucharist, a Character being impressed on the Soul, is delivered; to which is
adjoin'd Grace, rightly and lawfully to discharge that Office: Which thing the
Apostle declares in these words: 2 Timothy 1.9.
I admonish thee, that thou stir up the Grace of God which is in thee, by the
Imposition of my hands: for God has not given us the Spirit of Fear, but of
Power, and of Love, and of Sobriety.

And now to use the words of Sacred Synod, since the Administration of so great
a Priesthood is so Divine a thing, that it might be exercised so much the more
worthily, and with so much the greater Veneration, it was fit, that in the most
comely and orderly Disposition of the Church, there should be many and diverse
Orders in the Church, who by their Office might serve the Priesthood: and those
indeed who thus are distributed, are now to be known by their being shaved in
the manner of Clerks, and ascend through the lesser to the greater Orders.

It shall therefore be taught that these Orders are seven in number, XXII. How
many Orders of Ministers of the Church, and what they are.
as has always bin taught in the Catholic Church, the Names whereof are these,
Doorkeeper, Reader, Exorcist, Acolyt, Subdeacon, Deacon, Priest. These Orders
have bin remembered by Dionys. lib. Eccl. hier. cap. 3. Cornel. Papa in Ep. ad
Fab. Epist. Antioch. extat apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 35. Conc. Carth. 4.
Can. 4. and sequ. Ignat Ep. ad Antioch.

Now that this number of Ministers is rightly. defined may be proved; XXIII.
Why so many.
by reason of those Ministers which seem necessary to the Holy Sacrifice of the
Mass, and to the consecrating and administering the Eucharist, for which cause
especially they were instituted.

Now of these there are some Greater, XXIV. Some Orders greater some lesser,
and which they are.
which are also called Sacred, and there are Others Lesser. The Greater or
Sacred, are the Orders of Priesthood, of Deaconship, and Sub-deaconship. To the
Lesser Orders are referred the Acolyts, Exorcists, Readers and Door-keepers, of
all which severally we will say a little, that the Curats may have wherewith to
instruct those chiefly whom they know are to be received into any Holy Order.

And we must begin at the First shaving, XXV. What the first shaving is.
which must be taught to be a kind of Preparation to Orders. For as men are
used to be prepared for Baptism by Exorcisms, and for Matrimony by Betrothing:
So when by shaving the Hair of the Head, they are dedicated to God, there is an
Entrance, as it were opened them to the Sacrament of Order: For it is declared
what kind of person he ought to be, who desires to receive Ordination.

For the Name of Clerk, XXVI. Where the Name of Clerk is taken.
which is then first put upon him, is taken from hence, that he begins to have
the Lords Lot, and his Inheritance, as those among the Hebrew people who were
bound to the Divine Service, to whom the Lord forbad any portion of Fields to
be given in the Land of Promise, Numb. 18.20.
when he said, I am thy Part and Inheritance. And tho this be common to all the
Faithful, yet in a special manner it must needs suit to them, who have
consecrated themselves to the Ministry of God. Vide Hieron. Epist. 2. ad Nepot.
and citatur 12. q. 1. c. Clericus.

And the Hair of their Head is cut in the fashion and likeness of a Crown,
XXVII. Why the Hair of the Head cut in the shape of a Crown.
which they ought always to keep: And as any one is afterward placed in a
higher Degree of Order, so that Round Form is every way cut larger.

And this came indeed from the Tradition of the Apostles, XXVIII. From whence
this Usage of cutting the Hair.
as the Church teaches, since of this kind of cutting the Hair, S. Dennys the
Areopagite, S. Austin, S. Hierom the most ancient and grave Fathers have taken
notice. Dionys. de Eccles. Hier. c. 6. part 2. Aug. Sermon. 17. ad Fratres in
Eremo. Hier. in cap. 44. Ezekiel. vide Rhaban. Maur. lib. de Institut. Cleric.
Bed. lib. hist. 5. Angl. c. 22.

Now they report, XXIX. Why Clerks appointed to bear the ^^r ^ of a Crown.
that the Prince of the Apostles first of all brought in this Custom, for
preserving the Remembrance of the Crown of Thorns, which was put upon our
Saviors Head, that what wicked men intended for reproach and Torture, the same
the Apostles used for their Ornament and Glory: The first Reas n.
And they also signified that the Ministers of the Church are to take care,
that in all things they carry the Resemblance and Figure of Christ our Lord.

Although some do assert, The second Reason.
that by this Note is declared their Royal Dignity, which seems suitable to
those who are called into the Lot of the Lord. For that which the Apostle Peter
attributed to the Faithful people: Ye are a chosen Generation, a Royal
Priesthood, a Holy Nation, we easily understand to belong to the Ministers of
the Church, in a kind of peculiar and more proper manner.

And there are not wanting some who think by this Circular or Round Figure, The
third Reason.
which of all others is most perfect, is signified either the Profession of
that more perfect life undertaken by Clerks, or the Contempt of External
things, and the Freedom of the Soul from all human cares: because the Hair of
their Heads, being a kind of superfluous Excrement of the Body, is shorn of.

After the First shaving, XXX. The Order and Office of Door-keepers.
the first degree is used to be made to the Order of Door-keepers, whose Office
is to keep the Keys and Doors of the Church, and to keep them from entering into
it, who are forbid. He assisted also at the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass, and
took care that no one should come nearer to the Sacred Altar than was fit, and
answered the Priest doing Divine Service. There were other Services also
committed to him: as may be perceived by the Rites, which are used at his
Consecration. For the Bishop taking the Keys off the Altar, and delivering them
to him, says thus to him, whom he makes a Doorkeeper, So behave thy self as
thou will give an account to God for those things which are kept under these
Keys.

Now that in the ancient Church the Dignity of this Order was Great, XXXI. The
Dignity of Door-keepers.
is understood from hence, because to this time we observe it to be kept in the
Church. For the Office of Treasurer, which was also the Keeper of the
Sacristary, which belonged to the Door-keepers, is even at this time accounted
among the better Offices of the Church, De Ostiario vide Trid. Sess. 23. de
reform. c. 17. Conc. Tolet. c. 6. and citatur did. 25. Ostiar. Isid. l. de
Eccl. c. 14. and did. 25. c. p^rledis. and apud. Baron. Anal. Eccl. an. 34.
number. 2^7. and an. 44. number. 78. and number. 78. and number. 80.

The second degree of Order, XXXII. The Order and Office of Reader.
is the Function of Reader. To him it belongs to recite with a clear voice and
distinctly the Books of the Old and New Testament, and especially what is used
to be read at Nocturnals. It was his Part also to teach the Faithful people the
first Rudiments of Christian Religion. The Bishop therefore in the presence of
the People, at his Ordination delivering him a Book, wherein were put down
those things which belong to this matter, says, Receive this, and be thou a
Relater of the Word of God, and thou shall have, if thou faithfully and
profitably fulfill thy Office, thy part with them who from the beginning have
minister'd well the Word of God. Vide Cypr. Epist. 33. and Tertul. de
Praescript. c. 61. and apud Baron. Annal. Eccl. anno 34. n. 287. and an. 54.78.
and 79. an. 156. n. 93. an. 456. n. 20.

The third Order is that of Exorcists, XXXIII. The Order of Exorcists.
to whom the Power is given of calling upon the name of the Lord over those who
are possessed with unclean Spirits. Wherefore the Bishop, when he Institutes
them, holds forth a Book to them, wherein are contained Exorcisms, using this
Form of Words, Take this and commit it to memory, and have thou power of laying
hands on those that are possessed, whether they be Baptized or Catechumens, Of
Exorcists see the Authors above cited, and apud Baron. Annal. Eccl. an. 34. n.
287. an. 44. n. 78. and n. 80. an. 237. n. 89. an. 56. n. 5. and n. 8.9, 10,
11, 12.

The fourth degree is of Acolyts, XXXIV. The Order and Office at Acolyt.
and is the last of those which are called Lesser, and not Sacred. Their Office
is to follow and serve the greater Ministers, Subdeacons and Deacons in the
Ministry of the Altar. Besides, they carry and hold the Lights, when the
Sacrifice of Mass is celebrated, but especially when the Gospel is read; whence
they are also called by the name of Waxlight-bearers. When therefore they are
ordained, this Rite is used to be observed by the Bishop: First, after that he
has diligently admonished them of their Office, he delivers Lights to each of
them, saying in this manner: Receive thou this Waxlight, and know that thou art
bound to kindle the Lights of the Church, in the name of the Lord. And then he
delivers them little Pitchers, wherein Water and Wine is served for the
Sacrifice, saying: Receive these little Pitchers, to serve Wine and Water for
the Eucharist of the Blood of Christ in the name of the Lord. De Acolytis vide
Cypri. Epist. 55. and apud. Baron. Annal. Eccl. an. 44. n. 79. and n. 80.

By the Lesser Orders, XXXV. The Order, Dignity and Office of Subdeacons.
not Sacred, whereof has bin spoken already, a lawful Entrance and Ascent lies
open to the Greater and Sacred. In the first Degree whereof is placed the
Subdeacon: whose Office the very Name declares; to serve the Deacon at the
Altar. For he ought to prepare the Linen, Vessels, Bread and Wine, necessary
for the Use of the Sacrifice: Now he gives Water to the Bishop and Priest when
they wash their hands for the Sacrifice of the Mass. The Subdeacon also reads
the Epistle, which formerly was recited by the Deacon at Mass: And as a witness
assists at Divine Service, and takes care that the Priest be not disturbed by
any one at the Sacred Ministration.

Now those things which belong to the Ministry of the Subdeacon, XXXVI. How
Subdeacons are ordained.
may be known by the Solemn Ceremonies which are used in his Consecration.

For first, First.
the Bishop admonishes, that the Law of perpetual Continence is laid upon him;
and plainly tells that no one is to be received unto the Order of Subdeacons,
who resolve not freely to receive this Law. And then after the Solemn Prayer of
the Litanys, he declares and expounds what the Offices and Functions of a
Subdeacon are.

These things done, Secondly.
every one of those who are to be Ordained, severally receive of the Bishop the
Sacred Chalice and Paten.

But to Subdeacons, Thirdly.
that it may be understood that the Subdeacon is to serve the Office of
Deacon, are given little Pitchers filled with Wine and Water, together with a
Basin, and a Towel, wherewith the Hands are wiped, and the Bishop says; Look ye
what kind of Ministry is given you, I therefore admonish you so to behave your
selves as that ye may please God.

There are added other Prayers besides: Fourthly, Fif hly, and Sixthly.
At last when the Bishop has adorned the Subdeacon with Sacred Vestments, at
putting on of every one of which, proper Words and Ceremonies are used; he
delivers him the Book of the Epistles, and says, Receive the Book of the
Epistles, and have thou power of reading them in the Holy Chureh of God, both
for the living and for the Dead. De Sub-Diaconis praeter auctores supra citatos
vide Cypr. Epist. 24. and Epist. 42. did. 17. cap. Presbyteris. Can. Apost.
can. 25. Conc. Carthag. 4. Can. 5. Arelat. 2. can. 2. Aurel. 3. c. 2. Eliber.
can. 33. Leo 1. Epist. 82. item apud Baron. Annal. Eccl. an. 44. number. 79. and
80. an. 253. number 72, 79, 97. an. 239. number. 21. an. 324. number. 128. an. 588. number.
58. an. 489, number. 6. an. 1057. number. 32.

The Deacon takes the second Degree of Sacred Orders, XXXVII. The Offices of
the Deacon.
whose Ministry is larger, and was ever accounted very holy.

It belongs to him always to follow the Bishop, to keep him when he is
preaching, and to be ready at the Bishops or Priests hand, at the Sacred
Offices, or administering the Sacraments, and to read the Gospel at the
Sacrifice of Mass.

And formerly he did often stir up the Minds of the Faithful, to attend
diligently to the Sacrifice.

He also minister'd the Blood of the Lord, in those Churches where it was
customary for the Faithful to receive the Eucharist under both Species.

The Dispensation also of the Goods of the Church was committed to the Deacon,
that he might give to every one necessaries for Food.

It belongs also to the Deacon, as the Eye of the Bishop, to find out who in
the Dioces led their life piously and religiously, and who did otherwise, who
came together to the Sacrifice and the Sermon at the appointed times, and who
absented themselves, that when he had certifi'd the Bishop of all these things,
he might either exhort and admonish every one privately, or openly chide and
correct them, according as he thought most edifying.

He ought also to call over the names of the Catechumens, and to place those
before the Bishop, who were to be initiated in the Sacrament of Order.

Moreover, in the absence of the Bishop and Priest, he may explain the Gospel,
but not from the Pulpit, that it may be understood that This is not his proper
Office,

Now how great care ought to be used that no person unworthy of this Function
climbs up to this degree of Order, XXXVIII. How carefully the Deacons are to be
chosen. 1 Timothy 3.
the Apostle shows, when he expounded to Timothy the Manners, Virtue and
Integrity of the Deacon.

This, XXXIX. The Ordination of Deacons.
the Rites and solemn Ceremonies wherewith he is consecrated by the Bishop
sufficiently declare. For the Bishop uses more and more holy Prayers, at the
Ordination of a Deacon than of a Subdeacon: And adds other Ornaments of Sacred
Vestments. Besides, he lays his hands upon him: Which we read to have bin done
by the Apostles, when they instituted the first Deacons: Lastly he delivers
them the Book of the Gospels with these Words. Receive thou Power to read the
Gospel in the Church of God, both for the Living and for the Dead, in the name
of the Lord. De Diaconis praeter citatos supra, vide Clem. Romans Constit.
Apostol. lib. 2. cap. 6. Cypr. de Lapsis. Amb. lib. 1. Offic. c. 41. Leo 1.
Sermon. de S. Laurent. Clem. Romans Epist. 1. ad Jacob. fratrem Domini. Hieron.
Epist. 48. and apud Baron. Annal. Eccl. an. 33. number. 41. an. 34. number. 283, and
285, and 287. an. 34. number. 316. an. 44. number. 78. and 80. an 57. n. 31. and n.
195. an. 58. n. 102. an. 112. n. 7, 8, 9. an. 316. n. 48. an. 324. n. 115. an.
325. n. 152. an. 402. n. 44. and 47. an. 508. n. 15. an. 741. n. 12.

The Third and highest Degree of all Sacred Orders, XL. The Order of Priests.
is the Priesthood: And those who had this Order, the ancient Fathers were used
to call by Two names.

For sometimes they called them Presbyters, XLI. Why called Presbyters.
which in Greek signifies Elders, not only because of their Ripeness of Age,
which is very necessary to this Order; but much rather for the Gravity of their
Manners, their Doctrine and Prudence: Wisd. 4.
For as it is written, Venerable Old Age is not that which consists in length
of Time, nor that is measured by number of years: But the Wisdom of a Man is
his Grey-Hair, and an unspotted life is Old Age.

And sometimes they call them Priests, XLII. Why Priests.
both because they are consecrated to God, and because it belongs to them to
administer the Sacraments, and to treat of Sacred and Divine Matters.

But because the Priesthood is described in Sacred Scripture to be twofold,
Priesthood double.
the one Internal, the other External: They must each of them be distinguished,
that it may by the Pastors be explained of which it is here meant.

As to the Internal Priesthood, XLIII. Internal.
all the Faithful, after they have bin washed with the saving Water of Baptism,
are called Priests; but especially the Just, who have the Spirit of God, and by
benefit of the Divine Grace, are made living Members of that most High Priest
Christ Jesus: For these, by Faith which is inflamed with Charity, offer to God
Spiritual Sacrifices upon the Altar of their Mind; of which kind are to be
accounted all good and honest actions, which they do for the Glory of God.
Wherefore we read in the Apocalypse thus; Apoc. 1.5.
Christ has washed us from our sins in his Blood, and made us a Kindom, and
Priests to God, and his Father. According to which Sense it was said by the
Prince of Apostles; 1 Pet. 2.5.
Ye, as living Stones are built up a Spiritual House, an Holy Priesthood,
offering up Spiritual Sacrifices to God through Jesus Christ. And the Apostle
exhorts us: Romans 1.2.
That we yield our Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, as
being our reasonable service. Also David long before said, Ps. 50.19.
The Sacrifice of God is a contrite Spirit, an humble and a contrite Heart, O
God thou will not despise. All which, it is easy to see, belongs to the
internal Priesthood.

But the External Priesthood belongs not to the Multitude of the Faithful,
XLIV. External.
but to particular Men, who being instituted and consecrated to God by lawful
imposition of Hands, and solemn Ceremonies of Holy Church, are properly
appointed to the Sacred Ministry.

This Difference of Priesthood may be observed even in the old-Law: XLV. This
double Priesthood proved from the Old Law. 2 Par. 26.18.
For that David spoke of the Internal, was showed a little before. But of the
External no one can be ignorant, how many commands God had given to Moses and
Aaron. Besides, he appointed the whole Tribe of Levi to the Ministry of the
Temple, and provided by Law, that no one of any other Tribe should presume to
intrude himself into that Function: Wherefore King Ozias, was smitten with
Leprosy from the Lord, because he usurped the Priestly Office, and suffered
most grievous Punishments for his arrogance and Sacriledg. Amb. lib. 4. de
Sacram. c. 1. Aug. lib. 10. de Civit. Dei, cap. 6. and 10. Leo Sermon. 3. de
Annivers. Pontisicat.

That therefore we may observe the same Distinction of Priesthood in the Law of
the Gospel, XLVI. The External Priesthood here treated of.
the Faithful must be taught, that we now treat of the External Priesthood,
which is given to particular Men; for this only belongs to the Sacrament of
Order.

The Priests Office therefore is, XVII. The Consecration of a Priest explained.
First.
To do Sacrifice to God, to administer the Sacraments of the Church, as is seen
by the Rites of his Consecration.

For when the Bishop makes any Priest, He first, together with all the Priests
then present, lays Hands upon him.

And then spreading upon his Shoulders a Stole, Secondly.
he draws it upon his Breast in manner of a Cross: Whereby is declared, That
the Priest is endued with virtue from above, whereby he may be able to bear the
Cross of Christ our Lord, and the sweet Yoke of his Divine Law, and to teach
this Law, not by Words only, but by the Example of a most holy and upright Life.

Afterward he anoints his Hand with Oil, Thirdly.
and then delivers a Chalice with Wine, and a Paten with a Host, saying;
Receive thou Power of Offering, Sacrifice to God, and of celebrating Masses as
well for the Quick as for the Dead. By which Ceremonies and Words, he is made
an Interpreter and Mediator of God and Men; and This is to be looked upon as
the chief Function of a Priest.

Lastly, Fourthly.
Laying Hands upon his Head; he says, Joh. 20.23.
Receive thou the Holy Ghost: whose Sins Thou shall remit, they are remitted to
them, and whose sins Thou shall retain, they are retained: And gives him that
heavenly Power, which the Lord gave his Disciples of retaining and remitting
sins.

These are the proper and special Functions of the Priestly Order: XLVIII. Five
Degrees in the Priestly Order.
Which Order tho it be but One, yet it has different Degrees of Dignity and
Power.

The first is of those who are simply called Priests, The first of Priests.
whose Functions have hitherto been declared.

The Second is of Bishops who are placed over of their several Bishoprics, The
second of Bishops.
to govern not only the other Ministers of the Church, but the Faithful People
also, and with the utmost vigilance and care to take regard of their Salvation.
Wherefore in Sacred Scripture they are often called, The Shepherds of the
Sheep. Whose Duty and Office Paul describes as we read in the Acts of the
Apostles, Act. 20.29.
in that Sermon he made to the Ephesians. And also a kind of Divine Rule of
that Ministry of a Bishop has bin delivered by Peter the Prince of Apostles.
According to which, 1 Pet. 5.2.
if the Bishops would study to square their actions, it cannot be doubted but
that the Pastors will both be, and be accounted good. Now the same persons are
called both Bishops and Pontifices, or High Priests, taking that name from the
Ethnics, who were used to call the chief of their Priests, Pontifices or High
Priests.

The Third Degree is of Archbishops, The third of Archbishops.
who preside over many Bishops; and these are also called Metropolitans,
because they are Prelates of those Cities, which are accounted as it were the
Mothers of that Province; wherefore they have a higher place, and larger Power
than Bishops, although in their Ordination they differ in nothing from Bishops.

In the Fourth Degree are placed Patriarchs, The Fourth of Patriarchs.
i. e. the First and Highest Fathers* In old time, besides the Supreme Bishop
of Rome, there were in the whole Church only Four Patriarchs, nor yet were they
all alike in Dignity: For the Patriarch of Constantinople, although this Honor was
last of all given to him, yet for the Majesty of the Empire, he obtained the
higher place. The next is the Patriarch of Alexandria, whose Church Mark the
Evangelist, by order of the Prince of Apostles, sounded. The third is the
Patriarch of Antioch, where Peter first had his See. The last is the Patriarch
of Jerusalem, which Church S. James the Brother of our Lord built.

Above all these the Catholic Church has always had a Veneration for the Roman
Chief Bishop or Pope, The Fifth of Supreme Bishop or Pope.
whom in the Council of Ephesus, Cyril Archbishop of Alexandria calls the
Father and Patriarch of the whole World. For since he sits in the Chair of
Peter the Prince of Apostles, wherein it is manifest that he sat to the end of
his life, she acknowledges in him, the Supreme degree of Dignity, and fullness
of Jurisdiction, not as given by any Synodical or Human Constitutions, but of
God: Wherefore he being Father and Governor of all the Faithful, and of the
Bishops also and other Prelates, with what Office or Power soever they be
endu'd, presides over the Universal Church, as Peter's Successor and the true
and lawful Vicar of Christ our Lord. Of the Primacy of the Pope, see Anatol.
Epist. 3. and citat. did. 22. c. sacro sancta. Greg. lib. 7. Epist. 64, and
65. Nicol. Pap. Epist. ad Mediolanens. and citatur did. 22. c. omnes. Vide
etiam ead. did. c. Constantin. Conc. Chalced. in Epist. ad Leonem.

From these things therefore the Pastors shall teach, XLIX. What is to be
taught concerning Order.
both what are the principal Offices and Functions of Ecclesiastical Orders and
Degrees, and who is the Minister of this Sacrament.

For it is evident that this Administration belongs to a Bishop, L. The
Minister of this Sacrament is the Bishop.
which is easy to prove, both from the Authority of the Sacred Scriptures, and
most certain Tradition, the Testimony of the Fathers, the Decrees of Councils,
and the Usage and Practice of Holy Church. But tho it be permitted to some
Abbots to administer the Lesser, but not Sacred Orders; yet there is no one
doubts that this Office is properly the Bishop's, to whom only of all the rest,
and besides him, to no body else, it is lawful to receive into the other Orders
which are called the Greater and Sacred. For only the Bishop and he alone
ordains Subdeacons and Priests: but the Bishops, by the Tradition of the
Apostles, which has always bin preserved in the Church, are consecrated by
Three Bishops.

It now follows to explain, LI. Get care to be used in receiving an^ to
Priesthood.
who are fit for this Sacrament, and especially for the Priestly Order, and
what things are chiefly required in them. From hence it will not be hard to
determine what ought to be observed, in the giving of other Orders, according to
the Office and Dignity of each of them. Now that there is very great caution to
be used in this Sacrament, is thus gathered; because the other Sacraments give
Grace to the Sanctification and Use of them by whom they are received: But
those that are admitted into Sacred Order, are therefore partakers of Heavenly
Grace, that by their Ministry they may help forward the Salvation of the
Church, and consequently of all Men.

Whence we understand it comes to pass, that upon certain appointed days only,
when according to the most ancient practice of the Catholic Church, solemn
Fastings are appointed, Ordinations are performed; to wit; that the Faithful
People with Devout and Holy Prayers might beseech of God that the Ministers of
such kind of sacred things, might be rendered more fit to exercise so great a
Power as they ought to do, and to the profit of the Church.

First therefore integrity of Manners is very much commendable in him that is
to be made a Priest, LII. Integrity of Life necessary in making a Priest.
not only because, if being conscious to himself of any mortal sin, he procure
or but even suffer himself to be received into Sacred Order; he intangles
himself in a new, and a most extreme wickedness: But also because he ought to
show himself a Light and a Guide of Virtue and Innocence to others. For this
cause, what the Apostle commanded Titus and Timothy; Tit. 1. 1 Timothy 3.
is to be declared to the Pastors; and also it is to be taught, That the
Deformities of the Body, which in the Old-Law by the commandment of the Lord,
excluded any from the Ministry of the Altar, in the Evangelical Law, is
specially to be applied to the deformity of Mind. Wherefore we consider that
that Holy Custom is preserved in the Church, that they who are to be ordained,
endeavor diligently, first to purge their Consciences by the Sacrament of
Penance.

Furthermore, LIII. Knowledge also necessary to a Priest.
there is required in a Priest, not that knowledge only which belongs to the Use
and Ministering of the Sacraments, but he ought also to be so furnished with the
knowledge of Sacred Scripture, that he might be able to teach the Mysteries of
Christian Faith, and the Precepts of the Divine Law to the People, and stir up
the Faithful to Virtue and Piety, and reclaim them from Vice. For there are Two
Functions of a Priest: Whereof the One is, that he rightly make and administer
the Sacraments: The other that he instruct the people committed to his charge
in those matters and things which are necessary to Salvation. For Malachy
testifies, Mal. 2.7.
The Priests Lips preserve knowledge, and they require the Law from his Mouth:
Because he is the Angel of the Lord of Hosts. As therefore in one of these, tho
he be qualified bu^ with small learning, he may perform what he ought to do:
Yet the other requires no small, but rather an exquisite stock of Learning:
although the highest pitch of the Knowledge of hidden matters, is not equally
required in all Priests, but that which is sufficient for every one, for the
discharge of his own proper Office and Ministry.

Now this Sacrament is not to be given to Boys, Furious or Madmen, LIVE. Boys,
Furious and Madmen, not to be ordained.
because they want the Use of Reason, although if it were administered even to
them also, it ought certainly to be believed that the Character of this
Sacrament, is imprinted upon their Souls.

But what Year of Age is to be looked for, Not of ripe Age.
for these several Orders, it is easy to know from the Decrees of the Sacred
Council of Trent.

Servants also are to be excepted; Servants.
for neither ought he to be dedicated to Divine Worship, who is not at his own
dispose, but in the Power of another.

And Men of Blood and Manslayers; Man-slayers
because by Ecclesiastical Law they are repelled, and are irregular.

Also Bastards, Bastards.
and all those who were not begotten in lawful Wedlock. For the same Law
teaches, that those that are dedicated to Sacred things, should have nothing in
them which might seem worthily contemptible or despicable to others.

Lastly, Deformed in Body.
they ought not to be admitted, who are Creeples, or deformed with any notable
Uncomeliness of Body. For that Deformity and Debility must needs both cause
offense, and also hinder the Administration of the Sacraments.

And now these things being expounded, LV. The effects of the Sacrament of
Order. The First.
it remains that the Pastors teach what the effects of this Sacrament are.

And it is manifest, that tho the Sacrament of Order, as before was said,
belongs chiefly to the profit and beauty of the Church; yet the Grace of
Sanctification is wrought also in the Soul of him who is initiated into Order:
Because he is rendered fit, and qualified for the due discharge of his Duty,
and for the administering of the Sacraments, even as by the Grace of Baptism,
every one is made fit to receive the other Sacraments.

And it is evident that another Grace also is given in this Sacrament, The
Second.
to wit, a special Power, which is referred to the most holy Sacrament of the
Eucharist; in the Priest indeed full and perfect, as being he alone that can
consecrat the Body and Blood of our Lord: But in other Ministers of inferior
Orders, greater or less, according as every one by his Ministry comes more or
less to the Sacraments of the Altar.

And this also is called a spiritual Character, The Character.
because they that are tinctured with Sacred Order, are by a certain inward
Mark impressed upon the Soul, distinguished from the rest of the Faithful, and
wholly bound to Divine Worship; to which the Apostle seems to have had respect,
when he said to Timothy, Neglect not the Grace which is in thee, 1 Timothy 4.
which was given thee through Prophecy, with the Imposition of the Hands of the
Presbytery. And elsewhere, 1 Timothy 7.
I admonish thee, that thou stir up the Grace of God, which is in thee, by the
Imposition of my Hands. This is sufficient to have bin spoken concerning the
Sacrament of Order: For we undertook to deliver to the Pastors only the more
weighty heads of Matters, that they might furnish them with arguments to teach
and instruct the Faithful in Christian Piety.

Of the SACRAMENT of MATRIMONY.
BEcause the Pastors ought to propose to Christians a blessed and perfect Life,
I. The Virtue of Continency to be desired of all. 1 Cor. 7 7.
it were much to be wished for them also, what the Apostle wrote to the
Corinthians, that himself desired, in these words: I will, that all Men be,
even as I my self: To wit, that All would follow the Virtue of Continence. For
there can nothing in this life fall out more happy to the Faithful, than that
the Mind being distracted with none of the cares of the World, being quiet, and
restrained from every Lust of the Flesh, may take rest and satisfaction only in
the study of Piety and the Thoughts of heavenly things.

But because, II. The Holiness of Matrimony diligently to be taught. Joh. 2.2.
as the same Apostle testifies, every one has his own proper gift from God, one
after one sort, and another after another sort, and Matrimony is adorned with
many and divine Blessings; so that is is truly and properly reckoned among the
other Sacraments of the Catholic Church; and the Lord himself honored the
celebration of Marriage with his own presence; it sufficiently appears, that
the Doctrine thereof is to be taught, especially since we may observe, that both
S. Paul, and the Prince of Apostles also, have exactly left in writing in many
places, not only those things which belong to the Dignity, but also to the
Duties of Matrimony. For being inspired with the Spirit of God, they very well
knew, how great and how many advantages might come to the Christian Society, if
the Faithful rightly understood the Holiness of Matrimony, and kept it
inviolable: And on the contrary, That being not well understood or neglected,
that very many and very great Calamities and Hurts are brought upon the Church.

First therefore the Nature and Virtue of Matrimony is to be explained: III.
What is chiefly to be explained concerning Matrimony.
For since Vice often bears the Resemblance of Goodness, heed must be taken
lest the Faithful being deceived with a false show of Matrimony, pollute their
Soul with Filthiness, and hurtful Lusts: For declaring whereof, some may begin
with the signification of Matrimony.

Matrimony is therefore so called, IV. The various names of Matrimony.
because the Woman desires to be married chiefly that she might become a Mother
[Matrem]: Or else because to conceive, to bring forth, and to bring up, is the
part of a Mother, [Matrix.]

It is also called Wedlock [Conjuginm a conjungendo] a joining together,
Wedlock.
because a lawful Woman is bound with her Husband as it were in one Yoke.

Besides it is called Marriage [Nuptiae] because as S. Ambrose says, Marriage.
for Modesties sake, Maids covered or veiled themselves. Whereby it seemed to
be declared, that they ought to be obedient and subject to their Husbands. Of
these Names, See Aug. lib. 19. cont. Faust. c. 26. Ambr. l. 1. de Abraham. c.
9. in fine. item vide 30. q. 5. c. feminae. and 33. q. 5. c. Mulier. Isidor.
lib. 2. de Eccles. Officiis c. 19.

And thus it is defined according to the common sense of Divines: V. The
Definition of Matrimony given to be explained.
Matrimony is a Conjugal Conjunction of a Man and a Woman, between two lawful
persons, holding an individual nearness of life. The parts of which Definition,
that they may the better be understood, it must be taught, that although all these
things are in perfect Matrimony, to wit, Inward Consent, Outward Agreement or
Pact expressed by Words, Obligation and Bond, which is made by virtue of the
Pact, and the Copulation of Husband and Wife, whereby the Matrimony is
consummate; yet nothing of these has properly the Nature and Virtue of
Matrimony, unless that Obligation and Knot which is signified by the word
Conjunction.

The word Conjugal is added because other kinds of Compacts whereby Men and
Women are obliged mutually to help each other, Conjugal.
either for Money, or for any other respect, are far from the Nature of
Matrimony.

Then follows, Between lawful persons.
Between lawful persons, because they who by the Laws are wholly excluded from
the Conjunction of Marriage, cannot enter into Matrimony: Nor, if they should
marry, is their Marriage valid: for Example, those who are joined in kindred
within the fourth degree, and a Youth before the fourteenth year of his Age, or
a Girl, before her twelfth, which is the Age established by Law, such persons
are not fit to enter into the just Covenants of Matrimony.

But that which is put in the last place [Keeping an individual nearness of
life] declares the Nature of an indissoluble Bond, Indissoluble.
wherewith the Husband and Wife are tied together.

From these things therefore it is plain, VI. Wherein especially the virtue of
Matrimony is placed.
that the Nature and Reason of Matrimony consists in that Bond. For that which
other Definitions of the most learned Men, seem herein to attribute to the
Consent: As, when they say, That Wedlock is a Consent of a Man and of a Woman:
In Epist Eugen. 4. ^d Arm^n.
This is so to be understood, that that Consent is the working cause of
Matrimony: which thing the Fathers in the Council of Florence have taught: for
Obligation and Tie cannot be, without Consent and Compact.

But it is very necessary, VII. The Consent of the p esent time to be expressed
by words.
that the Consent be expressed in words which signify the present Time: For,
neither is Matrimony a simple Donation, but a mutual Compact. And therefore it
is, that the Consent of One only is not to join Matrimony, but there must be a
mutual Consent of Two betwixt themselves: And for the declaring of this mutual
Consent of mind, it is evident that there is need of Words.

For if Matrimony could consist in the inward Consent only without any outward
signification; VIII. The Inward Consent not enough for Matrimony.
then this also would seem to follow: that when Two, who were severed far
asunder and in different places, would consent to marry, before the One had
declared his Will to the other, either by Letters or Messengers, they would be
joined together in a true and lasting Matrimony: which notwithstanding is very
far both from Reason and from the Practice and Decrees of Holy Church.

It is rightly said therefore, IX. Consent of present in words of future time
no sufficien^.
that the Consent must be expressed in words, which have the signification of
the present time; for those words which show a future time do not conjoin
Matrimony, but promise only; and then, it is evident that those things which
are future, are not yet: but those things which are not, must be thought to
have little or nothing of firmness or stability in them. Wherefore as yet, no
one has a Right of the Marriage Bed with that Woman, which he promises that he
will marry, nor is it presently fulfilled what he promises he will do; although he
ought to perform his promise: which if he perform not, he is convicted as
guilty of breach of Faith. But he that is joined to another in the Covenant of
Matrimony; although afterward he repent: yet what is done, he cannot alter, or
make void or ineffectual. Since therefore the Obligation of Wedlock is not a
bare Promise, but such a kind of abal^enation, or transferring over a Right,
whereby a man delivers indeed the power of his Body to the Woman, and the Woman
the power of here is to the Man; therefore it is necessary, that Matrimony be
contracted with words which signify the present time. The Virtue and Force of
which words, remain even after they are pronounced, and hold the Man and the
Woman bound together with an indissoluble Bond.

But yet instead of Words, a Nod with the Head, X. A Nod or other signs may
suffice instead of Words.
or other signs, which plainly show the inward Consent, may be sufficient for
Matrimony: yea, even silence it self, when a Maid by reason of Modesty answers
not, but her Parents speak for her. From these things therefore the Curats
shall teach the Faithful, that the Nature and Force of Matrimony lies in the
Bond and Obligation: And besides the Consent, expressed in that manner as has
now bin said, that Matrimony might be true, the Bed is not necessary: Gen 2.
For it is plainly manifest, that our first Parents before they had sinned, all
which time there had bin no carnal copulation betwixt them, as the Fathers
testify, were joined together in true Matrimony. Wherefore the Holy Fathers
say, that Matrimony stands not in the Marriage Bed, but in the Consent: which
we find repeated also by S. Ambrose, in his Book concerning Virgins, De Inst.
Virgin. c. 6.

Now these things being explained, XI. Matrimony Two ^ ^d, Natural and
Sacramental.
it must be taught That Matrimony has a double respect, for Conjunction is to
be considered either as it is Natural (for Wedlock was not invented by Man but
by Nature); or as it is a Sacrament, the Force whereof excels the Condition of
Natural Things, and because Grace perfects Nature: 1 Cor. 15.46.
for neither that which is spiritual is first, but that which is Animal, and
afterward that which is Spiritual; so that the Order of the Matter requires,
that we first treat of Matrimony as it is Natural; and afterward explain those
things which agree to it as a Sacrament.

First, XII. Natural Matrimony instituted of God.
therefore the Faithful are to be taught that Matrimony was instituted of God.
For it is written in Genesis: God created them Male and Female, and bless d
them; and said: Increase and multiply: Genesis 2.
And, It is not good that Man be alone, let us make him an help like himself.
And a little after: But there was not found for Adam an help like himself,
therefore the Lord God, sent a deep sleep upon Adam; and while he slept, he
took one of his Ribs, and closed up the Flesh instead thereof. And the Lord God
formed the Rib that he took from Adam into a Woman, and brought her to Adam,
and Adam said, This now is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh; she shall
be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man: Wherefore a Man shall leave
his Father and Mother, and shall cleave to his Wife, and they Two shall be One
Flesh. Which things, Mat. 19.6.
even by the Authority of our Lord himself in St. Matthew, show that Matrimony
was of Divine Institution.

Nor did God institute Matrimony only, XIII. Matrimony made indissoluble.
but as the Holy Synod of Trent declares, he added to it a perpetual and
indissoluble Knot: for our Savior says, What God has joined, none may put
asunder. For tho it was convenient that Matrimony, Sess. 24. initio.
as it is an Office of Nature, might not be dissolved; yet much more so now as
it is a Sacrament: Mat. 19.6.
for which cause it gains the highest perfections, even in all things which are
proper to it by the Law of Nature: and yet that the Bond should be dissoluble,
would be repugnant to the bringing up of Children, and the other benefits of
Matrimony.

But, XIV. The Law of contracting Matrimony not laid upon all. Genesis 1.
that it was said of God, Increase and multiply: This tends hither, that he
might declare, for what cause Matrimony was instituted, not to put a necessity
upon every man: For Mankind being now increased, the Law of Marriage is so far
from compelling any, that Virginity is rather highly commended and persuaded to
every one, and that by Sacred Scripture, as being more excellent than the state
of Matrimony, and containing in it greater Perfection and Holiness: For our
Lord and Savior thus has taught: He that can receive it, let him receive it:
Mat. 19 12.
And the Apostle says, Concerning Virgins I have no command from the Lord, but
I give my Counsel as having obtained Mercy, 1 Cor. 7.23.
that I might be Faithful.

XV. Why Man and Woman ought to be joined. The first cause.
But now we must explain for what Reasons the Man and Woman ought to be joined
together.

The first therefore is, That this very Society of the diverse Sex is desired by
natural Instinct; there being Hope of mutual help; that One being assisted by
the help of the Other, might the more easily bear the inconveniences of life,
and the weakness of old age.

Another is the desire of Procreation, The second cause.
not so much for this End, that we might leave behind us Heirs to enjoy our
Honors and Riches, as that they might be brought up in true Faith and Religion;
which that it was chiefly the Design of the Holy Patriarchs when they married,
sufficiently appears from Sacred Scripture. Wherefore the Angel, when he
admonished Tobias, by what means he might repel the force of the Devil; Tob. 6.
I will show thee, says he, who they are that can prevail over the Devil: for
those who so enter into Wedlock, as to exclude God from themselves, and their
Soul, and so give themselves to their lust, as the Horse and Mule, which have
no understanding, the Devil has power over them. And then he adds: Thou shall
take a Virgin with the Fear of the Lord, being led thereto rather by the Love
of Children than Lust, that thou may get in thy Children, the blessing of the
seed of Abraham.

And this also was One cause why God at first instituted Matrimony:

The third, The third cause.
and which began to take place after the Fall of our first Parents: when through
the loss of Righteousness in which Man was created, his Appetite began to
oppose his right Reason, to wit, that being conscious to himself of his own
weakness, nor being willing to endure the Fight of the Flesh, he might use the
remedy of Matrimony to avoid the sins of Lust: Of the which the Apostle thus: 1
Cor. 7.
Because of Fornication let every Man have his own Wife, and let every Woman
have her own Husband. And a little after, when he had taught, that sometimes
men ought to abstain from the Debt of Matrimony for the sake of Prayer, and
subjoins: And return again to that very thing, le^t Satan tempt you by your
Incontinence.

These are the Causes,

But if to these Causes others be also added, whereby men are induced to enter
Marriage, and in choosing a Wife, they propose such as These to themselves, as
the desire of leaving an Heir, Wealth, Beauty, Nobility, or likeness of
conditions: These Reasons indeed are not to be condemned, since they oppose not
the Holiness of Matrimony: Genesis 29.
For neither in Sacred Scripture is the Patriarch Jacob reprehended, because
having chose Rachel for her Beauty, he preferred her before Leah.

Thus far of Matrimony shall be taught, as it is a Natural Conjunction: XVI. Of
Matrimony as a Sacrament.
but as it is a Sacrament, we must show that the Nature of it is much more
excellent, and is wholly to be referred to a higher End.

For as Matrimony, XVII. Matrimony as a Sacrament far excels the Natural.
as it is a Natural Conjunction, was instituted at the beginning for the
Propagation of Mankind: So afterward, that a People might be procreated and
brought up to the Worship and Religion of the true God, and of our Savior
Christ, the Dignity of a Sacrament was given to it.

When Christ our Lord was minded to give a certain sign of that most close
Relation which is betwixt him and his Church, XVIII. The Union of Christ and
his Church declared by Matrimony.
and of his immense love toward us, he declared the Divinity of this Mystery
chiefly in the Holy Conjunction of Man and Woman, which that it was most fitly
done, may be understood from hence, that among all human relations, there is
none bind so nearly as the bond of Matrimony, and the Husband and Wife are
bound together each to other in the greatest Love and Good will: And therefore
it is, that the Holy Scriptures frequently put before our Eyes the Divine
Copulation of Christ and the Church, by the similitude of Marriage.

Now that Matrimony is a Sacrament, XIX. Matrimony proved to be a Sacrament.
the Church confirmed by the Authority of the Apostle, always held certain: for
thus he writes to the Ephesians, Men ought to love their Wives even as their
own Bodies. He that loves his Wife, loves himself: for no one ever hated his
own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as Christ does the Church,
because we are Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones. For this
cause a Man shall leave his Father, and his Mother, and shall cleave to his
Wife, and they Two shall be One flesh: This is a great Sacrament, but I speak
in Christ and in the Church. For, in that he says, This is a great Sacrament,
no one ought to doubt, that it is to be referred to Matrimony: to wit, because
the Conjunction of the Man, and of the Woman, whereof God is the Author, is a
Sacrament, i. e. a Sacred Sign of the most Holy Bond wherewith Christ our Lord
is joined with his Church. And that this is the proper and true sense of these
words, the ancient Holy Fathers, Tertul lib. de Monog. Aug. de fide, and oper.
c. 7. lib. de Nup. and concup. c. 10. and 12. Ambr. in Epist. ad Ephesians. Ephesians.
3.25.
who have interpreted this place, have showed, and the Holy Synod of Trent has
explained the same thing. It is evident therefore, that the Husband is
compared, by the Apostle to Christ, and the Wife to the Church, That the Man
is the Head of the Woman, as Christ is of the Church; and for that reason it
is, that the Husband ought to love his Wife, and the Wife ought again to love
and reverence her Husband, for Christ loved his Church, and gave himself for
her. And again, as the same Apostle teaches, the Church is subject to Christ.

But that in this Sacrament also Grace is signified and given, XX. The
Sacrament of Matrimony give^ Grace.
in which thing especially the Nature of a Sacrament consists, these words of
the Synod declare: But the Grace which perfects that Natural Love, and confirms
that indissoluble Unity, Sess. 14.
Christ himself the Author and Finisher of the Venerable Sacraments has merited
for us by his Passion.

Wherefore it must be taught, XXI. The Effects of the Grace of this Sacrament.
Heb. 13.4.
that by the Grace of this Sacrament, it is brought to pass, that the Husband
and Wife being joined together with the Bond of Mutual Love, acquiesce
together and rest in each others good will, and seek no strange and unlawful
Loves and Copulations, but in all respects their Marriage is honorable and the
Bed undefiled.

But how far the Sacrament of Matrimony excels all other Matrimonies, XXII. How
much the Sacrament of Matrimony excels all other Matrimony.
we may know from hence; because, though the Gentiles themselves thought there
was something in Matrimony that is Divine, and for that reason judged that
wandering Copulations, were strange to the Law of Nature; and also that
Whoredom, Adultery, and other kinds of Lusts were to be punished; yet their
Marriages had no Virtue at all of a Sacrament.

But among the Jews the Laws of Matrimony were much more religiously observed;
XXIII. The Matrimony of the Jews, tho it were Holy, yet it was no Sacrament.
Genesis 2;.
nor is it to be doubted, but that their Marriages were indu'd with a greater
Sanctity. For seeing they received that Promise, That all Nations should be
blessed in the seed of Abraham, it justly seemed to be an Office of great Piety
among them, to beget Children, and to propagate the Offspring of a chosen
people, of which Christ our Lord and Savior, as to his human Nature, was to
have his Birth; but even those Marriages also wanted the true reason of a
Sacrament.

To this may be added, XXIV. Matrimony before and under the Law was imperfect.
Deuteronomy. 24.1. Mat. 19.7.
that whether we consider the Law of Nature after the corruption of it, or the
Law of Moses, we may easily observe, that Matrimony had fallen very much from
the Excellency and Gracefulness of its first Original. For while the Law of
Nature was in force, we find that there were many of the ancient Fathers, who
had several Wives together, and, if occasion were, giving them a Bill of
Divorce discharged them: Both which being taken away by the Evangelical Law,
Marriage has bin restored to its former state.

For, XXV. Plurality of Wives contrary to Matrimony.
that Polygamy (or diverse Wives) was contrary to the Nature of Matrimony
(although some of the ancient Fathers are not to be accused, because it was not
without Gods indulgence that they married diverse Wives) Christ our Lord, shows
in these words: Mat. 19.5.
For this cause shall a man let go Father and Mother, and shall cleave to his
Wife, and they Two shall be in One Flesh. And then he adds: Therefore now they
are not Two but One Flesh.

By which words he has made it evident, XXVI. Matrimony is a Conjunction of Two
only.
that Matrimony was so instituted of God, that it should be defined in a
Conjunction of Two only and no more. Which elsewhere he has taught very
plainly; for he says, Whosoever shall put away his Wife, and marries another,
commits Adultery upon her; and if the Wife put away her Husband, and he married
to another, she committs Adultery. For if it were lawful for a Man to marry
many Wives, there would seem no reason he should rather be said to be guilty
of Adultery, because he married another Wife, besides that he had at home, than
because the former being put away he was joined with another.

And for this cause we understand it to be,

But it is easily proved by the same Testimony of Christ our Lord, XXVII. The
Bond of Matrimony dissolved by no Divorce.
that the Bond of Matrimony can be dissolved by no Divorce: For if after a Bill
of Divorce a Woman were freed from the Law of her Husband; it might be lawful
for her without any crime of Adultery to marry another Husband: Mat. 19.8.
But the Lord plainly denounces, Every one that puts away his Wife and marries
another commits adultery.

Wherefore it is plain, XXVIII. Death only dissolves Matrimony. 1 Cor. 6.39.
that the Bond of Wedlock is broken by nothing else but Death: which the
Apostle also confirms, when he says, A woman is bound to the Law, for so
long-time as her Husband lives; but if her Husband die, she is freed from that
Law, she may be married to whom she pleases, only in the Lord. And again, to
those, who are joined together in Matrimony, I command, yet no^ I, but the
Lord, that the Wife depart not from her Husband: But if she depart, let her
abide unmarry'd, or be reconciled to her Husband. The Apostle has left this
Choice to that Woman, who for a just cause has left her Husband: either that
she remain unmarry'd, or that she be reconciled to her Husband.



And that the Law of Matrimony may not seem rigorous, XXIX. How it comes that
Indissolubility is more tolerable.
because it can never for any reason be dissolved; it must be taught, what the
Advantages joined with it are.

For first, First.
Men should know, that in joining Matrimony, Virtue and Likeness of Manners are
to be regarded, rather than Riches and Beauty. In which thing no one can doubt,
that the common Society is very much concerned.

Besides, Secondly.
if Matrimony could be dissolved by Divorce, Men would scarce ever want causes
of strife, to be daily laid in their way by the old Enemy of Peace and Modesty.

But now when the Faithful consider with themselves, Thirdly.
tho they want the bed and board of Wedlock, yet that they are held bound with
the Bond of Matrimony, and that all hope of marrying another Wife is cut off;
for this cause it is that they are slower to anger and discord.

But if sometimes they proceed to make Divorce, Fourthly.
and yet cannot long endure the want of a Mate, they are easily reconciled by
Friends, and return to each other.

But here the wholesome Admonition of S. Austin is not to be passed over by the
Pastors: Fifthly. Lib. de Adulter. Conjug. c. 6. and 9.
For he, to show the Faithful, that they should not look upon it as a
burdensome thing, to receive again into favor their Wives which they had put
away for the cause of Adultery, if they repented of their sin. Why, says he,
should not the Faithful Husband receive his Wife again, whom the Church
receives: Or why should not the Wife pardon her adulterous Husband, whom even
Christ has pardoned? Prove. 18.12.
For that the Scripture calls him a Fool who keeps an Adultress, it means of
her, which when she has offended, repents not, and refuses to leave off the
filthiness she has begun. From these things therefore it is plain, that the
Marriages of the Faithful far excel the Marriages both of the Gentiles and of
the Jews in perfection and Nobility.

The Faithful are further to be taught, XXX. Three Benefits of Matrimony.
that there are three Benefits of Matrimony; Children, Faith, Sacrament: By
recompense of which those inconveniences are lessened which the Apostle shows
in these words: 1 Cor. 7.28.
They that are married shall have Tribulation of the Flesh. And thereby it
comes to pass that the Conjunction of Bodies, which without Matrimony are
worthily condemned, is rendered honest. Vide Aug. lib. 5. cont. Julian c. 5.

The First Good therefore is Children, The First.
which are begotten of a just and lawful Wife; for this the Apostle reckons so
much of, 1 Timothy 2.25.
that he said. The Woman shall be saved by the begetting of Children. Nor is
this to be understood only of the Begetting of Children, but also of the
Education and discipline of them, whereby Children are instructed in Piety. So
the Apostle presently adds: If they remain in Faith. The Scripture also
admonishes: Eccle. 7.25.
Have thou Children? teach them and bend them from their Childhood. The same
thing the Apostle teaches. And of this kind of Teaching, Tobias, Job, and other
Holy Fathers in Sacred Scripture afford us very fair Examples.

But what the Duties of Parents and Children are,

Now follows Faith, The Second.
which is another Benefit of Matrimony, not that Habit of Virtue, wherewith we
are tinctured when we receive Baptism, but a kind of Fidelity wherewith the
Husband binds himself to his Wife, and the Wife mutually binds her self to her
Husband, and that in such a manner, that each of them deliver the power of
their Bodies to each other, and promises never to violate the Holy Covenant of
Marriage. This is easily gathered from those words uttered by our first Father,
Genesis 2.24.
when he received Eve his Wife, and which Christ our Lord afterward approved
in the Gospel. Wherefore a Man shall leave his Father and Mother, and cleave to
his Wife, and they Two shall be One Flesh: Also from that place of the Apostle.
1 Cor. 9.4.
The Woman has not power of her own Body, but the Man; and in like manner the
Man has not power of his own Body, but the Woman. Wherefore those more grievous
Punishments were most justly appointed by the Lord in the Old Law, against
Adulterers, Levit. 20.^0.
because they broke this Material Faith.

The Faith of Matrimony requires further, Ephesians. 3.25.
when he said: Men love your Wives as Christ also loved the Church, which
certainly he embraced with that immense Charity, not for his own profits sake,
but proposing to himself the advantage only of his Bride.

The Third Good of Matrimony is called the Sacrament, The Third.
to wit, the Bond of Marriage, from which they can never be dissolved: 1 Cor.
7.19.
For as the Apostle has it; The Lord has commanded that the Wife depart not
from her own Husband: But if she depart, that she remain unmarri'd, or be
reconciled to her Husband, and that the Husband put not away his Wife. For if
Matrimony, as it is a Sacrament signify the Conjunction of Christ with his
Church: it must needs be, that as Christ never separates himself from his
Church; so a Wife, as to the Bond of Matrimony, can never be separated from her
Husband. But that this holy Society may be the better preserved without
Quarrel; the Duties of the Husband and of the Wife, as they are described by S.
Paul and S. Peter the Prince of Apostles, are to be taught. Vide Aug. lib. 1.
de Adulterin. conjug. c. 21. and 22. and de bono Conjug. c. 7. and de Nupt. and
concupisc. lib. 1. c. 10.

It is the Part of the Husband therefore liberally and honorably to treat his
Wife, XXXI. The Duty of the Husband toward the Wife. First.
for which purpose it ought to be remembered, that Eve was called the Companion
of Adam; when he said, The Woman thou gave me for a Companion. For which
cause it was, as some of the Fathers have taught, that she was not formed out
of the Feet, but out of the Side of the Man. Even as also she was not made of
the Head, that she might understand that she is not the Mistress of her
Husband, but rather subject to him.

Besides, Secondly.
it is the Office of the Husband to be always employed in the Study of some
honest thing; both to provide those things which are necessary for the
Sustenance of his Family; and also that he grow not sluggish and idle, from
whence flow the Vices of almost all.

And then, Thirdly.
rightly to order his Family, to appoint them all their Business, and to hold
them in their Duty.

And again, XXXII. The Duty of the Wife. First. 1 Pet. 3.12.
the Parts of the Wife, are these, which the Prince of Apostles reckons up,
when he says: Let Women be subject to their own Husbands; that if any believe
not the Word, by the Conversation of their Wives, they may be gained without
fear, considering your holy Conversation in fear, whose adorning let it not be
outward in braided hair, or glittering of Gold, or of Clothes and Apparel: but
which is the hidden man of the heart, in the incorruptibility of a quiet and
modest Spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price: For so in times
past, the holy women which hoped in God, adorned themselves, subjecting
themselves to their own husbands, even as Sara obeyed Abraham, calling him Lord.

Let it also be their chief study to educat their Children in true Religion,
Secondly.
and diligently to take care of the Household Affairs.

And let them willingly contain themselves at home, Thirdly.
unless necessity compel them to go abroad; and let them never presume so to do
without the permission of their Husbands.

And then, Fourthly.
(it being the thing wherein chiefly the Marriage-Conjunction consists) let
them always remember that next to God they must love no one more than their
Husband, nor esteem any one more than he, to whom in all things, which are not
against Christian Piety, they must behave themselves, and obey with the
greatest alacrity of mind.

After the explication of these things, XXXIII. The Ceremonies of Matrimony.
it will follow, that the Pastors teach the Rites also which ought to be
observed in contracting Matrimony. Whereof it is not to be expected that in
this place Rules should be given, seeing that by the Holy Synod of Trent, those
things which are chiefly to be observed concerning this matter, have bin
largely and exactly decreed: Nor can the Pastors be ignorant of that Decree. It
will therefore suffice to admonish, that they study to know those things which
belong to this matter, from the Doctrine of the Sacred Council, and diligently
expound them to the Faithful.

And First lest young Men and Maids, XXXIV. Of what Young persons are to be
admonished.
whose very Age must needs want counsel and discretion being deceived by a
false show of Matrimony, should unwarily rush into the covenants of dishonest
Loves; they shall often teach, that those Marriages are to be accounted neither
true nor lawful, which are not contracted in the presence of the Curate of the
Parish or of some other Priest by the License of the Curate, or of the
Ordinary, and of a certain number of Witnesses.

Also those things which hinder Matrimony are to be explained. Upon which
Argument very many grave and learned men, XXXV. The Impediments of Marriages to
be taught.
who have written of Vices and Virtues, have bin so diligently conversant that
it will be easy for all, to apply hither those things which they have delivered
in their Writings, especially seeing the Pastors account it necessary scarcely
ever to lay those Books out of their hands: Both those Rules therefore, and
also those things which have bin established by Holy Synod concerning the
Impediments which arise either from Spiritual Kindred, or from the Justice of
public Honesty, or from Fornication, they diligently read, and take care, that
they be taught the Faithful.

Whence it may be perceived, XXXVI. With what intention Matrimony is to be
enterpris'd.
with what mind the Faithful ought to be affected when they contract Matrimony:
For neither ought they to think that they go about any Human matter, but a
Divine, wherein that a singular Integrity of mind and Devotion is to be used,
the Examples of the Fathers of the Old Law, sufficiently show, whose Marriages,
tho they were not indu'd with the Dignity of a Sacrament, yet they always
thought that they were to be used with the greatest Religion and Holiness.

And amongst other things, XXXVII. Clandestine Marriage not to be contracted.
the Sons and Daughters of a Family are to be exhorted to give that honor to
their Parents and to those in whose Trust and Power they are, as not to
enterprise Matrimony without their knowledge and consent. For in the Old
Testament we may observe that Children were always disposed in Marriage by
their Parents. In which case, that very much is to be given to their Wills, the
Apostle also seems to show in these Words: He that joins his Virgin in
Matrimony, does well; and he that joins her not, does better.

The last Part remains, XXXVIII. Two things to be advised concerning Matrimony.
which belongs to the Use of Matrimony, concerning which the Pastors shall
treat so, that no word fall from their mouth, which may seem unworthy the ears
of the Faithful, or may distaste pious minds, or move laughter. For as the words
of the Lord, are chaste words: Psalm. 11.7.
So also it very much becomes the Teacher of Christian people, to use such kind
of discourse, as carries in it singular Gravity and Integrity of mind.
Wherefore the Faithful shall be taught these Two things especially.

First, The first.
that Marriage is not to be enterpriz'd for Pleasure or Lust's sake: but they
are commanded of the Lord to use it within those limits, which we have showed
before. For it is convenient to remember, what the Apostle exhorts: 1 Cor. 7.29.
They that have Wives, let them be, as tho they had not. And also what is said
by S. Hierom: A wise man ought to love his Wife with judgment; the violence of
Pleasure reigns not with Passion, nor will he be carried headlong to embraces.
There is nothing more filthy than for a man to love his Wife as an Adultress.

But because all good things are to be sought of God with Holy Prayers; The
second.
there is another thing which the Faithful must be taught, that for the sake of
praying and beseeching God, they sometimes abstain from the Office of
Matrimony: And first let them know, that this is to be observed by them for
three days at least before they receive the Sacred Eucharist, but more when
they celebrate the solemn Fasts of Lent, even as our Fathers have well and
holily appointed. For so it will come to pass that they shall feel those
benefits of Matrimony increased daily with a greater heap of Divine Grace, and
following the study of Piety, they shall not only pass away this life in
Tranquillity and Comfort, but they shall be confirmed with the certain and sure
Hope, of obtaining life eternal also by the Goodness of God, which hope will
not confound them. Romans 5.5.
Vide 33. q. 4 per totam. and de Consecr. did. 2. c. omnis homo. Hier. in
Apol. pro liberis contra Jovinian. post medium. inter Epist. number. 50. and in c.
12. Zach. super illud. In die planctus magnus erit fructus thori immaculati.

THE CATECHISM FOR THE CURATES, BY THE DECREE OF THE Council of TRENT.
PART III.
Of Gods COMMANDMENTS contained in the DECALOG.
THat the Decalogue is the Sum and Epitome of all Laws S. Augustine has observed
in his Writings. For tho the Lord spoke many things, I. The Decalog the Sum of
all Laws. Quaest. 140. super Exodus Matthew. 22.
yet there were but Two Tables of Stone given to Moses, which are called the
Tables of the Testimony to be in the Ark. And all the other things which God
commanded, if they are diligently observed so as to be understood, do depend
upon those Ten Commandments which were written in the Two Tables And how again
those Ten Precepts depend upon these Two, to wit, of the Love of God and of a
man's Neighbor, upon which depends the whole Law and the Prophets.

Seeing therefore that it is the Sum of the whole Law, II. The Pastors rightly
to understand and explain the Decalog.
the Pastors ought to be conversant in the contemplation thereof Day and Night,
not only to direct their own Life according to this Rule, but also to instruct
the People committed to their charge in the Law of the Lord.

For, Mal. 2.7. Let the Priests mark this.
the Priests Lips preserve Knowledge, and they enquire of the Law at his mouth,
because he is the Angel of the Lord of Hosts: Which thing most especially
belongs to the Pastors of the New Law, who are nearer to God, and ought to be
transformed from Brightness to Brightness, as by the Spirit of the Lord: And
seeing that Christ our Lord called them by the name of Light, it is properly
their Parts, 2 Cor. 3.^. Gal. 6.1.
to be a Light to those that are in Darkness, the Teachers of the Unwise, the
Instructors of Babes, and if any one be overtaken in any fault, those who are
Spiritual ought to restore such a one.

But in Confessions they bear the person of a Judge, III. The knowledge of the
Decalog. very necessary to Confession.
and give Sentence according to the quality and kind of the Offense: Wherefore
unless they are minded that their own Ignorance shall betray themselves and
deceive others, it is necessary that they be very watchful, and very well
skilled in the Interpretation of the Divine Laws, that they may make a right
Judgment concerning every Action, and the Omission of every Duty, and, as the
Apostle has it, 2 Timothy 4.16.
That they teach found Doctrine, i.e. free from Error, and that they heal the
Diseases of Souls, Tit. 2.14.
which are their Sins, that the People may be acceptable to God, following good
works.

And now in Discourses of this kind, IV. Why the Decalog so religiou^^ly to be
observed.
the Pastor shall propose both to himself and to others such Arguments as may
persuade to the Obedience of the Law. And amongst other things which may well
drive men to the Observance of the Commands of this Law, This has very great
force, That God is the Author of this Law. For tho it be said to be given by
Angels; Gal. 13.29.
yet no one can doubt, that God himself is the Author of the Law. Of the truth
whereof, not only the Words of the Lawgiver himself, which shall by and by be
explained, afford sufficient testimony; but almost infinite other places of
Scripture, which the Pastors will easily meet with.

For there is no one who feels not, V. God the Author of the Law of Nature.
that a Law is implanted in his Soul by God, whereby he can discern good from
evil, that which is honest from that which is dishonest, what is just from what
is unjust. The force and Virtue of which Law, seeing it differs not from that
which is written who is there that dares deny, that God is the Author, as of
the inward, so also of the written Law?

Therefore when God gave the Law to Moses, VI. Why he gave the Written Law.
it must be taught that he rather made this Divine Light, which by ill manners
and daily perverseness was now almost darkn'd, much more illustrious, than that
he gave a new one, lest happly the People hearing the Law of Moses spoken
irreverently of, might think themselves not bound to the Observation of it.

For most certain it is that we are not to obey these Commandments because they
were given by Moses, VII. Why we must obey the Laws of the Decalog.
but because they are implanted in our Souls, and are explained and confirmed
by Christ our Lord.

Now this Consideration will help much, VIII. Obedience to the Law of God how
to be enforced.
and has great force to persuade, that it is God who made this Law: Of whose
Wisdom and Justice we cannot doubt, nor can we escape his infinite Power and
Virtue. Wherefore when by the Prophets God commanded that the Law should be
observed, he said, that he was the Lord God; and in the beginning of the
Decalog, I am the Lord thy God: Exodus 20.1.
and elsewhere; Malach. 1.6.
If I am a Lord, where is my Fear?

Now that God has declared his Will, IX. God to be thanked for the giving of
the Law.
wherein is contained our Salvation, will stir up the minds of the Faithful,
not only to keep the Commandments of God, but also to be thankful to him. And
therefore the Scripture in many places declaring this very great Benefit, warns
people to observe its Dignity, and God's Beneficence, as in Deuteronomy: Deuteronomy.
4.6.
This, says it, is your Wisdom and your Understanding before the People; that
all hearing these Commandments, may say, This is a wise and an understanding
People, and a great Nation. And again in the Psalms: Psalm. 147.10.
He has not dealt so with every Nation, and he has not manifested his judgments
to them.

But if the Curat shall moreover declare the manner of the giving of the Law
from the Authority of Scripture, X. With how great Majesty the Law was given.
the Faithful will easily understand, how piously and humbly they ought to
honor or reverence the Law, received from God himself; Exodus 19.10.
for it was commanded of God to all, that Three Days before the giving of the
Law, they should wash their Clothes, and not touch their Wives, that so they
might be more holy and better prepared to receive the Law, and be present on
the Third Day; and then when they were brought to the Mountain, from whence the
Lord by Moses was about to deliver the Law, Moses alone was commanded to ascend
up into the Mountain, whither the Lord came with very great Majesty, and filled
the place with Thunder and Lightning, with Fire and thick Clouds, and began to
speak with Moses, and gave him the Law.

Which thing the Divine Wisdom would not have done, XI. Why the Law given in
this terrible manner.
but to admonish us that the Law is to be received with a pure and humble mind,
and if we neglect the Commandments, that Punishment hangs over our heads from
the Divine Justice.

And let the Curate show also that the Commandments of the Law are not
difficult, XII. It must be showed that the Law is easy. Aug. Ser. 47 de tempore.
which he may teach even from this one reason of S. Austins, when he says, How,
I pray; is it said to be impossible for Man to love: I say to love the
bountiful Creator, the most loving Father, and then also his flesh in our
Brethren? But now, Romans 13.8.
He that loves, has fulfilled the Law. Wherefore the Apostle S. John plainly
testifies, 1 John 5.3.
That Gods Commandments are not grievous; for nothing could have bin required
of man more justly, more deservedly and more profitably, Lib. de diligendo Deo.
lib. 1 Confess. c. 5.
as S. Bernard witnesses; and therefore S. Austin admired the exceeding great
kindness of God, Speaking to God in this manner: What is Man that thou would
be loved by him? and if he do not do it, thou threatnest him mighty
punishments? is not this punishment great enough, that I love thee not?

But if any one offer this excuse, XIII. The excuse of the Weakness of our
Nature is vain. Luc. 11.13.
that he is hindered through the Infirmity of Nature, so that he cannot love God;
it must be taught, that God who requires our Love, does implant in our Hearts
the Virtue of Love by his Holy Spirit. Now thus good Spirit is given of our
Heavenly Father to them that ask it. So that S. Austin prayed well, "Give what
thou command, and command what thou will.

Because therefore we have Gods help ready at hand, XIV. God's help is ready at
hand.
and especially since the Death of Christ our Lord, by which the Prince of this
World was cast out, there is no reason for any one to be discouraged with the
difficulty of the matter, For there is nothing hard to a loving mind. Aug. in
Psalm. 111. Bernard. Sermon. de Dominica in ramis Palmer. item in Sermon de
Magdal.

Moreover to persuade the same thing it will very much avail, XV. We all are
necessarily obliged to the Obedience of the Law.
if it be explained, that the Law is necessarily to be obeyed: especially
seeing in our days there are not wanting those who are not afraid wickedly,
and to their great hurt, to say, That whether the Law be easy or difficult,
yet it is no ways necessary to Salvation. Whose wicked and impious Opinion the
Curat shall confute by Testimonies of Sacred Scripture, and especially of the
same Apostle by whose Authority they endeavor to defend their Impiety, 1 Cor.
7.10.
What therefore says the Apostle? Circumcision and Uncircumcision are nothing,
but the Observation of the Commandments of God. Now that he elsewhere repeats
the same Opinion, he says that a New Creature only avails in Christ, 1 Cor.
6.15.
we plainly understand, that he calls him a Creature in Christ, who observes
God's commandments. For he that has Gods Commandments and keeps them, loves
God, John 14.2.
as our Lord himself in S. John testifies: If any one love me, he will keep my
Saying.

For tho a Man may be justified,

Lastly, XVI. What Fruits or Advantages the Keepers of the Law have.
that the Curat may not pass over any thing, whereby the Faithful may be
brought to keep the Law, he shall show how large and sweet the Advantages
thereof are: which he may easily prove by those things which are written in the
18th Psalm: for therein are celebrated the Praises of the Law of God; whereof
this is very great, which much more largely shows the Glory and Majesty of God,
than the very Heavenly Bodies themselves do by their Beauty and Order, which as
they draw all Nations, even the very Barbarous ones into the Admiration of
them: So do they force them to acknowledge the Glory, Wisdom and Power of the
Maker and Creator of all things. And indeed, the Law of the Lord converts Souls
to God. For knowing his VVays, and what the most holy Will of God is by his
Laws, we turn our feet into the Way of the Lord. And because they only who
truly fear God, are Wise, he has bestowed this Power upon it, to give Wisdom
to little ones. Hence it is that they who observe Gods Law, heap to themselves
true and mighty joys, both in this Life and the Life to come, from the
Knowledge of Divine Mysteries.

Nor is the Law to be observed of us so much for our own Advantage, XVII. The
Law to be observed for God's sake.
as for Gods sake; who has revealed his Will in his Law to Mankind; which
seeing the other Creatures follow, it is much more mere that Man himself should
follow it.

Nor is this to be passed by in silence, XVIII. The Reward of obedience very
great.
that even herein especially God has manifested his Mercy and the Riches of his
Goodness toward us: that seeing he could not oblige us to glorify him without
rewarding us, he would notwithstanding join his own Glory and our Advantage
together. That what is profitable to Man, the same should be to God's Glory.
Now because this thing is very great and excellent, the Curat shall teach, as
the Prophet in the last place says: In keeping them there is great reward. For
there are promised to us not only those Blessings, which seem to belong rather
to the earthly felicity, that we should be blessed in the City, and blessed in
the Field: but there is offered a full Reward in Heaven, and good measure,
heaped and thrust together and running over, which by pious and just Actions,
by the help of the Divine Mercy, we merit.

The First COMMANDMENT of the DECALOGVE.
I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the Land of Egypt; out of the
house of bondage: Thou shall not have strange Gods before me: Thou shall not
make to thy self a graven thing, etc.

Although this Law were given the Jews in the Mount from the Lord, I. The words of
the Law, and the History of the people of Israel to be explained.
yet because by Nature it was long before impressed and written in the minds of
all, and for that reason, God would have all men always to obey it; it will be
very profitable diligently to explain those words wherein it was proclaimed to
the Hebrews by Moses the Minister and Interpreter of it, and the History of the
people of Israel, which is full of Mysteries.

And first, II. The History of the people of Is ael briefly explained.
he shall show, that out of all the Nations under heaven God chose One, which
had its Original from Abraham, whom he would have to be a Sojourner in the land
of Canaan: The possession whereof when he had promised him, yet both he and his
Posterity were Pilgrims for more than five hundred years, before they inhabited
the promised Land. In which Pilgrimage he never left the care of them: Psalm.
10.4.
they went indeed from Country to Country, and from one Kingdom to another
People; but yet he suffered no injury to be done them, but punished even Kings
(for their sakes). But before they went down into Egypt, he sent a Man before,
by whose Wisdom both they and the Egpytians might be delivered from Famine. But
in Egypt he embraced them with so much kindness; that tho Pharaoh opposed and
set himself upon their destruction; yet were they increased after a wonderful
manner and when they were grievously afflicted, and very hardly used as
Bondslaves, he gave them Moses for their Leader, who led them forth with a
mighty hand: Of this deliverance especially the Lord makes mention in the
beginning of the Law in these words, I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee
out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of Bondage.

From hence this is chiefly to be observed by the Curat, III. Why God chose the
small Family of Abraham. Deuteronomy. 7.
that there was One chosen out of all Nations by God, which he called his
People, and to whom he was pleased to grant the knowledge and worship of
himself; not that this One was more just or numerous than the rest, even as God
admonishes the Hebrews; but because so it pleased God, rather to propagate, and
enrich a small and poor Nation, whereby his Power and Goodness might be made
more apparent and illustrious to all.

Seeing therefore that this was the Condition of those men, Deuteronomy. 10.15.
whereby he provoked the other Nations to emulation; that the Israelite's
happiness being perfect, all men might be take them selves to the worship of
the true God: even as S. Paul also testifies, that he provoked to emulation his
own Flesh, Romans 11.14.
by proposing the happiness of the Gentiles, and the true knowledge of God,
wherein he had instructed them.

And then he shall teach the Faithful that God suffered the Hebrew Fathers to
pilgrimage for a long while, IV. Why the People of Israel suffered so long.
and permitted their Posterity to be oppressed with a cruel Bondage, and to be
vexed, for this cause, that we might be taught, that none are made. God's
Friends, but the Worlds Enemies and Strangers in the Earth: And therefore that
we are more easily received into familiarity with God, if we have nothing to do
with the World: And also that being restored to the service of God, we may know
how much more happy they are that serve God, than they that serve the World: Of
which things the Scripture warns us; 2 Par. 8.
for it says, Nevertheless they shall serve them, that they may know the
difference betwixt my service and the service of the kingdom of the Earth.

He shall further show, V. Why God performed not his promise so long
that after five hundred years God performed his Promise, that that People
might be sustained with Faith and Hope. For God will have his Children always
to depend upon himself, and put all their Hope in his Goodnes^, as shall be
said in the Explication of the first Commandment.

Lastly, VI. Why the Law given at such a time and place.
he shall observe the Time and Place, when and where the people of Israel
received this Law from God, to wit, after they were brought out of Egypt, and
came into the Wilderness, that being allured with the remembrance of a fresh
benefit, and yet affrighted with the ruggedness of the place in which they
were, they might be better disposed to receive the Law: for Men are very much
bound to those, whose Bounty they have experienced, and betake themselves to
the Protection of God, when they find themselves destitute of all human hope.

Whence we may learn, Doctrine, by how much the more they have abstracted
themselves from the deceits of the World, and the pleasures of the Flesh, as it
is written by the Prophet: Isay 28.9.
Whom shall he teach knowledge, and whom shall he make to understand doctrine?
them that are weaned from the Milk, and drawn from the Breasts.

The Curat therefore shall endeavor, VII. The beginning of the Law of God
and as much as he can, cause the Faithful always to have these words in their
minds, I am the Lord thy God. Whence they may learn, that they have the
Creator, by whom they were made, are preserved, for their Lawgiver: And
therefore that they can rightly take up that saying, He is the Lord our God,
and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand; the frequent
and earnest admonition of which words will have this Efficacy, that the
Faithful will be made more ready to observe the Law, and abstain from sin. But
that which follows,

Who brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, VIII. A Motive of singular Piety.
out of the house of Bondage. Although this seems to agree only to the deliverance
of the Jews from the Bondage of the Egyptians: Yet if we consider the inward
nature of universal Salvation, it much more properly belongs to Christians,
Colos. 1.13.
who are taken of God, not out of an Egyptian servitude, but from the dominion
of Sin, and from the power of Darkness, and are translated into the Kingdom of
the Son of his Love. The Greatness of which Benefit the Prophet Jeremy
considering, Hierom 10.14.
propheci'd thus. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, and it shall no more be
said: The Lord lives who brought the Children of Israel out of the Land of
Egypt: But the Lord lives who brought the Children of Israel out of the Land of
the North, and from all Countries whither I had scattered them, and I will
bring them back into their own Land which I gave to their Fathers: Behold, I
will send many Fishers, says the Lord, and they shall fish them: And the rest.
For our most indulgent Father, through his own Son has gathered together his
Children that were scattered abroad, that now being no longer the servants of
Sin, Luc. 1.24.
but of Justice, We might serve him in Holiness and Justice before him all our
days.

Wherefore against all Temptations, the Faithful shall use as a Buckler, IX.
How we must resist Temptations. Romans 6.
that of the Apostle: How shall we who are dead to Sin, live any longer
therein? We are not now our own, but his, who died and rose again for us: He is
the Lord our God, who has bought us for himself with his own Blood; how shall
we be able to Sin against the Lord our God, and crucify him again? As
therefore being made truly free, and with that Liberty too wherewith Christ has
made us free; as formerly we yielded our Members to serve Injustice, so let us
now yield them to serve Justice to Sanctification.

Exodus 10.
Thou shall not have strange Gods before me.

The Curat shall teach that those things that belong to God, X. The Division of
the Decalogue.
have the first place in the Decalogue; and those that belong to our Neighbor
have the last; because those things which we do to our Neighbor, we do for Gods
sake; for then in Obedience to Gods Command we love our Neighbor, when for Gods
sake we love him; now those things are laid down in the First Table.

In the second place, XI. Here are two Precepts.
in the words proposed there is contained a twofold Precept: whereof the One
has the Virtue of commanding, and the Other of Forbidding. For in that it is
said, Thou shall not have strange Gods before me. The meaning is, Thou shall
worship me the true God, thou shall give no worship to strange Gods.

In the First is contained the Precept of Faith, XII. What the first Part
contains.
Hope and Charity: For when we say that God is immovable, unchangeable,
remains always the same, faithful, we confess aright, without any fault:
whence, assenting to his Oracles, we must needs attribute all Faith and
Authority to him: But he that considers his Omnipotency, Mercy and Promptitude,
and Propensity to do good, can he choose but place all his Hope in him? But if
he contemplate the Riches of his Goodness and Love shed upon us, can he choose
but love him? Hence this is the Beginning, hence this the Conclusion, which God
uses in Scripture in Commanding and Charging; I am the Lord.

But this is the other Part of the Precept, XIII. What the latter Part
command^, and why ^^ is add^d.
Thou shall have no strange Gods before me. Which Form of Speech the Lawgiver
used, not as tho this Sentence had not bin sufficiently explained by the
Affirmation of the Commandment, in this manner, Thou shall worship me the only
God: For if he be God, he is One: But because of the blindness of very many,
those who in Old Times professed themselves to worship the true God, did
worship a multitude of Gods: Of which sort there were very many among the
Hebrews themselves, who as Elias objected against them, halted between two
Opinions: which thing the Samaritans also did, who worshipped the God of Israel,
and the Gods of the Nations.

These things being explained, it must be added, XIV. The first Commandment of
the Decalogue excels the rest.
That this is the First and Chiefest of all the Commandments, not only in
Order, but in Nature, Dignity and Excellence. For God ought to have more Love
and Authority among us by infinite degrees, than Lord or King. He created us,
he governs us, and we were nourished by him in our Mothers Womb, and brought
forth thence into the World; he supplies us with things necessary for Life and
Food.

Now they sin against this Commandment, XV. The chief Sins against the first
Commandment.
who have not Faith, Hope and Charity, the Sin of whom lies plainly open: For
in this Number are those who fall into Heresy; which believe not those things
which our Holy Mother the Church proposes to be believed: those who give credit
to Dreams, Fortune-telling, and such like Vanities: those who cast off the Hope
of their Salvation, and trust not in the goodness of God: those who take
Pleasure in Riches only, or in the Health and Strength of the Body, which
things are more largely explained by those who have wrote concerning Vices and
Sins. De variis istis peccatis. Vide did. 24. quaest. 2. multis in capitibus.
Aug. in lib. de divinat. demon. cap. 5. and citatur 26. q. 4. secundum.
Origin. Hom. 5. Josue and habet 26. q. 2. c. sed and illud Aug. lib. 2. de
doct. Christian. c. 19. and 20. and citatur eodem c. illud quod est Conc.
Carth. 4. c. 89. vide plura 26. q. 2.3. and 5.

Of the WORSHIP and INVOCATION of SAINTS.
BUt this is also diligently to be taught in the Explication of this
Commandment, XVI. The Honor of the Saints not against this Commandment.
That the Veneration and Invocation of Saints and Angels and Blessed Souls,
which enjoy the Glory of Heaven, or even the Honor which the Catholic Church
has always given to the very Bodies and Ashes of the Saints, is not against the
Law. For who is so mad, that when the King requires, that no one shall take
upon himself to be King, or suffer himself to be worshipped or honored as King,
will therefore presently think it to be the Kings Will, that no Honor shall be
done to his Magistrates: for Christians are said to adore the Angels, by the
Example of the Saints of the Old Testament, yet they give not that Veneration
to them which they give to God. Vide Trid. sess. 17. de Sacrif. Missae. c. 3.
and sess. 25. sub princip. cap. de invocati. Sanctorum. Item vide Synod 7. act.
6. in fine. Item Aug. lib. 8. de civit. Dei. c. 27. and lib. 10. c. 1. and lib.
21. contra Faust. c. 21. Basil. hom. 20. in 40. Mar. and 26. de Mar. Mamon.
Item Nazianz. orat. in laud. sancti Cypriani.

Now whereas we read that the Angels refused to be worshipped by Men, XVII. Why
the Angels sometimes would not be worshipped. Apoc. 19.10. Apoc. 22.9.
it must be understood that they did so, because they would not have that Honor
done to them, which was due to God alone. For the Holy Spirit, who says: Honor
and Glory be to God only, the same has commanded to honor our Parents and
Elders. Besides, holy Men, who worshipped One God only, did adore Kings also, as
we see in Holy Scripture, i, e. they did humbly reverence them. 1 Timothy 17.
Exodus 19.2. Lev. 19.11, Deuteronomy. 5.16.

But if Kings, XVIII. Angels to be worshipped and why.
by whom God governs the World, are so highly honored; shall we not give so
much the greater Honor to Angelical Spirits, whom God has bin pleased to make
his Ministers, and whose labor he makes use of, not only for the Government of
his Church, but of other matters also, and by whose Aid we are delivered from
the greatest Dangers both of Soul and Body, although they suffer not themselves to
be seen by us, by how much those blessed Spirits excel Kings themselves in
Dignity? Dan. 10.15.
Add hereto their Love, wherewith they love us, being led by which, they pour
out Prayers for those Provinces over which they are placed, as is easily
understood from Scripture: which also is not to be doubted but they do for
those whose Guardians they are; for they offer our Prayers and Tears to God.
Wherefore in the Gospel our Lord has taught that little ones are not to be
offended; Mat. 18.10.
because their Angels in Heaven, always behold the Face of their Father which
is in Heaven.

Therefore they are to be invocated, both because they always behold God, XIX.
Angels to be invocated.
and most willingly undertake the Patronage of our Salvation committed to them.
The Holy Scriptures are Testimonies of this Invocation. For Jacob begged of the
Angel with whom he wrestl'd, yea, and compelled him to bless him: Genesis 32.27.
for he professes he would not let him go, before he blessed him. Nor did he
beg a Blessing to be given him of him only whom he saw, but of him also whom he
saw not, when he said: Genesis 48.16.
The Angel who delivered me out of all evil, bless the Children.

Whence it may also he gathered, XX. The Honor given to the Saints lessens not
the Glory of God.
That the Glory of God is so far from being lessened by the Honor and
Invocation of the Saints, who sleep in the Lord, and by reverencing their
Relics and Ashes; that thereby it is very much increased, and Men's Hope the
more stirred up, confirmed, and exhorted to the Imitation of the Saints. Which
Duty is proved from the Second Council of Nice, the Council of Gangre, and the
Council of Trent, and from the Authority of the Holy Fathers. Nicen. Conc. 2.
Act. 6. Gangr. can. 20. and citatur did. 30. c. Siquis per Superbiam. Trid.
sess. 25. item Conc. Chalced. sub finem. and in 6. Synod. general. c. 7. and
Conc. Geron. c. 3. Aurel. 1. c. 29. Damasc. de Ortho. Fid. lib. 4. c. 6.

But that the Curat may be better prepared to refute those that are Adversaries
to this Truth, XXI. The same confirmed by the Fathers.
let him chiefly read S. Hierom let him chiefly read S. Hierom against
Vigilantius, and Damascen. Libro. 4. de Orth. Fid. c. 16.

According to whose Account, XXII. The same proved from Apostolical Tradition.
which is a principal thing, is added the Practice received from the Apostles,
and always kept and preserved in the Church of God. Dionys. c. 7. Hier. Eccles.
Iren. lib. 5. contra haeres. c. 19. Athan. Sermon. in Evang. de sancta Deip.
Eusebius. lib. 13. Praepar. Evang. c. 7. Cornel. Pap. Ep. 1. Hill. in Psalm. 126.
Ambr. in lib. de Viduis.

Of which thing who can desire a more strong or clear Argument than the
Testimony of Holy Scripture, XXIII. The same testified by Scripture.
which wonderfully celebrates the Praises of the Saints? for there are divine
Commendations of some Saints, whose Praises seeing they are celebrated in
Sacred Scripture, what reason is there, that Men should not have a singular
honor for them?

Although for this cause also they are the rather to be Honored and Invocated,
XXIV. The Saints help us with their merits.
because they earnestly Pray for the Salvation of Men, and for their Sake and
Merit, God bestows many Benefits upon us.

For if there be joy in Heaven over one Sinner doing Penance, XXV. Proved. Luc.
15.15.
will not the Citizens of Heaven also help the Penitent? being requested will
they not beg Pardon of Sin for us, and Reconcile the Grace of God to us?

But if it be said, as said it is by some, XXVI. The Patronage of the Saints
not superfluous.
that the Patronage of the Saints is needless, because God without an
Interpreter hears our Prayers; those Words of S. Austin easily convince these
Sayings of Impious Men: There are many things which God grants not, unless by a
Mediator and Intercessor. Aug. quaest. 149. super Exodus Sermon. 2. and 4. de S.
Steph.

And this is confirmed by the clear Examples of Abimelech and Job's Friends:
XXVII. Confirmed by Examples.
whose sins God forgave not but by the Prayers of Abraham and Job. Genesis 20.
Job. 42.

But if it be said, XXVIII. Objections answered. Mat. 8.10. Luc. 7.3.
That this is done through the want and weakness of Faith, that we use the Saints
as Intercessors and Patrons: how will answer to the Example of the Centurion,
who tho he had that singular Commendation for his Faith, which our Lord God
bestowed upon him, yet he sent the Elders of the Jews to our Savior, to beg
Health for his sick Servant.

Wherefore, XXIX. The Invocation of the Saints hurts not the Unity of the
Mediator. Heb. 9.12.
if we must acknowledge that there is only One Mediator proposed us, Christ our
Lord, to wit, He who only has reconciled us through his Blood, to our Heavenly
Father, and who having finished our Redemption, and once entered into the
Holies, ceases not to intercead for us: yet it can by no means follow from
hence, that we may not have Recourse to the Favor of the Saints. For if it be
therefore unlawful to use the Assistance of the Saints, because we have one
Patron Jesus Christ; the Apostle would never have done it, nor would he ever
have committed himself so earnestly to the Prayers and Assistance of the
Brethren yet alive.

For surely the Prayers of the Living do not less diminish the Glory and
Dignity of Christ the Mediator,

But who is there, XXX. The Invocation of Saints proved lawful by many Miracles.
whom the wonderful things that have bin done at the Graves; as the Blind, the
Lame, the Maimed, and otherwise diseased Persons restored to Health and
Soundness, the Dead recovered to Life, the Devils cast out of Men's Bodies, do
not convince of the Honor which is due to the Saints, and of our Protection
which they undertake, which things S. Ambrose and S. Austin in their Writings
have largly testified; not that they heard of them, as many others have done;
or that they have read of such things, as very many very grave Men have done;
but that they themselves saw them. Amb. Epist. 85. and Sermon. 95. Aug. de civit.
Dei, lib. 22. c. 8. and Epist. 137.

What need is there of many Proofs for this? If the Clothes, XXXI. The Virtue
of Relics confirms the same.
if the Handkercheifs, if the very of Shadow of the Saints before they departed
out of this Life, drove away Diseases, and restored the Sick to Health; who can
be so bold as to deny that God by the Sacred Ashes, the Bones, and other
Relics of the Saints does wonderfully work the same things?

This is showed by that dead Body, 4 Reg. 13.21.
which being happily let down into Elisha's Grave, upon the touching of his Body
immediately revived.

But that which follows, XXXII. These words contain not a distinct Commandment.
Thou shall not make to thy self a graven thing, nor every likeness which is in
Heaven, and which is in the Earth beneath, nor of those things which are in the
Waters under Earth: Thou shall not adore them, nor worship them. Some thinking
this to be another Commandment, will have the two last to have the Force of one
Commandment only^: but S. Austin dividing those last, will have these Words to
belong to the First Commandment; which Opinion because it is most celebrated in
the Church, we willingly follow. Although we have in readiness that most true
Reason, that it was fit that every one's Reward and Punishment should be joynd
with the First Commandment. Vid. Aug. super Exodus quaest. 71. and in Ps. 32.
Sermon. 2, sententia. D. Aug. de praeceptorum distinctione magis placet
Eccelesiae. Vide D. Thom. 1, 2, q. 100. art. 4.

And let no one think, that the Art of Painting, Carving or making Images is
forbid by this Commandment: XXXIII. The use of Images not against this
Commandment.
for in Scripture by God's Command, we find that there were made Figures and
Images of Cherubims and the Brazen Serpent. It remains therefore that we teach
Images to be forbidden for this Reason, that nothing should be withdrawn from
the true Worship of God, to the Worshipping of Images, as Gods.

Now as to this Commandment, XXXIV. Two things here forbidden. First to worship
Idols.
there are two VVays especially, whereby it is evident that the Majesty of God
is very grievously offended.

The One is, when Idols and Images are worshipped as Gods, or when it is
believed, that there is any Divinity, or Virtue in them, for which they are to
be worshipped; or that any thing is to be begged of them, or that any Trust is
to be put in them, as of Old the Gentiles did, who placed their Hopes in Idols,
which thing the Sacred Scriptures in many places reprove.

The Other is, Secondly, by Art to frame any likeness of the Divinty
when any one endeavors to make any Shape of the Divinity, as tho he could be
seen with bodily Eyes, or expressed in Figures. For who, as Damascen says, can
describe God, who cannot be seen, who has no Body, who can be circumscribed
with no Limits, nor described under any Figure? Which thing is more largly
explained in the Second Council of Nice. Damasc. lib. 4. de Ortho. Fid. c. 17.
Council. Nicen. 2. Act. 3.

Therefore the Apostle said excellently, Romans 1.23.
That they had changed the Glory of the incorruptible God, into the likeness of
Birds, Beasts and Serpents: For they reverenec'd all these things as Gods when
they put up their Images: wherefore the Israelites when they proclaimed before
the Image of the Calf: Exodus 24.
These are thy Gods, o Israel, which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt,
were called Idolaters, because they changed their Glory into the likeness of a
Calf which eats Hay.

When therefore the Lord forbids other Gods to be worshipped, XXXV. The meaning
of this last part of the Commandment. Isay 40.18. Act. 7.
utterly to take away all Idolatry, he forbad any Image of the Divinity to be
drawn or made in Metal or any other matter, which Esaias declaring, says, Like
to what will ye make God, or what Image will ye make for him? Now that this is
the meaning of this Commandment, besides the Writings of the Holy Fathers, who,
as has bin showed in the seventh Council, do thus interpret it; Deuteronomy. 4.16.
those words in Deuteronomy also do sufficiently declare, where Moses willing
to draw the People from Idolatry, said, Ye saw not any likeness in the Day
wherein the Lord spoke with you in Horeb out of the midst of the Fire. Which
the most wise Lawgiver therefore said, lest being led by any error, they might
make the Image of the Divinity, and give to a Creature the Honor due to God.

Moreover, XXXVI. It is lawful by some figures to shadow out the Trinity.
let no one think that any Offense is committed against Religion and the Law of
God, when any Person of the most holy Trinity is expressed by certain signs,
which have appeared as well in the Old, as in the New Testament: For there is
none so rude, as to think that the Divinity is expressed by that Image: but let
the Pastor teach that by them are declared some Properties or Actions which are
attributed to God: As when by Daniel the Ancient of Days is described siting in
a Throne, before whom the Books were opened: there was signified Gods Eternity
and infinite Wisdom, whereby he beholds all, both the Thoughts and Actions of
Men, that he might judge concerning them.

Angels also are painted in Human shape, with Wings: XXXVII. The manner of
Painting Angels approved.
that the Faithful may understand, how prone and ready they are to perform
Service of the Lord for Mankind: for they all are ministering Spirits, for them
who receive the Inheritance of Salvation.

But the shape of a Dove, XXXVIII. Figures of the holy Ghost.
and Tongues like as of Fire, which in the Gospel and in the Acts of the
Apostles signify the Properties of one Holy Ghost, are much better known than
to need a larger Explication. Heb. 1.14. Matthew. 3.16. Mar. 1.10. Luc. 3.21.
Joan 1.32. Act. 2.2.

But when Christ our Lord, XXXIX. The use of Images of Christ and of the Saints
approved.
and his most Holy and Pure Mother, and all the other Saints endu'd with Human
Nature, bore the likeness of Men: To make and honor their Images, was not only
not forbidd'n by this Commandment, but was always accounted Holy, and a most
certain Argument of a grateful mind: which thing both the Monuments of the
Apostles Times, and of the General Council, and the Writings of so many of the
most Holy Fathers, agreeing among themselves, do evidence. But the Curat shall
show, not only that it is lawful to have Images in the Church, and to give them
Honor and Worship, seeing that the Honor which is given to them, is to be
referred to the Prototype; but he shall also declare, That this has bin done to
this very day, with the great Advantage of the Faithful; Lib. 4. de fid. orth.
c. 17. Nic. Syn. passim.
as we may learn from Damascen's Book which he wrote concerning Images, and
from the Seventh Council, which is the Second Council of Nice. But because the
Enemy of Mankind, by his Deceits and Fallacies, endeavors to abuse every the
most holy Institution. But if happily any Offense shall be committed by the
People about this Matter, following the Decree of the Council of Trent, Trid.
Conc. sess. 25.
as far as may be, he shall study to correct it, and shall explain the Decree
it self also to the People, when there is occasion.

Then he shall teach the unlearned, LX. The lawful use of Images.
and those that understand not the use of Images, that Images were made to
learn the History of both Testaments, and to renew the Memory thereof; because
being stirred up with the remembrance of Divine Matters, they inflame more
earnestly to the Worship and Love of God himself: and he shall also show, that
the Images of the Saints are placed in the Churches, both that they may be
honored, and that we being warned by their Example, might conform our selves
and our Manners to their holy Lives. De cultu and usu Imaginum, vide Conc.
Nicen. 2. Act. 6. Histor. tripart. lib. 6. c. 41. Eusebius. lib. 8. Hist. Eccles.
c. 14. Cyril. lib. 6. contr. Jul. Aug. lib. 1. de consensu Evang. c. 10. Vide
item Sextam Synod. Can. 82. and Conc. Romans sub Greg. 3. and Conc. Gentiliac.
item and aliud Romans Pontif. in vita Sylvestri. Item Lactant. carm. de Pass.
Domini. Basil Orat. in S. Barlaham, Greg. Nyss. Orat. in Theod. Brud. him. de
S. Cas. and him. de S. Hippolyt. Item apud Baron. Annal. Eccles. an. 57. n.
116. and deinceps. Vide terum Aug. contr. Faust. lib. 22. c. 73.

I am the Lord, The Appendix to all the Commandments.
the Lord thy God, strong, jealous, visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon
the Children to the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and
showing mercy upon thousands in them that love me and keep my Commandments.

XLI. Two things to be explained.
There are in the last part of this Commandment two things diligently to be
expounded.

The first is, The first is the Reward.
That although for that most heinous wickedness of the breach of the first
Commandment, and the ready inclination of Men to commit it, the Punishment is
fitly laid down in this place, yet this Appendix is common to all the
Commandments: For every Law leads Men to the keeping of the Commandments by
Reward and Punishment. Hence come those so frequently repeated Promises of God
in sacred Scripture: For, to omit the Testimonies of the Old Testament, which
are almost innumerable, it is written in the Gospel, Mat. 19.17.5, 6, 7. Mat.
5.10.
If thou will enter into Life, keep the Commandments; and elsewhere, He that
does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven, he shall enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven; Mat. 6.23.
and also, Every tree which brings not forth good fruit, shall be cut down and
cast into the fire; and, Every one that is angry with his brother, shall be
guilty of the judgment; and elsewhere, If ye forgive not men, neither will your
heavenly Father forgive you your sins.

The other is, The other is Punishment.
That the Perfect are to be taught this Appendix for a far different Reason
than Carnal Men are.

For, XLII. Punishment displeases not the Perfect.
to the Perfect, who are moved by the Spirit of God, and obey him with a ready
and cheerful mind, it is like a kind of glad tidings, and a great Argument of
God's good will toward them; for they own the Care of their most loving God,
who in a manner compels them to his Worship and Reverence, sometimes with
Rewards, sometimes with Punishments; they acknowledge his infinite good will
toward them, who will command them, and use their Labor to the Glory of his
divine Name: Nor do they only acknowledge this, but they are in good hope, that
he, commanding what he pleases, will also give ability whereby they may obey
his Command.

But to the Carnal, XLIII. Punishment moves the carnal most.
who as yet are not freed from the Spirit of Bondage, and abstain from Sin more
out of fear of Punishment, than love of Virtue, the sense of this Appendix is
grievous and bitter.

Wherefore they are to be assisted with pious Exhortations,

But the Curat, as often as there is occasion to explain any Commandment, shall
propose these same things to himself.

That there are two Spurs, XLIV. Two Spurs.
as it were, to be used both to the Carnal and Spiritual, which being put in
this Appendix, do very much rouse Men up to the observation of the Law. For in
that God is called Strong, The first is. The Strong God.
it is by so much the more diligently to be explained, by how much the Flesh,
which is little moved by the Terrors of God's Threatening, oftentimes fancies to
her self diverse ways, whereby she may avoid the Wrath of God, and escape the
Punishment threatened: Now he that is verily persuaded, that God is strong,
Psalm. 138.7^
will say that of King David, Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, and whither
shall I fly from thy Presence? And sometimes also the Flesh distrusting the
Promises of God, believes the Power of the Enemy to be so great, that she
thinks her self not able to endure it. But he that by a firm^ and stable Faith,
doubting nothing, relies upon the Strength and Power of God, this Consideration
will certainly recreate and confirm; Psalm. 26.^.
for he says, The Lord is my Light and my Salvation, whom shall I fear?

But the other Spur is God's Zeal or Jealousy. For sometimes Men think that
God takes no care of Human Matters, The other is the Zeal of God.
nor whether we keep or break his Laws; whence follows a great disorder of
Life: But when we believe that God is Zealous, the Meditation hereof easily
holds us in our Duty*

Now the Jealousy which is attributed to God, XLV. What Zeal is attributed to
God.
signifies no Disturbance of Mind; but that Divine Love and Charity whereby God
suffers no Soul that goes a whoring from him, to go unpunished; but as many as
commit Fornication against him, he destroys.

God's Jealousy therefore is his most calm and most upright Justice, XLVI.
God's Zeal defined.
whereby a Soul corrupted with false Persuasions and wicked Lusts, is rejected
and cast off by God as an Adulteress.

Now we feel this Jealousy of God to be most sweet and delightful, XLVII. When
we feel God's Zeal.
when in that Jealousy is evidenced his most excellent and incredible
Good Will toward us; for neither can there be found either a more ardent Love,
or a greater and stricter Conjunction amongst Men, than that of those that are
married.

Therefore God shows how dearly he loves us,

Wherefore let the Curat teach from hence, XLVIII. With how great Zeal God is
to be worshipped.
That Men ought to be so earnestly bent upon the Worship and Honor of God, that
they may rather be rightly called Jealous, than Lovers, by his Example, who
says of himself, I am jealous with Jealousy for the Lord God of Hosts. Yea,
and let us imitate Christ himself, who says thus, The zeal of thy house has
eaten me up.

But the meaning of the Commination is to be explain^^, XLIX. The Transgressors
of the Law not unpunished. Deuteronomy. 7.9.
That God will not endure any Sinners, but either he will chastise them as a
Father, or punish them sharply and severely as a Judge. Which Moses signifying
in another place, That thou may know, says he, that the Lord thy God is the
strong God, and faithful, keeping covenant and mercy for them that love him,
and for them that keep his Commandments, Jos. ^4.19.
to a thousand generations, and forthwith recompensing those that hate him. And
Joshua: Ye cannot, says he, serve the Lord; for God is Holy and Strong, and he
hates and will not pardon your wickedness and your sins; if ye forego the Lord,
and serve strange Gods, he will turn, and will afflict you, and overthrow you.

Now the People are to be taught, L. This Point to be explained.
That the Punishment here threatened, belongs to the third and fourth Generation
of the Impious and Wicked; not that the Children always suffer the Punishments
of their Forefathers; but tho they and their Children may go unpunished, yet
all their Posterity shall not escape the Wrath and Punishment of God.

And this happened to King Josias: 2 Par. 34.27.
For when God had spared him for his singular Piety, and had granted him to be
carried to the Grave of his Ancestors in Peace, that his Eyes might not see the
Evil of the following Times, which for the Wickedness of his Grandfather
Manasseh were to come upon Judah and Jerusalem; he being dead, 4 Reg. 23.30.
the Vengeance of God fell upon his Posterity, so that he spared not even the
Children of Josiah.

But why these words of the Law are not against that Sentence pronounced by the
Prophet, An Objection answered. Ezekiel. 18.4.
The Soul that sins, it shall die, the Authority of S. Gregory, agreeing with
all the other ancient Fathers, plainly shows: for he says, Whosoever imitates
the Iniquity of a wicked Father, is also bound under his Sin; but whosoever
imitates not the Iniquity of a wicked Father, shall by no means suffer for his
Sin.

Whence it comes, that the wicked Son of a wicked Father suffers Punishment,
not only for his own Sins which he has added, but for his Father's Sins also;
seeing he is not afraid to add moreover his own Wickedness also to his Father's
Vices, whereat he knew God to be angry: And just it is, that he who under an
offended Judge fears not to imitate the wicked ways of a wicked Father, should
be forced in this present Life to suffer Punishments for the Sins of his wicked
Father also. Extat locus Greg. lib. 15. moral. c. 31. Vide Aug. Epist. 75. D.
Thom. 1, 2. q. 87. art. 8.

And then the Curat shall observe how much God's Goodness and Mercy excels his
Justice: LI. Gods Goodness overcomes his Justice.
God is angry to the third and fourth Generation, but he bestows his Mercy upon
thousands.

But in that it is said, LII. Sinners hate God.
Of them that hate me, The greatness of Sin is showed: For what can be more
wicked and abominable, than to hate the Supreme Goodness, that most excellent
Truth? Now this does therefore belong to all Sinners, because as he that has
Gods Commandments and keeps them, loves God: so he that despises the Law of the
Lord and keeps not his Commandments, is deservedly said to hate God.

But that which is last: LIII. The Law to be obeyed out of Love.
And them that love me, teaches the way and manner of keeping the Law; for it
is necessary that they that keep the Law of God, be led to the Obedience of it,
by the same Love and Charity as they bear toward God; which things must be
remembered hereafter in all the several Commandments.

The Second COMMANDMENT of the DECALOGVE.
Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain.

Although this Commandment which follows in the Second place, I. Why this
Commandment, is d^stinguish'd from the First.
be necessarily contained in the First Commandment of Gods Law, wherein we are
commanded to worship God piously and holily: For he who will have honor done
him, requires us to speak most reverently of him, and forbids the contrary,
which the Words of the Lord by Malachy plainly show: Malach. 1.16.
A Son honors his Father, and a Servant his Master; if therefore I be a Father,
where is my honor? Yet God for the weightiness of the matter would make this
Law distinct concerning the Honoring of his Divine and most Holy Name, and this
he has commanded in plain and evident Words.

Which thing ought indeed in the First place to be an Argument to the Curat, II
How diligently this Commandment to be explained.
by no means to think it enough to speak generally of this Matter; but that
this is a Point, which it is necessary that he stay longer upon, and that
whatsoever belongs to the Handling thereof, to explain it to the Faithful
distinctly, plainly and diligently. De hoc Praecept. vid. D. Thom. 2.2. q. 122.
art. 3. item and 1, 2. q. 100. art. 5.

Nor is this to be thought a needless Diligence, III. How frequently and rashly
men swear.
since there are not wanting those that are so far blinded with the darkness of
Error, that they are not afraid to treat him rudely in their talk, whom the
Angels glorify; for neither are they by the Law once declared, terrified so as
not most shamefully to dare daily to lessen the Majesty of God. For who sees
not that all things are affirmed with an Oath, that all things are stuffed with
Imprecations and Execrations? And that to so high a degree, that there is
scarce any one that either sells or buys any thing, or does any other Business
without the religious Bond of an Oath, and does not rashly use the most holy
Name of God a thousand times about the most trivial and vain matter.



But now in the Explication of this Commandment, IV. Here is a Command and a
Prohibition.
it is first to be taught, That together with that thing which the Law forbids,
there is joined a Command of those things also which Men ought to perform. Now
each of these is to be taught severally.

And First, V. What is required in this Commandment.
that those things which are to be taught, may the more easily be expounded, it
must be known what this Law requires, and then what it forbids; Now this is it
that it requires, That Gods Name be honored, and to swear holily by it: Again
this is it that it forbids; That no one despise Gods Name, that no one take it
in vain, nor swear by it falsely, or vainly, or rashly.

In that part therefore wherein we are commanded to give Honor to Gods Name,
VI. How Gods Name to be honored.
the Curat may warn the Faithful, that the Name of God, that the Letters and
Syllables of it, I say, or the naked Word alone of it self is not here
altogether to be regarded: but that we must seriously consider what that Word,
which signifies the Almighty and Eternal Majesty of the Tri-une Godhead, means.

Now from hence it is easily gathered,

But tho this be put in the singular Number. Thou shall not take the Name of
God, VII. The same honor to be given to all the Names of God.
This is not to be understood of any one Name, but of all the Names which are
used to be attributed to God: for there are many Names ascribed to God; as
Lord, Almighty, Lord of hosts, King of Kings, Strong, and others of the like
sort, which we read in Scripture, all which have the like and the same
Veneration.

And then it must be taught, VIII. We are bound to know and to honor Gods Name.
after what manner due Honor is to be given to Gods Name; for it is not fit
that any should be ignorant how very profitable and necessary it is to
Christian People in whose mouth the Prayers of God are daily celebrated.

Now tho there be many ways of honoring Gods Name, IX. By what means Gods Name
to be honored. First.
yet in those, whereof we are presently to speak, the whole force and weight of
all seems to be.

First therefore, God is honored, when in the face of all the World, we
faithfully confess him to be God and our Lord, and both acknowledge and declare
Christ to be the Author of Salvation.

As also when we give holy and diligent heed to Gods Word, Secondly.
wherein his Will is revealed; and are daily meditating thereon, and studiously
learn it, according to every ones Ability and Employment.

And again, Thirdly.
we honor and worship Gods Name, when for Duty and Religion sake we celebrate
Gods Praises, and render him singular Thanks for all things, Psalm. 20.2.
as well for Adversity as for Prosperity: For thus says the Prophet, Bless the
Lord o my Soul, and forget not all his Benefits. And there are very many of
David's Psalms, wherein with an excellent kind of Piety toward God, he most
sweetly sings the Divine Praises. There is the Admirable Example of the
Patience of Job, who when he fell into those exceeding great and horrible
Calamities, yet he never forbore to praise God with an exalted and unconquered
Soul. When therefore we are afflicted with grief of Mind or Body, with Miseries
and Troubles, let us presently turn all our Study and all the Powers of our
Souls to praise God, saying that of Job, Job. 1.21.
The Lords Name be praised.

Nor is Gods Name less honored if we faithfully implore his help, Fourthly.
to wit, that either he would free us from them, or else would give us
Constancy and Strength courageously to endure them: Psalm. 49.15.
For this the Lord requires; Call upon me, says he, in the day of tribulation,
and I will deliver thee, and thou shall honor me. Clear Examples of which kind
of Imploring God, are found both in many other places, and especially in the
26.13. and 118 Psalms.

Moreover, Fifthly.
we honor Gods Name, when for more assurance and belief we call God to be a
witness: and this way differs much from the former: For those things which we
mentioned before are of their own nature so good and excellent, that to Man
nothing can be more happy, nothing can be more desirable, than diligently to
exercise himself Night and Day in performing them: I will bless the Lord, Psalm.
33.1.
says David, at all times, his praise shall ever be in my mouth.

But tho an Oath be good, X. Why the frequent use of Swearing forbidd'n.
yet the frequent use thereof is not commendable. Now the reason of this
difference lies herein, that an Oath is appointed for this cause only, to be a
kind of Remedy of Human Frailty, and a necessary means to prove what we say.

For as it is not fit to take Physic for the Body, A Similitude.
unless there be need, and the frequent use thereof is very hurtful: so also it
is not good to use any Oath, but when there is some just and weighty cause,
which to use frequently is so far from being profitable, that indeed it is very
hurtful.

Wherefore S. Chrysostom excellently teaches, XI. Whence the Custom of
Swearing. Ad pop. Antioch. hom. 26.
That Not at the beginning of the World, but when it began to grow old, and
when Wickedness had far and wide spread it self over the whole Earth, and when
nothing contained it self in its own Place and Order, but all things being
jumbled together and troubled, were tumbled upside down, and brought into utter
Confusion; then at last after a long time that Custom of Swearing broke in upon
Men: For when Men's Perfidiousness and Wickedness was grown to that pass, that
no one could easily be brought to believe one another, then did they call God
as a Witness.

But whereas in this part of the Commandment, XII. The first way of Swearing.
the best way is to teach the Faithful how they ought to Swear piously and
holily; it must first be said, That to Swear is nothing else, but to call God
as a Witness, by what Form or Conception of Words soever it be done: For to
say, God it Witness, and by God, is the same thing.

That is also an Oath, XIII. The second way of Swearing.
when for more Belief we swear by Creatures; as by the Holy Gospel of God, by
the Cross, by the Relics of the Saints, their Name, and such like: Yet these
things of themselves give not any Strength or Authority to an Oath; but it is
God himself that does it, the Splendour of whose Divine Majesty shines forth in
those things. Whence it follows, that they who Swear by the Gospel, Swear by
God himself, whose Truth is contained and declared in the Gospel: And in like
manner they that do Swear by the Saints, who are the Temple of God, and who
believed the Truth of the Gospel, and with all Reverence obeyed it and
dispersed it abroad in all Countries and Nations.

That Oath that is made with a Curse, XIV. The third way of Swearing.
is of the same nature; such as is that of S. Paul, I call God to witness upon
my Soul: For by this means, he that swears thus, subjects himself to the
Judgment of God as to the Revenger of a Lie. Yet we deny not therefore that
some of these Forms may so be taken, as not to have the Force of an Oath; but
yet it is useful, even in these cases also, to observe what was said concerning
an Oath, and wholly to direct and reduce them to the same Rule and Order.

Now there are two kinds of an Oath: XV. An Oath Twofold. Assertory.
The First is that which is Assertory, to wit, when we religiously affirm any
thing concerning any Matter present or past, as the Apostle in the Epistles to
the Galatians: Gal. 1.20.
Behold before God, I lie not.

But the other is called Promissory, Promissory.
to which also belong Threatenings, and have Ralation to the Time to come. When
we certainly promise and confirm it, that such a thing shall be so: Of which
kind is that of David, who swearing to Bersabe his Wife, by the Lord his God,
promised that Solomon his Son should be the Heir of his Kingdom, 2 Reg. 1 17.
and succeed him in his room.

Now tho to an Oath, XVI. How many things required to a lawful Oath.
it be sufficient to use God as a VVitness, yet to make it just and holy, there
are many more things required, which are diligently to be explained; but those
things as S. Jerome testifies, Jeremy briefly reckons up, when he says: S.
Hierom. in hunc locum. Hier. 4.
Thou shall swear, the Lord lives, in Truth, and in Judgment, and in Justice.
In which words are briefly and summarily contained those things, wherein all
the Perfection of an Oath lies, to wit, Truth. Judgment and Justice.

Truth therefore has the first Place in an Oath, XVII What it is to Swear in
asserting Truth.
to wit, that what is asserted be the very Truth, and that he that swears it be
assured that it is so, not to be led to it rashly, or by light conjecture, but
by the most certain Arguments:

But the other kind of Oath, XVIII. What in Promising.
whereby we promise any thing, requires Truth in the same measure: For he that
promises any thing, ought to be so minded, that when the Time comes, he truly
perform and fulfill his Promise; nor will any honest Man ever undertake to do,
what he thinks to be against the most Holy Commandments and Will of God: but
whatsoever was lawful for him to promise or swear, he never will alter it,
being once promised; unless by chance the Condition of Matters being altered,
the things begin to be such, that now if he would keep his Word and stand to
his Promise, he might undergo the hatred and displeasure of God. But, that
Truth is necessary to an Oath, David also shows in these words; Psalm. 14.
He that swears to his neighbor, and disappoints him not.

In the second place follows Judgment: XIX. What it is to swear in Judgment.
for it is fit that an Oath should not be taken rashly and inconsiderately, but
with good counsel and advice. He therefore that is about to swear, should first
consider well, whether there be any necessity that compels him, or not; and
should carefully consider the whole matter, whether it be of such a nature as
seems to stand in need of an Oath. Let him moreover consider the Time and the
Place, and very many other Circumstances; and let him not be moved to it by
Love or Hatred, or any other violent Passion of the Mind; but by the quality
and necessity of the thing it self.

For without this Consideration and diligent Attention, XX. What a rash Oath is.
certainly the Oath must needs be rash and hasty: Of which sort is the
irreligious Affirmation of them, who in any the most trivial and vain matter,
without any Reason or Advice, burn as it were with this evil Habit.

And this almost every where we daily see done by Buyers and Sellers: Observe
and reprove.
For the one sort, that they may sell as dear as they can; and the other sort,
on the other hand, that they may buy as cheap as may be, are not afraid, even
with an Oath, either to commend or discommend the things to be bought or sold.

Since there is need therefore of Judgment and Prudence, Cornelius, That an
Oath should not be required of Children before they came to maturity, i. e.
before their Fourteenth year. 22. q. 5. c. Honestum, etc. pueri.

The other is Justice, XXI. What it is to swear in Justice.
which in Promises especially is required: Wherefore if any one promises any
thing unjust or dishonest, and sin by swearing, and in making Promises he adds
sin to sin: there is in the Gospel the Example of this thing in King Herod, who
having bound himself with a rash Oath, gave John Baptist's Head to the Dancing
Girl, Mar. 6.23.
as the Reward of her Dancing. For such was the Oath of those Jews, who, as it
is in the Acts of the Apostles, Act. 23.12.
bound themselves under a Curse on this Condition, That they would eat nothing
till they had killed Paul.

These things thus explained, XXII. When and how an Oath is lawful.
there can be no doubt but that he may safely swear, who observes all these
things, and who establishes his Oath with these Conditions, as it were with a
kind of Bulwarks.

But it is easy to prove this by many Arguments: Proved. First. Psalm. 18.8.
Deuteronomy. 6.10, 18.
For the Law of the Lord, which is spotless and holy, has commanded it; for it
says, Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve: and thou
shall swear by his Name.

And David wrote, Secondly.
All they that swear by him, shall be commended.

Besides, Thirdly.
the Sacred Scripture shows, That those Lights of the Church, the most holy
Apostles, did sometimes use an Oath; and this appears by the Epistles of the
Apostle.

Add also, Fourthly.
That the Angels themselves sometimes swear; for S. John the Evangelist, Apoc.
10.3.
in the Apocalypse, writes, That the Angel swore by him that lives for ever.

Yea, Fifthly. Heb. 6.17. Gen 22.10. Exodus 3^.
and God himself also, who is the Lord of the Angels, swears. And in the Old
Testament, in many places, God confirms his Promises by an Oath; as to Abraham,
and to David, who says thus concerning God's Oath, Psalm. 109.4.
The Lord swear, says he, and will not repent: Thou art a Priest for ever after
the Order of Melchisedec.

Nor is it hard to show, Sixthly.
That an Oath is commendable, if any one carefully consider the whole Matter,
By Reason.
and mark the beginning and end thereof. For an Oath has its beginning of
Faith, whereby Men believe God, who can neither ever be deceived himself, or
deceive others, to be the Author of all Truth, to whose Eyes all things are
open and naked, who by his admirable Providence takes care of all human
Affairs, and governs the World. Men therefore being seasoned with this Faith,
use God as a Witness of Truth, to whom not to give credit would be impious and
wicked.

But as to the End; XXIII. The End and Design of an Oath.
an Oath tends thither, and wholly has respect to this, to prove the Justice
and Innocence of Man, and to put an end to all Wranglings and Controversies;
Heb. 9.
which the Apostle also in his Epistle to the Hebrews teaches.

Nor are the Words of our Savior in S. Matthew against this sense: An
Objection. Mat. 5.3.
Ye have heard that it has been said by them of old time, Thou shall not
forswear thy self, but shall pay to the Lord all thy Oaths: But I say to you,
Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, because it is God's Throne; neither by the
Earth, because it is his Footstool; neither by Jerusalnm, because it is the
City of the great King; neither shall thou swear by thy Head, because thou
can not make one Hair white or black: but let your speech be, Yea, yea, Nay,
nay; for whatsoever is more than this, comes of evil.

For in these Words an Oath is not said to be condemned generally and
universally, Answered.
since we have already seen, that our Lord himself and his Apostles did
frequently swear: But our Lord would reprove the perverse Judgment of the Jews,
whereby they thought, that nothing was to be regarded in Swearing, but to
beware of Lying. They did therefore both swear very commonly themselves, and
required an Oath of others, and that in Matters very trivial and of no moment.
This Custom our Savior reproves and condemns, and teaches wholly to abstain
from Swearing, unless Necessity require it.

For an Oath was appointed because of human Frailty, XXIV. Why an Oath was
instituted.
and indeed it came of evil; because it shows Inconstancy, either in him that
swears, or the Contumacy of him for whose sake we swear, who cannot otherwise
be brought to believe.



And indeed when our Savior says, XXV. That place of the Gospel explained.
Mat. 5.37.
Let your speech be, Yea, yea, Nay, nay; by this manner of speaking he
sufficiently declares, that he forbids the Custom of swearing in our Discourses
of ordinary and trivial Matters: Wherefore our Lord warns us of this
especially, that we be not so easy and prone to swear: And this must
diligently be taught and inculcated into the Ears of the Faithful; for that
almost infinite Mischiefs do come from the too frequent Custom of Swearing, is
proved from the Authority of Sacred Scripture, and from the Testimonies of the
most H. Fathers. In Ecclesiasticus it is written, Ecclus 23.
Accustom not thy mouth to swear: for there are many hazards therein. Again, A
Man accustomed to swear, shall be filled with iniquity, and sorrow shall not
depart from his house. Much more may be read concerning this Matter in S.
Basil, and S. Austin in his Books contra Mendacium. And thus far of what is
Commanded: Now we are to speak of what is Forbidden. Basil. in Psalm. 14. ad
haec verba, Qui jurat proximo suo: and Aug. lib. de Mendac. 14. Vide 22. q. 2.
c. primum est.

We are forbidden to take the Name of God in vain: XXVI. A great Fault to swear
rashly.
For it appears that he binds himself under a grievous Sin, who is hurried by
Rashness, not led by Counsel, to swear. Now that this is a very grievous Sin,
these words also show: Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in
vain; as tho he would show a Reason why this is so heinous and wicked a Sin, to
wit, because thereby his Majesty is disrespected, whom we profess to be our God
and Lord.

By this Commandment therefore Men are foridden to swear falsely: XXVII. When he
that swears falsely does injury to God.
for he that will not take heed to escape so great a Sin, as falsely to call God
as a Witness, does notable injury to God; because he would charge him either
with Ignorance, while he thinks that the Truth of any thing can be kept secret
from him; or else of Dishonesty and Ill-affection, as to confirm a Lie with his
Testimony.

Now, XXVIII. Sins against this Commandment. First.
not only He swears falsely, who with an Oath affirms that to be true which he
knows to be false: Vide Aug. de Verbis Apost. Sermon. 28. and citatur 21. q. 2.
c. homines.

But he also, Secondly.
who with an Oath asserts that which,

For since a Lie is therefore a Lie, What a Lie is.
because it is produced contrary to the mind and meaning of the Soul; it is
manifest, that such an one evidently lies and is perjured.

For the like reason He also is perjured, Thirdly.
who swears that which he thinks to be true, and yet indeed it is false; unless
he used what care and diligence he could, fully to know and understand the
matter; for tho his Words agree to the sense of his Mind, yet he is guilty of
this Commandment.

And He is to be thought guilty of this Sin, Fourthly.
who promises with an Oath to do something; when notwithstanding he either
intended not to fulfill his Promise; or if he did, yet he does not indeed
perform it.

And this belongs to those also,

Moreover, Fifthly.
Sin is committed against this Commandment, if Justice be wanting, which is One
of the Three Companions of an Oath. Therefore if any one swear that he will do
some Mortal Sin, for example, that he will kill a Man, he is guilty of this
Commandment; although he declare it seriously and from his Heart, and his Oath be
true, which we said in the first place that an Oath ought to be.

To these may be added that kind of Oaths which proceed from a kind of
Contempt; Sixthly.
as when one swears that he will not obey the Evangelical Counsels, such as are
Exhortations to the Unmarried Life and Poverty; for tho no one is needs bound
to follow those Counsels, yet if any one swear that he will not obey them, by
that very Oath he despises and violates those Divine Counsels.

Besides, Seventhly.
He violats this Law, and Sins in Judgment who Swears what is true, and
believes it to be so, but is led thereto only by light and far-fetch't
Conjectures: For although the Truth do accompany an Oath of this kind, yet in the
bottom, there is in a certain manner a Falsehood: for he that swears so
carelessly, is in great danger of Perjury.

Besides, Eigthly.
he Swears falsely, who swears by false Gods: For what is more contrary to
Truth, than to call as VVitnesses, lying and false Gods, as tho they were the
true God? Vide Aug. Ep. 54.

But because the Scripture when it forbids Perjury, Ninthly. Levit. 19.22.
says, Neither shall thou pollute the Name of thy God; Disrespect is forbidd'n,
which is to be avoided in the other things, to which by Authority of this
Commandment, Honor is due: such as is the Word of God. The Majesty whereof not
only pious Men, but even the Wicked too sometimes reverence, Judic. 3.20.
as it is recorded of Eglon King of the Moabites in the History of Judges.

Now he does highly wrong God's Word, whoever he be, that stretches the Sacred
Scripture from its true and proper meaning, to establish the Opinions and
Heresies of impious Men: Of which Wickedness the Prince of Apostles warns us in
these Words: 2 Pet. 3.
There are some things hard to be understood, which the unlearned and unstable
wrest, as they do the other Scriptures, to their own Destruction.

Furthermore, Tenthly.
the Sacred Scripture is defiled by soul and dishonest Blots, when wicked Men
turn the Words and Sentences thereof, which ought to be used with all
reverence, to any Profaneness, as to Raillery, fabulous and vain Conceits,
Flatteries, Detractions, Fortune-telling, Enchantments, and such like: Of which
Sin the Sacred Synod of Trent commands to beware.

And then as they honor God, Eleventhly.
who implore his Aid and Help in their Calamities; So he denies God his due
Honor, that calls not upon him for help; whom David reproves, when he says,
They have not called upon God, Psalm. 15.5.
they tremble for fear; where no Fear was.

But they entangle themselves in a far more detestable Sin, Twelfthly.
who with an impure and defiled mouth presume to curse and blaspheme the Holy
Name of God, which is to be blessed and extolled by all Creatures with the
highest Praises: or even the Name of the Saints that reign with God.

Which Sin is verily of so high and cursed a Nature, 3 Reg. 21.13. Job. 1.12.29.
when the Discourse is of Blasphemy, uses the word Benediction.

But because the terror of Pain and Punishment is used very much to restrain
Men from the Liberty of Sinning; XXIX. The Appendix to the second Commandment.
Therefore the Curat, the better to stir up the minds of Men, and more easily
to prevail with them to keep this Commandment, shall diligently explain the
other Part of it, Exodus 27.
which is, as it were, the Appendix, For the Lord will not hold him guitless
that takes his Name in vain.

And first he may teach, XXX. Why Threats joined to this Commandment.
that it was very reasonably done, to join Threatenings to this Commandment,
that so both the weight of the Sin, and the goodness of God toward us, who is
not delighted with Men's Destruction, might be acknowledged; that we might not
undergo his Wrath and Displeasure, he terrifies us by these saving Threatenings,
to the end, that we may rather experience his Kindness than his Displeasure.

The Curat may press this Point, XXXI. What the Curats are to do. First.
and may insist earnestly upon it, that the People may know the grievousness of
the Sin, and loath it the more heartily, and use the greater diligence and
caution against it.

He may further show, Secondly.
how prone and ready Men are to commit this Sin: So that it was not enough to
establish a Law about it, without adding Threatenings also. For it is incredible
how profitable this Consideration is.

For as nothing is so hurtful as Carelessness and Security of Mind: Thirdly.
So the knowledge of our own Weakness is very profitable.

And then he may also show, XXXII. What mischiefs the Transgression of the
second Commandment brings.
that there is no certain Punishment appointed of God, but only that threatens
in general, that whosoever entangle themselves in this Sin, shall not go
unpuish'd.

Wherefore, the various Punishments wherewith we are daily afflicted, ought to
warn us of this Sin. For we may easily conjecture hence, that Men fall into
very great Calamities, because they obey not this Commandment: The
Consideration whereof it is likely will make them more wary for the Time to
come. Let the Faithful therefore being terrified with a Holy Fear with all
their endeavor avoid this Sin: Mat. 12.36.
For if an Account must be given in the last Judgment of every idle word; what
shall be said concerning the most heinous Crimes, which carry in them a great
Spite and Contempt of Gods Name?

The Third COMMANDMENT of the DECALOGVE.
Remember that thou sanctify the Sabbath Day.

Six Days shall thou labor, and do all thy Work.

But the seventh Day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God.

Thou shall not do every work therein, thou and thy Son, and thy Daughter, and
thy Servant, and thy Maid, thy Cattle and the Stranger that is within thy
gates: For in six Days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all things
that are in them, and he rested in the Seventh Day, therefore the Lord blessed
the Sabbath Day, and sanctified it.

IN this Commandment of the Law, I. What is commanded in this third Commandment.
the Outward Worship which we owe to God, is rightly and orderly appointed:
For this is a kind of Fruit as it were of the former Commandment: Because, whom
we devoutly worship inwardly, being led by the Faith and Hope we have in him,
we cannot choose but honor him with external Worship and render him thanks.
Vide Trid. Decr. de ciborum delectu, and festu diebus. sess. ult. sub finem,
Item D. Thom. 2.2. q. 122. art. 4 item de Consec. did. 3. multis capitibus.

And because these things cannot easily be done by those who are occupi'd with
worldly Businesses, II How indulgent God is.
there is a certain Time appointed, wherein they may conveniently be done.

Since therefore this Commandment is of that very kind, III. Very useful often
to explain this Commandment.
as brings forth admirable and profitable Fruit: It much concerns the Curat to
be very diligent in explaining thereof: And to beget an ardent Study therein,
the first word of this Commandment, Remember, has great Force For as the
Faithful ought to remember such a Commandment: So it is the Office of the
Pastor both by teaching and admonishing, often to bring it into their
Remembrance.

But how greatly it concerns the Faithful to obey this Commandment is perceived
from hence, IV. How profitable to observe this Commandment.
That by a diligent Observance of this, they are more easily induced to the
keeping of the other Commandments of the Law.

For since among other things which they ought to do on Festival Days, V. Why
we must come to Church on Holy Days.
they have need to come to Church to hear Gods Word, and when they have
learned what the Will of God is, that they also follow it, that with their
whole Heart they may keep the Law of the Lord: Wherefore in Sacred Scripture,
the Worship and Celebration of the Sabbath is very frequently commanded, Exodus
16.20.31. Lev. 16.19.23.^6. Deuteronomy 3. ^s. 66.^4. Hier. 1. ^ze. 10.22.46.
as we may see in Exodus, Leviticus, Deuteronomy, and in the Prophecies of
Isayah, Jeremy and Ezekiel: In all which places there is given a Commandment
concerning this Worship of the Sabbath. De praedic. verbi Dei. Vide Trid.
Sess. 5. c. 2. Vide and singularem hac de re libellum S. Caroli Borrom. in
actis Eccles. Mediol. Vide etiam acta Eccles. Bononiens.

But Princes and Magistrates are to be exhorted to help the Prelates of the
Church with their Authority, VI. The Magistrates Duty to promote Gods worship.
in those things especially which belong to the Support and Increase of this
Worship of God, and to command the People to obey the Precepts of the Priests.

Now as to the explaining of this Commandment, VII. The way of explaining his
Commandment.
pains must be taken to teach the Faithful in what things this Commandment
agrees with the rest, and in what it differs from them: For by this means they
shall know the cause and reason why we honor and keep Holy, not the Sabbath,
but the Lord's Day.

There seems therefore a manifest Difference; VIII. How this Commandment
differs from the other Nine.
because the other Commandments of the Decalogue are natural and perpetual, nor
may they be alterd for any Reason: Whence it comes to pass, that tho Moses's
Law be abrogated, yet Christians observe all the Commandments contained in the
Two Tables.

Which they do, Moses commanded so; but because they are agreeable to Nature, by
Virtue whereof Men are driven to observe them.

Now this Commandment of keeping Holy the Sabbath, IX. This Command, as to
time, is ceremonial.
if we consider the appointed time, it is not fixd and constant, but alterable;
nor does it belong to Manners, but to Ceremonies: Nor is it Natural because we
are not instructed or taught by Nature, on that Day rather than on any other,
to give Worship to God: But from that Time when the People of Israel were
delivered from the Bondage of Pharaob, they kept Holy the Sabbath Day.

But the Time when the Observance of the Sabbath was to be taken away, X. Why
and when the Sabbath Day ought to be changed into the Lord's Day.
was the same with that wherein the rest of the Jewish Worship and antiquated
Ceremonies were removed, to wit at Christ's Death: For since those Ceremonies
were as it were, certain shadows or images of the Light and Truth; it was
therefore but necessary, that at the coming of that Light and Truth, which is
Jesus Christ, they should be removed: Gal. 4.10.
for which cause S. Paul to the Galatians, when he reproved the Observers of
the Mosaical Rites, wrote thus: Ye observe Days, and Months, and Times, and
Years: I am afraid of you, lest happily I have bestowed on you labor in vain.
Col. 2.16.
On which score he wrote also to the Colossians. And thus much concerning the
Difference.

But this Commandment agrees with the rest, XI. Wherein this Commandment agrees
with the rest.
not in Rites and Ceremonies, but because it has something which belongs to
Manners and the Law of Nature. For God's Worship and Religion, which is
expressed in this Commandment, has its Being from the Law of Nature; since it
is natural to spend some Hours about those things which belong to the Worship
of God; whereof this is an Argument, That among all Nations we see there were
certain appointed Days, and those Public ones too, which were consecrated to
the performance of Sacred and Divine Matters: For it is natural to Man to allow
some certain Time to those things that are necessary to the discharge of
Business, as to the Sleep and Rest of the Body and such like.

And as to the Body, Observe this Similitude.
so by the same Natural Reason it is that we allow some Time to the Mind, that
she may refresh her self with Divine Contemplation: And therefore since there
ought to be some part of Time for performance of Divine Matters, and giving due
Worship to God, this belongs to the Commandments of Manners.

For which cause the Apostles decreed to consecrate the First day of the Seven,
XII. Why the Sabbath changed into the Lords day. Apoc. 1.10. 1 Cor. 16.2.
to Divine Worship, which they called The Lord's Day: For S. John in the
Apocalypse makes mention of the Lord's Day; and the Apostle, on the Moon of the
Sabbaths, which is the Lord's Day, as S. Chrysostom interprets it, commands
Collections to be made, that we may know, that even then already the Lord's Day
was accounted Holy. Chrysostom. Hom. 13. in Corinth. Amb. item and Theophylact.
Vide etiam Can. Ap. c. 67. Ignat. Epist. ad Magnes. Just. Apol. 2. Tertul. in
Apol c. 16. and de Coron. Milit. c. 3. and de Idol. c. 14. and Cypr. Epist. 33.
Clement. Alexand. l. 5. Strom. satis ante finem. Orig. Hom. 7. in Exodus

And now that the Faithful may know what they ought to do on that Day, XIII.
Four Parts in this Commandment.
and from what Actions they ought to abstain; it will not be amiss for the
Curat diligently, and to a Word, to explain this Commandment, which may well be
divided into Four Parts.

The First therefore in general proposes what is prescribed in these words,
XIV. What the Words teach.
Remember that thou sanctify the Sabbath Day. Now for this cause, in the
beginning of the Commandment, is that word Remember fitly added, because the
Sanctification of that Day belongs to Ceremonies.

Of which thing it seemed the People are to be admonished; First.
since tho the Law of Nature teaches, that at some time or other God is
religiously to be worshipped, yet it has not appointed any certain Day whereon
this ought chiefly to be done.

Moreover, Secondly.
the Faithful are to be taught, that from those Words may be gathered the Way
and Manner how it is convenient to do Work all the Week; to wit, so as always
to have regard to the Holy Day; on which Day seeing an Account is to be given
to God, as it were, of our Works and Actions, it must needs be, that we do such
Works as will neither be rejected by the Judgment of God, and which, 1 Reg. 2.5.
as it is written, shall not wound or offend our own Conscience.

Lastly, Thirdly.
We are taught, which we ought carefully to observe, to wit, That there are
not wanting Occasions to make us forgetful of this Commandment, either being
led by the Example of others that neglect it, or out of love to Shows and
Plays, whereby we are very much led away from the holy and religious Observance
of this Day.

And now come we to the Signification of the Sabbath. Sabbath is an Hebrew
word, XV. What the Sabbath is.
which in English signifies a Cessation; to keep Sabbath is therefore called in
English, Genesis 23. Exodus 20.12. Deuteronomy. 5.14.
to cease and rest. In which Signification the Seventh day was called by the
name of Sabbath; because the whole World being finished and perfected, God
rested from all his Work which he had done: for so the Lord, in Exodus, calls
this Day.

But afterward, Luke said; Luc. 18.12.
I fast twice in a Sabbath. And thus much of the Signification of Sabbath.

Now the Sanctification of the Sabbath in Sacred Scripture is a Cessation from
all Bodily Labor and Business; XVI. What it is to sanctify.
as plainly appears from these words of the Commandment which follow: Thou
shall not work. Nor does it signify that only, (for otherwise it would be
sufficient to say in Deuteronomy, Observe the Day of the Sabbath): Deuteronomy. 12.
But seeing that in the same Place it is added, to sanctify it, by this word
is showed, that the Day of the Sabbath is Religious, and consecrated to divine
Actions and holy Duties

We therefore do then fully and perfectly celebrate the Sabbath Day, XVII. The
true Sanctification of the Sabbath. Esaias 58.13.
when we perform Duties of Piety and Religion to God: And that this is
evidently a Sabbath, which Esaias calls delightful, because Holy Days are, as it
were, the Delights of God and Pious Men. Wherefore, if to this religious and
holy Observance of the Sabbath, we add Works of Mercy, Esaias 58.6.
surely they are many and very great Rewards, which in the same Chapter are
proposed to us.

The true and proper Sense of this Commandment therefore is, XVIII. What the
true sense of this Commandment is.
That Man both in Soul and Body might be careful to set apart some certain
determined Time, from Bodily Business and Labor, to worship and reverence God
devoutly.

Now in the next part of this Commandment is showed, XIX. What the second Part
of the Commandment requires.
That the Seventh day is dedicated by God to Divine Worship; for thus it is
written; Six days shall thou labor, and do all thy work; but the Seventh day is
the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. The meaning of which words is. That Sabbath is
consecrated to the Lord, and that on that Day we pay him our Duties of
Religion, and that we know the Seventh day to be Sign of the Lord's Rest.

Now this Day is dedicated to God, XX. Why this Day is dedicated to God.
because it was not fit that the rude People should have the power of choosing
the Time after their own Will, lest happily they might imitate the Religion of
the Egyptians.

Therefore of the Seven days the last was chosen for the Worship of God: XXI.
Why God chose One Day.
Which thing indeed is full of Mystery. Wherefore in Exodus, and in Ezekiel,
the Lord calls it a Sign: See therefore, says he, that ye keep my Sabbath.

For it is a Sign between me and you in your Generations, The First Reason.
that ye may know, that I am the Lord who sanctify you. It was a Sign
therefore which showed, that Men ought to dedicate themselves to God, and to
keep themselves holy to him, since we see even the very Day to be dedicated to
him: for that Day is Holy, because then especially Men ought to exercise
Holiness and Religion.

And then it is a Sign and Monument, The Second.
as it were, of the wonderful Creation of the World.

And it was moreover given as a Sign to remember and warn the Israelites, The
Third.
that they might remember, that they were delivered and freed by God's help
from the most hard Yoke of the Egyptian Bondage. And this the Lord showed in
these words: Deuteronomy. 5.25.
Remember that thou also did serve in Egypt, and the Lord thy God brought
thee out thence, with a strong hand and stretched-out arm; therefore he has
commanded thee to keep the Sabbath Day.

The Fourth.
And it is also a Sign both of the Spiritual and Eternal Sabbath.

Now the Spiritual Sabbath consists in a holy and mystical kind of Rest; XXII.
What the Spiritual Sabbath is.
to wit, when the old Man being buried with Christ, is renewed to Life, and
studiously exercises it self in those Actions which are agreeable to Christian
Piety: Ephesians. 5 2.
For they who sometimes were Darkness, but now are Light in the Lord, ought to
walk as Children of the Light, in all Goodnes^, Justice, and Truth, and not to
communicate with the unfruitful Works of Darkness.

But the Heavenly Sabbath (as S. Cyril says upon that place of the Apostle,
XXIII. What the Heavenly Sabbath is. S. Cyril lat. l. 4 in Jo. c. 5 1.
There remains therefore a Rest to the People of God) is that Life wherein we
shall live with Christ, and enjoy all good things, and Sin be utterly plucked
up by the Roots, according to that, Esa. 53.8.
There shall no Lion nor evil Beast go up thither; but there shall be a pure
way, and it shall be called Holy: For the Soul of the Saints in the Vision of
God gets all good things. Wherefore the Pastor must exhort and encourage the
Faithful with these words; Heb. 4.2.
Let us make haste to enter into that Rest.

Now besides the Seventh day, XXIV. That Jews had other Feasts besides the
Sabbaths.
the Jews had other Festival and Sacred Days appointed by God's Law, whereby
the Memory of their greatest Benefits was renewed. Of those other Feasts see
Levit. 23. Number. 29. Deuteronomy. 16. and if you would know the moral meaning of the
Feasts of this kind, see Cyril de Adoratione in spiritu and verit. lib. 17. D.
Thom. 1.2. q. 102. art. 4. ad. 10.

But it pleased the Church of God, XXV. Why the Sabbath changed. The First
Reason.
that the Worship and Celebration of the Sabbath Day should be transferred to
the Lord's Day

For, as on that Day the Light did first shine upon the World; so by the
Resurrection of our Redeemer, which opened us an Entrance to Eternal Life,
which happened on that Day, our Life was recalled out of Darkness into Light; and
for this cause the Apostles would have it called The Lord's Day.

Besides, The Second Reason.
in Sacred Scripture we find that this was a Solemn Day, because therein the
Creation of the World began, and because the Holy Ghost was given to the
Apostles.

But the Apostles in the beginning of the Church, XXVI. Why other Feasts
apopointed.
and aftewards in the sollowing Times our Holy Fathers appointed other
Holy Days, that we might devoutly and holily call to remembrance God's Benefits.

Now among these are to be reckoned as the most remarkable, XXVII. The Order of
Holy Days.
those Days that are consecrated to Religion for the Mysteries of our
Redemption, and then those that are dedicated to the most Holy Virgin Mother,
is praised, due Honor done to them, and the Faithful stirred up to the
Imitation of them.

And because to the keeping of this Commandment, XXVIII. Idleness forbidd'n.
that part of it has great Force, which is expressed in these words, Six Days
shall thou labor; but the Seventh Day is the Sabbath of God, The Curat ought
diligently to explain that part. For from these words, it may be gathered, That
the Faithful are to be admonished, that they lead not their Life in Sloth and
Idleness: But rather being mindful of the Apostles Advice, 1 These. 4.11.
That every one do his own business, and labor with his hands, as he commanded.

Besides, XXIX. No servile work to be put off to the Lords Day.
in this Commandment the Lord requires, that In Six Days we do our Work. Lest
any of those things which ought to be done on the other Days of the Week,
should be put off to the Holy Day, and so the Mind be called off from the care
and study of Divine matters.

In the next place, XXX. What the third part of the Commandment forbids.
the third Part of the Commandment is to be explained, which in a manner shows
how we ought to keep Holy the Sabbath Day: But especially it explain's what we
are forbidden to do on that Day; wherefore says the Lord: Thou shall not do any
Work therein, thou and thy Son and thy Daughter, thy Servant and thy Maid, thy
Cattle and the Stranger that is within thy Gates.

By which Words we are taught, XXXI. Whatever withdraws our mind from the
divine Worship, is forbidd'n.
first wholly to avoid whatsoever may hinder the Worship of God: For it may
easily be perceived, that every kind of servile Work is forbidden, not because
it is naturally, either base or evil; but because it withdraws our mind from
the Worship of God, which is the End of this Commandment.

Where, Note, and I teach this.
the Faithful are the rather to avoid those Sins, which not only call off our
Minds from the Study of Divine matters, but wholly separate us from the Love of
God. Vid. Aug. tract. 3. in Joan. and in Psalm. 31. Sermon. and lib. de december
chordis. c. 3.

Yet those Actions and those Works which belong to Divine Worship, XXXII.
What works are not forbid'n on Holy Days. The first sort.
although they be servile, as to cover or deck the Altar, to adorn the Churches
for some Festival Days, and our like, are not forbidd'n: and therefore the Lord
says, The Priests in the Temple violate the Sabbath, and yet are without Sin.

Nor is it to be thought, The second sort.
that the doing of those things, which otherwise will be lost, if not done on
the Holy Day, are forbidden by this Commandment, even as also it is permitted
by the Sacred Canons.

There are many other things which our Lord in the Gospel has declared, The
third sort.
may be done on Holy Days, which the Curat may easily observe in S. Matthew and
S. John.

But that nothing may be omitted, XXXIII. Cattle not to be part to labor on
Holy Days.
by the doing whereof, the Sanctification of the Sabbath may be hindered, here
is mention made of Cattle: by which sort of living Creatures Men are hindered
from keeping the Sabbath: For if on the Sabbath Day the use of Cattle be
designed to the doing of any Work, the Labor of Man is also necessary to make
them work. The Beast therefore can do no work of it self, but helps the Man who
manages him: But on that Day it is not lawful for any to do work, therefore not
for the Cattle whose Labor Men make use of for their work.

This Commandment requires also, XXXIV. Cruel y to Cattle forbidd'n.
that if God would have Men to spare the Labor of their Cattle, they ought
surely to be so much the more wary that they be not cruel to them, whose Labor
and Industry they use.

Nor ought the Curat to omit, XXXV. What to be done on Holy Days. To be present
at Ma s.
but diligently to teach, in what Works and Actions Christians ought to
exercise themselves on Holy Days.

Of which kind are these: To come to Gods Church, and to be there present at
the Holy Sacrifice of Mass, with a sincere and devout Attention of Mind. Conc.
Agath. c. 47. Aurel. c. 8. Tribur. c. 35. vide de consec. did. 1. capite
Missas, and cum ad celebrandas. and, omnes Fideles.

Often to make use of the Sacraments of the Church, To frequent the Sacraments.
which were instituted for our Salvation, and to cure the VVounds of our Souls.
Aug. de Eccle. dogm. c. 53. and citatur de cons. did. 2. c. quotidie.

Nor is there any thing which can be either more seasonable or better for
Christians, To confess Sins.
than often to confess their Sins to the Priests: For doing of which the Curat
may exhort the People, taking for clearing of this matter, a Pattern and
Example from those things which have already in their proper place bin
delivered, and taught in the Sacrament of Penance.

Nor shall he only stir up the People to that Sacrament; To receive the
Eucharist.
but he shall diligently again and again exhort them to it, that they may
frequently receive the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist.

Moreover, To hear Sermons.
the Sacred Sermons are diligently and attentively to be heard by the Faithful:
For there is nothing les^ to be endured, nor indeed is there any thing so
unworthy, as to despise or negligently to hear Christ's Word. Justin Apol. 2.
and ex Actis Apost. c. 20.7. Aug. lib. 50. Hom. hom. 26. and citatur 1. q. l.
cap. interroga.

Also the Exercise and Study of the Faithful in Prayers, To pray to, and praise
God.
and Praises of God, ought to be frequent.

And hereof a chief care should be, To be present at Catechizing.
diligently to learn those things, which belong to the Institution of a
Christian Life.

And let him exercise himself in those Duties which contain Christian Piety, To
do works of Mercy.
by giving Alms to the Poor and Needy, by visiting the Sick, and piously
comforting those that are in Heaviness and Affliction: Jac. 1.
For as S. James says, Pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father is
this, To visit the fatherless and Widows in their tribulation. So the ancient
Christians did, as do testify Justin. apol. 2. Tertul. in apol. and in lib. ad
Martyrs, and in lib. 2. ad Vxorem, prope finem.

From what has bin said, XXXVI. The fourth part of this Commandment.
it is easy to gather, what things are committed contrary to the Rule of this
Commandment.

And let the Curat reckon it as his Duty to gather Reasons and Arguments
strongly to persuade the People with their utmost Study, XXXVII. How just it is
to observe the Festivals.
Care and Diligence to keep the Law of this Commandment: And to this end it
will be very useful for the People to understand and perceive plainly, how just
and agreeable to Reason it is, that we should have some certain Days which we
may bestow wholly upon Divine Worship, and wherein we may acknowledge, worship
and venerate our Lord, from whom we have received most excellent and
innumerable Benefits.

For if he had commanded us every Day to render him the Worship of Religion,
Vide de Consecr. did. 1. and in Decret. Titul. de Feriis and Conc. Matisc. 2.
c. 1. and 37. Tribur. c. 35. Ignat. in Epist. ad Philip. Leon. sermon. 3. de
Quadrag. August. Sermon. 251. de tempore.

And then the Curat may show, XXXVIII. How good and profitable it is to observe
this Commandment.
how great the Virtue of this Commandment is, since those who truly observe it,
seem to be in the Presence of God, and to speak freely with him: For in making
Prayers we both contemplate the Majesty of God, and freely talk with him: And
in hearing the Preachers, we receive the Voice of God, which throw their Labor,
who preach of Divine Matters holily and devoutly, reaches even to our Ears: And
then we adore Christ our Lord present in the Sacrifice of tile Altar; and these
are the good things which they enjoy especially, who diligently obey this
Commandment.

But those who altogether neglect this Law, XXXIX. How great a Sin to break
this Commandment.
seeing that they obey not God and his Church, and hear not his Commandments,
are Enemies both of God and of his Holy Laws: which may be observed from hence;
because this Precept is of such a kind, as may be observed without any pains.
For since God imposes no labor upon us, which yet were it the hardest in the
World, we ought to undergo for his sake, but only commands us to be free and
quiet on the Holy Days from wordly cares; it is a sign of great rashness to
refuse Obedience to this Commandment: Hereof the Punishments which God has
inflicted upon those that violated it, Numb. 1.15.
ought to be for an Example to us, as we may see from the Book of Numbers.

That therefore we may not run into Gods Displeasure, Remember, and to lay
before our Eyes those mighty Profits and Advantages, which, as has been showed
before, may be had by the ^bservance of Holy Days: And many other things
belonging to the same purpose, which a good and diligent Pastor can largely and
fully discuss, as Occasion shall require.

The Fourth COMMANDMENT of the DECALOGVE.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother that thou may live long upon the Land which
the Lord thy God shall give thee.

SInce the highest Virtue and Dignity is in the former Commandments; I. How
this Commandment agrees with the former.
those which we now proceed upon, because they are very necessary, rightly
claim the next place: For those directly have Regard to God as their End; but
these teach us Charity toward our Neighbor; although at the long Run, they lead
to God himself, that is, to that ultimate End, for the sake whereof we love our
Neighbor: Matt. 22.39. Mar. 12.31.
wherefore Christ our Lord said, that those two Commandments of loving God and
our Neighbor, are like one to the other. Vide Aug. in Psalm. 32. Sermon. 1. item
lib. 3. de Doctr. Christ. cap. 10. and lib. 50. Hom. hom. 38. D. Thom. 2.2.
quaest. 17. art. 8.

Now it can hardly be expressed how great Advantages this Point has, II. The
Love of God shines forth in the Love of our Parents. 1 John 6.20.
since it both bears its own fruits, and those large and excellent; and is as
it were a Sign, whereby the Obedience and Duty of the First Commandment is
apparent. He that loves not his Brother, says S. John, whom he sees, how can he
love God, whom he sees not? After the same manner, if we do not Reverence and
Honor our Parents whom we ought to love (...) to God, seeing they are almost
always in our Sight, what Honor, what Worship will we give to God the Supreme
and Best Parent, who is above our Sight? Whence it is plain, that both
Commandments agree among themselves.

Now the use of this Commandment is very large: III How large this Commandment
is.
For besides those that have begotten us, there are many other besides whom we
ought to Honor as Parents, by reason either of their Power, or Dignity or
Profitableness, or some other excellent Function or Office. Besides, it eases
the Labor of Parents and Superiors: For seeing their chief Care is, that those
whom they have in their Power, live well and agreeably to the Divine Law; this
Care will be very easy if all Men understood, that even by Gods Authority and
Admonition, the greatest Honor is to be given to Parents.

Which that we may do, it is needful to know a kind of Difference between the
Commandments of the First, and those of the Second Table. These things
therefore are first to be explained by the Curat; and first of all let him
Teach, That the Divine Laws of the Decalogue, were cut in Two Tables: In one of
which, as we are taught by the Holy Fathers, those Three were contained, which
have already been explained; but the rest were included in the other Table.
Vide Clem. Alexand. lib. 6. Strom. satis ante finem. August. in Exodus q. 71.
and Epist. 119. cap. 11. D. Thom. 1.2. q. 100. art. 4.

And this Description was very fit for us, IV. Mark this Reason.
that the very Order of the Commandments might distinguish the Reason of them:
For whatsoever in Sacred Scripture is commanded by the Divine Law, it arises
from one of these Two Kinds: For in every Duty our Love either toward God, or
toward Man is seen. Now the Three first Commandments teach our Love toward
God: But that which belongs to the Conjunction and Society of Men, is contained
in the other Seven Commandments. Wherefore it was not without Reason, that such
a Distinction was made, that (...) Commandments (...) to the First and others
to the Last Table.

For in the Three first Commandments, V. The first Difference betwixt the
Commandments of the first and second Table.
whereof has bin spoken, God, who is the Supreme Good, is as it where the
subject Matter which they handle; but in the rest, the good of our Neighbor. In
the First is proposed our greatest Love, in the rest our next Love; the First
respect their End, the rest those things that are referred to the End. Vide
Aug. in Psalm. 32. Ser. 1. D. Thom. 22. q. 122. art. 1 and 2. and in opusc. 7.
c. p. de primo praecept.

Besides, The second difference.
the Love of God depends thereupon. For God is of himself, and not for the sake
of any other thing, to be loved above all things; but the Love of our Neighbor
has its beginning from our Love of God, and is to be directed to it, as to a
certain Rule: For if we account our Parents Dear, if we obey our Masters, if we
reverence our Betters, we must do it specially for this Cause, because God is
their Procreator, and would have them above others, by whose Labor he rules and
defends the rest. Who, seeing he requires it of us, to reverence such kind of
persons, we ought therefore to do it to them, who by God are dignfied with this
Honor: Whence it comes to pass, that the Honor we have for our Parents, we seem
to have it for God rather than for Men. For so it is in S. Matthew, when
mention is made of Observance to Speriors; Mat. 10.40.
He that receives you, receives me: And the Apostle, in his Epistle to the
Ephesians, Ephesians. 6.5.
teaching Servants; Servants, says he, give obedience to your Masters according
to the Flesh, with fear and trembling, in the simplicity of your heart, as to
Christ; not with eye-service, as pleasing Men; but as the Servants of Christ:
Vide Aug. lib. 3. de Doctr. Christ. c. 12. and l. 4. Confess. c. 9, 10, 11, 12.
Prosper. l. 3. de Vita contempl. c. 13. Bernard: de Diligendo Deo.

Add hereto, The third Difference.
That no Honor, no Piety, no Worship is given to God, that is worthy enough,
toward whom our Love may be infinitely increased: And therefore it is necessary
that our Love toward him grow more ardent (...) by his own Commandment we
ought to love with all our Heart, Deuteronomy. 6.5.
with all our Soul, Luc. 10.27.
and with all our Strength: But the Love we bear to our Neighbor is bounded
within its proper Limits; Mat. 22.32.
for the Lord commands us to love our Neighbor as our selves.

But if any one exceed these Limits, VI.
so as to love his Neighbor equally with God, If any one come to me, Luc. 14.26.
says our Lord, and hates not his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Children,
and Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and his own Life also, he cannot be my
Disciple. According to which sense it is also said, Luc. 9.60.
Suffer the Dead to bury their Dead; when one would first go bury his Father,
and afterward follow Christ. The Explication of which thing is more clear in
S. Matthew; Mat. 10.37.
Ho that loves Father or Mother more than me, is not worthy of me.

Nor is it yet to be doubted, VII. How Parents to be loved.
but that Parents are highly to be loved and observed: But yet, in the first
place, it is necessary to Piety, to pay the chief Honor and Worship to God, who
is the Father and Creator of all; and so to love our mortal Parents, that the
whole force of our Love he referred to our Heavenly and Everlasting Father.

But if at any time the Commandments of Parents are against the Commandments of
God, VIII. When Parents not to be obeyed.
there is no doubt but that Children are to prefer the Will of God before the
Pleasure of their Parents, being always mindful of that Divine Sentence, Act.
5.29.
We must obey God rather than Man.

Which things being explained, IX. What it is to Honor.
the Curat shall interpret the words of the Commandment. And first he shall
show what it is to Honor. And it is to think honorably of some one, and very
highly to esteem of all that is his.

Now, X. How sitly the word Honor is here used.
to this Honor, all these things are joined; Love, Observance, Obedience, and
Worship or Reverence. Now, in the Law this word Honor is excellently placed,
rather than that of Love or Fear; although Parents are very much to be loved and
feared: For he that loves, does not always observe and reverence; and he that
fears, does not always love: But whomsoever a Man honors from his Heart, him he
also loves and fears.

When the Curat has explained these things, XI. First, They are called Fathers
that beget.
he shall then treat concerning Fathers, and who they are that may be called by
this Name. For tho the Law speak of those Fathers chiefly of whom we were
begotten, yet this Name belongs to others also, as we easily gather from very
many places of Holy Scripture.

Besides those therefore that begat us, Secondly, The Prelates of the Church and
Priests.
there are other sorts also of Fathers in Sacred Scripture, as we touched
before; to all which their proper Honor is due. First then, the Rulers of the
Church, the Pastors and Priests, are called Fathers; as it is manifest from the
Apostle, who writing to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4.14.
says, I write not these things to shame you; but I warn you, as my most dear
Children: For tho you had ten thousand Instructers in Christ, yet not many
Fathers; for in Christ Jesus I begat you through the Gospel. And in Ecclesiasticus
it is written, Ecclus 44.1.
Let us praise Men glorious, and who were our Fathers in their Generation.

And then those are called Fathers to whom is committed the Government, Thirdly
Magistrate. ^^
Magistracy, or Power, who govern the Commonwealth; so Naamam was called by his
Servants, Father.

Furthermore, Fourthly, Tutors and Masters.
We call them Fathers, to whose Care, Trust, Honesty, and Wisdom others are
committed. Of this kind are Tutors and Guardians, Teachers and Masters:
Wherefore the Sons of the Prophets called Elijah and Elisha, Father. 1 Reg. 5.
4 Reg. 2. 4 Reg. 13.

Lastly, Fifthly, The Aged.
We call Old Men and Aged, Fathers, whom we ought also to reverence.

And let this be a chief Matter in the Precepts of the Curat, XII. Why Parents
are to be honored.
to teach, That Fathers of what kind soever, but especially those of whom we
were begotten, are to be honored by us; concerning whom the Divine Law makes
special mention.

For they are, Here there are Ten Reasons.
certain Images of the Immortal God, and in them we behold the Image of our own
Beginning. Life is given us by them; God made use of them to bestow on us Mind
and Soul; by them being brought to the Sacraments, and trained up to Religion,
to Civil and Manly Education, we are taught Integrity and Holiness of Manners.
Of the Duties of Children toward their Parents, Vide Antonium Augustinum, lib.
10. tit. 19.

And let the Curat teach, XIII. Here is rightly men son made of Mother.
That the Name of Mother is deservedly expressed in this Commandment, that we
may consider the Benefits and Merits of a Mother toward us, with how great
Care and Trouble she carried us in her Womb, with how great Labor and Grief she
brought us forth and bred us up.

Moreover, XIV. The first Honor due to Parents.
Parents are so to be observed, that the Honor which we pay them may be seen to
proceed from our Love and the inmost sense of our Soul; to whom this Office is
due, especially seeing they are so well affected toward us, as to refuse no
Labor, no Striving, no Dangers for our sakes; and nothing more pleasant can
happen to them, than to find that they are dear to their Children, whom they
love very dearly. Joseph when he was in Egypt, Genesis 46.19.
was next to the King in Honor and Wealth; yet he honorably entertains his
Father, 3 Reg. 2.19.
when he came into Egypt. And Solomon rose up to meet his Mother, and did
reverence to her, and placed her in the Royal Throne on his right hand.

There are other Offices of Honor which ought to be done to Parents; The Second.
for then also we honor them, when we humbly beg of God, that all things may
succeed well and prosperously to them, that they may be very much loved and
esteemed among Men, and very acceptable also to God and his Saints that are in
Heaven.

Again, The Third.
We honor our Parents, when we do according to their Will and Pleasure; to
which Solomon persuades: Prove. 1.8.
Hear, says he, my Son, the Instruction of thy Father, and forego not the Law
of thy Mother; that Grace may be added to thy Head, and Bracelets to thy Neck.
Of which sort also are those Exhortations of S. Paul, Ephesians. 6.1.
Children, obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is just. Again, Col. 3.20.
Children, obey your Parents in all things; for this is pleasing in the Lord.
And it is confirmed by the Examples of the most holy Men: Genesis 12.9.
For Isaac, when he was bound by his Father for a Sacrifice, modestly obeyed,
without refusing; Hier. 15.9.
and the Rechabites, that they might never depart from the Counsel of their
Father, always kept themselves from Wine.

Again, The Fourth.
We honor our Parents, when we imitate their good Manners and Actions: For we
seem to attribute very much to them, to whom we would be as like as may be.

Again, The Fifth.
We honor our Parents, when we not only listen to, but also follow their
Counsels.

As also when we relieve them, The Sixth.
giving them Food and other Conveniences. Which thing is approved by Christ's
own Testimony, who reproving the Impiety of the Pharisees, Mat. 15.4.
says, Why do you transgress the Commandment of God for your Tradition? For God
said, Honor thy Father and thy Mother; and whosoever curses Father or Mother,
let him die the Death: But ye say, Whosoever shall say to his Father or to his
Mother, Whatsoever Gift is of me, profits thee, and he will not honor his
Father or his Mother; and ye have made the Commandment of God void by your
Tradition. That Parents are to be relieved, Vid. Basil. Hom. de Honor
Parentum, and in Hexam. Hom. 9. Amb. lib. 5. Hexam. c. 16. Conc. Gangr. Can.
16. Vide item Did. 86. multis in locis. Hieron. lib. 2. Comment. in Matthew.
August. lib. 1. Quaest. Evang. c. 14.

We ought indeed at all times to pay the Duties of Honor to our Parents; The
Seventh, and of great moment.
but especially then, when they are dangerously sick: For then it is to be
endeavored that they pass not over any thing that belongs either to the
Confession of Sins, or to the other Sacraments, which are to be received by
Christians when Death approaches: And let it be our care, that pious and
religious Persons visit them frequently, who either may strengthen them being
weak, and help them with their Counsel, or else may raise them to a cheerful
Hope of Immortality; that when they have lifted up their Minds above the things
of the World, they may cast them wholly upon God: And so it will come to pass,
that being fortified with the most blessed Company of Faith, Hope, and Charity,
and with the Defense of Religion, they will look upon Death not only as a thing
not at all to be dreaded, seeing it is necessary to all; but forasmuch as it
hastens an entrance to Eternity, they will account it desirable.

Lastly, The Eighth and last.
Honor is paid to our Parents, even when they are dead, if we bury them, and
perform their Funerals becomingly, and to their Burials bestow Honor; if we
take care for their Anniversary Rites and Sacrifices; if we carefully pay their
Legacies.

But not they only, XV. Others also who are called Fathers, to be honored.
of whom we were born, are to be honored; but those also who are called
Fathers, as Bishops and Priests, Kings and Princes, Magistrates and Tutors,
Guardians and Masters, Teachers and Old Men, and the like; for they are worthy
to receive Fruit from our Love, Obedience and Labor.

Of Bishops and other Pastors it is thus written: XVI. Prelates and Priests how
to be honored. 1 Timothy 5.17.
Let the Priests that rule well, be counted worthy of double Honor, especially
they that labor in the Word and Doctrine: Vide Ambros. Comment. in eundem locum.

But now, First.
of how great a Love toward the Apostle did the Galatians give evidence, to
whom is given that famous Testimony of their Benevolence, Gal. 4.15.
For I bear you witness, that, if it were possible, you would have pulled out
your very Eyes and given them to me.

Now, Secondly.
to the Priests also are to be given those things which are required to the
necessary Uses of Life. Wherefore the Apostle says, 1 Cor.9.7.
Who ever goes to War at his own Costs? And it is written in Ecclesiasticus,
Ecclus 7.33.
Honor the Priests, and cleanse thy self with the Arms; give them their part,
as it is commanded thee, of the First Fruits and Trepass Offering. That Tithes
are to be paid, vide Council. Aurel. 1. c. 17. Matiscon. 2. cap. 5. ^orojul. c.
ultim. Lateran. Magnum. c. 53. Trid. Sess. 25. c. 13. Vide item multa capita
16. q. 1. and 7. and Tit. in Decretal. de Decimis. D. Thom. 2.2. q. 87.

The Apostle teaches, Thirdly. Heb. 13.7.
That they are to be obeyed also. Obey, says he, them that are put over you,
and subject your selves; for they watch as those that shall give an account for
your Souls.

Yea, The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses's Chair; Mat. 25.
all things therefore whatsoever they say to you, observe and do: But do not ye
after their Works; for they say, and do not.

The same thing is to be said concerning Princes and Magistrates, XVII. Honor to
be given to other great Men. Romans 13.1. 1 Timothy 2.2. 1 Pet. 2.12.
and the rest whose Power we are under. But to them, what kind of Honor,
Worship, and Observance is to be paid, the Apostle to the Romans largely
explains; for whom also he admonishes to pray; And S. Peter says, Be ye subject
to every human Creature for God's sake; whether to the King, as excelling the
rest; or to Magistrates, as sent by him. Vide Tert. in Apol. 6.30. and 32. and
ad Scapulam. c. 2.

For, XVIII. Princes to be honored wi^h a kind of divine Honor.
if indeed we give Honor to them, that Honor is referred to God. For an
excellent degree of Dignity, which is instead of the Divine Power, in which we
reverence the Divine Providence, who has given them the public Administation of
Office, and whom he uses as the Ministers of his Power, has the Veneration of
Men. Vid. Aug. lib. 5. de civit. Dei. c. 10, 11, 14 and 15.

Nor do we reverence the Dishonesty or Wickedness of Men, XIX. When wicked
Princes are to be obeyed.
if the Magistrates are such; but the Divine Authority which is in them, so
that, tho it may seem very wonderful perhaps, although they may be Spiteful, Cruel
and Implacable to us; yet there is no cause sufficient, why we should not most
dutifully observe them: For even the great Duties of David toward Saul, are
recorded, when as notwithstanding he was very injurious to him, Ps. 119.7.
which he shows in these Words, With them that hated peace, I was peaceable.

But if they command any thing wicked or unjust, XX. When they are not to be
obeyed.
since they do it, not of Power, but by Injustice and Perverseness of Mind,
they are by be no means to be obeyed.

When the Curat has explained these things severally; XXI. The Reward of this
Commandment proposed.
let him then consider, what the Reward is, and how agreeable it is to those
that obey this Divine Commandment: For herein is its excellent Fruit, that they
live long, and therefore that they are worthy, to enjoy a Benefit as long as
may be, the memory whereof they always preserve. Seeing therefore, that those
that honor their Parents, return them thanks, from whom they have the use of
Light and Life; rightly and deservedly do they continue that Life, even to the
greatest Age.

Then is to be added a clear Explanation of Gods Promise: XXII. This promised
Reward to be explained. 1 Timothy 4.8
For the Use not only of that blessed and eternal Life, but even of this too,
which we live in the World, is promised, which Sentence S. Paul interprets,
when he says, Piety is profitable for all things, having the promise of the
Life that now is, and of that which is to come.

Nor is this Reward either small or contemptible although Death was desirable to
the most Holy Men, XXIII. This no small Reward.
as to Job, David, Paul, and the continuance of Life to miserable and afflicted
Men, be unpleasant: For the addition of those Words, Which the Lord thy God
will give thee, promises not only the length of Time to live in, but Rest,
Quiet and Safety to live well. For in Deuteronomy he says not only, Deuteronomy. 5.16.
That thou may live a long Time, but adds this also: Ephesians. 6.5.
That it may be well with thee, which was afterward repeated by the Apostle.

Now we say that these good things are advantageous to them, XXIV. Many
obedient Children enjoy not this Reward, and why.
to whose Piety God gives Grace: For otherwise there will be no assurance and
steadiness of the Divine Promise; Because sometimes those who are more dutiful
to their Parents live not so long a Life, as those to whom it happ'ns to live
long.

Either because it is for their good who depart out of this Life before they
forsake the Tie Virtue and Duty: The First Reason.
For they are suddenly snatched away, Sap. 4.10.
lest malice should alter their understanding, or deceit beguil their Soul.

Or because whilst Destruction and Perturbation of all hings is impending, The
Second.
they are called out of this World, that they may escape the common bitterness
of the Times; For says the Prophet, Isa. 57.1.
The righteous man is taken away from the face of evil. And this is done, lest
either their Virtue or their Salvation might be endangered, God takes Vengeance
on Mortals for their Wickedness.

Or that they may not feel the sharpness of Sorrow in the saddest Times, The
Third.
for the Calamities of their Kindred and Friends.

Wherefore,

Now as the Reward and Advantage of Duty is proposed by God to those that are
grateful to their Parents: XXV. Ungrateful Children to be punished grievously.
So ungrateful, wicked Children are reserved for the heaviest Punishments; for
it is written, Exodus 21.26. Levit. 20 29. Prove. 19.26. Prove 20 20. Prove. 30.17
He that curses Father or Mother, let him die the Death. And, He that afflicts
his Father, and flies from his Mother, is shameful and unhappy. And, He that
curses Father or Mother, his light shall be put out in the midst of darkness.
And, The eye that mocks at his Father, and despises the birth of his Mother,
let the Ravens of the Brook pick it out, and let the young Eagles eat it. We
read of many that wronged their Parents, against whom Gods anger grew hot. For
he left not David unrevenged, 2 Reg. 18.4.
but paid Absalom the due reward of his Wickedness, whom for his wickedness he
punished, being thurst through with three Spears.

But of them that obeyed not the Priests, XXVI. How they are punished that
obeyed nor the Priests.
it is written, He that grows proud, and will not obey the command of the
Priest, that ministers at that time to the Lord thy God, that man shall die by
the decree of the judge. Vid. Clem. Epist. 3. subinit. Item Epist. 1. etiam
subinit. Amb. lib. 2. Offic. c. 24. Hier. Epist. 1. post med. vide item 11. q.
3. c. 11, 12, 13.

And as it is established by the Divine Law, XXVII. The Duty of Parents toward
their Children.
That Children should give Honor to their Parents, obey them, and be dutiful to
them: So the proper Duties of Parents are, To train up their Children, in most
holy Instructions and Manners, to give them the best Rules of Life, that being
instructed and prepared for Religion, they may worship God holily and
unblameably, which we read to have bin done by the Parents of Susanna. Let the
Priest therefore admonish Parents, Dan. 13.3.
to show themselves Masters to their Children, of Virtue, Equity, Continence,
Modesty and Holiness.

Let them therefore beware of three things especially, XXVIII. Parents to
beware of three things. The First. Col. 3.21.
wherein they often use offend.

First, not to speak or do any thing too severely against their Children, which
the Apostle in his Epistle to the Colossians commands thus, Fathers provoke not
your Children to indigation, that they he not discouraged, for there is danger
lest they be of a broken and abject mind, while they are afraid of every thing.
Wherefore let him warn them to avoid overmuch Severity, and let them rather
amend or correct, than to revenge themselves on their Children.

And then when a Fault is committed, The Second.
when Chastisement and Chiding is necessary, not dissolutely through Indulgence to
pardon any thing to their Children: For many times Children are utterly spoiled
by the too great Lenity and Indulgence of Parents; wherefore let the Curat
affright them from their too great Indulgence by the Example of Hell, 1 Reg.
4.18.
who because he was too indulgent to his Children, suffered very great
Punishments.

Lastly, The Third.
which is a very soul thing, let them be advised not to take that preposterous
Counsel in the Education and Teaching of their Children: For very many are
imploi'd in this only Study and Care, to leave their Children Riches and Money,
a fair and large Estate; whom they persuade not to Religion, or Piety, or
learning of good Arts, but to Covetousness, and to increase their Family. Nor
are they careful of the Esteem or Salvation of their Children, so that they
have but Money, and are very Rich, than which, what can be said or thought more
base? And so it comes to pass, that they leave them not so properly their
Wealth, as their Wickedness and their Vices, to whom they become Guides, not
toward Heaven, but toward everlasting Punishment. Let the Priest therefore
instruct Parents with the best Precepts, and stir them up to the Fxample and
parallel Virtue of Tobias, Tob. 4.
that when they have well trained up their Children to Holiness and the Worship
of God, they may receive the plentiful fruits of their Love, Observance, and
Obedience.

The Fifth COMMANDMENT of the DECALOGVE.
Thou shall not kill.

THe great Happiness which is proposed to Peacemakers, I. How profitable it i^
to explain this Commandment.
because they shall be called the Children of God, ought very much to move the
Pastors diligently and exactly to teach the Faithful what is to be learned from
this Commandment: For there can be no better way to reconcile the minds of Men,
than that the Law of this Precept, rightly explained, be so holily kept as it
ought to be of all; because then we may hope that Men being joined one to
another with the strongest Agreement of Hearts, may preserve Peace and Concord
entire.

But how necessary it is that this Commandment should be explained, II. How
necessary.
appears from hence, That immediately after the drowning of the whole Earth,
this was the only thing which God first forbad Men, Genesis 9.5.
The blood of your Lives, says he, will I require at the hand of all Beasts,
and at the hand of Man. And in the Gospel among the Old Laws, which first were
explained by our Lord, this is first, whereof it is thus written in S. Matthew,
Matthew. 5.22.
For it has been said, Thou shall not kill. And the rest which in that very
place are recorded concerning this Matter.

And the Faithful ought attentively and willingly to hear this Commandment:
III. How this Commandment to be heard.
For if the Force of it be observed, it is very available to defend every ones
Life; because in those words, Thou shall not kill, Manslaughter is utterly
forbidd'n.

Therefore all Men ought to receive it with so great a pleasure of mind, IV.
This Command pleasant to be heard.
as tho, if Gods anger being proposed, it were specially forbidd'n under the
heaviest Punishments, that none should be hurt: Therefore as this Commandment
is pleasant to be heard: So the caution against this Sin, which is forbidden by
this Commandment, ought to be full of Delight.

But when our Lord explained the Force of this Law, V. Two things here
commanded.
he shows that two things are contained in it.

The One, that we do not kill, which we are forbidd'n to do.

The other, which we are commanded to do, That we embrace our Enemies with a
friendly Agreement and Love, have Peace with all Men, and lastly patiently to
suffer all Inconveniences.

Now that Killing is forbidd'n, VI. What killing not forbidd'n here. First.
Exodus 12. throughout.
it is first to be taught what kind of Killing is not forbidd'n by the Law of
this Commandment.

For to kill Beasts is not forbidd'n; for if it be allowed of God that Men
should be fed by them, it is but meet they be killed: Of which matter S. Austin
says thus, When we hear, says he, Thou shall not kill, we understand not this
to be spoken of Fruits, because they have no Sense, nor of irrational Animals,
because they are joined with us on no account. De civit. Dei lib. 1. c. 20.
Item de morib. Manich. lib. 2. c. 13, 14, 15.

There is another sort of killing allowed, Secondly.
which belongs to such Magistrates as have the Power of Death, whereby by the
Rule and Judgment of the Laws, they punish wicked Men, and defend the Innocent:
In which Office, so that they behave themselves justly, they are not only not
guilty of Murder, but very exactly obey this Divine Law, which forbids Murder:
For seeing the end of this Law is for the Preservation of Man's Life and Safety,
the Punishments appointed by the Magistrates, who are the lawful Avengers of
evil, have respect hither, that all Boldness and Injury being repressed by
Punishments, Man's Life may be safe. Wherefore David says, Psalm. 108.8.
I will soon slay all the Sinners of the Earth, that I might destroy out of the
city of the Lord, all the workers of iniquity. Aug. Epist. 154. and citatur 23.
q. 5. c. de occidentibus. Item Epist. 54. and citatur ibid. c. Non est
iniquitatis vide adhuc. Ibid. alia capita, and D. Thom. 2.2. q. 64. a. 2. and
q. 108. a. 3.

For which reason, Thirdly.
neither do they sin, who in a just War, not driv^^ by Lust or Cruelty, but
with the only desire of the Public Good, take away the Lives of the Enemies.
Aug. de Civit. Dei, c. 26. citatur 23. q. 5. c. Miles. Vide item de Bello D.
Thom. 2.2. q. 40 per A. Articulos.

There are other Slaughters besides of the same kind, Fourthly.
which are done expressly by God's Command. The Sons of Levi sinned not, tho
they killed so many thousand Men in one day; upon which Slaughter done, God
thus spoke to them: Exodus 23.26.
Ye have consecrated your Hands this Day to the Lord.

Nor is he guilty of this Commandment, Fifthly.
who kills a Man, not willingly nor advisedly, but by accident: Concerning
which matter, it is thus written in the Book of Deuteronomy; Deuteronomy. 19.
He that ignorantly slays his Neighbor, and is proved to have had no hatred
against him in time past, but went with him honestly into the Wood, to fell
Timber, and in the hewing down of Timber, his Ax flew out of his Hand, and the
Head of his Ax slipping off the Handle, struck his Friend, and killed him.
These Slaughters are of that kind, which because they are done, not with a Will
or Design, are therefore in no case to be reckoned sinful; which is proved by
S. Austin's Sentence: for he says, God forbid, that those things we do, either
for a good or lawful End, if beyond our Intention any Evil happen, it should be
laid to our charge. Vide Aug. Epist. 154. and citatur 23. q. 5. c. de
Occidendis. Item vide multa capita did. 5. D. Thom. 2.2. q. 64. a. 8. Trid.
Sess. 14. de Reform. c. 7.

Where, VII. Two Cases to be observed.
notwithstanding, Sin may be committed, for two Reasons. The one is, If any one
being employed in an unjust matter, kills a Man. For example:

If any one with his Fist or Foot strike a Woman with Child, The First.
whereupon follows an untimely Birth. This happens indeed beyond the Design of
the Striker; yet he is not blameless, because it was no means lawful for him to
strike a Woman with Child.

The other is, The Second.
If he carelessly and heedlesly kill any one not looking well about him.

For which cause also, Sixthly.
if any one for defense of his own Safety, using all the care he can, kill
another, it appears plain enough, that he is not guilty of this Law.

And these are the Slaughters we have now mentioned, VIII. What Killing is
forbidden here.
which are not contained in this Commandment of the Law, which being excepted,
all the rest are forbidden, whether we consider the Slayer, or the Person
slain, or the Means by which the Slaughter was done.

As to those that are the Slayers, IX. Who forbidden to kill.
there is none excepted, neither Men of Wealth nor of Power, neither Masters
nor Parents; but without all difference and distinction, all are forbidden to
kill.

If we consider those who are killed, X. Who may not be killed.
this Law belongs to every one; nor is there any one of so mean and base a
Condition, but he is defended by virtue of this Law.

Nor is it lawful for any one to kill himself, XI. None may kill himself.
seeing no one has so much the power of his own Life, that at his own pleasure
he may kill himself: And therefore by the words of this Law it is not thus
appointed, Thou shall not kill another; but simply, Thou shall not kill.

But then if we respect the manifold ways of Murder, XII. Every way of killing
forbidden.
there is none excepted: For it is not only unlawful to take away any Man's
Life, either with his Hands, or Sword, or Knife, or with a Stone, or with a
Staff, or with a Halter, or with Poison; but it is utterly forbidden to be done
either by Counsel, Help, or Assistance, or by any other Means.

And here the great Dullness and Stupidity of the Jews appears,

But to a Christian, XIII. None may be angry at, nor kill another.
who, as Christ has interpreted it, has learned, that this Law is Spiritual,
and teaches us not only to have our Hands clean, but our very Souls chaste and
sincere, that is not enough, which the Jews thought sufficient to themselves:
For in the Gospel we are taught, That it is not lawful so much as to be angry,
since our Lord says, But I say to you, Every one that is angry at his Brother,
shall be guilty of the Judgment; but he that says to his Brother, Racha, shall
be guilty of the Council; but he that shall say, Thou Fool, shall be guilty of
Hellfire. De ira vide Basil. hom. 10 Chrysostom. hom. 29. ad Pop. Antioch. D.
Thom. 2.2. q. 158. per totam.

From which words it is evident, XIV. This place of the Gospel explained.
That he is not free from Sin that is inwardly enraged at his Brother, tho he
contain his Anger shut up in his Mind; but he that gives any Token of that
Anger, sins grievously; but he sins yet much more grievously, who is not afraid
to handle his Brother hardly, and to reproach him. Vide Aug. de Sermon. Dom. in
Monte, lib. 1. D. Thom. 2.2. q. 158. a. 3.

And verily this is true, XV. What Anger not forbidden.
if there be no cause of Anger: For the Cause of Anger, which is allowed by God
and his Laws, is This; When we are displeased at those, who being under our
Government and Power, are guilty of a Fault; for a Christians Anger ought to
proceed not from Carnal Sense, but from the Holy Ghost; 1 Cor. 6.17.
seeing it is fit that we be the Temples of the Holy Ghost, in which Jesus
Christ may dwell.

There are, XVI. The perfect Observation of this Commandment.
besides, many other things taught by our Lord, which belong to the perfect
following of this Law; of which sort are these: Not to resist Evil; but if any
one smite thee on thy right Cheek, turn to him the other also; and he that will
go to Law with thee, and take away thy Coat, give him thy Cloak also; and he
that will compel thee to go a Mile, go with him two. Vide Aug Epist. 5. ad
Marcel. and de Sermon. Domini in Monte, lib. 2. c. 20.

From what has been already said, XVII. How many offend against this
Commandment.
we may observe, how prone Men are to those Sins which are forbidden in this
Commandment; or, how many may be found, who tho they commit not Wickedness with
their Hands, yet do it in their Hearts.

And because there are Remedies for this Disease in the Sacred Scripture,
XVIII. The Curat's Duty.
it is the Curat's Duty to teach them diligently to the Faithful.

And this is the Chief, XIX. How great a Crime it is to kill a Man.
That they understand how wicked a Sin the killing of a Man is: And this may be
seen from very many and very evident Testimonies of Holy Scripture; for God in
Holy Scripture so detests Murder, that he says he will punish even the very
Beasts for the killing of Men, Genesis 9.6.
and commands that Beast to be killed that hurts a Man.

Nor would he have Man abhor Blood for any other cause,

For Men-slayers are the worst Enemies of Mankind, XX. Murderers injure God
himself.
and consequently of Nature; who, as much as in them lies, overthrow the
universal Work of God, when they destroy a Man, for whose sake, he testifies,
that he made all things whatsoever were created. Yea, and even in Genesis,
since it is forbidden to kill a Man, because God created him after his own
Image and Likeness, he does a notable Injury to God, and seems as it were to
lay violent hands upon him, who removes his Image out of the way.

David having with Divine Cogitation of Mind meditated hereof, XXI. How prone
Man is to Murder. Psalm. 13.36.
very grievously complained of Blood-thirsty Men, in these words: Their Feet
are swift to shed Blood. Nor did he simply say, They kill; but, They shed
Blood: Which words he uttered for amplification of that Wickedness, and to show
their exceeding Cruelty; and to show especially how headlong they are carried
by the impulse of the Devil to that Wickedness, he says, Their Feet are swift,

But now the things which Christ our Lord in this Commandment requires us to
observe, XXII. The end and scope of this Commandment. Mat. 5.24.
tend to this, That we may have Peace with all Men: For, interpreting this
Place, he says If thou offer thy Gift at the Altar, and shall there remember
that thy Brother has any thing against thee leave there thy Gift before the
Altar, and go, first be reconciled to thy Brother; and what follows.

Which things shall so be explained by the Curat, XXIII. Catholic Charity
commanded.
as that he teach, That all, without any Exception, are to be embraced with
Love. VVhereto, in the Explication of this Commandment, he shall stir up the
Faithful, as much as may be, because therein the Virtue of Loving our Neighbor
shines most clearly.

For since Hatred is plainly forbidden by this Commandment, XXIV. Hatred
forbidden. 1 John 3.5.
because he that hates his Brother is a Murderer; it certainly follows, that
here is given a Commandment of Love and Charity.

And since in this Law there is a Command concerning Love and Charity, Offices
of Love commanded.
there are Rules given of all those both Offices and Actions which use to
follow that Charity.

Charity is patient, Patience. Luc. 21.19.
says St. Paul: Therefore we are commanded Patience, in which we shall possess
our Souls, as our Savior teaches.

Kindness next is the Companion and Associate of Charity, XXV. Offices of
Kindness.
because Charity is kind.

But the Virtue of Benignity and Kindness largely extends it self, and its
Office is chiefly concerned in these things; to relieve the Poor with things
necessary, to give Meat to the Hungry, Drink to the Thirsty, to cloth the
Naked; and wherein any one most wants our Help, therein to bestow our greater
Liberality upon him.

These Offices of Kindness and Goodness, XXVI. Kindness to be showed toward
our enemies. Mat. 5.44. Romans 18.20.
which of themselves are illustrious, are made so much the more illustrious, if
extended to our Enemies: For our Savior says, Love your Enemies, do good to
them which hate you; which the Apostle also advises in these words, If thy
Enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him Drink: for in doing thus, thou will heap Coals of Fire on his Head. Be not overcome of Evil, but overcome Evil
with Good.

Lastly, XXVII. Long-suffering and Gentleness.
if we consider the Law of Charity, which is kind, we must understand that by
that Law we are commanded to do all Offices whatsoever that pertain to
Long-suffering, Gentleness and other Virtues of the like kind.

But that Office which is far the most excellent of all, XXVIII. A chief Office
of Charity to forgive.
and which is most full of Charity, wherein most of all we ought to exercise
our selves, is this, With a cheerful Mind to forgive and pardon the Wrong we
have received; which to do fully, the Scriptures of God, as before was said,
often warn and exhort us, since they do not only call them blessed that really
do so. See Deuteron. 32.35. Also 1 Reg. 25.32, 33. Also 26.6, 7, 8.9. Also 2
Reg. 19.20. Psalm. 7.5. Eccles. 28. throughout. Isai. 58.6. Matthew. 6.14. And in
the Gospel in many places. See also Tertul. in Apolog. c. 31 and 37. Aug. in
Joan. Tract. 81. lib. 50. Hom. hom. 6. Item Sermon. 61 and 168. de tempore.

But because the desire of Revenge is commonly rooted in Men's Minds; XXIX.
Forgetting of Injuries, to be inculcated.
it is necessary that the Curat use very great Diligence herein, not only to
teach, but also earnestly to persuade the Faithful, That a Christian ought to
forget Injuries and to forgive them; and since there is very much mention of
this Matter made among Sacred Writers, let him consult them, for the overcoming
of their Stubborness, who are of an obstinate and fixed Resolution on the Lust
of Revenge. Let him have the Arguments in readiness, which those Fathers
devoutly used, they being very weighty and very suitable to the Matter. Vide
quae citantur. n. 18.

But especially these Three are to be explained.

The First is, XXX. Three Arguments for this purpose. The First.
That he that thinks he has received an Injury, should be earnestly persuaded
that he, whom he desires to be avenged of, was not the principal cause of his
loss or Injury. So that admirable Man Job did, who being grievously assaulted
by the Sabeans, Chaldeans and by the Devil, yet took no Regard of them; but as
an upright and right pious Man, truly and devoutly used these Words, Job. 1.28.
The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away.

By the Words and Example of that most patient Man therefore, XXXI. Gods
goodness in inflicting Punishments.
let Christians persuade themselves, what is most true, that all things
whatsoever we suffer in this Life, come from the Lord, who is the Father and
Author of all Justice and Mercy. Nor does he punish us as Enemies (which is his
infinite Kindness,) but corrects and chastises us as Sons.

Nor indeed, XXXII. How they are to be accounted that persecute us.
if we rightly consider it, are Men in these cases any other thing at all, but
the Ministers and Officers as it were of God: And tho a Man may wrongfully hate
another, and wish him very ill; yet, unless by Gods Permission, he can by no
means hurt him. For this Reason Joseph patiently endured the wicked Counsels of
his Brethren, Genesis 45.8 2 Reg. 16.10.
so David did the Injuries done him by Shimei.

To this Matter also belongs properly that kind of Argument, Tom 3 in Hom. Quod
nemo laeditur nisi a seipso.
which S. Chrysostom gravely and excellently handled, to wit, That none is hurt
but by himself: For those that think themselves to be injuriously dealt with,
if they consider the matter well with themselves, will certainly find that they
have received no wrong or damage from others: for tho the things are outward
wherein they are hurt, yet they most of all hurt themselves, when they wickedly
pollute their Soul with Hatred, Lust, Envy.

The Second is, The second Argument.
That it contains two special Advantages, which belong to those, who being led
with a pious Endeavor to please God, freely forgive Injuries.

The First whereof is this, Two Advantages. The First. Matthew. 18.33.
That God has promised, that they shall obtain Pardon of their own Sins, that
forgive others their Offenses; from which Promise it easily appears, how
acceptable this Office of Piety and Love is to him.

The other Advantage is, The second Advantage Matthew. 5.46.
That we get a kind of Nobility and Perfection, because by forgiving Wrongs, we
are made in a manner like God, Who causes his Sun to rise on the Good and Bad,
and rains on the Just and Unjust.

Lastly, The third Argument.
the Disadvantages are to be explained, into which we then fall, when we will
not forgive the Wrongs that are done us. Let the Curat therefore lay before the
Eyes of them who cannot bring themselves to forgive their Enemies, not only that
the Sin is grievous, but also that by the continuance of the Sin^ it grows
greater.

For whereas he, XXXIII. The perverseness of Hatred.
whose Mind is thus affected, thirsts after his Enemies Blood; being full of
Hope of being revenged on him, is Night and Day so employed in the continual
agitation of his wicked Mind, that he seems never to be quiet from the
contriving of Murder, or some other heinous thing; whence it comes to pass,
that either never, or with very great Labor is he driven to it, either wholly
to pardon, or at least in some measure to remit Injuries.

And therefore it is rightly compared to a Wound,

There are moreover many Inconveniences and Sins, XXXIV. The attenddants of
Hatred. 1 Joan. 2.11.
which are chained as it were to this one Sin of Hatred: And therefore S. John
according to this Sense spoke thus, He that hates his Brother is in darkness,
and walks in darkness, and knows not whither he goes, because Darkness has
blinded his Eyes: Therefore he must needs fall oftentimes; for how can it be,
that a man can allow the Words and Actions of him whom he hates? Hence proceed
rash and unjust Judgments, Anger, Envy, Reviling, and such like, wherein even
they also are ensnared, who are related in Kinddred or Friendship.

And therefore it often happens that out of one Sin,

Nor is this wrongfully called the Devils Sin; XXXV. Hatred the Devils Sin.
Joh. 8.
Because he was a Murderer from the beginning. Wherefore our Lord Jesus Christ
the Son of God, when the Pharisees sought to put him to Death, said, That they
were begotten of their Father the Devil.

But besides these which have been mentioned, XXXVI. Remedies against Hatred.
there are other Remedies delivered in the Monuments of Holy Scripture, and
those indeed very fit, whence Reasons may be had for detestation of this
Wickedness.

And the first and greatest Remedy of all, The First.
is the Example of our Savior, which we ought to imitate: For he, tho he could
not in the least be suspected to be guilty of any Sin, yet when he was beaten
with Rods, crowned with Thorns, and at last Crucified, he made this Prayer so
full of Piety, Luc. 23.4.
Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. The sprinkling of whose
Blood, Heb. 12.24.
as the Apostle testifies, Speaks better than that of Abel.

Another Remedy proposed by Ecclesiasticus, The Second.
Is to remember Death and the Day of Judgment, Remember, Ecclus. 7.40.
says he, thy last things, and thou will not sin for ever. The meaning whereof
is, as if he had said; Often times consider this again and again, that shortly
thou must die, and because at that time thou will have very much to do, and
that it will he highly necessary to obtain the infinite Mercy of God; it is
necessary for thee to put it now and always before thy Eyes; for so it will
come to pass, that that unruly desire of Revenge, will leave thee; since for
the obtaining of Gods Mercy, thou can find no Remedy fitter or greater, than
Forgetfulness of Injuries, and to love them, who have wronged either thee or
thine in Deed or Word.

The Sixth COMMANDMENT of the DECALOGVE.
Thou shall not commit Adultery.

BEcause the Bond between the Husband and Wife is the strictest, I. Why this
Commandment placed in this O^der.
and nothing can happen more delightful to both of them, than to know that they
are beloved with a mutual and singular kind of Love; and on the contrary,
nothing more grievous than to perceive their lawful and due Love to be bestowed
elsewhere; rightly and in good order does this Law concerning Whoredom and
Adultery follow that, which defends the Life of Man from Murder: So that no one
by the Wickedness of Adultery dares violate or break off the Holy and Honorable
Conjunction of Matrimony, wherein there is used to be the great Power of Love.

But yet in explaining of this very thing, II. This Commandment to be explained
with caution.
let the Curat be very cautious and prudent, and handle the Matter with modest
Expressions, a Matter which rather wants Restriction than copious Discourse;
for it is to be feared, lest while he endeavors too largly and fully to
explain by what Means Men depart from the Rule of this Law, they happily fall
upon the Discourse of those things, from whence uses to arise Matter rather of
provoking Lust, than the way of restraining it.

But because in this Commandment many things are contained which are not to be
pretermitted, III. The Division of this Commandment. The first Part forbidding.
those things shall be explained in their proper places.

The Force of it therefore is double, The One, wherein Adultery is plainly
forbidd'n. Vide 32. q. 4. c. Meretrices. Item ibid. multa alia capita. Item
Amb. de Abraham. c. 4. Hier. contra Jovin. l. 1 and l. 2. item in c. 5. Epist.
ad Galat. ad illa verba (Manifesta autem.) item in c. 5. ad Ephesians. ad haec verba
(Viri diligite) Aug. de bono conjug. c. 16. and lib. 22. cont. Faust. c. 47.48
item in quaest. Deuteronomy. q. 37. ad c. 23. iterum Amb. in Sermon. de S. Joan. qui sic
incip. Diximus superiore Dominica est. 65. item Greg. in moral. lib. 12. c. 21.
D. Th. 1, 2. q. 100. a. 5. and 2.2. q. 122. a. 6.

The Other, The other part requiring.
which requires us to keep Chastity, both of Mind and Body.

But to begin with that which is forbidd'n: IV. What Adultery is.
Adultery is the wrong of a Lawful Bed, whether it be a Man's'own, or another;
for if a Man that is an Husband, has to do with a single Woman, he wrongs his
own Bed: But if a single Man have to do with another Man's Wife, the other Man's
Bed is polluted with the stain of Adultery.

Now by this Prohibition of Adultery, V. All impure Lust forbidden here.
as S. Ambrose and S. Austin testify, all things whatsoever are dishonest and
immodest, are forbidd'n. Amb. lib. 1. Officior. c. 50. in fine Aug. q. 71.
super Exodus

That these words are so to be understood, VI. The Scriptures confirm this
Commandment. Genesis 38.24. Deuteronomy. 23.16.
may be gathered from the Sacred Scriptures of the Old and New Testament: For
besides Adultery, there are other kinds of Lust punishd in Moses's Writings. In
Genesis there is the Judgment of Judah against his Daughter in Law. In
Deuteronomy there is that excellent Law of Moses, That none of the Daughters of
Israel should be Whore There is the like Exhortation of Tobias to his Son, Tob.
4.13.
Look to thy self my Son, Ecclus. 41.25.
beware of all Fornication. And Ecclesiasticus, Be ashamd', says he, in respect
of a whorish Woman. And in the Gospel Christ our Lord says, Matthew. 25.19.
Out of the Heart proceed Adulteries and Fornications which pollute a Man. And
S. Paul the Apostle detests this Vice with many and weighty Expressions, 1
These. 4.19.
This, says he, is the will of God, even your Sanctification, 1 Cor. 5.9
that ye abstain from Fornication. And, Avoid Fornication. And, 1 Cor. 6.18.
Be not Companions of Fornicators. But Fornication, Ephesians. 5.3.
says he, and all Uncleanness and Covetousness, 1 Cor. 6.9.
let it not be named among you. And Neither Fornicators, nor Adulterers, nor
Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with Mankind, shall possess the Kingdom
of Heaven.

But Especially for this cause is Adultery so plainly forbidd'n because besides
the Foulness of it, VII. Why Adultery especially forbidd'n.
which is common to that with other kinds of Intemperance, it has joined with
it the Sin of Injustice also, not only against our Neighbor, but also against
civil Society.

But this is certain, that he that abstains not from the Intemperance of other
Lusts, will easily fall into that Incontinence of Adultery.

Wherefore, VIII. Even the inward Lust of the Mind is here forbidd'n.
by this forbidding of Adultery we may easily perceive, That every kind of
uncleanness and immodesty, whereby our Body is polluted, is forbidd'n: Yea, and
that even every inward Lust of the Mind is forbidd'n by this Commandment, both
the very Force of the Law it self shows, which, as it is manifest, is
Spiritual, and also Christ our Lord has taught in these Words: Matthew. 18.
Ye have heard that it has been said by them of old Time, Thou shall not commit
Adultery: But I say to you, that every one that sees a Woman, to lust after
her, has already committed Adultery with her in his Heart.

These are the things which we have thought fit should be taught publicly; IX.
Things to be observed by the Curats.
but if these things be added, which have bin decreed by the holy Synod of
Trent against Adulterers, and those that keep Bawds, and Harlots, and passing
over many and diverse kinds of Immodesty and Lust, Ses. 24. c. 24. de reform.
whereof every one shall be admonished by the Curat privately, as the State of
the Time and Persons shall require:

It now follows to explain those things, X. Chastity to be kept by every one in
his condition.
which have the Force of Commanding. The Faithful therefore are to be taught
and earnestly exhorted, to keep Modesty and Continence with all their Study,
and to cleans themselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit,
perfecting Holiness in the fear of God.

And First, they are to be admonished, That tho the Virtue of Chastity shines
more bright in that sort of Men, that holily and religiously hold that most
commendable and truly divine purpose of Virginity; yet it is suitable to them
also, that lead a Married Life, or being married, keep themselves clear from
forbidd'n Lust.

But because by the Holy Fathers many things have bin delivered, XI. Remedies
to be proposed against ^ Lust.
whereby we are taught to conquer our Lusts and bridle our Pleasures: The Curat
shall study to expound them accuratly to the People, and let him be very
industrious on this Account. Vide. D. Thom. 2.2. q. 151. Trid. 24. de matrim.
c. 3. and ses. 25, de regular.

And they are such as consist partly in Thought, XII. Remedies against unclean
Thoughts. The First.
and partly in Action. The Remedy which concerns Thought, consists in this;
That we understand,

How great the Foulness and Hurtfulness of this Sin is: Which being known, the
way of detesting it will be much more easy. But that it is a hurtful
Wickedness, may be understood from hence; because, by reason of this Sin, Men
are taken and thrust out of the Kingdom of God; and this is the worst of all
Evils.

And that Calamity is indeed common to all Sins: The Second.
But this thing is proper to this Sin, That they that commit Fornication are
said to sin against their own Bodies, according to S. Paul, who writes thus: 1
Cor. 5.18.
Avoid Fornication: for every Sin that a Man does, is without his Body; but he
that commits Fornication, sins against his own Body: Which is therefore said,
because he wrongs his Body, when he violates the Sanctity of it; 1 Thessalonians. 4.5.
of which matter he writes thus to the Thessalonians: This, says he, is the
Will of God, even your Sanctification, that ye abstain from Fornication; that
every one of you may know how to possess his Vessel in Sanctification and
Honor, not in the Passion of Concupiscence, as the Gentiles do which know not
God.

And then, The Third.
which is yet more wicked, a Christian, by the foul Act of giving himself to a
Whore, ^ Cor. 6.17.
makes Christ's Members the Members of an Harlot; for so St. Paul says, Know ye
not that your Bodies are the Members of Christ? Shall I therefore take the
Members of Christ and make them the Members of an Harlot? God forbid. Know ye
not that he that is joined to an Harlot, is made one Body?

Besides, The Fo^rth. 1 Cor. 6.17.
as S. Paul testifies, A Christian is the Temple of the Holy Ghost; to violate
which, is nothing else but to cast the Holy Ghost out of it.

But in the Sin of Adultery there is great Injustice: XIII. The great Injustice
of A ul^ery. ^ Cor. 7.
For if, as the Apostle has it, they that are joined in Matrimony are under the
power of each other, so that neither of them has the power or dispose of their
own Body, but are so bound with a kind of mutual Bond of Service, as it were,
each to other, that the Husband ought to comply to the Will of his Wife; and
again, the Wife ought to accommodate her self to the Will and Dispose of her
Husband: certainly, if either of them separate their Body, which is the others
Right, from that Person to whom it is bound, he or she is very unjust and
wicked.

And because the fear of Disgrace vehemently stirs Men up to those things that
are just, XIV. The notable Filthiness of Adultery.
and deters Men greatly from things forbidden, the Curat shall teach, That
Adultery brands Men with a notable Mark of Baseness: For in Sacred Scripture it
is thus written, Prove. 6.32, 33.
He that is an Adulterer, through lack of Understanding, will lose his Soul: he
gathers to himself. Disgrace and Ignominy, and his Reproach shall not be
blotted out.

Now the greatness of this Sin may be easily perceived from the Severity of its
Punishment: XV. The punishment of Adultery.
For Adulterers, by God's Law in the Old Testament, were stoned to death; yea,
and even for one Man's Lust, not only he that committed the Sin, but sometimes
a whole City has been overthrown. Levit. 20.10. Joh. 8.5. Genesis 34.25.

There are in Sacred Scripture many Examples of God's Vengeance, XVI. Examples
of the Punishment of Adultery.
which the Curat may gather, to terrify Men from their evil Lust; as, the
Destructiom of Sodom and the other neighboring Cities, the Punishment of the
Israelites who committed Fornication with the Daughters of Moab in the
Wilderness, and the Destruction of the Benjamites. Genesis 29.24. Number. 25.4. Jud.
20.

But those that escape Death, yet they escape not intolerable Pains and
Tortures of Punishment, XVII. Adulterers blinded and become foolish in all
things.
which frequently lays hold on them; for their Mind is blinded, which is the
greatest Punishment of all; so that they have no regard of God, nor of their
Fame, nor of their Honor, nor of their Children, nor even of their own Life:
and by this means they grow to be so wicked and unprofitable, that nothing of
moment ought to be trusted with them, and they are hardly fit for the discharge
of any Office.

Hereof we may find Examples in David and Solomon; Examples.
whereof the one, after his Adultery, became very unlike himself; of Merciful,
he became Cruel, 3 Reg. 11.
so that he delivered Vriah to Death, who had deserved very well of him: The
other, when he had given himself wholly over to the Lust of Women, so turned
himself from God's true Religion, that he followed other Gods. This Sin
therefore, Hos. 11.
as Hoseas says, takes away the Heart of Man, and oftentimes blinds him.

And now let us come to the Remedies, XVIII. Antidotes against Lust. The First.
which consist in Action.

Whereof the first is this, Strongly to resist Ideness, in which when the Men
of Sodom blunted themselves, as it is in Ezekiel, they fell headlong into the
most foul Sin of wicked Lust.

Next, The Second. Hier. 5.7.
Gluttony is to be avoided. I fed them, says the Prophet, and they committed
Adultery; because a full and satisfied Belly begets Lust. This very thing our
Lord signified in these words; Luc. 21.34.
Take heed to your selves, lest happily your Hearts be overcharged with Gluttony
and Drunkenness: Ephesians. 5.18.
And so says the Apostle, Be not drunk with Wine, wherein is Excess.

But especially by the Eye is the Mind used to be inflamed with Lust; The Third.
whither belongs that Sentence of Christ our Lord, Mat. 5.32.
If thy Eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee. There are besides
many Sayings of the Prophets to this purpose; Job. 31.1.
as that of Job, I have made a Covenant with my Eyes, that I would not so much
as think of a Virgin. Lastly, There are many and almost innumerable Examples of
the Evils which had their beginning from the Sight of the Eyes. So David, and
so the King of Sichem sinned; and by this means those Old Men, the false
Accusers of Susanna, sinned. 2 Reg. 11. Genesis 34.2. Dan. 13.8.

Also more curious Apparel or Ornaments, The Fourth.
wherewith the Sense of the Eyes is much taken, oftentimes affords no small
Occasion to Lust: Ecclus 9.8
And therefore Ecclesiasticus admonishes, Turn away thy Face from a Woman
curiously attired.

Whereas therefore Women are overmuch employed in adorning themselves, Let the
Curat observe thi^
it will not be far from the Matter, if the Curat use some Diligence herein,
sometimes to admonish, and sometimes to chide them, in those words which S.
Peter used, the most weighty in this kind: 1 Pet. 3.3.
Let not the adorning of Women be outward, as the glittering of Gold, or the
exquisit Ornament of Apparel: 1 Timothy 2.1.
And S. Paul, Not in curled Hair, says he, or Gold, or Precious Stones, or
costly Clothes: for many Women adorned with Gold and Precious Stones, have lost
their Ornaments both of Mind and Body.

But after this Provocation of Lust, The Fifth.
which consists in the exquisit Ornament of Clothes, there follows another,
which is filthy and obscene Talk: for by obscene Words, as by a kind of
Firebrand, the Minds of Young Persons are inflamed: For, as the Apostle says,
1 Cor. 15.53.
Evil Communication corrpts good Manners. And since the more delicate and
effeminate Singing and Dancing works the same thing, they must diligently take
heed of them also.

Of which kind are to be accounted obscene and amorous Books, The Sixth, and
Seventh.
which are to be shunned, as Images which carry in them a Representation of
Filthiness, seeing they have in them a mighty force to inflame the Minds of
young Persons to corrupt Abuses. But let the Curat chiefly take care, that
those things be very religiously observed, which have been piously and
religiously decreed by the Holy Council of Trent, concerning those things.
Sess. 25. Decret. de Invocat. and Venerat. and Sacris Imagine.

Now, The Eighth, Ninth, Tenth, Eleventh, and Twelfth.
if all those things beforementioned be avoided with great care and labor,
then all the Matter or Fuel of Lust in a manner will be taken away: But the
frequent use of Confession, and of the Eucharist, will be very prevalent to
destroy the power of it; as also daily and devout Prayers to God, joined with
Alms and Fasting.

For Chastity is the Gift of God, XIX. God gives Chastity to them that ^ ask it.
which he denies not to them that ask it aright, nor suffers us to be tempted
above what we are able. -- Vide Tertul. de Monag. in fine. Nazianz. Orat. 3.
Basil. de Virg. ultra medium. Chrysostom. and Hieron. in cap. 16. Matthew. August.
lib. 6. Confess. c. 11.

But the Body is to be exercised, XX. Other Antidotes.
and the Desires of the Senses to be repressed, not only with Fastings, and
with those things especially which Holy Church has appointed; but with
Watchings, and devout Pilgrimages, and other sorts of Afflictions: For in
those, and such like things, is very much observed the Virtue of Temperance;
according to which sense, S. Paul writes thus to the Corinthians: 1 Cor. 9.15.
He that contends in a Combat, keeps himself from all things; and These that
they may receive a corruptible Crown, but We an incorruptible one. And a little
after, I chasten my Body, says he, and bring it it into servitude, lest happily
when I have preached to others, I my self be made a Reprobate. And in another
Place, Romans 13.14.
Fulfill not the Desire of the Flesh in the Lusts thereof.

The Seventh COMMANDMENT of the DECALOGVE.
Thou shall not steal.

THat this was the ancient manner of the Church to inculcate the Force and
Virtue of this Commandment upon the Hearers, I. The ancient of the Church's
inculcating this Commandment. Romans 2.21.
the Apostles Reproof of those who would scare others from those Vices, whereof
they themselves were found guilty, plainly shows: For, says he, thou that
teach another, teach not thou thy self? Thou that preachest, A Man should
not steal, do thou steal?

By which excellent way of teaching, II. The profitableness of this manner.
they not only corrected the common Sin of those Times, but also appeased
Disturbances and Quarrels, and the other Causes which were used to move the
Ancients to Theft.

Now since this our Age also is miserably prone to the like Sins, III. The
Curat's Duty in this Case.
and the Inconveniences and Calamities of them; after the Example of the Holy
Fathers, the Masters of Christian Discipline, the Curats shall urge this Point,
and shall carefully and diligently explain the Force and Meaning of this
Commandment.

And first, IV. Herein Gods Love toward us is manifested.
they shall exercise their Office and Diligence to show the infinite Love of
God toward Mankind; who not only in those two former Commandments, [Thou shall
not kill, Thou shall not commit Adultery,] as it were by Fences defends our
Life, our Body, and our Fame and Esteem; but also in this Commandment, [Thou
shall not steal,] secures and defends our outward Goods and Estates by a kind
of Protection. For what can be the meaning of these Words, but that which we
have already said, when we spoke of the other Commandments? To wit, That God
does forbid these our Goods, which are under his Protection, to be hurt or
taken away by any one. Vide D. Thom. 1.2. q. 100. a. 3. and 2.2. q. 122. art. 6.

Now by how much the greater this Benefit of the Law of God is by so much the
more thankful ought we to be to God, V. How willingly we are to obey this
Commandment.
the Author of that Benefit: And because the best way both of being thankful
and paying our Thanks, is not only willingly to hearken to his Commandments,
but also to manifest them in Deed; the Faithful are to be excited and inflamed
to the performance of the Duty of this Commandment.

Now this Commandment, VI. This Commandment divided into two Parts.
as the former, is divided into two Parts; whereof the former, which forbids
Theft, is plainly declared; but the force and meaning of the other, wherein we
are commanded to be kind and liberal to our Neighbor, lies hid and wrapped up
in the former. We will first speak of the First, Thou shall not steal.

Where it is to be observed, VII. What is here understood by Theft.
That by the Name of Theft is to be understood, not only the taking away of any
thing from the right Owner, privily and without his knowledge; but also when a
Man possesses that which is another Man's, against the Will and Knowledge of
the true Owner thereof; unless we would think, that he that forbids Theft, does
not disallow that violent taking away of other Men's Goods by Force and VVrong,
1 Cor. 6.10.
since the Apostle has declared, that Extortioners shall not possess the
kingdom of God. All the practice and ways whereof are to be avoided, as the
same Apostle teaches. Vide Aug. q. 7.1. in Exodus and citatur. 32. q. 4. c.
M^retrices.

But tho forcible taking away of any thing from another, VIII. Robbery or
Rapine worse than Theft.
be a greater Sin than Theft, because besides the thing taken away from any
one, they moreover use force, and give greater affront. Vide D. Thom. 2.2. q.
66. art 4 and 9. item. 14. q. 4. c. Poenale.

Yet it is not to be wondered at, IX. Why that name of Theft is here used.
that the Precept of this Divine Law uses the lighter Term of Theft, and not of
Robbery; for it is so done on a very weighty Account, because Theft is of a
larger signification, and extends to more things than Robbery, which they only
can commit who have Power and Strength.

Although there is no one that sees not that the greater Enormities are also
forbidd'n,

For the unjust Possession and use of another things is known by diverse names,
X. The various kinds of Theft.
according to the diversity of those things that are taken away without the
Will an Knowledge of the Owners.

For if any private thing be taken from a private Person, Theft.
it is called Theft.

If from a public Person, Pecculatus.
it is called in Latin Pecculatus.

If a Freeman or another Servant be carried into Slavery, Man-stealing.
it is called Man-stealing.

But if a Sacred thing be taken away, Sacriledg.
it is called Sacriledg; which Wickedness, the most horrid and lewd of all, is
so common, that the Goods which were piously and wisely given to the necessary
use of Divine Worship, and to the Ministers of the Church, and to the Benefit
of the Poor, are converted to private Covetousness and pernicious Lusts.

But besides the Theft it self, XI. The will of Stealing forbidd'n.
that is, the outward Act; the very Will and Desire of Theft, is forbidd'n by
Gods Law.

For the Law is Spiritual which regards the Soul, the Fountain of our Thoughts
and Designs; for out of the Heart, as our Lord says in. S. Matthew, Matthew. 15.19.
proceed evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, False
Witness.

Now how grievous a Sin Theft is, XII. Theft a grievous Sin.
even the very natural Light and Reason sufficiently show: For it is contrary
to Justice, which renders to every one his own. For the Distributions and
Assignments of Goods, even from the very first beginning have bin determined by
the Law of Nations, and confirmed by Divine and Human Laws, and ought to be
ratified, That every one, (unless we will take away all human Society,) may
enjoy those things which he has rightly gott'n; for as the Apostle says, 1 Cor.
6.10.
Neither Thieves, nor Covetous Persons, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor
Extortioners, shall possess the kingdom of God.

Now there are very many evils, XIII. The mischiefs following Theft.
which follow Theft, which show the Savageness and Enormity of this Sin.

For hereby many rash and unadvised Judgments are made of many Persons.

Hatred breaks forth.

Differences are begun.

Sometimes innocent Men are most cruelly condemned.

And what shall we say concerning that necessity, XIV. The necessity of
Restitution.
which by God himself is laid on all, of satisfying him that is wronged? For,
as S. Austin says, The Sin is not forgiven, unless Restitution be made. Epist.
54.

Of making which Restitution, XV. How difficult Restitution is.
when a Man has accustomed himself to enrich himself with other Men's Goods, how
great must the Difficulty needs be, besides that which every one may judge,
both from the Discourse of others and from his own Sense, we may understand it
from the Testimony of the Prophet Abacuc, Abac. 26.
for he says, Woe to him that increases that which is not his, how long? and to
him that gathers together against himself a thick clay.

He calls the Possesion of other men's Goods a thick Clay,

But there are so many kinds of Theft, XVI. Many kinds of Theft.
that it is very hard to number them; wherefore it is suffcient to have spoken
of these Two, Theft and Robbery, to which, all the rest we shall speak of, are
referred as to their proper Heads. The Curat therefore shall use all Care and
Diligence to bring the Faithful to the Hatred of them, and to deter them from
so horrid a Wickedness.

But to go on with these Parts.

Therefore they also are Thieves, Who are Thieves. First.
that buy stolen Goods, or keep things that were found, lent, or taken away:
For S. Austin says, If thou have found a thing and restorest it not, thou have
robbed. Lib. 50. Hom. hom. 9. and de verbis Apost. Sermon. 19.

But if the true Owner can by no means be found,

But if the Finder cannot be brought to restore them,

They entangle themselves in the same guilt, Secondly.
who in Buying and Selling use Deceit and vanity of Words; the Lord will
revenge their Cheats.

But they are more wicked and unjust in this kind of Theft, Deuteronomy. 25.17.
For in Deuteronomy it is written, Thou shall not have diverse weights in the
Bag. And in Leviticus, Levit. 19.35.
Do nothing unjust in judgment, in mete-yard, in weight or in measure; let the
Balances be just, let the Weights be just, let the Bushel and the Quart be
just; Prove. 20.32.
for diverse Weights are an abomination to the Lord, and a deceitful Balance is
not good.

It is plain Theft also in those Laborers and Artificers, Thirdly.
who require a full and whole reward of them, for whom they have not done their
just and due labor.

Neither are unfaithful Servants and Stewards of their Lords or Masters other
than Thieves: Fourthly.
but rather by so much worse than the other kind of Thieves who are not trusted
with the Keys, because from such a thievish Servant nothing in the House can
well be locked or shut up.

Moreover, Fifthly.
they seem to steal, who with feigned and hypocritical words, or by deceitful
lies extort Money from others; whose sin is by so much the greater, because they
add Theft to a Lie.

They also are to be reckoned in the number of Thieves, Sixthly.
who being put into some private or public Office, using none, or but little
care therein, neglect their Duty and enjoy the Reward and Wages only.

It would be very tedious and difficult, Seventhly.
as we said before, to go through the other multitude of Thefts, found out by
restless Covetousness, which has known all the ways of getting Money; and
therefore it seems fit we should speak of Rapine or Extortion, which is the
other head of these Wickednesses:

If the Curat shall first have admonished the People to remember that Sentence
of the Apostle, They that will become rich, 1 Timothy 6.9.
fall into temptation, and the snare of the Devil. Nor does this Precept suffer
any one in any case to exceed it, Whatsoever ye would that men should do to
you, Matt. 7.22.
do ye also to them. And let them always think on that, Tob. 4.16. Luc. 6.31.
What you would not should be done to you, see that you do it not to another.

Extortion therefore is very large: XVIII. The First kind of Extortion or
Robbery.
For they who pay not Laborers their due Reward, are Extortioners or Robbers.
And these men S. James calls to Penance in these words, Go to now ye rich men,
lament houling in your miseries, which will come upon you. Of which Penance, he
subjoyns a Reason: For behold the hire of the ^^borers that reaped your fields,
which you have defrauded them of, cries, and the cry thereof has entered into
the ears of the Lord of Sabbath. And this kind of Robbery is higly condemned
in Leviticus, Deuteronomy, Malachi and Tobit. Levit. 19.13. Deuteronomy. 24.14 Malach.
3.9. Tob. 4.4, 15.

In this crime of Robbery are included, The Second.
those that do not pay, or do turn to other uses, or take to themseves the
Customs, Tributes, Tithes and other things of like kind, which are due to the
Governors of the Church and to the Magistrates.

Hitherto do belong Usurers, The Third.
the most rigid and cruel Extortioners, who pill poor People and rack them with
Usury.

Now, XIX. What Usury is.
That is Usury, whatsoever is received above the Principal, which was lent,
whether Money or any thing else, that may be bought or valued with Money: Ezec.
18.8.
For thus it is written in Ezec. Usury and increase thou shall not receive. And
our Lord in S. Luke says, Luc. 6.31.
Lend ye, hoping for nothing from thence.

Now this was always accounted a most grievous wickedness, XX. Usury a hateful
Crime.
and even very hateful among the Gentiles. Hence came that Saying, What is
Usury? what is it, does it say, to kill a Man? For they that take Usury, sell
the same thing twice, or sell that which is not. De Vsura vide 14. q. 3 and q.
4. passim. Vide item titulum de Vsuris and Decretalibus and D. Thom. 2.2. q.
78. item Amb. lib. de Sab. c. 14.

Also Judges that receive Bribes are Robbers, The Fourth kind of Robbery.
who Sell Judgment, and being greased in the Hand with Bribes and Rewards,
overthrow the rignteous Causes of the Poor and Needy.

Also Cheaters and Defrauders of their Creditors, The Fifth.
and those who take up Goods on their own or other Men's Credit, and do not
discharge their Trust, are guilty of the same Crime of Robbery, whose sin is
the greater, because by occasion of their Unfaithfulness and Deceit, to the
great Damage of the Country, are fain to sell all things the dearer; to whom
that Sentence of David seems properly to belong, Tho wicked Man borrows and
will not pay again.

And what shall we say of those Rich Men, Psalm. 36.12.
who of them that are not able to pay them, The Sixth.
require that they trusted them with, with rigidness; and also contrary to
God's Command, take those things of them for Pawns which are necessary to cover
their Bodies: Exodus 22.26, 27.
For God says, If thou receive of thy Neighbor a Garment for a Pledge, thou
shall restore it him before the Sun set; for it is the only thing wherewith his
Skin is covered, and he has no other to sleep in. If he shall cry to me, I will
hear him; for I am merciful. We will appeal against the Cruelty of the
Exaction, and consequently the Robberies of these Men. Titulum habes de
pignoribus in Decretal. lib. 3. tit. 21. Vide Amb. lib. 5. de Offic. c. 6.

Of the number of those that are by the Holy Fathers called Robbers, The
Seventh.
are those who in time of Dearth or Scarcity keep their Corn from the Market,
and by their Fault cause Provisions to be dearer and scarcer: Which thing
belongs also to all things necessary for Food and Life; to whom pertains that
Curse of Solomon, He that withholds Corn, shall be cursed by the People. Which
kind of Persons the Curats shall admonish of their Wickedness, and chide them
soundly, and plainly show them the Punishments threatened to those Sins.

Thus far of what is forbidden: XXI. Of Restitution.
Now we come to what is commanded: Where Satisfaction or Restitution has the
first place; for the Sin is not forgiven, unless the Thing taken away be
restored.

But because not He only who committed the Theft, XXII. Who are bound to
Restitution.
or who stole, ought to restore it; but all they also who were Partakers of the
Theft, are bound to this Law of Restitution; it must be showed who they are
that cannot be excused from this. Necessity of making Satisfaction and
Restitution.

Now there are many sorts of them; First, Those that command Theft.
and the first is of those that command others to steal; and these are not only
the Companions and Authors of Thefts, but even the very wors t Thieves of all.

Another sort is of those, Secondly. Th^se that persuade to it.
who being like the former in Will, but not in Powor, are notwithstanding to be
ranked in that Degree of Thieves, who tho they cannot command, are yet the
Persuaders and Procurers of Thefts.

Thirdly. Those that consent to it.
The third sort is of those that consent with Thieves.

The fourth sort is of those, Fourthly. Those that partake od it. Psalm. 49.
that being Partners in the Thefts, make a Gain to themselves from thence, if
so be that it may be called Gain; which, unless they reject, exposes them to
eternal Torments; to whom David speaks thus: When thou saw a Thief, thou
consentedst with him.

The fifth sort of Thieves is of those, Fifthly. Those that do not hinder it.
who when they could hinder Thefts to be done, are so far from opposing and
hindering them, that they permit and give them leave.

The sixth sort is of those, Sixthly. Those that do not discover it.
who certainly know both that the Theft was committed, and where it was done,
and yet do not discover it, but make as tho they were ignorant of it.

The last sort is that which contains all the Helpers, Seventhly. Those that
protect the Thief.
Concealers, and Defenders of Thieves, and those who give them House and
Harbor: All which kind of Persons ought to satisfy those who had the Damage,
and are earnestly to be exhorted to that Duty.

Nor are they altogether clear of this Sin, Eighthly. Those that com nend him.
Ninthly.
who approve and commend Theft.

Nor are those Children and Wives free from this Fault, that privily take Money
from their Fathers and Husbands.

But now, XXIII. Of Works of Mercy.
in this Commandment there is this further Meaning, That we compassionate the
Poor and Needy, and relieve their Streights and Hardships with our Ability and
Power: Which Argument, because it is very often and very largely to be handled,
the Curats may gather Matter enough whereby to perform this Duty, out of the
Books of these most Holy Men, Cyprian, John Chrysostom, Gregory Nazianzen, and
others, who have wrote excellently of Alms-deeds. Cyprian. lib. de Opera and
Eleemosyn. Chrysostom. Hom. 32. ad Pop. Antioch. and Hom. 32. and 34. in Matthew.
Vide etiam Hom. 16.37. ad Pop. Antioch. Nazianz Orat. de Pauperum amore. Aug.
Sermon. 50. and 227. de Tempore; item Hom. 18, 19, 28, 45.

XXIV. Motives to persuade to Mercy. The First.
For the Faithful are to be inflamed to the Study and Cheerfulness of helping
those who are to live upon others Mercy.

And they are also to be taught how necessary Alms-deeds are, to wit, that we
be liberal in our Work and Deed toward those that want, and that by the most
true Argument, That in the last Day of Judgment God will detest and condemn to
everlasting Flames those that omit and neglect the Duties of Alms-deeds; but
will commend and bring into his Heavenly Kingdom those that have been bountiful
to the Needy. Both which Sentences were pronounced by the Mouth of Christ our
Lord: Come ye blessed of my Father, possess the Kingdom prepared for you; and,
Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting Fire.

Besides, The Second. Luke 6.38.
the Priests shall use those Places very fit to persuade hereto: Give, and it
shall be given you.

They shall produce the Promise of God, The Third.
than which nothing can be imagined more full, nothing more glorious. For, Mar.
10.29.
there is no one that shall have left, etc. that shall not only receive an
hundredfold now in this World, but in the World to come Life everlasting.

And they shall add that which was spoken by Christ our Lord: The Fourth. Luc.
16.9.
Make ye Friends of the Mamnton of Unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may
receive you into everlasting Tabernacles.

And they shall expound the Parts of this necessary Duty, XXV. We must lend
freely for nothing.
that those that cannot give to the Needy, for Maintenance of Life, may yet at
least lend to the Poor, according to Christ our Lord's Appointment; Lend ye to
them that need, Luc. 6.34.
hoping for nothing from thence. And the Blessedness of so doing, David has
expressed; Psalm. 111.5.
Blessed is the Man that takes pity and lends.

Now it is the Part of Christian Piety, XXVI. We must labor to relieve the Poor.
unless they have some other way of doing them good who have need of other Men's
Mercy, to relieve them with Food; as also, for avoiding of Idleness, with their
Work, their Labor, and their Hands, to get those things whereby they may
relieve the Want of the Needy. To this the Apostle exhorts all by his own
Example, in his Epistle to the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians 5.7. 1 Thessalonians. 4.^1.
in these words: For ye know how ye ought to imitate us: And to the same; Do
your endeavor to be quiet, and to do your Business, and labor with your Hands,
as we have commanded you: Ephesians. 4.25.
And to the Ephesians; Let him that stole, steal no more; but rather let him
labor, working with his Hands that which is good, that he may have wherewith to
give to him that suffers want.

We must also use Frugality, XXVII. We must have frugally.
and not be overchargeable to others, lest we be troublesome and burdensome to
them: And this kind of Temperance was very apparent in all the Apostles; but it
shone most bright in S. Paul, who wrote thus to the Thessalonians: 1 Thessalonians. 2 9.
Ye remember, Brethren, our Labor and Travel, laboring night and day; that we
might not be chargeable to any of you, we preached to you the Gospel of God.
And the same Apostle, in another place; In labor and travel working night and
day, that we might not be burdensome to any of you.

But that the Faithful may abhor every kind of these heinous Wickednesses,
XXVIII. How to resist Theft and Robbery.
it will be fit for the Curat to seek out of the Prophets, and the other Divine
Books, and show what a hatred God has against Theft and Rapine, and the
dreadful Threatenings of God denounced against those that commit them. The
Prophet Amos cries out, Amos 8.5, ^.
Hear this, O ye that grind the Poor, and cause the Needy of the Land to fail,
saying, When will the New Mood be gone, that we may sell our Merchandise; and
the Sabbath, that we may set open our Wheat; that we may lessen the Measure,
and increase the ^hekel, and falsify the Balances by deceit? There are many
things to the same purpose in Jeremy, in the Proverbs, and Ecclesiasticus,
Hier. 5. and 21. and 22. Prove. 21. Eccl. 10.

Nor is it to be doubted,

Now that Christians may exercise all Offices of Liberality and Benignity to
the Poor and Needy, XXIX. How Men are to be exhorted to liberality.
(which thing belongs to the other part of this Commandment.) Let the Curats
produce those very ample Rewards which God promises that he will give to the
Bountiful and Liberal, both in this and in the other Life.

But because there are not wanting those that even excuse themselves in their
Thefts, XXX. Theft or Rapin has no excuse.
they are to be admonished, That God will accept no Excuse for their Sin; yea,
and that so it will be, that by their very Excuses their Sin will not only not
be made less, but will be wonderfully increased.

And here the Folly of Noblemen is not to be endured, XXXI. The vain excuse of
great Men.
who seem to themselves to extenuate their Fault, by saying, That it is not for
Covetousness or Avarice that they take the Goods of other Men from them; but to
continue the Greatness of their Family, and of their Forefathers, whose Esteem
and Dignity would perish, if it were not underpropp'd by the Addition of other
Men's Goods or Estates.

From whom that dangerous Error is to be taken away, XXXII. How great Men are
to be reduced from Rapin.
and they are to be taught, that the only way of preserving and enlarging the
Wealth, Riches and Glory of their Ancestors, is to obey the Will of God and
keep his Commandments, by contempt whereof the best gott'n and surest settled
Riches are overthrown; even Kings have been thrown headlong from their Royal
Throne, and from the highest pitch of Honor, into whose places sometimes the
meanest Men, and those whom they most of all scorned and hated, were called of
God. It is past Belief how angry God is at this kind of Persons. Of this Isaiah
is a Witness, by whom God says thus, Isay. 1.
Thy Princes are Infidels and Companions of Thieves. They all love Gifts, and
follow after Rewards; For this thing, says the Lord God of Hosts, the Mighty
one of Israel: Ah! I will ease me of my Adversaries, and avenge me of my
Enemies; And I will turn my hand to thee, and will purely purge out all thy
Dross. Vide Trid. Sess. 22. decret. de reform. 11. item Conc. Aurel. 3. cap.
13.22. Paris. 1. cap. 1. Tuton. 2. c. 25. Aurel. 5. cap. 15. Mogunt. c. 6.11.
Worm. c. 75. Aquisgr. c. 88. Vide and 1.2. q. 2. variis in capit.

There are some, XXXIII. Another vain excuse of Noblemen.
who now forbear that Reason of their Splendour and Glory, and bring another,
for the more easy Maintenance and Provision for Sustenance and Life: These are
to be reproved and taught, How impious both the Works and the very Prayers of
those Men are, that prefer any Advantage before the Will and Glory of God,
which, by neglecting his Commandments we offend in a wonderful manner.

And yet, Eccles. 5.17.
For upon the Thief, says Ecclesiastes, is Confusion and Repentance.

But supppose it were no disadvantage to them, XXXIV. How in^urious the Thief
is to God.
yet the Thief does highly dishonor Gods Name: For he opposes his most holy
Will, despises his most wholesome Commands: From which Fountain springs all
Error, all Dishonesty, all Impiety.

And what shall we say to that which sometimes we may hear from Thieves, XXXV.
The dangerous excuse of others
who contend that they do not sin herein, because what they take, they take it
from rich and wealthy Men, and thereby do them no hurt, and that the Rich feel
no hurt at all; verily a miserable and dangerous excuse indeed.

Another thinks that this ought to be received as a Satisfaction for him,
XXXVI. Another excuse to be condemned. Ephesians. 4.18.
That he has took a custom of Stealing, so that he cannot easily forbear,
either in mind or Action, who, unless he hearken to the Apostle's Saying. Let
him that stole, henceforth steal no more; whether he will or no, must also take
a custom of enduring eternal Punishments.

There are some that excuse themselves, XXXVII. The base excuse of others.
That they had a fair Occasion given them of taking away something from
another: For that common Proverb is true; Those that are not Thieves, are yet
made such by Opportunity. Who are to be brought off from that evil Opinion, by
this means, That we are to resist evil desires. For if presently, that were to
be performed in Action, which our Lust would persuade to; what measure, what
end will there be of horrid Crimes and wickedness? That Excuse therefore is
most base, or is rather a plain Confession even of the greatest Intemperance
and Injustice.

For he that says,

There are others who say, XXXVIII. Another vain excuse.
they steal for Revenge sake, because they were in the same manner wronged by
others; who are thus to be answered: First that it is not lawful to return
Injury with Injury, and then that no one can be a Judge in his own cause, and
much less can it be allowed, to punish one for another fault committed against
him.

Lastly, XXXIX. Another foolish excuse.
some think that they have defended and excused their Theft sufficiently by
this Reason; that seeing they are oppressed by Debt, they cannot otherwise be
freed from that Oppression, but by Theft: Which kind of Persons must be thus
dealt with, That there is no Debt more grievous, and wherewith Mankind is
pressed, than that Debt, whereof in the Lord's Prayer we daily make mention,
Math. 9.18.
Forgive us our debts; wherefore it is the part of the maddest Man in the
World, to be willing to owe more to God, i. e. to sin more, that he may pay
what he ows to Men; and that it is much better to be cast into Prison, than to
be cast into everlasting Torments in Hell; and that it is far more grievous to
be condemned by the Judgment of God than of Men: And moreover that they ought
humbly to fly to Gods Help and Mercy, of whom they may obtain whatsoever they
have need of.

There are other kind of Excuses,

The Eighth COMMANDMENT of the DECALOGVE.
Thou shall not hear false Witness against thy Neighbor.

OF how great, I. The frequent explication of this Commandment necessary. Jac.
3.2.
not only Advantage but Necessity also the Diligent Explication and Admonition
of the Duty of this Commandment is, the Authority of S. James warns us in these
words, If any one offend not in Words, he is a perfect Man. And again, The
Tongue is indeed but a little Member, and yet it boasts great things. Behold a
little Fire, how great a Wood it kindles? And so forth to the same purpose.

Whereby we are admonished of two things. First, II. The vice of the Tongue
very extensive. Psalm. 11.5.31.
That the Vice of the Tongue extends very far, which is also confirmed by that
saying of the Prophet, All Men are Liars. That it is in a manner the only Sin
which seems proper to all Men.

The Other, III. The Tongue the instrument of innumerable mischiefs.
That thence proceeds innumerable Mischiefs; since often times by the fault of
an ill-tongu'd Person, the Estate, Fame, Life, yea, and the Salvation of the
Soul, are lost, either of him who is wronged, because he cannot patiently
endure the Disgrace, but is pievishly discontented at it, or of Him that does
the wrong, because being deterred with a little Shame and a false Opinion of
any ones Credit, he cannot be brought to make Satisfaction to him that is
wronged.

Wherefore the Faithful are here to be admonished, IV. How this Commandment to
be received.
To give very great Thanks to God for this so wholesome a Command of not bearing
false Witness: Whereby not only we our selves are forbidden to wrong others;
but also by this Obedience we are forbidd'n to be wronged by others.

But we will proceed in this Commandment after the same way and manner, V. In
this Commandment are two Laws. Forbidding, Commanding.
as we did in the rest, to wit, observing therein two Laws.

The One, forbidding to bear false Witness.

The other, commanding to measure all our Words and Works with naked Truth, all
Dissembling and Deceit being laid aside. Of which Duty the Apostle admonishes
the Ephesians in these words, Doing the Truth in Love, Ephesians. 4.15.
let us increase in him in all things.

Now the First part of this Commandment has this Sense, VI. What this
Commandment forbids.
That tho by the Name of false Testimony is signified whatsoever is constantly
said of another, either in good or evil part, whether in Judgment or out of
Judgment. Yet that Testimony is especially forbidd'n which in Judgment is
falsely given by one that is sworn. For a Witness swears by God, because the
Words of one so justifying them, and using the name of God thereupon have very
much Weight and Belief.

Now because this Testimony is dangerous, Matthew. 18.
that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word should stand.

But that the Faithful may plainly understand this Commandment, VII. Who is
said to be our Neighbor.
they are to be taught what this word Neighbor signifies, against whom it is
unlawful to bear false VVitness. Now our Neighbor, as is gathered from the
Doctrine of Christ our Lord, is any one whosoever that wants our help, whether
he be related to us or not, whether of the same City or Town, or a stranger,
whether a Friend or an Enemy. Vide Aug. Epist. 52. ad Macedon. and de Cath.
rudibus. 26.

For it is wicked to believe that it is lawful to speak any thing falsely in
Evidence against Enemies, VIII. It is wicked to bear false Witness against
Enemies.
whom by the Command of God and our Lord we ought to Love.

Yea, IX. Unlawful to bear false Witness against ^^les self. Lib. 2 de civit.
Dei. c. 20.
and because every one in a certain sort is Neighbor to himself, it is not
lawful for any one to bear false VVitness against himself; which thing they
that commit, branding themselves with the mark of Shame and Disgrace, wound
both themselves and the Church, whose Members they are; after the same manner
as they trouble the City who wilfully kill themselves: For so says S. Austin
Nor to those that rightly understand, could it seem not to be forbidd'n, that
any one should be a false VVitness against himself, because in the Commandment,
it is added, Against thy Neighbor: If any one therefore bear false VVitness
against himself, let him not therefore think that he is not guilty of this Sin,
since he that loves, takes his rule of loving his Neigbor from himself.

But because we are forbidd'n to wrong our Neighbor by false VVitness, X. For
Friendship's sake we may not bear false Witness.
let no one therefore think the contrary to be allowed us, by Perjury to profit
or advantage him that is related to us by Nature or Religion. For we must not
gratify any Body by a Lie or by Vanity, much less by Perjury. Wherefore S.
Austin, de mendacio ad Crescentium, c. 12.13, 14. teaches from the Sentence of
the Apostle, that a Lie is to be reckoned among false Testimonies, although it be
spoke in the false Commendation of any one. For handling that place, 1 Cor. 1.5.
But we are found false Witnesses of God, if we bear witness against God, that
he raised Christ from the Dead, whom he raisd not, if the Dead rise not: The
Apostle, says he, calls it false Testimony, if any one lies concerning Christ,
and what seems to belong to his Praise.

But it very often happens, XI. He that favors one, hurts another.
that he that favors one Person wrongs another, and is a certain means of
causing the Judge to err, who sometimes being misled by false Witnesses, is
forced to determine sometimes injuriously against that which is right.

And sometimes it happens, XII. How dangerous it is to make use of false
Witnesses.
that he that has overcome in Judgment by means of any ones false Testimony,
and goes away unpunished, rejoicing in his unjust Victory, he takes up a custom
of corrupting and using false VVitnesses, by whose help he hopes to attain to
whatsoever he desires.

But this even to the Witness himself falls out very unlucky, XIII. To bear
false Witness is injurious even to the person that gives it.
that he is known to him, whom by his Oath, he did help and assist, to be false
and perjured, and (which evil succeeds to him of Sentence) he daily takes a
greater Practice and Custom of Lewdness and Impudence.

As therefore the Vanities, XIV. The lies of Lawyers forbidd'n.
Lies and Perjuries of Witnesses; so also of Accusers, of the Guilty, of
Patrons, Kinsfolks, Proctors and Advocates, and even of all that are concerned
in Judgment are forbidd'n.

Lastly, XV. To Witness a Falsehood, every where forbidd'n. Levit. 19.11.
God forbids all Testimony, not only in Judgment, but out of Judgment, that may
bring any wrong or hurt to another. For in Leviticus where these Commandments
are repeated, we read thus, Ye shall not steal, ye shall not lie, neither shall
any one deceive his Neighbor. So that no one can doubt but that every Lie is
rejected of God and condemned in this Commandment. Which thing David very
plainly testifies in this manner, Psalm. 5.7.
Thou shall destroy all them that speak lies.

Now by this Commandment is forbidd'n, XVI. The vice of Detraction detestable.
not only false Testimony, but even the hateful Will and practice of speaking
ill or another; from which Plague it is incredible how many and how grievous
Inconveniences and Evils do spring. This Vice of Reviling, and disparaging
another secretly, the Holy Scripture in many places reproves. I did not so much
as eat with such a One, Psalm. 100.5.
says David. And S. James, Jac. 4.11.
Speak not evil one of another, my Brethren.

But the Sacred Scriptures do not only afford us Precepts, An Example. Hester.
13.
but Examples also, whereby the greatness of this Sin is shown; for Aman by
forged Crimes had so incensed Assuerus against the Jews, that he commanded all
that Nation to be killed. Sacred History is full of Examples of this kind, by
remembrance whereof, the Priests shall endeavor to deter the Faithful from the
foulness of this thing.

But that the greatness of this Sin, XVII. Who are Detractors.
whereby another Credit is injured, may evidently appear,

We must know that Men's Reputation is hurt, First.
not only by Calumny or Slander,

But by increasing and amplifying their Faults; Secondly.
and if any thing secretly has by any one bin committed, which when it comes to
be known, becomes dangerous and hurtful to a Man's Credit, he that publishes
that matter, where, when, and to whom there is no need so to do, is truly
called a Reviler and Slanderer.

But of all Slander there is none more deadly than that of those, Thirdly.
who slander the Catholic Doctrine and the Preachers of it.

Fourthly.
They are in the same Fault that commend the Teachers of Errors and false
Doctrins.

Nor are they to be left out of the Number of these Men, Fifthly.
nor are they free from this Fault, who lending their Ears, to Revilers and
Slanderers, reprove them not, but willingly assent to, or belive them. For to
slander, or to hearken to a Slanderer, as S. Hierom and S. Bernard write, it is
not easily manifest whether of the two is more damnable: For there would be no
Slanderers, if there were none to listen to their Slanders. S. Hierom. Epist.
ad Nepotianum circa finem. D. Bernard. lib. 2. de Consider. ad Eugen. in fine.

Of the same sort are those, Sixthly.
who by their Artifices cause Men to fall out, and quarrel among themselves,
and are greatly delighted in keeping Differences: So that breaking the
strictest Friendships and Societies, by their feigned words, they compel the
most friendly Men in the World, to immortal Hatred and Quarrels. This Plague
the Lord exceedingly hates. Lev. 19.6.
Thou shall not be a Tale-carrier nor Whisperer among the People. Such were
many of Saul's Counselors, who strove to estrange his Love from David, and to
provoke the King against him.

Lastly, mere fair-spoken Men and Flatterers, Seventhly. Flatterers.
who by their smoothing and dissembling Praises buzz into those men's Ears and
Minds, whose Favors, Money and Honor they would purchase, calling, as the
Prophet has it, Isa. 5.20.
Evil good, and good Evil; offend against this part: whom to drive away and rid
our doors of them, David admonishes us in that Saying, Ps. 140.5.
Let the Just Man reprove me with mercy, and let him chide me; but let not the
Oil of the wicked anoint my Head. For tho they revile not their Neighbor, yet
they wound him grievously, who even by commending his Sins, afford him a cause
of persevering in his vices as long as he lives.

And indeed of this kind of Flattery, The First kind of Flattery.
that is worst, which is used for the Calamity and Hurt of our Neighbors: So
Saul when he desired to expose David to the Fury and Sword of the Philistines,
he soothed him with these words, Behold my eldest Daughter Moreb, 1. Reg.
her will I give thee to wife, only be thou valiant and fight the Lords
battles: So the Jews in that treacherous Speech of theirs, thus spoke to Christ
our Lord, Master, Marc. 12.14.
we know, that thou art true, and teach the way of God in Truth.

But far more hurtful is the Speech of those Friends, The worst sort of
Flattery.
Relations and Kinsfolks, which they sometimes flatteringly use to those, who
being sick to Death, are now at their last Breath: while they tell them that
even then, they are in no danger of Death, and bid them be merry and cheerful,
and keep them from Confession of their Sins, as from a sad melancholy Thought:
And lastly, while they divert their Minds from all Care and Thought of their
utmost Dangers, in which they are very greatly involved. Wherefore all kinds of
Lies are to be avoided: But especially that whereby any one may be most
damnifi'd.

But most wicked of all is that Lie which is made against Religion,

God is also grievously offended with those Slanders and Reproaches which are
committed by Libels, Eighthly. The Author of Libels.
such as they call Libellous Pamphlets, and other Contumelies of the like kind.
De libel. famos. Vide Bull. Pij V. 147. datam Ann. 1572. and Bull. Greg. XIII.
4. datam eodem anno.

Besides, XVIII. A merry Lie forbidden.
either for Sport or for Office sake, to deceive by a Lie, although no one thereby
have any Gain or Loss, yet it is altogether unworthy a Man: For so the Apostle
admonishes us, Ephesians. 4.25.
Putting away lying, speak ye the Truth. Vide D. Thom. 2.2 q. 110. art. 3 and 4.

For thereby comes a great Proneness to frequent and more grievous Lying; Note
the Reason.
and from telling of Lies for Mirth, Men take a custom of Lying; whence they
fall into a Reputation of not speaking Truth at all: wherefore to gain Belief
they are necessitated to swear at all times.

Lastly, XIX. All dissembling forbidd'n.
in the former part of this Commandment, Dissembling is forbidden; and not only
those things which are spoken dissemblingly, but which are done so, are joined
with this Sin: For as well Words as Actions, are Notes and certain Signs of
those things which are in the Mind of any one; and for this Reason our Lord
often chiding the Pharisees, calls them Hypocrites: And thus much of the former
Law of this Commandment, which has relation to things forbidden. Vide. D. Thom.
2.2 q. 211. per totam.

Now we will explain what the Lord commands in the other. And the force and
virtue of this part of this Commandment tends hither, XX. The other part of the
Commandment.
That all Judgments of Courts be justly exercised and according to Law, and
that Men do not wrest and usurp Judgment.

For it would not be fit to judge another Man's Servant, XXI. A Judge cannot
condemn one not subject to him. Romans 14.4.
as the Apostle writes, lest they give Sentence before the Matter or Cause be
known: In which respect the Counsel of the Priests and Scribes was fault, y who
gave Judgment concerning S. Stephen; and this was the Fault also of the
Philippian Magistrates, of whom the Apostle says, Act. 7 59. Act. 16.37.
They have sent us, after having bin publicly beaten, into Prison, being
Romans and uncondemned; and now they would thrust us away privily. Vide in 6
lib. 5. titul. 7. de privilegiis. c. 1. and ibid. lib. 2. lit. 2. de foro
competenti.

Let them not condemn the Innocent, XXII. What is required of Judges.
or discharge the Guilty; let them not be moved with Reward or Favor, with
Hatred or Love: For so Moses admonishes the Elders, whom he had made Judges of
the People, John 7.19.
Judge ye what is just, whether he be citizen or stranger, there shall be no
difference of persons, so shall ye bear the Little as the Great; neither shall
ye accept any ones person, because the Judgment is Gods.

Now concerning the Guilty, XXIII. The Guilty being asked by the Judge, ought
not to lie.
God will have them confess the Truth, when they are asked according to the
Form of Judgment: For that Testimony and Declaring is a kind of Confession of
the Praise and Glory of God, as appears from Joshuah's Sentence, who exhorting
Achan to the Confession of the Truth, Jos. 7.19.
says, My Son! give glory to the Lord the God of Israel. Vide. D. Thom. 2.2. q.
96. per totos 4. Articulos.

But because this Commandment chiefly concerns the Witnesses, XXIV. The
Witnesses chiefly concerned here.
the Curat shall diligently treat concerning them also: For such is the Force
of the Commandment, that it not only forbids false Testimony, but also commands
the Truth to be told.

For in human Affairs there is very great Use of the Testimony of Truth, XXV.
The chief use of Witness-bearing.
because there are innumerable things whereof we must needs be ignorant, unless
we know them by the Credit of Witnesses. Wherefore there is nothing so
necessary as the Truth of Testimonies in those things which we neither know of
our selves, and yet ought not to be ignorant of Concerning which, the Sentence
of S. Austin is memorable, He that conceals the Truth, and he that utters a
Lie, are each of them guilty; the one, because he will do no good; the other,
because he would do hurt. Haec Sententia citabatur olim a Gratiano ex August.
sed apud August. non est inventa. Similiter legitur apud Isidorrm, Lib. 3. c.
59.

Yet sometimes it is lawful to conceal the Truth, XXVI. When we may conceal the
Truth.
but out of Judgment: For in Judgment when the Witness is lawfully asked by the
Judge, the Truth is wholly to be laid open.

Yet here the Witnesses are to take heed, XXVII.
lest trusting too much to their own Memory,

The rest are Counselors and Advocates, Atturneys and Sollicitors; XXVIII.
What is required of Counselors.
these therefore ought not to be wanting in their Labor and Defense, when Men
have need of them, and kindly to help those that are needy, not to undertake to
defend unjust Causes, nor by Calumny to prolong Suits, nor for gains sake to
encourage them.

And as to the Reward of their Labor and Service, Vide 14. q. 5. c. non sane.
D. Thom. 2.2. q. 71. Art. 5.

Sollicitors and Accusers are to be admonished not to create danger to any one
by unjustly charging them with Crimes, XXIX. What required of Officers and
Sollicitors.
being led thereto either by Love or Hatred, or any other Lust. Lastly, this
Commandment is given of God to all pious Persons, that in all their
Entertainments and Discourses, they always speak the Truth from their Heart, to
say nothing that may hurt another Reputation, no not even of those by whom
they know themselves to have bin provoked and injured, since they ought always
to remember, that there is between them so great a Nearness and Society, that
they are Members of the same Body.

But that the Faithful may the more freely take heed of this Vice of Lying,
XXX. Things to be aganst Lying.
the Curat shall propose to them the exceeding great Misery and Baseness of
this Sin.

For in Sacred Scripture the Devil is called, Joh. 8.44.
The Father of Lies: For because the Devil stood not in Truth, he is a Liar and
the Father of Lies.

And to overthrow this so great a Sin, Secondly.
he shall add those Mischiefs, which follow a Lie; and because they are
innumerable, he shall show the Fountains and Heads of those Inconveniences and
Calamities.

And First, Thirdly.
so far as it is an Offense to God, and how far a vain and lying Person incurrs
his Hatred, he shall declare from Solomon's Authority in that place, Prove. 6.
There are Six things which the Lord hates, and the Seventh his Soul abhors, a
proud Look, a lying Tongue, Hands that shed innocent Blood, a Heart devising
evil Thoughts, Feet that are swift to run to Mischief, him that tells Lies, and
a deceitful Witness, and so, forth.

Who is there therefore that can promise him Safety, Fourthly.
who is so notably hated of God, that he shall not be most grievously punished?

And what is there more base or foul, Fifthly.
as S. James says, Jac. 3.6.
Than with the same Tongue wherewith we bless God, and the Father, to slander
Men that are made after the Image and Likeness of God? So that out of the same
Fountain does flow sweet and bitter Water.

For the Tongue, Sixthly.
which before gave Praise and Glory to God, afterward, as much as in it lies,
does disgrace and reproach it by Lying.

Wherefore it comes to pass, Seventhly.
That Liars are excluded from the Possession of the Bliss of Heaven: For when
David asked thus of God, Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? The Holy
Spirit answers, He that speaks the Truth from his Heart, and has used no Deceit
in his Tongue.

There is in a Lie this further very great Disadvantage, Eighthly.
That this Disease of the Mind is almost incurable.

For when a Sin is committed by falsely laying a Crime to any ones Charge, XXXI.
How a Lie is incurable.
or by slandering his Fame or Reputation, it cannot be pardoned unless the
Slanderer satisfy the Person whom he slandered for the wrong he did him. But
this is very hard to be done, as we learned before, by Men deterred with vain
shame, and a certain Opinion of their Dignity: So that there is no doubt that
he is destined to the eternal Punishments of the Damned, who remains in this
Sin.

Nor may any one hope to obtain Pardon for his Calumnies or Slanders, Let
Slanderers observe this.
unless he first satisfy him, whose Worth and Credit he has wronged, either
publicly in Judgment, or in private and familiar Conversation.

Besides this Damage spreads it self very wide, XXXII. How great hurt comes of
Lying.
and falls upon others, whereby through Vanity and Lies, Faith and Truth, which
are the straitest Bands of human Society, are taken away, and these being once
gone, Life's greatest Confusion follows; so that Men seem to differ nothing at
all from Devils.

The Curat shall further teach, XXXIII. Prattling discommended.
That Prattling is to be avoided, by shunning whereof, both other Sins will be
escaped, and also great Security against Lying; from which Vice Pratlers cannot
easily restrain themselves.

Lastly, XXXIV. The first Excuse of a Lie to be rejected.
the Curat shall take away that Error from them that excuse themselves for vain
Babbling, and defend their Lies by the Example of Wisemen, whose part it is,
say they, to lie in season: He shall tell them, what is most true, That the
Wisdom of the flesh is Death.

He shall exhort his Hearers in their Difficulties and Streights to trust in
God,

Those that charge others with the cause of their Lies, The second Excuse null.
by whom they were deceived by Lies, are to be taught, That it is not lawful
for Men to revenge themselves, and that Evil is not to be recompensed with
Evil, Romans 12.17.
but rather That Evil is to be overcome with Good: But if it were meet to make
such a Return, yet this could not be profitable to any one to be revenged to
his own loss; but this would be the greatest Damage which we do by telling a
Lie.

To those that bring in the Frailty and Weakness of human Nature, The third
Excuse vain.
this Precept of Duty shall be taught, to wit, To implore Gods help, and not to
yield to human Infirmity.

Those that allege Custom, The fourth Excuse foolish.
are to be admonished, if they have bin used to Lie, that they endeavor to
take the contrary custom of speaking Truth, and especially seeing that they
that Sin by Use and Custom, sin more grievously than others.

And because there are some that cover themselves with the excuse of other Men,
The fifth Excuse ridiculous.
whom they say, do commonly lie and forswear themselves, they are to be drawn
from this Opinion by this means, that ill Men are not to be imitated, but to be
reproved and corrected; but when we our selves lie, our Admonition will have
less Authority in reproving and correcting of another.

As for others thus defending themselves, The Sixth Excuse evil.
that by speaking Truth Men oftentimes have brought Inconvenience on themselves
or others, the Priests shall deal thus with them, That this is an Excuse, not a
Defense; Since it is the Duty of a Christian to suffer any Loss, rather than to
Lie.

There remains two sorts of those that excuse themselves in Lies. The one is of
those that say, Two other Excuses to be removed.
they tell Lies for Mirth's sake; the other is of those that do it for
Advantage sake, because they can neither buy nor sell without the Use of Lies.
Both these sorts the Curat ought to turn from their Error. And the former of
them he shall draw from this Vice, both by teaching how much the Use of Lying
increases the Practice in that kind of Sin, and by often inculcating, Matthew.
12.26.
that Of every idle word an account is to be given. But the last sort he shall
chide more sharply, in whose very Excuse there is their greater Accusation,
that make their boast that they give no Credit or Authority to those Words of
God: Seek first the kingdom of God, and the justice thereof; and all these
things shall be added to you.

The Ninth and Tenth COMMANDMENTS of the DECALOGVE.
Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors House: Nor shall thou desire thy Neighbors
Wife, nor his Servant, nor his Maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing
that is his.

IN these two Commandments, I. The force and extent of these Commandments.
which are delivered in the last place, we are to know first of all, that the
same Order in a manner is followed, as was observed in the other Commandments:
For that which is here appointed in these words, tends hither, That if any one
be careful to keep the former Commandments of the Law, let him chiefly do this;
let him not covet, because he that does not covet, being content with that that
is his own, seeks not what is another, rejoices at other Men's welfare; he will
give Glory to the immortal God, and will offer him the greatest Thanks, will
honor the Sabbath, i. e. he will enjoy a perpetual rest, and he will reverence
his Betters. Lastly, he will hurt no body either in Deed, or in Word, or any
other way: For the root and seed of all Evils, is evil Concupiscence, wherewith
those that are inflamed, are carried headlong into every kind of Wickedness and
Mischief. Vide Aug. lib. 1. Retract. c. 15. and Epist. 200. and lib. 9. de
Civit. Dei. c. 4 and 5.

These things being observed,

But tho we have therefore joined these two Commandments together, II. Why
these two Commandments here delivered together.
because since the Argument of them is not unlike, they have the same way of
teaching; yet the Curat in exhorting and admonishing, may handle them either
together or apart, as he shall think more convenient. But if he undertake the
Office of Interpreting the Decalogue or Ten Commandments, he shall show, what
the Dissimilitude of these Two Commandments is, and how the one Concupiscence
or Covetousness differs from the other, which difference S. Austin declares in
his Book of Questions upon Exodus. Quaest. 77. in Exodus Vide item D. Thom. 2.2.
q. 122. a. 7. ad 3 and 4.

For the one of them has respect only to Profit and Advantage; III. The
difference of the Ninth and Tenth Commandments.
the other, to Lust and Pleasure; If therefore any one covet a Field or a
House, he rather follows his Gain and Profit than his Pleasure; but if he
desires another Man's Wife, he burns with the desire, not of Profit, but of
Pleasure.

Now of these Commandments there is a double necessity.

The One, IV. The necessity of these Commandments. The first Necessiy.
that the meaning of the Sixth and Seventh Commandments might be explained; for
although, by a kind of light of Nature, we may understand, that the desire of
enjoying another Man's Wife is forbidd'n, because Adultery is forbidden: For if
it were lawful to covet, it were lawful also to enjoy: Yet many of the Jews
were so blinded with Sin, that they could not be persuaded to believe that this
was forbid'n of God; yea tho this Law of God was published and known, yet there
were many who professed themseves Interpreters of the Law, that were involved
in this Error, as we may observe from that Speech of our Lord in S. Matthew,
Matthew. 5.
Ye have heard that it has been said by them of old time, Thou shall not commit
Adultery; but I say to you, etc.

The other necessity of these Commandments is, V. The Second Necessity.
that some things are distinctly and explicitly forbidd'n, which in the Sixth
and Seventh were not so: For, for example, the Seventh queryCommandment forbids
every one unjustly to seize another Man's Goods, or to endeavor to take them
away: But this forbids every one so much as in the least to covet them, although
by Right and Law he may obtain the thing, by getting whereof he sees his
Neighbor damnified.

But first of all, VI. Why God added these two Commandments to the rest.
before we come to the Explication of the Commandment, the Faithful are to be
taught, That by this Law we are not only learned to restrain our Desires, but
also to observe the Love of God to us, which is infinite.

For when, VII. For our sake these Commandments were added.
by the former Commandments of the Law, he had fenced us about, as it were with
Walls, that no one should wrong either us or ours; by this Commandment, joined
to the former, he was pleased to provide, that we should not hurt our selves by
our own Appetites; which we might easily do, if we might freely and fully covet
and desire all things. By this Law therefore of Not coveting, God provided,
that the Spurs of Desires, wherewith we are pricked forward to all hurtful
things, by virtue of this Law are in a manner blunted, that they sting us the
less, and we have therefore the longer space of time to free our selves from
the troublesome Importunity of our Desires, to perform those many and very great
Duties of Piety and Religion which we owe to God.

Nor does this Law teach us this only; VIII. God's Law is to be ob^v'd not only
in our outward, but in our inward Action^.
but it shows us also, that it is of such a kind, as is to be kept not only in
outward Performances of our Duties, but also in the inward Sense of the Soul:
So that there is this difference between the Laws of God and the Laws of Men,
that the Laws of Men are satisfied with outward Performances only; but the Laws
of God, forasmuch as God looks at the Heart, require a pure Soul, and a sincere
Chastity and Integrity.

God's Law therefore is as it were a kind of Looking-glass, A singular
Similitude.
wherein we may see the Corruptions of Nature: Romans 7.^.
Wherefore the Apostle said, I had not known Concupiscence, if the Law had not
said, Thou shall not covet. For since Concupiscence, i. e. the Fuel of Sin,
which had its beginning from Sin, always sticks fast in us; hence we perceive,
that we are born in Sin: wherefore we humbly fly to him, who alone is able to
wipe away the Spot of Sin.

Yet these several Commandments have this thing common with the rest,

As to the Virtue of Forbidding, IX. All Concupiscence is not here forbidden.
lest happily any one should think that that Concupiscence which is indeed
blameless, is in any measure a Vice, as for the Spirit to lust against the
Flesh, or to covet the Justifications of God at all times, the very thing which
David so earnestly desired; the Curat may teach, what that Concupiscence is,
which by appointment of this Law we are to shun.

Wherefore, X. What Concupiscence is.
it must be known, that Concupiscence is a certain Commotion and Force of the
Mind, whereby Men are provoked to desire those delightful things which they
have not.

And as the other Motions of our Minds are not always evil, XI. Harmless
Concupiscence.
so this Force of Concupiscence is not always to be accounted vicious; nor is
it therefore ill to desire Meat or Drink, or when we are cold, to desire to be
warm; or, on the contrary, when we are hot, to desire to be cold.

And indeed this Power of Concupiscence, XII. Concupiscence corrupted by Sin.
by the Will of God, was rightly put into us by Nature; but by the Sin of our
First Parents it came, that overpassing the Bounds of Nature, it grew so far
depraved, that it oftentimes is incited to lust after those things that are
against the Spirit and Reason.

And yet this Power, XIII. The Advantages of a right Concupiscence. The First.
if well governed, and kept within its own Limits, does oftentimes afford no
small Advantages.

For first, It makes us with earnest Prayers to supplicate God, and humbly to
beg of him those things we most earnestly desire: For Prayer is the Interpreter
of our Desires; but if this well, ordered Power of Concupiscence were wanting,
there would not be so many Prayers in the Church of God.

Besides, The Second.
it makes God's Gifts the more dear to us: For by how much we are inflamed with
a more earnest Desire of any thing, by so much the more dear and delightful
will that thing be to us, when we have gotten it.

And then The Third.
the Delight it self, which we feel from the thing desired, makes us with the
greater Devotion to give Thanks to God. If therefore it be lawful at any time
to covet, we must needs confess, that the whole Power of Concupiscence is not
forbidden. And tho S. Paul said, Rom 7.20.
that Concupiscence is Sin; yet that must be taken in the same meaning in which
Moses spoke, Exodus 10.16.
whose Testimony he brings, the same that the Apostle's Words declare; for in
his Epistle to the Galatians he calls it, Gal. 5.10.
the Concupiscence of the Flesh: Walk ye in the Spirit, says he, and ye shall
not fulfill the Desires of the Flesh.

That natural and well-governed Power of Concupiscence therefore, XIV. Two good
sorts of Concupience.
which transgresses not its Limits, is not forbidden; and much less that
spiritual Desire of an upright Mind, whereby we are stirred up to desire those
things that are against the Flesh. For to this kind of Desire the Holy
Scriptures exhort us; Covet ye my Sayings; and, Come unto me, all ye that
desire me. Wisd. 6.1. Eccles. 24.26.

In this Interdict therefore, XV. What Concupiscence is here forbidden.
not the very Power it self of Coveting, which we use as well for that which is
Good, as for that which is Evil; but the use of corrupt Desire, which is called
the Concupiscence of the Flesh, and the Incentive to Sin; and if it have the
Assent of the Mind joined with it, it is always to be accounted vicious, and is
utterly forbidden.

That Lust of Concupiscence therefore only is forbidden, XVI. The Concupiscence
of the Flesh explained.
which the Apostle calls the Concupiscence of the Flesh; to wit, those Motions
of Desire which have no measure of Reason, and which are not contained within
the Limits appointed by God.

This Covetousness is condemned, XVII. Reasons why Concupiscence is forbidden.
The First. The Second.
either because it desires that which is evil, as Adultery, Drunkenness,
Murder, and such like heinous Wickedness, of which the Apostle says, Let us not
covet evil things, even as they coveted them, 1 Cor. 10.6.

Or else because tho the things themselves were not by Nature evil, yet there
is some other cause why it is evil to desire them: Of which sort are those
things which God or his Church forbids us to have, for we may not so much as
desire those things, which it is unlawful for us to have. Such kind of things,
in the Old Law, were the Gold and Silver whereof Idols had been made, which the
Lord, in Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy. 7.26.
forbad that any one should covet.

Besides, The Third.
for this Reason this vicious Covetousness is forbidden, because those things
it desires are another; as House, Servant, Maid, Field, Wife, Ox, Ass, and
many other things; which being another, the Law of God forbids to covet them.

And the very Desire of things of this kind is wicked, XVIII. This
Concupiscence is Sin, and when it is committed.
and to be reckoned among the worst of Sins, when the Mind yields her Assent to
the Desire of them: For then it becomes Sin, when after the Impulse of evil
Desires, the Mind is delighted with that which is evil, or does not resist it;
as S. James, when he shows the Beginning and Progress of Sin, teaches in these
Words: Jac. 1.14.
Every one is tempted, being drawn away and enticed by his Concupiscence. And
then when Concupiscence has conceived, it brings forth Sin; and Sin, when it is
finished, begets Death. Vide D. Thom. 1.2. q 4. art. 7. and 8. item Aug. lib.
12. de Trinit. c. 12. item de Sermon. Dom. in Monte, c. 23. Greg. hom. 19. in
Evang. and l. 4. Moral. c. 27. and in Respons. 11. ad Interrog. Aug. Hieron. in
Amos, c. 1.

Seeing therefore it is thus by Law provided, XIX. The Scope of the Ninth and
Tenth Commandments.
Thou shall not covet; the meaning of these Words is, that we restrain our
Desires from those things which belong to others: For the Thirst of Desire of
other Men's Things is immense and infinite, nor can it ever be satisfied; as it
is written, A covetous Man will not be satisfied with Money: Eccl. 3.5.
Of whom it is thus said in Isaiah, Esa. 5.8.
Woe to you that join House to House, and Field to Field.

But by the Explication of the several Words, XX. The Words expounded.
the Foulness and Greatness of this Sin is more easily understood.

Wherefore the Curat shall teach, XXI. What House here signifies.
That by the Word House is signified not only the Place which we dwell in, but
the whole Inheritance, as is observed from the Use and Custom of Divine
Writers. In Exodus it is written, Exodus 1.21.
That Houses were built of the Lord for the Midwives; to signify, that God had
bettered and enlarged their State and Condition.

From this Interpretation therefore we observe, XXII. What is here meant by
coveting another's Hou e.
That in the Law of this Commandment we are forbidden greedily to covet Riches,
and to envy other Men's Wealth, Power, Nobility; but to be content with our own
State, whatsoever it be, whether low, or high: And then we ought to know, that
the coveting another Man's Glory is forbidden, for this also belongs to House.

Now follows, XXIII. What by Ox and Ass.
Nor Ox, nor Ass: Which shows, that we may not covet not only those things that
are of greater concern, as House, Nobility, and Glory, because they belong to
others; but also things of small moment, whatsoever they are, whether Animate
or Inanimate.

And then it follows, XXIV. What by Servant.
Nor his Servant: Which is to be understood as well of Slaves, as of other
Servants; which, as the rest of the Goods of another Person, we may not covet.

And as for Freemen, XXV. They that serve others are not to be enticed away.
who serve at pleasure, either for Wages, or Love and Observance, no one ought
to corrupt or persuade them, either by Words, or Hope, or Promises, or Rewards,
to forsake them to whose Service they have freely obliged themselves.

Yea,

Now that in this Commandment there is mention made of our Neighbor, XXVI. Why
here is mention made of Neighbor.
the meaning is, That the Vice of those Men might be showed, that use to covet
the Neighboring Fields, and the nearest Houses, or any such things, that border
upon them.

For Neighborhood,

Yet they do not break this Commandment, XXVII. He that desires to buy other
Men's Goods does not sin.
that desire to buy of their Neighbor those things they have to sell, or give
them a just price for them: For such Persons not only do not injure their
Neighbor, but they very much help him, seeing he has more need of, and benefit
by the Money, than of the things he sells.

Now after this Law of not coveting another Goods, XXVIII. The Law of not
coveting another Man's Wife explained.
there follows another, which forbids us to covet another Man's Wife: By which
Law, not that Lust of Concupiscence only, whereby an Adulterer desires another
Man's Wife, is forbidd'n, but also that, wherewith any one being affected,
desires to marry another Man's Wife: For at that time, when a Bill of Divorce
was allowed, it might easily happen, that she that was cast off by one Husband,
might be married to another.

For this Reason the Lord did forbid that either Men should be solicited to
leave their Wives, XXIX. Why this Law was made.
or that the Wives should behave themselves so sour and churlish to their
Husbands, that for that cause there should be any necessity as it were laid on
their Husbands to cast them off.

But now it is a greater Sin, XXX. A gri^vous Sin to covet another Man's Wife.
since it is not lawful for another to marry a Woman, tho she be divorced from
her Husband, unless her Husband be dead: He therefore that covets another Man's
Wife, easily slides out of one Covetousness into another.

For either he will wish her Husband dead,

And the same thing may be said of those Women that are betrothed to another;
XXXI. Or a Woman betrothed to another.
for neither is it lawful to covet them, since they that endeavor to break
these Contracts violate the most holy Band of Faith.

And as it is utterly unlawful to covet her that is married to another; XXXII.
Or a Virgin consecrated to God.
so it is by no means lawful to desire her for his Wife, that is consecrated to
Gods Worship and Religion.

But if any one desires to marry a Woman, Note this Case.
that is already married, supposing her not to be married, and would not desire
to marry her if he knew that she were married to another, (which we read
happened to Pharaoh and Abimimelech, Genesis 12. and 20.
who wished to have Sarah to be their Wife, supposing her not to be married,
but to be Abraham's Sister and not his Wife) he verily that is thus minded,
seems not to break this Commandment.

But that the Curat may lay open the Remedies, XXXIII. Remedies against hurtful
Desires.
that are fit to take away this Vice of Covetousness, he ought to explain the
other part of the Commandment, which consists herein, That if Riches increase,
we set not our Hearts upon them, and that we be ready to apply them to the
Study of Piety and of Divine Matters, and that we freely bestow our Money in
relieving the Miseries of the Poor: And if we are in want, that we bear our
want with an even and a cheerful Spirit; and indeed if in diposing of our Goods
we use Liberality, we shall quench our Covetousness of other Men's Goods. Now
concerning the Praises of Poverty, and despising of Riches, in Sacred
Scriptures, and in the Holy Fathers, it will be easy for the Curat to gather a
great many things, and to teach them to the Faithful. Vide Hier. Epist. 1. ad
Heliod. and 8. ad Demetriadem. and 150. and Haedipiam. q. 1. and 16. ad
Pammach. Item Basil in regul. fusius disputatis. Interrog. 9. Chrysostom. in Epist.
ad Romans ad haec verba, Salutate Priscam Cassian. lib. de institut. and Monach.
c. 13 and 33. and collat. 24. c. 26. Greg. hom. 18. Ezech. Ambr. in c. 6. Lucae
Leonem Magn. in Sermon. de omnibus sanctis. Aug. lib. 17. de Civit. Dei. and
Epist. 98. ad Hilar. and Epist. 109.

By this Law it is also commanded, XXXIV. The other part commanding.
That very earnestly and with our utmost desire, we wish that thing chiefly to
be done, not which we our selves will, but what God wills, as is taught in our
Lords Prayer.

Now it is the Will of God chiefly, XXXV. What the Will of God toward us, is.
that we be made holy after a singular Manner, and that we keep our Soul
sincere and upright, and clean from every Spot, and that we exercise our selves
in those Duties of Mind and Spirit, which are contrary to our bodily Senses,
and that our sensual Desires being brought into subjection, being guided by
Reason and the Spirit, we lead the course of our Life aright; and further, that
we utterly beat down the Force of those Senses which afford matter to our Lusts
and Desires.

But to the quenching this heat of our Desires, XXXVI. The Antidotes of evil
Desires. The First.
this also will be very prevalent, to put before our Eyes, the Inconveniences
we suffer thereby.

The First Inconvenience is, That by Obedience to our Lusts, Sin gets the
utmost force and power in our Soul: Wherefore the Apostle admonishes, Let not
Sin reign in your mortal Body, Romans 6.12.
that ye should obey the Lusts thereof: For even as if we resist our Lusts, the
Power of Sin decays; so if we yield to them, we throw our Lord out of his
Kingdom, and place Sin in his room.

Besides, The Second.
another Inconveniency is, That from this force of Concupiscence, as from a
kind of Fountain, all Sins flow, as S. James teaches, and S. John. says, Jac.
1. 2 John 2.16.
All that is in the World, is the Lust of the Flesh, and the Lust of the Eyes,
and the Pride of Life.

The Third Inconvenience is, The Third.
That the true Judgment of the Mind is darkened: For Men being blinded with the
darkness of their Lusts, think all those things good and excellent whatsoever
they desire.

Besides, The Fourth.
by force of Concupiscence the Word of God is oppressed, which is sown in our
Souls, by God that great Husbandman: For thus it is written in S. Mark, Some
was sown among Thorns: These are they which hear the Word, and the cares of the
World and the deceitfulness of Riches, and so other things entering in by
Concupiscence, choke the Word, and so make it unfruitful.

But now those that above others labor under this Vice of Concupiscence,
XXXVII. These are guilty of this Vice of Covetousness. First.
and whom the Curat ought therefore more earnestly to exhort to observe this
Commandment,

Are those that are delighted with dishonest Sports, and that immoderately
abuse Games.

As also Merchants, Secondly.
who wish for scarcity of things and dearness of Provisions, and take it ill
that others besides themselves do sell Commodities, and sell cheaper than they.

In which case they also Sin, Thirdly.
that wish others to want, that either by selling or buying, they may make a
Gain of them.

And those Soldiers also, Fourthly.
that wish for War, that they may get Plunder.

Fifthly.
And those Physicians that pray for Diseases.

Sixthly.
And those Lawyers that desire a Throng and Multitude of Contentions and Law
Suits.

Seventhly.
And those Tradesmen who being greedy of Gain, wish for Scarcity of such things
as are for Food and other Necessaries, thereby to get Profit to themselves.

Eighthly.
And in this kind they also grievously sin, that are greedy and covetous of
other Men's Glory and Praise, not without some slandering of other Men's Credit,
and specially if they that thus covet it are idle Persons and of no worth; For
Fame and the Glory of Virtue and Industry is not the Reward of Sloth and
Idleness.

THE CATECHISM FOR THE CURATES, BY THE DECREE OF THE Council of TRENT.
PART IV.
Of PRAYER.
AMong the Duties and Offices of a Pastor, I. The Curat's Duty in this Matter.
the Teaching of the Faithful to Pray after a Christian manner, is one of the
Chiefest; the Way and Efficacy whereof many must needs be ignorant of, unless
by the pious and faithful Diligence of the Pastor it be showed them. Wherefore
the chief Care of the Curat ought to be used herein, that Devout Hearers might
understand for What and How they are to pray to God.

Now that Divine Form which Christ our Lord would have known to his Apostles,
II. The Lord's Prayer to be ^otten by Heart.
and through them and their Successors to all Men that should embrace the
Christian Religion, contains all the necessary Parts of Prayer: The Words and
Sentences whereof we ought so to comprehend in Mind and Memory, as to have them
always in a readiness. Now for the Curat's Assistance in teaching the Faithful
to pray, we have here proposed those things that seem more convenient, being
taken from those Writers whose Learning and Ability in this respect is easily
granted; and as for the rest, if there be need, the Pastors may draw them from
the very same Fountains. Concerning Prayer have written Tertullian, Cyprian,
August. Epist. 111. ad Probam. Chrysostom. Hom. 15. Cassian. lib. 9. collat. D.
Thom. in Opusc. and 2.2. q. 85. per 17. Articulos.

Of the Necessity of PRAYER.
FIrst therefore, I. Prayer is necessary.
it must be taught, how Necessary Prayer is; the Precept whereof is not
delivered only as a Counsel, but also has the force of a necessary Command; as
is declared by Christ our Lord, in these Words: We ought always to pray, Luc. 8.

Now, II. The Reasons.
this Necessity of Praying, the Church shows, even in that Proem, as it were,
of the Lord's Prayer.

First.
Being admonished by wholesome Precepts, and taught by Divine Institution, we
are bold to say.

Secondly.
Seeing therefore that Prayer is necessary to Christians, and that his Disciples
asked him, Lord, teach us to pray; Luc. 11.1.
the Son of God prescribed them a Form of Prayer, and gave them hope of
obtaining those things they prayed for.

Thirdly.
And he himself was an Instruction to them of Prayer, Luc. 6.12.
which he not only diligently used, but even watched therein all night.

Fourthly.
Of which Duty afterward the Apostles were not wanting to give Precepts to
those who would devote themselves to the Faith of Jesus Christ.

Fifthly. 1 Pet. 3.7.
For both S. Peter and S. John very diligently instruct the Faithful about it.

Sixthly.
And the Apostle being mindful of the same thing, admonishes Christians in many
Places, of the Necessity of Prayer to Salvation.

Besides, Seventhly.
we want so many Goods and Conveniences for the necessary defense both of the
Soul and Body, that we must needs have recourse to Prayer, as to the only and
best Interpreter of all our Wants, and Procurer of those things we stand in
need of.

For since God owes nothing to any Body, Eighthly.
verily it remains, that we beg of him by Prayer those things we have need of;
which Prayer he has given us as a necessary Instrument to obtain that we
desire; especially since there are manifestly some things which we cannot
obtain but by help thereof.

For Sacred Prayers have this excellent Virtue, Ninthly. Mat. 17.22.
as to cast out Devils: For there is a sort of Devils which is not cast out but
by Fasting and Prayer.

Wherefore, Tenthly.
those Men deprive themselves of the Faculty of many singular Gifts, who use
not this Practice and Exercise of diligent and devout Prayers: For there is
need not only of good, but also of diligent Prayer, for obtaining what you
desire: For, as S. Hierom says It is written, To every one that asks, Mat. 11.9.
it shall be given; if therefore it be not given thee, it is not given thee
because thou do not ask it: Ask therefore, and ye shall receive. Hier. in
cap. 7. Matthew.

Of the Advantage of PRAYER.
NOw this Necessity of Prayer has this great Advantage, I. The Fruits of Prayer.
that of it self it brings forth an abundance of Fruits; a sufficient plenty
whereof the Pastors shall gather out of Sacred Scripture, since there will be
need of teaching them to the Faithful. We, out of that abundance, have made
choice of some, which we thought fit for this Opportunity.

Now, The First.
the first Advantage which we gather from thence, is this; That we honor God in
praying to him: For Prayer is a certain Argument of Religion, which in Sacred
Scripture is compared to a sweet Perfume; Psalm. 140.9.
for, says David, Let my Prayer be directed in thy sight as Incence. Wherefore
by this means we profess our selves subject to God, whom we acknowledge and
declare to be the Author of all Good; from whom only we look for Refuge and
Defense, for Safety and Salvation. Of this Advantage we are admonished in these
words; Psalm. 39.15.
Call upon me in the day of Tribulation, and I will deliver thee, and thou
shall honor me.

Another very large and sweet Fruit of Prayer follows, The Second.
when God hears our Prayers: For according to S. Austin's Sentence, Sermon. 226.
de Tempore.
Prayer is the Key of Heaven: For Prayer, says he, ascends, and God's Mercy
descends; tho the Earth be low, and Heaven high, yet God hears the Voice of Man.

The Force and Advantage of which Duty of Prayer is so great, II. How many and
great Gifts Prayer obtains.
that thereby we obtain the Fullness of Heavenly Gifts: For we get to our selves
the Holy Ghost to be our Guide and Helper, and the Security and Preservation of
our Faith, and escaping of Punishments, and the Protection of God in
Temptations, and Victory over the Devil; There is a real Crowd or Heap of
singular Joy in Prayer. Wherefore the Lord says thus: Joh. 16.14.
Ask, and ye shall receive, that your Joy may be full.

Nor is there left any room to doubt, III. How ready God is to hear Prayer.
but that God's Goodness is ready at hand, and meets our Prayers; which many
Testimonies of the Divine Scriptures prove: which because they are ready at
hand to all, we will only touch those of Isaiah for an Example: Isa. 58.9.
For then, says he, thou shall call, and the Lord shall hear; thou shall cry,
and he shall say, Here I am. And again: Isa 65.24.
It shall be, that before they cry, I will hearken; and while they yet speak, I
will hear. And as for the Examples of those that have obtained of God their
Petitions, because they are in a manner infinite, and evident to all Men, we
omit them.

But sometimes it happens, IV. Why God sometimes hears not our Prayers.
that what we ask we obtain not of God. It is so: But then God takes the
greatest care of our Advantage; either because he bestows upon us other greater
and larger Blessings, or else because what we desire is neither necessary nor
profitable for us; yea, and perhaps it would be not only unnecessary, but
hurtful to us, if he should give it us. For as S. Austin says, God in mercy
denies us some things, which sometimes in anger he grants; and sometimes also
we pray so carelessly and negligently, that even we our selves regard not what
we say. Aug. init. Sermon. 33. de Verb. Dom. item in Joan. tract. 73.

Now since Prayer is the mounting up of our Souls to God, V. What Prayer is.
if in Prayer the Mind, which ought to be carried to God, go a wandering, and
without any care or devotion, we rashly utter the Words of a Prayer; how shall
we call this empty Noise of a Prayer, a Christian Prayer? De Orationis
definitione, vide Damascen. lib. 3. de Fide Orthod. c. 24. Aug. de Sermon
Domini in Monte, c. 7. and Sermon. 230. de Tempore.

Wherefore it is no wonder, Mark this Reason.
if God give us not our Desire since we prove our selves, by the Negligence and
Ignorance of our Prayer, to be in a manner unwilling to have the thing we pray
for, or else pray for that which would hurt us.

But, VI. To those that ask aright, more is given than asked. Luc. 15.
on the contrary, much more is given of God to those that carefully and
diligently pray, than they prayed for: Which also the Apostle testifies in his
Epistle to the Ephesians, and is declared in the Parable of the Prodigal Son,
who thought he should have been well dealt with, if his Father would but have
entertained him as one of his hired Servants. And to those that rightly
consider it, God heaps his Favors, not only on us that ask them, and that not
only in an abundance of Gifts, but also in the speedy granting of them, as the
Holy Scriptures show, when they use that form of speaking, Psalm. 9.17.
The Lord hears the Desire of the Poor.

For God meets the inward and silent desires of the needy,

To these is added another Advantage, The third Advantage of Prayer.
that by Prayer we exercise and increase the Virtues of the Mind, and
especially Faith: For as they cannot Pray aright, that have not Faith in God,
for it is said, Romans 10.14.
How can they call upon him, on whom they have not believed? So the Faithful,
with how much the greater Intention they Pray, by so much the greater and more
assured Faith they have of God's Care and Providence, which chieffly requires
of us, that referring our selves to him for those things we have need of, we
ask all of him.

God can indeed give us all things abundantly, VII. Why God will have us pray.
tho we ask not nor think of them, even as he gives all things necessary for
the Sustenance of Life to Creatures void of Reason; but our most bountiful
Father will be called upon by his Children; he will have us by daily praying
aright, to pray with the greater Confidence: he will daily testify and declare
his good Will toward us, bestowing upon us the things we pray for.

Our Charity also is enlarged; The Fourth Advantage.
for acknowledging him the Author of all our good Things and Advantages, we
embrace him with the greatest Love we are able. And as those that Love, by
Freedom of Discourse and Conversation come to a higher degree of Love: So
devout persons by how much the more frequently they make Prayers to God, and
implore his Goodness, as discoursing with him, with so much the greater Joy are
they affected in all their Prayers, and are stirred up to Love and Worship him
the more ardently.

He will therefore have us use this Exercise of Prayer, The Fifth.
that being intent upon the Desire of begging what we wish for, we might profit
so far by that Diligence and Desire, that we might be made worthy, to have
those Gifts bestowed on us, which before our starved and narrow Souls were not
able to Receive. Vide August. Epist. 121. c. 8.

Besides, The Sixth.
God will have us to know and always to remember what is really true, if we
should be forsaken and deprived of the Help of his Heavenly Grace, that by our
own Industry we can get nothing, and therefore to give our whole Heart to
Prayer.

And these Weapons as it were of Prayer, The Seventh.
are most prevalent against the most violent Enemies of our Nature; for says S.
Hilary We must wrestle against the Devil and his Forces, with the Cry of our
Prayers. Hilar. in Psalm. 63.

Moreover we obtain this excellent Fruit of Prayer, The Eighth.
that seeing by the Corruption of our natural Infirmity we are prone to evil,
and to the various Appetites of our Lusts, he suffers himself to be conceived
in our Thoughts; that while we pray and importune to be made worthy of his
Gifts, we become desirous of Innocence, and cleanse our selves from every Fault
by cutting off of our Sins.

Lastly, The Ninth.
according to S. Hieroms Sentence, Prayer withstands Gods Anger: Exodus 32.10.
God therefore spoke thus to Moses, Let me alone, when by his Prayers he
hindered him from punishing that People; for there is nothing that so much
appeases God, when he is angry, or that so much hinders and turns him from his
Fury, when he is ready to bring Punishments upon wicked Men, as the Prayers of
Devout Men. De his Orationis fructibus agunt. Isidor. lib. de summo bono. c.
87. Aug. Ser. 230. de tempore and Ep. 121. ad Probam.

Of the Parts and Degrees of PRAYER.
THE Necessity and Profitableness of Christian Prayer being expounded, I. It
must be taught of what Parts Prayer consists.
the Faithful ought further to know of what Parts that Prayer consists; for
that this belongs to the Perfection of this Duty, the Apostle testifies, who in
his Epistle to Timothy, exhorting to pray devoutly and holily, he diligently
reckons up the Parts of Prayer: 1 Timothy 2.1.
I bescech you, says he, that first of all Prayers, Supplications,
Intercessions and giving of thanks be made for all men. Now that there is a
kind of subtle Difference of these Parts, if the Curat shall think it
convenient to explain it to their Hearers, they shall consult S. Hilary and S.
Austin. Hilar. in Ps. 140. ad illa Verba, Dirigatur Oration. Aug. Epist. 59. ad
Paulin. ante med. Vide item Cassian. Collat. 9. c. 9. and seq. item. D. Thom.
2.2. q. 83.

But because there are two special Parts of Prayer, II. What the chief Parts of
Prayer are.
Petition and Tanksgiving, from whence all the rest flow, as from the Head, we
thought not fit to pass them over. For we approach to God, paying Worship and
Veneration, either to beg somewhat of him, or to give him Thanks for his
Benefits, wherewith of his Liberality we are daily enriched and adorned. Each
of these Parts God himself by the Mouth of David has pronounced to be a
necessary Part of Prayer, Ps. 39.15.
in these Words. Call upon me in the day of tribulation and I will deliver
thee, and thou shall honor me. Vide Basil. lib. Constitut. Monast. c. 2.

But how much we stand in need of Gods Bounty and Goodness, III. We stand in
very great need of God.
who is there that is ignorant, if he do but consider the exceeding great want
and misery of Man?

But how propense the Will of God is to Mankind, IV. How great Gods goodness
toward us us is.
and how liberal his Benignity, all Men know that have Sight and Understanding.
For wheresoever we cast our Eyes, whithersoever we turn our Thought, the
wonderful Splendour of God's Bounty and Good Will shines about us.

For what have Men which they have not received of God's Liberality? V. Why we
ought to give thanks to God.
and if all things are his Gifts and Largesses, what reason is there that all
Men should not with all their Power celebrate our most bountiful God with
Praises and Thanksgivings?

But of each of these Duties, VI. Many degrees or ways of Prayer.
both of asking any thing of God, and of giving him Thanks, there are many
Degrees, whereof some are more excellent and perfect than others. That the
Faithful therefore may not only pray, but also excellently perform that Duty of
Prayer, The Pastors shall propose to them the most excellent and perfect way of
Praying, and as diligently as they can, exhort them to it.

But what is the best and most excellent Degree of Prayer? VII. The best and
most excellent degree of Prayer.
to wit, That which just and pious Men use, who being well grounded on the firm
Foundation of the true Faith, by certain Degrees of an excellent Mind and
Prayer, arrive to that height as to contemplate the infinite Power, and immense
Bounty and Wisdom of God: Where also they attain to a most assured Hope, that
they shall obtain, both whatsoever they ask at present, and also the fullness of
unspeakable good things, which God has promised that he will give to them that
devoutly and from their Heart beg his divine Help. Vide. Bernard. Sermon. 4. de
Quadrag. and in Sermon. de quatuor modis orandi. and Basil. loco jam citato.

By these two Wings as it were, VIII. The two Wings of the Soul.
the Soul being raised up to Heaven, approaches even to God with fervent
Desire, whom she adores with all the Honor of Thanks and Praises, because by
him she has bin made partaker of the greatest Benefits, and then with singular
Devotion and Veneration, as an only Child to her most dear Father, she doubts
not to lay open whatsoever she stands in need of.

Which way of Praying, IX. How great the Souls liber^^ in Prayer is. Ps. 141.3.
Psalm. 61.
the Sacred Scriptures express by the Word Pourirg out; for the Prophet says, I
pour out my Prayer in his sight, and I pronounce my tribulation before him: The
meaning of which word is, that he conceals nothing, that he hides nothing; but
he pours out all things, that comes to pray, flying with Confidence into the
Bosom of God his most dear Father: For hereto the heavenly Doctrine exhorts us
in these words, Psalm. 54.
Pour out your Hearts before, the Lord, and cast your care upon him: S. Austin
means this Degree of Prayer, when in his Book called Enchyridion cap. 7. he
says, "What Faith believes, that Hope and Charity prays for.

There is another Degree of those, X. Another degree of Prayer.
who being oppressed with mortal Sin, yet with that Faith which is called dead,
strive to raise themselves, and climb up to God: but by reason of the faintness
of their strength and the exceeding weakness of their Faith, they are not able
to raise themselves higher from the Earth, but yet bemoaning their Sins, and
their Consciences being grievously troubled, humbly and submissively repenting,
at that very far distance they implore of God Pardon of their Sins and Peace.

The Prayers of these have their place with God: XI. This degree of Petitioners
are heard. Matthew. 11.28. An Example.
For their Prayers are heard, yea the Merciful God invites this sort of Men
most heartily, Come to me, says he, all ye that labor and are laden and I will
refresh you.

Of this sort of Men was that Publican, who not daring to lift up his Eyes to
Heaven, went away notwithstanding, says our Savior, more justified than the
Pharisee. Quomodo Peccatores audiuntur. Vide Aug. in Joan: tr. 44. and 73. and
de verb. Dom. Ser. 53. D. Tho. 2.2. q. 83. art. 16.

There is another Degree of those, XII. Another degree of Prayer.
who as yet have not received the light of Faith; but yet the Goodness of God
kindling the glimmering light of their Nature, are earnestly stirred up to the
desire and study of Truth. Which that they might be taught, they most earnestly
pray; who if they continue in that Mind, God of his Mercy does not reject their
endeavors.

An Example.
Which we see verified in the Example of Cornelius the Centurion. Act. 10.2.



The last Degree is of those, XIII. The last degree of Prayer.
who not repenting of their Sin and Wickedness, but rather adding Sin to Sin,
are nevertheless not ashamed to ask God Pardon of their Sins, in which they are
minded to continue, who being in such a state, ought not indeed to presume to
ask Pardon even of Men.

The Prayers of such God hears not: XIV. This degree of Petitioners are not
heard.
For thus it is written of Antiochus, Now this wicked man besought the Lord, of
whom notwithstanding he did not obtain Mercy.

Wherefore they that are involved in this grievous Misery,

Of those things that are to be prayed for.
NOW because in the several Petitions, I. Nothing to be prayed for but what is
just and honest.
it is taught in their proper place what is to be prayed for, and what not: It
will be sufficient in this place to admonish the Faithful in general, that Men
ask of God such things as are just and honest, lest if they ask any thing
unseemly, they should be sent away with this Answer, Ye know not what ye ask.
Matthew. 20.22.

Now we may ask whatsoever may rightly be wished, Ask whatsoever ye will, and
it shall be done for you: Joh. 15.7.
For he promises that he will grant all things.

Wherefore we must direct our first wish and desire according to this Rule, II
The first thing we ought to pray for. The Second.
i. e. to refer our utmost study and desire to God, who is the chiefest Good.

And then we must desire those things that unite us most with God: but those
things that separate us from him, or any way cause us to be disjoined from him,
are utterly to be removed far from our studies and desires.

Hence we gather how all other things, The Third.
which are called Good, next after that chiefest and perfect Good, are both to
be wished and prayed for of God our Father, for those Goods that are outward
and belong to the Body, as Health, Strength, Beauty, Riches, Honors, Glory,
which oftentimes afford matter and occasion to Sin (for which cause it is, that
they are not at all devoutly and piously to be prayed for) that Petition shall
be limited in these Bounds, that we pray for the Conveniences of this Life for
necessitie's sake, which ground of Prayer is referred to God.

For tho we may in our Prayers ask those things which Jacob and Solomon prayed
for, III. How bodily Goods are to be desired. Genesis 28 20. Prove. 30.8.
Jacob thus, If he will give me Bread to eat and Clothes, to put on, the Lord
shall be my God. And Solomon thus, Only give me necessary food. Now since of
Gods Liberality we are supplied with Food and Raiment, It is but meet that we
remember that Exhortation of the Apostle, 1 Cor 7.30.
Let them that buy, be as tho they possessed not, and those that use this
World, as tho they used it not, for the figure of this World passes away.
Again, Psalm. 61.11.
If Riches increase set not your heart upon them. Whose fruit and use is only
ours, but yet so, as that we communicate with others, as we are taught by God
himself.

If we have Ability, IV. The true use of outward Goods.
if we abound with other outward Goods of the Body, let us remember, that they
are therefore given us, that we may serve God with more ease, and lend our
Neighbor all things of this kind.

And then for the Goods and Ornaments of the Understanding, V. Under what
condition Arts and Sciences to be prayed for.
of which kind are Learning and Arts, we may not pray for them, but on this
condition only, if they will be profitable to us for God's Glory and our
Salvation; but that which is absolutely and without any adjunct or condition,
to be prayed for, wished and begged, as we said before, is the Glory of God,
and after that, all things else that may join us to that most excellent Good,
as Faith, the Fear of God, and his Love, of which we will speak more fully in
the explication of the Petitions.

For whom we are to Pray.
NOw it being known what things are to be prayed for, I. There is no sort of
Men which are not to be prayed for.
the Faithful are to be taught, for whom they are to pray. Prayer contains
Petition and Thanksgiving, wherefore we will first speak concerning Petition.
We must therefore pray for all, without any Exception, either of Differences,
of Favor or of Religion: For whether he be Enemy, Stranger, or Infidel, he is
our Neighbor; whom because by God's Command we ought to love, it follows, that
we ought to make Prayers also for them, which is the Office of Love; for
thither tends that Exhortation of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.1.
I beseech you that Prayers be made for all Men.

In which Prayer we are first to beg those things which concern the Welfare of
the Soul,

Now we ought to perform this Office first for the Pastors of our Souls, II.
First, We must pray for the Pastors of our Souls. Col. 4.3.
whereof we admonished by the Apostle from his own Example; for he writes to
the Colossians to pray for him, that God would open him a Door of Speech: which
also he does to the Thessalonians. And in the Acts of the Apostles we read,
Acts 12.5.
That Prayer was made by the Church without ceasing, for Peter. Of which Duty
also we are admonished by S. Basil, in his Books de Moribus: For, says he, we
must pray for them that are over us in the Word of Truth. Basil. lib. Moral.
Reg. 56. c. 5. item Homil. in Isaiam.

In the second place, Secondly. For Princes.
we must pray for Princes, according to the Sentence of the same Apostle: For,
how great Public Good we enjoy by just and pious Princes, there is no one
ignorant. God therefore is to be entreated, that those that are above other
Men, may be such kind of Persons as they ought to be. Vide Tertul. Apolog. 30.
and ad Scap. c. 2.

There are Examples of Holy Men, Thirdly, For Pious Men.
whereby we are admonished to pray for good and pious Men; for they also stand
in need of the Prayers of others: Which is so ordered of God, that they may not
be puffed up with Pride, while they see that they want the Prayers of their
Inferiors.

Besides, Fourthly, For Enemies.
Our Lord has commanded us to pray for our Persecuters and Slanderers, Matthew.
5.44.

For, Fifthly, For Strangers from the Church.
it is well known from the Testimony of S. Austin, that this Practice of making
Supplications and Prayers for those that were without the Church, was received
from the Apostles; That Faith might be given to Infidels; that Idol-worshippers
might be delivered from the Error of their Impiety; that the Jews, the Darkness
of their Souls being dispelled, might receive the Light of Truth; that Heretics
returning to Soundness of Mind, might be instructed in the Precepts of Catholic
Doctrine; that Schismatics being bound with the Band of true Charity, might be
joined in Communion with our most Holy Mother the Church, from whom they fell
away. Now how great a force hearty Prayers made for this kind of Men has,
appears by so many Examples of Men of all sorts, which God daily carries, being
snatched out of the Power of Darkness, into the Kingdom of the Son of his Love;
and of Vessels of Wrath, he makes them Vessels of Mercy: In which Case, no one
in his right Mind can doubt that the Intercession of Devout Men prevails very
much. Vide S. Aug Epist. 107. ad Vitel. Cyprian. de Orat. Domin. Item
Caelestinum Papam, Epist. 1. c. 11.

And Prayers for the Dead, Sixthly. For the Dead.
that they may be delivered from the Fire of Purgatory, did flow from the
Doctrine of the Apostles; concerning which enough was said, when we spoke of the
Sacrifice of the Mass. Dionys. cap. lib. de Eccles. Hierarch. c. 6, 7. Clem.
Pap. Epist. 1. and lib. Constit. Apost. Tert. de Coron. Milit. and in Exhort.
ad Castit. and in lib. de Monog. Cypr. Epist. 66.

But those that are said to sin unto Death, Seventhly, For Sinners.
Intercessions and Prayers profit them but little: yet it is the part of
Christian Charity, both to pray for them, and even with Tears to wrestle for
them, if by any means they can render God reconcild to them.

And for the Curses of Holy Men, III. How the Curses of Holy Men to be
understood.
which they used against the Wicked, it is manifest from the Sense of the
Fathers, that they are either Prophesies of those things that would befall them,
or else are used against their Sin, that the Men being saved, the force of
their Sins might perish. Vide Aug. de Sermon. Domini in Monte, lib. 1. c. 22. and
Sermon. 109. de Tempore.

In the other part of Prayer we give the highest Thanks to God, IV. For whom we
ought to give thanks.
for his Divine and Immortal Benefits, which he always did, and daily does
bestow upon Mankind. But best of all do we discharge the Duty of Thanksgiving
upon the account of all the Saints, when in our Office we attribute singular
Praises to God, for their Victory and Triumph, which they, by his Goodness,
have born away from both their inward and outward Enemies.

Hither belongs that first part of the Angelical Salutation, V. The Angelical
Salutation the greatest of all Thanksgivings.
when we use it at our Prayers; Hail Mary, full of Grace, the Lord is with
thee, blessed art thou among Women. For we honor God with the highest and
truest Praises and Thanksgivings, that he dignified that most Holy Virgin with
every Endowment of Heavenly Gifts; and we congratulate the Virgin for her
singular Happiness. Vide Aug. Ench. c. 100. and 21. de Civit. Dei, c. 24. and
lib. 20. contra Faust. c. 21.

And rightly has the Holy Church of God to this Thanksgiving added Prayers
also, VI. Why to that Salutation is added S. Mary.
and imploring of the most Holy Mother of God, whereby we piously and humbly
fly to her, that by her Intercessions she would reconcile God to us miserable
Sinners, and that she would obtain for us those good things that are necessary
both for this, and for the Life everlasting. Therefore we, the cast-off
Children of Eve, who dwell in this Valley of Tears, ought diligently to invoke
the Mother of Mercy, Advocate of the Faithful, to pray for us Sinners, and by
this Prayer to implore her Help and Assistance, of whose both most excellent
Merits with God, and most sincere Good will of helping Mankind, there are none
but impious and wicked Men can doubt. Vide Aug. Sermon. 18. de Sanctis. Ambr. in
1. c. Luc. Bern. Hom. 3. in Missus est. Item l. 5. c. 19. Athan. in Evang. de
Sancta Deipara. Aug. Sermon. 2. de Annunt. Nazian. in Orat. de S. Cypriano.

Who is to be Prayed to.
NOw that God is to be prayed to, I. The Tri-une God to be invoked.
and his Name to be called upon, the very Light of Nature, implanted in the
Souls of Men, teaches; and not only the Sacred Scripture, in which we may hear
God himself commanding, Psalm. 49.15.
Call upon me in the Day of Tribulation: But by the Name of God, we understand
Three Persons.

In the second place, II. Secondly, The Saints.
We fly to the Assistance of the Saints that are in Heaven; to whom also that
Prayers are to be made, has been held so certain in the Church of God, that to
pious Men there can arise no doubt: Which because it has already been explained
apart in its proper place, we remit both the Curats and others thither.

But to remove all Error of the Unlearned, III. God and the Saints to be
invoked after a different manner.
it will be worth the labor to teach the Faithful what difference there is in
the manner of this Invocation; for we do not pray to God and to the Saints
after the same manner. For we pray to God, either to give us the good things we
want, or to deliver us from evil; but we pray to the Saints, because they are
in favor with God, to undertake our Patronage, and to beg of God for us those
things we want.

Hence we have two ways of Praying, IV. The Forms of Prayer.
differing in the Manner: For we properly say to God, Have mercy upon us, Hear
us; but to the Saints, Pray for us; although we may, for some other Reason, pray
to the Saints to have pity upon us. We may therefore pray them, that being
moved with the Misery of our Condition they, with their Favor with God, and
Intercession, would help us.

Yet here all must take great heed, V. Observe this diligently.
that what is proper to God, they give not to any besides him: And withal when
before the Image of any Saint, any one says the Lord's Prayer, let him then
think thus, that he begs of the Saint to pray with him, and to beg those things
for him which are contained in the Form of the Lord's Prayer; and lastly, that
he would be his Interpreter, and Intercessor to God: Apoc. 8.3.
For that the Saints perform this Office, S. John the Apostle has taught us in
the Revelations.

Of Preparation to be made.
IN Sacred Scripture it is thus written: Eccl. 18.2.
Before Prayer, prepare thy Soul, and be not as a Man that tempts God. For he
tempts God, who while he prays well, does ill; and while he speaks to God, his
Mind wanders from his Prayers.

Wherefore since it so much concerns him, I. The Preparations of a good Prayer.
First. Humility.
with what Mind every one makes Prayers to God, let the Curats teach the devout
Hearers how to pray.

The first Step therefore to Prayer is a truly humble and lowly Soul, and
acknowledgment of Sins; by reason of which Sins, let him that comes to God
know, that he is unworthy, not only to obtain any thing of God, but even to
come into his Presence to pray to him. Of this Preparation the Sacred
Scriptures very often make mention, and speak thus: Psalm. 101.18.
He has respect to the Prayer of the Humble, and has not despised their
Supplications. Again; Eccl. 35.^1.
The Prayer of him that humbles himself, pierces the Clouds. But to the Learned
Pastors there will occur innumerable places, that meet together in the same
meaning. Wherefore we will forbear the unnecessary quoting of many Places; but
yet we will not in this place pass over those two Examples, which before we
touched upon, because they are so very proper to this purpose. That Publican is
most notable, Luc. 18.13.
who standing afar off, durst not lift up his Eyes from the Ground. There is
also that of the Woman the Sinner, Luc. 7.5^.
who being moved with Sorrow, washed the Feet of Christ our Lord with her
Tears. Each of these showed how great prevalency Christian Humility gives to
Prayer.

Next follows Grief upon the Remembrance of Sin, Secondly. Grief for Sin.
or at least some sense of Sorrow because we cannot grieve. Both whereof, or at
least the one of them, if not brought with the Penitent, he cannot obtain
Pardon.

But because there are some Sins which very much hinder God from granting our
Petitions in our Prayers, Thirdly. Refraining from Cruelty.
as Murder and Oppression; we must restrain our hands from Cruelty and
Violence, of which Wickedness God speaks thus by the Mouth of Esaias, Esaias 2.15.
When ye stretch forth your hands, I will turn amy Eyes from you, and when ye
multiply Prayers, I will not hear, for your hands are full of blood.

Anger and Discord are to be avoided, Fourthly. Anger to be avoided.
which greatly hinder our Prayers from being heard, concerning which the
Apostle says, I will that men pray in every place, lifting up pure hands
without anger and debate. 1. Tim. 2.8.

We must further take heed that we be not irreconcilable to any that wrong us;
Fifthly. Forgetfulness of Injuries.
for if we are of that temper, we cannot by our Prayers prevail with God to
pardon us: For, says he, when ye stand to pray, if ye have ought against
another, forgive it: And if ye forgive not men, neither will your heavenly
Father forgive you your sins. Mar. 11.25. Matthew. 6.15.

We must also take heed that we be not hard hearted and unmerciful to the
Needy; Sixthly. Works of Mercy.
for thus it is spoken against such kind of Men, He that stops his ear at the
cry of the Poor, even he shall cry, and shall not be heard. Prove. 21.13.

And what shall we say of Pride? Seventhly. Pride to be subdued.
whereby how greatly God is offended, that word witnesses, God resists the
Proud, but gives Grace to the Humble. Jac. 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5.

And what, Eighthly. Gods word to be heard.
of the contempt of the Divine Oracles? against which says Solomon, He that
turns away his ear from hearing the Law, his Prayer shall be accursed. Prove.
28.9.

In which case notwithstanding the Acknowledgment of Wrong done, lastly of
other Sins, is not excluded, if Pardon be sincerely begged.

Now to this Preparation of Mind, Ninthly. Faith to be exercised.
Faith also is necessary, which if it be wanting, there can be no knowledge of
the Omnipotence of the Supreme Father, nor of his Mercy, from which
notwithstanding springs the Confidence of him that prays; Math. 28.22.
even as Christ our Lord has taught, All things, says he, whatsoever ye ask in
Prayer, if ye believe, ye shall receive them. Of this kind of Faith S. Austin
writes. De verbis Domini. If thy Faith fails, thy Prayer perishes. A chief
point therefore in praying well, as was even now said, is to be well grounded
and fixed in Faith, which the Apostle shows by its contrary, Romans 10.14.
How shall they call upon him, on whom they have not believed? We must
therefore believe, that we may be able to pray. And that that Faith, whereby we
pray to good purpose, fail us not; for it it is Faith that pours out Prayers,
let us pray that all doubtfulness being removed, our Faith might be firm and
stable. To this effect S. Ignatius exhorted those that came to God with
intention to pray. Epist. 10. ad Hier.
Be not in Prayer of a distrustful mind, blessed is he that has not doubted.
Wherefore to the obtaining of God the thing we desire, Faith and an assured
Hope of Success, is of very great moment, which thing S. James, admonishes,
Jac. 1.6.
Let him ask in Faith, nothing doubting

II. How Faith to be stirred up. First.
Now there are many things whereof in this Duty of Prayer we ought to be
confident.

There is evidently seen the good will and Bounty of God toward us, since he
commands us to call him Father, to let us understand that we are his Children.

Second.
Then there is the almost infinite number of those that have obtained their
Requests of God.

Then there is that chief Advocat Christ our Lord, Third.
who is always assistant to us, of whom it is thus written in S. John, If any
Man sin, we have an Advocat with the Father, Jesus Christ the just, and he is
the Propitiation for our Sins. And the Apostle S. Paul, Romans 8.32.
It was Christ Jesus that di'd, yea, and that rose again, that sits at the
right hand of God, who also intercedes for us. And so in Timothy, 1 Timothy 2.5.
For there is one God, and one Mediator of God, and of Men, the Man Christ
Jesw. And to the Hebrews, Heb. 2.27.
For which cause he ought in all respects to be made like to his Brethren, that
he might become a merciful and faithful high Priest to God. Wherefore tho we
are unworthy to obtain any thing; yet by the Dignity of our most excellent
Mediator and Intercessor Jesus Christ, we ought to hope and to be very
confident that God will grant all things that we ask aright through him.

Lastly, Fourth.
there is the Holy Ghost the Author of our Prayer, by whose conduct our Prayers
must needs be heard: Romans 8.15.
For we have received the Spirit of Adoption of the Sons of God, in whom we
cry, Abba, Father; which very Spirit helps our Infirmity and Ignorance in this
Duty of Prayer, yea, says he, he prays for us with groans unutterable.

What then, Fifth.
if any should chance sometimes to stumble, nor know themselves to be strong
enough in Faith; let them use that word of the Apostle, Lord increase our
Faith: And that of the Blind man, Help my unbelief. Luc. 17.5. Mark. 9.28.

But then when we are grown strong in Faith and Hope, The tenth Preparation to
Prayer.
we shall obtain of God all that we desire, when according to his Law and
Will, we shall conform all our Mind, Actions and Prayers, Joh. 15.
for says he, If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ask whatever you
will, and it shall be done for you. Although, as we said before, for this Power of
obtaining all things of him, the forgetting of Injuries, Liberality and
good will toward our Neighbors, is in the first place necessary.

What way is required in PRAYER.
NOW it highly concerns Men how they perform their Sacred Prayers: for tho
Prayer is a wholesome Good; I. Prayer unless rightly performed, profits nothing.
Jac. 4.3.
yet if it be not rightly applied, it profits not, For what we ask, we
oftentimes do not obtain, as S. James says, for this Reason, because we ask
amiss. The Curats therefore shall teach the Faithful what the best way of
Praying well, both privately and publicly is, and what Rules have bin delivered
by the direction of Christ our Lord for Christian Prayer.

We must therefore ask in Spirit and Truth; II. We must pray in Spirit and in
Truth. Joh. 4.23.
For our heavenly Father seeks such as worship him in Spirit and in Truth. Of
this way of praying in Spirit and in Truth, vide Cyrill. Alexandr. per 17
libros integros; item D. Thom. 2.2. q. 83. a. 12.

Now He prays after that manner, that exercises an inward and ardent desire of
Mind, III. Who prays in Spirit and Truth.
from which Spiritual way of Praying we exclude not the Vocal; but yet we hold,
that the principal in place is of right to be given to that Prayer which
proceeds from an earnest mind, which God, to whom the secret Thoughts of the
Heart are open, hears, although it proceed not out of the Mouth.

He heard the inward Prayers of Anna, who was the Mother of Samuel, An Example.
1 Reg. 1.16.
of whom we read that she prayed weeping, and moving her lips only.

After this manner prayed David; Another. Psalm. 26.8.
for he says, My Heart said to thee, my face has sought thee diligently.
Examples of this kind they will meet with in many places, that read the divine
Books.

But Vocal Prayer has its proper Benefit and Necessity; IV. Vocal Prayer
profitable and necessary.
for it inflames the Intention of the Mind, and sets on fire the Devotion of
him that prays, which S. Austin wrote to Proba after this manner, Cap. 8, 9,
10. We our selves more earnestly stir our selves up sometimes by words and
other Signs to increase our Holy Desires. We are sometimes forced with a
fervent Desire of Soul and Devotion to express our meaning by words; for while
our Souls exult with Joy, it is meet also that the Tongue rejoice, and withal
it teaches us to offer that plentiful Sacrifice, both of Soul and Body; which
that it was the Apostle's manner of praying, we learn from the Acts, and from
the Apostle in many places.

But because there is a twofold way of praying, V. Prayer public and private.
Private and Public; we use the pronunciation of a Private Prayer, to help the
inward Intention and Devotion; and in the Public, which is instituted to stir
up the Devotion of the Faithful, at certain appointed times, the Office of the
Tongue can by no means be superseded.

Now this practice of praying in Spirit, VI. Praying in Spirit proper ^o
Christians. Matthew. 6.7.
and which is proper to Christians only, Infidels can by no means use, of whom
we hear Christ our Lord speaking thus, When ye pray, do not speak much, even as
the Heathens do; for they think that they shall be heard for their much
speaking; be not ye therefore like them; for your heavenly Father knows what ye
have need of before ye ask him.

But tho he forbids Babbling, VII. What is forbid'n by vain Babbling in Prayer.
Luc. 6.7. Matthew. 26.41.
yet for long Prayers, which proceed from an earnest and continued Intention of
the Soul, far be it from us to think that he rejects them, since by his own
Example he exhorts us to practice that way, who spent not only whole Nights in
Prayer, but thrice repeated the same words. And so much is to be determined,
that with an empty noise of words we must by no means make Prayers to God. Vide
Aug. Epist. 121. ad Probam. c. 9.

Nor indeed do Hypocrites pray from the Heart, VIII. God rejects the Prayers of
Hypocrites.
from whose practice Christ our Lord would deter us after this manner, When ye
pray, ye shall not be as the Hypocrites, who make a noise standing in the
Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets, to pray, that they may be seen
of men; verily I say unto you, they have had their reward.

But thou when thou prayest, IX. What it is to pray in the Chamber.
enter into thy Chamber, and having shut the door, pray to thy Father in
secret, and thy Father which sees in secret shall reward thee. That which is
here called a Chamber, may be referred to the Heart of Man; into which it is
not enough to enter, but it ought moreover to be shut, that nothing might rush
or fly in from without, whereby the Integrity of Prayer might be violated: For
then our heavenly Father, who very well sees the Minds and secret Thoughts of
all Men, will grant the request of him that prays.

Another requisite of Prayer is Importunity; X. We must pray importunately.
Luc. 18.23.
which how great force it has, the Son of God shows by the Example of that
Judge, who, tho he neither feared God, nor regarded Man, yet being overcome by
the Importunity and Diligence of the Widow, he granted her Petition. Prayers
made to God therefore must be importunate.

Nor are they to be imitated,

It is the Will of the Son of God, XI. Our Heavenly Father is to be prayed to
through Christ. Joh. 16.23.
that our Prayers come to the Father in his Name, which by his Merit and by the
Grace of his Intercession, gets such weight or efficacy, that it is granted of
our Heavenly Father: For that Word which we read in S. John, is his own,
Verily, verily I say to you, if ye shall ask any thing of the Father, in my
name, he will give it you; hitherto ye have not asked any thing in my name: ask
and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full. And again, Joh. 14.41.
Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, I will do it.

Let us therefore imitate the ardent Intention of Holy Men, XII. We must pray
fervently.
which they usd in Prayer; and let us join Thanksgiving with Prayer, after the
Example of the Apostles, who always observed this practice, as we may see in
the Apostle.

And to Prayer let us add Fasting and Alms-dees: XIII. To make Prayer
effectual, Fasting must be added.
for indeed Fasting is very nearly related to Prayer; for those that are loaded
with Meat and Drink, have their Mind oppressed and clogged, that neither can
they look up to God, nor consider what they pray for. Vide hac de re Aug. in
Psalm. 42. in sine, and lib. de perfect. justitia respons. 17. item. S. Leonis
Sermon. 1. de jejunio septimi mensis. Petr. Chrysostom. Sermon. 43. Bernard in Sentent.
Sentent. 11.

Alms-deeds follow, XIV. Alms-deeds to be added to Prayer.
which also have a near affinity with Prayer; For who is there, that has a
Power of doing good to him that lives by others Mercy, and helps not his
Neighbor and his Brother, and yet dares say that he has Charity? Or with what
Face will he that is void of Charity beg the assistance of God, unless when he
begs Pardon of his Sin, he withal humbly beg Charity of God?

Wherefore it was divinely appointed, XV. Three Remedies against Sin.
to help forward Man's Salvation by this threefold Remedy: For when either by
Sinning we offend God, or wrong our Neighbor, or wound our selves; by Sacred
Prayers we reconcile God to us; by Alms-deeds we redeem our Offenses against
Men; by Fasting we cleanse away the Spots of our own Life. And although all these
are profitatable for all kinds of Sin, yet they are suitable and fit in a
proper manner for those several Sins, which we mentioned before.

The LORD'S PRAYER.
Our Father which art in Heaven.

SInce this Form of Christian Prayer delivered by Jesus Christ, I. The Entrance
of the Lord's Prayer.
has such Virtue, that before we come to the Requests and Petitions, we are to
use certain Words for a Preface or Entrance, whereby when we come devoutly to
God, we may do it with the greater assurance; it is the Curat's Duty to show
them distinctly and clearly, that pious Persons may go the more cheerfully, and
may know that they are to deal with God as with a Father. Orationem Dominicam
explicant Tertul. in lib. de Orat. Cyprian. in lib. de Orat. Dom. Cyril.
Hierosol. Catech. 5. Mystag. Chrysostom. Hom. de Orat. Dom. Hieron. Theoph.
Euthim. in cap. 6. Matthew. Amb. lib. 4. de Sacram. c. 4. Aug. Epist. 121. ad
Probam. Item de Sermon. Domini in Monte, lib. 2. c. 5, 6, 7, 8, 16. and Hom. 42.
Item de Bono perseverantiae, c. 2. and sequ. and Sermon. 126, 135, and 182. de
Temp. Item Cassian. collat. 7. c. 18, 19, 20, 21. D. Thom. in Opuscul. and 2.2.
q. 83. c. 9.

Now as for the Entrance,

And the first Word which by God's Command and Institution, II. Why God called
Father.
we use in this Prayer, is, Father.

For tho our Savior could have begun this Divine Prayer with any Word that had
more Majesty in it, The first Reason.
of Creator, for example, or of Lord; yet these, which might also strike us
with Dread, he omitted.

But he made use of that Word that might minister Love and Affiance to them
that pray to, or beg any thing of God. For what is more sweet than the Name of
Father, which carries in it Love and Indulgence? Vide D. Leon. Sermon. 6. de Not.
Dom. D. Thom. 1. p. q. 33. a. 1.

But for what Reasons the Name of Father is suitable to God, III. Why the Name
Father given to God. The first Reason.
the Faithful may be taught from those Heads of Creation, Government, and
Redemption.

For when God created Man after his own Image, he bestowed not that Image upon
the other Creatures. For this singular Privilege wherewith he adorned Man, he
is rightly in Sacred Scripture called the Father of all Men, not only of the
Faithful, but also of Infidels.

And from his Government may be taken an Argument. The second.
That by regarding and advising well of Man's Advantage, by a special kind of
Care and Providence, he affords us his Fatherly Love.

But that in the Explication of this Argument we may the better understand
God's Fatherly Care over Men, IV. Of the Ministers of God's Providence.
it seems proper to say somewhat of the Guardianship of Angels, in whose
Protection Men are.

For by God's Providence, V. To every one is given of God a Guardian Angel.
this Business is committed to the Angels, that they should keep Mankind, and
be at hand with all Men, that they receive no great damage. For, as Parents, if
their Children are to go any infested and dangerous Journey, appoint Keepers to
go with them, and secure them from harm; so our Heavenly Father, in this
Journey, wherein we are making toward our Heavenly Country, has put Angels over
every one of us, by whose help and diligence being guarded, we may escape the
Snares privily laid by our Enemies, and beat back their terrible Assaults made
against us; and by their direction we may hold on strait in our Journey, lest
any Error being cast in our way by our treacherous Adversary, he might entice
us out of the Way that leads to Heaven.

Now, VI. The Advantage of the Guard of Angels.
of how great advantage to Men, this Care of God, and his singular Providence
is, the Charge and Administration whereof is committed to the Angels, who have
a middle Nature betwixt God and Men, appears by Examples, whereof the Sacred
Scriptures furnish us with abundance, which testify, that oftentimes, by God's
Goodness, it came to pass, that in the very sight of Men, the Angels wrought
wonderful things: Whereby we are admonished, that innumerable things of this
kind, which do not fall under Sight, are profitably and savingly wrought by the
Angels, the Guardians of our Safety.

The Angel Raphael, VII. Raphael's Benefits to Tobias.
who was Tobias's Companion, and the Guide of his Journey appointed by God,
brought him on his Journey, and home again in safety.

And he was Assistant to him, that he might not be devoured of that great Fish,
and showed him how great Virtue there was in the Liver, Gall, and Heart of that
Fish.

He drove out the Devil, Tob. 1.2.
and fettering and hindering his Power, he kept him from hurting Tobias.

Tob. 6.
And taught the young Man the true and lawful Use and Institution of Matrimony.

Tob. 12.
And restored Sight to blind Tobias.

Also that Angel that delivered the Prince of Apostles, VIII. The Benefits of
the Angel that guarded S. Peter.
affords plentiful Matter to the Curats for Instruction of their devout Flock,
concerning the admirable Advantage of the Care and Custody of Angels, when they
shall show, that the Angels illustrating the Darkness of the Prison, and
raising Peter from Sleep by touching his Side, loosing his Chains, breaking his
Bands, warning him to rise, and taking his Sandals and his other Apparel to
follow him; and when they shall teach, that by the same Angel Peter being set
at liberty, was led out of Prison through the Watch; and lastly, that the Gates
being opened, he was put into safety.

Of this kind of Examples, IX. Profitable to relate these Examples.
as was said before, the History of Sacred Scripture is full; whereby we see
how great the Power of those Benefits is, which God bestows upon Men by the
Ministry and Service of Angels: Nor are they sent only upon some certain and
particular account; but even from our very first beginning they are charged
with the Care of us, and placed over Men in particular for defense of their
Safety.

Now, X. The profitableness of the Doctrine of the Guardianship of Angels.
this Advantage will follow upon the diligent handling of this Doctrine, That
the Minds of the Hearers will be attentive and roused up to the acknowledging
and reverencing this Fatherly Care and Providence of God toward them. He that
will read more concerning the Creation and Excellency of the Angels, let him
look back to the First Article of the Creed, page 13.

And here the Curat shall commend and highly extol the Riches of God's
Goodnes's toward Mankind, XI. How great the Riches of God s Goo^ness toward
us is.
whom tho in the First Parents both of our Kind, and of our Sin, and even to
this day, we have offended by our Wickedness; yet he continues his Love toward
us, nor does he lay aside that special Care over us.

Whom, if any one thinks that he forgets Men, XII. A great Sin to say, that God
forgets Men. Exodus 17.7.
he is mad, and most unworthily dishonors God. God is angry at Israel for the
Blasphemy of that Nation, which thought it self forsaken of the Divine Care:
For we read in Exodus, They tempted the Lord, saying, Is God among us, or not?
And in Ezekiel, Ezekiel 8.12.
God is angry at the same People, because they said, God sees us not; the Lord
has left the Earth. The Faithful therefore are to be deterred by these
Authorities from that wicked Opinion. That God can be unmindful of Men.

In which sense we may hear the Israelites complaining of God in Esay's
Prophecy; Isa. 49.14.
Sion said, The Lord has forsaken me, and the Lord has forgotten me. To whom
God answers, Can a Woman forget her Infant, that she should not have compassion
on the Son of her Womb? Tho she may forget, yet will not I forget thee. Behold,
I have carried thee in my Arms.

By which Places tho this be clearly confirmed, XIII. God never forgets Men.
yet that the Faithful may be fully persuaded that God can at no time lay aside
the Care of Men, so as not to give them the Effects of his Fatherly Love, the
Curats shall prove this Matter from the most clear Example of the first of
Mankind; whom, after the neglect and violation of God's Command, when you hear
them more sharply accused and condemned with that dreadful Sentence, Genesis 3.17.
Cursed is the Earth by thy Deed; in labor shall thou eat of it all the days of
thy Life: Thorns and Briars shall it bring thee forth, and thou shall eat the
Grass of the Earth: when you see them driven out of Paradise; and, to take away
all hope of return thither, when in the entrance of Paradise you read that
there is pl^c'd a Cherubin holding a Flaming Sword turning hither and thither;
when you understand, that they were punished with both inward and outward
Sorrows by God's revenging their Wrong:

Would you not think now, Observe.
that Man's Business were done? Would you not believe that he were stripped not
only of all Divine Help, but also expos d to all kinds of Wrongs? But yet even
in these so great Tokens of God's Wrath and Revenge, there arise some Sparks of
God's Love toward them: Genesis 3.2.
For, says the Scripture, The Lord God made for Adam, and for his Wife, Coats
of Skins, and he put them upon them. And this was a very great Argument, that
God would never at any time be wanting to Men.

The Efficacy of this Sentence, XIV. God's Love to Man never drawn dry by any
Injury Psalm. 76. Habac 3.2. Mich. 7.18.
That the Love of God is not to be exhausted by any Sinfulness of Man, David
expressed in these Words: Will the Lord keep his Mercy in his Anger? And this
Habacuc, speaking to God, expounds, while he says, When thou art angry, thou
remembrest Mercy. So Michaeas; Who, O God, is like to thee? who take away
Iniquity, and put'st away the Sin of the Relic of thine Inheritance: Thou will no more send forth thy Fury, because thou love Mercy.

Verily thus the Case is: XV. God helps in extremity.
When we think our selves utterly lost, and deprived of God's Protection, then
especially, of his Infinite Goodness, does God seek and take care of us: For in
his Anger he restrains the Sword of his Justice, nor does he cease to pour out
the inexhaustible Treasures of his Mercy,

God's Creation and Providence therefore have a very great Efficacy, XVI. How
rightly God called a Father.
to show how God loves and defends Mankind. But yet that Work of Man's
Redemption shines so bright between the other two, that the most gracious God
and our Father has illustrated his infinite Kindness toward us, by pressing in
this third Benefit upon the rest.

Wherefore the Curat shall declare to his Spiritual Children, XVII. Why we are
called and are the Children of God.
and diligently inculcate into their Ears, this passing excellent Love of God
toward us; that they may know, that being redeemed after a wonderful manner,
they are become the Sons of God. For, Joh. 1.^1.
says S. John, He has given them power to become the Sons of God, and they are
born of God.

For which cause, is called the Sacrament of Regeneration; for thereby we are
born the Children of God; for our Lord himself says, Joh. 3.6.
That which is born of the Spirit is Spirit, and we must be born again. And the
Apostle S. Peter, 1 Pet. 1.25.
Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, through the Word
of the living God.

By virtue of this Redemption we have both received the Holy Spirit, XVIII. How
great the Benefit of Redemption is. Romans 15.
and are dignified with Gods' Grace, by which Gift we are adopted the Sons of
God, as the Apostle S. Paul writes to the Romans, Ye have not received the
Spirit of Bondage again to Fear; but ye have received the Spirit of Adoption of
Sons, in whom we cry Abba, Father. The Efficacy and Virtue of which Adoption, 1
John 3.8.
S. John explains after this manner, Ye see how great Love the Father has given
us, that we should be called and be the Sons of God.

These things being explained, XIX. What we ow to God our Father.
the Faithful are to be admonished, what return they ought to make to God our
most loving Father, that they may know what Love and Devotion, what Obedience
and Veneration, they ought to perform to their Creator, Governor and Redeemer,
and with what Hope and Affiance they ought to call upon him.

But to take away that Folly, XX. A great Error to be removed.
and the better to guide the perverseness of the Opinion of such as think a
prosperous State and happy course of Life, is the only Argument that God loves
us; but when we are exercised of God, with Adversities and Calamities, that
that is a Sign that God is angry, and has wholly estranged his good will from
us:

It must be showed, XXI When God chastises he loves. Job. 9.21. Psalm. 88.34.
when the Lords hand touches, that the Lord does not do this as an Enemy, but
that by striking he heals us; and that a Wound that comes from God is a
Medicine: For he chastises sinners, That by that Discipline he might make them
better; and by the present Punishment, he redeems them from everlasting
Destruction.

For indeed he visies our iniquities with a rod, and our Sins with Scourges,
but his Mercy he takes not away from us.

Wherefore, XXII. What we are to do when God chast'ns us. Job. 18.
the Faithful are to be admonished, that in this kind of Chastisement, they
acknowledge Gods Fatherly Love; and let them have that Saying of patient Job in
their Memory, and in their Mouth, He wounds and he heals; he smites, and his
hand will heal. That they may take up that that Jeremy wrote under the Person
of the Israelites, Hier. 31.18.
Thou did chastise me, and I am taught even as an heifer that was untamed;
convert me and I shall be coverted, because thou, O Lord, art my God. And to
follow Tobias's Example, who when he felt the Fatherly Hand of God punishing
him in that Affliction of Blindness, cried out, Tob. 11.17.
I bless thee O Lord God of Israel; because thou have chastis'd me, and thou
have saved me.

But here the Faithful must be very careful, XXIII. We must not murmur in
afflictions. Luc. 21.18.
lest, when they are afflicted with any Trouble, and grieved with any Calamity,
they think that God knows it not; for he says, A hair of your head shall not
perish. Yea, rather let them cheer up themselves with that Comfort of the
divine Oracle, Apoc. 3.19.
which we read in the Revelations, Whom I love, I rebuke and chasten. Let them
rest satisfied in that Exhortation of the Apostle to the Hebrews, My Son,
neglect not the Chastning of the Lord, Heb. 12.5.
nor be thou weary while thou art reproved by him; for whom the Lord loves he
chastises, and corrects every Son whom he receives; but if ye are without
Chastisment, ye are Bastards and not Sons: We have had Fathers of our flesh
that instructed us, and we reverenced them; shall we not much rather obey the
Father of Spirits and live?

Our, XXIV. Why of particular persons God is called Our. Matthew 23 8.
When every one of us calls him Father, and Our Father, we are taught that it
necessarily follows from the Gift and Right of the Divine Adoption, that all
the Faithful are Brethren, and ought to love one another as Brethren: For, says
he, ye are all Brethren, for there is one your Father who is in Heaven.
Wherefore the Apostles also in their Epistles, call all the Faithful Brethren.

Whence also it is a necessary Consequence, XXV. How we are now Brethren of
Christ and of one another.
that by the same Adoption of God, not only all the Faithful are joined
together among themselves in the relation of Brotherhood; but because the only
begotten Son of God, was Man, they are called, and are his Brethren: For in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, the Apostle speaking of the Son of God, Heb 2.11.
wrote thus, He is not ashamed to call them Brethren, saying, I will declare
thy Name to my Brethren. Which things so long before David foretold concerning
Christ our Lord. Yea, Psalm. 21.
and Christ himself in the Gospel says to the Women, Mattth. 21.10.26.66.
Go, tell my Brethren to go into Galilee, there they shall see me.

And it is manifest that this was then spoken of him, XXVI. Christ our Brother
even in Heaven.
when being risen from the Dead, he had gotten Immortality, that none might
think that this Fraternal Relation was dissolved by his Resurrection and Ascent
into Heaven: For Christ's Resurrection was so far from destroying this
Conjunction and Charity, as we have bin taught, that even from the very Seat of
his Majesty and Glory, Matthew. 25.31.
and even then when he shall judge all Men of all Ages, the very least of all
the Faithful shall be called by the Name of Brethren.

And how can it be, XXVII. We are Coheirs with Christ. Romans 8.17. Heb. 1.2.
but that we must needs be Christ's Brethren, since we are called his Heirs; for
he is the first begott'n, appointed Heir of all; but we in the second place
begotten, joint Heirs with him, according to the measure of heavenly Gifts,
according to the Degree of Love whereby we yielded our selves the Servants and
Fellow Laborers of the Holy Ghost.

Who being our Guide to Virtue and good Works, Heb. 6.10.
For, as the Apostle says, God is not unjust to forget your Labor and Love.

But how we ought from our Heart to utter this word Our, XXVIII. God is to be
called Ours from the Heart, and why.
the Sentence of S. Chrysostom shows, who says, That God freely hears a
Christian praying not only for himself, but for another; because Nature teaches
every one to pray for himself, but Grace teaches to pray for others. Need
compels Men to pray for themselves, but brotherly Charity exhorts to pray for
others. To which he subjoyns

That Prayer is more acceptable to God which brotherly Charity puts up,
Chrysostom. hom. 14. oper^s imperfecti in Matthew.

Concerning this so weighty a matter of saving Prayer, XXIX. An Admonition of
great moment.
the Curat ought to exhort all, of every Age, Condition and Rank, that being
mindful of this common Relation of Brotherhood, they behave themselves
courteously and brotherlike each to other, and that they carry not themselves
insolently to one another.

For tho in the Church of God there are diverse Degrees of Offices,

Even as in the Body of Man, A Similitude.
the various Uses and different Offices of the Members does not cause this or
that part of the Body to lose the Name and Office of a Member.

Consider him that is in Kingly Power, XXX. An equality among Christians.
is he not therefore, if he be faithful, Brother of all them that are within
the Communion of the Christian Faith? Yes. Why so? Because there is not one God
of the Rich, and another of the Poor; not one God of Kings, and another of
those that are under the Power of Kings: But there is one God and Father and
Lord of all.

All therefore have the same Nobility of Spiritual Birth, XXXI. The Nobility of
Christians is equal.
all have the same Dignity, the same Luster of Family, seeing we are all born
the Sons of God, of the same Spirit, by the same Sacrament of Faith, and are
all Coheirs of the same Inheritance. Nor have Wealthy and great Men one Christ
for their God, and the Poor and Beggarly another; they are not initiated by
other Sacraments, nor do they look for another Inheritance in the Kingdom of
Heaven. We are all Brethren, and as the Apostle to the Ephesians says, Ephesians.
5.20.
We are Members of Christ's Body, of his Flesh and of his Bone. Which very thing
the Apostle signifies in his Epistle to the Galatians, Gal. 3.26.
Ye are all the Children of God by Faith in Jesus Christ; for as many as were
baptized in Christ, have put on Christ; there is neither Jew nor Greek, there
is neither Servant nor Freeman, there is neither Male nor Female; for ye all
are one in Christ Jesus.

Now this is a Matter diligently to be considered of the Pastors of Souls,
XXXII. This Doctrine often to be taught to Christians.
and they are wittingly to abide on this Consideration: for it is a Point very
fit, no less to comfort and encourage the Poor and Forelorn, than to beat down
the Presumption of the Rich and Mighty. To cure which Frailty of Men, the
Apostle urged this Brotherly Charity, and did inculcate it in the Ears of the
Faithful.

When therefore, XXXIII. With what Affection we ought to say Our Father.
O Christian, you are going to make these Prayers to God, remember that you go
as a Son to God your Father: When therefore you order your Prayer, and
pronounce that word, Our Father, consider into what a State the infinite Love
of God has raised you, who has not commanded you to come as an abashed and
fearful Servant to his Lord, but as a glad Child to fly securely to him as a
Father.

Consider with what Attention and Regard, XXXIV. With how great Devotion we are
to pray.
with what Care and Devotion you are to pray; for you must endeavor to behave
your self, so as becomes a Child of God, i, e. that your Prayers and Actions be
not unbeseeming that Divine Lineage, wherewith it has pleased your most gracious
God to ennoble you. To this kind of Duty the Apostle exhorts, Ephesians. 5.11.
saying, Be ye therefore Imitators of God as most dear Children; That it may
truly be said of us, what the Apostle wrote to the Thessalonians, 1 These 5.5.
Ye are all the Children of Light, and the Children of the Day.

Which art in Heaven. All that think rightly of God, XXXV. How God is every
where.
agree that God is in all Places; which is not so to be understood, as tho he
were divided into Parts, and does supply and defend one place with one part,
and another place with another part; for God is a Spirit, and cannot be
divided; for who dares circumscribe God in the limits of any place, as held to
any point, Hier. 13.14.
since he says of himself, Do not I fill Heaven and Eearth?

Which again is thus to be understood; XXXVI. God is whole every where.
That God by his Power and Might comprehends the whole Heaven and Earth, and
whatsoever is contained in Heaven and Earth; but that himself is not contained
in any place, for God is present with all things, either creating them, or
preserving them, being created; but himself tied to no Country, nor limited by
any Bounds, or so defined, as that being every where present, he cannot dispose
his Nature and Power; which thing blessed David expressed in these words, Psalm.
138.8.
If I ascend up to Heaven, thou art there. Aug. lib. 1. Con. c. 3. D. Thom. 1.
p. q. 8. a. 2.

But tho God be present at hand in all places and things, XXXVII. Why God is
said to be in Heaven.
not bound to any limits, as was said before; yet in Sacred Scripture he is
often said, To have his dwelling in Heaven.

Which we see to be so done, Thr First Reason.
because Heaven, which we see, is the noblest part of the World, and remains
undecay'd, excelling all other Bodies, in Power, Greatness, Beauty, and is
endu'd with certain and steady Motions.

To stir up the Minds of Men therefore to contemplate his infinite Power and
Majesty, The Second Reason.
which shines most gloriously in the work of Heaven, God in Sacred Scripture
testifies, that he dwells in Heaven. He also often declares, as indeed the
Truth is, that there is no part of the World, which is not comprehended by
Gods Nature and Power present every where.

Although in this Consideration the Faithful shall propose to themselves the
Image, The Third Reason.
not only of the common Father of all, but also reigning in the Kingdom of God;
that when they are about to pray, they may remember, that their Mind and Soul
is to be carried to Heaven; and see how much Hope and Affiance the name of
Father gives it, so much Christian Humility and Devotion let that excellent
Nature and Divine Majesty of our Father, which is in Heaven, add to it.

Which words beforehand determine what is to be prayed for by those that make
Prayers: The Fourth Reason.
for all our Requests for the Necessities and Uses of this Life, unless joined
with the good things of Heaven, and directed to that End, are vain and unworthy
a Christian.

Wherefore the Curats shall admonish their Hearers of this Order of Prayer,
Colos. 5.2.
If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ is
sitting at the right Hand of God. Relish those things which are above, not
those things which are on the Earth.

The FIRST PETITION.
Hallowed be thy Name.

WHat we are to ask of God, I. When Prayer is well disposed.
and in what Order it is to be done, the Master and Lord of all has himself
taught and commanded: For since Prayer is the Messenger and Interpreter of our
Cares and Desires, we then pray well and according to Reason, when the Order of
our Requests follows the Order of the things to be prayed for.

But true Charity admonishes us to offer our whole Soul and Thoughts to God,
II. The Order of Charity.
because he alone, in whom is truly the chiefest Good, is to be loved with a
kind of special and singular Love.

Nor can God be loved alone and from the Heart, III. What the true Love of God
is.
unless his Honor and Glory be preferred before all things and Natures in the
World besides; for both our own and others Goods, yea, and all whatsoever is
called by the name of Good, proceeding from him, give place to him the Chiefest
Good.

Wherefore, IV. Why this the First Petition.
that our Prayer may proceed orderly, our Savior has appointed this Petition,
concerning the Chiefest Good, to be the Principal and Head of all the other
Petitions.

Teaching us, The First Reason.
before we pray for any thing, that either we or our Neighbor have need of,
that we ought to pray for those things that are proper to God's Glory, and to
declare to God himself our Study and Desire of that thing.

By doing whereof, Another Reason.
we shall continue in the Duty of Charity, whereby we are taught, both to love
God more than our own selves; and first to beg those things that we wish for
God, and then what we desire for our selves.

And because this Desire and Petition is about such things as we want, V. What
may be desired in this Petition.
nor can there be any Accession to the true God, i. e. to his Nature; nor the
Divine Substance be any way increased, because after an inexpressible manner it
is fill d with all Perfection: it is to be understood, that what we pray for of
God, concerning himself, belongs not to this Matter, but to his external Glory.

For we beg and pray, Note these three things.
that God's Name may be better known to all Nations, that his Kingdom may be
enlarged, that there may daily be more that yield Obedience to his Divine Name.
Which three things, his Name, Kingdom, and Obedience, are not his internal
Good, but are assumed from without.

Now when we desire that God's Name may be sanctified, VI. What is first
desired in this Petition.
our meaning is, that the Holiness and Glory of God's Name may be increased.
And here the Curat shall observe and teach his devout Hearers, That our Savior
says not, that it be sanctified in the same measure in Earth, as it is in
Heaven; i. e. that the Earthly Sanctification of it should equal the Heavenly;
for this can by no means be done: but that it be done out of Love, and an
inward Endeavor of the ^oul.

Although most true it is, VII. To sanctify God's name. H w it may be done.
that God's Name of it self wants not Sanctification, since it is Holy and
Terrible, even as God himself of his own Nature is Holy; Ps. 100.10.
nor can any Holiness be added to him, wherewith from all Eternity he was not
endu'd: Mark the Sense.
Yet because in Earth he is far less honored than is fit, and sometimes also is
abused with Curses and wicked Expressions, therefore we desire and pray, that
he may be celebrated with Praise, Honor, and Glory, after the example of that
Honor and Glory which is given him in Heaven, i. e. that his Honor and Worship
may be so frequent in our Heart, in our Soul, and Mouth, that we magnify him
with all Veneration both inward and outward, and celebrate the Holy and
Glorious God, after the Pattern of the Citizens of Heaven above.

For as they in Heaven, A Similitude.
with the exactest agreement, give Glory and Renown to God; so we pray, that
the same may be done in Earth, and that all Nations may know, worship, and
reverence God; that there may no where be found any of Mankind who embrace not
the Christian Religion, and dedicate their whole Selves to God, believing that
in him is the Fountain of all Holiness, and that there is nothing Pure or Holy,
which comes not from the Holiness of his Divine Name.

For the Apostle testifies, Ephesians. 5.26.
That the Church is cleans'd by the Laver of Water in the Word of Life: But the
Word of Life signifies the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, in which we are Baptized and Sanctified.

Because therefore there can be no Expiation for any, VIII. What secondly.
no Purity, no Integrity, upon whom God's Name is not called; we wish and pray
God, that all Mankind, leaving the Blindness of their impure Infidelity, and
being illuminated with the Rays of the Divine Light, may come to know the
Virtue of this Name; so, as in him to seek true Holiness, and by God's Mercy
receiving the Sacrament of Baptism in the Name of the Holy and Undivided
Trinity, they may obtain the Virtue of perfect Holiness.

IX. What thirdly.
Our Prayer and Petition therefore belongs no less to those that being polluted
with Sin and Wickedness, have lost the pure Integrity of Baptism, and Robe of
Innocence, whereby it came to pass, that in those most miserable Wretches that
most unclean Spirit has again taken up his Seat: We wish therefore, and pray
God, that in them also his Name may be sanctified; that returning to a due
Consideration and Soberness of Mind, they may, by the Sacrament of Penance,
redeem their former Holiness, and yield themselves a pure and holy Temple and
Dwelling to God.

Lastly, X. What fourthly. Jac. 1.17.
They shall pray, That God would illuminate the Souls of all, that they may
see, that every good and perfect Gift coming down from the Father of Lights, is
given us of God, whereby they freely obtain Temperance, Justice, Life,
Salvation, and lastly, all good things of the Soul and of the Body, for Life
and Salvation; from whom, as the Church declares, proceeds all good things, and
whatsoever Benefits Mankind enjoys by the Light of the Sun, and by the Motion
and Course of the other Stars; that by this Spirit every where diffusing it
self, we are nourished; that the Earth sustains our Life with plenty of all her
Fruits and Provisions; that by the Care of the Magistrates we enjoy Quiet and
Tranquillity. Now these, and innumerable other Benefits of this kind, God's
infinite Bounty affords us. And for those which Philosophers call Second Causes,
we ought to intepret them as the Hands of God, wonderfully made and fitted for
our Use, wherewith he distributes us his good things, and pours them out upon
us far and wide.

But that which contains the chief Point in this Petition, XI. What fifthly and
lastly.
is this, That all Men may know and reverence the most Holy Bride of Jesus
Christ, and our Mother, the Church, in whom alone is that most plentiful and
everlasting Fountain, that cleanses and washes away all the Spots of Sin, and
from whom we have all the Sacraments of Salvation and Sanctification, whereby,
as by a kind of Heavenly Pipes, that Dew and Liquor of Holiness is conveyed
from God to us; to whom alone, and to those whom she embraces in her Bosom and
Lap, belongs the imploring of that Divine Name, Act. 4.12.
which alone under Heaven is given to Men, whereby they must be saved. Vide
August. Sermon. 181. de Tempore, and Greg. l 35. Moral. c. 6.

Now the Curat must drive this Point home, Let the Pastor mark and teach this.
That it is the part of a good Child, not only in Word to pray to God his
Father, but also to endeavor in Deed and in Work that the Sanctification of
God's Name may shine forth in him.

And would to God there were none, XII. How contrary an ill Life is to this
Petition.
who while they daily pray for the Sanctification of God's Name, do violate it
as much as lies in them by their Deeds; by whose Fault sometimes God himself is
ill spoken of, against whom it is said of the Apostle, The Name of God through you
is blasphemed among the Gentiles: And we read in Ezekiel, They went to the
Gentiles, among whom they entered, and polluted my Holy Name, while it was said
of them, This is the People of the Lord, and they came out of his Land. Romans
2.24. Ezekiel. 37.20.

For see what kind of Life they lead,

Wherefore they that live according to Christian Religion, XIII. To what
Christians are obliged in this part.
which they have undertaken, and square their Discourse and Actions according
to its Rules, give a great occasion to others of praising and celebrating, with
all Honor and Glory, the Name of our Heavenly Father. For the Lord himself has
required this of us, that by our virtuous and illustrious Actions, we provoke
Men to praise and glorify the Name of God, to whom he thus speaks in the
Gospel; Matthew. 6.
Let your Light so shine before Men, that they may see your good Works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven. And the Prince of the Apostles; 1 Pet.
2.4.
Having your Conversation honest among the Gentiles, that considering you in
your good Works, they may glorify God.

The SECOND PETITION.
Thy Kingdom come.

THe Kingdom of Heaven, I The whole Gospel directs us to the Kingdom of God.
Mat. 3.2.
which we pray for in this other Petition, is of such a sort, that thither is
referred and terminated all the Preaching of the Gospel: For thence S. John the
Baptist began his Exhortation to Penance; Do Penance, says he, for the Kingdom
of Heaven is at hand. Nor did the Savior of Mankind take the ground of his own
Preaching elsewhere. And in that saving Sermon of his, wherein on the Mount he
showed his Disciples the way of Bliss, for the intended Argument of his
Discourse, as it were, he took his Text from the Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed,
says he, Mat. 4.17.
are the Poor in Spirit, because theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. And to those
that would have staid him, he gave this Cause for the necessity of his Journey,
Mat. 5.3. Luc. 4.43.
I must preach the Gospel of the Kingdom of God to other Cities also: for
therefore I am sent. This Kingdom therefore he commanded the Apostles
afterward to preach, as he answered him that said he would go bury his Father,
Mat. 10.17 Luc. 8. Act. 1.3.
Go thou, and preach the Kingdom of God. And when he was risen from the Dead,
for those Forty days wherein he appeared to his Apostles, he spoke concerning
the Kingdom of God.

Wherefore the Curats shall diligently handle this Point of the second
Petition, II. The Pastors Duty.
that their Faithful Hearers may understand how great the Efficacy and
Necessity of this Petition is.

And first, III. Why this Petition distinct from the rest.
This Consideration will furnish them with abundance of Matter for the
explaining of this Point well and wisely; that tho this Petition be joined with
all the rest, yet he commanded this also to be used separately from the rest;
that what we pray for, we may seek with our utmost endeavor: Mat. 6.33.
For he says, Seek first the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof, and
all these things shall be added to you.

And indeed so great a confluence and plenty of Heavenly Gifts is contained in
this Petition, IV. What this Petition comprehends.
that it contains all things necessary for the Security of our both Corporal
and Spiritual Life.

But how shall we call him worthy of the Name of a King,

In this Petition therefore of the Kingdom of God, V. All things necessary are
here prayed for.
are comprehended all things whatsoever which in this Pilgrimage, or Exile
rather, we stand in need of; which God graciously promises that he will grant:
for immediately he subjoins, All these things shall be added to you.

Whereby he plainly declares, VI. How great Gods Bounty is.
that he is a King that largely and bountifully supplies Mankind. Upon the
consideration of which infinite Bounty, David being fixed, sings thus, The Lord
is my King, therefore I shall want nothing. Psalm. 22.1.

But it is not enough earnestly to seek the Kingdom of God, VII. To be heard in
this Petition, what is necessary.
unless together with our Petition we use all other Means whereby it is sought
and found: For those Five Foolish Virgins indeed earnestly sought it after this
manner, Lord, Lord, open to us; Mat. 25.21.
but yet, because they did not well guard their Petition, they were shut out,
and not without cause; for that Sentence came out of God's own Mouth, Mat. 7.21.
Not every one that says to me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Wherefore the Priests, VIII. How to stir up the Desire of the Kingdom of
Heaven.
and those that have Cure of Souls, shall draw out of the most flowing
Fountains of Sacred Scripture those things that may move in the Faithful the
Study and Desire of the Kingdom of Heaven, and which may put before their Eyes
their calamitous State and Condition, and which may affect them so, as that
looking about them, and recollecting themselves, they may be brought back to
the remembrance of that highest Bliss, and those unspeakable good things,
wherewith the everlasting House of God our Father abounds.

For here we are but mere Exiles, IX. How many and great the Miseries of this
Life are. Gal. 5.17.
and Inhabitants of that place wherein the Devils dwell, whose spite against us
can be mitigated by no means; for they are most hurtful and implacable to
Mankind. And what shall we say of those domestic and intestine Quarrels, which
the Soul and Body, the Flesh and Spirit daily make among themselves, wherein we
ought always to fear lest we should be worsted? And it is to be feared, yea we
should presently fall, were we not defended by the Protection of Gods right
Hand; which weight of Miseries, when the Apostle perceived, Romans 7.24.
he said, O wretched Man that I am! who will deliver me from the Body of this
Death.

This Misery of Mankind, X. How we come to know more readily the greatness of
Man's Misery.
although it be well known of it self, yet it may more easily be understood, from
the Contention of other Natures and created things: For we see it seldom happen
in them, whether void of Reason or Sense, that aany of their Natures so decline
from their proper Actions, Sense or Motions that were implanted in them, as to
forsake their appointed and determined End. This appears in the Beasts of the
Field, in Fishes and Birds; so that the Matter wants nothing to be said for the
clearing of it. If you look up to Heaven, do ye not perceive it to be most true
which was said by David, Psalm. 118.89.
Thy Word, O Lord, endures for ever in Heaven, to wit, That Heaven is carried
about with a steady and perpetual Motion, so that it does not in the least
forsake the Law appointed it of God: If you consider the Earth, and all other
Creatures, you may easily perceive, that they fall off, either not at all, or
but very little.

But miserable Mankind very often falls, XI. Nothing more inconstant than Man.
and seldom does it proceed in any good purposes, but for the most part leaves
off good Actions when begun, and despises them, and the best Sense, which
pleased for a while, presently displeases; and that being rejected, it falls
into ill Counsels and such as are pernicious to it self.

What therefore is the cause of this Misery and Inconstancy? XII. What the
causes of Man's Misery are.
It must needs be the Contempt of divine Inspiration; for we shut our Ears to
Gods Admonitions; we will not cast our Eyes upon those things that would give
us Divine Light, nor do we hearken to our Heavenly Father, commanding us those
things which are for our Salvation.

Wherefore the Curats are to be very careful to lay these Miseries before the
Eyes of the Faithful, XIII. The Curats Duty in thi^ case.
and let them show the causes of their Miseries, and the virtue of the
Remedies; to do which, they will not want means, if they read those very Holy
Men John Chrysostom and Austin, and especially what we have set down in the
Exposition of the Creed: For those things being known, who is there, even of
the most wicked Men in the World, but, by the Help of Gods Grace preventing
them, will endeavor by the Example of the Prodigal Son in the Gospel, Luc. 15.
to bestir and raise himself up, and come into the presence of this heavenly
King and Father? Vide Chrysostom. in Psalm. 118. and in cap. 4. Isai. and hom. 62.
ad Popul. Antioch. Item and hom. 69. and in hom. de vanit. and brevit. Vitae.
Aug. lib. 10. Confess. c. 28. and 31. and lib. 21. de Civit. Dei c. 14. and
lib. 22. c. 22.

Having explained these things, XIV. What is here understood by the Kingdom of
God.
they shall then show how this Petition becomes advantageous to the Faithful,
and what it is that in these words we beg of God, especially seeing that this
word, the kingdom of God, signifies many things, the declaring whereof will be
useful, both to the understanding of other places of Scripture, and is
necessary to the knowledge of this place.

The common Signification therefore of the Kingdom of God, First.
and which is frequent in the Sacred Scripture, is not only that Power which he
has over all Men and Creatures in the World, but his Providence also, which
rules and governs all things. For as the Prophet says, Psalm. 94.4.
In his hands are all the Ends of the Earth. By which Ends are also understood,
those things which are secret and hidden in the inmost parts of the Earth, and
of all things else. According to this Sense spoke Mordochaeus in these words,
Esther 13.9.
O Lord God, thou art an Almighty King: for in thy Power are all things, and
there is none that can resist thy Will, thou art Lord of all, nor is there any
that resists thy Majesty.

Again, Secondly.
by the Kingdom of God, is signified that special and singular Rule of
Providence, whereby God defends and takes care of pious and holy Men. Of which
mighty care so proper to God, it is said of David, The Lord governs me,
therefore shall I want nothing. And Isaiah says, The Lord our King, he shall
save us. Psalm. 22.1. Isay 32.22.

In which Kingly Power of God, XV. Christ's Kingdom is not of this World. John
18.36.
tho even in this Life, those pious and holy Men are, after a special Manner,
of whom we have made mention: yet Christ our Lord admonished Pilat, that his
Kingdom is not of this World, i. e. it has not its Beginning from this World,
which is made to perish; for after that manner, as we have said, Emperors,
Kings, Commonwealths, Rulers, and all they, that either have obtained and are
chosen of Men to be over Cities and Provinces, or by Violence and Wrong to
possess the Government, have the Rule or Mastery.

But Christ our Lord is appointed of God to be King, XVI. What Christ's Kingdom
is.
as the Prophet says: whose Kingdom, as the Apostle says, is Justice, for he
says, The Kingdom of God is Justice and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Psalm.
2.6. Romans 24.15.

Now Christ our Lord reigns in us by internal Virtues, Faith, Hope and Charity;
XVII. How Christ reigns in us.
by which Virtues we are made parts, as it were, of his Kingdom; and being
subject to God after a special manner, we are consecrated to his Worship and
Reverence; that, as the Apostle said, Gal. 2.
I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me; so we may say, I reign, yet not I,
but Christ reigns in me.

Now this Kingdom is called Justice, XXIII. Why God's Kingdom is Justice.
because it is constituted by the Justice of Christ our Lord. And of this
Kingdom thus speaks our Lord in S. Luke, The kingdom of God is within you. Luc.
17.21.

For tho Jesus Christ reigns by Faith in all, Grace is said to be.

Now, Thirdly. The Kingdom of God is eternal Glory. Matthew. 25.34. Luc. 23.42.
that is God's Kingdom of Glory, whereof we hear Christ our Lord speaking in S.
Matthew, Come ye Blessed of my Father, possess the Kingdom prepared for you
from the beginning of the World. Which very Kingdom that Thief in S. Luke
admirably ackowledging his Wickedness, begged of him in this manner, Lord
remember me, when thou come into thy Kingdom. S. John also makes mention of
this Kingdom, John. 3.5.
Except a Man be born again of Water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. And the Apostle to the Ephesians mentions it, Ephesians. 5.
For no Whoremonger, or Unclean person, or Covetous man, (who is an Idolater)
has any Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God. Matthew. 13.^1.
Hither do belong some Parables of Christ our Lord, speaking of the Kingdom of
Heaven.

But first it is necessary to establish the Kingdom of Grace; XIX. The double
Kingdom of Grace and Glory.
nor can Gods Glory reign in any, except his Grace first rule in them.

But Grace, XX. What Grace is.
according to the Sense of our Savior himself, is, A fountain of living water,
sprining up to eternal life, John. 4.14.

And what shall we call Glory, but Grace made perfect and absolute?

For so long as we are clothed with this frail and mortal Body while weak and
wandering in this blind Pilgrimage we are absent from the Lord, XXII. Our
Instability in the Kingdom of Grace.
we often slip and fall, casting off the Admonitions of the Kingdom of Grace
wherewith we were secured: but when the Light of the Kingdom of Glory, which is
perfect, shall have enlightened us, we shall always stand firm and stable, for
every Fault and Inconveniency shall be taken away; every Infirmity being
confirmed shall be strengthened: Lastly, God himself will reign in our Soul and
Body. But this thing has bin more fully handled in the Creed, when we
discoursed of the Resurrection of the Flesh.

These things therefore, XXIII. What things are here prayed for. First.
which show the common Sense of the Kingdom of God, being explained, we must
show what this Petition properly prays for.

Now we beg of God, that Christ's Kingdom, which is the Church, may be
propagated; that all Infidels and Jews, Schismatics and Heretics may turn
themselves to the Faith of Christ our Lord, and receive the Knowledge of the
true God, and return to Soundness of Mind, and to the Communion of the Church
of God, from whence they are fallen, that it may be fulfilled and brought to
that Issue which the Lord spoke by the Mouth of Isaiah, Isa. 54.2.
Enlarge the place of thy Tents, and stretch out the Borders of thy
Tabernacles, make thy Lines long, renew thy Rule: for thou shall penetrate to
the right and left Hand, because he that made thee shall reign over thee. And
again. The Gentiles shall walk in thy Light, Isa. 60.5.
and Kings in the brightness of thy rising; lift up thy Eyes round about and
see; all these are gathered together, they came to thee, thy Sons shall come
from far, and thy Daughter shall rise from beside thee.

But because in the Church there are some that in their Words confess God,
Secondly.
but in their Deeds deny him, and yet boast of their deformed Faith, in whom,
by Reason of Sin, the Devil dwells and rules as in his own Houses; we pray also
that the Kingdom of God may come upon them, whereby the Darkness of their Sins
being dispelled, and being illustrated with the Rays of the Divine Light, they
may be restored into their former Dignity of being the Children of God; that
all Heretics and Schismatics being taken away, and all Offenses and all causes
of Sin cast forth out of his Kingdom, our Heavenly Father may purge the Floor
of his Church, that in worshipping God devoutly and holily, she may enjoy a
quiet Peace and Tranquillity.

Lastly, Thirdly.
we pray that God alone may live in us, and he alone may reign in us, that
hereafter there be no place for Death; but that it may wholly be swallowed up
in the Victory of Christ our Lord, who having scattered and dispersed all the
Principality of the Enemies, by his own Power and Might he may subject all
things under his Government.

And it shall be the Curats Care, XXIV. The Curats Duty in this case.
to teach the Faithful, what the Reason of this Petition requires, with which
Thoughts and Meditations being furnished, they may make these Prayers devoutly
to God. And First, they shall exhort them, to consider the Force and Meaning of
that Parable used by our Savior, The Kingdom of Heaven is like to a Treasure
hidden in a Field, which he that found it in the Ground, hid, and for joy
thereof, goes and sells all that he has, and buys that Field.

For he that knows the Riches of Christ our Lord, XXV. All things seems vile
when we know Gods Kingdom.
will despise all things in comparison of them, all Excellencies, Riches and
Power will seem mean to him; for nothing can be compared to that most precious
Jewel, or be able to stand before it. Wherefore those that know it, Phil. 8.
will cry out with the Apostle, I account all things but loss, and esteem them
but as Dung, that I may gain Christ. This is that famous Jewel of the Gospel,
Matthew. 13.45.
for which he that sells all his Goods and gives the Money thereof, shall enjoy
everlasting Happiness.

O happy we, XXVI. How precious this Jewel of didivine Grace is. Romans 8.15.
if Jesus Christ would give us so much Light as to see this Jewel of Divine
Grace, whereby he reigns in those that are his; for we would sell all that we
have, yea and our very selves, to buy and secure this; for then at last we
might assuredly say, Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? But if we
would know what is the exceeding Excellency of the Kingdom of Glory, let us
hear the Words and Sentences of the Prophet and Apostle agreeing in the same:
Isa. 64.2. 1 Cor. 2.9
Eye has not seen, neither has Ear heard, nor has it entered into the Heart of
Man, what things God has prepared for them that love him.

Now, XXVII. That we may be heard, we must pray with Humility.
for the obtaining what we desire, it will be very profitable to consider with
our selves what we are, i. e. the Offspring of Adam, justly cast out of
Paradise, and Exiles; whose unworthiness and Perverseness might rather deserve
God's utmost Hatred and eternal Punishments.

XXVIII. The Advantage of selfdespising. The First.
Wherefore it then behooves us to be of an humble and lowly Spirit.

Our Prayer also will be full of Christian Humility.

And wholly distrusting our selves, The Second.
we will betake our selves, as that Publican did, to God's Mercy.

And ascribing all to his Bounty, Third. Romans 8.15.
we will give him immortal Thanks, who has given us his Holy Spirit, encouraged
by whom, we may be emboldened to cry, Abba, Father.

And we shall take Care and Consideration what we are to do, The Fourth.
and on the contray what to avoid, that we may come to the Kingdom of Heaven.

For we are not called of God to Idleness and Sloth; for, says he, Matthew. 11.12.
the Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence, and the violent take it by force. And
if thou will enter into Life, Matthew. 19.17.
keep the Commandments.

It is not enough therefore to seek the Kingdom of God, XXIX. We must labor
together with Grace.
unless Men labor and toil for it, for they ought to help and serve that Grace
of God in holding that Course which leads to Heaven.

God never forsakes us,

And in this Kingdom of God, XXX. The defense of our Salvation and how great.
which is his Church, are all things, wherewith he defends the Life of Man, and
perfects their eternal Salvation: Multitudes of Angels which are invisible, and
the Benefit of visible Sacraments full of Celestial Treasures; in these things
there is so much Security appointed us by God, that we may be safe, not only
from the Government of our worst Enemies, but we are able to cast down and
tread under our feet even the very Tyrant himself, and his wicked Accomplices.

Wherefore let us lastly pray earnestly of Gods Spirit to command us to do all
things according to his Will; XXXI. What we pray for in this Petition in the
Fourth place.
that he would take away the Kingdom of Satan, that he may have no Power over
us in that great Day, that Christ may overcome and triumph, that his Laws may
prosper through the whole World, that his Decrees may be kept, that he may have no
Traitor or Deserter, but that all may behave themselves so, that they may come
cheerfully, into the presence of Gods Kingdom, and may come to the Possession
of the Kingdom of Heaven, appointed for them from all Eternity, where they
shall be blessed and enjoy an everlasting Age with Christ.

The THIRD PETITION.
Thy Will be done.

SEeing that it is said of Christ our Lord, I. How properly this Petition
follows the other.
Not every one that says to me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; but he that does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven, he shall
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: Whoever they be that desire to enter into
that Heavenly Kingdom, ought to pray that his Will may be done. Wherefore this
Petition is put immediately after that of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Now that the Faithful may understand how necessary that is to us, II. The
necessity of this Petition.
which we pray for in this Petition, and how great a heap of saving Gifts we
obtain by the begging thereof, the Curats shall show from the Miseries and
Afflictions wherewith Mankind was oppressed, by reason of the Sin of our first
Parents.

For at the Beginning God implanted in all Created things the desire of their
proper Good; III. The state of Nature as entire.
that by a kind of natural Propension, they might seek and find their own
proper End, from whence they might never turn aside, unless hindered from
without themselves. Now in the Beginning this Power of desiring God, who is the
Author and Parent of his Happiness, was by so much the more clear and excellent
in Man, because he was capable of Reason and Counsel.

Now when as the other Creatures void of Reason, IV. How great mischief the
fall by Sin caused.
kept this desire which was naturally inbred in them; which as at first they
were created good by Nature, stood so in that State and Condition, and continue
so to this Day: but miserable Man kept not his course; for he not only lost the
good of Original Justice, wherewith he had bin dignified and adorned by God
above the Power of his own Nature; but has also obscured the chief Study of
Virtue in his Mind, Psalm. 52.3.
For all are gone out of the way; they are altogether become unprofitable,
there is none that does good, no not one.

For the Thoughts and Imaginations of Man's heart^ are set upon evil, V. How
corrupt Man is. Genesis 8.21.
from his youth upwards. So that it may easily be perceived, that there is no
one of himself wife to Salvation; but that all Men are prone to Evil, and that
the evil Thoughts of Men are innumerable, while they are carried headlong with
rageing desire of Anger, Pride, Ambition, and almost all kinds of evil.

In which Evils, VI. The exceeding great misery of Man by the fall.
tho we are daily busied; yet which is the utmost Misery of Mankind, there are
many of those Evils which seem to us to be not at all evil; and this shows the
notable Calamity of Men, who being blinded with their Lusts and Desires, see
not, and think those things to be for their Welfare, which are very infectious,
yea, and are carried headlong in pursuit of those things that are dangerously
Evil, as to a desirable and excellent Good; and abhor those things that are
honest and good, as the contrary thereof.

This false Opinion and Judgment God detests in these words, VII. Man by the
Fall, fell into Gods Hatred.
Woe to them that call evil good, and good evil, putting Darkness for Light, and
Light for Darkness, putting Bitter for Sweet, and Sweet for Bitter. Isa. 5.20.

Therefore to put these Miseries before Men's Eyes, VIII Two ^^^ellent
Similitudes.
the Scripture compares us with them that have lost the true Sense of Taste;
whence it comes to pass, that they are Strangers to wholesome Food, and seek the
contrary. And they further compare us with Sick persons; for as they, while
their Distemper lasts, cannot discharge the Offices and Parts of healthy and
sound Men: So neither can we, do those things that are acceptable to God,
without the Assistance of divine Grace.

But if, IX. Man void of Grace can do no hing toward his Salvation.
while we are thus affected, we go about any such things, they are but trivial,
and such as are of little or no moment to the obtaining the Bliss of Heaven.
But to love and serve God as is fit, it being a matter too great and high for
us, we could never be able to do it without the Help of Divine Grace.

Although that Comparison is also very proper, An excellent Similitude.
to signify the miserable Condition of Mankind, when we are said to be like
Children, who being left to their own Will, are rashly moved at all things: We
are, I say, Children and foolish, wholly given to idle Chat and frivolous
Actions, if forsaken of the Divine Assistance; for thus Wisdom reproves us,
Prove. 1.22.
How long, ye little ones, do ye love Infancy, and Fools desire those things
that are for their Hurt? 1 Cor. 14.20.
And after the same manner the Apostle exhorts;

Be not Children in Understanding, X. The great need we have of divine Help.
although we are imploi'd in greater Vanity and Error than little Children, who
yet want the Wisdom of Men, to which notwithstanding, in time, they may come of
themselves; but to the Divine Wisdom, which is necessary to Salvation, we can
never aspire, but by Gods teaching and assisting us. For except Gods help be
present with us, we cast away those things that are truly good, and wilfully
rush upon our own Destruction.

Now he that by Gods Grace has this Darkness of Mind removed, XI. How
profitable the knowledge (...) our own Darkness is.
can see these Miseries of Men; and being awakn'd from his dead Sleep, can feel
the Law of his Members, and perceive his Sensual Desires fighting aga nst the
Spirit, and can despise every Propensity of Nature to Evil; who is there that
can choose but with an earnest Study, seek out a fit Remedy against this so
great an Evil, wherewith we are so oppressed by the Corruption of Nature, and
search out that Rule to which the Life of a Christian is to be directed and
conformed?

Now this is the very thing which we beg, XII. In this Petition is desired a
Remedy for all our Weakness.
when we thus pray to God, Thy Will be done. For, whereas by casting off our
Obedience, and neglecting the Will of God, we fall into these Miseries; God
offers us only this one Remedy of all our Evils, that at last we would live
according to his Will, which by Sin we have despised, and that we would measure
all our Thoughts and Actions by that Rule; which that we may be able to do, we
humbly beg it of God, Thy Will be done.

They also, XIII. This Petition necessary even for the Just.
in whose Souls God already reigns, and who are illuminated with the Rays of
Divine Light, by benefit of whose Grace they obey the Will of God, must
heartily beg it. Which things, tho thus obtained, yet properly they are against
our Desires, by reason of our proneness to Evil, which is rooted in Men's
Hearts. So that tho we were such kind of Persons, yet in this case we are in
very great danger from our selves, lest being drawn away and enticed by our
Lusts, which war in our Members, Jac. 4.1.
we again turn aside from the way of Salvation: Of which Danger our Lord
admonishes us in these words; Mat. 26.41.
Watch and pray, that ye enter not into Temptation: The Spirit indeed is ready,
but the Flesh is weak. Vide Hier. lib. 2. advers. Jovin. and Aug. de Haeresi 6.

For it is not in the power of Man, XIV. Even j stified Persons endure the
Affections of the Flesh.
no not even in his who is justified by the Grace of God, so to subdue the
Affections of the Flesh, as never after to rise up against him; for when the
Grace of God heals the Minds of those that are justif'd, he heals not their
Flesh also; of which the Apostle writes thus: For I know that in me, i. e. in
my Flesh, dwells no good thing. Romans 7.18.

For as once the First Man lost his Original Justice, XV. Since Adam's Fall no
one could govern his Desires.
whereby his Desires were governed as with a Bridle, his Reason could never so
contain them in their Duty, as not to seek after those things which are even
against Reason. In that part of Man therefore Sin dwells, i. e. the Incitement
to Sin, as the Apostle writes, that we may know, that it abides not with us a
Guest for a time, but that it always remains as an Inhabitant in our Body, in
the House of our Members, as long as we live.

Therefore that we may stoutly withstand our domestic and inbred Enemies,

And now the Faithful must be made to know, XVI. What Will of God is here
understood.
what the Force of this Petition is; where omitting many of those things which
are profitably and largely disputed by Learned Schoolmen concerning God's Will,
we say, That here the Will is taken for that which they use to call a Sign, i.
e. for that which he has commanded or warned us either to do, or to beware of.

Wherefore by the word Will, XVII. This Will signifies all God's Commandments.
in this place, are comprehended all things that are proposed to us for the
obtaining of the Bliss of Heaven, whether they belong to Faith or Manners; and
lastly, all things whatsoever Christ our Lord, either by himself, or by his
Church, has commanded or forbidden us to do: Of which Will, the Apostle writes
thus: Be ye not unewise, but understanding, what the Will of God is. Ephesians. 5.
v. 17.

When therefore we pray, XVIII. What is here prayed for First. Secondly.
Thy Will be done, we first of all pray, That our Heavenly Father would give us
Power to obey his Divine Commands, and to serve him in holiness and justice all
our days.

To do all things according to his Will and Pleasure.

Thirdly.
To do those Duties of which we are admonished in Sacred Scriptures.

To perform all other things by his Direction, Fourthly.
which they teach them that are born, not of the Will of the Flelh, but of God;
following the Example of Christ our Lord, who became obedient to Death, even
the Death of the Cross.

To be ready to endure all things, Fifthly.
rather than in the least to depart from his Will.

Nor is there any one that more ardently burns with the Love and Study of this
Petition, XIX. Who pray this heartily.
than he to whom it is given to behold the exceeding great Dignity of those
that obey God: For he understands that Saying to be most true, Whosoever, says
our Lord, will do the Will of my Father which is in Heaven, he is my Brother,
and Sister, and Mother; that is, I am most closely joined with him in all the
Bonds of Love and Good Will. Bern. Sermon. 3. de S. Andrea.

There is scarcely any of the Saints but earnestly besought God for the
exercise of this Petition; XX. How often this Petition repeated by the Saints.
all have very often used this Prayer, tho in a different Expression; among
whom we see the admirable and excellent David thus in a different manner
praying: For one while he says, Would God my Ways were directed to keep thy
Justifications; another while, Lead me into the Way of thy Commandments;
another while, Order my Steps according to thy Word, and let no Injustice rule
over me. Hither belong those Sayings, Give me Understanding, that I may know
thy Testimonies. He often uses the same Sense in different words; and these
Places are diligently to be observed and explained to the Faithful, that all
may know how great a Store and Plenty of wholesome Matters is contained in the
First Part of this Petition.

In the second place, XXI. What we detest by this Petition, in the seventh
place. Gal 5 19. Romans 8.13.
when we pray, Thy Will be done, we detest the Works of the Flesh, whereof the
Apostle writes thus: Now the Works of the Flesh are manifest, which are these,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Immodesty, Wantonness, etc. And, If ye live according
to the Flesh, ye shall die: And we pray, That God would not suffer us to
accomplish those things which our Sense, our Lust, our Weakness would persuade
us to, but that he would govern our Will.

Now voluptuous Persons are Strangers from this Will of God, XXII. This
Petition not well made by the Voluptuous.
being bent wholly upon the thought and care of Earthly things: For they are
carried headlong by their Lust to the enjoyment of that they desire, and place
their Happiness in the enjoyment of their evil Desires; insomuch that they call
him happy that obtains whatsoever he lusts for.

We, What we here pray for, in the sixth place.
on the contrary, pray God, as the Apostle says, That we may not follow the
care of the Flesh in its Desires, but that his Will may be done.

Not that we are easily brought to beg of God, XXIII. Hard to make this
Petition aright.
not to satisfy our Desires; for this purpose of Mind has some difficulty,
that we seem in a sort to hate our selves while we pray thus; which those Men
account no better than Folly, who are wholly bent upon the Flesh.

But let us willingly undergo the repute of Folly for Christ's sake; If any one
will follow me, let him deny himself. Mat. 16.24. Luc. 9.23.

Especially since we know it to be much better to pray for that which is right
and just, XXIV. Better to wish what is good, than to obtain what is unjust.
than to obtain that which is against Reason, and the Power and Laws of God:
And certainly he is in a worse condition, whosoever he be, that attains to
whatsoever he rashly and through the impulse of his Lust desired, than he that
obtains not that thing which he excellently prayed for.

Although we do not only pray God not to grant us what we desire of our selves,
since it is manifest that our Desires are corrupt; but also not to give us what
by the persuasion and impulse of the Devil we sometimes pray for as a Good.

That VVish of the Prince of the Apostles seemed very excellent, An Example.
and very full of Devotion, when he would have persuaded our Lord from his
Purpose of proceeding to Death; and yet our Lord did sharply chide him, because
he was led by Human Sense, and not by Divine Reason.

What could seem to have been greater Love to our Lord, Another Example.
than to pray as those Holy Men James and John, who being angry at the
Samaritans, who would not entertain their Master, besought him to command Fire
to come down from Heaven, to consume those hard-hearted and cruel Men: But they
were reprehended by Christ our Lord, in these words; Ye know not what Spirit ye
are of; for the Son of Man came not to destroy Men's Souls, but to save them,
Luc. ^.54.

Nor ought we to pray God that his Will may be done, What ninthly
only when we desire what is evil, or has the show of evil; but also when
indeed it is not evil: as when the Will follows that first Inclination of
Nature, that it desires those things which preserve Nature, and rejects those
things that seem contrary to it.

Wherefore when we are come to that Point, A singular Example.
as to pray for any thing of that kind, then let us heartily say, Thy Will be
done: Let us imitate himself, from whom we receive both our Salvation and the
Direction to Salvation, who when he was moved with a natural Fear of Torments,
and the Bitterness of Death, yet even in that utmost Horror of Grief, he
submitted his own Will to his Fathers: Not my Will, says he, but thine be
done. Luc. 22.42.

But Mankind is wonderfully corrupt, XXV. Without Grace we cannot avoid Sin.
who when they have used Force upon their Desires, and have subjected their own
to the Will of God; yet without God's Help, by which we are protected from
Evil, and directed to Good, we cannot escape Sin.

We must therefore have recourse to this Petition, What tenthly.
and beg of God to perfect those things he has begun in us.

What eleventhly.
That he would suppress the insolent Motions of our Desire.

What twelfthly.
That he would make our Appetites to be obedient to our Reason.

What thirteenthly.
That he would conform us wholly to his Will.

We also pray, What fourteenthly.
That the whole World may receive the Knowledge of his Will, and that the
Mystery of God, which was hidden from all Ages and Generations, may be made
known and evident to all.

We pray further for the Form and Prescription of this Obedience, What f
f^teenthly.
to wit, that it be directed according to that which the Blessed Angels observe
in Heaven, and the other Quire of Celestial Souls do keep; that as they do
freely and with the utmost willingness obey God, so we may most cheerfully obey
his Will, in the exact manner as he would have us.

And in the Work and Service we do for God, XXVI. How God must be served.
He requires of us our utmost Love and highest Charity; that tho in hope of the
Reward of Heaven we have wholly devoted our selves to him; yet that we so hope
for it, as it has pleased his Divine Majesty, that we should enter upon that
Hope. Wherefore let all our Hope be resolved into Love toward God, who has
offered to our Love eternal Bliss.

For there are some who cheerfully serve another, XXVII. Imperfect Love.
but yet it is for the sake of the Reward, whither they refer their Love.

Besides, Perfect Love.
there are some, who being moved only with Love and Devotion, regard nothing in
him whom they serve, but his Goodness and Virtue; in consideration and
admiration whereof, they esteeem themselves happy, that they can do him any
Service. And this is the meaning of that Apposition, As in Heaven, so in Earth,

For we must endeavor with our utmost Labor to be obedient to God, XXVIII. The
manner of our Obedience. Ps. 102.^1.
as we say that the Blessed Souls are, whose Commendations, for their exact
performance of Obedience, David sets forth in the Psalm, Bless ye the Lord all
ye Powers of his, ye Servants of his, that do his Will.

Which, XXIX. The Explication of S. Cyprian.
if any one, following S. Cyprian, thus interpret it, as tho by In Heaven, were
meant among good and devout Persons, and by In Earth; were meant among the
Wicked and Impious: We also approve of that Sense, that by Heaven may he
understood the Soul, and by the Earth may be understood the Flesh, that all Men
and all Things may in all things obey the Will of God.

This Petition does also contain a Thanksgiving: XXX. In this Petition there is
also Thanksgiving.
For we reverence his most holy Will, and being filled with the greatest Joys,
we celebrate all his Works with the highest Praises and Gratulations,
certainly knowing, that he does all things well: For seeing it is manifest that
he is God Almighty, it necessarily follows, that we know that all things were
made at his Command; and when we affirm also, That he is, as he is indeed, the
Supreme Good, we confess, that there is none of all his Works which is not
good, since he imparts his Goodness to all.

But if we reach not the Divine Reason in all things; XXXI. Our Understanding
to be brought into Obedience to God.
yet in all things the Cause of all Doubtfulness not regarded, and all Distrust
being laid aside, we confess with the Apostle, That his ways are past finding
out. Romans 11.33.

But for this very Reason also we very much honor Gods Will, that we are
dignified with his Heavenly Light: For having snatched us out of the power of
Darkness, he has put us in the Kingdom of the Son of his love. Colos. 1.13.

But, XXXII. What we are to meditate on from this Petition.
that in the last place, that may be explained, which belongs to the Meditation
of this Petition, we must return to that which we touched upon in the
Beginning, that the Faithful in the Pronouncing of this Petition, ought to be
of an humble and lowly Spirit, considering with themselves, the violence of
Desires, which yet is rooted in their very Nature, and repugnant to the Will of
God, thinking it self, while containing it self in its own Duty, to be below
all other Natures; whereof it is thus written, All things serve thee, and
especially, that he is but feeble, who cannot only not do some Work acceptable
to God; but cannot so much as design it, unless assisted by Gods Help. Psalm.
118.91.

Now because nothing is more great or magnificent, XXXIII. Wherein Man's
greatest glory is placed.
nothing more excellent, than, as we said before, to serve God, and to lead our
Life according to his Law and Commandments, what can be more desirable to a
Christian than to walk in the Ways of the Lord, than to think nothing in his
Mind, than to undertake to do nothing that may be contrary to Gods Will?

He therefore that would follow this Exercise, XXXIV. All things out ill to
them that submit not themselves to God.
and would keep himself carefully to that Resolution, let him search out of the
Divine Books, for the Examples of those to whom all things succeeded ill, when
they would not reduce the Reason of their own Counsels to the Will of God.

Lastly, let the Faithful be admonished to rest satisfied in the simple and
absolute Will of God.

And let him that seems to himself to be in a lower Condition than his Dignity
requires, bear it patiently.

Let him not forsake his own Order, but abide in his own Vocation, in which he
is called.

And let him subject his own Judgment to Gods Will, who does better for us than
we can wish to our selves.

If we are pressed with Poverty or Want, XXXV. How Men may live contented.
if with Sickness of Body, if with Persecutions, if with other Troubles and
Difficulties, we must certainly assure our selves, that none of these things
could come upon us, without the Will of God, which is the highest Rule of all
things; and therefore that we ought not to be much moved, but to bear them with
an undaunted courage, always having in our Mouths that Saying, Joh 1.21.
The Will of the Lord be done. And that of blessed Job, As it pleased the Lord,
so has it been done. The Lords Name be praised.

The FOVRTH PETITION.
Give us this Day our daily Bread.

THE Fourth Petition, I. The Reason of the Order of the seven Petitions.
and the rest that follow afterward, wherein we properly and namely beg
necessary Reliefs for our Souls and Bodies, are referred to the former
Petitions: For our Lords Prayer has this Order and Rule, that the begging of
those things which belong to the Body and to the Defense of this Life, follows
after the Petitioning for Divine Matters.

For as Men are referred to God, II. All our concerns to be referred to God.
as to their ultimate End: So after the same manner the Goods of this Life, are
directed to the Divine (good things,) which indeed are therefore to be wished
and prayed for, either because the Order of God so requires it, or because we
want those Assistances, to the obtaining of Divine good things, that by their
Help, we may attain to the End proposed, which consists in the Kingdom and
Glory of our Heavenly Father, and in doing and performing of those Commands
which we know to be the Will of God.



The Curats therefore shall discharge their Duty to their Faithful Hearers,
III. Temporal things to be prayed for according to Gods appointment.
that they may know that in praying for those things that belong to the Use and
Advantage of Earthly Matters, that our Minds and Desires are to be directed
according to Gods Appointment; nor are we to go aside from that in the least.
For what does the Apostle write in this Case? We know not what to pray for as
we ought. We sin very much in these Petitions for Earthly and fading things.

These good things therefore are to be prayed for as we ought, Ye know not what
ye pray for. Matt. 20.22.

Now the Purpose and Design of him that prays, IV. How to know whether our
Prayer be good or bad.
will be a sure note of judging which Petition is evil, which good: For if any
one prays for Earthly things with such a Heart as to think those things to be
altogether good, and to rest satisfied in them, as in his desired End, and
seeks nothing else; without doubt he prays not as he ought. For, as S. Austin
says, we seek not these Temporal things as our Goods, but as our Necessaries.
Lib. 2. de Sermon. Domini in monte. Cap. 16. Item Epist. 121. c. 6.

And the Apostle in his Epistle to the Corinthians teaches, 1 Cor. 10.31.
For whether ye eat, says he, or drink, or whatsoever else ye do, do all to the
Glory of God.

But that Gods Faithful may see of how great necessity this Petition is, V. How
the necessity of thi^ Petition is to be showed.
the Curats shall observe, how great need we have of these outward things for
Food and Preservation of Life; which they will the better understand, if they
compare those things together, which were needful to our first Father, and to
the rest of Mankind afterward for Life.

For tho he in the most ample Estate of Innocence, VI. The difference between
the State of Innocence and of Nature after the Fall.
from whence he, and all his Posterity, through his Fault, fell, had need of Food
to refresh his Strength; yet there is a great difference betwixt the
Necessities of his, and of our Life. For he had no need of Clothes to cover his
Body, nor of a House for his shelter, nor of Arms for his Defense, nor of
Physic for his Health, nor of other things, the Help whereof we stand in need
of to defend the Weakness and Frailty of our Nature; that Fruit which the
blessed Tree of Life yielded, was sufficient to him for an immortal Life, which
since it never gave for any Labor of his, or his Posterity.

Nor was Man to be idle in those so great Delights of Paradise, VII. Adam
labored in Paradise.
to occupy which, God placed him in that Habitation of Pleasure; but no Labor
had bin troublesome, no Discharge of Duty had bin at all unpleasant to him, he
had for ever enjoyed the most delightful Fruits from his Tillage of those
fruitful Gardens, nor had his Labor or his Hope at all ever deceived him.

But his Posterity is not only deprived of the Fruit of the Tree of Life, VIII.
How great the Misery of Adams Posterity is.
but also is condemned with that dreadful Sentence, Cursed is the Farth by thy
act; in labor shall thou eat thereof all the Days of thy Life, Briers and
Thorns shall it bring thee forth, and thou shall eat the grass of the Earth, in
the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy Bread, till thou return to the Earth
out of which thou wast taken; for Dust thou art, and into Dust shall thou
return.

To us therefore all things are fallen out contrary to what they had done to
him and his Posterity, IX. Among these Miseries, which is the greatest.
if Adam had bin obedient to Gods Command. All things therefore are altered and
changed for the worst. Among which this is very lamentable, that for our
exceeding great Charges, utmost Labor and Sweat, we very often receive no
Fruits, when the Seed we sow turns to bad standing Corn, or is choked with
Weeds, or is stricken with Storms, Winds, Hail, Blasts, Cankers, and so
perishes and is destroyed; so that all the whole Labor of the Year in a short
Time, by some Calamity of the Air or Earth, comes to nothing: And this happens
for our Wickedness, at which God being angry, does not bless our Labors. But
that dreadful Sentence remains, which at first he pronounced against us. Genesis 3.

The Pastors therefore in handling of this Point, X. Men's Labor but vain unless
God bless it.
shall labor that the Faithful may know, that Men fell into these Streights and
Miseries by their own Fault, that they may understand that they must labor and
sweat in getting those things that are necessary for Life; but yet except God
bless their Labor, that all their Hope will deceive them, and all their
striving be in vain; For neither is he that plants any thing, nor he that
waters; but God that gives the Increase. And, Except the Lord build the House,
they labor but in vain that build it. 1 Cor. 3.7. Psalm. 126.1.

The Curats therefore shall teach, XI. Whence the Necessity of Prayer proved.
that there are almost innumerable things, which if we want, we either lose
Life, or render it very uncomfortable. For this want of things, and this
Weakness of Nature being known, Christians will be compelled to go to their
Heavenly Father, and humbly to beg of him both Earthly and Heavenly good things.

They will imitate that Prodigal Son, An Example Luc. 15.
who when in a far Country he began to want, nor was there any one that would
give him so much as Peas-husks to eat, when he was hungry, returning afterward
to himself, he understood that there was no Remedy to be expected any where for
those Evils wherewith he was pressed, but from his Father.

And here also the Faithful will come with more Confidence to pray, XII. How
Faith given to them that pray.
if in their Minds they consider the Divine Goodness, that his Fatherly Ears
are always open to the Voice of his Children; for while he exhorts us to seek
our Bread, he promises that he will bestow it abundantly upon them that rightly
ask it of him: for by teaching us how to ask it, he exhorts us to ask it; by
exhorting, he inforces us to ask it; by enforcing us to ask, he promises to
give it; by promising to give it us, he leads us into a certain Hope of
obtaining it.

The Minds of the Faithful therefore being stirred up and inflamed, XIII. What
we pray for in this Petition.
it now follows, that we show what is prayed for in this Petition; and First,
what Bread that is, which here we ask.

We must know therefore that in Sacred Scripture by this Word Bread are
signified many things, XIV. What is meant by the Word Bread.
but especially these two: First, whatsoever we use for Food and other
Provisions for the Body, for Preservation of Life; and then whatsoever is given
us of God's Blessing for the Life and Salvation of our Spirit and Soul.

Now here we ask Relief for that Life which we lead here in the Earth, XV. What
we here pray for. First.
and this by the Authority of the Holy Fathers that thought so.

Wherefore they are not to be heard, XVI. Earthly good things may lawfully be
prayed for.
that say that Christians may not ask of God the Earthly good things of this
Life: For there are against this Error, besides the concurring Sense of the
Fathers, very many Examples both of the Old and New Testament.

For Jacob vowing, prayed thus, An Example Genesis 28.20.
If the Lord will be with me, and keep me in my way, by which I walk and give
me Bread to eat and Clothes to put on, and that I return in safety to the House
of my Father; the Lord shall be my God, and this Stone which I have put up for
a Monument, shall be called the house of God, and of all that thou shall give
me, I will offer to thee the Tithes.

And Solomon also prayed for certain Relief of this Life, Another. Prove. 30.8.
when he prayed thus, Give me neither Beggary nor Riches, but give me only
Necessaries for Food.

And what shall we say, Others out of the New Testament. Matthew. 24.20.
when the Savior of Mankind commands us to pray for those things, which no one
dares deny, do belong to the use of the Body? Pray ye, says he, that your
flight be not in Winter, or on the Sabbath. And what say we of S. James, Jac.
5.13.
whose Words are these, Is any of you sad? let him pray: Is any one cheerful?
let him sing. And what of the Apostle, who says thus to the Romans, Romans 15.30.
I beseech you, Brethren, through our Lord Jesus Christ, and through the Love of the
Holy Ghost, that ye help me in your Prayers to God for me, that I may be
delivered from the Infidels that are in Judea.

Wherefore, XVII. Earthly good things are here pr y'd for.
when God gives leave to the Faithful to ask the Comforts of human things, and
this perfect Form of Prayer was deliverd by Christ our Lord; there is no doubt
left that this is one of the seven Petitions.

Besides, XVIII. What we pray for Secondly.
we beg our daily Bread, i. e. Necessaries for Food, and under the name of
Bread, whatsoever is sufficient both for ^ lothes to cover us, and for Food to
sustain us, whether it be Bread, or Flesh, or Fish, or whatsoever else we can
think on.

For we see that Eliseus used this manner of speaking, An (...) ple. 4 Reg 6.22.
when he admonished the King to give Bread to the Assyrian Soldiers, to whom a
great abundance of Meat was given.

And we know that it was written concerning Christ our Lord, Another.
He entered into the House of a certain Prince of the Pharisees on the
Sabbath Day to eat Bread: Luc. 14.1.
by which word we see is signified whatsoever belongs to Meat and Drink.

For the perfect Signification of this Petition, XIX. We here pray for
necessaries only.
we must further observe, that by the Word Bread, we are not to understand, an
abundant and exquisit plenty of Meat and Clothes; but only what is simply
necessary, as the Apostle wrote, Having Food and Raiment, 1 Timothy 6.8. Prove.
30.8.
let us therewith be content. And Solomon, as we said before, prayed, Give me
only necessary Food.

And of this Sparing and Frugality we are admonished in the next Word: XX. We
here pray for nothing for Luxury.
For when we say Our, we pray for that Bread that is for our Need, not for
Wantonness. Neither do we say Our, as tho we were able to get it by our own
Industry, without God: Psalm. 10^.
(For David says, All things wait on thee, to give them Meat in season: when
thou give it them, they gather it; when thou openest thy Hand, all things are
filled with Goodness. And in another place, The Eyes of all things hope in
thee, O Lord, and thou give them their Meat in due season) but because it
being necessary for us, it is given us of God the Father of all, who by his
Providence feeds all things living.

And for this cause also it is called Our Bread; XXI. Why this Bread is called
Ours.
because we are to get it lawfully, not by Wrong, Deceit or Theft: For
whatsoever we get to our selves by ill Arts, it is not ours, but other Men's;
and very commonly, either the Getting of it, or the Possession, or at least the
spending of it, is very Calamitous; but on the contrary, according to the
Sentence of the Prophet, there is great Peace and Happiness, in the honest and
toilsom Profits of pious Men: Psalm. 127.2.
For, says he, because thou shall eat the labors of thy hands, happy art thou,
and well it will be for thee.

And now for those that seek their Bread by their honest Labor, XXII. God
blesses the Laborious. Deuteronomy. 28.8.
God promises them the Fruit of his Blessing, in that place, The Lord will send
his Blessing upon thy Stores, and upon all the works of thy hands, and he will
bless thee.

Nor do we only beg of God for our selves, XXIII. What we pray for, Thirdly.
that we may use that, which through our Sweat and Labor we have gotten by the
help of his Bounty; for that is truly called Ours: but we pray also for a good
Heart, that what we have justly gott'n, we may also well and wisely make use of.

Daily. In this Word also lies an Admonition to Frugality and Parsimony, XXIV.
By the word Daily we are taught Frugality.
of which we spoke last; for we pray not either for Dainties, or many sorts of
Meat, but only for that which satisfies the Necessities of Nature; so that here
they may be ashamed, who being weary of common Meat and Drink, seek for the
most rare sorts of Dainties and Wines.

Nor by this Word Daily, XXV. The same Word condemns Covetousness. Isa 5.8.
are they less blamed, against whom Isaias utters these; dreadful Threats, Woe
to you that join house to house and field to field, even to the utmost extent
of place, will you only dwell, in the midst of the Earth? For the Covetousness
of these Men is inexpressible, of whom it is thus written by Solomon, Eccle.
5.6.
A covetous Man will not be satisfied with Money. Hitherto belongs also the
Saying of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.9.
They that will become rich, fall into temptation and the snare of the Devil.

Besides, XXVI. It shows us to be mortal.
we call it Our daily Bread, because we are fed therewith for the Supply of our
Vital Moisture, which is daily consumed by the force of natural Heat.

Lastly, XXVII. It teaches us to pray diligently.
there is this Reason for this Word, because it is to be prayed for daily, that
we may be kept in this practice of loving and worshipping God; and that we may
assuredly persuade our selves, as true it is, that our Life and Health depends
upon God.

Give us. How much matter these two words afford, XXVIII. The Force of these
words to be explained. Luc. 4.
to exhort the Faithful devoutly and holily, to worship and reverence the
infinite Power of God, in whose hands are all things; and to loath that wicked
Pride of Satan, All things are delivered to me, and I give them to whom I will,
there is none that sees not; for at the pleasure of God alone, all things that
are given, are preserved and increased.

But what need is there, XXIX. The Rich beg their daily Bread.
may some one say, for Rich Men to pray for their daily Bread, seeing they
abound with all things? They have this Necessity for praying in this manner;
not that those things may be given them, of which, by Gods Bounty, they have
enough; but that they lose not those things which they have in abundance.
Wherefore as the Apostle writes, 1 Timothy 6.27.
Let them hence learn not to be overwise, nor to trust in uncertain riches; but
in the living God, who gives to all men all things liberally to enjoy.

Chrysostom gives this Reason for this necessary Petition. Hom. 14. oper.
imperfect. in Matthew. not only that he would supply us with Food, but that when
the Hand of the Lord does relieve us with giving to our daily Bread, a wholesome,
and therefore a healthful Virtue, he would cause our Food to nourish our Body,
and our Body to be serviceable to our Soul.

But what is the Reason why we say, XXX. Why we pray here in the plural Number.
Give us, in the the Plural Number, and not Give me? Because it is the Property
of Christian Charity, not that every one be careful for himself only, but that
he take pains for his Neighbor also; and in taking care for his own Advantage,
that he remember others also.

Add hereto, Another Reason.
that the Gifts which God gives to any one, he gives not to the End, that he
alone should possess them, but that he should communicate to others, what
things he has above Necessity: For says S. Basil, Hom. 6. varior. arg. and S.
Ambrose Sermon. 81. It is the Bread of the Needy which thou detain'st, it is the
Clothes of the Naked which thou loock'st up, it is the Redemption, the Freedom,
the Money of the Miserable, which thou hidest in the Earth.

This Day. This Word admonishes us of our common Infirmity: XXXI. What this
word to Day signifies.
For who is there, that if by his only Labor he be past Hope to be able to
provide the necessary Expenses of Life for a long while, does not trust at
least that he shall provide Food for one Day?

But neither does God allow us the Power of this Confidence, since he commands
us to beg our Meat of him every Day.

Which Sentence has this necessary Reason, XXXII. The Lords Prayer to be said
daily.
because we all want daily Bread, therefore we must all daily use the Lords
Prayer.

And thus much of the Bread, which being received into our Mouth, nourishes and
sustains our Body, which God of his admirable Bounty bestows upon all in
common, as well on the Faithful as Infidels, as well on the Pious as Impious,
Matthew. 5.46.
Who causes his Sun to rise upon the Good and upon the Evil, and rains upon the
Just and on the Unjust.

The other Bread, XXXIII. Fourthly, we here pray for Spiritual Bread.
and which we also pray for in this place, is Spiritual, whereby all things are
signified, whatsoever are required for the Safety and Salvation of the Spirit
and Soul. For as the meat, wherewith the Body is nourished and sustaind, is of
many sorts; so the Meat which preserves the Life of the Soul and Sprit, is not
of one kind only.

For the Word of God is the Food of the Soul: First.
For Wisdom says, Prove. 9.5.
Come ye, eat of my Bread, and drink of my Wine which I have mingled for you.

Now when God takes away from Men the Use of this Word, XXXIV. When the Food of
God's Word is taken away Amo^ 8.11.
which he uses to do when he is much provoked by our Sins, he is said to send a
Famine upon Men: For thus it is in Amos; I will send a Famine upon the Earth,
not a Famine of Bread, or a Thirst of Water, but of hearing the Word of the Lord.

Now as it is a certain Sign of Death approaching, XXXV. A singular Comparison.
when Men cannot take Food, or having taken it, cannot keep it; so it is a very
great Argument that their Salvation is in danger, who either desire not God's
Word; or, if they have it, will not endure it, and pour out that impious Cry
against God, Job. 21.14.
Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy Ways.

In this Madness of Soul, XXXVI. The Despisers of Gods Word.
in this Blindness of Mind they are taken, who disregarding those Catholic,
both Bishops and Priests, that are put over them, and cutting themselves off
from the Holy Roman Church, have given themselves over to be governed by
Heretics, that corrupt the Word of God.

But then, XXXVII. Christ the Bread of the Soul. Joh. 6.15.
Christ our Lord is the Bread of the Soul: For he says of himself, I am the
Living Bread that came down from Heaven.

It is past belief, with how great Pleasure and Joy this Bread then fills
devout Souls, they are most afflicted with Earthly Troubles and Inconveniences.
That holy Quire of Apostles may serve us for an Example, of whom it is thus
recorded, Act. 5.41.
They went out from the presence of Council, rejoicing. The Books of the Lives
of Holy Men are filled with Examples of this kind. And of those inward Joys of
Good Men, God speaks thus, Apoc. 2.17.
To him that overcomes, I will give the hidden Manna.

But especially this Bread is Christ our Lord, XXXVIII. Christ in the Eucharist
is the Bread of the Soul.
which is substantially contained in the Sacrament of the Eucharist. This
unspeakable Pledge of his Love he gave us, when he was about to return to his
Father; of which he said, He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwells in
me, and I in him. Take ye and eat; This is my Body. Job. 6.65. Mat. 26.6. 1
Cor. 11.64.

And the Curat shall fetch those things which belong to the profit of the
Faithful, from that place where the Force and Virtue of this Sacrament is
particularly explained, Page 181.

And here it is said, XXXIX. How Christ in the Eucharist is the Bread of the
Soul.
Our Bread, because it belongs to the Faithful, i. e. to those, who joining
Charity with Faith, by the Sacrament of Penance wipe away the Spots of Sin; who
remembering themselves to be the Children of God, take and worship this Divine
Sacrament with the greatest Holiness and Veneration they are able. Vide Tertul.
lib. de Orat. Cypr. item de Orat. August. and alios, locis citatis supra, page
473.

But why is it called Daily? There is a twofold Reason: XL. Why Christ is
called our daily Bread. Psalm. 54.25.
The one is, That in the Sacred Mysteries of the Christian Church it is offered
to God daily, and given to those that devoutly and holily desire it: The other
is, That we ought daily to receive it, or at least, so to lead our Life, as to
be fit daily to take it and eat it.

Let those that think otherwise, Ambrose says; If it be thy Daily Bread, why
do thou take it but once a Year? Lib. 5. Sap. c. 4. Vide etiam de Consec.
did. 2.

But in this Petition the Faithful are specially to be exhorted, XLI. The Issue
of this Petition to be left to God.
That when they have honestly and well advised, and been industrious in getting
the Necessaries of Life, they leave the Success to God, and refer their Desires
to his Pleasure, Psalm. 45.23.
who will not always leave the Just in a tottering condition.

For either God will grant the things desired, than themselves do. Upon this
Point the Curats may enlarge themselves, in explaining those Reasons which are
excellently collected by S. Austin in his Epistle to Proba.

The last thing in discoursing upon this Petition, is this: XLII. Why God gives
good things to Rich Men.
That Rich Men well consider their Wealth and Plenty, and that they received
them from God; and let them think with themselves, that those good things are
therefore heaped upon them, to distribute them to the Needy. To which sense
agree those things that are disputed by the Apostle, in his first Epistile to
Timothy; 1 Timothy 6.17.
whence the Curats may fetch Divine Precepts enough for the clearing this Point,
both profitably and savingly.

The FIFTH PETITION.
And forgive us our Debts, as we alsso forgive our Debtors.

SInce there are so many things that signify God's Infinite Power to be joined
with the like Infinite Wisdom and Goodness, I. Christ's Passion a singular Token
of his Love to us.
that whithersoever we turn our Eyes and thoughts, we meet with the Tokens of
his Immense Power and Goodness; verily there is nothing that more evidently
shows his most profound Love and admirable Charity toward us, than that
unspeakable Mystery of the Passion of Jesus Christ, from whence sprang that
everlasting Fountain to wash away the Pollutions of Sin, whereby we wish to he
cleans'd and expiated, God being our Guide and Benefactor when we pray thus of
him, Forgive us our Debts.

Now this Petition contains the Sum, II. What this Petition contains. Isa. 27.9.
as it were, of those Goods which are heaped upon Mankind through Jesus Christ:
For so Esaias taught; Iniquity shall be forgiven to the House of Jacob, and all
this Fruit is to take away Sin. Which thing David also shows, declaring them
that could receive that saving Fruit, to be blessed, in these words, Psalm.
34.11.
Blessed are they whose so Iniquities are forgiven.

Wherefore the Pastors must observe and expound the meaning of this Petition
accurately and deligently, III. This Petition to be explained.
which we perceive to be so available to the attaining of the Life of Heaven.

Now we enter upon a new way of Praying; IV. This ^^^ten d ^ers from the rest.
for hitherto we have begged of God, not only Eternal and Spiritual Good
things, but Transitory Conveniences, and such as belong to this Life: But now
we pray to be deliv^r'd from the Evils both of Soul and Body, both of this and
the other Life.

Now because to the obtaining what we pray for, V. What need we have to pray
aright.
there is required a proper way of Petitioning, it seems fit to show how they
ought to be affected, that will make Prayers to God.

The Curats therefore shall admonish the Faithful, First.
first, That it is necessary, that he that will come to beg this, first
acknowledge his Sin.

And then, Secondly.
that he be moved with the Sense of, and Grief for it.

And then, Thirdly.
that he throly persuade himself, that God is willing to pardon those that have
sinned, if they are so affected and disposed, as we have said: lest happily after
the bitter remembrance and acknowledgment of Sin, there follow the despair of
Pardon, which long ago took hold upon the Souls of Cain and Judas, Genesis 4 13.
Mat. 27.4.
who looked upon God only as a Revenger, and not also as Gracious and Merciful.

In this Petition therefore we ought so to be affected, VI. With what Mind this
Petition to be made.
that with grief acknowledging our Sins, we fly to God as to a Father, and not
as to a Judge; whom we pray to deal with us, not in Justice, but in Mercy.

Now we are easily brought to acknowledge our Sins, VII. How Men are to be
brought to acknowledge their Sin. Psalm. 13.52.
if we but hearken to God himself admonishing us, in such places of sacred
Scripture as these: For thus we read in David; They are all gone out of the
Way, they are all together become unprofitable; there is none that does good,
no not one, To the same sense speaks Solomon; There is no Man just upon the
Earth, that do s good and sins not. Pertinent to which, is this also; Who can
say, My Heart is clean, I am pure from Sin? Prove. 20.9.
Which very thing also, for the deterring Men From Pride, is written by S.
John; 1 John 1.8.
If we say, that we have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in
us. And by Jeremy; Hier. 2.35.
Thou said, I am without Sin, and innocent; and therefore let by Anger be
turned from me: Behold, I will contend with thee in Judgment, because thou
said, I have not sinned.

All whose Sentences, VIII. In what sense this Petition is to be understood.
agreeing in the same, tho coming out of their several Mouths, Christ our Lord
confirmed in the appointment of this Petition: For the Authority of the Council
of Milevis forbad that it should be otherwise interpreted, after this manner,
c. 7, 8, 9. We decree, That whosoever will have those Words of the Lord's
Prayer, where we say, Forgive us our Debts, so to be said of the Saints, as
that it be said for humility, but not truly; Let him be Anathema.

For who can endure one to pray, Vide Trid. Sess. 6. de Justificatione, c. 11.
Item Aug. in Ench. c. 17.

But in the necessary acknowledgment of our Sins, IX. Sin is to be remembered
with grief.
it is not enough lightly to make mention of them: For, that the remembrance of
them might be bitter to us, there is need that we be pricked at the Heart,
wounded at the Soul, and grieve inwardly.

Wherefore the Curats shall diligently handle this Point,

Nor shall they labor to lay before the Eyes of the Faithful the Filthiness
only of their Sin, X. How the Peoples Sins are to be put before their Eyes.
but also Men's Indignity and Blemishes; who being nothing else but stinking
Flesh, and the utmost Deformity, dare after an incredible manner, provoke the
incomprehensible Majesty and inexpressible Excellency of God; and especially
since by him, we have been created, redeemed, and enriched with innumerable and
exceeding great Benefits.

And why? Note and Amplify.
that being estranged from God the Father, who is the Supreme Good, we dedicate
our selves to the Devil, for the basest Reward of Sin, and to the most
miserable Slavery. For neither can it be expressed how cruelly he tyrannises in
the Souls of them, who having cast away the sweet Yoke of God, and broken the
most lovely Knot of Charity, whereby our Soul is tied to God our Father, they
have fallen off to their most bitter Enemy, Joh. 14.30.
who for that Reason is called in Sacred Scripture, the Prince and Ruler of the
World, Ephesians. 6.12. Job. 41.25. Isa. 26.13.
and the Prince of Darkness, and King over all the Children of Pride. And to
them that are oppressed with the Devils Tyranny, does that Word of Esaias
properly agree, O Lord our God, other lords besides thee have ruled over us.

If these broken Covenants of Love move us not, XI. How many and great
Mischiefs Sin causes.
at least let the Calamities and Miseries into which we have plunged our selves
by Sin, move us: For the Sanctity of the Soul, which we know is espoused to
Christ, is violated, and this same Temple of the Lord, is profaned, which
those that pollute, 1 Cor. 3.
the Apostle threatens thus, Now if any one violate the Temple of God, him will
God destroy. Innumerable are the Evils which Sin brings upon Men. Which Plague,
being almost infinite, Psalm. 37.4.
David expresses in these Words, There is no soundness in my Flesh, because of
thy Anger, neither is there any rest in my Bones, by reason of my Sins.

To wit, Explications to be mark d.
he observes the force of that Plague, when he confessed, that there was no
part of him uninfected by the Plague of Sin, for the Poison of Sin went into
his very Bones, i. e. it had infected his very Reason and Will, which are the
most solid parts of the Soul. The Sacred Scriptures show, that this Plague
spreads its self wide, when they call Sinners, Lame, Deaf, Dumb, Blind, and
seized in all their Members.

But besides, XII. God is angry at, and fights against Sinners.
the Grief which he felt from the Wickedness, as it were, of Sin; David was
more troubled for Gods Anger, which he knew he had provoked against himself, by
reason of his Sin; for the Wicked have War with God, by whose Wickedness he is
beyond Belief offended; for the Apostle says, Romans 2.2.
Wrath and Indignation and Tribulation, and Sorrow to every Soul of Man that
does evil.

For tho the Act of Sin passed away utterly, XIII. After the Act of Sin the
Guilt remains.
yet the Blot and the Guilt of it remains, which Gods Anger always hangs over
and follows, as the Shadow does the Body. Therefore when David was wounded with
these Arrows, he was moved to beg Pardon of his Sins, whose both Example of
Grief and way of Teaching, the Curat having drawn out of his Fiftieth Psalm,
shall propose them to his Faithful Hearers; that by Imitation of the Prophet,
they may be taught to grieve, i. e. they may be taught true Penitence and
encouraged with the Hope of Pardon.

Now how great Advantage this way of teaching has, XIV. The utility of this
Doctrine to lead to Penitence.
to learn us by our Sorrow for Sin, that Word of God in Jeremy shows, who
exhorting Israel to penitence, admonishes them to perceive the Sense of those
Evils, which were the Consequence of their Sins: Jer. 2.19.
For see, says he, that it is an evil and a bitter thing to forsake the Lord
thy God, and not to fear me, says the Lord of Hosts.

They that want this necessary Acknowledgment and Sense of Grief, XV. The
hardness of the Impenitent.
are by the Prophets Esaias, Ezekiel and Zachary, said to have a hard, stony,
and adamantine Heart; For they are like a Stone, not softn'd by any Grief,
having no Sense of Life, i. e. of Saving Confession. Isa. 46.12. Ezekiel. 36.26.
Zach. 7.12.

But lest the People being terrified with the Weight of their Sins, XVI. How
Sinners are to be encouraged with Hope of Pardon.
should despair of being able to obtain Pardon, the Curat ought to encourage
them to Hope, with these Reasons.

First.
Because Christ our Lord has given Power to his Churh to forgive Sins, as is
declared in the Sacred Article of the Holy Creed.

And in this Petition he has taught how great the Goodness and Liberality of
God toward Mankind is; Secondly.
for if he were not willing and ready to forgive the Penitent their Sins, he
would never have appointed us this Form of Prayer, Forgive us our Debts.

Wherefore we ought to keep it fixed in our Minds, XVII. Whence Confidence is
to be had.
that he will bestow his Fatherly Compassion upon us, since he has commanded us
to beg it of him in our Prayer; for under this Petition, this meaning is fully
contained, that he is so tender toward us, as that he will freely pardon true
Penitents.

For he is God, XVIII. How grievously God is offended by Sin
against whom by casting away our Obedience, we sin; the Order of whose Wisdom,
by our Deeds and Words we disturb and violate.

But he is also a most loving Father, XIX. The singular goodness of God.
who because he can forgive all things, has not only declared that he is
willing to do it; but also drives Men to ask it of him, and teaches them with
what words to do it.

Wherefore no one can doubt,

And because this Testification of the readiness of the Divine Will to pardon,
XX. How Gods Propensity toward us, is to be proved.
increases our Faith, cherishes our Hope, and inflames our Love; it is worth
the while to amplify this Point with some Divine Testimonies and Examples of
Men, to whom, being penitent for their very great Wickedness, God granted
Pardon; which because we ran it as far as the matter required, in the Entrance
of this Prayer, and in that part of the Creed which is concerning the
Forgiveness of Sins, the Curat from thence shall take what seems fit for the
teaching of this Point, and the rest he shall draw from the Fountain of the
Sacred Scriptures.

And then let them use the same Order which we thought proper to be used in the
other Petitions; XXI. What Debt signifies.
and that the Faithful may know what the word Debts singnifies here, lest happily
being deceived by the Doubtfulness of the Word, they pray for another thing
than what is here to be prayed for:

We first must know, XXII. What we pray here for First.
That we pray not, that the Love which on all Accounts we owe to God, with all
our Heart, with all our Soul, and with all our Minds, the paying of which Debt
is necessary to Salvation, should be remitted us.

And because in the word Debt, XXIII. The second thing here prayed for.
are also contained Obedience, Worship, Veneration, and all other Duties, of
that kind, we pray not to be discharged from them neither.

But we pray that he would discharge us from our Sins; XXIV. What here prayed
for. Luc. 13.4.
for so S. Luke interprets it, who puts Sins instead of Debts; because in
committing them we become guilty before God, and liable to due Punishments,
which either by satisfying or suffering, we undergo. Of this kind, that Debt
was, whereof Christ our Lord spoke by the Mouth of the Prophet, Psalm. 68.5.
I then paid what I never took.

From which Sentence of Gods Word we may understand, XXV. What a Sinner must
do that cannot pay.
that we are not only Debtors, but utterly unable to pay, since the Sinner of
himself can by no means make Satisfaction. Wherefore we must fly to God's
Mercy, to whom, because he answers by his Justice, which God will never part
with, we must use Prayer and the Protection of the Passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ, without which no one ever obtained Pardon of Sins, and from which, as
from its Fountain, flows all the Virtue and Efficacy, of making Satisfaction.

For that Price, XXVI. How plentiful Christ's fruits are.
which was paid by Christ our Lord upon the Cross, and communicated to us by
the Sacraments, using the matter with Study and Desire, is of so great Efficacy
and VVorth, that it brings to pass and procures, that our Sins be forgiven us.

And here we pray not for Forgiveness of small Mistakes only,

But we say Our Debts after a far different manner, XXVII. Our Sins and our
Bread are ours in a different manner.
than when we say, as before, Our daily Bread; for that Bread is Ours, because
it is given us of the Gift of God; but our Sins are Ours, because the Guilt of
them is in our selves: for we do them wilfully, which would not have the Nature
of Sin in them, if they were not voluntary.

We therefore undergoing and confessing this Guilt, XXVIII. In this Petition
we accurse our selves. Genesis 3.12.
implore Gods Mercy, which is necessary to expiate our Sins: In which case we
use no Excuse at all, nor lay the Blame upon any other, as our first Parents
Adam and Eve did; but we judge our selves, using, if we are wise, that Prayer
of the Prophet, Psalm. 144.4.
O my, heart, decline not thou into words of malice, to make excuses for thy
sins.

Nor do we say, XXIX. Why we here pray in the plural number.
forgive me; but forgive us: because the Brotherly Relation and Charity which
is between all Men, requires of us all, that being careful for the common
Salvation of our Neighbors, when we pray for our selves, we should also pray
for Pardon for them.

And this manner of Praying delivered by Christ our Lord, XXX. Whence we had
this manner of Praying.
and from him received by the Church of God, and always kept by her, the
Apostles themselves held in bighest Veneration, and required others to observe
it.

Of this ardent Care and Desire in praying for the Salvation of our Neighbors,
we have in both Testaments the famous Examples of those Holy Men Moses and
Paul; whereof the one prayed God, in this manner, Exodus 32.32.
Either forgive them this Sin, or if thou will not do it, blot me out of thy
Book. The other thus, Romans 9.8.
I my self wished to be an Anathema from Christ for my Brethren.

As we also forgive our Debtors.
THis word As, XXXI. The twofold Acceptance of the Particle As.
may be understood two ways; for it has both the Nature of a Similitude, as
when we pray God that he would pardon our Sins, so, as we forgive them their
Wrongs and Reproaches, that have injured us.

And besides it is a Note of Condition, in which Sense Christ our Lord
interprets this Petition, For, says he, Matthew. 6.14.
if ye forgive Men their Offenses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you
your Trespasses; but if ye forgive not Men, neither will your Father forgive
you your Sins.

Now there is need to know both these Senses, XXXII. It is here taken in both
Senses.
that if we would have God to give us Pardon of our Offenses, we must needs
spare them of whom we have received VVrong; and he so far requires mutual Love
and Care, that he rejects and despises the Gifts and Sacrifices of them that
are not reconciled to each other: For even by the Law of Nature it is
appointed, that w^ be such to others, as we would they should be to us; that he
is really very impudent, that desires God not to punish him for his Sins, when
himself bears a Revengeful Mind against his Neighbor.

Wherefore those that have suffered injuries ought to be ready and easily
inclined to pardon, XXXIII. He that will be forgiven, must also forgive. Luc.
17.5.
since they are strongly urged to it, both by this Form of Prayer, and in S.
Luke God commands it, If thy Brother have trespassed against thee, reprove him,
and if he be penitent, forgive him; and if he trespass against thee seven times
in a day, and seven times in a day, and return to thee, saying, I repent,
forgive him. And in S. Matthew's Gospel, Matthew. 5.44.
Love your Enemies. And the Apostle, and long before him Solomon wrote, If
thine Enemy hunger, give him meat, Romans 12 20. Prove. 15.2.
if he thirst, give him drink. And in S. Mark the Evangelist, M^rc. 11.2.
When thou come to pray, if thou have any thing against another, forgive it,
that your Father which is in Heaven may also forgive you your Offenses.

But because by the Fault of Corrupt Nature, XXXIV. What is to be done when Men
will hardly be reconciled.
there is nothing that Man does more against the Hair, than to forgive one that
injures him; let the Curats use all the Skill they have, both of Prudence and
of Affection, to turn and bend the Minds of the Faithful to this Indulgence and
Mercy, so necessary to a Christian.

Let them continue a while in handing of such of the Divine Oracles, First.
wherein they may hear God himself commanding them to pardon their Enemies.

And let them teach them by an Argument, Secondly.
which indeed is most true, and likely to prevail with Men, that they are the
Children of God, if they are ready to forgive Injuries, and love their Enemies
from their Heart.

For when we love our Enemies,

And for the Close of this Admonition and Precept, Thirdly.
let them make use, for an Argument, of the Empire and Government of Christ our
Lord, which we cannot refuse without the utmost Shame and Ruin, Matthew 5.
Pray for them that persecute and spitefully use you, that ye may be the
Children of your Father which is in Heaven.

But here is required a greater Prudence than ordinary in the Pastors; XXXV.
What kind of forgetfulness of Injuries required to Virtue.
lest any one, knowing the Difficulty, and yet the Necessity of this Precept
should despair of Salvation. For there are some, who knowing that they ought
resolutly to forget Injuries, and to love those that have wronged them, do
desire so to do, and according to their Power do so; but find that they cannot
utterly put all the Remembrance of Injuries out of their Minds; for there do
stick in the Mind some Relics of secret Grudgings; for which cause their
Consciences are afflicted with great Struglings; fearing, lest, not simply and
heartily forgetting Injuries, they obey not Gods Command.

Here therefore the Pastors shall explain the Contrary Motions of the Flesh and
of the Spirit, XXXVI. The struggling betwixt the Flesh and Spirit to be here
explained.
that the Sense of the One, is prone to Revenge; The Nature of the Other, is
ready to forgive; hence it comes, that there is a perpetual Quarrel and
Wrangling betwixt them. Wherefore they shall show that they are not to despair
of Salvation, because the Appetites of corrupt Nature are always striving and
contending against Reason, so that the Spirit persists in her Office and
Resolution of Forgiving Injuries, and of loving her Neighbors.

And because there have been some perhaps, XXXVII. Why this Prayer to be used
by those that cannot as yet love their Enemies. First.
who because they cannot yet resolve to forget Injuries and love their Enemies,
are therefore so frighted, with the Condition before mentioned, that they dare
not use the Lords Prayer: Let the Curat use these two Reasons for the taking
away from them that Destructive Error.

For every one that is of the Number of the Faithful makes these Prayers in the
Name of the whole Church, wherein there must needs be some pious persons, that
have forgiven their Debtors those Debts that are here mentioned.

Add hereto, Secondly.
that when we pray this of God, we do at the same Time pray for whatsoever is
necessarily to be bestow d upon us to do according to this Petition.

For we pray for Pardon of Sins and the Gift of true Penance.

We pray for the Faculty of inward Sorrow.

We pray that we may be able to hate our Sins, and to confess them truly and
devoutly to the Priest.

Therefore since it is necessary for us to pardon those that have done us any
Wrong or Mischief, when we pray God to pardon us, we also pray him to give us
Power to reconcile our selves to those, against whom we have any Quarrel.

Wherefore they are to be deterred from this Opinion, God the more against
them: And on the contrary, they are to be exhorted, to the frequent use of this
Prayer, that they pray to God our Father, to give them a Heart to pardon those
that have injured them, and to love their Enemies.

And that our Prayer may be to good Purpose, XXXVIII. What is necessary to make
this Prayer fruitful.
let us first take care and consider, That we are Petitioners to God, and seek
Pardon of him; which he gives not, but to the Penitent; and that we ought
therefore to exercise so much Charity and Piety, as is suitable to Penitents,
and that it is very convenient for such, having their own Faults and Vices
before their own Eyes, to expiat them with Tears.

Together with this Consideration, XXXIX. The Occasions of Sin to be avoided.
there is to be joined Caution for the future against those things which may
give any Occasion of Sin, and which may give us any Opportunity of Offending
God our Father. David was careful in this matter, Psalm. 40.5. Psalm, 6.7.
when he said, My Sin is ever before me. And in another place, Every night will
I wash my bed and water my couch with my tears.

Let every one further in their Prayers propose to himself the most ardent
Intention of those who in their Prayers begged of God Pardon of their Sins, XL.
Examples to be followed.
as of that Publican, who standing afar o^^, and for Shame and Grief casting
down his Eyes to the Ground, smote upon his Breast, and only prayed thus, Luc
18.13 Luc. 2 38.
God be merciful to me a Sinner. As also of that Woman the Sinner, who having
with her tears washed our Lords Feet, and wiped them with the Hairs of her
Head, kissed them: And lastly of Peter the Prince of Apostles, Matthew. 27.
who went out, and wept bitterly.

And then they must consider, XLI. What Remedies to be used. Penance. Eucharist.
by how much the weaker Men are, and by how much they are more prone to the
Diseases of the Soul, which are her Sins, by so much the more, and the more
frequent Remedies they stand in need of.

Now the Remedies of a Sick Soul are, Penance and the Eucharist, these things
therefore the Faithful ought frequently to use.

And then, Alms.
as the Sacred Scriptures teach us, Alms are Medicines very proper for the Cure
of the Soul: Those therefore that desire to use this Prayer devoutly, let them
according to their power be good to the Poor: For how great virtue it has to
wipe away the Pollutions of Sin, the Holy Angel of the Lord testifies in
Tobias, whose words are these: Tob. 12.8.
Alms deliver from Death, and it is that which purges away Sin, and causes us
to find Mercy, and everlasting Life: And Daniel testifies, who thus admonishes
King Nebuchodonosor; Dan. 4.24.
Redeem thy Sins with Alms, and thy Iniquities by showing Mercy to the Poor.

The best way of giving and of showing Mercy, XLII. Which the best kind Alms.
is the forgetting of Injuries, and showing your Good Will toward them that
wrong you in your Goods, your Reputation, your Body, or any of yours.

Whosoever he be therefore that desires God to be very merciful to him, let him
deliver up to God all his Ill Will; let him pardon every Offense done against
him, and let him pray most heartily for his Enemies, taking all Opportunities
of doing them good. But because this Argument has been already explained,

But let them shut up this Petition with this Conclusion, XLIII. Nothing more
unjust than a merciles Man.
That nothing is or can be imagined more unjust, than that he that is so cruel
to Men, as to show himself favorable to none, should desire God to be merciful
and gracious to him.

The SIXTH PETITION.
And lead us not into Temptation.

THere is no doubt but that the Children of God, I. They that are newly
converted to God, easily fall back again.
after that they have obtained the Pardon of their Sins, being inflamed with
the Desire of giving Worship and Veneration to God, both heartily pray for the
Kingdom of Heaven, and paying all the Offices of Piety to God, wholly depend
upon his Fatherly Will and Providence: But withal, by so much the more does the
Enemy of Mankind study all Arts against them, prepares all his Engines,
wherewith they are so opposed, that it is to be feared, lest their Resolution
being tired out and changed, they return again to their Vices, and grow far
worse than they were before. Of whom may rightly be said that of the Prince of
Apostles, 2 Pet. 2.11.
It were better for them not to have known the way of Justice, than after
having known it, to return back again from that holy Commandment which was
delivered them.

Wherefore the Command of making this Petition was given us of Christ our Lord,
II. Why this Petition added to the rest.
that we should commend our selves daily to God, and implore his Fatherly Care
and Defense; being well assured, that if we were forsaken of his Divine
Protection, we should be entangled in the Snares of our most bitter Enemy.

Nor did he command us only in this Rule of Prayer, III. Christ commanded this
Prayer twice, and why.
to beg of God not to suffer us to be led into Temptation; but also in that
Sermon which he made to the Holy Apostles about the time of his Death, when
indeed he said that they were clean, he admonished them of this Duty, in these
words: Joh. 13.10 Mat. 26.4.
Pray that ye enter not into Temptation. Which Admonition being made again by
Christ our Lord, he said a great Charge upon those that have Cure of Souls, to
be diligent in stirring up the Faithful to the frequent use of this Prayer;
that when every hour there are so great Dangers of this kind intended against
Men by their Enemy the Devil, they may earnestly beg of God, who alone is able
to drive them away, in this Prayer, Lead us not into Temptation.

But the Faithful will understand how much need they have of this Divine Help,
IV. How great the necessity of this Petition is.
if they but remember their own Weakness and Ignorance; if they remember that
Sentence of Christ our Lord, The Spirit indeed is ready, but the Flesh is weak;
if they remember what heavy and destructive Accidents Men would fall into by
the Devil's means, if they were not upheld by the help of God's Right Hand.

What clearer Example of Man's Weakness can there be, Examples of our Weakness.
than that of Sacred Quire of Apostles, who before were of a stout Courage, but
upon the first Terror laid in their way, forsook our Savior and fled? Although
that of the Prince of Apostles himself is yet more clear; who after so large a
Profession of singular, both Resolution and Love to Christ our Lord, when but a
little before, being very confident of himself, he said thus; If I were to die
with thee, yet I will not deny thee: yet presently, at the Voice of a silly
Maid, he protested with Oaths, that he knew not our Lord. Mat. 26.35.

And the Reason is,

But if the most holy Men have grievously sinned through the Weakness of Human
Nature, Note again.
to which they trusted too much; how are others to fear, who come far short of
them in Holiness?

Wherefore let the Curat propose to the Faithful the Fights and Dangers
wherein we are daily engaged, V. To how many Dangers of Temptations Men are
exposed.
while our Souls continue in these mortal Bodies, which on every hand the
Flesh, the World, and Satan oppose.

What Anger, what Lust or Covetousness can do in us, how few are there in the
World, that are not compelled to their great damage to feel? Who is there
that is not wearied with these Goads, who feels not these Thorns? Who is not
scorched with these secret Firebrands? And indeed their Blows are so many, and
their Importunities so various, that it is a very hard matter not to receive
some grievous VVounds.

And besides these Enemies, which lodge and live with us, there are moreover
those most bitter Enemies of whom it is written. Ephesians. 6.22^
We wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, but against the Rulers of this World
of Darkness, against Spiritual Wickedness in Heavenly things.

For to the inward Combats, VI. How great the violence of the Devils is.
the outward Violence and Assaults of the Devils join themselves; for they seek
to catch us, both by open Force, and secret Snares cast upon our Souls, so that
we can very hardly escape them.

Now these the Apostle calls Princes for the Excellency of their Nature, VII.
Why the Devils called Princes.
(for by Nature they excel Men, and all other Creatures that fall under Sense)
he also calls them Potestates or Powers, because they not only excel in
Strength of Nature, but of Power also: he also calls them Rulers of the World
of Darkness; for they govern not the Clear and Light World, i. e. Good and
Pious Men; but the Dark and Gloomy World, to wit, those who being blinded with
the Spots and Darkness of a naughty and wicked Life, are delighted with the
Devil the Prince of Darkness.

He also calls the Devils Spiritual Wickednesses, VIII. Why Spiritual
Wickednesses. What Carnal Wickedness. What Spiritual Wickedness.
i.e. the Wickedness both of Flesh and Spirit.

The Wickedness which is called Carnal, kindles our Desires to sensual Lusts
and Pleasures.

But Spiritual Wickedness, are evil Purposes and corrupt Desires, which belong
to the Superior part of the Soul; which are by so much worse than the rest, by
how much the Mind and Reason it self is higher and more excellent.

Which Wickedness of Satan, in Heavenly things.

Whence we may learn, IX. The Devil's Malice.
that the Enemies Forces are great, their Courage undaunted, their Hatred
against us cruel and infinite; That they wage perpetual War, so that there can
be no Peace or Truce with them. And how bold they are, that word of Satan
shows, which we read in the Prophet, Isa. 14.13.
I will climb up even to Heaven. He set upon our first Parents in Paradise, he
withstood the Prophets, he sought for the Apostles, and, as our Lord says in
the Evangelist, Luc. 12.31.
He would have winnow'd them as Wheat; nor did the very Face of Christ himself
make him blush or ashamed. The Apostle therefore expressed his insatiable
Desire, and indefatigable Diligence, when he said, 1 Pet. 5.8.
Your Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, wheels about, seeking whom he may
devour.

And yet not one Devil only tempts Man, X. Many Devils oppose one Man.
but sometimes many Devils join together against particular Men; which thing
that Devil confessed, who being asked of Christ our Lord, what his Name was,
Marc. 5.9. Luc. 8.30.
answered. My Name is Legion, to wit, a Multitude of Devils, which vexed that
miserable Man: Mar. 12.45.
And it is written of another, That he took with him Seven other Spirits more
wicked than himself, and entering in, they dwelt there.

There are many indeed who feel not the Impulse and Force of the Devil in
themselves, XI. The Devils tempt not wicked Men, and why.
and therefore think there is no such matter; who that they are not opposed by
the Devil, there is no wonder, seeing they have freely given up themselves to
him: They have no Piety, no Charity, none of that Virtue worthy a Christian;
and therefore they are wholly in the Power of the Devil, nor is there any need
of Temptations to destroy them, in whose Souls they give him leave to abide.

But those that have dedicated themselves to God, XII. The Devil chiefly tempts
the Pious.
leading a Heavenly life while they are on Earth, Satan seeks most of all by
his Incursions; These he most bitterly hates, for these at all times he says
Snares. The History of Sacred Scripture is full of the Examples of Holy Men,
whom, tho they were of a strong Resolution, yet either by Force or Fraud he
perverted. Adam, David, Solomon, and others whom it is hard to reckon up, have
felt the violent Impulses and will Craftiness of the Devils, whom it is
impossible to resist by Human Wisdom or Strength.

Who therefore can think himself safe enough in his own Protection? he would
not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able; but that he would make us a
way to escape together with the Temptation, that we may be able to bear it. 1
Cor. 10.

And here the Faithful are to be confirmed, XIII. How those that fear the Devil
are to be confirmed.
who through weakness of Mind, or ignorance of the Matter, are afraid of the
Devil's Power, that being tossed with the Waves of Temptations, may safely
Anchor in this Port of Prayer.

For Satan's Power and Obstinacy in his mortal Hatred to Mankind, XIV. God
overrules the Devils Power.
is not such as to be able to vex and tempt us, as much and as long as he
pleases; but all his Power is governed by God's Pleasure and Permission.

We have a most noted Example in Job, An Example.
concerning whom, if God had not said to the Devil, Behold, all that he has, is
in thy Power, Satan could not have touched any thing that was his: but on the
contrary, if God had not added, Only stretch not forth thy hand against him,
with one stroke of the Devil, He, together with his Children, and all that he
had, had been utterly ruined.

Yea, Matthew. 8. Mar. 5.11. Luc. 8.32.

But now for the understanding the Force of this Petition, XV. The Words of
this Petition explained.
it must be showed, what Temptation here signifies, and also what to be led
into Temptation.

Now to Tempt, XVI. What it is to tempt. First.
is to put him that is tempted into Danger, that by drawing out of him what we
desire, we may force out the Truth; this way of Tempting, God uses not, for
what is there that God does not know? For all things, says the Scripture, Heb.
4.13.
are naked and open to his Eyes.

There is another kind of Tempting, Secondly.
when by pooceeding farther, some other thing is sought for, either with a good
or evil Design.

With a good Design, XVII. What it is to tempt with a good Design.
as when any one's Virtue is tried in any thing, which Virtue being known and
discovered, the Person may be honored and advanced, and his Example offered to
others for Imitation; and lastly, that all Men for that Reason may be excited
to give Glory to God. And this way of tempting only is agreeable to God. An
Example of this kind of Temptation we have in Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy. 13.3.
The Lord your God tempts, or trys you, that it may be manifest whether you
love him or not.

After this manner also God is said to tempt those that are his,

After this manner we read that Abraham was tempted to offer his Son, An
Example. Genesis 22.1.
which being done, he became a singular Example of Obedience and Patience, to
be had in everlasting Remembrance of Men.

In the same Sense it is said of Tobias, Another. Tob. 12.
Because thou wast accepted of God, it was necessary that Temptation should try
thee.

But Men are tempted with an evil Design, XVIII. What it is to tempt with an
evil Design.
when they are driven to Sin or to Destruction, and this is properly the Devils
Office; for he tempts Men with a Design to deceive and carry them headlong,
Matthew. 4.
and therefore in Sacred Scripture he is called the Tempter.

Now in those Temptations, XIX. How eagerly the Devil tempts.
he one while applies his Trials to us inwardly, and the means of the
Affections and Commotions of the Mind; another while exercising us from without
he uses external Means, either Prosperity to allure us, or Adversity to break
us; sometimes he has his Emissaries and Skirmishes, as wicked Men, and
Heretics especially, who sitting in the Chair of Pestilence, sow the deadly
Seeds of wicked Doctrins, being such as make no choice or difference of Virtue
and Vice, Men naturally prone to Evil, Men that are tottering and rush headlong
downwards.

But we are said to be led into Temptation, XX. What it is to be led into
Temptation.
when we yield to Temptations: Now are we led into Temptation two ways,

First, First.
when being removed from our Station, we rush into that Evil, into which some
one by tempting drives us. But no one is thus led into Temptation by God;
because God is the Author of Sin to no one, Psalm. 5.5. Jac. 1.13.
yea, He hates all the Workers of iniquity. For thus says S. James, Let not any
one, when he is tempted, say that he is tempted of God; for God tempts no one
to evil.

And then, Secondly.
he is said to be led into Temptation, who tho he tempts not himself, yet does
his endeavor that we may be tempted; yet he is said to tempt, because when he
could have hindered us to be tempted, or to be overcome by the Temptation, yet
did not hinder.

After this manner the good God indeed has suffered pious Men to be tempted,

But yet sometimes by the just and secret judgment of God, Note again.
being left to our selves for our own Wickedness, we have fallen.

Besides, Thirdly.
God is said to lead us into Temptation, when we abuse the Benefits he has
given us for our good, to our own hurt; and like that Prodigal Son, wast our
Fathers Substance in living luxuriously, and following our own Lusts. Whefore
we may say, as the Apostle did of the Law, I found another Commandment which
was for Life to me, but this happens to be to Death. Luc. 15.12. Romans 7.10.

A fit Example in this case as Ezekiel testifies, An Example.
is the City Jerusalem, which God had enriched and adorned with all kinds of
Good; so that God by the Mouth of that Prophet says, Ezekiel. 16 14.
Thou wast perfect in Beauty; whom did I prefer before thee? And yet that City
so heaped with the good things of God, was so far from being thankful to him,
who had before, and still did deserve so very well of her, and from using those
Heavenly Benefits, which of his Grace she had received toward her obtaining of
Happiness, that being most ungrateful to God her Benefactor, and casting away
all Hope and Thought of Heavenly Fruits, wantonly enjoyed her present Plenty
only, and to her own Destruction; which thing Ezekiel enlarges upon in more
words.

Wherefore here we must say,

But we must here carefully mark the manner of the Sacred Scripture, XXI. The
manner of the Scripture Expressions to be explained. Exodus 47. Isa. 6.10. Romans
1.26.
which sometimes signifies Gods Permission, in such words, as if taken
properly, would signify as tho it were Gods Act: For in Exodus it is said, I
will harden the Heart of Pharaoh: And in Esaias, Make blind the Heart of this
People. And the Apostle to the Roman writes, God gave them up to the Passions
of their shame, and to a reprobate Sense. In which places and other like, we
are not to understand, that God did thus, but only that he suffered it to be
so. Vide Iren. lib. 4. contra. Haret c. 48. Tertul. lib. 2. contra Mar. 14.
Aug. lib. de Praedest. and gratia cap. 1. and de Praed. Sanct. cap. 9. and lib.
de great. and lib. arbitr. cap. 21, 22, 23. D. Thom. 2. p. q. 87. a. 2. and 2.2.
q. 15.

These things being considered,

Now this is profitable and advantageous to Mankind: XXII. Temptation is
profitable.
For in Temptations we know our selves, i. e. our Strength; for which cause
also we are humbled under the mighty Hand of God, and fighting manfully, we
expect the inestimable Crown of Glory: 2 Timothy 25. Jac. 1.12.
For he that wrestles is not crowned except he wrestle lawfully: And S. James
says, Blessed is the Man that endures Temptation, because when he shall have
been tried, he shall receive the Crown of life, which God has promised to them
that love him. But if sometimes we are urged with the Temptation of our
Enemies; this Consideration will cheer us exceedingly, Heb. 4.14.
That we have a High Priest to help us who can compassionat our Infirmities,
having himself been tempted in all respects.

What therefore do we here pray for? XXIII. What is here prayed for, First.
That not being destitute of Gods Help, we yield not to, or be deceived by
Temptations; or being afflicted, lose our ground, that Gods Grace would be
always present with us; which when our own Strength fails us, may comfort and
refresh us in our Afflictions.

Wherefore we ought to implore Gods Help, Secondly.
both in General, in all Temptations, and Particularly when we are afflicted in
any special case, we ought to betake our selves to Prayer; which we find to
have been done by David, almost in every kind of Temptations; For against a Lie
he prayed thus, Ps. 118 43.
Take not the word of Truth utterly out of my mouth. And in a Temptation of
Covetousness, thus, verse. 36.
Incline my Heart to thy Testimonies, and not to Covetousness: But in things
void of Life, and in the Deceitfulness of Desire, verse. 37.
he used this Prayer, Turn away mine Eyes that they behold not Vanity.

We pray therefore that we may not give way to our Desires, Thirdly.
nor be wearied in enduring of Temptations, that we fall not often from the way
of the Lord, that as well in Adversity as Prosperity we keep a steady and
constand Mind, and that God would never leave us destitute of his Help.

Lastly, Fourthly.
we pray that he would tread down Satan under our Feet.

XXIV. What we are to meditate on. when we pray for these things. First.
It remains that the Curat exhort the Faithful to do those things which in this
Prayer they ought chiefly to think and meditate upon.

Wherein this will be the best way, that understanding how great the Weakness
of Men is, we distrust our own Strength, and placing all the Hope of our Safety
in the Goodness of God, and being armed with his Defense, we have our Courage
undaunted in our utmost Dangers; especially considering how many that were
endu'd with this Hope and Courage, God has delivered from the jaws of Satan,
when ready to devour them.

Did he not advance Joseph to Glory, Examples. Genesis 39.7.
when he was every way beset with the burning. Lust of that wicked Woman,
snatching him out of his greatest Peril?

When Susanna was beset with Satan, Dan. 13.61.
and just at the Point to be slain by a wicked Sentence, did he not then keep
her in Safety? and no wonder; For, as it is said, her heart trusted in God.

Excellent is the Praise and Glory of Job, for his Triumph over the World, the
Flesh and the Devil. There are very many Examples of this sort, whereby the
Curat ought diligently to exhort the Pious, to this Hope and Confidence.

And let the Faithful consider whom they have for their Captain in the
Temptations of their Enemies, Secondly.
to wit, Christ our Lord, who by this Combat got the Victory. He overcame the
Devil, Luc. 11.
Christ is much stronger than he, who coming upon the strong Man, overcame him
tho armed, whom he disarmed and spoiled of his Victory which he got over the
World, Joh. 16.33.
he says in S. John, Be of good courage, I have overcome the World. And in the
Revelation he is called the conquering Lion, Apoc. 5.5.
and that he went out conquering to conquer, in which Conquest of his, he gave
Power to those also that worship him, to conquer.

The Epistle of the Apostle to the Hebrews is full of the Victories of holy
Men, Thirdly. Heb. 13.
Who by Faith overcame Kingdoms, stopped the mouths of Lions, etc.

And while we read such Acts to have been done, let us consider the Victories,
which Men excellent for their Faith, Hope and Charity, daily get both in their
inward and outward Combats with the Devil, which are so many and so noble, that
could they but be seen with our Eyes, we should think nothing more frequent,
nothing more glorious. Of which Vanquishing of the Enemy, S. John wrote thus, I
write to you young men, because ye are valiant, and the word of God dwells in
you, and ye have overcome the wicked one.

Now the Devil is overcome, XXV. How the Devil is overcome.
not with Idleness, Sleep, Wine, Revelling, Lust, but with Prayer, Labor,
Watching, Abstinence, Continence, Chastity, Watch and pray, says our Lord, as
was said before, Matthew. 26.41.
that ye enter not into Temptation. They that use these Weapons in this Fight,
turn their Enemies to Flight: Jac. 4.7.
For they that resist the Devil, he will flee away from them.

Yet in these Victories of holy Men, XXVI. We must think lowly of our selves.
whereof we have spoken, let no one please himself, let no one behave himself
proudly, trusting in his own Strength to be able to undergo the Temptations and
Violence of our Enemy the Devil; for this our Nature, our Weakness is not able
to do.

But the Strength whereby we throw to the Ground Satan's Accomplices, XXVII.
Without Gods help we can do nothing. 1 Reg. 2 4 Psalm. 17.3^.
is given of God, Who makes our arms as a bow of brass, by whose help the bow
of the mighty is overcome, and the weak are girded with strength, who gives us
the protection of Salvation, whose right hand upholds us, who teaches our hands
to war, and our fingers to fight, that we may ascribe the Thanks for the
Victory to God alone, by whose Help and Conduct only we can overcome, which
thing the Apostle did; 1 Cor. 15.
for he says, But Thanks be to God that gives us the Victory through our Lord
Jesus Christ. And that Voice in Heaven whereof we read in the Revelations.
proves the same to be the Author of our Victory, Apoc. 12.10.
Now is come Salvation, and Strength, and the Kingdom of our God, and the power
of his Christ, because the accuser of our Brethren is cast down, and they bound
him, by reason of the blood of the Lamb. And the same Book testifies, that the
Victory gotten over the World and the Flesh, is Christ our Lords, Apoc. 17.14
where we read, These shall fight with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome
them. And thus much concerning the cause and manner of overcoming.

Which things being explained, XXVIII. The Rewards proposed to them that
fight. Apoc. 5.5.
the Curat shall propose to the Faithful the Crowns that are prepared, and the
everlasting fullness of the Rewards appointed of God for those that overcome;
Divine Testimonies whereof, they may produce out of the same Revelations, He
that overcomes, shall not be hurt by the second Death. And in another place, He
that overcomes, shall be clothed with white Garments, and I will not blot out
his name out of the Book of Life, and I will confess his Name before my Father,
and before his Angels. And a little after, Apoc 5.12.
God himself and our Lord thus spoke to S. John, Him that overcomes I will make
a Pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall go forth no more. And also he
says, To him that overcomes, I will give to fit with me in my Throne; as I also
have overcome, and sat with my Father in his Throne. Lastly, Apoc. 2.7.
When he had showed the Glory of the Saints, and that perpetual Store of Good
Things which they shall enjoy in Heaven, he added, He that overcomes shall
possess these things.

The SEVENTH PETITION.
But deliver us from Evil.

THis last Petition, I. This Petition comprehends all the rest.
wherewith the Son of God conclu^^s this Divine Prayer, is all in a manner:
Whose Weight and Efficacy when he would show, at such time as he was about to
go out of this Life, he besought his Father for the Salvation of Men, using the
Close of this Prayer: For, says he, Joh. 17.16.
I pray that thou would keep them from Evil. In this Form of Prayer
therefore, which he delivered by Precept, and confirmed by Example, as in a
kind of Epitome, he summarily comprehended the Virtue and Efficacy of the other
Petitions. For when we have once but obtained what is contained in this Prayer,
there is nothing left, as S. Cyprian says, Lib de Orat. citato.
for us to ask further, when once we have begged God's Defense against Evil,
which having obtained, we stand secure and safe against all that the World and
the Devil can do against us. Wherefore, since this Petition is such as we have
said, the Curat shall use his utmost Diligence in explaining it to the Faithful.

Now this Petition differs from the last, II. The difference betwixt thi^^ and
the Sixth Petition.
because in the other we begged to escape Sin, but in this, to be delivered
from Punishment.

Wherefore in this place there is no need to admonish the Faithful, III. Why
this Petition to be often repeated.
how many Inconveniences and Calamities they labor under, and how much they
stand in need of the help of Heaven: For to how many and how great Miseries the
Life of Men is exposed, besides that both Sacred and Profane Writers have very
fully prosecuted this Argument, there is scarcely any one but understands, both
to his own and others hazard: For all are convinced of that, which the Example
of Job remember us of, Job 14.
Man that is born of a Woman, has but a short time to live, and is full of many
Miseries: He grows up as a Flower, and is cut down; he flees away as a Shadow,
and never continues in the same state. And that there is no Day passes, that
may not be marked with some Trouble of its own, as that Word of Christ our Lord
witnesses, Mat. 6.34.
Sufficient to the Day is the Evil thereof. Although that Admonition of our Lord
himself, wherein he taught, Luc. 9.23.
That we must take up the Cross daily and follow him, shows the Condition of
Man's Life.

As therefore every one feels how painful and dangerous this Life is, IV. We
easily pray in Adversity.
so the Faithful will easily be persuaded, that they are to beg of God
Deliverance from Evil, since Men are brought to pray by nothing more, than by
the Desire and Hope of Deliverance from those Evils wherewith they are oppressed,
or which hang over their Heads.

For this is naturally implanted in the Souls of Men, Psalm. 82.17.
Fill thou their Faces with Ignominy, O Lord, and they will seek thy Name.

And if Men naturally do this, V. The Curats to teach the manner how to pray.
and call upon God in their Calamities and Dangers, surely they are specially
to be taught by those to whose Trust and Prudence their Salvation is committed,
how to do it rightly.

For, VI. An ill way of praying to be amended.
there are not wanting some, who, contrary to the Command of Christ our Lord,
use a preposterous Order of Prayer; For he that commanded us to fly to him in
the Day of Tribulation, the same has prescribed us the Order of Prayer. For
before we pray to be delivered from Evil, he would have us to pray, That God's
Name may be sanctified, that his Kingdom may come, and the rest; whereby, as by
certain Steps, we come at last to this: But some there are, that if their Head,
their Side, their Foot ache, if they suffer any loss in their Goods, if they are
threatened, or are in danger of their Enemies; in time of Famine, of War, of
Pestilence, omitting the other Degrees of the Lords Prayer, pray only to be
delivered out of those Evils: but Christ our Lord's Command is against this
Custom, Mat. 6.33.
Seek ye first the Kingdom of God.

Those therefore that pray aright, VII. A good Order of Prayer.
when they pray against Calamities, Inconveniences, and freedom from Evil,
refer it to God's Glory. So David, to that Prayer, Lord, rebuke me not in thine
anger, added the Reason, whereby he showed himself very desirous of God's
Glory; Psalm. 6.
for he says, Because in Death there is no one that remembers thee, and in Hell
who shall confess to thee? And when he prayed God to have mercy upon him, Psalm.
50.2.
subjoyns this, I will teach the Unrighteous thy Ways, and the Wicked shall be
converted to thee.

To this excellent way of Praying, VIII. The evil Prayers of Infidels.
and to follow the Example of the Prophet, the Faithful are to be incited, and
to be taught how much difference there is between the Prayers of Infidels and
those of Christians. They also pray God heartily to recover of their Diseases
and Wounds, to be delivered from their pressing and imminent Dangers; but yet
they put their special Hope of that Deliverance in the Remedies prepared either
by Nature, or the Industry of Men; yea, without any Religion, they use any
Medicin given them by any one, tho made by Enchantment, Witchcraft, or the help
of the Devil, so that they have but any hope of Recovery thereby.

But the way of Christians is far otherwise, IX. The Prayers of Christians.
who, when they are in any Sickness or Adversity, have God for their Highest
Refuge and Protection of Health; they have Him only for the Author of all their
Good, and own and worship Him for their Deliverer, and certainly reckon, that
all the Virtue of Healing that is in Medicines, is given them of God; and that
they are profitable to the Sick only so far as God pleases. For Medicin is
given of God to Mankind, to heal their Sicknesses; Eccl. 38.
hence is that Saying of Ecclesiasticus The most High created Medicines out of
the Earth, and he that is prudent will not abhor them.

They therefore that have given their Name to Christ,

Wherefore in Sacred Scripture they are reproved, X. We must not use unlawful
Remedies. 2 Chronicles. 16.
who through confidence of the Medicines seek no help of God; yea, they that lead
their Life according to God's Laws, abstain from all Remedies whatsoever, which
it is manifest are not appointed of God; and if by the use of those Medicines
they might have certain Hope of Recovery, yet they would abhor them as the
Enchantments and Artifices of the Devil.

But the Faithful must be exhorted to put their Confidence in God; XI. In
Sickness we must trust in God only.
for, for that Reason our most bountiful Father has commanded us to beg of him
Deliverance from Evils, that because he has commanded it, therefore we should
have hope of obtaining. In Sacred Scripture there are many Examples of this
Matter, that they who are not led by Reason, may be compelled to have Hope and
Confidence by a multitude of Examples: Among whom, Abraham, Jacob, Loath,
Joseph, David, are sufficient Witnesses of God's Goodness. The Sacred
Scriptures of the New Testament reckon up so many that have been delivered out
of the greatest Difficulties by the prevalency of devout Prayer, that the thing
wants not the Proof of Examples.

We will therefore content our selves with that one Sentence of the Prophet,
Psalm 38.18.
For, says he, the Just cry, and the Lord hears them, and delivers them out of
all their Tribulations.

Now follows the Force and Virtue of the Petition, XII. The Force of t^is
Petition.
that the Faithful may understand, that in this place we do not pray to be
delivered wholly from all Evil: For there are some things which are commonly
thought Evil, 2 Cor. 2.
which yet are profitable to those that suffer them; as that Prick which the
Apostle had, 2 Cor. 12.
that by the Assistance of Gods Grace his Power might be perfected in our
weakness.

These things if their Virtue were known,

Wherefore we pray against those Evils only which do not at all profit the
Soul, XIII. From what evils we here pray to be d^livered.
but not against the rest, if we get but any Advantage by them.

The meaning hereof therefore is, that being freed from Sin and the danger of
Temptation, we may be delivered from Evil both inward and outward, that we may
be safe from Water and Fire and Lightning, that the Hail hurt not the Fruits of
the Earth, that we may not suffer scarcity of Provisions, Sedition or War.

We beg of God to drive away Diseases, Pestilence, Desolation, to keep us from
Imprisonment, Bonds, Banishment, Treasons, Snares and all other Inconveniences
wherewith the Life of Man is used to be greatly terrified and oppressed, and
lastly, that he would turn away all the Causes of Sin and Wickedness.

Nor do we pray against those things only which, even by the Consent of all,
are evil; but also against those things, which almost all Men account good, as
Riches, Honors, Health, Strength, yea, and this Life it self, rather than that
should turn to our hurt, and to the Destruction of our Souls.

We also pray God not to be oppressed by sudden Death, that we provoke not
Gods Anger against us, that we may never suffer the Punishments, which attend
the Wicked, that we may not be tormented with the Fire of Purgatory; from
which, that others also may be delivered, we make holy and devout Prayers.

This Petition both in the Mass and Litanies,

Now the Goodness of God delivers us out Evil, XIV. God delivers us from evil,
many ways.
not after one manner only; for he hinders those Evils that hang over our
Heads, as we read that that great man Jacob was delivered from his Enemies,
whom the Slaughter of the Sichemites had provoked against him: Genesis 35.3.
For it is said, The terror of the Lord came upon all the Cities round about,
and they durst not follow them returning back.

And indeed blessed are all they, who when they reign with Christ our Lord in
Heaven, are by Gods help delivered from all Evil.

But us that remain in this Pilgrimage, he will not have to be free from all
Inconveniences, but he delivers us from some.

But yet those Comforts which God sometimes gives to those that are pressed
with Hardships, XV. The Comforts he gives. Psalm. 93.8.
is as good as a Freedom from all Evils. In these the Prophet comforted
himself, when he said, According to the multitude of the Sorrows in my heart,
try comforts rejoiced my Soul. Besides God delivers Men from Evil, when he
keeps them safe and sound, when brought to the utmost Difficulties, Dan. 3.49.
which we read happened to the Three Children that were cast into the burning
fiery Furnace, Dan. 6.22. Dan. ^.
and to Daniel whom the Lions hurt not, even as the Flame scorched not those
Children.

But according to the Sense of the great S. Basil, XVI. The Dev l called Evil.
S. Chrysostom and S. Austin, the Devil is specially called the Evil one,
because he was the Author of Man's Fault, that is, of his Sin and Wickedness,
whom God uses as his Minister, in punishing wicked and criminous Men: for God
appoints to Men all the Evil they suffer for their Sins, which the Sacred
Scripture means when it says, Amos 3.6.
Is there any evil in the City which the Lord has not done? And, Esa 45.7.
I am the Lord, and there is none other, forming the Light and creating
Darkness, making peace and creating Evil.

And the Devil is called Evil for this Cause, Another Reason.
because tho we had done him no hurt, yet he always makes War against us, and
persecutes us with mortal Hatred.

But if because we are armed with Faith, Evils, and vexing us by all the means
he is able; wherefore we pray God, that he would deliver us from the Evil one.
Chrysostom. hom. 20. in Matthew. and hom. 5. in Job. Aug. in Ecclesiast. dogmat. c.
57. Basil in hom. quod Deus non sit auctor malorum non procul a fine.

Now we say from Evil, XVII. Why we pray to be delivered from Evil, and not
from Evils.
not from Evils, for this Reason; because the Evils which happen to us from our
Neighbors, we lay upon him, as the Author and Perswader, that we may not
therefore be angry against our Neighbors, but turn all our Hatred and Anger
against Satan himself, by whom Men are driven to do us the Injury.

If therefore your Neighbor has hurt you in any kind, i. e. from those
Injuries, which your Neighbor lays on you; but that he would snatch that very
Neighbor of yours out of the Power of the Devil, by whose impulse Men are led
into Deceit.

We must also know, XVIII. When we are not heard herein, what we must do.
if by our Prayers and Vows, we are not delivered from Evils, that we ought
patiently to endure those things that press us, understanding that so it
pleases God, that we should patiently suffer them. Wherefore it is by no means
fit for us, either to be angry, or to grieve because God hears not our Prayers:
but we must referr all things to his Will and Pleasure, esteeming it to be
profitable to us, and for our Good, which pleases God that it should be so; and
not that which we would have to be otherwise.

Lastly, XIX. Here all inconveniences are patiently to be endured. 2 Timothy 3.12.
the Devout Hearers are to be taught, That whilst they are in the Stage of this
Life, they ought to be ready to bear all kinds of Inconveniences and
Calamities, not only with a patient, but also with a cheerful and glad Heart;
For all, says the Apostle, that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
Persecution. And, Act. 14.21.
Through many Tribulations, we must enter into the Kingdom of God. Again, Luc.
24.26.
Ought not Christ to suffer these things, and so to enter into his Glory? for
it is not fit that the servant should be greater than his Lord, as it is very
unfit, according to S. Bernards Sense, that the Members should be delicat under
a thorny Head. Sermon. 5. de omnibus Sanctis.

The Example of Vriah is very excellent for our Imitation, An Example
who when David exhorted him to stay at home, said, 2 Reg. 11.11.
The Ark of God, and Israel and Judah dwell in Tents, and shall I go into my
house?

Being furnished with these Reasons and Meditations, Other Examples.
if we come to pray, we shall obtain, that tho we were on all sides girded and
compassed about with Evils, yet we shall be kept safe, even as those three
Children that were untouched by the Fire; or at least as the Machabees, we
should constantly and stoutly endure all Adversities.

In Reproaches and Torments we will imitate the Sacred Apostles, Act. 5.41.
Who being beaten with Stripes, did heartily rejoice that they were counted
worthy to suffer. Disgrace for Christ Jesus. So we being thus prepared, will
sing with the greatest Pleasure of Mind, Psalm. 118.
Princes have persecuted me without a cause, but my heart was afraid for thy
Word: I will rejoice in thy word, as he that has found great Spoils.

The SEAL of the LORDS PRAYER
Amen.

THis Word Amen, I. Prayer must be rightly concluded.
or so it is, S. Hierom in his Commentaries upon Matthew 6.6. calls the Seal of
the Lords Prayer.

Wherefore as we before admonished the Faithful concerning the Preparation
which is to be made, before we go about to pray to God; so we thought it
convenient that they should know the Cause and Reason of the Close and End of
this Prayer.

For it is of no less moment devoutly to end,

Let the Faithful know therefore that the Fruits, II. The fruit of this
Particle.
we obtain by the End of our Lords Prayer, are many, and that very profitable;
but the most advantageous and welcome Fruit is, the obtaining of those things
which we have prayed for, whereof enough has already been spoken: For by the
former Part of this Prayer, we not only obtain to have our Prayers heard; but
also some greater and more excellent things than can by Words be expressed.

For since Men in Praying, III. The Advantage of Prayer.
discourse with God, as S. Cyprian says, the Divine Majesty is after an
unutterable manner brought nearer to the Person that prays, than to others; and
besides, it adorns them with singular Gifts: So that they who devoutly pray to
God, may be compared to them that come to the Fire; who if they are cold, begin
to grow warm; if they were warm, begin to grow hot: So they that come to God by
Prayer, according to the Measure of their Devotion and Faith, go away more
warmed; for their Minds are inflamed for Gods Glory, their Souls enlightened
after an admirable manner, they are exceedingly enriched with Divine Graces;
for thus it is written in Holy Scripture, Psalm. 20 14.
Thou have prevented him with the blessing of sweetness.

Moses in this case is an Example for all, An Example. Exodus 34 35. 2 Cor. 3.^3.
who by reason of his walking and talking with God, did shine so with a kind of
Divine Brightness that the Israelites could not look on his Eyes or Countenance.

Verily they that pray with that earnest Study, I will stand early to pray,
says the Prophet, and will see, because thou art a God that willest not
Iniquity. By how much the more Men know these things, with so much the more
hearty Worship and Devotion do they reverence God, Psalm. 5.
and with so much the more Delight do they feel how sweet the Lord is, and how
truly blessed all they are that hope in him.

And then being compassed about with that most clear Light, IV. A singular
effect of Prayer.
they consider how mean their own Lowliness is, and how great the Majesty of
God is; for S. Austin's rule is, If I know thee, I may soon know my self.
Therefore not relying on their own Strength, they commit themselves wholly to
Gods Goodness, not doubting, but that he who has embraced them with his
Fatherly and Admirable Love, will abundantly supply them with all things which
are necessary both for Life and Salvation; for this cause therefore they apply
themselves to the highest Thanksgivings they are able to conceive in their
Minds, and which in Prayer they can comprehend, which we read that David did,
who, when he made this Prayer, Psalm. 7.2.
Save me from all them that persecute me, concludes thus, I will pray to the
Lord according to his justice, and I will sing to the Name of the Lord most
high.

Of this sort there are innumerable Prayers of the Saints, V. Of what kind the
Prayers of Saints are.
the Beginning of which are full of Fear, but the End full fraught with good
Hope and Joy; but it is wonderful how David's Prayers excel in this respect;
for when being troubled with Fear, he began to pray thus, Psalm. 3.3.
Many there are that rise up against me, and many there are that say to my
Soul, there is no Salvation for him in his God; a little after being somewhat
confirmed, he subjoyns, tho thousands of the People came about me, I will not
fear. And in another Psalm, when he had bewailed his Miseries and at last
having put his Confidence in God, he rejoices incredibly, in the Hope of
eternal Bliss, and he says, Psalm 4.8.
For that very thing I will sleep and rest in peace.

What think we of this? Psalm. 6.2.
Lord rebuke me not in thy Fury, neither correct me in thy Anger, with how
great Trembling and Horror must we believe that the Prophet said this?

On the contrary, with how confident and cheerful a Soul did he utter that
which presently follows? Psalm. 33.3.
Depart from me, says he, all ye that work Iniquity, because the Lord has heard
the voice of my weeping. But when he was afraid of Saul's Anger and Fury, how
lowly and humbly did he implore Gods Help, Save me O Lord, for thy Names sake,
and judge me in thy Strength; and yet in the same Psalm, he cheerfully and
confidently subjoyns, For behold God helps me, and the Lord is the upholder of
my Soul.

Wherefore he that betakes himself to Sacred Prayer, VI. How to come to pray.
Let him go to God armed with Faith and Hope; and that he may obtain that which
he has need of, let him by no means be distrustful.

Now in this last word of the Lords Prayer Amen, VII. The Dignity of the word
Amen.
there are many Seeds as it were of those Rules and Meditations which we before
mentioned.

And indeed this Hebrew Word was so common in our Saviors Mouth, VIII. What it
properly signifies.
that it pleased the Holy Ghost to have it still kept in the Church of God.

The meaning of which Word in a manner is this, Know thou that thy Prayers are
heard; for it has the Effect of Gods answering, and sending him away with his
good Grace, after that by Prayer he has obtained what he desired.

This Sense the perpetual Practice of the Church of God has approved, IX. The
use of this word in Mass.
which in the Sacrifice of the Mass, when the Lords Prayer is pronounced, she
has not given this Word Amen to the Minister of the Sacred thing, whose part it
is to say, But deliver us from evil; but has reserved it, being fitted to the
Priest himself, who being Interpreter between God and Men, answers the People
that God has accepted them.

Not that this Right is common to all Prayers; Amen; but that of the Lords
Prayer is particular: for in other Prayers it only signifies Consent and
Desire; but in this it is an Answer that God has consented to the Prayer of the
Petitioner.

Now this Word Amen is indeed variously interpreted by many: X. The word Amen
variously interpreted.
The Seventy Interpreters translate it So be it. Others translate it Verily,
Aquila turns it Faithfully; but it is but a small matter whether it be rendered
one way or the other, so that we understand it to have the Virtue before
mentioned, to wit, of the Priest confirming that the thing prayed for is
granted. Of which Sense the Apostle witnesses in his Epistle to the
Corinthians, For, says he, as many promises as are of God, in him are Yea, and
therefore through him Amen in God to our Glory.

This Word therefore wherein is a kind of Confirmation of those Petitions which
hitherto we have asked, XI. It raises Attention.
is suited to us; which also makes them attentive that use Prayer: for it often
happens that Men are distracted in Prayer, and drawn elsewhere by various
Thoughts.

Yea, XII It is a Repetition of the whole Prayer.
and we pray with the utmost Study in this very Word, that all things may done,
i. e. may be granted, which before we prayed for; he or rather understanding
that we have already obtained all those things, and perceiving the present
Virtue of the Divine help, we together with the Prophet sing, Psalm. 53.7.
For lo, the Lord helps me, the Lord takes care of my Soul. And there is no
cause for any one to doubt, but that God is moved, both by the Name of his Son
and by this word which he used so very often, Who, as the Apostle says, Heb.
5.7.
was always heard for his Reverence.

FINIS.
THE INDEX.
A
ABbats permitted sometimes to administer the Inferior orders. Pa. 310
Abraham's Pilgrimage. 339 Abraham's Bosom. 58 Absolution, the Form of it. 245
Who are to be absolved. 271 The Power of Absolution to whom given. 267 The
Accidents remain in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, without the Subject. 218
How great Misery Adam brought upon himself and his Posterity. 510 Adam in the
State of Innocence wanted Food to refresh his Strength. ibid. How great
difference there is betwixt Adam's Necessities and ours. ibid. Adam had not
wanted many things which we want, if he had not sinned. ibid. Adam, tho in the
Paradise of Pleasure, yet was not to be idle. ibid. Adam in Paradise had no
Grief. ibid. Adam's Posterity deprived of the Fruit of the Tree of Life, and
cursed with a horrible Sentence. Pa. 510 Adam and Christ compared. 42 Adultery
what it is. 405 In Adultery what Sins are forbidden. 406 The Detestableness of
Adultery. ibid. In the forbidding of Adultery, every kind of Uncleanness and
Immodesty whereby the Body is polluted, is forbidden. ibid. In Adultery is
forbidden the inward Lust of the Mind. 407 Adultery brands a Person with a
notable Mark of Reproach. 409 The Inconvenience and Punishment of Adultery.
ibid. The Necessity of Alms-deeds. 421 An Exhortation to Alms-deeds. ibid. We
are to labor with our Hands to relieve the Needy. 422 Alms to be added to
Prayer. 472 Alms is a Medicin prepared to cure the Wounds of the Soul. 531
Affestions of the Flesh not in the power of a Man, tho regenerate, to subdue
them so, as never to rise again. Page 505 Affinity of Godfathers with whom
contracted. 159 Amen, what it signifies for the End of the Lord's Prayer. 553
The Interpretation of Amen. ibid. Why in the Sacrifice of the Mass Amen is
reserved to be pronounced only by the Priest. ibid. Angels their Creation. 26
Angels from their very first Original endu'd with Grace. ibid. Angels were
adorned with Wisdom and Power. ibid. To the Angelical Salutation the Church has
added Prayer and Imploring of the Blessed Virgin. 463 An Angel taught Tobias
many things. 474, 475 How the Angels are adored. 344 Why the Angels are
pictured in the shape of Men. 350 In the Angelical Salutation God is honored.
463 The Angels Care of Men. 474 Their Obedience to God. 505 Anger when it is
sinful, when not. 398 We ought not to be angry when God hears not our Prayers.
452 The Appetite of its own proper Good implanted in all things. 498 What is
got by ill Arts, is not ours. 514 The Articles of the Creed. The First. 14 The
Second. 29 The Third. 38 The Fourth. 45 The Fifth. 56 The Sixth. 66 The
Seventh. 72 The Eighth. 79 The Ninth. 86 The Tenth. 101 The Eleventh. 107 The
Twelfth. 117
The Article of Christ's Ascension declares his Majesty and Glory. 68 The
Causes of Christ's Ascension into Heaven. ibid. Christ as Man ascended up into
Heaven with his Soul and Body. 67
B
OF the Sacrament of Baptism. 145 The Knowledge of Baptism very necessary. ibid.
At what time Baptism to be treated of by the Curats. 146 What the word Baptism
signifies. ibid. The Sacrament of Baptism to what Men signified. ibid. The
Definition of Baptism as a Sacrament. 147 The Sacrament of Baptism of what
Matter it is made. 148 The Water put into the Sacred Font for the Use of
Baptism, is not the Sacrament. Page 149 The Matter of Baptism is the Element of
Water. ibid. The Figures of Baptism. ibid. In Baptism what kind of Chrism is
added. 150 The Form of Baptism. 151 The Form of Baptism disterent among the
Greeks. ibid. Why the Apostles baptized in the Name of Jesus. 152 Baptism may
be performed three ways. 153 In Baptism it is not material whether there be
only one or three Ablutions. ibid. In Baptism the Words are to be uttered in
the Ablution. ibid. In Baptism the Head is to be washed. ibid. Baptism was
instituted by Christ our Lord, and when. 154 When the Power of Sanctifying was
given to the Water. ibid. When Men began to be obliged by the Law of Bapti^m.
155 The Ministers of Baptism. 156 Why Priests may baptize in presence of the
Bishop. ibid. Order to be observed among the Ministers of Baptism. 157 Who may
not be Godfathers at Baptism. 160 Baptism necessary to Salvation. 161 The
Sacrament of Baptism to be given to Infants. Page 161 Infants are baptized in
the Faith of their Parents and of the Church. 162 Infants to be baptized as
soon as may be. ibid. In baptizing of the Adult, a different way is to be
observed from that of Infants. 163 When Baptism is immediately to be given to
the Adult. 164 How they that are to be baptized ought to be affected. ibid.
They that are to be baptized, are demanded of their willingness. ibid. When
Madmen, and they that sleep, are to be baptized. 165 For the obtaining of the
Grace of Baptism, Faith is necessary. ibid. He that is to be baptized ought to
repent of his Sins. ibid. In the Sacrament of Baptism every Sin is forgiven.
166 In Baptism Sin is wholly taken away, and plucked up by the Roots. 167
Concupiscence remains in them that are baptized; but it has not the true nature
of Sin. ibid. The proper Effect of Baptism is the Forgiveness of all Sins. 168
By Baptism both the Sin and Punishment of Sin are forgiven. 168, 169 By Baptism
are not forgiven the Punishments due from civil Magistrates. Page 169 Why after
Baptism we are not restored to the State of Incorrupt Nature. 170 The Fruits of
Baptism. 171, etc. Baptism imprints a Character. 173 It is Sacrilege to
iterate Baptism. ibid. Baptism throws open an Entrance to Heaven. 175 The
Fountain of Baptism consecrated, by adding the Oil of Mystic Unction. 176
Certain Days appointed for consecrating the Water of Baptism. ibid. What Names
to be given to them that are Baptized. 180 The Cermonies of Baptism explained.
176, etc. The Evangelical Acceptance and Possession of this word I believe in
a matter of Faith. 14. Who it is that believes. 15. What we are first to
believe. 13 He that believes is freed from the Curiosity of searching. 15 We
must believe in God. 14 He that believes ought to produce the inward Acts of
Faith in the open Profession of his Faith. 15 Gods Benignity many ways delivers
us from evil. 340, 341 A Bishops Office what. 308 A Bishop only confers Orders.
Page 310 Blasphemy against the Name of God, and of the Saints a detestable
Wickedness. 368 Gods Blessings take place of our Endeavors. 413 Of Bliss. See
the whole Twelfth Article of the Creed 117, and the Eleventh. 107 Essential
Bliss wherein placed. 117 By the Light of Glory we are raised up to the Vision
of the Divine Essence. 122 The Images and Resemblances of Bliss. 122 Accidental
Bliss wherein it consists. 123 By the name Bread many things signified in holy
Scripture. 512, 513 In asking Bread what we pray for of God. 513 By asking
daily Bread, we ask necessaries for Food. ibid. Bread is to be prayed for, for
necessity, not Wantoness. ibid. We must get our Bread lawfully, not by Fraud or
Wrong. 514 Why it is called daily Bread. ibid. Why we are diligently to beg our
Bread of God. 515 How rich Men ought to beg their daily Bread. ibid. We are to
beg our Spiritual Bread. 516 What Spiritual Bread signifies. 517 That Bread
which is Christ, pours incredible Joy into the Souls of the Pious. 517 Christ
is our substantial Bread contained in the Sacrament of the Eucharist. ibid. All
the Faithful are Brethren. 480
C
THE necessity of Catechizing. 4 The teaching of Catechism fitted to every
Capacity. 6, 7 Caution to be used in avoiding the Occasions of Sin. 410 The
Ceremonies, and Prayers made in Baptism reduced to three Heads. 176 The
Ceremonies and Rights of Confirmation. 192 The Ceremonies used at the Sacrament
of Penance. 261 The Ceremonies used in the Sacrament of Extreme Unction. 286 A
Character the Effect of three Sacraments 143 What a Character performs. 144
Christ's Spiritual Kingdom. 34 Christ from his different Natures took different
Properties. 36 Why Christ called our Lord. ibid. Christ not called the Son of
God by Adoption, but by Nature. 41 Christ came of David according to the Flesh.
42 Why Christ called the last Adam. ibid. Christ's Humility an Example fitted
for the beating down our pride. 44 Christ's Birth teaches us a saving Lesson.
ibid. Christ's Blood washes away our Sins. 105 Christ the Author of all the
Sacraments. 139 Christ is our Brother. 480 Christ's Resurrection destroys not
his Brotherhood with Men. ibid. How Christ reigns in us. 493 For Christ's sake
we must be willing to be counted Fools. 504 We must imitate Christ in
submitting our Will to Gods Will. ibid. Christ our Lord is Bread. 517 The
Mystery of Christ's Passion evidently shows Gods Power and Goodness. 519 Under
the Protection of Christ's Passion we get Pardon of our Sins. 525 Christians
have all the same Spiritual Original. 481 The Knowledge of a Christian
comprehended under one Head. 5, 8 Wherein the Labor of a Christian Teacher
ought to be employed. 5 Wherein Christian Wisdom differs from that of the
World. 16 How much a Christian is bound to Christ. 37 By the Name Church what
is properly to be understood. 86 The Difference between Church and Synagogue.
Page 87 The Church called by many Names. 88. Why the Church called Militant and
Triumphant. 89 The Figures and Similitudes of the Church. 90 Who are shut out
of the Church. ibid. The Properties and Prerogatives of the Catholic Church.
91, etc. The visible Head of the Church. 92 The Unity of the Church. 93 The
Church called Holy. 94 The Church is Catholic. 95 A certain Rule to know the
the true Church from falfe ones. 96 The Church is Apostolic. ibid. The Church
cannot err. ibid. Without the Church there is no true Worship. 97 God is the
Author of the Church. 98 We understand by Faith that the Church has the Keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven. ibid. Why we say, believe the Church, and not in the
Church. ibid. The Name of Clerk whence derived. 300 Whence the Clerk's Crown
had its beginning, and what it signifies. ibid. The first Commandment of the
Decalogue. 338 The Reason of the Order of the Commandments. 342 A double
Precept contained in the first Commandment. 342 The first and greatest of all
the Commandments. 343 Who break the first Commandment. ibid. In the first
Commandment is not forbidden the Art of Graving, Painting or Limning. 348 Why
the first Commandment separate from the second. 356 What is forbidden and
commanded in the second Commandment. 357 The use of that Command about loving
our Parents is very extensive. 382 The Ten Commandments engraved in Two Tables,
and why. ibid. Why the Command of loving our Parents expresses our Mother. 386
Why the two last Commandments are joined together. 439 A two fold necessity of
the two last Commandments ibid. Communion, one of the names of the Eucharist.
195 Before Communion, what Preparation ought to be, and how necessary it is.
225 One Preparation to the Communion, is to have Peace with all. 226 Another
is, to love God. 227 All ought to Communicate at least at Easter. ibid. Why
the Church approved the practice of Communicating in one Kind only. Page 231
What things are common to three Divine Persons, and what are not common. 39
Concupiscence remains in the Regenerate, but has not truly the Nature of Sin.
167 Evil Concupiscence the Root of all Evil. 438 Concupiscence of other Men's
Goods and Wife, how it differs. 439 What Concupiscence is. 441 The Power of
Concupiscence not always to be accounted vicious. ibid. The Power of
Concupiscence implanted in us by Nature, yet by God's Appointment. ibid. The
Concupiscence of our First Parents corrupted by Sin. ibid. The Power of
Concupiscence, if moderated, is profitable. ibid. Why S. Paul called
Concupiscence Sin. 442 What is meant by Thou shall not covet. 443 Another's
Wife not to be coveted. 445 Not to covet another's Wife, what it signifies.
ibid. How dangerous it is to covet another's Wife. ibid. Who are most guilty of
Concupiscence. 448 The Antidotes of evil Concupiscence. 447 How Concupiscence
is known to be a Sin. 44^ Covetous Men reprehended Page 443 Whence Confidence
in God begins. 467 Confidence in God is increased by calling him in Prayer Our
Father. ibid. How we come to have Confidence in Prayer. ibid. The Creed divided
into Four Parts. 14 Confession of Sins, and the Necessity of it. 262 -- why
instituted. ibid. -- its Profitableness. 258 -- its Virtue and Nature. ibid. --
its Definition. ibid. -- its Rites and Ceremonies. 259 -- it is called an
Accusation, and why. 261
The Ecclesiastical Judgment made in Confession, is far unlike to the Civil
Judgment. ibid. Confession instituted by Christ of his Goodness and Mercy: 258
A Figure of Confession. ibid. Whom the Law of Confession obliges. 263 At what
Age a Child is required to confess. ibid. When Confession is to be iterated.
26^ Who the due and lawful Minister of Confession. 267 In Confession Sins are
not to be excused. 270 The Fault of them that dare not for shame confess their
Sins. ibid. Diligent search is to be made in our Conscience for Sin. Page 271
When a Confessor ought to send back a Penitent. ibid. The Sacrament of
Confirmation. 181 The Name of Confirmation. ib. Confirmation is truly a
Sacrament. 182 The Sacrament of Confirmation very different from that of
Baptism. 183 The Original of the Sacrament of Confirmation. 184 Christ the
Author of the Sacrament of Confirmation. ib. The Sacrament of Confirmation why
called Chrism ibid. The Matter of Chrism. ibid. Chrism made by Consecration of
a Bishop. ibid. Why Chrism made of Oil and Balsom. 185 When, and with what
Ceremonies Chrism is made. 185, 186 The Form of the Sacrament of Confirmation.
ibid. In Confirmation Three things to be observed. ibid. The proper Ministers
of the Sacrament of Confirmation. 187 Why a Godfather required at Confirmation.
188 The Assinity contracted with Godfathers at Confirmation. ibid. What Age
they ought to be that are to be confirmed. 189 The Sacrament of Confirmation
belongs equally to all the Faithful. Page 189 The Adult receiving Confirmation,
ought to grieve for their Sins. 190 The Sacrament of Confirmation gives new
Grace. ibid. Whence the Word Confirmation derived. 191 The Effects of
Confirmation. 190, etc. Confirmation cannot be iterated. 192 The Rites and
Ceremonies of the Sacrament of Confirmation. ibid. When chiefly the Sacrament
of Confirmation is administered. 193 What Contrition is. 250 Contrition is not
only a new Life, but the hatred of a Life misled, and the Expiation we ought to
make. ibid. The Virtue and Efficacy of Contrition. ibid. The Grief of
Contrition how vehement it ought to be. 252, 253 There is no Measure set to the
Hatred of Sin. 253 The proper Grief of Contrition to be applied to every Mortal
Sin. 254 What things are necessary to true Contrition. ibid. A Motive to stir
up Contrition. 256, 257 The Fruit of Contrition. ibid. The various Names of
Contrition. 251 Creation. 24, etc. What God created, he preserves. 27, 28 What
a New Creature in Christ is. Page 336, 337 The Cross of Christ how precious it
is. 525 The Crowns prepared of God for them that overcome. 542, 543 The Curse
wherewith Man was condemned after Adam's Sin. 510, 511
D
ON the Lord's Day what the Faithful ought to do, and from what they ought to
abstain. 373 The Commandment for keeping Holy Days. 369, etc. Why the
Observation of Holy Days appointed. 370 Other Holy Days besides the Sabbath
among the Jews. 376 Why other Holy Days besides the Lord's Day appointed by the
Church. ibid. The most celebrated Days in the Church. ibid. In what Works
Christians ought to exercise themselves on Holy Days. 377 Debts, what they are
which we pray to be forgiven. 525 Why those Debts called Ours. 526 The Precepts
of the Decalogue. 332 The Decalogue the Sum of all Laws. ibid. The Ten
Commandments of the Decalogue depend upon Two of Charity. 333 With how great
Majesty the Law of the Decalogue was given. Page 335 To believe that God is the
Author of the Decalogue, is of very great use for the observing of the Law.
ibid. The Cause of Christ's Descent into Hell. 59 Detraction or Defamation, see
the Eighth Commandment. 426 The Devil's Malice against Men. 534 The Devil
counterfeiting an Angel of Light, persuades Men to seek those things as good,
which are not so. 504 Why the Devil called the Prince and Ruler of the World
of Darkness. 534 Who they are that the Devil opposes not. 535 Why the Devil
is specially called the Evil one. 548 We ascribe to the Devil, as the Author
and Persuader of it, all the Evil we suffer from our Neighbor. 549 The proper
Office of the Devil. 537 With what intent the Devil tempts Men. ibid. Why the
Devil called the Tempter. ibid. What Means the Devil uses to tempt. ibid.
E
TO love Enemies the most excellent Office of Charity. 400, 401 Who love their
Enemies are the Children of God. Page 528 We must not be angry at our Enemies,
but at the Devil. 549 We must forgive our Enemies if we would be forgiven. 527
We must love our Enemies. 528 What they ought to beg of God who forgive not
their Enemies. 529 Visible Enemies of what sort they are. 533 The Enemies of
Mankind use all their Arts against us. ibid. They that abstain long from the
Eucharist suffer exceeding great loss. 228 The Institution of the Eucharist.
194 The Dignity and Excellency of the Eucharist. ibid. The Sacrament of the
Eucharist called by many Nanes. 185 Why the Eucharist called a Communion.
ibid. Not lawful after Meat and Drink to receive the Eucharist. 196 The
Eucharist truly a Sacrament, and One of the Seven. ibid. In the Sacrament of
the Eucharist we adore the Body and Blood of Christ. 197 What things properly
have the Nature of a Sacrament in the Eucharist. ibid. The Difference between
the Eucharist and other Sacraments. Page 197 The Consecration of the Matter
makes the Sacrament of the Eucharist perfect. ibid. The Eucharist is only One
Sacrament, and no more. 198 The Sacrament of the Eucharist signifies Three
things. ibid. The Matter of the Sacrament of the Eucharist double. ibid. Why a
little Water is mingled with the Wine. 201 What the Bread and Wine signify
in the Sacrament of the Eucharist. 202 The Form of the Sacrament of the
Eucharist. 203 The Form of Consecration of the Wine, and the Declaration
thereof. 204 In the Sacrament of the Eucharist Three things very admirable. 208
In the Eucharist the true Body and Blood of Christ are contained. ibid. The
Sacrament of the Eucharist not only a Sign of Christ's Body. 209 The Fruit of
the Eucharist. 212 In the Sacrament of the Eucharist whole Christ is contained.
ibid. In the Sacrament of the Eucharist what things are by Concomitancy. 213
Why in the Sacrament of the Eucharist are made two several Consecrations. 214
In every Particle of both kinds of the Sacrament of the Eucharist is contained
whole Christ. Page 214 The Substance of Bread and Wine in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist do not remain after Consecration. ibid. Why after Consecration the
Sacrament of the Eucharist is called Bread and Wine. 216 The admirable
Conversion in the Sacrament of the Eucharist is called Transubstantiation. 217
The Sacrament of the Eucharist not curiously to be pried into. ibid. After what
manner Christ is in the Sacrament of the Eucharist. 218 The Resemblance of
Bread and Wine remain in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, without any Subject
matter. ibid. Why Christ appointed the Sacrament of the Eucharist to be
administered under the Species of Bread and Wine. 219 The Eucharist is the
Fountain of all Graces. 220 How the Eucharist gives Grace. 221 The first Grace
not given to Man, unless he have first received the Sacrament of the Eucharist
at least in desire. 221, 222 The Eucharist is the End of all the Sacraments.
ibid. Manna a Figure of the Eucharist. Page 222 The Advantages of the
Eucharist. 223 Three Ways of Receiving the Eucharist. 224 They deprive
themselves of very great Good, that being prepared to receive Christ's Body
Sacramentally, receive it only Spiritually. ibid. None may receive the
Eucharist before Sacramental Confession, if a Priest may be had, and if they be
conscious of Mortal Sin. 226 The Sacrament of the Eucharist ought to be
received Fasting. 227 Who are Married ought to abstain from their Wives
certain Days before they come to the Communion. ibid. The Communion of the
Eucharist often to be iterated. 227, 228 The Soul is daily to be fed with the
Sacrament of the Eucharist. 228 In old times the Faithful did daily receive the
Eucharist. ibid. They are excepted from the Communion of the Eucharist who by
reason of Age have not the use of Reason. 229 Why the Eucharist denied to
Infants. 230 The Eucharist not to be given Madmen. ibid. Lay People may not
receive the Eucharist in both Kinds. Page 231 Why the Church prohibited the
Custom of Communicating under both Species. ibid. The Power of Consecrating the
Sacrament of the Eucharist given to the Priests only. 232 Who is not
Consecrated, ought not to touch the Sacred Vessels. ibid. The Eucharist is a
Sacrifice. 233 The Eucharist is a Sacrifice most acceptable to God. ibid. The
Eucharist, instituted of Christ for two Causes. ibid. The Eucharist, as it is a
Sacrifice has the Virtue not only of Meriting, but also of Satisfying. 234
When the Sacrifice of the Eucharist was instituted. ibid. The Figures and
Prophecies of the Eucharist. 235 The Sacrament of the Eucharist an
inexpressible Pledge of Charity. 517 Why the Sacrament of the Eucharist called
Our Bread. 518 Why the Sacrament of the Eucharist called Our daily Bread.
ibid. See Sacrifice. The Event of things to be left to God. 549 When we suffer
Evil, we must fly to God for Help. Page 544 We pray not for deliverance from
all Evil. 546 Some things which are commonly accounted Evils, are yet very
advantageous. ibid. We pray against those Evils that can bring no Advantage to
the Soul. 547 From what Evils we are to pray to be delivered. ibid. The Evils
our Neighbors do us, are to be ascribed to the Devil. 549 Deliverance from Evil
to be begged of God. 544 Examples of Human Infirmity. 533 Examples which may
encourage us to hope well. 546 Extream-Vnction. 283 The Sacrament of
Extream-Vnction, why so called. ibid. The Matter and Form of Extream-Vnction.
285 What time the Sacrament of Extream-Vnction to be used. 287 They are not
fit to receive the Sacrament of Extream-Vnction, that want the use of Reason.
288 What Parts of the Body are to be anointed. ibid. The Sacrament of
Extream-Vnction may be iterated. 289 The Preparation of Extream-Vnction. ibid.
The Minister of Extream-Vnction. ibid. The Utility of Extream-Vnction. 290 The
fittest time of Extream-Vnction. Page 287 Why Sick Persons, receiving the
Sacrament of Extream-Vnction, are not healed. 291
F
FAith necessary to Salvation, 9 Many Degrees of Faith. 10 What we are first
of all to believe. 13 The Knowledge of Faith much more certain than that of
Human Reason. 16 The Faith of God's Almighty Power how necessary it is. 24 The
Faith of our Redemption was always necessary to Salvation. 29, 30 The Faith of
the Old Fathers and ours is the same. 30 Faith must go before Penance. 241
Faith is necessary in Prayer. 467 Firmness of Faith is a chief Point in Praying
well. ibid. False-witness what it is. 427 The wrong done by False-witness. 428,
429 False-witness forbidden not only in Judgment, but out of Judgment also. 429
A Lie accounted amongst False-testimony. 432 Fasting and Alms to be joined with
Prayer, See Alms. What the Name Father signifies in God, see the First Article
of the Greed. 14 Why the first Person of the Trinity called Father. Pa. 21 Who
are called Fathers. 385 Fathers, of what kind soever, are to be honored. 3^6
God the Father of all. 382 Godfathers at Baptism, and what belongs to them,
see Baptism. 158, etc. See Parents. Figures of Christ's Conception and
Nativity. 43 Figures of Christ's Cross. 48 Figures of Confession. 261 The Form
of the Sacrament of the Eucharist 203, 204 The Form of the Sacrament of
Penance. 245 The Form of the Sacrament of Baptism. 151 The Form of the
Sacrament of Extream-Unction. 285 The Form of Confirmation. 186 The Form of
Praying to God, and to the Saints, different. 464 Fornication, the Calamities
proper to it. 409 The Detestableness of Fornication. ibid. Frugality to be
used. 422 The Fruit of the Tree of Life. 510 The excellent Fruit of Prayer is
the obtaining our Desires. 551
G
IN honest Gain there is Peace. 514 We ought not to be ignorant of the Person
of the Holy Ghost. 79 The proper Signification of the Holy Ghost. Page 80 Why
He has no proper Name given him. ibid. The Holy Ghost in all things equal to
the Father and Son. 81 The Holy Ghost is God. 82 The Holy Ghost proceeds from
Father and Son. 83 The admirable Effects of the Holy Ghost. 85 Why the Holy
Ghost called a Gift. 84 Glory, what it is. 494 The Glory of God how prayed for.
485 The Glory of the Saints unutterable. 119 We must confess One God only, and
no more. 18 Why God called a Father. 19 What the word Father signifies in God.
ibid. An Almighty Power attributed to God. 22 God the Creator of all. 27 What
God created, he preserves. 27, 28 God is the Author of the Law. 334 It is easy
to love God. 335 Why God called Jealous. 354 Why God threatens Punishment to
the third and fourth Generation. 355 God's Goodness overcomes his Justice.
ibid. How God's Name is honored. 357, etc. Many Names given to God. 358 How God
is to be praised. ibid. God holds him not guiltless that takes his Name in
vain. Page 368 God is first to be loved, and then our Parents. 383 God's
Providence toward Men. 474 God forgets not Men. 476 God's Good Will and Mercy
toward Men. 477 God's Love toward Men showed in their Redemption. 478 When
God's Hand touches us, he does it in Love, not as an Enemy. ibid. Why God
chastises whom he loves. 478 God is not ignorant of our Calamities. 479 God is
the God of all. ibid. God is every where, and How. 483 Why God is said to be in
Heaven. ibid. How God is to be loved from the Soul. 484 What is first of all to
be begged of God. 485 How we pray God's Name to be sanctified. 485, 486 God's
holy and terrible Name needs not Sanctification. ibid. How God's Name is
sanctified in all. ibid. God's Name to be sanctified in our Deeds, and not in
our Words only. 486, 487 God's Providence concerning Man's Salvation. 487 God
has not called us to Sloth and Sluggishness. 497 God never forsakes us. Pa.
497. God affords us his Help to attain to the Kingdom of Heaven. ibid. We
cannot love God as we ought, without the Help of his Divine Grace. 500 Without
God's Direction and Help, we cannot so much as aspire to Christian Wisdom.
ibid. God heals the Soul of those that are justified, not the Body. 501 God
requires our utmost Love in all that we do for him. 506 All the Works of God
are Good. 506, 507 God bestows his Goodness upon all his Works. 507 Why above
all thing's we prefer God's Will 507, 508 God's VVays past finding out. 507 God
does better for us than we can desire. 508 All Necessaries for our Life are to
be referred to God's Glory. ibid. God's Infinite Power to be worshipped. 515 God
is ready to forgive the Sins of the Penitent. 524 God is offended at Sin. ibid.
God is a most bountiful Father. ibid. God is most firm to his Justice. 525 How
God tempts those that are his. 537 How God suffers Good Men to be tempted. 598
How God is said to lead us into temptation. Page 538 God gives us Power to
tread down Satan. 540 God gives Power to overcome our Enemies. ibid. God's
Goodness many ways frees us from Evils. 547 God will not have us utterly free
from all Inconveniences. 548 God comforts those that are pressed with Adversity.
ibid. God uses the Devil as his Servant, in inflicting Punishments on the
Wicked. ibid. What Grace is. 172 How the Eucharist confers Grace. 198
H
WHy God chose the Hebrew People. 339 The Deliverance of the Hebrews from
Egypt. ibid. Why God suffered the Hebrews to be so oppressed. 340 Why the
Promises made to the Hebrews were performed Four hundred years after. ibid.
Hell, the Signification of the word. 57 How Christ descended into Hell. 58 How
many Places are thereby signified. 57 What Arts Heretics use to disperse their
impious Doctrins. 3, ^ Who may be called an Heretic. 86 The Command of Honoring
Parents. 381 What Honor is. Page 385 Parents of all kinds are to be honored.
ibid. The Duties of Honor which we owe to Parents. 386 The Honor due to Parents
after their Death. 388 What Advantages they reap that honor their Parents. 390
Who honor not their Parents, may fear an untimely Death. 391, 392 Hope of
obtaining is of great use to obtaining. 467 How we ought to devote our selves
to God, in hope of the Reward of Heaven. 506 Our Hope should be wholly placed
in God's Love. ibid. We ought to hope to obtain Pardon of Sin. 520 How to get
Hope even in Temptations. 535, 536 We are to hope in God's Protection when we
are tempted. ibid. Why a Husband ought to love his Wife. 327 The Duty of a
Husband to his Wife. ibid. etc. Hypocrites pray not from their Heart. 470 The
Hypocrites Practice in Praying to be avoided. ibid.
I
JEsus the Son of God alone was able to reconcile us to God. 29 How great
profit they have that believe Jesus Christ to be the Son of God. Pa. 29 What
the Name Jesus signifies. 31 How the Name Jesus contains all his other Names.
3^ Jesus Christ Supreme King, Priest, and Prophet. 33 Jesus the Son of God,
true God. 34 Jews, see Hebrews. To have the Images of Christ and of the Saints
in the Church, is not only lawful, but very profitable for the Faithful. 351
When any one, before the Images of the Saints, prays the Lord's Prayer, what he
ought to think. 464, 465 The Incarnation of the Word, of how great value it is
to us. 38 One Person alone wrought not all the Mysteries of the Incarnation. 39
No Confusion of the Natures made by the Incarnation. 40 Why in a peculiar
manner the Work of the Incarnation attributed to the Holy Ghost. 39 In the
Mystery of the Incarnation some things done beyond, and some things by the
Order of Nature. 40 The Wonders that happened in the Incarnation of the Word.
ibid. All Inconveniences to be born patiently. 540 Infants, see Baptism. An
Infidel being converted to the Faith, is to keep his first Wife. Page 323 Man's
Ingratitude toward God. 538 Inhumanity to be avoided by him that desires that
God should hear him. 466 Christians by all means to be persuaded to forget
Injuries. 528 How to persuade Men to forget Injuries. ibid. Injuries to be
forgiven of him that would be forgiven of God. 531 God requires of us to forget
Injuries. ibid. What Advantages they get that forgive Injuries. 402 The
Inconveniences they fall into that will not forgive Injuries. 403 Remedies to
lay aside Injuries. 404 Forgetting of Injuries the best Alms. 402 Who are
desirous to forget Injuries, ought to use in the Lord's Prayer that Petition,
[Forgive us, etc.] and why. 528 Why Christ will be the Judge of all. 72 Of the
Last Judgment. ibid. Christ's Judgment of us twofold. 73 The Necessity of a
General Judgment. 73, 74 Judges that take Bribes are Robbers. 418 Judgment in
Civil Courts to be administered according to Justice and the Laws. 428, 429 The
Power of Jurisdiction how proved. Page 267 Original Justice given of God to Man
beyond the Power of Nature. 27 He cannot be justified that is not ready to obey
all God's Commands. 337 The Justification of a Sinner is a Work of God's
Infinite Power. 104 It is given by the Sacraments, as by Instruments. 134
K
THe Dignity and large Power of the Keys. 104 All have not the Power of the
Keys. ibid. Kings are to be obeyed. 390 The Kingdom of Heaven. 489 The Kingdom
of Heaven to be prayed for before all things else. 490 The praying for the
Kingdom of Heaven contains a great heap of excellent Gifts, ibid. The Kingdom
of Christ is not of this World. 493 What the Kingdom of God is. ibid. The
Kingdom of God is within us. ibid. Why the Kingdom of Christ called Justice.
ibid. The Kingdom of Grace put before the Kingdom of Glory. 494 The Kingdom of
Christ, which is the Church. 495 The Propagation of the Kingdom of the Church.
ibid. How the Kingdom of God comes upon Sinners. P. 495 How the Kingdom of
Christ is sought. ibid. The Excellency of the Kingdom of Heaven. 496 God
affords us Assistances to obtain the Kingdom of Heaven. 497 Those that would
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, ought to beg of God that his Will be done.
498
L
THe Last Things to be often remembered. 78 The Law of Nature the same with the
Written Law. 334 What the Law of Nature is. ibid. They break the Law of Nature
that spare not their Enemies. 527 The Law of the Decalogue is no new Law, but
the Law of Nature illustrated. 334 With how great Majesty the Law was given.
335 The Laws of Nature not hard. 336 The Law is to be obeyed. ibid. The Benefit
of observing the Law. 337 To know God to be our Lord, makes us more ready to
keep his Law. 341 Every Law induces Men to obey it, either for love of Reward,
or fear of Punishment. 352 The way and manner of keeping the Law. God's Law is
to be kept in the inward Sense of the Soul. Page 440 The difference between
Divine and Human Laws. ibid. God's Law is as a Looking-glass, wherein we may
see the Deformities of our Nature. ibid. Life eternal, what it signifies. 117,
etc. Man's Life on Earth a Temptation. 539 Our Life and Salvation depend upon
God. 515 All kind of Lying is to be avoided, etc. See the Eighth Commandment.
M
THe Honor due to Civil Magistrates. 389 When Magistrates are to be obeyed, and
when not. 390 Man formed after God's Image and Likeness. 27 Man last created,
made immortal by Divine Gift, not by Natural Virtue. ibid. The first Fall of
Man. 29 How much a Christian Man is obliged to Christ. 37 Men ought to be
studious of God's Honor. 354 How Man is obliged to God. 478 Man's Misery. 491
Man's Misery by reason of Adam's Sin. 499 Men compar d to Sick Folks, and to
those that have lost their Taste. 499, 500 Men compared to Children. Page 500
Man, tho justified, cannot so tame the Lusts of the Flesh, as never more to
stir in him. 501 Voluptuous Men Strangers to Divine Pleasure. 503 Man's
Instability. 491 Man's Weakness. 510 With what kind of Curse Man was condemned
after Adam's. Sin. ibid. Man's Folly and Weakness. 533 Virgin Mary, see the
Third Article of the Cred. 32, 463 The Sacrifice of Mass the same with that on
the Cross. 236 Mass a Propitiatory Sacrifice, and not only Commemorative. ibid.
Mass offered for, and profits the Dead. 237 The Rites of Mass not superfluous.
ibid. The Matter or the Sacrament of the Eucharist, see Eucharist. The Matter
of the Sacrament of Penance, see Penance. Matter of the Sacrament of
Extream-Unction, see Extream-Vnction. Matrimony, whence so called. 314 The
Sacrament of Matrimony called by diverse Names ibid. The Definition of
Matrimony, and the Declaration thereof. 315 They cannot enter into Matrimony
who by Law are excluded. Page 315 Wherein the Virtue and Nature of Matrimony
consists. ibid. Consent makes Matrimony. 316 That Consent expressed in Words
signifying the present Time. ibid. The Consent of one Party is not enough to
Matrimony. ibid. Words are needful to declare Mutual Consent. ibid. Matrimony
not contracted by Words signifying Time to come. ibid. If after Matrimony the
Parties repent, they cannot alter their Deed. 316, 317 In stead of Words, a Nod
or other Sign is sufficient in Matrimony. 317 Besides Consent, there is no need
of the Eed to make it true Matrimony. ibid. The double respect of Matrimony, as
it is an Office of Nature, and as it is a Sacrament. ibid. Matrimony as it is
an Office of Nature appointed by God. 318 Matrimony indissoluble. ibid. Those
Words, [Increase and multiply] lay not a Necessity of Matrimony upon all Men.
ibid. Mankind being increased, Virginity is very highly commended. 318, 319 For
what Causes Matrimony was instituted. Page 319 The Nature of Matrimony as it is
a Sacrament. 320 That Matrimony is a Sacrament, and one of the Seven Sacraments
of the Gospel. 321 The Sacrament of Matrimony instituted by Christ. ibid.
Matrimony signifies and gives Grace. 322 How far the Sacrament of Matrimony
excels that Matrimony before the Law. ibid. The Matrimony of the Jews. ibid.
Why the ancient Fathers had many Wives. 323 Why a Bill of Divorce allowed by
the Law of Moses. ibid. Poligamy strange to the Law of Nature. ibid. Matrimony
consists in the Conjunction of two only and no more. ibid. An Infidel being
converted, ought to keep to his first Wife. ibid. The Bond of Matrimony
dissolved by no Divorce. 324 Very profitable that Matrimony cannot be
dissolved. ibid. Three Advantages of Matrimony. 325 The Mutual Offices of
Husband and Wife. 327 Clandestin Marriages neither true nor ratified. 329 The
Impediments of Matrimony. ibid. How they ought to be disposed that contract
Matrimony. Page 329 What use there ought to be of Matrimony. 330 We are
sometimes to abstain from the Office of Matrimony for the sake of Prayer. ibid.
The Law against Murder pleasant to be heard. 394 Murder forbidden to all. 397
All Men by virtue of this Law protected from being murdered. ibid. Unlawful for
one to murder himself. ibid. What Manslaughter is not forbidden. 395 The Law
against Murder restrains not only the Hands, but the Heart. 397, 398 Medicin
given of God to Men. 545, 546 What hope we are to put in Medicinal Remedies.
546 Our Merits depend upon Christ's Passion. 277 Being assisted by Grace, we
may merit. 278 The proper Minister of Baptism, see Baptism. The Order of the
Ministers of Baptism to be observed. ibid. The proper Minister of the Sacrament
of Confirmation, see Confirmation. The Minister of Confession must be Learned
and Prudent. See Penance. The Minister of the Sacrament of Order. See Order.
The Misery of Man. See the Third Petition. 499 Modesty and Continency
diligently to be kept. 407
N
NAmes given to those that are baptized. See Baptism. 180 Giving Heathenish
Names in Baptism reproved. ibid. What real Honor to be given to God's Name.
357, 358 How God's Name to be sanctified in all. 486 God's holy and terrible
Name wants not our Sanctification. 485, 486 How God's Name is sanctified in
all. 486 God's Name to be sanctified in Deed, and not in Word only. 488 Who is
our Neighbor. 427 A sure Note of knowing which Prayer is good, which bad. 469,
470, 471
O
ALl bound to obey God's Will. 506 What Order is. 298 There are Seven Orders.
299 The Greater and Lesser Orders. ibid. Why Holy Order reckoned among the
Sacraments of the Church. 298 Holy Order imprints a Character. ibid. The first
Shaving. 299 The Order of Doorkeeper, and his Office. Page 301 The Order and
Office of Reader. 302 The Order and Office of Exorcists. ibid. The Order and
Office of Collats. ibid. The Order and Office of Subdeacon. 303 Perpetual
Continence imposed on the Sacred Orders. ibid. The Order and Office of Deacon.
304 The Office of a Deacon to explain the Fospel, but not in the Pulpit. 305
The Order of Priesthood. 306 To what kind of Persons Orders are to be given.
294, 310 Sacred Orders conferred on certain appointed Days, wherein Fasting is
enjoined. 310 Those that are to be Ordained ought first to their Conscience by
the Sacrament of Penance. 311 The Sacrament of Order not to be conferred on
Children or Mad Persons. 312 What Age is required for the several Orders. ibid.
The Sacrament of Order confers Grace. ibid. The Sacrament of Order imprints a
Character. 313
P
PArents their Duty toward their Children. 392 When Parents are not to be
obeyed. Page 385 Honor due to Parents. ibid. Parents to avoid too much
Indulgence and Severity. 392, 393 The Mystery of Christ's Passion clearly shows
the Power and Love of God. 55 Christ's Passion often to be proposed to the
People. 45 Why the Time of Christ's Passion is observed. 46 Christ's Suffering
inwardly in his Soul. ibid. The Cause of Christ's Passion. 51 Christ suffered
the heaviest Punishments. 53 Christ's Passion much more bitter than that of the
Saints. 54 What Benefits Christ's Passion brings to us. 55 Christ's Passion
procures us Pardon of Sin. 519 From Christ's Passion flows all the Virtue of
our Satisfaction. ibid. The Pastors of the Church are to be heard even as
Christ himself. See the Preface. We must obey the Pastors tho Wicked. 389 The
Necessity of Penance. 238 The want of the Use of Penance very hurtful to us.
ibid. Of Penance as a Virtue, and what belongs to it. 240, 241 The Sacrament of
Penance necessary. 238 Penance ought to be iterated Page 244 The diverse Notions
and Significations of Penance. 249 God by translation is said to repent. 240
Wherein the various Significations of Penance differ. ibid. Faith goes before
Penance. 241 Why inward Penance is a Virtue. ibid. What a Penitent ought to
propose to himself. 242 By what Degrees we arrive at Penance. ibid. The S.
Scripture promises the Kingdom of Heaven to Penance. 243 External Penance is a
Sacrament. ibid. Why God instituted the Sacrament of Penance. ibid. The Form
and Matter of the Sacrament of Penance. 245 The Ceremonies and Rites of
Penance. 246, 247 The Fruits of the Sacrament of Penance. 247 Penance restores
us into favor with God. ibid. The entire Parts of Penance. 249 Why Penance
consists of Parts. ibid. Why Public Penance enjoined for Public Offenses. 276
In Penance two things to be observed. 277 The Punishment of Penance freely
undertaken, turns away God's Punishments from us. 278 Restitution is necessary
to a Penitent. Page 419 What Perjury is. See the second Commandment. 356, etc.
M Men are perjured many ways. Ibid. The great propensity of men to Perjury.
Ibid. For Perjury men are many ways afflicted Ibid. The Perils we are in daily
ought always to be before our eyes 533 Permission in God, how to be understood
539 Pride very offensive to God. 466 The Properties of the Divine Persons. 21
Why the first Person of the Trinity called Father. Ibid. What belongs to the
Divine Persons ought not to be curiously searched into. Ibid. Christian
Philosophy differs from the wisdom of the World. 16 What the Philosophers
thought of God. Ibid. The Pope of Rome is the Head of the Catholic Church. 92
The Supreme Dignity and Jurisdiction of the Pope of Divine Right. Ibid. The
Pope is the Supreme Governor of the Universal Church, the Successor of St.
Peter, and Christ's true and lawful Vicar. Ibid. God is first to be prayed to,
and then the Saints. 464 The best way of praying. 457 For whom we must pray.
461 The Saints are to be prayed to, and after what manner we beg them to take
pity on us. 464 The manner of Prayer. 469 We must pray in Spirit and Truth.
Ibid. Infidels cannot pray in Spirit and Truth. 470 We must pray in Christ's
name. 471 By praying to God, we honor him. 452 The Divine Majesty approaches
to him that prays. 551 They that pray, converse with God. Ibid. The benefits
and advantages of such as pray. 452 Many degrees of Prayer and Thanksgiving.
455, etc. The manner of vocal Prayer. 469 What sinners God hears and helps when
they pray. 558 Prayer to God necessary. 450 Christ prayed all night 470 The
power that Prayer has with God. 471 The profitableness and advantage of Prayer.
452, etc. Prayer is an argument of Religion. Ibid. By Prayer we acknowledge our
subjection to God. Ibid. Prayer is the Key of Heaven. Ibid. The Virtue and
Advantage of Prayer. Ibid. Of what parts Prayer consists. 455 The two principal
parts of Prayer. 456 The Prayer of such as have not yet received the light of
Faith. 458 The Prayer of such as God hears not. 459 Prayers for the wicked have
great influence. 462 Prayers for the Dead in Purgatory flowed from the
Apostles. Ibid. Prayers for such as are in mortal sin, not very efficacious.
Ibid. What he ought to think that pronounces the Lord's Prayer, before the
Images of the Saints. 465 Prayer must be humble. Ibid. The preparation of
Prayer. Ibid. What sins they must avoid that would have their Prayers heard of
God. 466 Contempt of God's Laws makes our Prayers execrable. Ibid. Prayer
admits of no doubting. 467 Mental Prayer excludes not vocal 469 Mental Prayer
is more excellent. Ibid. The proper advantage and necessity of vocal Prayer.
Ibid. Private and public Prayer. 470 The Exposition of the Lord's Prayer. 472
The Preface of the Lord's Prayer. Prayer made for another profits himself. 481
Prayer is a weapon against the Devil. 541 The order to be observed in Prayer.
545 The preposterous order used by some in their Prayers. 544 The Preaching of
God's word never to be intermitted. In the Preface. The authority of the
Preachers of God's word. Ibid. Preparation to Prayer, wherein it consists. 465
Preparation before the Communion, what it ought to be, and how necessary. 225,
226 Preparation to the Communion requires us to come fasting. 227 The Priest
alone has the power of consecrating the Eucharist. 232 When Christ instituted
Prists. 235 Priests are to conceal in perpetual silence the sins revealed to
them in Confession. 268 Priests called Gods and Angels. 293 The Priests of the
New Testament more excellent than all others. 293, 297 The Priests Power very
great. 294 What they ought to propose to themselves that are to be initiated
into Holy Orders. Ibid. Mercenary Priests. 294, 295 Priests entering in by the
door of the Church. 295 When the Power is given to the Priest by the Bishop.
Page 298 The Ceremonies used in Ordaining Priests and other Clerks. 298, etc.
The Order of Priesthood, tho it be burdensome, yet it has diverse degrees of
Dignity and Power. 308 What is required in him that is to be made Priest. 311
What knowledge is required in a Priest. Ibid. Two duties of a Priest. Ibid.
The Nobility and Excellency of a Priest. 236 The charge of a Priest to be laid
upon none rashly. 310 Who are said to be called to the Priesthood. 294 The
Power of the Priesthood double. 296 The Power of the Priesthood of the Law of
the Gospel far more excellent than that of the written Law, or Law of Nature.
297 The Power of the Priesthood of the Gospel has its Original from Christ.
Ibid. That Priesthood twofold. 306 The Office of the Priesthood. 307 The duty
of Prosecutors and Advocates. 434 God's Providence toward Men. 490, etc.
Purgatory. 57
R
REdemption, the great benefits we receive thereby. 54 Remedies against evil
desires. Page 447 The remedies of a sick soul are Penance and the Eucharist.
289 Remission of sins to be had in the Church 102 With how great thankfulness
the benefit of remission of sins is to be received. 103 Christ has given the
power of remitting sins in the Church to the Bishops and Priests. Ibid. Our
sins remitted by Christ's blood. 105 None can obtain remission of sins without
Penance. 526 Restitution necessary to a Penitent. 419 Who are to be compelled
to make restitution. 419, 420 The Resurrection of Christ, and the glorious
Mystery of it. 62, etc. Christ rose again by his own power. 61 By the benefit
of the Resurrection Christ is become the first fruits of all. Ibid. That Christ
rose again the third day, how to be understood. 62 The mystery of Christ's
Resurrection very necessary. 63 The end of Christ's Resurrection. 64 What
examples Christ's Resurrection proposes to us. 65 The signs of spiritual
Resurrection. Ibid. Our Faith established by the belief of the Resurrection of
the dead. 107. Why the Resurrection of man is called the Resurrection of the
Flesh. 107 The Resurrection of the Flesh proved by Examples and Testimonies.
108 The different condition of them that shall rise again. 111 Before the
Resurrection all then alive shall die without exception. Ibid. Our Bodies shall
rise again immortal. 114. The powers of those that rise again. Ibid etc. What
fruits we gather by the Article of the Resurrection. 116 Robbery, and its
kinds. 417 Robbery a greater sin than Theft. 414 Robbery, and the various kinds
of Rapine. 417
S
THe celebration of the Sabbath. why so often commanded in holy Scripture. 369
What Sabbath signifies. 373 What the signification of Sabbath is. ibid. Why the
Sabbath consecrated to God 375 The Sabbath was a sign. Ibid. The Sabbath in
Heaven. Ibid. Why the Sabbath transferred to the Lord's day. 376 After what
manner the Sabbath is to be observed. 377 The name Sacrament, how taken. 127
What a Sacrament is. 128 Justice and Salvation attained by the Sacraments. 128
St. Austin's definition of a Sacrament. Ibid. Sacraments referred to those
things they signify. 129, etc. Sacraments are signs appointed of God. 130 A
sacred thing, and the Grace of God. 131 A Sacrament signifies, and works
Holiness. Ibid. Sacraments signify diverse things. 132 The Sacraments of the
Law of the Gospel, why instituted. 133 Every Sacrament consists of two things,
Matter and Form. 135 Among all signs, words have the greatest efficacy. 136 The
Sacraments of the New Law have a form of words prescribed, without which there
is no true Sacrament. Ibid. The Ceremonies of the Sacraments cannot be omitted
without sin 137 If the Ceremonies of the Sacrament should be omitted, the
nature of the Sacrament is not lessened. Ibid. Why the Sacraments administered
with solemn Ceremonies. Ibid. The necessity of the Sacraments. 138 The number
of the Sacraments. 137 The excellency of the Sacraments. 139 The difference of
the Sacraments among themselves. Ibid. Christ the Author of the Sacraments.
Ibid. Why God would have the Sacraments administered by men 140 The Ministers of
the Sacraments represent the person of Christ. Ibid. The Sacraments confer
justifying Grace. 142 How dangerous it is to such Ministers as minister the
Sacraments of the New Law with polluted consciences. 141 The effects of the
Sacraments. Ibid. The excellency of the Sacraments of the New Law, compared
with those of the Old. 143 Three Sacraments imprint a Character. Ibid. By the
use of the Sacrament the Edifice of Christians is propp'd up. 145 Wicked men
may minister the Sacraments, if they observe what belongs to the nature and
truth of the Sacraments. 140 The difference between a Sacrament and a
Sacrifice. 234 A Sacrifice is offered to God, not to the Saints. 235 The bloody
and unbloody Sacrifice is one and the same. 236 The Sacrifice offered on the
Cross and that in the Mass is one and the same. Ibid. The Communion of Saints,
how profitable, and what it signifies. 99 By Communion of all, Christians are
made one Body. 100 The members of Christ's body, tho dead, do not cease to be
his members. Ibid. What things in the Church are common to Christians. 101
God's Glory is not diminished by the worship of the Saints, but increased. 345
The Patronage of the Saints is not superfluous. 346 Tho Christ be offered to us
as our Mediator, yet it does not follow but that we may have recourse to the
favor of the Saints. 347 It is not forbidden by God's Law to paint the Images
of the Saints. 348 Satan's Attempts. See Devil. The necesity of Satisfaction.
274 Whence the name of Satisfaction. 272 Satisfaction variously taken. Ibid.
etc. What Satisfaction reconciles God to us. 252, 253 Christ's Satisfaction is
for almost all sins. 273 Canonical Satisfaction. Ibid. Satisfaction taken of
us. Ibid. Satisfaction, as a part of the Sacrament. Ibid. Satisfaction,
defined. 272 The virtue of Satisfaction. 298 Our Satisfaction does not obscure
Christ's Satisfaction, but rather illustrates it. Ibid. Painful and afflictive
works undertaken in satisfaction. 279, 280 All kinds of satisfaction referred
to 3 chief heads. 279 True Satisfaction requires that he that satisfies be
himself just. 279 Inconveniences and labors sent of God have a virtue of
satisfying, if born with patience. 280 One may satisfy for another. Ib. Before
a Penitent, that has wronged his Neighbor in his Goods or Repute, be absolved,
he ought to promise to make satisfaction. 281 In appointing the punishment of
satisfaction, what is to be observed. 282 The manner of satisfaction should
answer to the degree of the fault. Ibid. The Penitent ought of his own accord
often to repeat the works of satisfaction which the Priest appointed him. Ib.
The Seal of the Lord's Prayer. 550. Some Sins irremissible, how to be
understood. 248 The punishment of sin and sinners flows to us from Adam. 29 We
ought to confess our sins of thought. 265 Two consequences of sin. 277 God is
so provoked by our sins, that he blesses not our labors. 522 All are subject to
sin. 520 What our acknowledgment of sin ought to be. 521 The baseness of sin.
Ibid. The plague of sin. 522 Tho the act of sin pass away, yet the guilt of it
remains. 523 God's anger always follows sin. Ibid. How necessary the sense of,
and grief for sin is. 521 God is always ready to forgive the sins of Penitents.
524 We cannot avoid sin without God's help. 505 Swearing. See Perjury.
T
BEing tossed with the waves of Temptation, we must fly to the Port of Prayer.
540 We must pray God that we be not led into Temptation. 532 What Temptation
is. 536 The many kinds of Temptations. 533 God tempts, and how. 537 Men tempted
for evil. Ibid. Why the Devil is called the Tempter. Ibid. When we are led
into Temptation. ibid. He tempts that does not hinder Temptation. 538 Man's
whole life a Temptation on Earth. 539 Temptations to be patiently endured. 540
What we beg of God in Temptation. 539. etc. The Commandment about Theft is as
a Protection whereby our outward goods are defended. 413 This Commandment
divided into two parts. Ibid. Why the 7th Commandment makes mention of Theft,
and not of Robbery. 414 What is understood by the word Theft Ibid. God's great
love showed to us in this Commandment about Theft. 413. Theft, which is an
unjust possession and use of other men's things, known by diverse names. 414 The
will of stealing forbidden in this Command. 415 How grievous a sin Theft is.
Ibid. The consequences of Theft manifest the greatness of the sin. Ibid. Many
kinds of Thefts. 416 The various kinds of Thieves. Ibid. God accepts no excuse
for Theft. 423 Theft not excusable. Ibid. The excuses which men use to defend
their Theft withal. Ibid. etc. The Thief dishonors God's Name. 424
V
THe Vice of the Tongue very extensive. 326 Of the Vice of the Tongue come
innumerable mischiefs. ibid. Unction. See Extreme Unction.
W
WAtching overcomes Temptations. 541 The Wife to be subject to her Husband. 328
The Wife must abide at home. 328 The Duties of a Wife. 327, etc. Why Woman was
taken out of the side of man. Ibid. Why we pray God's Will be done. 505 Who
especially ought to pray God's Will be done. 503 Who says [thy Will be done]
what he ought to think. 505 The Commandment of not bearing false Witness. 426
The Command of not bearing false Witness restrains the Vice of the Tongue.
Ibid. In the Command against false Witness are containd two Precepts, one
commanding, the other forbidding 427 What is forbidden in false Witness. Ibid.
A Judge cannot well reject sworn Witness. Ibid. What false Witness is. 428,
429 The mischiefs of false Witness. 429 False Witness forbidden not only in
Judgment, but out of Judgment. Ibid. How many ways a man's esteem is wounded by
Lies. 429, etc. Witness-bearing is a confession of God's Praise. 433 True
Witness-bearing of very great use in human affairs. Ibid. Witnesses to be very
careful not to affirm for truth what they are not very sure of. 434 The Word of
God the Food of the Soul. 517 The Word of the Pastors of the Church to be
received as the Word of God. See the Preface. Words of all signs have the
greatest Virtue. See Sacrament. By the preaching of the Word and use of the
Sacraments, the Christian Building is firmly laid 145 Incarnation of the Word.
See Incarnation.
Z
WHat Zeal to be attributed to God. 354
FINIS.

