THE TESTIMONY OF A Cloud of Witnesses, Who in their Generation have testified
against that horrible Evil of FORCING of CONSCIENCE, and PERSECUTION about
Matters of RELIGION.

Whose Testimony may be seasonable and suitable for the present state of the
wise and learned men in England, whether of the Magistrates or of the Clergy;
And may serve as a timely Warning to them all, of defiling their hands with
that horrible filthy thing, which is already in part committed in the Land.

Composed together, and Translated into English, by a living Witness against
the aforesaid Evil, WILLIAM CATON.

God shall persuade Japheth, and he shall dwell in the Tents of Shem, and
Canaan shall be his Servant,

Genesis 9.27. And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of
their Testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death,

Rev. 12.11. Printed in the Year, 1662.

TO THE READER.
FRIEND,
IN these latter Days, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ has raised up many
Witnesses, who Faithfully bear their Testimony to the Eternal Truth, against
the many Evils which superabound in the World; but as the Testimony of his
Faithful Witnesses has been heretofore Rejected by the World; in like manner
is the Testimony of his Servants now, contemned and set at naught by the Wise
and Learned of this World, who now with their Power and Wisdom resist the
Almighty, as in Ages and Generations past: which thing I seriously observing,
it entered into my Heart to manifest the Testimony of some of the Ancients (who
heretofore have been renowed in their Generations) to my Countrymen, to the
end, that both the Wise and Simple, Noble and Ignoble amonst them, might see
and perceive, how that the Almighty, even the Lord of Hosts, has so far opened
the Understandings of many, as that he has given them to see the Evil of that
horrible Evil, (viz.) of FORCING of CONSCIENCE; which noisome and hurtful thing
has been testified against by Emperors and Kings, and by other Potentates of
the Earth, who by experience have found the Evil of it: And likewise it has
been witnessed against by many Wise and Eminent Learned Men in their several
Generations, even as it is now testified against, by the Servants and
Handmaids of the Most High, which is evidently manifested by this following
Treatise.

It has been long upon me to produce this to our Native Country, and to
publish these Testimonies in its own Language, that its Inhabitants might
understand how other Kingdoms and Countries have been depopulated and spoiled,
through their Persisting in the aforesaid Evil; and that they also might be
warned from running headlong in that evil Course unto Perdition, and thereby
incur Desolation upon the Land, and hasten the Lord's Judgments upon its
Inhabitants.

Much I might have added to the further demonstrating of this Evil, but being
there is so much writ already concerning it, and so much testified daily
against it, and that I was not desirous to make a great Volumn, but chused much
rather such a compendious Abstract as this; Therefore have I only inserted
their Testimonies, without any Paraphrasing upon them, which I leave unto thy
just Judgment.

Sometimes I have instanced the Chronicle or History, in which they are to be
found more at large, and sometime I have not; for I believe that very few of
them are extant in our English Language, and that there is not one among a
thousand in England that do know the Chronologies, out of which they have been
extracted.

If that thou ( Courteous Reader) do with the Spirit of Meekness peruse this
brief Treatise, then may thou reap of the Fruit of this my Labor of Love,
the effects of which I shall leave unto the Lord, whose Power I know is
sufficient to make it effectual.

W. C.
Palatine in Germany, the 29th. of the first Month, (called March) 1662.
The Epistle to the READER.
IT has been the fervent labor and travel of my youth, to seek for, and to
follow after the way of Righteousness and Truth, and it has ever been the very
temper of my Spirit until this day, to affect Justice and Mercy; and the
Virtues of the Lord God has delighted my Soul, in what Person, and among what
People soever as I have seen the same, and perfect Liberty and Freedom in all
the ways of God inwardly and outwardly, in all the exercise of godliness; and
the Virtues of the Spirit of Christ I have longed after, and according to that
Light and Knowledge committed to me, these things have I followed that I might
attain to the perfection thereof, to the fulfilling of my Faith and Patience in
the enjoyment of these things, when God himself should bring them forth in the
World, and give his chosen People the possession of the same as the Lot of
their Inheritance.

And for this Cause and the accomplishing of this end, I have had my Portion of
afflictions among many other; and I have suffered somewhat in Body and Spirit
in my day, if possibly this may be obtained in the end (to wit) free, open,
public and perfect Liberty in the exercise of Conscience, in Duty and Worship
to Godwards, in and through the whole World; This has been and is the end of
that long traveled Journey, which once obtained is a sufficient reward for all
Afflictions, and Tribulations, and Persecutions suffered and endured in the
way; and saving my Hope, and Faith, and Confidence in the Promises of God
concerning this thing, the heart would faint, the Spirit fail, and the Soul be
weary, and nothing could comfort my life: Thus it is not only with me, but
with many more like minded, who are all Travelers, Mourners and disconsolate,
till the Lord appear bringing with him perfect Liberty of Conscience to all his
People, now Oppressed and Imposed upon with grievous Burdens of Force and
Violence, concerning Worship and Duty to Godwards, under which Soul groans,
Spirit grieves, Life mourns, and the Holy Seed is slain in all Nations through
the World; and the Soul, Spirit, Life, and Holy Seed, Cries unto God day and
night, and are poured out before him, How long Lord, how long, when shall it
once be, That Persons, Peoples, and Nations, shall offer Service, Obedience and
Worship to thee, according to thy Teaching, and as they are led and persuaded
by thy Spirit? Free Service and Worship, and without force is that which God
only accepts, and by which he is glorified; it is the way of true Worship, it is
the way of Salvation, Duty and Service, in the exercise of the free Spirit of
the Lord, in the hearts of his People, in this only is he delighted; and all
the exercise of that concern which is by force through Imposition, is neither
pleasing to him, nor saving to the Soul, but abomination in his sight, as
Iniquity which his Soul hates, and a vexation of guilt unto the Righteous Soul:
Hence may it be said, woe unto Imposed Worship and Service which is forced by
outward Power, it grieves and vexes the God of Heaven unto Wrath and
Indignation, and it wounds and oppresses the Immortal Soul unto Death and
Damnation.

Surely, It is contrary to the very purpose of God in Order of Creation, who
made and Ordained Mankind free from Bondage, and never brought him forth into
the World to be a subjected slave to the will of another man, in things
Temporal, much less in things Spiritual, and relating to Eternity; and this
work of Imposing by force in matters of Faith, Worship, and Duty to God, of one
man upon another, or of some Persons over all, is certainly an Act of Bondage
and Slavery, laid as a grievous yoke upon the necks one of another, and
subjecting one another in Oppression, not unto the good Will of the Creator,
but unto the evil will of mortal perishing and sinful Creature, and this
differing from and contrary to, the pure and perfect Order and Decree of
Creation, which was blessed altogether; and whatsoever is degenerated by
Corruption, and Erred through Temptation from that Pure and Holy Order of
Creation, either in things Wordly or Divine; is in the Curse and Oposition
against the Holy Creator, and so is this thing of which I am now Treating,
Imposition upon Conscience in matters Divine and Temporal: Force, exercised in
Spiritual Cases, is the highest Product of Degeneration, and the greater
degression from the Holy Order of Creation; for without Controversy the
Creator himself, reserved and retained in his alone only Power, the Privilege
of Supremacy, in and over the inward man, in all the matters Immortal, that he
might be the only Lord in that Case, and give Spiritual Law, to Command, and
force thereby to exercise the Soul and heart, in Fear, Love, Faith, Worship,
and Obedience to himself, that he might be served as the Lord over all, most
chiefly in respect of the Inward Spiritual and Immortal man; This Power of
Supremacy I say, he reserved and retained in himself in the Creation to
exercise over Mankind, and did not commit this Privilege to any other;
wherefore without Controversy, it is an Usurpation of the Creators rightful
Dominion, it is a robbing of him of his Dignity and Prerogative, it is an Act
of Violence done against his Sovereignty, an audacious intruding into his
proper right, and a violating of the Law and Decree of Creation, for one
Person, or one People, to assume to themselves, Power, Authority and
Government, over other Persons and Peoples, in Commanding and Imposing in
matters Spiritual, over their Consciences in the Worship and Service of God;
and it is such an abomination against the Creator both in the Cause and End of
it, That he will arise and take Vengeance upon it, and he will ease himself of
all such his adversaries.

Again, It is contrary to the Law of Love, Unity, Fellowship, and Concord among
the sons of men, by order of Creation, which God appointed to be among them;
and by Imposing in matters of Spiritual concern, as aforesaid, that Love,
Unity, Fellowship and Concord among men decreed in Creation, is broken and
confounded, and disannulled among them, by reason of the same, and Nations and
Kingdoms hate and contend one with another; Neighbors and Brethren, cannot
agree but fall into strife one against another: Kings and their Subjects,
Rulers and their People, are in discord, debate, Disobedience and Rebellion one
contrary to another, by reason that Liberty of Conscience in Worship and Duty
to Godwards is wanting in the World, and Impositions and force by outward
Authority in that Case, are prevailing and in Power; And thus the Law of Love,
Unity, and Concord, Decreed in Creation, is violated, despised, and made void;
and hatred, divisions, strifes, and discords intraduced in its room, and
abounds in the Spirits and visible actions of the sons of men through the
World, to the woeful effects of killing, persecuting, and destroying one
another, Nation of Nation, Neighbors of Neighbors, and Kings of their
Subjects; occasioned and grounded upon this thing as the Foundation of the
same, (to wit) Imposing by force upon Conscience in matters Divine. Wherefore
not only against God is this evil extended, to dishonor and disgrace him as
is showed, but against man also is this evil and mischief in the effects of it
reached forth as ye have seen; and the Law of Creation is violated, both in
respect of Creator and Creature. It is in its cause and ground so evil, in its
works and effects so wicked and mischievous, and in its end so provoking and
damnable, and all this both in respect of God and man, that I have not yet
Comprehended the height and depth thereof; though my Spirit from a Child has
often entered into the serious Considerations of this thing, with mourning and
sorrow because of it, and with testimony and abhorrance against it; and at this
hour I am a sufferer in body and Spirit, because of the same; Carnal Imposition
upon Conscience in Spiritual things, woe unto it, my Soul hates, and my God will
Plague in his season.

If I should study in searching to find out, and to discribe all the evils,
mischiefs and woeful Inconveniences, and effects of this Gulf out of which they
ascend, I might make this Epistle a large Volumn; but since that I have
elsewhere written about this matter, I shall now Contract this, with the saying
of the Apostle, This Mystery of iniquity does work, until he be taken out of
the way; Yea, this Imposition upon Conscience opposite to perfect Liberty in
the exercise of the same, is the only Main, Material, Support, Prop, and
Defense of the Kingdom of Antichrist throughout the World at this day: and
whomsoever as are friends hereunto, they are friends to him, and they love his
ways, and are subjects of his Kingdom, and are rebellious against Christ, and
to his Kingdom they are Enemies: Wherefore my heart and soul says within me,
would to God I had such a gift of Demonstration, by Pen or Tongue, and that the
same were so forcible and Efficacious to awaken every soul, to an abhorrance
and dislike of that Spirit, Principle and Practice of Imposition upon
Conscience, that there might be a total turning from the Kingdom of
Antichrist, which Consists of Falsehood, Darkness, Sin, and Enmity, of Bondage,
Oppression, and cruel Impositions to the Kingdom of Christ Jesus, which
Consists of Truth, Light and Righteousness, of freedom and perfect Liberty in
Soul and Spirit; Which Kingdom and Government, the Lord of Heaven and Earth
will promote and Exalt in the Kingdoms of this World, which must become the
Kingdoms of the Lord and of His Christ, according to Promise.

It has ever been my Judgment, That want of Liberty and free exercise of
Conscience in Spiritual matters, and the Contrary Imposed by worldly Power, and
it remains still with me, That this is one main Cause of the woeful Distractions
in Kingdoms, of the unsetledness in States, and of many evil Consequences
abounding in the Governments of the World; and also the Cause wherefore the God
of Heaven is angry and provoked against them, and for which Cause he will smite
and wound, confound and overturn Kingdoms, Powers, and Authorities, even till
he Reign whose Right it is; who only and alone, will Rule in the free exercise
of Soul, Spirit, and Conscience, through the teachings of his own Spirit: And
though much Opposition and great Contention have been made against this in the
World, in which men have striven against their own good and welfare, yet there
is a day, and it hastens to come in Power, when Imposition upon Conscience by
outward worldly force in Cases Divine, will be banished the whole Fabric of
the Creation, and exiled into the pit of never-rising obscurity and darkness,
and then shall the Sons of men be delivered from the Violence of it, and from
all its miserable and mischievous Consequence; Then shall the heritage of the
Lord rejoice in Joy unspeakable, being delivered from the oppression under
which she has long mourned, traveled, and groaned in deep distress; Then
shall Nations delight in amity one with another; then shall Neighbors rejoice
in Society one among another; and then shall Kings and Rulers love their
Subjects and People freely, and People shall Obey and serve their Rulers with a
willing and cheerful heart and mind; Hereby the God of Heaven should be
Glorified, and all People become Blessed, Amity, Love, Unity, and Concord, and
the first Creation order and Decree, would be restored between God and his
Creatures, and also between man and man, in holy Covenant.

And this matter (to wit) Concerning Liberty of Conscience in the free exercise
of Godliness) has been of these late years in great Debate and Contest among
men in these Nations, and some have been of one Judgment, and others of a
contrary about this matter, and the Contention has arisen very high, even unto
Blood and loss of all; and is yet remaining undetermined in the minds and
Spirits of many people, which ought to be resolved in every heart through
conviction by sound Arguments of Truth and Divine reason; and men ought then to
obey the same according to inward Spiritual Conviction; and this Case ought not
to be determined by Carnal weapons, forcibly Compelling people in the Case by
the Impositions of Conquest, in a Violent way of outward Power: And since that,
This is a Case dubious, whether free Liberty of Conscience in the exercise of
Worship, or Imposition about the same is most worthy: I therefore upon this
necessity calling upon me, with my willingness to assist in such a work, would
add my mite and grain of Knowledge and Wisdom toward the resolving of such a
dubious and needful Case, And have taken this opportunity and occasion thus to
declare my mind, and shall leave the effect hereof to the purpose and
Providence of the Lord, who only is Wise, to work whatsoever he will, by
whomsoever he pleases; for he never yet limited himself to any one Instrument,
in the bringing forth, and accomplishing his purpose; however no man is to
dispute the Leadings and Commands of God, nor yet to measure his obedience to
him, by either objected, or real Consequence, in the fruits and effects of his
obedience: And this is that warrant (to wit the leadings of God) under the
Commission of which, the Servants of God do Act in their Obedience, and
disputes not the Authority nor the Consequence, but leaves the Issue of all
things to him that Commands.

The total sum of this matter (to wit, Liberty of Conscience) is very large,
and requires multitude of Words, and many arguments to unfold the Truth of it,
the virtue of it, and the Evil Causes, Works and effects of the Contrary; but
at this time I shall contract the sum into, and state it in this total head;
Whether it is not perfect Reason, Justice, and Equity, and that without all
Exceptions, that every man upon the Earth, be permitted in the free exercise of
Conscience, without any kind of Force put upon him by any man to the contrary,
to follow that Religion, and to live in such Faith, and perform such Worship to
God, as he dares trust his own Soul withal, and give account thereof before God
in the day of dreadful Judgment.

My Judgment is on the affirmative Part, in answer to this Question, and it is
my Judgment in the Fear and Spirit of the Lord, that it is perfectly
reasonable, Just and Equal, that every man in the World be permitted his
Liberty in the free exercise of his Conscience, and that without any force
imposed upon him to the Contrary, to follow that Religion, and live in that
Faith, and perform that Worship to God, with which he dares trust his own Soul
to the Salvation thereof; and the contrary is Unreasonable, Unjust and Unequal;
and this might be amplified in a large manner upon occasion: And this is not
only my Judgment alone, nor the false Fancy of a single Person, but it is the
Faith and Judgment of many more, and that not of Fools altogether, but of the
Wise, not only of some few men of our Age, but of many Ages past, whose
Principles were for the Toleration of Liberty in the exercise of Conscience in
matters Spiritual, as in this small Treatise following more at large appears; to
which, for proof of this Particular, and to second the Truth of my Judgment, I
do refer the serious and well considerate Reader; in which small Piece, he may
find the Judgments of diverse Persons asserted by their own Sayings, concerning
the very Case of Liberty of Conscience; and what esteem some Kings and Princes,
and Religious Men have had of the same; for this following Piece (to which I am
now prefacing) is no other than a certain sum of brief Collections, of the
Sayings of Emperors, Kings and Potentates, of former Ages, contracted into this
short method, for the better Intelligence of all that are inquiring about this
occasion; and such is mine affection to the present Contraction collected, that
I wish, that all the Rulers and Princes of our Age through the World, would
seriously read, and rightly study the same, and improve it to their own
advantage, in practicing the Sayings of their Grave and Wise Progenitors; and
oh that they would engross this small Piece in their Records, and enclose it in
their Closets, and use the same as Counsel and Instruction to themselves in the
Premises; the effect of it might prove happy to them, if their present Practice
would be answerable to the Intimations of the Ancients.

And this small Piece happily ariving the harbor of my hands, through the
tedious industry of the Collector, and through other passages of tempestious
Dangers, which it lay liable unto; I have transported it over a serious view,
and am affected with it unto my Commendation and approof; first of the matter
it self, and secondly of its Author's pains and Industry, in forming of it into
this method, in which it now appears; both of which I cannot but commend, and
do also herewith recommend to the View, Consideration, and Instruction of every
impartial Reader, who must, and that every man for himself, be judge of the
verity of what he Reads, even by the Light of the Spirit of Christ Jesus in his
own Conscience; to which this is singly committed.

E. B.
From my place of present restraint, the 27th. day of the 7th. Month, 1662.
THE TESTIMONY OF A CLOUD of WITNESSES, Who in their Generation have testified
against that horrible Evil of FORCING OF CONSCIENCE, and PERSECUTION about
Matters of RELIGION.
CHAP. I.
Concerning the Christian Religion, how it is not to be planted, established,
nor defended by Weapons, nor by Violence; and how it does not admit of any
forcing of Conscience.

A Certain Chancellor, speaking before the King and his Council at Orleans, in
praise of the Christian Religion, said, That those that went about to Establish
the same by Weapons, did against their Calling, which is (said he) to suffer
Violence, and not to do it.

Herein differ we (said Chrisostomus) from the Heathen, who do force and compel
by Violence, but the Christians they are patient and forbearing; neither has
our Religion had her beginning with Weapons (said he) neither has it been
maintained by Weapons.

It is not the manner of the Children of God to Persecute others to Death about
their Religion, but it has been, and is their Condition to be put to Death
themselves for the Testimony of the Truth; Moreover (said he) the shedding of
blood about Religion, is an evident token of Antichrist. Relig. Uryl. Page 192.

That Religion which goes about to set up a Sect, which seeks not Peace, but
speaks against all, and will suffer none equal with it, but will be alone
Master, and exercise Lordship over the faith of all others, and with the Civil
Powers, persecute those that are of another Opinion, by shedding their blood,
Banishing of them, and spoiling of their Goods, or with War and Fighting
Establish their own, such do thereby show that they are no right Shepherds of
the true Christians, but rather Wolves, Caines, Ishmaelites, and Esauhites,
whose hand is against all, and every man's hand against them.

The Kingdom of Christ (which is otherwise called the Christian Church, said a
certain Writer) has no earthly King, no Temporal Magistrate nor Governor, for
the Lord alone is King in his Kingdom; as he is Ordained to be the Head of the
Church, so he has committed that to none to Govern.

This King governs with the word of his Grace, the Soul and Conscience; here
are none compelled, for there is a Spiritual Freedom and willingness, there is
no Violence or contention; which was held forth by the Figure of Solomon's
Temple, where no Hammar, no Axe, or Iron instrument was to be heard, but
there is Love and Unity, Peace and Mercy among all his Children.

That is certain (said one) that all Religion is vain without true Godliness,
and it is little matter of what Opinion any man be in different points of
Religion, while he leads an ungodly life, and through that Doctaine which he
professes is not bettered, but bittered against his fellow Christian, and
hates, judges, and persecuteth him, as it often happens among them that
seem to be Religious.

The States of Holland, have confessed that the point of Religion in the
Government of a Land, was of great concernment; And further they said, that
they abominated forcing of Conscience, otherwise then with good Doctrine, good
works, and entreaties.

A certain Turkish Ambassador, complained to the King Emmanuel of Portugal, of
the King of Spain, for his compelling by Violence the Moors in his Dominion to
the Christian Faith or Religion, saying; it was not lawful neither for the
Christians, nor yet for the Mahomets to compel any man so, as that he should
forsake that Religion in which he had been Educated; And that he could not be
silent to see such things, to the injury and desolation of People in the
general, but must testify that it was to the prejudice of Mankind, and to the
disadvantage of Religion, etc.

Osorius declared, That it was neither according to the Law, nor according to
Religion, to compel the Jews and Moors to the Faith; And that none ought to
determine to restrain the free mind, for he affirmed, it was not the Will of
Christ, neither ought such things to be.

Anno 1455. The Turk wrote a Letter to the Pope Calixtus the third, wherein he
acknowledged, that Jesus Christ had been a great Prophet, yet (said he) he has
not commanded that any should compel People by Violence and Weapons, to believe
his Law.

Haywardus said, That the best Writers of that time did agree in one Opinion,
and with Tertulliano, Lactantio, Cassiodoro, Iosepho, etc. That People must
inform men to embrace Religion with reason, and not compel them by Violence.

I have for a long season determined (said one of the Kings of France) to
reform the Church, which without Peace (said he) I cannot do, and it is
impossible to reform or convert People by Violence.

I am King as a Shepherd (said he) and will not shed the blood of my Sheep, but
will gather them through the mildness and goodness of a King, and not through
the Power of Tyranny; And I will give them of the Reformed Religion, right
Liberty to live and dwell free, without being examined, perplexed, molested, or
compelled to any thing contrary to their Conscience; for they shall have the
free exercise of their Religion, etc. Vide Chron. Vande Onderg. 2. Deel. Page
1514.

And as concerning the planting, nourishing, and defending of the Christian
Religion, that is said to be the office and work of upright and sincere
Teachers; further (says he) it concerns the Magistrate to defend and protect
the Innocent and harmless People, who are Persecuted, Robbed, Prisoned, and
Tyrannically used.

Experience has sufficiently manifested, both in France, Germany, Bohemia, and
in the Low Countries, and elsewhere, that to make War about Religion, or
thereby to establish and defend it, is an absolute perverse and destructive
means, and that which is totally against the true Christian Religion: yet
notwithstanding some cry up Weapons, Weapons, but alas have we not seen, that
Weapons are stirred up against Weapons? And what is this reconciling slaughter,
with slaughter, and blood with blood, but the manner and custom of the Heathen?

CHAP. II.
Concerning the true and false Church; the Gospel and Religion: As also showing
the insufficiency of carnal Weapons in Spiritual Matters.

THe Church that is dispersed through the World, has the name of Christ her
Head, and is strengthened not with resisting, but with Suffering and Patience;
for the Gospel in the Primitive Church, was not Preached with Swords and an
Armed hand, but with Exhortation and Persuasion, Hist. Eccl. lib. 4 Chap. 26.

Barnardus said, The Church must not persecute as Wolves, but be Persecuted,
like as the Sheep are of the Wolves; And in this Calamity of the World, they
stand as Palm Trees through the Power of God, and grow and increase; so that
some have esteemed Sanguis Martirum est semen Ecclesiae, (i. e.) the blood of
the Martyrs to be the seed of the Church; for (said he) as one was put to
death, there came ten in his stead.

Luther said, That the hypocrites Church was to be known by its manners, whose
Image and figure was Esau, yet she boasted of God, and would be accounted his
Church, but lived wholly according to the World.

Further (said he) the true Church is not defended by a fleshly Arm, which
wicked Bishops especially use and cry unto, Thaesau. Page 622.

As heretofore, he that was born after the flesh, Persecuted him that was born
after the Spirit, even so is it now, etc. Consider these words of Paul (said
Castellio) Ishmael that was born after the flesh, Persecuted Isaac who was born
after the Spirit; even so now do the fleshly Persecute the Spiritual; But Abell
did not Persecure Cain, nor Lot the Sodomites, nor David Saul, nor the true
Prophets the false, nor Christ and his Apostles the Scribes and Pharesees,
although some of them might have done it, yet nevertheless they did it not.

So is it at this day, though the number of the Righteous be but small, who are
Persecuted of the wicked, yet sometimes they might injury their Persecutors,
but they are so far from doing that, that they are rather helpful to them, and
do seek their Salvation.

The false Church is grounded more upon men then upon Christ, and she
Persecuteth those that live Righteously according to the Word of God, and such
as reprove her for her failings.

Damascenus said, that the Gospel had been Preached in all the World, but did
not conquer its opposers with Weapons, Arms, or Fighting, but a few unlearned,
confounded the Wise ones of the World.

Oh (said Boudaert) that the Bishops were so well experienced in the Word of
God, that they would rather with Reason seek to bring them that go astray to
the right way, then to compel them by Corporal punishment to adhere unto their
Elect.

It is impossible (said Luther) that the Church of Christ should be, or should
stand without bloodsheding, for the Devil who is an Enemy of God's Church, is
also a Liar and a Murderer, yet the Church has always increased in blood,
said He; in the Colloq.

Sanguine mundata est Ecclesia, Sanguine cepit
Sanguine succrevit, sanguine finis erit.
Ian Monliu, the Bishop of Valence affirmed, That it was an Error to molest the
public Peace with Weapons, under pretense of Religion; a thing (says he)
which has been always abhorred by the Ancients.

For Wars and compulsary punishments, have never been the means to bring to
Unity; For Wars and cruelty tend to the destroying both of Body and Soul, even
of those, who peradventure might otherwise have been gained through love and
gentleness, for that counsel which tends to cruelty is worse then the desease;
yet notwithstanding, it is the manner of such Bishops to plead for Weapons as
have lost the Spiritual Sword of Peter, and therefore (said he) do they now
make that Sword their Defense, which he drew against the servant of the High
Priest. Chron. vande Rel. uriih. page 123, 124.

Anno 1579. The States of Holland said, That this they observed, finding it by
true experience, (viz.) dat gewelt end wapenen luttel helpen tot
verbreijdinghe end behoudenisse der Religien (i. e.) That violence and Weapons
availed little in spreading, and maintaining Religion; And further said they,
as we would not have that men should do violence to our consciences, neither
will we do violence to the consciences of others; for we are not to do that to
another, which we would not have another to do unto us.

The Prince of Orange said, We are not so unexperienced in the Doctrine of the
Christian Religion, as that we do not know, that all those ties of Conscience
wreathed or turned of men, are to no purpose to bind man before God: People
should not think it strange, nor therefore take up Arms (said he) because that
many of the Inhabitants of this Country are become of another opinion, and
simply declare themselves, yea against the Will of the Magistrates, which thing
the Histories do testify not to be new, but that such differences have been in
the World in many Monarchies heretofore.

To the same purpose did the States of Holland testify, (viz.) how that
difference in doctrine was not strange in the Church, but said they, it is
better rectified through forbearance, then through devision, Inde Apolog. 1581.
fol. 15.

CHAP. III.
Concerning cruel Laws against Heretics, how the Bishops and Clergy
heretofore have been the cause of them; who are the cause of tumults; the
necessity of just Liberty, and the good effect thereof.

IN the year 553. the Pope Palagius instituted first of all, That Heretics and
Apostates should be forced by external compulsion, etc. Clemens the fifth made
Laws that Heretics should be burned; Gerandus Naviomagus shows, how that
the Laws for putting of Heretics to death, came not by the free will of the
Emperors, but through the earnest importuning of blood-thirsty Bishops, whose
constant recourse was a burden to the Emperors, so that finally they obtained
what they desired; but when the Clergy could not prevail with one Emperor,
they excluded him out of Italy, excommunicated him, brought him in suspicion,
freed the Subjects from the Oath, and stirred them up against the Power; And
thus have the Clergy handled when they could not have their wills.

And it might be plenteously manifested out of the Histories, how that it has
been blood-thirsty Bishops with others of the Clergy, that have provoked Kings,
and the Potentates of the Earth to cruelty, and who have counseled them to
make bloody Laws, like the Bishop Nestorius, who in his Sermon spoke unto the
Emperor and said, O Emperor give me a Land cleansed of Heretics, and I will
give thee Heaven; help me against the Heretics, and I will help thee to subdue
the Persians thy Enemies, etc. Yet it does not appear that upright and sincere
Teachers have sought the defense or help of the Emperors or Kings against
Heretics, but it is evident that banishing and persecuting to death about
Religion, came not from the example of the Righteous, but rather from the
Heathen, and from Arius, Nestorius, Palagius, and their Proselytes.

There was a certain man that complained unto the Prince of Orange, saying,
That it was sufficiently known, that since the days of the Apostles, that
hurtful and noisome Plague has reigned and had the Dominion in the Church, (
viz.) that the greatest part of the Divines and Clergy, have assumed more
Authority and Power to themselves (yea and have taken it by force) then ever
God the Father gave them; And the aforesaid Prince observed, how they sought to
usurp Authority over the Conscience, and to bring People in subjection to their
Laws and Institutions.

There are some Teachers (said a certain wise man) that are exceeding cruel,
angry, passionate, full of Covetousness and Pride, who judge and reject all
things but their own, and would have such punished and put to death as do not
agree with them, and conform unto them; Another sort there are that are Meek,
Patient, Gentle and Humble, who bear all things, and hope all things, and will
compel none to their Religion.

Brassius said, That they that have a right Evangelical Doctrine and Faith,
persecute none, but are persecuted themselves; it is true Paul said, we should
reject a Heretic after the first and second Admonition; but he said not, that
we should Banish him out of the City or Country.

Consider once, said Adrianus, and see if the Heretics have not always
persecuted the Righteous; but where do you find that false Prophets and false
Teachers have been persecuted of the World, which does always love that which
belongs to it, and vilify, curse, kill and murder that which Christ has
chosen; for that which he chooses is not of the World: And now is Christ and
his Disciples (said he) esteemed of the World as Heretics, Seducers,
Uprore-makers; and the Seducers, Heretics, and they that rise up against the
Lord, and his Anointed, they are by the World called Christians.

The true Christians have been always persecuted of the World, not because
they have deserved it, but because they have not been conformable to their
false Doctrines, false Sacraments, their Vanity and Superstition.

It is the manner of the false Teachers (said a certain writer) to cry out
against those that teach any thing contrary to them; for say they, They make
Tumults among the People; and this with other things they charge upon those
that reprove them, when they themselves are the most tumultuous; for if they
did not stir up the Magistrates and People to Persecution and shedding of
blood, there would not be such Tumults among the People.

Moreover the contention and Tumults that are among men, proceed not from them
that serve God in the exercise of their Religion according to their Conscience,
but from such as will not suffer that, but with Violence will usurp Authority
over the Faith of others.

The Histories do testify, how that the Mallady wherewith several Emperors,
Kings, and Princes have been perplexed, could nor be cured, nor perfect Peace
and Rest enjoyed, nor true Obedience and Subjection maintained to Magistracy,
except they gave Liberty of Conscience to their Subjects; wherefore some of
them suffered themselves to be thereunto persuaded by their Subjects.

Anno 1601. In the Land of Cleave, there was a notable Reformation and
Tolleration in Religion; For there it was decreed, that from henceforth, no man
should be adjudged unfit for places of Office, for his different judgment in
Religion; which did occasion much trust and Peace, and did free the People from
all Persecution in Spiritual matters.

It has been formerly said* that when a Prince comes so far, that between two
parties he defends one party with Weapons, and oppresses the other with
Weapons, that then he gets the name of a Tyrant, and robs the Land of its
welfare, and through his own Power weakeneth his own might, and makes the same
open for an Enemy. Merck-tyck: Page 57.

CHAP. IV.
The evil Effects of Forcing of the Conscience; what it is; Their Folly shown,
that would have the Magistrates to Force People; How the Old Fathers and
Ancient Christians heretofore have witnessed against it; and what other Means
they used.

THis do most Histories testify ( viz.) That the Distractions, Uproars, and
many more Inconveniences have been chiefly occasioned through severe
Proclamations, cruel Proceedings, and Persecution about matters of Religion,
and Forcing of Conscience, which is plenteously to be found in several
Chronicles; but especially in the Chronicles of the overthrow of the Tyrants,
Printed at Hoorn, in North Holland, Anno 1620.

Forcing of Conscience is said to be this (to wit) When any Compels Men to do
any thing which is contrary to their Conscience, or to abstain from such
Exercises as they in Conscience esteem to be profitable and necessary to their
Salvation; one of these two is that which is commonly called forcing of
Conscience, against which the Martyrs since the Days of the Apostles have
testified, and have manifested it clearly to be an unfitting thing, as might be
shown at large out of Histories, Books of Martyrs, Apologies, Remonstrations,
etc.

Maximillian the Emperor, told Hendricus the King of France, That there was no
Sin so great (in his account) as to do Violence to the Conscience; And that
those that went about to conquer the same, thinking to gain Heaven, did often
lose that they had upon Earth.

It is well known, that many are of Opinion, that it is very necessary that the
Magistrate compel by Force and Violence the unwilling to the Faith, to the end
that they may come of themselves as they imagine: But said Erasmus, Most men
are so disposed, that they will rather be led then compelled, and that by
Entreaties more may be obtained than through Cruelties.

Those that are ignorant of the drawings of the Father (said a Wise man) would
have Magistrates to draw by violence; such, as do not only remain Ignorant of
the Drawings of the Father, but also others that are in the Truth, they would
have drawn to their dead Inventions, as if they would conform so soon as they
are punished: But I suppose (says he) that those that would otherwise come of
themselves voluntarily, through Punishments are terrified away; As the Fish in
the Water that come voluntarily to the Bait and Net, but when People would
compel them, they fly. The truth of this, can Geneva, Savoy, and other Places
witness, said the Author.

Chrisostomus said, That in Heavenly matters, People must use no Violence; for
says he, These that use Violence, estrange men most of all from their
Religion; instancing an Example in West India, of the Spaniards Tormenting a
Casique or Lord, (so called) and one of the Clergy seeking by his Preaching to
convert him to the Faith, told him of Heaven and Hell, etc. Then he asked the
Clergyman, Where he and the Spaniards should be? he said in Heaven; then said
the other, Let me continue in Hell, not being willing to be with such cruel
People: Bartolomeus delas casas Lactantius dixit, non est opus vi et injura
quia Religio cogi non potest; verbis potius quam verberibus ves agenda est, ut
sit voluntas. Nihil est enim tam voluntarium quam Religio, in quasi animus
sacrificantis aversus est, jam sublata, jam nulla est.

Augustinus said, He did not approve of the Emperors Compelling any by
violence, contrary to their Conscience; and he with Chrisostomus, together with
several others of the Ancient Writers, inferred from the 13th. of Matthew, that
men should do no Violence to Heretics neitheir compel any to the free Faith,
seeing God would have a willing unforced Heart. Chron. van de urijh. der, Rel.
2. deel, page 17.

There were some in a certain National Synod, that did much endeavor to stir
up the civil Powers to compel all People by Fines, or other politic
Punishments, to come to hear the Sermon; but others bare Testimony against such
politic Corrections, as to punish by Fines, Imprisonments, etc. which they
esteem unfitting to be introduced into the Church, being they were inconsistant
with the Christian Long-Suffering and Meekness, and for the which they had no
Example neither in the Old nor New Testament. Anno 1619.

Calvin said, That the Apostle gave to understand, that to exercise Authority
over ones Faith, was in no wise just nor tolerable; yea, (says he) it is
Tyranny in the Church, for Faith ought to be free from all Subjection of men.

Though some are yet of that Opinion, that it is lawful for the Magistrates to
compel People contrary to their Consciences, by corporal Punishments, yea even
to the Death, for to make them keep silent, or confess things contrary to their
minds: Yet most of the Old Fathers have alleged, that it has not been lawful
for the Magistrates to touch the Conscience, as to force it in matters of
Religion. Merck-teyck. Chap. 4. 2 Deel. page 132.

The Ancient Christians did not approve of any External Compulsion, but only by
Entreating, by good Living, with Exhortations, Doctrins, Informations and
endeavors, they labored to convince People, and through the Word of Truth,
they sought to bring People Captive so under the Obedience of Christ; and if
the like means now do not prevail, then no humane invention through doing
Violence will, for that will rather make them worse, as heretofore it has done.

The most Violence that can be done by man, cannot compel or change the vain
infidelity of the mind; how should that then possibly move or alter them, that
are unmoveably established in the Eternal Truth, who will not in any wise be
brought to receive things that are damnable, nor to forsake that which they
esteem to be necessary to their Salvation.

CHAP. V.
A Chancellours Testimony. Their Folly that would force Men, and the Fruits
thereof. How Just Liberty would preserve Unity. And how they that Force others,
would not be forced.

TThe Chancellor of France said in the great Assembly of the three States
before the King, First, That the absurdity of the Romish Church was the Cause
of Heresy. Secondly, That evil Remedies had strengthened the same. Thirdly,
That the Weapons of Love, Prayer, and Information with the Word of God, were
fit for such a Battle. Fourthly, That a good Life Preached more than Words.
Fifthly, That the Sword could do little against the Spirit, except it was to
undo both Body and Soul. In the Comm. Fol. 132.


Are they not carnal and violent Ishmaelites (said one) who would Violently
Force rational Men (often to humane and damnable Opinions) as Horses and Mules,
and not with kindness entreat, and only instruct with the Truth, and invite to
the needful spiritual knowledge of the Truth, and true Worship, as reasonable
and free men.

Humani juris et naturalis potestatis est unicuique, quod putaverit colere, nec
alij prodest aut obest alterius Religio; sed nec Religionis est cogere
Religionem que sponte non vi suscipi debeat.

Erasmus said, the Divines not relying upon that Power wherewith they ought to
be Armed, they make Violence their Refuge, as if men might be compelled to
believe otherwise than their Opinion.

When several of the Priests in the Low Country, Requested of the Prince and
States, that they would introduce Ordinances and Discipline according to their
Opinions; but the Prince and the States rejected their Requests, esteeming them
prejuditial both to Religion and Policy, when they observed the diverse Opinions
that were among the People, concluding it was the best (as many Politicians
have done) to preserve Unity among the People, to give Liberty at all, and to
compel none, Anno 1608. Edict. Fol. 27.

It has also been the judgment of many, That Forcing of Conscience has made
many Hipocrites, but no true Servants of God: Therefore ought men to strive
with the Word and Disputation, and to conquer with Reason, said Augustinus,
least that we make them Hypocritically Catholics, whom before we have known to
be manifest Heretics. Anno 1200.

The Chronicles do show, how that they that are, and have been but seemingly
Religious, do commonly join themselves to that Religion or Sect which is the
uppermost, whereby they may live in Ease, Honor and Fullness, and get profit
and preferment, through Places and Offices; instancing how that in England,
there were them in the Days of King Hendrick and Edward, that showed
themselves to be Protestants; and in the Days of Queen Mary Papists, and
Persecuted others to Death, and afterward in the days of Queen Elizabeth, got
again in the lap of the Protestant Church, and then persecuted the Papists;
vide the second part of the Chronicle of the overthrow of Tyrants, page 1502.

Arennius affirmed, That all Forcing of Conscience, though it was but a
forbidding of the Exercise which is esteemed by one or another to be necessary
to Salvation, was in no wise right nor fitting: He also affirmed, That through
Diversities of Religions, the Kingdom should not be brought into any
Disturbance.

The Ancient Reformed Protestants, termed that Forcing of Conscience, when they
were constrained to leave off the exercise of their Religion, saying, Car nous
privant de nostre Religion, on nous tiendroit en une continuele mort corporelle
and spirituelle. (i. e.) For to deprive us of our Religion, is to keep us in a
perpetual corporal and spiritual Death. Adding thereunto, how that they would
rather be put to Death, than be bereaved of the exercise of their Religion, etc.

Many have testified, and many do testify, that Forcing of Conscience is a
wicked destructive means, both for Soul and Body, against which the Martyrs
that have suffered have universally born Testimony.

Now (said a certain Wise Man) Let these consider, who do so much stir up the
Powers of the Earth to Force free minds against their consciences, whether they
would be forced by violence against their conscience, to embrace the Popes
Faith of Rome, with all its Superstitions, or that which is worse, and that
upon pain of death: Let such then judge (said he) how hard it is to be Forced
against ones conscience to any Form of Worship, which is not in the Spirit and
Truth, etc.

If any durst speak freely what he beleiveth, and thinks in his heart (says
Castellio) he should say that he thinks, and believes that such Forcers are
absolute Tyrants; and that whereunto they press him is not good: And if
formerly he had any inclination thereunto, that he through such violence comes
wholly to abhor it.

The Ancient Protestants testified, that that Religion which was defended with
cruelty, was not grounded upon the Word of God.

CHAP. VI.
A shift of the Popes; a humane invention; how the Spiritual Kingdom, and true
Church, subsisteth and is Defended by Spiritual Weapons; and how Persecution
answers not the end of Persecutors.

THE History shows, how that this is one of the Popes Maxim's, (viz.) that
when he sees the Spiritual Weapons are not sufficient for him, then does he fly
unto the carnal, therewith to help himself: Int Duii^se, 244.

And others have been and are of that opinion, That Religion could not be
preserved without the Magistrates Sword, therefore understood they, that they
were to be cried unto for help, as many do now.

But Ireneus Philaletius said, That this was but a humane invention of the
Natural understanding, which would gladly change the Nature of the Church of
Christ; but it is in vain said he.

The States of Holland said, That the true Ministers of Christ, who did
perfectly trust in the Lord, had no External Sword, nither did they call unto
any civil Power for Protection; but they used the Sword of the Spirit, which
is the living Word of God, with which they defended the Church, etc. vide urede
Handel van Colen, Page 198.

Barnardus said, That the Kindome of Christ was Spiritul, and as it was builded
by Spiritual Virtues, so was it spread, preserved, and established with
Spiritual Weapons; for its Enemies were and are Spiritual, Ephesians. 6.11. and 2.2.

Lactantius said, If you will with blood, with evil, and with torments defend
the Worship, it shall not thereby be defended, but polluted, Lib. 5. Chap. 20.

The Apostles had not the assistance of Emperors, Kings, Princes, nor Lords;
but had even the whole World against them, (said a certain Wise Man) wherefore
how can this stirring up, and instigating of Magistrates be Evangelical, or
according to the Gospel? Or how can this work of tumultuous Teachers, bring
honor to Gods Word and his Truth? Who has heretofore defended the Church of
Christ, was it defended by Pilate? Or was the Church of the Apostles no Church?
What coercive Power or outward Protection had they? Or what external Power, or
outward defense had their Church in the Beginning? And cannot the true Church
now subsist, with that which she had in the Beginning?

And it is evident, that many who have suffered much Persecution for the
exercise of their conscience, have been thereby strengthened, and have therein
multiplied; therefore it is apparent, that the fruit of Persecuting to death in
matters of Religion, is wholly contrary to the determination of Persecutors.

Castellius said, That Paul strove with Spiritual Weapons, and thereby overcame
hundreds; but we (alas said he) are together by hundreds to put to death one
single man, and appear for Christ with fleshly Weapons, to the end that People
might understand, that we are stripped of the Spiritual Weapons, and will have
a fleshly Christ.

But seeing the Apostles, who Planted the Church were satisfied with their
Spiritual Weapons; it is then evident, that they who make use of carnal
Weapons, confide not sufficiently in the Spiritual, which they would confide in
no doubt if they had them, seeing they are alsufficient, as shall appear at the
coming of the Lord; who will conquer Antichrist his greatest Enemy, with no
other Weapon, then with the Sword of his Mouth.

Constantinus the Emperor said, That it was enough that he preserved the unity
of the Faith, that he might be excusable before the judgment Seat of God, and
that he would leave every one to his own understanding, according to the
account he will give before the judgment Seat of Christ; hereto may we stir up
People (said he) not compel them, beseech them to come into the unity of the
Christians; but to do violence to them, we will not in no wise.

[ Nota] Herein was Constantinus much commended, because that he tolerated
every one to believe, and to serve God as he was persuaded in his own heart,
esteeming his gentleness and mercy more available, then severe Proclamations;
and in this particular he was not deceived, Sabast. Frank. Chron. fol. 127.

The Christian Religion (said the States of Holland) is a great Mystery, for
the furtherance of which God does not make use of wicked Soldiers, nor of Bow,
nor of Sword, but his Spirit, and the Shepherds that are sent by him; further
they said it was not their intention to compel any to their Religion, etc.

CHAP. VII.
How the Inquisitioners and Clergy have stirred up the Powers to Persecute; and
what fair pretenses Persecutors have had; how dangerous it is to root out the
Tares before the time; and wherein the Ancient Protestants have been more Noble
than the Clergy now.

IT is a common thing with many, to accuse those with troubling of the Churches
peace, and with disturbing of the public peace, (said a certain wise Man) who
teach otherwise than the Church, or who speak any thing against the Clergy, or
dispute with any of their restless Priests, or hold their Meetings apart,
though it be in all civility and stilness.

In like manner has the Inquisitioners and the Clergy (said he) stirred up the
Emperor, the King of Spain and of France, to terrible Persecution, laying it
upon their consciences to quit themselves severely against the Heretics, if
they would escape the Lords reproof, though most of their Subjects and Land
should perish. And when the Clergy had prevailed with them, then they declared
in their Proclamations and Edicts, That their intent was only the Glory of
God, and the Salvation of the Heretics Souls, and to prevent the peoples being
drawn to any cursed Error or Sect, but that they should continue in subjection,
and in the old observations of the Mother, the H. Church, and H. Christians
Faith and Sacraments, as appears from their Proclamations, Annis. 1538, 1546,
1560, 1564.

Erasmus said, How that sometime it comes to pass, that those who with more
fury, then with good understanding carry on matters, do sometime not only root
out the Wheat with the Tares (which Christ has forbidden) but also in place of
rootting out the Tares do root out the Wheat; seeing they Judge before they
have understanding, or will make that odious, which is well spoken by
perverting of it; And they will have that to be a Zeal for Religion, and a
detesting of Heresy, when it is the only destroying of Godliness and Unity.
Chron. van de Rel. urijh. 2 Deel, page 33.

Augustinus said, Some disturbed the peace of the Church, while they went about
to root out the Tares before the time; and through this Error of blindness
(said he) are they themselves separated so much the more from being united unto
Christ.

Retnaldus testified, That he who with Imprisoning and Persecuting seeks to
spread the Gospel, and greaseth his hands with blood, shall much rather be
looked upon for a wild Hunter, then a Preacher, or a Defender of the Christian
Religion.

Erasmus said, That the World had common Laws for to punish offenders; but the
Christian meekness must rather use diligence to reform men, then to judge them.

In the beginning of Reformation (says the Chron.) the Church gloried of the
Truths Weapons, and desired that those that had any thing to say concerning
their Doctrine, should freely reprove them, and they would defend the same with
the holy Scripture; Exhorting people in their Pulpits, and freely proffering to
confer or Dispute with any, and every one had then freedom.

But now will not the Clergy (said the same Author) be spoken against, who sit
at ease in Pride, Idleness, and Fullness; and if any do speak against them, they
will so much as in them lie, cause such to suffer, charging them with breaking
the Peace of the Church, or the Peace of the Kingdom; and with railing words,
will evade entering into a sober discourse, thereby manifesting the badness of
their Cause, and the guiltiness of their Conscience; and then seek to defend
themselves more by the Power of the Magistrate, then with Gods Word and Godly
testimony; and in the mean time prejudice others, by procuring their own rest
and peace; but surely this is neither just, right, nor equal.

Further (says he) in the mean time those men would have a triumphant Church
upon the Earth, but no suffering; neither will they suffer any trouble,
difficulty, or opposition, but do make the Magistrate believe, that such things
incurr trouble, Uproar, Disturbance, etc. Yet nevertheless some of the Clergy
themselves have put forth sundry Treatises, wherein they showed how that the
Peace and Welfare of the Land might be preserved, though several Religions in
the Land were tolerated.

Quand a la permission de S'assembler es Temples, Sire, aucunc division and
tumulte ne'n adviendra enter vous Subjects, mais bien un repos public and
extinction de toute Sedition Populaire.

As touching the permitting the assembling together in Temples, no manner of
Division or Tumult can from hence arise among your Subjects, but rather a
Public rest and extinguishing of all Popular Sedition.

For the Chronicle also shows, how that the disturbance and trouble comes
not through those that live orderly according to their Conscience and the word
of God, and accordingly exercise their Religion in Stilness, but through those
who will not suffer this, nor bear others, but seek to have the Pre-eminence,
and to exercise Lordship over others, and therefore do they raise up
Persecution.

But the States of Holland testified, Dat waer vervolginghen Ziju, datter daer
al in roere is, maer waer geen en sijn al sijnder verscheijden Religien, dat
daer all saelren stilder sijn, so ^olr in onse vijden is bevonden, (i. e.)
That where there was Persecution, there was all in distraction; but where there
was none (though there were several Religions) there all things were the
quieter; as have been evident in our days, said they. Vide urede Handel van
Coln. fol. 53.

CHAP. VIII.
Concerning obedience to Magistrates; the vanity and evil of forcing of
Conscience; Certain Mixims asserted by many wise men, how Violence becomes not
the Ministers of the Gospel, neither has Christ nor his Apostles taught it,
nor practiced it.

CAlvin said, That those that are set over us must be obeyed, if that the
command of God be not thereby disobeyed, but if they lead us from Obedience to
God, and presumptuously strive against the Lord, then must they not be regarded
(said he) to the end that God with his Authority may retain the Pre-eminence.

The States of Holland, testified, That Subjects were not obliged in all
things, whether right or unright, to be subject to their Princes. Int plac.
Anno 1581. 2. Deel. fol. 12.

Prince of Orange being commanded by the King, when he departed out of Zealand,
to put many sober People to death, who were suspected concerning their
Religion, but therein he would not obey the King, knowing he could not do it
with a good Conscience, and also being assured, that it was better to obey God
than man.

Moreover (said a certain Writer) the truth with sad experience has learned
us, and plainly shown us, That forcing of Conscience and Persecuting about
Religion is not only in vain, but a direct contrary means, and a cause of
Sects and disturbances, and of many evils, as the Chroncles of Germany, France
and the Low Countries, do abundantly testify.

The States of Holland also affirmed, That it was not possible to find out
means of any good and certain Peace, otherwise then by Tollerating more then
one Religion.

Experientia satis edocti sumus, ferrum, flammas, exilum, proscriptiones,
irritasse potius, quam sannasse morbum menti inhaerentem.

The King of France was moved with great Zeal (said a certain Bishop) to ordain
great Torment and punishment for the Heretics, thinking thereby to root out
their Opinion, and to Unite the People together in one Opinion; but in his
determination (says he) he was deceived; So was also Duke d'Alba, who for five
or six years together, endeavored with exceeding great Tyranny, to maintain
the Law of the King in the Low-Countryes. In Het. 36. van de standt der Rel.
fol. 190.

Now notwithstanding the great Persecution that is and has been about
Religion, these following Maxims are asserted and owned by most men; 1. That
Faith is the gift of God. 2. That Relgion ought to be free. 3. That no Religion
by Violence can be imprinted in the Heart. 4. That Forcing makes men
Hypocrites. 5. That it is impossible to preserve the Land in Peace, without
giving Liberty for the free exercise of Religion. 6. That in one Land or City,
there may be well more Religions than one. 7. That it is a seed of Contention
and Uproar among the People, when men contrary to Promise, and to what they
ought, resist one another in their Religion. 8. And that prohibiting the free
exercise of Religion, tends openly or manifestly to the destruction of men,
which happens, when one party with Violence seeks to root out another
Religion.


Nevertheless (said the Author) it is evident, that many foolish Zealots will
obstinatly run on in that destructive path of forcing Conscience, and thereby
bereave others of the Exercise of their Religion.

Fredericus the King of Bohemia said, That in these last times there were many
different Opinions risen among men in matters of Faith and Religion, but
according to what is contained in the Scripture, and according to the settled
Foundation of Doctrine (said he) men will not be urged, compelled or forced in
their Conscience; for when such forcing has been attempted, it has had an
evil end; and in the chiefest Kingdoms and Provinces, there has been a
remarkable change made; for through this means, Cities come to be more ruined
than benefitted. Vide his Declaration Printed in the Hagne, Anno 1619.

It does in no wise become the Preachers of the Gospel, and Ministers of the
New Testament, to deal in Matters of Faith by Force, Violence and Tyranny (said
a wise Man) or thereunto to help, Counsel, or Advise; but with Prayer, with the
Word of God, and with the Sword of the Spirit.

Lambertus testified, saying, Truly things are not well, neither do men right,
when they go about to remove Heretics and Errors with Weapons; for the Truth
and certainty of the Christian Doctrine, ought not to depend upon the uncertain
Effects of War: Therefore has neither Christ himself nor his Apostles, taught
men to take up Arms against them that were reprobated from the Faith, as if
that were an external means for to rout out Errors, for the receiving or
spreading of Religion, which is through fear of Weapons, is more like unto
Mahometisme, than unto the Christian Religion.

Stephanus the King of Poland said, Our desire is, that all the Cities and
Inhabitants did praise one God unanimously; but it has been declared, that in
the latter Days Offenses shall come; therefore will not we compel any to
believe (said he) but will keep Peace and concord among the Contentious, that
contend about Religion, and defend every one in his Religion. Chronicle of the
Tyrants, second P. page 1326.

CHAP. IX.
How Judas Proselytes now do follow his footsteps; How Confusion and Uproar is
not occasioned in a Land through a just Toleration, but rather through want of
it; And how none ought to be Banished about Religion.

THe Histories shows, how that some of the Clergy has said, That the Princes
ought to kiss the Son, and to use their Power for to preserve and defend
Religion against all her Enemies, though their Lands should therefore be
spoiled: But the Son of God has never taught any man so to kiss him, though he
was so unkindly kissed of Judas, as many Betrayers do yet in his Members; yet
notwithstanding Christ nor his Apostles did not seek to deliver Judas over to
the Magistrates, but Judas sought to deliver Christ over to them: And so do
Judas Children at this day, deliver the true Christians (whom they falsely call
Heretics) into the Hands of the Earthly Powers.

And though some say, That People of different Opinions, cannot live together
in a Kingdom without continual contention; and therefore say they, must that be
prevented with Fire and Sword. But what though there be virtue and filthiness
in a Kingdom, good and bad men, which are one contrary to the other, one must
not therefore (said a wise Man) to prevent it, bring a whole Kingdom or Land
into Confusion, by stirring up the People one against another.

Again, the true Church (said he) has never helped her self with Persecution,
neither does she use any other Sword than God's Word, which she having and
keeping the Commands of God, prepares her self for to bear the Cross, and to
Suffer Persecution, but not to bring Suffering upon others.

Moreover it is evident, That in Dutchland, Poland, and in the Low-Countryes,
more Religions than one are Suffered, and yet there are not continual Uproars
and Tumults, as some imagine such Toleration would occasion in a Kingdom;
therefore may we conclude, that it is not the Toleration of more Religions than
one, which produces Uproar in a Kingdom, but rather the untowardness and
perverseness of them that seek to obstruct this Toleration.

Camerarius said, That it was groundless and irrational to say, that
Diversities of Opinions in matters of Religion do disturb the Polity; but on
the contrary, the Polity is disturbed, when any man with the Liberty of his
Opinion is not contented, but will molest and trouble others.

But some say, That every one in matters of Faith, are bound to obey the
Magistrates under whom they live, and to follow them, and that they are worthy
of Punishment who do it not.

But let such know (says the Author) that they do not only hereby condemn the
first Reformed Protestants, but also the true Prophets and Apostles, yea,
Christ himself, and all the Martyrs, and so justify their Persecutors and
Murderers; if not, then may not the Magistrates now, oppress a Church, or a
Religion, as many of the disorderly Clergy would gladly see (said he) and make
the Magistrates believe.

And it is to be observed, how that among the Jews there were many Sects, as
the Pharisees, Esseans, Galileans, Saduces, Samaritans, etc. who retained many
unwholesome Opinions, yet they were not so Persecuted, as now the false
Christians do Persecute one another.

The History shows, how that it has been sufficiently proved, That none
ought to Banish any about Religion that paid Tribute; yea, that the peaceable
Jews and Heathen ought not to be Banished out of the Land where they were born;
for that which they have, they possess through that right which is common to
all Nations; and to banish People, is said to be directly contrary to the Law
of Nature, and to the Commands of Love; for Kings and Princes so well as
others, Ought to do unto others as they would have others to do unto them, And
if they would not be Banished out of their Dominions, then should not they
Banish others; and Innocence becomes them as well as others, who ought to do
Evil to no man.

Les Princes qui se sont Gouvernez par douceur and clemence conjointe a
Justice, and qui ont use de moderation and debonnairete en verse leurs subjets
ont tousjours grandement prospere and longuement regne.

Mais au contraire, les Princes cruels, iniques, perfides and oppresseurs de
leurs subjets, sont incontinent tombez eux and leur estat en peril ^^ en totale
ruin, etc. par. N. M. Anno 1576.

Those Princes that have ruled by Gentleness and Clemency added to Justice, and
have exercised Moderation and Meekness toward their Subjects always, greatly
prospered and Reigned long.

But on the contrary, those Princes that have been Cruel, Unjust, Perfidious
and Oppressors of their Subjects, have soon fallen, they and their Estate into
danger, or total Ruin, N. M. 1576.

CHAP. X.
The Severity of a Popish Synod; The Disposition of the right Christians; How
Heresy is not slain through the Death of Heretics; and the evil consequence
of the Laws, which tend to the putting of Heretics to Death.

IN a General Synod holden at Rome, it was forbidden men to hold any Fellowship
with those they termed Enemies of Religion, neither were they in any thing to
assist them, which might tend to the preserving of their Life, and great things
were promised them that persecuted such, and inflicted punishment to the utmost
upon them. Vide Merula, page 772.

But the true Christians Persecute no man about Religion, Socrat. lib. 4. chap.
3. For the right Christians did always deal mercifully with them that were
Heretics indeed, and not Tyrannically by shedding of their Blood; but
Heretics and Infidels have been always cruel toward the Christians, with
Persecuting of them to Death.

When men with the Truth (said one) slays the lies of Heretics, then their
Bodies remain alive, and their Souls come to be cured; but when men put
Heretics to death, they do not slay the Heresy, but rather both Body and Soul.

Veritus said, Seeing Christ is a Lamb, whom you profess to be your Head and
Captain, then it behooves you to be Sheep, and to use the same Weapons which he
made use of, for he will not be a Shepherd of Wolves, and Wild Beasts, but only
of Sheep; wherefore if you lose the nature of Sheep (said he) and be changed
into Wolves or Wild Beasts, and use fleshly Weapons, then will you exclude your
selves out of his calling, and forsake his Banner, and then will he not be your
Captain.

Often does Chrisostomus show, how that the true Christians may not put any
Heretic to Death, nor with Violence Force him to the Faith; manifesting how it
is against the Scripture, Reason and Equity, that People should put men to
Death because of their Opinion or Ignorance, who otherwise are of a good Life
and Conversation.

Aug. Diligite homines, interficite Errores, sine sevitia pro veritate certate.

Where have thou ever read in thy days (said Menno) in the Writings of the
Apostles, that Christ or the Apostles ever cried out to the Magistrates for
their Power, against them that would not hear their Doctrine, nor obey their
Words? I know certainly said he, that where the Magistrate shall banish with
the Sword, there is not the right Knowledge, Spiritual Word, nor Church of
Christ; it is Invocare brachium seculare.

It is not Christian-like but Tyrannical, said D. Philipsen, to Banish and
Persecute People about Faith and Religion, and they that so do, are certainly
of the Pharisaical Generation to whom Stephen said, you stiff-necked and
uncircumcised in heart and ears, you do always resist the Holy Ghost, Acts
7.51, 52.

When a King or a Prince gives forth a Law, by virtue of which Murderers are
to be put to Death, then all the People that own and obey this Law, will do
their best in helping to put them Death, whom they know assuredly to be
Murderers; even so (said a certain Writer) when the Bishops, Presbyters, or any
other writes or publishes, that People ought to put Heretics to Death, then
must it needs follow (said he) that the Papists shall do their best to put the
Protestants to Death, and the Protestants the Papists, the Episcopal men the
Presbyterians, and the Presbyterians the Episcopal men; for every Sect
supposes themselves to be the right Believers, and the rest they esteem to be
Heretics; and then should Mannasseh with Ephraim, and Ephraim with Mannasseh,
rise up against the Jews, yet should not the Wrath of the Lord be appeased.

Castellius testified, how that some of the Divines (so called) when they
meddled with Heretics, they judged them all to be Apostates, false Prophets,
and Blasphemers, to the end, that thereby they might the more vilify and
oppress those that differed from them; which (says he) has been the manner
of all Scribes and Pharisees.

But who can produce a Law out of the holy Scripture, that requires Heretics
to be put to Death? it is true (said he) there are Laws against Blasphemers; but
what is this to the purpose, except it can be proved that Heretics are
Blasphemers? for who will believe that all these who at this day are crlled
Heretics, are Blasphemers and ungodly Men? who are so foolish as to believe
the Pope (who judges the Protestants to be Blasphemers, because they differ
from him in point of the Sacrament) that they therefore are Blasphemers? and
that the Baptists are Blasphemers, because they differ from him in their
Baptism.

Aeontius said, It cannot be that a Heretic should reject his Error when he
will, except that some reason constrain him thereunto; Wherefore then said he,
do you trouble such a miserable man, for to make him Lie, and to provoke him
more and more to Sin against the Lord? surely men cannot deny but that it is an
Invention of Satan (said he) for to Force the Servants of God to deny Christ
for fear of Punishment: Further (said he) people must seek to conquer such men,
not through Threatenings, but it must be through the Power of certain
Testimonies and living Manifestations.

CHAP. XI.
The Popes Counsel and Entreaty; The sad Effects of cruel Proclamations; How
Inconsistant it is with the Life of Christ to Persecute; Under what pretense
the true Believers have Suffered; And how Persecution cannot effect the thing
for which it is intended.

Heresy is a Greek Word, and signifies a Sect or an Opinion, and they that
did stiff-neckedly cleave unto evil Sects were called by the Greeks (...), by
the Latins Pertinaces, and by us are they called Heretics. Now it is an easy
matter to accuse a man of being a Heretic, and of retaining Opinions contrary
to his Conscience; but it is a difficult thing, sufficiently to prove and
manifest the same; for all the Martyrs that have Suffered for the name of
Christ, have been accused with being Heretics, even as the Innocent Lamb's of
Christ that Suffer now for his Names sake, are accused at this day.

Pope Paul the third, counseled and entreated the Emperor Charles, and King
Ferdinandus, to compel the Protestants to forsake their Error. Anno 1545.

There can be no greater Suffering and Sorrow (said a certain wise Man) brought
upon such as fear the Lord, than there may by compelling them through
Punishment, to do that which is against their Conscience, or to leave off such
an Exercise as they are persuaded in their Conscience is necessary to their
Salvation.

The History do show, how that in the Low Countries, there were betwixt
eighteen and nineteen thousand Men put to Death, upon their resisting of the
Inquisition, being brought into those Parts.

Moreover, the Chronicle testifies, That in the Days of Charles the Emperor,
there were above fifty thousand Men put to Death by Proclamations; some
Proclamations did forbid upon pain of Death, Peoples holding any Fellowship
with them that fled, or were Banished about Religion, or of assisting them with
Money or Provision; yea, one was Hanged (says the Chronicle) because he
entertained his own Son, Merck-tyck. page 77.

Now, if any Emperor, King, Prince, or Superiors, should through the Counsel
of the Divines or Clergy, go the same way that this Emperor Charles went with
his Son King Phillip, who were Destroyed with their Land and People; who may
not so truly, as certainly Prophecy and warn such Powers, who wilfully take
such a Course (said the Author) that they also will bring themselves with their
Land, Religion, and Subjects to Ruin?

M. Publ. Alienis malis cautior. Seneca, 21.

Some are, and have been of that Opinion, That there are no People that ought
to be more severely Punished than Heretics, Blasphemers, and Contemners of
Religion.

But what said Erasmus, Is it a greater Transgression to be a Christian than to
be a Murderer of Father or Mother, etc. But such things shall the Devil raise
up against the Gospel; and oftentimes they are called Heretics, who do so
little contemn Religion, that they will die for their Religion; and therefore
it appears (said he) that they are no despisers of Religion, who are so given
up to Suffer, for to keep a good Conscience before God.

Likewise, He appears to be free from Blasphemy, who will rather die, than by
embracing Error will be freed from Death or Persecution; such appear to be free
from Blaspheming God willingly.

And as concerning the Life of Christ, that has been always so meek, that it
is as possible to find an Example of a Lambs devouring of a Wolf, as of that
putting a Heretic to Death by the Sword; and they in whom his Spirit dwells
are minded like him: But as concerning Persecutors, while in the New Testament
they find nothing but Meekness, which is directly contrary to their Persecution
(said he) therefore are they necessitated to fly unto the Old, by which they
suffiiently manifest whose Spirits Children they are.

This does the multitude of the Martyrs testify with their Innocent Blood, how
that the true Believers, have Suffered as Heretics, Blasphemers,
Uproar-makers, Contemners of Religion, and Seducers, etc.

Yet it is a fast and certain Rule (says the History) That where the Spirit of
God and his truth has place, that there must all Consultations of Persecutions
cease; then much more the thing it self, knowing that their Weapons are wholly
Spiritual (even as God and his whole Kingdom is) which must be used and Felt,
and keep the Authority; for there are (says he) Weapons of Love, of Prayer, of
Peace, and of Patience, whereby the inward Understanding of the Heart and Soul,
may be brought unto the right Way: But what is Flesh and Blood with fleshly
Weapons, alas (said he) in no wise fitting, but like unto the World, which run
on in the broad Way to Destruction.

Moreover it is evident enough, for in the whole Europa, Experience has
learned it, that the cruel Condemning, Banishing, Persecuting and putting
Heretics to Death about Matters of Faith and Religion, is an absolute contrary
means, for to rout out Heretics, for to unite the divided Christendom, and to
quiet its Disturbances.

And it has also been found by Experience, that External Peace and Unity, can,
and may be better preserved in a Kingdom or Commonwealth, through forbearance,
and by Suffering of contrary Opinions (through Love and Christian Meekness)
than by Banishing and Persecuting People to Death, about Matters of Faith and
Religion.

CHAP. XII.
When the Bishops began to seek the help of the Magistrate; How it then
Ministered Offense; What Punishment the Church heretofore had (according to the
Will of the Lord) for Heretics; And how difficult a thing it is for
Magistrates to judge aright in Matters of Heresy.

ERasmus Testified, That for above 400. Years, the Bishops did not seek the
help of the Emperors against the Heretics; and when they did seek it against
the insufferable Wickedness of the Donatisten, it did not please the good
Party, that they should then seek the help of the Civil Power; for they then
Judged, that it became not the Bishops to use any other Weapons, or to have any
other Help, than the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, although the Evil
was incurable, yet would they have excluded it by Excomunication, which is said
to be the greatest Judgment or Punishment that then the Church had.

Now it is confessed, that the Lord Jesus Christ has manifested his Will by
that which is left upon record, and which was delivered by his Apostles, who
have shown us how we should carry our selves.

1. Toward them that resist the Truth, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. Chap. 3.6.8. Chap.
4.15. 2. Toward Back-sliders, 1 Timothy 1.20. 3. Toward them that deny the
Resurrection, 2 Timothy 2.16, 18. 4. Toward them that Teach what they ought not,
Titus 1.11, 13. 5. Toward them that cause Divisions and Offenses, Romans 16.17.
6. Toward false Prophets, Mat. 7.15. Chap. 16.11, 12. 7. Toward them that
Walk Disorderly, 2 These. 3.6. 8. Toward Pharisaical Hypocrites, that have the
Form of Godliness, and not the Power, Luke 12.1. 2 Timothy 3.5. 9. Toward false
Brethren, 1 Cor. 5.11. 10. Toward Heretics, Titus 3.10. 11. Toward
Fornicators, and Idolaters, 1 Cor. 5.11. 12. Toward the Disobedient, 2 Thessalonians.
3.14. 13. Toward the Stiff-necked, Mat. 18.17.
Thus it appears from the Scripture of Truth, that it was not the Will of our
Lord and Lawgiver, That they should be punished with severe Punishments in
Prisons, or by Banishment, or by having their Goods spoiled, or by being put to
Death; nay, but he has rather commanded, 1. That with Meekness we should
Instruct, 2 Timothy 24.25. 2. Deliver unto Satan, 1 Timothy 1.20. 3. Sharply to
rebuke, Tit. 1.11, 13. 4. To avoid them, Romans 16.17. 2 These. 3.6. 2 Ioh. 10.11.
5. To beware of them, Mat. 7.15. 6. To have no fellowship with them, 1 Cor.
5.11. 7. To reject them, Tit. 3.10. 2 Timothy 4.15. 8. To let them alone, Mat.
15.14. 9. To esteem them as Heathens or Publicans, Mat. 18.17.


Thus we see the Laws that the Lord Jesus Christ has ordained for their
Punishment, to the end, that the Fruits hereafter mentioned might be brought
forth; for God wills not (as many blood thirsty Men) that they should die and
perish; but the Will of God is; That they all should repent, 2 Pet 3.9. 2 Timothy
2.25. That they cease from men's Traditions. That they might be ashamed, 2 These.
3.14. That they might learn not to Blaspheme, 1 Timothy 1.20. That they might be
found in the Faith, Tit. 1.13. That the Spirit might be saved, 1 Cor. 5.5.
For the Power which the Lord has given the Apostles, was to Edification, and
not to Destruction, 2 Cor. 13.10.

Erasmus said, The Christian Meekness must satisfy it self with these
Punishments; to Stone, that is the Jews work; but the true Christians work is
to Heal.

Ambrosius said, That Heretics were only to be Punished by Excomunication, and
not to be Beat and Persecuted; for so did the Heathen said he, that knew not
God: And Ignatius said, you shall separate your selves from them, and exhort
them to Repentance.

In Haereticis coercendis quatenus progredi liceat ubi nominatius eos ultimo
supplicio affici non deberi aperte demonstratur, Christlinge Impressum, Anno
1577. Sectio 2.

Chrisostomus said, That he was not such a Fool, as that he would suffer them
to be his Judges who were his open Enemies, for it is against all right and
reason, that he who is the Accuser, and Witness, should also be Judge. Every
one (says he) will be judge over another, yet none acknowledging the other to
be his Judge.

Tell me then ye wise Men (who would have the Heretics Punished, or Persecuted
to Death by the Magistrate) who shall be the Judge, the Magistrate, the Church,
or the Doctrine which is spoken against? And how shall the Magistrate be assured
of the Odiousness of the Blasphemy, and Crimes? And how shall the Magistrate
know certainly who are punishable Sismaticks, Apostates, false Teachers,
Heretics and Seducers; who they are that set up a Sect or a Church? Who
believe well or Evil? Who Teach according too, or contrary to the Scripture?
Who are moved of God, or by his own Zeal? Who do according to a good Conscience
or contrary? Who are wounded and judged in themselves, and who are not? And who
are obstinate and stiff-necked Heretics, or constant upright Christians?

But suppose the Magistrates should refer this to the Divines or Clergy (said
he) to judge of, what more assurance shall they have than the Magistrate? who
through their strong importuning, blindly Persecute the Heretics, and have
martyred and put to death most of the Christians and Servants of God; (said he)
how can they then more than the Magistrate judge of such hidden Mysteries as
before mentioned? Vide Synopsis Disp. 57. These. Chap. 20.

CHAP. XIII.
The necessity of just and equal Liberty; How expedient it is to hear and see
before one Judge; How the Persecuting Clergy do follow the Example of the
Jews; How Life and Conversation has not been so much looked at, as difference
in Doctrine and Worship; And how prejudicial it would be for Christians, if
their Counsel were followed, that stir up men to Persecute.

ARemnus said, The profitableness of the King and Kingdom, requires a firm and
entire Union of all the Citizens and Subjects; now there can be no firm Union
(said he) except that all the Citizens and Subjects enjoy equality, and that
especially in matters of Religion; for inequallity among them in that
particular, is and has been of most Politicians called one Pestilence of the
Kingdom or Commonwealth. Anno 1575. Com. did. Fol. 79.

Qui autem partem civium consulunt, partem negligunt rem pernitiosissimam in
civitatem inducunt. Cicero in offi. When the King Lodewick of France, was much
importuned by the Cardinals and Bishops to put several People to Death in his
Dominion, who were accused of much odious Heresy; the King said, If I were to
begin a War with the Turk, or the Devil, I would first hear them: And
afterward he sent Legaten to examine the matter, and when he found them to be
such in their Life and Conversation, and Worship, that he broke out with an
Oath, and said, These men are better than I with my Catholics. Urede hand. van
Colen. Fol. 39.

The Jews, Scribes and Pharisees, exclaimed against Christ to the Magistrate,
and said, If he had not been an Evil doer, we would not have delivered Him up
unto thee: And then they accused Him of perverting the Nation, of forbidding
the People to give tribute to Caesar, of stirring up the People, of casting out
Devils through Beelzebub; and they also said, That they had a Law, and that by
that Law he ought to die, etc. Luke 23.2, 5. John 18.30. Mark. 3.21. John 19.6,
7. Thus did they seek to deceive Pilate, who was unexperienced in their Law;
even as the Clergy now (said a certain Writer) stir up the Magistrates with
their Lies, seeking to make them believe that they have a Law, by which
Heretics ought to be Persecuted and put to Death; and by their Sophistical Art
(said he) can they prevail with them so far, as that finally they (to continue
their Friend, and the Emperors (or the Kings) deliver them into their hands as
Pilate did Christ, who said, Take Him, and Judge Him according to your Law,
etc. Certainly said one, where Christ is now made manifest, there are also
Iudas's to be found, the World is no better nor holier then it was, but rather
worse; and therefore does the Truth now suffer under the name of Heresy (said
he) as heretofore.

For now in these Days men do little regard Life or Conversation, but
presently fall upon judging of the Doctrine, Persecuting and shamefully
Entreating those that differ from them in Doctrine, though their Life be never
so good (said he) but indeed they ought to do otherwise, and with the Spirit of
Meekness to instruct those that Err, and not to put men to death for their
Errors, which is indeed a very great Error.

Condonabiles sunt quidem piorum hominum errores, sicut et non quivis corporis
morbus uxitialis est. Certainly it is Unchristian-like, yea unnatural, That any
should judge a man to be an obstinate Heretic, who lives a good life, and is
of an upright mind, and who cannot comprehend the matter otherwise than he
understands it, and thereupon is he resolved to suffer whatsoever may come;
but when they have nothing to charge against his Life, then rail they against
his Doctrine; like as the Persecutors of Daniel said, We shall have nothing
against him, except it be concerning his Worship: And as Amazia the Priest of
Bethel informed the King against Amos, and accused him of Uproar, and told him
that the Land could not bear all his Words, Amos 7.10. Dan. 6.5. Acts 24. Ier.
26.8, 9, 11.

If one Sect should rise up against another, to the destroying one of another
(which must needs follow, if their Counsel be followed, who would have
Heretics put to Death) then when they had destroyed one another, consider then
what a door there would be opened for the Turk, and for other Barbarous People,
for them to take possession of the remainder, and then to Tyrannize over them.

But as Lactantius said, Even as they are deceived in the Religion it self, so
are they deceived in the manner of its Protection; for the true Religion is not
to be defended with Killing, but with Exhorting; not with Cruelty, but with
Patience; not with Wickedness, but by Faith: for they that go about to defend
their Worship with Torments, they rather pollute it, than defend it.

CHAP. XIV.
Several Testimonies against Persecution, and Forcing of Conscience; Of the
Liberty among the Heathen; How Meekness is better than War; How the Christians
Meetings were forbidden upon Pain of Death; And of the Efficacy of Faith and
Patience.

STephanus King of Poland, said, It belongs not to me to Reform the
Conscience, I have always gladly given that over to God which belongs to
him, and so shall I do now; and also for the future, I will suffer the Weeds to
grow until the time of Harvest, for I know that the number of Believers is but
small; therefore said he, when some were proceeding in Persecution, Ego sum Rex
Populorum non Conscientiarum (i. e.) I am King of the People, and not of their
Consciences: He also affirmed, That Religion was not to be planted with Fire
and Sword. Chron. van de Rel. vrijh. 2 deel.

Tindallus (apud Foxium in Actis et Monument is) said, The New Testament of
Christ suffered no Law of Compelling, but alone of Persuading and Exhorting,
page 1338.

Timestius, Exhorted the Emperor, To cease from Persecution, beseeching him
that he would not be cruel by reason of the discord or defference of the
Christians Doctrine, seeing there was such a multitude of Sects among the
Heathen; and that every one continue in his own Doctrine, contrary to the
Meaning and Doctrine of the rest.

The Prince of Orange Testified, That it was impossible that the Land should be
kept in Peace, except there was a free Tolleration in the exercise of Religion,
Anno 1579.

Swinckfeild testified, That according to the Doctrine of Christ and the
Example of the Apostles, it did not become the Preachers of the Gospel, and
Ministers of the New Testament, in no wise to Force with Violence and Tyranny
the Conscience in Matters of Faith, but with the Sword of the Spirit, the Power
of God, and with Prayer, were they to resist the evil Spirit and all its
Temptations, and with long Suffering learn to overcome them all.

The Chronicle testifies, How that Theodosius Persecuted no Man, neither did
he constrain any to hold Fellowship with him, but permitted every Man to meet
in his own house, or at his own Meeting; and he being a very meek man, did
thereby (to wit, through Meekness) sooner bring his Subjects to Obedience, than
by War, neither would he Force the Consciences of his Subjects. Relig. Uriih.
page 6.

John Taulerius spoke also much in his Sermon Book, of the Tribulation,
Oppression and great Suffering, that the Christians were to expect here, but
not that he should cause any of them to suffer.

The Burgemeesteren of Amsterdam testified, That no man had Power to bind
another man's Conscience, let him be who he will (said they) for this Power
pertains only to God, under whose Command and Power the Conscience is, Anno
1617.

Erasmus said, That though they take our Moneys and Goods, they cannot
therefore hurt our Salvation; they afflict us much with Prisons, but they do
not thereby separate us from God: Moreover the Lord said, If they Persecute you
in one City, fly unto another; thereby does he teach (says Eras) that
persecuted Christians, should not expel Weapons with Weapons, but rather fly
before Weapons; for if Peter was reproved, because he drew his Sword against
the Wicked and Ungodly, for his harmless Lord; wherefore then should a
Christian man for the future, revenge Wrong with Wrong, when it is done unto
him? In de Krijgdes urede. Fol. 63.

Lactantius said, We Christians desire not that any man against his Will should
serve our God, who is the Creator of all things, neither are we likewise angry
if he be not served; for we believe (says he) that his Majesty might as well
revenge their despisings, as he does the injuries of his Servants: And
therefore when we suffer such shameful things, we keep silent, referring
vengeance unto the Lord, and do not like unto those who would be esteemed
Defenders of their Gods, who are full of Wrath against those that do not honor
them. Rel. Uriih. page 17.

We are assured (said Cyprianus) That they that Persecute us, shall not remain
long unpunished, and the greater Injuries which they have done, the more
manifest revenge will come upon them; though we had no knowledge of the Ancient
times, yet notwithstanding, that which of late has happened, might serve for a
sufficient Warning, (to wit) that in so short a time (says he) so grievious
and terrible a revenge is already come upon Persecutors. Merula. page 214.

When Cyprianus was threatened to be Banished out of the Land, except he would
renounce the Christian Religion; he replied to those that threatened him, and
said, He that carries Christ shut up in his Heart and Mind, can be no Exile or
banished Man, For the Earth is the Lords, and the Fullness thereof. Afterward
he was much urged by the Governor to betray his Brethren, to which he would in
no wise condescend; and when the Governor told him, that the Emperor had
forbidden the Meetings of the Christians, that they should not meet upon pain
of death, then he gave the Governor to understand, that he was prepared to die
for the Profession of the Truth.

Moreover said Cyprianus, Have we not seen that the Martyrs of Christ, did not
look upon their Torments with cruel Eyes, neither did they threaten Tyrants,
but was more sorrowful for their Blindness, than for their own Suffering. Anno
1567.

Petrus Viretus said, That there was nothing that sooner broke the Violence of
Tyranny, than the Patience of the Saints; neither was there any better means to
take away the sharpness of their Swords (said he) and to quench and extinguish
their Fire, than through Faith, Constancy and Prayer.

CHAP. XV.
Augustinus's Testimony; How Ambrosius was threatened; How private Meetings
could not be prevented by Proclamations, etc. How it is the Duty of Christians
to continue their Meetings; And how we are to Obey God more than the Emperor or
the King.

AUgustinus testified, That when Emperors were in Error, then did they make
Laws for to defend Errors against the Truth; yet Ambrosius would not obey the
Emperor in things that were contrary to God and his Commands, wherefore the
Emperor threatened, that he would cut off his Head; then said Ambrosius, I will
Suffer as a Bishop, do thou as becomes an Executioner or Hangman. Apoph. Fol.
144.

The Chronicle testifies, How that in times past, private Meetings could never
be hindered through rigorous Proclamations, strict Orders, and Executions, nor
yet Sects of sinister Opinions, but by how much the more they were forbidden by
Orders, and Persecuted, by so much the more they Acted against the Orders. Bor.
111.6.91.

Moreover it shows, how the Martyrs in Tribulation were mostly accused,
because they continued their Meetings contrary to the Command of the King. Int
Martel. lib. 5. page 456.

This is the Duty of all the Faithful (said a certain wise Man) That they
continue their Meetings together in the name and fear of the Lord, though
Kings, Princes, and Magistrates by their Proclamations and Orders command the
contrary; for after the Apostle through many perils of his Life, had Preached
the Doctrine of the Gospel in Synagogues, Schools and Markets, and being
resisted by open Violence, and forbidden to Preach any more in that Name, he
notwithstanding after that kept Meetings in private Houses when he Preached.

Grotius testified, How that it was the Opinion of some, that they that did
cruelly handle, such as kept their Meetings (not to Gormandize or play the
Glutton, nor to disturb the public Peace, but as Schools of Virtue) were
themselves in such a State, as ought to be punished. Vide Grot. lib. 2. page
445.

The History shows, how that heretofore some said, as others do now, That new
things, as new Opinions, etc. are always to be feared, especially great
Meetings and Assemblies; but (said the Author) Men need not fear that Doctrine
which tends to the bringing of People to Piety and Honesty; neither need men be
afraid of the Meetings of honest peaceable People, who seek not to keep
themselves private, except that they be thereunto constrained; concerning whom
I may say (said he) as Augustus said concerning the Meetings of the Jews, that
they were not to Domineer, nor to be excessive in eating and drinking, nor yet
to disturb the Peace, etc.

Anno 1560. In Scotland it was decreed and concluded, That People should in all
things, obey the Magistrates, Religion only excepted. Hist. Georg. Fol. 697.

Lucernus said, He that commands any thing wherewith he binds the
Conscience, that is an Antichrist. Inde Bennse Disp. Fol. 71.

Therefore said Erasmus, If that at any time Evangelical Godliness require that
People must contemn their Commands, that must be done with such moderation, as
that it may not be through any hate against them, but through a godly Zeal.
Vide Exodus 1.16, 17, 21. Considering how that the Commands of God are to be
esteemed above the Commands of Men; Obey your Masters (says he) but not
against God, to whom you are more bound than unto men.

Daniel kept himself Innocent before God and the King, notwithstanding his
doing contrary to the King's command, concerning the free Exercise of his
Religion, Dan. 6.22.

But say some, the Powers will not suffer this new Doctrine; I know not, but
that they might well suffer it, where it fundamentally manifests it self,
said Vrbanus Regnis; yet though they will not suffer it, every true Christian
knows that he ought to keep to the Lord and his Truth, and in such a case he
may (said he) without contempt of Authority, let pass that worldly command; and
of this will the spiritual Law admit: For it does not become the Emperor, nor
the King to determine any thing against the divine Command, nor to do any thing
that is against the Rule of the Exangelical Prophets, and Apostles Truth; and
if that they command any Evil, then must we give them this answer, We must obey
God rather than Men, Acts 5.29. But in these things which are not against the
Command of God, we will be subject. Yet when the Emperor or King commands
one thing, and God another, and that we obey God, who has the Supreme Power,
we desire herein to be excused by the Emperor and King; if they threaten
Imprisonment for Disobedience, he threatens Hell. Vide his Epistle of twofold
Righteousness, Fol. 6, 7. Anno 1532.

CHAP. XVI.
How it does not become the Magistrate to Force the Conscience, nor to be a
Judge in Points of Doctrine; and of what dangerous consequence it would be, if
the Magistrate should proceed against Heretics, according to his own
Interpretation of the Law.

CAstellius testified, That in Matters of Religion, there was no other
Magistrate than Christ alone, and they that he (not with the Sword, but with
his Word) armeth and sends forth.

The Ancient Protestants testified, How that the most of the old Fathers
affirmed, That the Magistrate had nothing to do to meddle with the Conscience,
to force and compel that to believe, seeing that the temporal Sword was put
into their Hands to Punish Thieves, Murderers, and other disturbers of the
Peace; but as concerning Religion, and that which pertains unto the Soul, the
only Spiritual Sword, the Word of God, must and ought herein to Remedy,
separating the Zeal and Religion which did defend man from Tumults, and
disturbing of Governments. Neither does it belong to any man to ordain other
Laws for Punishment, besides those which God has appointed; and therefore is
it so highly forbidden to add or diminish, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Chap. 12.32. Rev. 22.18.
for no Laws but God's bind the Conscience. Merck-tyck, page 245.

Moreover it has been formerly testified, That they do very unchristianly, who
under pretense of Ecclesiastical Discipline, introduce a new Authority over the
Faith and Consciences of Men, Isa. 10.12. Psalm. 94.20, 21.

Acontius testified, That it was against the Office of a Magistrate to be a
Judge in Points of Doctrine, in matters of Religion, and in the same to use his
Power violently; and that in particular he should do contrary to his Office, if
that he used his Power to please any man, as that when he had committed the
care of Religion to some particular Person or Persons, and that he should be
ready to draw out his Sword against those whom the other accused as Heretics,
or give the Weapon into their Hand: Now how guilty (he that thus did) would be
in the day of the Lord, may you judge.

Alcmerus testified, That God alone is the judge of the heart, and that he
alone should judge of Faith and Unbelief; therefore is it not lawful for
Princes (said he) to judge any man in matters of Faith, while they are not
guilty of any manifest transgression of any known civil Law, as Theft, Murder,
etc. for they are Judges of the Body, and not of the Soul, Rel. uriih. 2 deel.
page 52.

Through what impudency dare you judge them to Death (says Castellius) that
profess the name of Christ? who has taught you the matters of Religion, of
which you are most ignorant? I believe you will say, you do not these things
alone from your own Judgment, but through the judgment of the Learned, who
has taught you, who ought to be Punished, and put to Death; and verily it is
so (said he) for I see that your Learned men do injoyne you, not to put any to
Death about Religion, but according to their Judgment.

W. Teelingh testified, That the Magistrate ought not to rest upon the
conclusion of the Church, nor thereupon to proceed, being that the Church might
err, and that it was dangerous following. De hevige end huestige Kerckelijcbre
luijden (i. e.) the vehement and hasty Clergy. In Eubul. 252.254, 256, Follies.

The Lord of Pleffy referred the Judgment of Doctrine and Teachers, etc. to
the Judgment of all Christians, and not only to the Judgment of the pollitick
Magistrates, nor not alone to the Ecclesiastical Clergy, neither only to them
both, no, but to all men. Vide his Trac. of the Church, page 80, 130, 147.

Experience has sufficiently demonstrated, that it is a very hurtful thing, to
compel all People to dance after the Magistrates Pipe (said a certain Writer)
for where it has been so, Oh! what has been the Effect thereof, but most
commonly an Universal Delusion of the Subjects, with a Bloody Persecution of
the true Prophets; for the greatest multitude of men is never the best; as also
the greatest number of Emperors and Kings are not very Holy, but often have
shown themselves (says he) to be very wicked. Merck-tyck. page 307.

The Lord has expressly declared (said one) That the Magistrate is no fit Judge
to judge of Doctrine; and that the use of such Jurisdiction is forbidden him.
For how shall a man know a Heretic but by knowing the Cause, whereby a man is
made a Heretic? And if the Magistrate do so interpret the Law, as that he
thinks those Heretics may be forgiven, who have not endeavored to counsel
others, and that they are to be put to Death, who persevere in teaching others,
and are resolved so to do; shall men then be in safety, and their Credit and
Welfare preserved? certainly no; for so often as the Truth shall falsely be
scandalized with the name of Heresy, through the Orders of the Magistrate, so
often shall the Servants of the Lord be thereby brought into Suffering; for it
is not lawful for them to whom God has manifested his Truth, to hide their
Talent in the Earth, through silence and dissimulation. Vide Arg. des Sat. lib.
3. page 184. idem page 94, 95.

With what clearer Example can the Magistrates be exhorted not to depend upon
any man's Judgment, then that concerning the Son of God, who was so carelessly
given over, not only according to the Judgment of his wicked and ungodly
Enemies, but also according to their desire. Take Him (said Pilate) and judge
him according to your Law. page 100.

David said, That Heaven was given to the Lord of Heaven, but the Earth unto
the Children of men; that is, God has given man Power over earthly matters,
and over whatsoever belongs unto Earthly Matters, but over Heavenly Matters,
and these things which appertain unto the Kingdom of Heaven, the King of Heaven
has only dominion over. Vred. hand. tot. Col. Fol. 137, 195.

Regula sit morte non puniendos, sed Iudex videat et ponderet.

CHAP. XVII.
How the Truth is Oppressed through somes Usurpation; How the Protestants have
been hindered from Printing of their Books; The unjustness of the thing; How it
has been the Papists doing, who will neither suffer Disputations nor Books
against themselves; The Cause why; And how unjust a thing it is that one should
usurp Authority over all the rest, etc.

NOt without Reason are men offended, said Calvine, when they see the Truth of
God lie oppressed with Fire and Sword, and that none dare appear to help and
defend the same; and that Error is so strongly maintained with the Cloak of
Lawful Judgment, that there is no Freedom to reprove and amend the same;
neither will they that have the name of the Supreme Authority, suffer any thing
to be spoken that is contrary to their Institutions; and if one reprove or
rebuke them, and Teach any thing contrary to what they Teach, then do they
account that to be uproarish, when they themselves are the most tumultuous,
Decl. Chap. 14, 15. Further he added, That if they themselves did not stir up
the Mighty to shed Blood, there would never arise so many Uproars among the
People.

And it was Luthers Opinion, That those that stirred up the Princes to
Persecute about Religion, they raised the Uproar. Thesaur. page 679.

Likewise the Reformed Protestants complained of being forbidden to Print
Books, and to Sell them, as appears from the Chronicles; which thing the
Prince of Orange held for unfitting, a Forcing of Conscience, a quenching of
Prophecy, and an oppressing of the Truth. Bor. Chron. second part, Fol. 48.47.

The Papists counseled the Emperor, the Princes and States, That they should
obstruct Writing and Printing of Books, as also Disputing and Preaching,
otherwise than according to the Interpretation and Approbation of the Church;
and that the Dispersers of such Books should be Punished. Vide, History of the
Counsel of Trent. page 42, 43.

When Tacitus had declared, How that the Lords Fathers had thought it good, to
burn the Books of Cremutius Cordus (some of which were afterward brought to
light) he said, He must laugh at the Folly of those, who thought by their
present Power, they could extinguish the remembrance of them from ages to come,
for most commonly the contrary happens; and when men reprove the glorious
Understandings, their honor and renown is not thereby diminished, but rather
augmented: Further (said he) All Kings that have used great Tyranny in such
Cases, have thereby brought contempt upon themselves, and more honor and
esteem to the other. Vide Annals, lib. 3. page 22.

The Emperor Nero, caused the Books of F. Veientio (who reproved the Priests
and the Council) to be burned; yet while they were to be gotten
(notwithstanding the danger) they were sought and read, but afterward People
were permitted to have them and to read them.

[ Nota.] When such Writings (said he) are little esteemed, they perish of
themselves, but when men are angry, then they come to be the more manifest; for
the difficulty in procuring of them, sharpeneth the Desire, kindles the Zeal,
and brings the matter into more esteem. Pol. 4. Lipsi. 6. lib. Fol. 354.

The Professors of Leyden said, That it sounded strange in their Ears, that Men
were come to the forbidding of Books, and would not suffer them according to
their Rights and Privileges; A thing (said they) for which People have justly
exclaimed against the Popish Government, for Liberty herein chiefly consists,
( viz.) that every one may freely speak his Judgment; and heretofore it has
been esteemed a mark of Tyranny, when People might not speak their thoughts.
Vide their Remonst. Anno 1582. Verily (said they further) Reason which opposes
all Tyranny, teaches us in the general, that the truth can be no more than the
Light constrained; therefore is it Tyrannical to forbid good Books, as the
Apostate Iulianus did.

The King of Spain, with other of the Popish Princes, will not suffer different
Religions in their Dominion, nor yet Disputations about Religion, neither will
they suffer any Books that speak in the least against their Orders and
Religion; this do many reprove in the Papists, and yet would gladly have it so
themselves.

They fear (said Lactantius) that being conquered by us, they should be
constrained to give us the hand; whereby they sufficiently manifest the
desparation of their corrupt Reason, seeing they dare not search nor enter into
dispute with any, because they know they should soon be overcome; and so not
searching, they expel Wisdom, and set Violence in its place; and being they
endeavor to judge those as being guilty, whom they know well to be guiltless,
yet will they not suffer their Innocence to be made manifest; as if it were
more unreasonable to manifest Innocence, than to condemn them that have not
been heard: But as I have said (said he) They fear that they should not be able
to judge, if they heard; and therefore Tortour, Kill, and Banish they the
Servants of the most high God, that is, righteous Men. Lactant. lib. 5. Chap. 1.

Certainly (said Acontius) If the Shepherds once get it so far, as that none
may oppose them, then will they Force the poor People, and compel them to
receive whatsoever they will; Then woe be to us and our Posterity, and woe be
to all honest People; if it once come again so far, that the just and equal
defense against the Learned, should be esteemed Calumnies, Wickedness, and
Crimen laesae Ma estatis. Arg. des sat. lib. 3. Fol. 97. For the Pope
Innocentius the third, made a Law, That he that presumed to Blaspheme the Pope,
was to be Punished with death, neither was any to speak against him, nor
against the Church of Rome, which were not to be judged by any man: Likewise a
Synod at Rome made a Decree, That none in the World should speak against the
Church of Rome; and cruelly did they Persecute those that did contrary to their
Decree. Merul. page 783, 787, 741, 748.

At Geneva it was also forbidden by a Proclamation, that any should speak
against Calvin and his Doctrine. An. 1553. Anno 1619. There were several of the
Clergy in the Low Country, that thought it needful that some Order was taken,
for the preventing and dispersing of such Books as they thought unfitting.

If that one Church or Teacher (said Castle.) be only tolerated, to reprove,
vilify, and falsely to accuse all other, and that without permitting any
Opposition, Defense or Reply; how can such clear themselves from being of
those, who will be Holier than others? And how can they reprove that great
Wickedness in the Papists of cutting out Peoples Tongues (or depriving them of
the power of Speaking) while they do the same, though in another manner.
Castle. call. Chap. 19.

With diligence do they hinder so much as they can any Books being Written or
Printed against them, to the end, that they might not be made manifest; and if
they be Printed, that they may not be sold but burned; and moreover, if any
have them, such are to be Banished and esteemed as Heretics* Merck-tyck. page
315.

If that some had Power according to their Wills (said one) all should finally
be esteemed and holden for Blasphemers and Heretics, that reprove any Divine
of any Error, or that is of another Opinion in Points of Religion. Chron. vande
Rel. uriih. 223.

But said the Duke of Saexon, It would tend to much praise, if they by their
Doings and Authority did bring it to pass, that this Controversy might not be
ended with Arms or Weapons, but that an orderly course might be maintained,
which would heal the Sickness, reconcile the Church or People, and do no
Violence to the Consciences of Men. Vide John Sleid. Chron. lib. 10.

God's Mercy and Judgment rationally shown to England.
HEar O England, and consider the things which the Lord has done in thee, and
suffer me a little to reason with thee, thou choicest of the Nations, and much
Renowned among God's People; In thee has the Light, Glory, and Power of the
Lord of Hosts appeared; in thee has the Standard of the Lord been set up; in
thee has the acceptable Day of Salvation and Deliverance been Proclaimed; in
thee has many Prophets and Handmaids been brought forth, which have gone out
of thee into other Nations, and thou have been as a Nursery unto them; in thee
has the everlasting Gospel been Preached freely, both in thy Steeple Houses,
Markets, Highways, and in many other Places; in thee has the Way of Life,
Peace, and Everlasting Salvation been made manifest; yea, in thee has the God
of Heaven thy Creator, done many notable and wonderful things; And what! will thou now undo thy self by resisting the Lord, by rebelling against Him, and by
choosing thy own Ways, by fulfilling thy own Lusts, and by satisfying thy own
Desires, by Persecuting and shamefully Entreating the Servants and Handmaids
of the Most High? Of which things thou would not have become so highly
guilty, had thou not rebelled against the Light of the Lord which is arisen
in thee, and resisted his Eternal Power and Counsel, which is broke forth in
the midst of thee; many besides my self lament over thee, and the Hearts of
many have been filled with Sorrow and Heaviness, by reason of thy Degeneration
and Apostasy, by reason of thy Violence and Cruelty, and by reason of thy
Persecution and Oppression; Oh! alas for thee, how shall thou avoid the Wrath
that is to come, or escape the Hand of the Lord? yet thy Destruction will be of
thy self, and thy Iniquities the Cause of thy Judgment.

But hear and consider, and suffer me to reason a little with thee; Was thy
King reduced out of his deplorable Sufferings in forragin Parts, and Peaceably
introduced into thee, to connive at the grievous Suffering of the Innocent in
thee? Have thy Parliaments and Councils been broken to pieces, and with
contempt secluded, to the end that others might come in, to make Acts and Laws
for the Binding and Forcing of the Consciences of the Lords dear Children? Were
thy Bishops reinstalled to exercise Lordship over Gods Heritage, and to augment
the Sufferings of the afflicted in thee? Were thy Judges and Justices (together
with many inferior Officers) turned out of their Places, that others who are
more deboyst might come in, to Oppress and Persecute the Harmless, more than
heretofore, in thee? Were thy high, notional pretended gifted Priests ejected,
that they that are more Lewd and Profane, might be brought in? Yet greater
havoc and spoil to make of the Saints, and of their Substance, than their
Predecessors did? In summa, Was that notable overturning and remarkable change,
which of late happened in thee, to this end? Or was it not rather to manifest
the Power of the Most High, and his wonderful Works in thee, that thy
Inhabitants might know that he alone will Rule, not alone in thee, but in all
the Kingdoms of the whole Earth.

Moreover, consider whether or no it has been for thy Profit and Honor, to
have so many of the Lord's Servants and Handmaids in thy Goals, Dungeons and
Houses of Correction; and so many Drunkards and Swearers, Cozenners and
Cheaters, at Liberty in thy Cities, Towns and Villages? Is it for thy Honor,
and the Welfare of thy Inhabitants Souls, that Covetous and Proud men, yea such
as God never sent, should have their free Liberty to Preach in thee for their
Heir, and that the true Messengers and Servants of the Lord (who Preach freely)
should be cast into Holes and Dungeons, thereby to silence them, or to prevent
them from spreading God's Truth abroad in thee? Is it for thy Profit and
Advantage, that faithful and discreet Merchants, trusty and laborious
Tradesmen, diligent and expert Mariners, careful and industrious Husbandmen,
should be deprived of their Liberty, about the exercise of their Conscience,
and thereby consequently obstructed from getting a comfortable Livelihood for
themselves and their Families? How think thou shall they be able to Pay all
the Customs, Taxes, Dues, Rights, and Assessments, etc. that are required in
thee of thy Inhabitants? How shall they possibly discharge those I say, if they
do not enjoy their Liberty and the Privileges of freeborn Englishmen; and if
they thereby come to be Impoverished, what will their Impoverishment enrich
thee? Or who is there in thee that will willingly relieve and maintain such, if
external Poverty should overtake them? Were it not therefore better for thee to
let them enjoy their Liberty (notwithstanding their different Judgment in
matters of Religion, provided that they lived Peaceably in the Kingdom) that
through Diligence and Industry, they might win or gain their own Bread, though
with the Sweat of their Brows, that the Land might so much the better yield
her Increase, and that Trading in thee might not decay, to the Impoverishing of
many more Families, whose Livelihood depends upon their Trade, which can
scarcely go well when the Father or Master of it is cast into a Prison for the
Exercise of his Couscience? which things I know will tend to the laying of thee
waste, and to the depopulating of thee, even as many Parts of Germany and other
Countries, have been laid waste and ruined; which desolation has had its rise
from such differences in part, as seem to arise in thee, which in process of
time may produce the like Effects, if God in his Mercy, through his Power and
Wisdom do not direct them. Though this brief Hint which I signify hereof to
thee, may be little regarded by thee, yet when thou have felt the smart of it,
then may thou lament it as other places have done, and remember that it was
told thee before it came upon thee: And this shall I add further ( viz.) If thy
Land open her Mouth to drink the Blood of the Saints (after which it seems to
thirst already) then expect thou the coming of the overflowing scourge
suddenly, which has been heavy upon other Countries, who have polluted
themselves with the Blood of the Lamb's Followers, from which horrible thing,
the Lord deliver Thee. Though I am not within thy Territories, yet my Spirit is
present with the suffering Seed in thy Dominion; for the deliverance of which
my Soul has often interceeded unto the Lord; and know assuredly, that in true
and entire Love to thee, have I laid these things before thee, for thy
Inhabitants (my Countrymen) to weigh and consider in the Light of the Lord.

W. C.
Germany the 17th. of the 11th. Month, 1661. But Transcribed in Amsterdam the
second Month, 1662.
FINIS.

