CAUTION to the Good People of ENGLAND, about the Choice of Members for the
Ensuing Parliament.
Gentlemen,
IT is now fully seen, that notwithstanding the Mortification, which some were
under during part of the Late King's Reign; yet they are now but the same Men,
which they were in the Reign of King Charles the II, when they ran down all
that opposed their Designs, as Fanatics or Commonwealths-men.

But never were Names more improperly applied, when those High Tantivy-men were
truly possessed with that Fanatick-fury or Madness, with which they without
color reproach others. Nor can any thing contribute more to a Commonwealth,
than the extravagancies of them, who by abusing the Favor of Princes, have
rendered the Governments of some of them Grievous, and Insupportable; making
very forward pretenses of Loyalty, and vowing Lives and Fortunes, which they
never intended to venture.

These Men are now especially the more dangerous, because those rights of
Sovereignty which they ascribe to all Kings, are not only Inconsistent with the
Laws, Liberties, and Statutes, of This or any other Free Nation, but with the
Right of our present King and Queen: and the late King is evidently that
Unaccountable, Irresistible, Sacred Monarch, whom they contend for.

To observe what Fears the Papists express at this time of Danger to the Church
of England, which they were but lately pulling down as fast as they could, and
of our falling into a Commonwealth, which the chief of their Writers have
commended most; would induce one to believe that Church and Crown, are but the
Word given the Party, and the Pasport to their Regiments in the Highlands of
Scotland; or rather an Artifice to List Soldiers for their supposed King of
Divine Right, against him whom they call but King in Fact. And this they would
have ignorant People believe to be the Doctrine of the Church of England. Thus,
tho they dare not directly declare for the Late King, they prepare Men
insensibly for him, and follow the steps of the Observator, and other Hackney
Writers for Rome, who while Popery was getting within the Walls, alarmed you
against Moderate Churchmen, and other Protestants; but especially, the Men of
Forty One, whom they had coniured up from them Graves.

You cannot but observe the Emissaries, and Instruments, who are again playing
over the same Game at Markets, Fairs, Churches, and all Places of public
Resort. The Success which the Knaves have formerly had, gives them hopes again
to make Honest Men Tools, to carry on their Work; and indeed, it is a
melancholy Consideration to think, how many are now cheated in as gross a
manner, as the Romish Priests impose upon their credulous Laity. Many of their
Hirelings pass among you for zealous Churchmen, just as the Popish Gentry do
for Officers of this Kings Army, by their Scarlet or Blew-Coats, which is their
common Disguise.

You, The good People of England, are in earnest in that Cause, which brought
over His present Majesty. Remember His most gracious Declaration, which engaged
your Hearts, your Fortunes, your Lives; nay, what is more, your Reputations and
Honors, when the most eminent among you for untainted Loralty, contemned the
Reproach of being accounted Rebels in the Cause of God, and your Country.

Nor did you fear to be thought Commonwealths men, while you were so hearty in
desiring that our present Sovereigns would accept the Crown, as an earnest of
this Nations Gratitude, and Love of Kingly Power; while others, if they meant
any thing by a Regency, but an Office under the Late King, c^able at his
Pleasure; were directly for a Commonwealth, with such another Protector as
Oliver Cromwell.

This is little less than Demonstration, for this Regency, or Protectorship,
which is the old English word for it, while the Lovers of France were for the
French word; either was to be derived from the Late Kings Authority, or from
the Peoples. If from the Kings, then his entire Power, or indivisible
Sovereignty, would come back to him, when ever he thought sit to return, tho
perhaps he could not depute another in his Absence, because the Law allows of
no Act of Royal Power, but while a King is in Possession.

If it were derived from the People, this were a Government of their own
Choice, without a King, and what is that, but a Commonwealth. Thus, this part
of the Charge against Men moderate in all things, but in their Zeal for the
Protestant Religion, and for this Government, falls upon their Accusers, who
either would have the Church of England preserved by a Popish King, or the
Monarchy by a Commonwealth

Many (...) who rose in Arms to meet your Great Deliverer, while the Generality
showed the like Disposition, have this for ever to stop their mouths, when they
would accuse you of Rebellion; that some of them were Rebels by their own
Confession, in Levying War against one, whom they acknowledge still to be their
King, whilst you, at least acquit your selves before God, as you resisted not
the Power which he had permitted or placed over you, till it, wholly ceast to
be any Ordinance of God or Man; and that he who had been your King, had lost
both his Name and Authority.

That you may reap the full benefit of His Present Majesty's most Gracious
Declaration, while he was only Prince of Orange, I take leave to offer these
Cantions to you, in Relation to that Choice which approaches.

1. To have a care of any Man, Ken recommended by them who refuse the Oath of
Allegiance, etc. Regency-Men.
for whom you are courted by those who have not taken the Oath of Allegiance to
this King and Queen, being in Capacities which require it, or who decline all
public Employments to avoid it; or if they have taken the Oath, declare that
it was with such Reservations, as leave room for Allegiance to the Late King.

2. By no means to choose the Regency-men, who were not only against the
Government of our Present King and Queen, but by their unseasonable Loyalty to
the Late King, whom they would not assist in his greatest Extremity; occasioned
the delay of Relief to the poor Protestants in Ireland, and that Expense of
Blood and Treasure which has followed it.

That this may appear to you more plainly, it is to he observed, That the loss
of so much time, as was unnecessarily spun out in Disputes, was in it self but
a small mischief in Comparison of the immediate and natural Consequences, in
encouraging the Rebels in Ireland, who were ready to have submitted upon any
Terms, till they found the Strength of their (...) and making it needful for
His Majesty (...) rei^^ Troops to secure him against them, who were so fond of
Allegiance to the Abdicated King; nor could he tell which of those, who had
declared for him, were to be trusted against one whom many of them still looked
on as their King.

This is a true and just Vindication of His Majesty's great Wisdom and
Inclination to make His Kingdoms happy, and give Peace to Christendom! while
some, out of labor to clear Evil Instruments, cast Reflections upon Him,
contrary to that Character which all the World has conceived of Him But as to
them of the Regency, they were for it, either out of Principle, beheving the
Late Kings Royal Power to continue; or from Design, as they thought that side
the Strongest; or that by joining with it, they might be considerable enough to
be bought off, either way the Late King has been beholden to them; but neither
our Present King and Queen, nor their People.

3. You may consider, ^rs of the Bill of Exclusion.
That they who opposed the Bill of Exclusion, generally did it upon a Principle
of the unalterableness of the Succession, which is directly contrary to our
Kings Title. Not but that some few of them are to be thought to have gone upon
other Grounds, they having in all other things been always in the Interest of
their Country.

4 You ought not to choose any who were Instruments of Violence and Oppression
in the two last Reigns. Instruments of Violence formerly.
The men are known among you, they have left their marks in the ruin of many
Families; and tho Death has put an end to the miseries of some of them, it is
not so long since the Lamentations of their Friends, their Wives, their
Children, struck through your very hearts, and you were your selves weeping
Spectators of the inhumanities and butcheries under which they suffered.

Have a care lest you come into Partnership with their guilt, who made it
dangerous to be an Englishman, or to appear for the interest of all Protestants
in general, while they ridiculed the very name.

5. Sons or Relations of them who have gotten Wealth or Honors by the spoil of
the Liberties etc. Such as are likely to repeal the Acts of the last Parliament.
Be cautious how you choose the Sons or nigh Relations of them who got Riches or
Honors by the Spoil of the Liberties of their Country; if their Fathers or
near Relations are living, their dependence upon them is too great to permit
them to enquire freely into those miscarriages which you complain of: if they
are dead, their Memories or Estates which might be subject to Attainders, or
Confiscations, to ease you of Taxes, will give the young men too strong a bias.

6. Take care lest you choose such as may repeal the Acts of the last
Parliament, either as disliking the matter of them, or questioning the
Authority, which not only made an happy Settlement of the Crown, and well
secured to you many Civil Rights which had been invaded, but freed you from the
burden of Chimueymoney; and eased many of your fellow Protestants, who had been
severely prosecuted, to the weakening your hands against the common Enemy, and
enriching only Informers, Officers of the Spiritual Court, Clerks of the Peace,
and some greedy Justices.

7. Accessaries to the inurders of L. Russel, etc.
Be sure to avoid all Judges, Lawyers, Sheriffs, Jurymen, or others, who were
accessory to the Murders of Ld. Russel, Col. Sidney, Sir Tho. Amstrong, Mr.
Cornish, Mr. College, or who by slighting the positive Proof against Sir George
Wakeman, or robbing the City of London of its choice of Sheriffs, were means of
stifling the Popish Plor, and turning the Plot upon Protestants.

8. Pensuners
Pensioners, who sold their Voices and their Country at certain Rates,
according to the Reputation which each man had in his House, how smoothly
soever they may have carried it since the Temptation has ceased, are never to
be trusted, lest they fell you to France, or any Interest that bids most.

9. Maintainere of the Dispensing Power, etc.
Promoters and Maintainers of the Dispensing or other arbitrary Powes,
Abhorrers of Petitions, and modest Applications for obtaining the sitting of a
Parliament, to enquire into the Popish Plot, ought to give very good Proofs of
their Repentance before you choose them for your Representatives.

10. Surrends rers of charters.
Your sense of what you have suffered by the Surrenders of Charters, how nigh
you were to the loss of your greatest Civil Right, and how far the common
people were excluded from Voting, may almost make it needless to caurion you
against Surrenderers, Promoters or Advisers of Surrenders of Charters. How much
soever the Threats and Solicitations of Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants,
Justices, Recorders and others, with face of Authority, may plead in excuse of
well-meaning Contrymen, not so well acquainted with the ends for which they
were delivered up, nothing can lessen the Crime of such as pretend to represent
the collective Wisdom of the Nation.

11. Some immediate consequences of thi^ choice.
It concerns you by this Choice from which His Majesty is like to form a settled
Judgment of you, to represent your selves worthy of His most indulgent
purposes; the fault, doubtless, will lie at your own doors, if you become not
an happy People under him; which that you may be, you ought to take particular
care, that no man may be chosen by you, whose business it has been, and
therefore it is probable may be, to alienate your Affections from the present
Government; which it behooves you to Support, as you would be free from the
French Slavery and Dragoons: The like Consideration should oblige you to avoid
those who would separate the King from his People, or the Church from both, or
from all other Protestants and Protestant Churches: How much soever particular
Persons may profit by such Divisions, it is morally impossible that the Nation
should not be weakened by them.

Gentlemen,

If you choose Men of Fortunes and Reputations, and (where other Circumstances
do not greatly overbalance) of good Families, with regard to the Cautions
which I have offered, out of an unfeigned Love to my Country, you may well
hope to revive the Honor of the English Mation.

I need not caution you against Dissenters from the Church of England, because
how much soever you may have been imposed upon formerly by those of them who
were Papists, they cannot now expect to be chosen? and tho some Protestant
Dissenters may have interest enough for it, yet they will in prudence decline
the competition with men of Moderation, who are for the good of the whole,
before any Party or Faction; and if Protestant Dissenters stand to keep out
others, you will have reason to be for them.

Neither need I mention other Commonwealths m^n than those of the Regency; for
tho some men thought the faults of former Reigns might justify their succesful
endeavors to alter the Government then, yet their own experience of the
necessity of Kingly Power, and the affection which they have ever since shown
for the English Monarchy, has cleared them from that imputation now; and all
others that way inclined, are as few and as inconsiderable, as the Regulators
who went about for hire to settle Corporations, according to the Power first
given by Surrenderers; for either of them to pretend to be chosen at this time,
were a piece of Considence which none but themselves could be guilty of.

In short; This Election will show, Whether you are for Papist or Protestant,
King James or King William; and should you find the effect of the worst choice,
there would be small comfort in the excuse of Fools, That ye had not thought it.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1690.


