THE CATTER PILLARS Of this NATION ANATOMIZED, In a Brief yet Notable Discovery
of House-breakers, Pick-pockets, etc.

Together with the Life of a penitent High-way-man, discovering the Mystery of
that Infernal Society.

To which is added, the manner of HECTORING and TRAPANNING, As it is acted in
and about the City of LONDON.

LONDON, Printed for M. H. at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane. 1659.

THE INTRODUCTION.
KNavery of late is so epidemically practiced, as that there is hardly a
livelihood to be had without; it is honesty now that beggars men: honesty put to
any occupation, may serve now as a fit Epithet, either for foolish, or
breaking: Therefore it is, that we now see most in this latter nonage to wear
the garment of knavery, as being ala mode, and lay aside the good old fashion
of honest dealing. Our forefathers that wore Trunk-breeches, endeavored to
keep within them Faith and Truth, by tying them with a Point of honesty; but
alas, we let them out at the knees of our all-wide-breeches, not reserving
eithre Religion or Conscience, hardly any thing that is good: So that it
amazeth me to think, what (in a small time) will become of this deplorable
Nation. Every man does that which is good in his own eyes, despising Religion
(but what is of their own making) and rejecting Conscience, Some by deadness of
Trade, are taught to play the knave sooner then otherwise they would; others
having nothing to live on, (either by sequestration, etc.) still retain a noble
and high mind, and so by taking ill courses, make use of their wit to keep up
their former gallantry. So that these times have reduced men to such a
condition, that they can hardly live without dishonesty, only there is this
difference, some do it more privately, others more publicly. As for those
that have a cloak to palliate their knavery, I shall pass by in silence, (as
most Tradesmen) for I think there is hardly a Corporation in the City, in which
Mr. Knave has not been Master, Warden, and Assistant; nay, there is scarce a
shop which he has not visited. The Lawyer has found out a trick to teach the
Law how to cheat both Plaintiff and Defendant: The Soldier knows how to stifle
Conscience, and fight for old Nick for pay: Thus these two differ, Red-coats
and Black gowns,
The one takes Angels, the other takes up Crowns.
The flattering Sycophant, for a little pelf, may be hired to write
Panagiticks and Encomiums of grim Pluto, and his sutty-fac'd Wife Proserpina.
The informing Catch-pole to get money will (if a man speak against the Pope his
holiness) inform against him, by vainly ascribing it to his Highness; if he
chance to pry into any book, he minds not so much the Authors intent or
meaning, as how to make it seditious, or scandalous, interpreting what is
spoken of some mechanic Trrdesman to be meant of such a Grandee. The Taster
has learned a trick of the Devil, to mingle with two pound of Tobacco half a
pound of Clots-foot, and sell it for three pipes twopence; his Cans have their
bottoms almost in the middle, and can fill his flaggons with froth by frigging
the tap; he is very busy to carry away cans half full, and bring full ones in
their room; and if for the riddance of his liquor he chance to be drunk, it may
help him to misreckon the better. Cruel Creditors, that under pretense of
getting their own, do rather seek to satisfy their malice by imprisoning and
undoing their worthless Debtors, on the other side, the politic Bankrupt
almost ruins all his Creditors, either by voluntary breaking, that thereby he
may compound, or else go to prison and cheat them of all, knowing well, that it
is but feeing his Keeper, and the rest of the Officers, and he may board (as in
the Fleet) lie in handsome Chambers, and may have so much liberty, as meeting
his Creditors in the street may laugh at them; he may live as voluptuously as
he please, and all this is done at his Creditors cost. Many more private
villainies and abuses I might unstrip, but then I shall have no room to speak of
those miscreants, that act their rogueries more publicly, which are the
Catterpillars of this Nation, corroding Cankers, that eat oftentimes so far
into men's estates and lives, as that thereby they are the undoing of many
Families; now because I intend shortly a large discourse, which shall be as an
Epitome of all the villains and their villainies committed in this Nation, I
shall therefore at present give you but an essay of some of them, viz. The
Ken-Miller or House-breaker, the Filer or Cloyer (alias) a common Theif, the
Bung-Nibber or Cutpurse, the Hector or Knight of the Blade, with his Rum-Mort
or Doxie, and lastly, the Cafe-Pad or Knight of the Road; of the former I shall
give you but a brief relation, that I may insist the longer on the last.

Of the Ken-Miller or House-breaker.
THese Rogues have a Society among themselves, over which they have a
Principal, or President, which places and orders every one in his several
function, every one according to his ability either of wit or of strength. When
they enterprise any robbery, they consider the difficulty thereof, or facility,
and so do accordingly go more or less in company: The first thing they do, is
an Oath they take to be faithful one to the other, to assist each other being
in prison, and if any one be taken, not to reveal the rest. The next thing they
take into consideration, is the strength of the house, what bolts, what locks,
what doors, what weak windows; if they can force none of these, and they know
there is a rich prize in the house, then they endeavor to seduce some servant
of that house into their party; if that fail, they often convey an Hobgoblin
(as they call him) in some Cask to Trunk, who (when there is a fit occasion)
lets them all in to perpetrate their work: they usually carry about little boys
with them, which being able to creep into a small hole, do often facilitate
their way. When they rob a house, they usually are disguised, and for fear of a
surprise, they gagg the mouths of all the household, tying them in such manner,
as they may neither stir nor cry out. Now since I can give you no certain note
by which you may know these Rogues, for they know not one the other any
otherwise then by acquaintaince, (though some suppose the contrary) I say, all
the advice I shall give you is, trust not too much ( lowre or mint) wealth in
your own house, but if you do, let not your servants know of it, for there are
few (Kens mild) houses broken open, wherein some servant of that house is not
an actor. In the next place see the (Giers jack'd) doors at night locked, your
self keeping the keys, which will not only in part prevent Thieves from coming
in, but hinder your servants from gadding out.

Of the Filets or Cloyers.
THeir office is to frequent shops, pretending to buy several Commodities; now
while the shopkeeper is busy in reaching down his Ware, in the mean time he
cleanly conveys somewhat into his codpiece, after this, disliking either the
Commodities or price, takes leave, and soon finds Stallin-kens to vend his
stolen goods in. Some have the impudence to slip a piece of ribband, or gold
buttons into their sleeve, looking a man in the face the while. Some of them
are so ventrous, as in a Goldsmiths shop to swallow a gold Ring, or any thing
else that will but slip down, to prevent the severest search, in case they are
suspected: And indeed they seldom enter a shop, in which they make not their
markets before they depart. In the night they stand in some by place, and
snatch off hats from the heads of those that pass by, sometimes cloaks; at
other times they will (when they see but a silly boy in a Godlsmiths shop) blow
out the candle, and so catch what they can: If he chance to espy a (Joseph)
cloak, hang in a shop any thing likely to be filled, it will go hard if it
escape him, neither shall any thing else that they can but touch with their
bird-lime fingers.

Of a Bung-nibber or Cutpurse.
OF this sort there be as many women as men, especially Whores, who when they
are wapping will be sure to geld the man's pocket: they are excellent good at
Hocus, for can they put in a man's pocket but a middle and a forefinger, and
say, pass, Praesto, be gone, the devil a farthing remains in his pocket; a
Watch they will serve in the same manner: But before they nib a bung they jog
the pocket, either to know whether there be any money there, or to jumble it
all into one corner thereof, that they may make but one diving: when trading is
bad with them, two or three of them will breed a quarrel in the street, and
when there is a great company gathered of gaping spectators, then take they the
opportunity to fibb and eloy. Their Exchange is Tyburne, or any great Show, but
especially Bartholmow-fair; in this last to tell how many pockets were picked, I
doubt 'twill almost out-passe Arithmetic, my reason is, by reason that
Pickpockets of late are so much increased: These of late have enlarged their
Trade since gold buttons on Cloaks have been in fashion, which they will cut
off from behind, nay they will cut off even the very tassels of silver
Hatbands, thus they play at small games rather then sit out.

A NEW DISCOVERY OF THE HIGHWAY THEIVES. BEING A seasonable advice of one
lately converted from them, to Gentlemen and Travelers to avoid their
Villainy, etc.
THE PROLOGUE.
THey who look either for a fine phrase, or a sublime lofty style from me, will
come as far short of their expectation, as he that seeks for happiness in this
transitory World; my theme and my aim being only truth, not curiosity, makes
me rather industrious to benefit by Instruction, then pleasant by delighting
the fancy with Rhetorique; But as my miscarriages have rendered me odious in my
own, sight, so in fincerity I shall endeavor to make my self hateful in the
eyes of my misdemeanor, by showing its nakedness to the World, that so I (...)
may also abominate me, and Inveterate enmity rend our late amity to a
perpetual discord, and I become an example to others to stear their action by
a scale of pity, l^st doing (...) aways, expose them as it did me to the
greatest exigent Imaginable, which divine providence having snatched me from I
intended by its assistance to become a friend to my Country, by being an enemy
to my late Company and Courses, which were obnoxious and exorbitant, which when
I embraced in the arms of an undaunted resolution, I thought those my
dishonest courses legitimate, and far more noble then the esteemed babe of
baseness, and sneaking way of borrowing, arguing thus though inconsistent with
honor, that it was far better taking of a purse by violence from a stranger,
then borrowing not Intending to pay, and so with a complement to rob my
Friends, and familiar acquaintance, when the former was usually-repay'd by the
Country being lost on the Rode, so that many were better able to bear,
contributing to my wants, then one or two, or a few: when and to which I
neither promise, nor with a thousand oaths swear to repay them, as they that
borrow most usually do: thus I was, and others are, poor wretches deluded by
Satan, who tells the Quarrellor that to affront a meek Man is noble, and the
Envious, that revenge is sweet, representing sin in its false-dresse, that so
it may neither be unpleasing to the Cautious, nor terrible to the Fearful, but
conformable to every disposition.

But the better to stifle and overcome these temptations, let us consider first
that every action has its proper end, if it be good, the end will be
answerable, for the end though it come last, it is first proposed, and guides
the whole course, thence it is that I giving the raines of my actions to (...),
had well-nigh ended in destruction here, which (...) a greater hereafter, these
serious thoughts hereof in (...) a conviction on my conscience, that the end
(...) be happy, because there remains some thing to come after it, which the
spirit of truth says is death, the due wages of sin, and it is want of the
thoughts of the end, that makes the end of so many, wretched; The Epicure
thinks the only means to make him happy is to indulge to sensuality, and
pleasures taken up at any rate, and the Drunkard imagines it consists in
abundance of wine, like Bonosus, of whom it was said, he was not born to live,
but lived to loss a pot, who being out-drank by one, he looked on it as an
infamy, and therefore hanged himself for vexation, of whom it was then said in
division, there hangs a Tankard, and no man, here is the way, and the end.

Secondly, that after an expiration of life, there is another being to be
expected, an eternal state, the happiness or wretchedness whereof consists in
the former consideration, a due weighing, that all our actions Centurin a good
end, which end it an eternal state, the consequence of this opened my eyes to
see the vanity of my villainy and youthful exorbitancies; In so much that true
conviction of spirit, and no self end, or intrest, or hope of favor has
prompume on to this discovery, but my wounded conscience that makes me fear
the displeasure of a Deity, more then death, knowing in my retired thoughts,
that it is my duty toward God, and my Country, to un^ould those secrets that
may ruin violence, and preserve (...) ^^ocencie, I shall therefore unlock the
door, and show you the deceiveing ways, acts and offenses of the Highway
Councels, being of that horrid nature, that they deserve the punishment both of
body and soul.

CHAP. II. An absolute Defiance of all those that follow my former lewd Courses.
NOW you lycentious Rebels that would be deemed Knights of the Road, I detest
your actions, for which I have showed my reason before, I begin my discovery,
then since your deceit must be divulged, pluck of your false Beards, Vizards,
Hoods, Pacches, Wens, Mufflers, and false Perriwigs, all unnatural, together
with those other disguises, that obscure the due proportion of your faces, that
I may make known unto the world and let them see, whether you possess so much
grace as may make you blush at the repetition, of the vileness of your ways,
the which I fear you want, which conjecture arises by the experience of my own
former hardness of heart when it was my own case; which in ordinate
gracelessnesse I so much commiserate in my mind, that I could with joy deposite
my blood to extenuate your transgression and that they might be no more; but
sound reason tells me I may be far more advantageous in serving of my native
nation if I live, by showing them your baseness and instructing them how to
avoid the danger of the same, that so Travelers may be secure and such as have
an inclining fancy to your practice may by the unworthiness of the art be
dissuaded from a closure with your wickedness, who ever therefore casts an
affectionate eye upon this highway baseness as a course belonging to a
Gentleman, shows himself to be ignoble, and is certainly blind, it being
clearly speculative to every discerning eye as not only base in it self, but
infamous in its end, which ought to be regarded in every undertaking. It is in
part admitted, that a Gentleman by birth and education destituted of means and
action too, may by the haughtiness of his spirit be lifted up to disdain, want
as a Tyrant, that may through its oppression make him rebel, and so cause him
to attempt this art though void of honor, when no nobler an employment
presents him with a maint'nance, but now when employments in the sports of Mars
his fiery blows affords both maintenance and honor in the exercise of arms,
against our nations foes, it is a^ore becoming them though stained in their
reputations, to endeavor their by the dends of martial power to snatch the
wreath of honor out of victorys hands in the field of proud Belona, then in
disgrace and infamy to besot their spirits in the arms of wanton Venus at
home, though I am duopoly sensible that the major part of the professors of
this mystery and villainy, are so frequently apt to glory in that which truly is
their shame, supposing themselves to be the best of men who are the worst of
villains, because they are styled Captains and Leivtenants by the drawers of
the Inns when its likely they are but lately rose from that doglike life of
lackyes like the fool that is proud of his own wit, because another in dirision
Ironically says he is wondrous wise.

CHAP. III. The Oath every young Theife takes when he is admitted into the
brotherhood, with other the Orders at the investation of him with that honor
of one of the Knights of the Road.
MOst disconsolate is the state of that man, that beleives not that their is a
God, but for more wreched is his condition that knowing and believing there is
a diety, shall un-God in his mind and to himself the Trinity, by worshipping
the Devil, and men's actions best speakeing their hearts, we may conclude of
those that they are all diabolichall, all having erred, and there is none
righteous no not one, for searing that their actions were not sinful enough to
conjoyne a oneness between them and the Diver, this is their practice at their
first admittance they confer an Oath of such soul stusse, as if with more then
a threefould cord, which is not easily broken, they would old themselves (...)
by their perjury, like him, that swears to be true to falsehood (which implies
an impossibility) by reading a charge of secrecy that what ever misfortune
happens to cloud their freedom by rendering them as a object to Justice and the
Law, they shall conceal their accomplices to the death, or against any other
jeopardy what so ever, burying in oblivion not only his confederates, but also
the manner of his entrance into that accursed way, and further they proceed to
swear him, that if the Judge should further press you on to a discovery of
particulars, then you must cunningly creare some men in your fancy, devising
not only names but to each man a particular feature, as such a beard, such a
hose, such eyes (...) ^^^^ingly finding, to each a dwelling and possession;
provided you be fure to place them at a distance far enough, and then before
inquiry be made, the danger of your trial will be past, and (...) may be your
pretended discovery may purchase favor from the bench for discovering of such
a one as was never thought on before; now ^f you are examined why and now you
fell into these courses; you must tell them that you came up to London, or some
other eminent place, with an intent to go to service, but before you could
provide your self, you had spent all your money, here setching a great sigh,
looking very, sad confessing that necessity constraining you to it to supply
your wants, you sell into these wicked courses, which will make them think you
are a poor young man newly drawn aside, and so cause them to take pity of your
condition; then must you promise never to commit the like offense: but if their
mercy extend to the remission of your guilt, it shall not only wrest you from
the due punishments of the Law, but from the prosecution of your past evils,
that so as you escape the one, you will also forsake the other, this is the
only way being in jeopardy to acquit you from those afflictions incident to
the like offenses by the justice of an imparciall Law, and by these means you
will not only qualify the guilt of it, but have liberty to fall to your old
courles, nor must conscience trouble you, but dispense with every impiety, and
glory in the greatest iniquities; thus in all kind of goodness they are slack,
but apt and readily prone to do evil with a kind of eagerness and delight,
having resolved to grow old in the most exquisite practice of vice.

CHAP. IV. The order prescribed, or the charge given by the eldest Thief; to
the resh before they attempt.
AS every proceeding has its aim and end, so has then undertakings its aim
to do evil, to rob and steal, and to spone the innocent, its end to conviction
and punishment and these to extremes also, its mean degrees of carriage for
being admitted, and that admittance graced or rather ^nsatiated in villainy,
they receive those precepts that may advantage their designed wickedness; for
Satan having led them by the hand unto that place which experience concludes as
most commodious for their purpose, they retire and lie in wait in some byplace
most advantageous and least suspicious, which yields the eye the prospect of
the road, to strictly view the booties, that others misfortunes may enrich
their's, and the honest man's loss be their gain, and then the oldest Theif as
they repair to their stations pleads the precepts of his experience, and as an
arch Ingen of the Devil, draws every advantage that may promote his cause to
the longest extent in this due order following, ye that are sworn Knights of
the road be ruled by me, whose long experience makes me able to command, and my
love to you willing to instruct you, thus must you place your maskes and chin
cloth and fit it at a moment to disguise your faces, thereby to blind the
intellects of such as by constraint pay tribute to your wants, who then can
know and with considerat heed directly swear you are the men, when these
artificial vizards, are withdrawn, and so the visible tokens vanish that might
inform men's knowledge what you are, and that your words may have a different
sound, after the utterance of your speech by (...) in your mouths, that so as
your habit, face and hair obscure your discovery, your speech reputed
undisguisable, may darken and not give light to your discovery, and then
ingeniously contrive a warch word to your selves that may occasion no
suspicion, as what is a Clock, a question common in almost every mouth, which
being named, let every man fall to his proper work, those that are strongest at
the grasp, let them seize first, always duly observing this, to catch the
bridle with your left hand, and with the right, seize on your sword, for your
just guard, and if they do resist, the one prevents their slight, the other
cuts his courage, the weaker sort whose charge is to bid stand, and so confront
the Horses head, present them with a pistol fit for to discharge, if they deny
delivering of their purse, so that either by consent, if not constraint,
enforce them to yield.

CHAP. V. The manner of their assault, with their Courage in and after the
Action.
THus being in readiness, let one cry arm, arm my Comrades. Whilst he is
talking thus, a prize comes by or in their sight, if up the Hill they meet him,
if down, they bid you follow close at their heels, where each having singled
out his choice, which he likes to deal with, the coast being clear, they fall
up to their close order, and side by side they jointly seize their prize, where
sometims the baseness of some spirits, make them unworthy of what they are,
men; for when nature has bestowed the full proportion of their limbs, to make
them of the largest manly size, yet so base is their spirts, so different are
the qualities of men, that no soonerthe word deliver is let loose, but they are
supprised so with fear, that like babes, they cry and tremble before there is
any weapon drawn to affright them, and of times their purses are as poor as
their courages, which makes thieves resolute and desperate to the like attempts
again, when occasion offers a trial, but then on the contrary, to their
praise, I speak it, that some in comparison to those baller men, are pignies,
yet of so undaunted resolution and unresistible courage, that neither threats
of death or torture can dull the edges of their courageous spirits, but that
before they will yield to men, they will stoop to death; but when power and might
subdues them to the Rob bers basest will, then they withdraw unto a secret
place, and search the secret parts where money use to lie, with so strict care,
that sooner may they quoine, then save one penny for their need, where if they
find some gold by chanes, quilted for more security, they call them Villains,
and dishonest men, because they seek to save what is their own, which they call
cousonage, at which the poor Traveller cries he is utterly undone, because he
loses then his whole estate, and by his means, endeavors to move their stony
hearts, but it is impossible to mollify those Flints with tears, or move those
Adimants with sighs or groans, whose consciences sleep fast in villainy, never
moved at a poor man's loss or straits, but prompt for the desire of unlawful
gain, to act the parts of fiends not, men; nor does your baseness centur in
those wrongs, but higher swell, oft-times exchanging horses with a jest, that
it is no robbery, desperately engaging them thus robbed, to swear they shall not
follow you by hew and cry, or by means of a general rising of the towns
adjacent; and so robbed, tifled, and amazed you leave them wrapped in woes, and
haste away to secure your selves where every Crow that flies, exstracts a fear,
and every Calfe or Coult that stirs or makes the bushes rush, seems to your
fearful fancy, a Constable to apprehend you for your theft, which sets your
wits upon the tenters of the most severest exigents, I speak not at a giusse,
but what I know, for lately when a Robbery was done, a strong confusion rose by
so small means, as cannot but engage the serious to admire the timerity of
their dejected minds, for an Owl who to gain shelter from the troubles of
the uncouth days, when all the ayery tribe wandering, flock to him, screen'd
now in the obscure retired residence of a hollow tree, no sooner was he got
into his den, but between discontent and joy, he seemd to rend his hollow
residence with fatal whoops, and much amazing screeks which infused such a
terror in their distrustful minds, that whips, switches and spurs were set on
furious exercise to out-speed the wind in their quick flight, for fear those
hollows were voices of the Country men, following them in their great hasty
speed to save themselves, thus does a continual fear attend their motion;
Insomuch that they fear very shadow of themselves, till some by Inn, afford; a
shelter to your baseness, where you fall to a division of your spoils, but
here you appear in your colors, by acting a cheat to your Robbery, and play
the double Thieves, first rob honest men, and chen your selves, with bloody
oaths cheating your bosom friends, reserving the best part unto your selves,
from those you date abuse, and to defend your justness, dam your selves to the
lawest region of the worst of places: thus have I often found your perjury; sad
it is to do wickedly, but most desperate to load on sin, with the weight of
another.

CHAP. VI. The unblessedness of their gains, and how soon they spend what they
thus unlawfully get.
THat which is founded on an unjust and unsound, principal, can have no good
or substanciall being or continuance, and that which is purchised by fraud and
deceit is wasted as likely with a blast, as it was gotten unjustly with abuses,
so that it marers not whether it be little or much that is gotten, since the
quality destroys the quantity being purchased with sin and sometimes that sin
died with blood, and as says the proverb, il-goten goods never prospers, nor
can they ever thrive who like rolling stones, are always moving from place to
place, but as the devil was your frined in enterprising your wretched act, so
are you his vessels in spending in adoration of him what you have gained, so
that to have much is to as little purpose, as for a man to thatch his dwelling
house with snow which the beams of Phabus, dissolves in drops, for Inns and
Taverns, those common sincks of sin, that know our wicked ways in larg our
biles to sink our coin in their unbosomed pouches, who knowing our wicked ways
presume we dare not cavile, least all prove ill for us, so that if right
considercd we rob for them not for our selves, and as with sin we purchased
what we had, so they with cousenage rob us, leaving remediless our wrongs that
live by fraud, to make them swim in wealth, so thrifty is their way that on the
ruins of the country they do subsist, which makes them rich in plenty, as we
penurious through our want of coin spent in excess; for some I know who had a
trible part of all we gained, as being Master of us all, and yet his gains
oftimes came short to countervaile his for'st expense and prodigality, yet was
he wary if I truly veiw him in his station, lest too much vapouring should
occasion suspicion, whence I conclude that want of a blessing on our continual
(...) trade, which is accursed, made all to vanish as if it had never been, he
only suffering us to rain till we were fit for the scourge of his wrath, who
spares long to see if grace will work its proper end, conversion: as ever
blessed be his name it has on me, but if in stead of contrition, there appear
nesse of heart, then God, lets loose Justice to execute due vengence on the
actors of such hellish deeds: First apprehension, next imprisonment, then
conviction then last of all, to conclude the tragical interlude of your
exorbitances, comes the period of your life by a shamfull death which the law
extracts as a due debt we owe to Justice.

BOOK II. Hearty disswasions with my best endeavors to reclaim them.
CHAP. I. The misery of an imprisoned estate, which must be the first step of
satisfying the Law.
LIberty, that rich inheritance of all that are born to live, and live to dye,
as it is the sweetest of enjoyment next that imperial gem of health, so the
want thereof, next to sickness, must needs be of all other the most bitter,
since then to be confined unto the confines of a Jaile is to be in part unmand
what and how great is that wretchedness that is occasioned by a want not only
of liberty, but a continual dread of a shameful death, and that made more
terrible by the unavoidable expectation of an eternal imprisonment, where
there is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing, of Teeth with flames of
unquenchable fire for ever more; for like the pitcher that though it go often
to the well, yet comes it broken home at last, othen forsake this lise, lest the
prison become your Inn, and the terror of that place full of tortures are so
exsasperated by the imagination of a noble mind, that hell it self cannot
contain more exquisite woes and pains, a continuance whereof wear sufficient to
punish all offenses, if the law dispensed with that debt due to Justice the
life of the offenders: for you no sooner enter here but a thousand vices in a
hundred licentious wretched souls surround you, where sighing is their air,
their comfort coldness, and their food despair, and when the keeper with the
grim aspect of his stern cuntenance makes you tremble with the fear of a new
marterdom, whilst the insulting rascal on the tiptoes of his pride, screws his
il-favored face to a stern frown, which so dejects the spirit of the imprisoned
slaves, that the contrition of their looks seems to implore his smiles whose
divilish heart having renounced remorse casts a desiance in their pitious face,
and not there unquiet hours only do taste the gall of bitterness but the sweet
minutes of their rest, if that rude place afford them any, are frighted with
your cares or some rude noise of beastly creatures from whose drunken voices
comes unwelcome sounds, oaths, cursing the Stars, the Earth, and all that's
represented to his thoughts blaspheming God, banning Angels, and their
creditors, reviling fate, in that he is heir only to fortuns frowns, and to be
sure, if only a sinal spark of wickedness came with him to this worldly hell,
you accomplish the highest exigent of shame before you come to shake hands and
part, and grow a subtle Artist in the Devils Trade of sin. Most in consistant
then is the found practice of the vulgar sort who say, a prison will reclaim
the faults of youth, when it is most true they do precipitate their utter over
throw, for ill exsamples purge not sin, but adultrate the will that is pron to
folly, so that the prisoners living deaths are feeling moniments of
wretchedness, and yet are only prologues to those tragedies, your over throws
record in characters of blood this will instruct you what it is to die not unto
nature, but far worse to a perpetual infamy.

CHAP. II. By showing them how much they are mistaken in other Men's opinions of
them.
MEN may be witty yet not wise, subtle yet not discreet, as it fares with
most of you, who think, though vainly, that by attempting deeds ignoble will
purchase you esteem, renown, and honor in the popular, vulgar eye, as if to
act base villainy were the way to be admired, not scorned, as though the actions
you have done, are such as have contracted amity with honor, and so engaged
Men in Authority to protect your lives, that in despite of Law you must
survive; so from the Jayle unto the gallows, in a presumptuous safety you are
sent careless of danger, where justice tells you your conceits are vain, as are
your lives, expenses and ungodly trade, for men whose judgments stear by piety,
justly condem your sin, and pity you for charity, not your desert, and since
my sincere endeavor has thus discovered you and your disguise, besure they I
know your tricks to well to be entrapped by you, since your fained worths are
obvious cheats, and faint prorectors of your wickedness, seace, and give over
those acts of fiends not men, which makes you as much the effigies of Satan,
as God created you the Image of Himself.

CHAP. III. By putting them in mind of their wicked and cursed ends, (which
they fondly and foolish: ly jest at, as also their reward in the world to come.
GOD concludes him cursed, and man most miserably wretched that hangs upon a
Tree, which besides the shame that attends you and your posterity, the death it
self might with the cursedness of it, dissuade you to put a period to the
practice of that great wickedness, in which consists the violation of a
command, and so a breaking of the whole Law, neither dies not your shame with
your body, but your Family though never so Noble, suffers a wrent in their
honor, by partiscipating of the Infamy you suffer, which for some ages rest
dyed with scandal, although never so much innocent of the crime, and yet those
senseless Catiffes who inherit this death by their transgressions, laugh at
this heavy curse, as at a sport, and call it pleasure to be pluck to heaven in
a string, and thus by the power of Satan are they prompt onwards to laugh at
their own ruin, whilst what affrights others with an apprehention of horror,
does rather move them with a kind of pleasing joy to delight themselves, who
think the more they become conformable to the Devil, the nearet they approached
happiness, but the same weakness that leads you on in confidence to those so
groundless hopes, may prompt you one step farther to presume, as I found mercy,
so may you from God and men, I wish to you the glorious grace I found, but pray
consider a particular, cannot Compose a general, one Swallow makes no summer,
and know that if mercy did extend to wave heavens and earths wrath from me, yet
grace twice offended, tribles the vengeance of a severe just Judge, and for your
sufferings here by death, that is but a rast of those highly birrer and ever
lasting sorrows that are reserved in store, for such as defile their lives with
so great sin, as makes heaven execute the heat of wrath wrath, as the due
merit of your heinous sin; which to prevent, thereis only one mesnes left, and
that is contrition; if there remain yet any sparks or likelihood of grace,
though but so much as may occasion one good thought: and if that unto sin you
have not made a lasting league of servitude, behold your fact with a relenting
eye of pity: thereby to purchase ease and comfort to your sad disparing souls:
then happy men, not that you have been base, but that from sin you have
retired the sanctity. Times never past to mend, better late then never; for he
that delights to persevere in sin, not being able to appeal to Christ, and to
his merits, but with a willing greediness lays hold on his damnation. And if
no sense of things secular can convict those hardened hearts, if not a temporal,
yet an eternal death must needs move sense of danger; the one is but breath,
the other endless everlasting pain, which ere it be ended is still renewed in
burning lakes of brimstone that never die, but burn with cruel tortures for
each heinous sin; where howls and hollow groans adds to the eternal weight of
misery; when frosts, fires, drownings, sulphur, and other the worst of
punishment attend their wretched souls: this is the sad period of your ways,
which if it work not it is desired end, plecease to labor to persuade you more.
But on the contrary, if I cannot convert you, I could willingly convict you:
and here I could name both you, and your abode, but that you have no constant
residence, but for a night in some by-road, and so away, either into the West,
or North, or sometimes into the South: And as your dwellings you change, so do
you every day your names; so that in shape, in being, place and name, you
change with every day, like the mutable Camelcon, but never into white
Innocence: And thus to inform, were but to put in doubt the Inquisitive, and
not at all in lighten to your due apprehension.

CHAP. IV. An Ingenuous discovery of them to each discerning eye, by infallible
tokens how to know them on the Road, and if robbed, how surely to track them.
THe uncertainty of your attire, and various disguises, with your
non-residence, and changable names, makes me incapable to do what I would;
therefore I will do what I can, and in every lineament so pourtract you and your
carriages to every man that scriously shall peruse this Treatise, that with
ease, not difficulty, he may know you as you ride, and by that means enable
him to provide for his own security; or if by you robbed, let him but observe
my directions, and he need not question to apprehend you, when your senses of
danger is past, and you in your thoughts secure. You shall have it may be two
or three of them overtake you, and pretend if they feared your strength, that
they were lately affronted in the Wood by eight or ten stout fellows; but they
beat the rogues, and made them Hie to save themselves, and seal this with
strong oaths, and by your answer sound your spirits whether valiant or no;
which if they find apt to be danted; then they wait an opportunity to act their
roguery on you; and it may be sometimes they boast in drink, what they have done
to others, as now to you; and as a reward for what unwillingly you lend to
them, they will pretend to give you a word that shall protect you from the like
affront again far better then your sword; as, Round-de-la-vera-hay, The Moon
shines bright, or the like; but these are chears, and no securing powers: It Is
true, when we were ready to seiz a prize, and spied a friend, or other company
coming near, we used some such words, to bid our company forbear a while for
our own safeties sake, which honest Travelers ignorant of any wrong suspected
nothing, whilst we by these knew what we had to do, but else those words we
valued not, for prize and nothing else could satisfy our minds that fought
for money; therefore never believe them; but observe dear Countrymen my better
rules for your security, which for your sakes I Will take the honest pains to
write in plain-wise, not deceitfully.

BOOK III Plain, instructions for the honest Traveller, that he may pass in
safety on the way.
CHAP. I. What he is to take heed unto before he begin his Jonrney.
DEar Countrie-men that travel on the Road, the pastpart of my wicked life
having been consumed in sin, and that sin maintained by the spoil of
Passengers; I seeing the wretchedness of that state, find how much I am bound
to satisfy the debt I owe you, to the uttermost of my power, which reaches to
no more satissactory an act, then good advise how to avoid the dangers of the
road, and what I spoke herein is the issue of my long finful experience; as
thus, when you carry a charge about you, let secrecy conceal your money, and
the time of your departure in your breast; for it is a cuftome no less common
then indiscreet, when you undertake a journey, to blase that undertaking
amongst your reputed friends, who out of seeming love, drink healths to your
good Journey, and your safe return; this glass of friendlhip exprates the
least mistrust of wrong or thought of Ill, when by those means I have often
known a Son betray his Father, a Brother his Brother, and one friend another;
in condescending and complotting with some thievs who for his giving notice of
the prize, shares one quarter, or more, of that gain he so betrays, when but
for this fond humor they had not been discovered and waylaien; and which is
worst; sometimes you choose a guard to succor you, and to take your part, in
whom you trust, who ost does bring you into danger, without the least suspicion
on your part; for when they bid you stand, he will draw as in a valiant rage, and
with some one appointed for that use, hack swords, while anothyer threarens his
leath; if he stand on those terms of seeming honor: you seeing his salse
danger fear his death, and bid him yield, which he though willing seems loath to
do: nay more, he knowing well which way they fled, will send the Hue and cry
another way; and if you suppose you know any of them that did the robbery, and
do hit right, he persuades you, that whilst they sought his disguise fell off,
and therefore he marked him, and knows it is not the man, and with pensive look
he will lament your bad hap: and thus your bosom friend betraies you.

CHAP. II. How to carry themselves in their Inns.
IT is as common a custom, as a cunning policy in thievs, to place Chamberlains
in such great Inns where Cloathiers and Grasiers use to lie; and by their large
bribes to infect others, who were not of their own preferring; who noting your
purses when you draw them, they will gripe your cloakbags, and feel the weight,
and so inform the Master thievs of what they think, and not those alone, but
the Host himself is often as base as they, if it be left in charge with them all
night; he to his roaring guests, either gives item, or shows the purse it self,
who spend liberally, in hope of a speedy recruit: and all this is occasioned
by want of discretion in managing your business for the best; therefore be
secret, and let little be made known to those that watch to do you wrong.

CHAP. III. Showing the danger of traveling on the Sabbath day.
HE that expects a blessing from the Father of blessings above, must so behave
himself in the eyes of Heaven, whilst on earth, that he must live here, as if
he were there already; and the only way so to do, is to stear our actions by
Gods command, which says, Keep holy my Sabbath Day, in which we ought to
remember Gods rest from labor, and rest our selves from sin; for when we come
short of this, Gods love and protection goes so far beyond us, that we can
feel no joy in that dark night which is out of his presence; which made Moses
say, Except thou O God. go along with us, let us not go hence: thence it is,
that few which Travel on this day, escape the hands of thievs; for they know
none ride at that time, but on great and urgent business and that can scarce be
don without great store of Coin; so that if they once are seen, they sure are
robbed imediately: and though the Country are in joined to pay what you;
shall lose by day, yet not on this; because it is a day of rest ^ and as you
are remediless being robbed, so helpless before, for there is no Company to
aid the honest Traveller as at other times.

CHAP VI. How to know a Thief from an gonest man.
Be sure on the Road to associate with none but such as you find inclined
rather to leave your company, then keep it; for such as press to be near you,
though against your will, are very dangerous: But I Will presently inform you how
to know if they be thievs or not. Take occasion to make some stay, then note
whether they stay, or keep their pace, or else alight and go on foot that you
may overtake them; follow some half an hour after a slow pace, and if you
overtake them, take heed, for that is the surest symptom of a Thief: The other
usual marks of Thieves be these, which as you ride you may discern so plain,
that you need not doubt the truth of what you think. They muffle their faces
with their cloaks, or else their cloak or coat hides all their clothes; they
have a hand-kercher or scarf, which with their hand they will rear up to their
eyes, over their faces just when they bid you stand. And if by occasion of my
discovery they leav off this, that you may miss your observayour eye full in
their face, and you shall see them turn their faces on one side; which if they
do, then keep you distance, ride from them, and mark whether their face and
beards agree together, and are not counterfeit: and above all things shun him
that rides in a Mountier-Cap; and such as whispers often, and are inquisitive
after your business; or what your employments are, for it is to know what you
have about you.

CHAP. V. Showing how dangerous it is to grow familiar with any stranger upon
the Way.
WHen you take your Journie whither the occasion calls you with a friend, you
pass not far before your company is increased by a third: when there is two
to one, there is no fear of him being alone, before you call him fellow-tra
veller, and joie in his company, and he in yours: but before you have rid 10
miles together on your way he overtakes some three more of his Company, then he
shakes and trembles, and seems afraid; and cries, Directly friends we are
fore-laid; if ye have Charge about you, let me know it, we will fighr it out; if
we have naught to lose, we were best yield: By these like words he will quickly
find whether the prize be rich; and whilst you thought there had been three
to three, there is four to two: If they find you armed, then one who they find
fittest for the work, they cloth in Russet, like a Country-bore, in his
high-shoo's, with twists of Hay instead of Boots, a goad in his hand, riding
aside upon a saddle moade of a wispe of straw, who rides cheek by joul with
you, and causes mirth by his most simple talk; you not so much as think he is
capable of hurt: but when he has brought you into their snare, he seizes one,
and your new fellow-traveller the other, the rest come in, and then it is in
vain to strive, for nothing less then your money will ransom you out of their
hands.

CHAP. VI. How, when, and where to wide.
THose so many prodigion ways to rob the Innocent, bids every man be wary
how, and when he (...), and where: if he have any charge about him, let me
advise you not to ride by day, but by night; but for those base sheep-stealing
punie rogues, that hazard their necks for a Noble, I am unacquainted with their
actions; therefore I do not undertake to show their deceits; but for those
Cutters on the road, I can assure you, you are free from any horsman
whatsoever: for it is their rule, that surely none by night will ride that are
worth robbing. Next, they must keep civil hours, for fear that through
mistrust they are apprelien ded; therefore it is their chief care to take their
Inn betimes? and more, they hardly dare advenuture in the dark, because they
cannot see either your dangerous defenses, or their own advantages, or spy
pistols or other private weapons: and you have time your money to convey from
them, and diverse other advantages the day denies; but since this is ordained
for rest, I can say no more, but it is my best advice, to keep you from the
dangers of the road: and it is a general rule with high-way-men, to keep their
station upon the greatest roads, that of those number which pass by, they may
select such as they think are richest prize: but on your petty rodes, where
searce any use to pass; they never use to come: there you may pass secure:
which I advise you choose if possible you can, rather then on great roads. But
it is a foolish custom you have gotten, when you ride by any place that commonly
speaks danger, you bussle up together side by side, which is most commonly your
overthrow: but take my counsel here, when e're you ride, in fear especially,
ride far asunder, a Buts length at least, and then be sure they will never
attempt to rob you, when your straggling order will give some of you leave
undoubtedly to escape, and to raise the Country in their pursuit: Besides,
their Company is set in several parties, when should you ride in a cluster,
they will surely sallie out; and seiz their purchase; when if they should fall
upon a straggling party, before they can do any thing it is strange but rescue
comes, which easily will make the Cutters fly.

CHAP. VII. If he be beset.
I Have thus traced them in every meander of their sinful courses, whereby to
discover them to you, that you may avoid them; it shall be my next work to
instruct you how to behave your self if unhappily you are beset; Look not as if
amazed about, as if you hoped for rescue, this incourages them to height of
resolution; but look as stern as they, and so, as if to fear you were a
stranger, and make your brow the throne of rage and fury; and this is the
readiest and most certain way to save your money, and your reputation too; for
they fighting with a guilty conscience within, and without against a
Countrie-Law and Justice, right and equity, which I speak by experience, if
nobly you resist, will make the most undaunted spirit of them all stoop to
discouragement; for I have known them that of themselves have been of so
unresistable a resolution, that they durst out-brave the roaring Canon to the
mouth, and scorn to stoop to basceness; yet in this act, when men have but
seemed to resist, they have shook and trembled, even to a remorse of their
wickedness; for though they swear to shoot you if you yield not, it is but to
fright you, for they dare not do it, because they know that murder never
escapes the hand of heavens just punishment, and by thus doing oftentimes
Thievs may be taken, and so others freed by their apprehension from the like
danger you were in, and by this act you will gain honor and repute.

CHAP. VIII. By telling them of a fault most Travelers are guilty of, if
Thievs assault them.
YOur meanest hearts submit too soon, and oft-times yield almost before they
bid you stand, and then wish they may escape, that so the Hundred may repair
your loss, if they are not apprehended by the Hue and Cry, and unworthily you
oft-times ad to, and if not double the sum, knowing the Hundred will be glad
for to compound; and so you cozen both the Country and the Thievs, and to
convince them that you fought like men, you cut and flash your clothes, and
swear they did it in the fight who robbed them; when yet ten to one your blows
were tears, crying for life, and then bid them take all; but these ignoble
spirits I hate, and by my work intend no love to them, but to the nobler sort.

CHAP. IX. If by chance he be unawares surprised, how to behave himself.
BUt if by your own negligence, and the frowns of fate, the pleasure of your
Journie be eclipsed and clouded by a sudden surprisal, blame not me, who
endeavor if you please to hinder those accidents if you be careful, else the
fault's your own; Yet let me still advise you what to do if you see no hopes
but you must yield, strive not at all when it is too late, but give the fairest
words you can, racking your finest wits to please their ear; and most devoutly
wish you had more money to supply their wants, and with a kind of
cheerfulness deliver some, and so perhaps they will let you pass without further
to do; but if they make an offer, seem to yield freely to it: then will they
sift you soundly, but do not hold your hand upon your money, but seem to be a
stranger unto fear, and that will vanish their suspicion of a greater sum;
for when I have took so much as pleased me well, I have by men's fear had
grounds to think that they had more, and so by laying my hand upon their arm
or thigh, or near where it lay hid, they would cry out, they were undone, when
I as yet found nothing more, but by their temeritie have been encouraged to
make a stricter search, and found considerable sums that secretly lay hid,
when if they had been disetect, they had been secure and safe from me.

CHAP. X. Being Robbed, how to follow them, which way to set Heu-and-cry, how
to coast, and where to find the Thievs.
IF you have lost your wealth, their is no help; but to endeavor to surprise
the thievs by strict pursuit: therefore be wary, and follow with all speed,
tell you obtain your wish: and seiz the rogues that lately seized you. But be
careful, as it becomes you to follow undiscerned, lest they lay Ambuscadoe to
surprise your liberty, and it subdue to bonds; for if they see you in your
chase, the foremost he will slip into some by place, when you supose no ill, ride
on: but when you do draw nigh, they sally, and secure you in strong bonds,
where fast bound they leav you, and then he that comes next releases you; to
him you tell your adverssfates, and say they left the road, but whither they
went you know not how to tell, but admit me to your counsel, and I Will tell
you how to shun their escape; and by example the surest Shool-Master, I shall
direct you what to do in this: as suppose in Coal-brook-road you lost your
purse, the Thievs to Vxbridg-road or Stanes will surely ride and not fail to
take up their lodging, there for that night this is most certain, and the
soundest precept in their law, and truly for invention, the wittiest secret
that I er'e knew or heard, and stands with reason, therefore let reason guide
you to secure these Thievs if they have robbed you: for they know full well
none use to travel from road to road: no not the Hue-and-cries they never
cross the passages, but go straight along; so that by this close way they rest
at pleasure, and are gone again before the lazy Hue and Cry salutes them with
an alarm; nay, and with grief I speak it, some silly fellow newly crept into
office searches and enquires, and by Authority seizes poor Travelers, as far
from wrong as they from wit and knowledge, thinking by this false apprehension
to get credit, and be esteemed double-diligent, when they poor harmless souls,
now under hold, though free from guilt, do oft-times lose their lives for what
they never were once so much as privy to; therefore to regulate this error,
and that you may avoid the like, take my advice, and then I hope you will find and
secure the right offender: and so to do, with all possible speed scour the next
great Road, not straight before, but either on the right hand, or on the left;
and if you miss them, then conclude they are sheltered in some Inn which you
have past, and therefore observe my good advice, and you shall surely find and
apprehend them, as thus; If you have mist them, set some careful Spies with a
sufficient assistance near at hand, and be consident you will see them come that
way without the least apprehension of fear; and if (because I have betrayed the
secrets of their Trade) they leav this use, I am sure neither their wit, nor
the Devils assistance, can ever devise the like again; and I seriously protest,
I see no way for them to fly with safety, or the least hope to esape: But
this observe, that if they light of any considerable sum, then they rid that
night to their randezvouz in the City of London, which is too sure a shelter
for them; but with a real heart to fright them from that way, who I cannot
draw from it with advice, I will pursue them hither with the best instructions
for their apprehension; but observantly take notice, for here is as eminent an
example of their subtlety as any ever the Devil enriched their knowledge with;
for if you are robbed in the Eastern quarter, pursue them not in the direct
road to London with Hue and Cry, for by some other way they are fled;
therefore have to the City, and in Westminster, Holborn, the Strand, and
Commongarden search speedily, for there they are. If Northward they light on
you, then to Southwark, the Bank side, or Lambeth they are gone, and so of the
West and South; and when you find them, seiz all you find, for they are all
Companions that are together.

Thus they always do contrive to take those places where they may most
seemingly be safe from dangers of pursuits, and in thus doing as I have showed
you, they think the City is between them and the Hue and Cry, and they
secure; and so before the search comes to them, as it seldom goes so far, they
have time enough to stay, and then be gone. Thus have I laid such a form of
Instructions for the Hue and Cry, as if observed, they cannot escape his hands.

CHAP. XI. An extraordinary Charge the Country usually put themselves unto,
which is both needless and hurtful.
Custom, that Mother of absurdities, has not only Tolerated, but Naturalized
a practice, which though well intended, is not only unnecessary in a discreet
eye: but hurtful, as shall be made manifest; for where any robbery is
committed, the Hundred commonly puts a watch immediately to guard that place
where it is done. Which verifies the old Proverb used in di^ision of the like
acts: To shut the stable-door when the Steed is lost: it is not to be imagined
that ever the Thief should come to make a needless breach to thank the Groom
for feeding of the beast so well, and rubbing, dressing, and looking to him with
honest care: for just so it must needs fare with them that should igno, rantly
come to the same place where they seized their prize knowing this custom to be
in use, but say they should com there, and at that time the watch is sat; I
really protest, I ever held that road that had a watch upon it, to be the
surest and best place for purchase. For first the honest Travellours supposes
it impossible for them to be robbed, being guarded thus, which makes him
careless to secure himself, because they fear not; whilst alas! the Thievs do
what they list, and freely pass, and the watchmen never the wiser; for they
stand on that place commanded for their station, and move not from it, when
it is indifferent with the Thievs when he lays hold on what he looks for, his
booty, which where he singled it out, all places are alike to him, and so
another's as good as that: so that the coast be clear in sight; nd when he has
done the deed, he may securely pass the watch, who cannot discern or know him
from another man, but lets him pass for honest. For I never past them, but they
gave me civil language: it is true, they bid me have a special care I was not
robbed, when in truth it was my trade to plunder others: but then suppose they
had examined me, I would have answered them with such respect and civil
language, and praise the work they stood to do, that they could not suspect me;
and I have known some of my fellow Cutters, that when examined, have carried
themselves with that discretion, that to encourage them to be careful in their
place, has thrown twelve-pence, or a half-crown piece but newly borrowed,
where they never mean to pay, that they have promised to drink his honest
health. Nay, suppose they should suspect me and my Company, alas! they are
poor silly old men, that are decrepid, weak, and altogether unable to make
resistance, and good for nothing but to loyter there; for I have seen a dozen
such stand all together with Halberds, Pikes, Pitchforks, and Clubs, amazed and
frighted, not daring to stir to rescue them that were distressed; whilst we
before their faces have bid men stand; assaulted, surprised, and refled such as
we liked; when we had done it, and were upon the gallop, then they faintly
cry, Thievs, Thievs: Stop them, stop them; when none but Trees and Hedges that
heard their clamours: and I have known some that by way of parley have grown
familiar with them, and watched opportunity, and seized and bound them hand and
foot; then in a ditch have charged them on their lives to lay so quiet that
none may hear them: and then like a safe guard, set to preserve the Travellour
from wrong, with the watch-mens bills have stood with confidence till booty
come that way, and then made bold as with authority to stop and hold such as
they think have coin, and on pretense of search for what was lately lost upon
the way: if they find purchase worth the taking, seaz it and be gone: so that
a watch does hurt, not good. But if you needs will have it so, choos lusty able
men, resolved and yonug, arm them with bows and arrows, Muskets, or good
Carbines, or Fowling-pieces, and with a horse or two let them coast up and
down: this may do good, that they may not be so abused as I have shown, but if
occasion be, may follow on to purpose; and this is my advice proceeding from
experience.

CHAP. XII. Diverse Instructions for the Innkeeper, how to know Thieves from
his honest Guests.
THus have I traced them from their first entrance to their action, and from
their action to their flight, and I hope therein given so clear light to those
that desire their apprehension, that yet may occasion either their Conversion,
or Imprisonment, and that their Conviction; and having spoke sufficiently unto
the Travilor to be careful in his carriage in each particular: Give me leave
to add a word unto the honest Innkeeper, that so he may discern between the
honest Travilor and the Thief, which I shall perform in a word; which to do,
let him make it his chiefest care not to wink at such dishonesty for hope of
gain, least that sweet be imbittered by futer trouble and disgrace: therefore
let thy respects, who ever thou art that reads in this, be levelled at honesty
more then gain, knowing that a certain little with a godly peace of
contentment, is a greater gain, and a higher happiness, then an uncertain deal
with a terror of conscience. And to discover them is easy, if you observe my
Rules.

First, let the Ostler observe and he shall discern their extraordinary
curiosity about their Horses, they must be strangely dressed, and as strangely
fed, with mashes, bread, and mingled provender, and that in an unusual
quantity; and if he wonder at this, they cannot forbear but praise their
Tricks, and show how by their good abilities they do deserve it, and sometimes
they will boast their worthy services will soon repay the cost, or some dark
words to that effect, that are palpable grounds for to suspect them; and then
they will ask, whose Horse is that, and what is the owner, that stands there?
what function is their Master? what manner of men? whither they travel, how
far, and when? So by his answer they surmise which will be the rich?st
purchase.

And, secondly, if you not their Clokebags, they are empty, only they carry
them to make ashew.

And then thirdly, when the Chamberlain has ushured them to their Chamber, he
strait is sent away; but let him hearken, and if they are surely Thieves, it is
ten to one, but they fall of share what prize they have got that day, and let
him pry narrowly into their Chamber and he shall see them share as well as
hear the money, and every one shall take what is his lot; this they never
defer, if they have had any purchase, lest he that has the purse should cheat
the rest; this done, they hug each other, and then they knock in have,
complaining at his negligence that should attend, and call for Sack, and then
they want my Hosts company, whom with the highest strain of Complement they
salute and bid him welcome; but if my Host mark their discourse, he may
conjecture much, and know what men they are, as also by the saucy carriage of
their men; and if their several Names you do inquire, enjoin your servants to
do the like, and you shall soon perceive they have more Names then one a
piece; and when they are at supper let some one hastily knock at your gate, and
bid him that attends observe their carriage then, and he shall see them start,
as in a fearful maze, and stare each other in the face with ghastly looks, and
if you are in the Chamber, ask what Officers are those? who do they look for?
Or if forth from them, ask aloud that they may hear, what would Mr. Constable
have? who does he seek? or what is the Constable mad to knock so hastily, or
the like: and if they Weem much frighted, bid them not fear, none shall come up
or offer him that wrong to search his house, so to disparage him, for he was no
guests but honest Gentlemen, and if they command him, he will use his authority
that none shall enter; there by this you may pry into their private thoughts
so far, that they will confess something, and reply, they shall be much engaged
for your succor, and then you may use your own discretion.

And you may see by their needless stay, their disregard of time, what they
expect, for they but bait to stand and gaze what purchase they can see go by,
and when they have spied a likely money booty pass by them, they pretehd
immediate business calls them to be gone.

And when they come to take up Inn to lodge, they commonly come in divided,
and come in several companies, to frustrate the Hue and Cry as to their number:
besides if one part be surprised the other may escape; and when the residue
comes in, they seem as strangers, and of mine Host they will enquire what their
Companions are, and what Countrymen, whether he know them; and if they find he
hair a jealousy or suspect either to them, they will presently will some
business to be gone with speed: but if for honest Travilers you take them, as
it is like you may, in your kitchen they do meet by seeming chance, they as
mear strangers one another salute, and drinking there together ere they part
they become familiarly acquainted and conclude to sup together, when if you
mark them well you shall find by their behavior that they are not strangers but
bosom friends, there they embrace, rejoice, and praise their plot, and laugh
at mine Host, that he suspect them not. The fairest Innes they usually
frequent, presuming that they will not so much disparage mine Host, as to make
search among his guests, which commonly are persons of account.

Thus have I laid open their devises and deceits, that so the honest traveller
mauescape their hand, and then fall into the hands of justice, thereby
endeavoring to repair the wrongs my Country has suffered, by endeavoring to
prevent others from living in the like sin, and so subvert sin that would raise
its own dominion by their fall and ruin; to which end that it may become
effectual, the Lord assist my endeavors to discover, and others by this
discovery to apprehend them, and that apprehension expose them to the Law of
justice, if they reject the Law of mercy.

Some Observations of the Hector and his Rum-Mort.
THis Dammce Captain by his Wit, Sword, and Baskethilt-Oathes; the two last he
makes use of to frighten Rum-Cullies out of their cash: As Horses get their
livings by their backs, as Swine and Women live for their flesh, so this
Creature lives by his wits; for what should he do? he has neither Lands nor
Manors but what lies commonly in a crosse-way, yet he makes London (by a new
denomination called Fools-Paradise) his Tenement, from which he receives good
round sums of money for rent. And thus he does it, he is excellently well
skilled in all kind of gaming, and all the cheats belonging to them; he
frequents Bowling-greens, Boards-end, Billiards; as for Cards and Dice, those
are the chief instruments of his trade, which he continually carries about him;
his Antagonist in praying is a Brother, and therefo e they play booty, that
they may go half-snipps for the Bets. Hide-park is his Mart, in which he often
sels a younger Brother a little wit, at a very dear rate, in racing, wenching,
etc. Sometimes he betakes himself to what he has a long time practiced, viz.
the Art of borrowing of any believing Creature, which he intends never to
repay, and this he usually brings to pass, for having a smooth tongue he will
prate (when he thinks there is any good to be done) faster then five Barbers,
and so many Tailors; swear more then any Car-man, and lie nimbler then a City
Tradesman. If he has spen but two shillings in a Tavern, he will the next time
endeavor to be trusted in it, which if they refuse, he will go near to
insconce the reckoning for that time, besides the carrying away a Cup too much
or so. He can likewise (if occasion serve) Hack and Pad, not regarding how much
he sets his Country on the score for it. But that which stands him in most
stead is his Whore, whom he calls his Wife, by which he pretends strange things
to him he ^rapans, for they both agree together and comply, how to manage their
design: Her part is to pick up a Dick that is full of money, whom she invites
to her house, being there, she soon inticeth him to her imbracements, and when
she observes Rem in Ree, then she thinks it high time to give her Hector notice
of it, by dropping her slipper, or falling a bed-staffe; he soon receives the
alarm, being before prepared for it; up he comes (with an assistant) with fire
darting through their eyes, belching and tumbling out Oaths faster then a
Iuggler pulls Ribband out of his month, and then makes at them, as if they
intended to kill them both, for the abuse done them, one being the Husband, the
other the Brother of this deceitful Queen: In fine, they threaten so long, till
oft-times they crown their design, viz. to fleece the Cully of his money, and
if that does not suffice, enter him into Bond for more.

The Hec. the Whore, and the Doctor are three,
Which cannot drive a Trade unless they agree:
The Whore drives the Trade, the Hec. is her man;
Yet both do combine to fleece whom they can.
Now if she be clapped by trading too much;
Least that she should break, the Doctor takes pain
To vamp her anew, so upsets her again.
Therefore I shall conclude with this; after he has run in debt by all ways
that can be imagined, and cheated by all means that can be invented, then is
he in continual fear and danger of prison; if he chance to be taken, his utmost
ambition is to be baild out again, which he fears not, as long as his wits keep
him company, by which its usual for him to rid fools out of prison eight times
in ten weeks. This rather persuades then disswades him from his debauchments,
for rather then he would leave them, he had rather die of the Pox in a
Bawdy House, or patiently walk down into a Vintners Cellar and drown himself in
a Pipe of Sack. Thus have I briefly characterized him, who seldom speaks what
he means, performs nothing what he promises, pays nothing what he owes,
speaks seldom without an Oath, lives without health in his bones, and dies
without repentance

FINIS.

