A Catholics Resolution, Or, a Serious ENQUIRY Whether it be Better To turn
Independent, Presbyterian, Roman?
Or continue What I am, Catholic? In Matter of RELIGION?

London, Printed Anno Dom. MDCLXVIII.

I. Whether Independent
OF all Religions I think I could make somewhat among Them; for what Learning I
have, will help maintain their Ignorance, and my being a Proselyte, will
promote their Confidence. It Is probable I could frame as plausible a Discourse
of the Reasons inducing me to be of that Persuasion, as some they have
admitted: But before I join with them, I shall wait a resolution of the
following Queries. And,

1. Whether I can easily join with such, as would Paganize and make
Antichristian all the Churches of Christ in the whole world, except themselves?

2. Whether that be a false Church that converts their Members, before they
come to be of their Party?

3. Or that which would propound a better way for Ministers maintenance, than
God, who has ordained, That they that serve at the Altar should live by the
Altar?

4. And that set up such to be Preachers, as have no art nor knowledge in the
Tongues?

5. That make the whole essence of the Ministerial Call to consist in Election
of the people, without Ordination?

6. That cry down Bishops, because they cannot preach to all their Flock at
once, and yet themselves gather Churches from York to London, so that many do
not see the face of their Pastor once in a year?

7. Whether under that Notion all Heresies have not crept into the Church?

8. Whether I shall join to that Party, who never yet could set bounds to
themselves; but do still expect some new Discoveries for Modification? and
whether my consent go that not be more dangerous than the Oath of etc?

9. Whether I shall submit to that Party, that hitherto neither the most
Religious, the most Learned, nor the major part of any Nation ever yet
submitted to?

10. Whether the first and best of our Reformers ever thought of or practiced
such a way?

11. Whether, were I now to die, I could take comfort in their Absolution,
seeing not one of them is authorized thereunto? And,

12. That would persuade us that all our Martyrs for the Protestant Cause, did
worship God in a wrong way, and therein condemn the Generation of the Just?

Could Answer be brought in to this Jury of Questions, That they are Not
guilty, I could then better believe them, and relieve my self: For the present,
my Conscience not being satisfied, I shall with them Catholic Charity, and
pray, That as they would shun the F^ock of Superstition on the one hand: they
would likewise avoid the Shelve of Separation on the other: And O thou that
alone art an Independent Being, teach all thine to depend upon thee, for
counsel and direction, and not to despise the Churches Communion!

II. Whether Presbyterian?
IT is a Thriving way, and I am poor; the tentation therefore is strong: but
better enjoy peace of Conscience, than the spoils of violence; I shall yet
propose some cases of conscience, and upon their true Resolves, I shall either
shake hands with him, or continue what I am.

1. Whether I do not believe, That Christ taught his Apostles to pray, and say,
Our Father which art in heaven?

2. Whether I do not believe, That the Apostles did pray, and say, as Christ
taught them, Our Father which art in heaven?

3. Whether I have done well, to expunge and obliterate that Prayer, Our Father
which art in heaven?

4. Whether I do not believe; That Christ sent his Apostles, as his Father sent
him? Joh. 20.21.

5. Whether I do not believe, That the Father sent Christ to be the chief
Bishop of our Souls? 1 Pet. 2.25.

6. Whether I do not believe both these missions to be jure divino?

7. Whether I do not therefore believe, Episcopacy to be jure Divino?

8. Whether I do not believe (...), to be a different word from (...)?

9. Whether I do not believe Bishop to be the name of office and dignity,
Presbyter to be a name of order and duty?

10. Whether I do not believe Bishops are sometimes called Presbyters, because
they were Presbyters before they were Bishops?

11. Whether I do not believe Presbyters qua Presbyters are never called
Bishops?

12. Whether I do not believe that St. Paul spoke and did divinely, when he
constituted Timothy Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus Bishop of Creet, to oversee,
and if need were to rebuke the Presbyters there?

13. Whether I do not believe St. Jerome spoke piously, when he said, Nisi
exors quaedam and ab omnibus eminens potestas Episcopo ducetur, tot essent
Schismata, quot Sacerdotes; That unless an extraordinary and peerless
pre-eminence were given to the Bishop, there would be as many Schisms as
Priests.

14. Whether I do not believe King James spoke politickly and prudently, when
be said, No Bishop, no King?

15. Whether I do not believe the Primitive Church, and so the Church
successively until of very late years, one century and less than an half, was
governed by Episcopacy?

16. Whether therefore I do not believe I have done very ill to shoulder out
Episcopacy, that I might get into his Chair?

17. Whether I do not believe that Thebulis and Aerius were therefore called
Heretics, because they would have had an ecclesiastical parity, Bishop and
Presbyter all one?

18. Whether I do not believe, The Canon; of the Apostles distinguished the
three degrees of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, and gave the superiority to
Bishops* Can. 4, 6, 7

19. Whether I do not believe Thebulis and Aerius did therefore fancy an
ecclesiastical parity, because they could not be made Bishops, which they
earnestly affected? Epiphan. Haeres. 75.

20. Whether I do not believe the Church of Jerusalem was called a Virgin
Church, and never corrupted, until by Thebulis, because he was not made a
Bishop? Eus. l. 4 c. 22.

21. Whether I do not believe Ignatius lived in the Apostles days, and saw
Christ in the flesh, and being yet a Bresbyter, writ to the Antiochians, to
remember Evodius their Bishop, who first from the Apostles received the
superiority above the Presbyters; and after being Bishop himself, and going to
suffer under Trajan, writ to the Clergy and Presbyters there, That they would
be diligent in feeding their flo^k, until God did show unto them, Him that
should rule over them after his death? And in another Epistle ad Sard. thus,
Presbyters be obedient to your Bishops; Deacons be obedient to your Presbyters;
Laymen be obedient to all: And after all concludes thus: My soul for theirs
that observe this order, The Lord be with them.

22. Whether I do not believe Aerius was the first that voted down all Fasts.
Vigilantius the first that voted down all Feasts appointed by the Church both
Heretics; and therefore whether I may not fear, I am something Heretical in
following their steps?

23. Whether I do not believe, that S. James set out a Lyturgie or book of
Common Prayer, for the Church in his time; St. Basil the like in his time; St.
Chrysostom the like in his time; and so downwards until Mr. John Calvin's time?

24. Whether I do not bel^eve, that Mr. John Calvin himself thought well of
Common Prayers, and particularly of our Common Prayer Book, when he said, Quod
ad formam precum and rituum Ecclesiae, valde probo, ut certa illa extet, a qua
pastoribus in sua functione d^scedere non licet; Concerning a Form of Prayer,
and Ecclesiastical Rites, I very well like, that there be a certain and
constant one, from which the Pastors of the Church may in no wise depart or
vary?

25. Whether I do not believe, That every word in the Common Prayer Book is in
the Bible, either literally or rationally deduced thence. v. g. for the
Confession. Almighty God, Genesis 17.1. And most merciful Father, Exodus 34.6. We
have erred and strayed from thy ways like lost sheep, Psalm. 119.176. We have
followed too much the devises and desires of our own hearts, Jer. 18.12. We
have offended against thy holy laws, Mat. 7.8. We have left undone those things
which we ought to have done, 1 Samuel 15.24. And we have done those things which
we ought not to have done, 1 Samuel 24.5. 2 Samuel 12.13. And there is no health in
us, Psa. 38.3. But thou O Lord have mercy upon us miserable offenders, Luke
18.13. Spare thou them O God which confess their faults, Prove. 28.13. Restore
thou them that be penitent, Ez. 18.31. According to thy promise declared unto
mankind in Christ Jesus our Lord, Mat. 11 18. And grant O most merciful Father
for his sake, Joh. 16.23. That we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and
sober life, Titus 2.12. To the glory of thy holy name, 1 Timothy 6.16.

26. Whether I do not believe the Absolution, Almighty God the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, be grounded upon, John 20.23.

27. Whether I do not believe the Lords Prayer, with the Doxology, Thine is the
Kingdom, Power and Clory, is verbatim in Mat. 6 and without that Doxology in
Luke 11.

28. Whether I do not believe, those Versicles, O God make speed to save us, be
not in Psalm. 102.13. Open thou my lips O Lord. And my mouth shall show forth
thy praise, Psalm. 51.15.

I might be endless: to answer therefore some of your Grand Objections; I ask,

29. Whether I do not believe, Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses
of our forefathers, is a sincere prayer for the living, and no sinful prayer
for the dead, viz. That God would not visit the offenses of our forefathers
upon in their children, and grounded upon Exo 20. and Ezekiel. 18.

30. Whether I do not believe, From sudden death good Lord deliver us, is a
fervent ejaculation, no idle desire, that God would not take us away
unpreparedly, until we have made ready our Accounts?

31. Whether I do not believe, For all them that travel by land or by water,
all women laboring of child etc. is a charitable prayer, and answerable to the
Apostles command, Do good to all, Gal. 6.10. Pray for all men 1 Timothy 2.3.

32. Whether I do not believe, By thy holy Nativity and Circumcision, by thy
Agony and bloody sweat etc. is obtestative, and the sign of our Faith, not
affirmative and the sign of an Oath; desiring God by these effectual means of
the Actions and Passions of Jesus Christ, to deliver us from those punishments
which are due unto us for our sins.

33. Whether I do not believe, the first prayer in the Office of Matrimony,
That God would bless this couple, as Isaac and Rebecca, proceeded rather from
the holy Ghosts inspiration, than from humane invention; because if from man
only, he would have gone upon reason, and made the prayer thus, bless them as
Abraham and Sarah, or bless them as Jacob and Rachel; for Abraham was Gods
first friend, jacob was Gods great friend; yet neither so, nor so, but as Isaac
and Rebecca; because Abraham had his Hagar, one Concubine; Jacob had his Zilkah
and his Bilkah two at least, Isaac never any but his Rebecca?

34. Whether I do not believe, That that prayer, Prevent us O Lord in all our
doings, etc. be not absolutely against those great points of Popery, concerning
works of preoperation and cooperation, grounded upon that of St. Paul, Ephesians.
2.8. and so no kin to the Mass Book?

34. Whether I do not believe the Creed of the Apostles is every word in the
Scripture, viz. I believe, Mark 9 24. in God John 14 1. the Father, 1 Cor. 1.3.
Almighty, Genesis 17.1. maker of heaven and earth, Genesis 1.1. and in Jesus Christ
his only Son our Lord, Romans 1.3. which was conceived by the holy Ghost, and
born of the Virgin Mary, Luke 1.35. suffered under Pontius Pilate, John 19.1.
was Crucified John 19.18. Dead John 19.30. and Buried, John 19.42. He descended
into Hell, Act 2.27. the third day he rose again from the dead, 1 Cor. 15.4. He
ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God, Mar. 10.19. From
thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. Act 10.42. And in the
holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19. The holy Catholic Church the communion of Saints,
Ephesians. 5.27. the forgiveness of sins, Col. 1.14. The Resurrection of the Body,
1 Cor. 15.35. and life everlasting, John 10.28.

36. Whether I do believe the Feasts of Christmas, Easter and whitsuntide
have been observed by the purest and Primitive Churches, and commanded upon as
to observe the same? Clem. ep. decret, Telesph. p. 117. Cyprian de Nativ.
Christi, Nazian. Orat. 38. Chrysostom. hom in Nativ* Christi. The Church of
Helvetias confess, c. 24. The Church of Bohemia, c. 15. The Church of Bremen,
Regist. 2. fine, the Church of Auspurge confess. act. 4.

37. Whether I do not believe, The Lord b^ with thee; and with thy Spirit,
equivalent to ^^uth. 2.4.

38. Whether I do not believe St. Paul spoke Scripture, when he said, and bid
us pray with the spirt and with the understanding, and whether I do not
sometimes pray without the understanding, when I think I pray by the spirit.

39. Whether I do not believe, That therefore I have done very ill to
excommunicate the English Common Prayer Book, which by most Divines has been
call ed optimum Breviarium, and so instead of it, have set up a Directory, which
speaks nothing so much, as the sixth sense, and has no better Derivation than
from the Directarii? But I am in earnest, and earnestly desire of Almighty God,
that if the Presbyterian be determined to go on in his opinion; yet that we may
join together in all Christian affection, and so meet in heaven, in everlasting
Union; for till I am convinced upon the former Queries, I am resolved never to
be of their communion upon earth; though I wish them increase of sanctity,
while they live; and eternity of happiness when they dye, through Jesus
Christ, Amen.

III. Whether Roman?
I Am as far from Rome, as I am from Geneva; yet finding the Roman possessed
with more of the water, and the Presbyterian with more of the fire, I hope some
moderation may in time cement England and Rome into the Catholic, so strongly,
as never hereafter to be dissolved, or melted by the fury of zeal: You and you
only I confess have the face of a Church, and I hope you will not deny us the
Form, and Being of a Church; since I believe there is so much ingenuity and
wisdom in you, as to distinguish betwixt a Church extinguished and eclipsed or
persecuted: The Church of England I acknowledge is under a cloud and eclipsed,
but the Candle is not quite out and extinguished: Wheresoever two or three (of
the Catholic Church) are gathered together, there is Christ in the midst of
them, so was his promise Matt. 18.20. And wheresoever a lawful Priest or
Pastor of the English Church is with two or three of his Congregation, I will
not, I dare not doubt of the performance. If you have less charity, either in
the taking or mistaking of it, I shall propose some few Queries in my own name,
as one of you, though I thank God I am none of you, not ever intend to be in
opinion, howsoever in affection, because you are my next neighbor; I therefore
love you ^s my self.

1. Whether I do believe Roman and Catholic are Termini co^vertiblies?

2. Whether I do believe, I may be saved, if I pray as the Catholic Church
does, and was taught by Christ, Our father which art in heaven; though I do not
pray, as the Ro^^n Church does, and teaches, O thou mother of God, St. ^^er,
St. Paul pray for me?

3. Whether if I do believe as the Primitive and Catholic Church did and does,
and has taught the Apostles Creed, though I do not believe as the Roman Church
does, the Creed of the Council of Trent, I may be saved?

4. Whether if I endeavor to live after Gods Commandments, and obey him,
though I do not endeavor to live after my superiors command, I may be saved?

5. Whether if I receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist as Christ Instituted
and Commanded me to receive it, in both kinds, Bread and Wine, Flesh and Blood,
though I do not receive it as the Church of Rome has abrogated it, and
Commanded to receive, in one kind only, I may be saved?

6. Whether my conscience can be satisfied by the device of concomitants that
the Blood is given in the Body, since in the Eucharist the Blood is to be given
as shed, not kept, as poured out, not contained in the Body?

7. Whether if I be born again, and made a Christian by true Baptism, and
afterward confirmed by a true Bishop, though I am not anointed with oil, I may
be saved?

8. Whether if I believe the Scripture, and frame my life according, though I
do not equally believe Tradition I may be saved?

9. Whether if I serve and worship God in Spirit and in Truth, though I
worship no images, nor God by images, I may be saved?

10. Whether I may not be saved, if I believe in Gods mercies through Christ's
merits, though I put no confidence in merits of my own works?

These Queries with a very few more by moderate and, unbyassed men, might be
brought to a reconciliation, and that they may be, I pray you let us join in
one Prayer, till we join in all points.

O Most merciful God, who have made all Mankind of one; O most merciful God,
who have contracted all the Elect of Mankind into one Body, thy Church; and
have given the whole Church but one Soul, thy Spirit; and that Soul but one
Life, thy Faith; and that Faith but one prop, one Gospel, one Baptism, one
Lords Supper; and this one Body and one Soul, but one Head, thy self, who art
but one Lord, and have again dispersed this Body into several Assemblies and
Societies, and have made each Society and Assembly but one; thereby intimating
to us, that we should all have but one Heart and one Mind; In mercy we beseech
thee look upon thy Church, and make her as thy Son did leave her, One; one in
Opinion and one in affection, that she may be no longer crucified betwixt
Heretics and Schismatics, Thieves of thy Truth; betwixt profligates and
hypocrites, thieves of thy Grace; betwixt Zelots and Superstitious, thieves of
thy Honor: but by virtue of thy Sons Golgotha, dry up Akeldama, and for the
merit of Calvary, Deliver, O deliver her from all her present misery; Relieve
her from Force without, and Fury within, both against her; Rescue her from
civil Enemies, and crafty Children, both which fall upon her; Suffer not Reeds
any longer to be thy Scepters, nor Chairs thy Throne, nor Tricks thy Order, nor
Rudeness in one part, nor Superstition in another part, thy Service; nor
Miscreants thy W^^shippers, nor Confusion thy Religion, nor Wild-(...) (...)
Zeal, nor Lunacies thy Resolutions, nor De^ (...) Spirit; but appear by her
once more in (...) ^^^rit of Peace and Purity, of Sanctity (...) Wisdom and
Sobriety, that all (...) Church by thy Livery, which tho(...) (...) Love, Peace
and Patience; and (...) may be guided by thy One Church, in the right way of
Truth into Heaven, through Jesus Christ Amen. In whose blessed Name and words
we further call upon thee, as he has taught us in his Holy Gospel, saying

Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name; Thy Kingdom come, Thy
will be done in Earth, as etc. Give us this day our daily bread, And forgive us
our trespasses, as etc. And lead us not into Tentation, but etc. For thine is
the Kingdom, Power and Glory* etc.

Or IV. continue what I am, Catholic?
I Desire so to continue, though I starve for it; For I have not took up this
Religion upon Tradition or Education, but upon Judgment and Deliberation; And
instead of Queries and Cases of Conscience, I offer to my self these
Irrefragable Propositions.

1. If I pray aright according to the Patter^ of Devotion sum'd up in the Lords
Prayer, I shall be heard.

2. If I repent aright according to the Prophets and Apostles Direction, with
the Contrition of my Heart, with the Confession of my Lips, and the Endeavor
of my Life; I shall be forgiven. Joel. 2. 2 Cor. 7.

3. If I do right according to Gods will in his Word, sum'd up in his
Decalogue, or Ten Commandments, though not absolutely and enactly, yet
uprightly and Evangelically: I shall be accepted.

4. If I believe aright according to Gods Gospel, sum'd up in the Apostles
Creed, without doubting, without dis^^us^^ng, without desparing, I shall be
saved.

5. If I receive Christ's holy Sacraments, as he did institute, and appoint
them, not only as Signs, but means of Grace, not only as Assurances of
Salvation, but Conveyances of Sanctification, I shall be glorified.

And my Religion being so good, I desire not to change but to continue as I am;
and for that I praise Gods mercy, and pray for Gods blessing.

My Religion is good, for it is Gods; my Calling is Lawful, for it is of God;
my Service is honorable, for it is for God and my Savior, my message in which I
am employed is honorable, for it is of Peace, and to be an Instrument of
Reconciliation betwixt God and his People, and my proceeding in it, if it be as
it ought to be, in Love, shall be acceptable; Joyfully I may do it, for God
will reward it; Freely I may do it, for God will make it good; Boldly I may do
it, for God will defend it; and incessantly I should do it, for first or last
God will give a blessing to it.

But who, who is worthy to do this weighty business? not the best of men, how
much more unworthy am I the worst of men and chief of Sinners? Truly of my self
I am as unworthy as unable, and unworthy to be enabled, if thou enter in
Judgment with me, That thou may not, I thus address my self to thy Throne of
Grace.

Look upon me O my God in the face of Jesus Christ I beseech thee, and for his
sake assist me with thy Spirit, That I may speak thy word, lest I be guilty of
carelesnes; That I may not speak before I Learn, lest I be guilty of Rashness.
That I may Learn and Speak, lest I be guilty of idleness; That I may not speak
to the Ear, lest I be guilty of Flattery; That I may speak to the Heart, and so
be a means of other men's salvation; and when I have preached to others, That I
may not be a Castaway my self: Sanctify me with thy Spirit I beseech Thee;
That I may as well live as speak Divinity; Let thy Glory be my chief, Thy
peoples and my own safety my next Aim; That I may not bring a woe to thy Flock,
Give me Learning; that I may not bring woe to my self, Give me Diligence; that I
may not bring Dishonor to thee, Give me Discretion; Deliver me from the misery
of Starving thy Flock, for want of skill; Deliver me from the Cruelty of
starving thy Flock, for want of will; Deliver me from a fruitless industry in
feeding thy Flock, for want of Prudence; make me painful in my Study, powerful
in my Pulpit; Fervent in my Piety, Holy in my Conversation, Succesful in all;
That I may be discharged of the Blood of all those Souls Committed to my
Charge: it is a precious People, for thou have purchased them at a dear Rate,
even with Blood, with thy Blood, with thy precious Blood: Let them be precious
too in my Esteem, That I may preach to them in Season and out of Season, not
only by Speaking well, but Living better: help their understandings in my
knowledge of Divinity, better their Wills in my Pract^se of Divinity; Supply
them and my self for th^s Life and the next out of thine own Fullness; and Crown
my Labors with the Conversion of such Souls, as thou have Ordained to Life
Eternal, Through Jesus Christ: In whose most Blessed Name and Words, I further
call upon Thee, as He has Taught.

FINIS.

