Catholicon

THE EXPEDIENCY OF AN EXPLICIT STIPULATION BETWIXT THE Parochial Ministers AND
THEIR CONGREGATIONS.

OR, An ESSAY to prove that the Intervention of Solemn Mutual Promises betwixt
the Parochial Ministers and their people (Faithfully to discharge their
Relative Duties to one another) would be useful and expedient for these ends:

To promote in Clergymen Regularity of Life, and Diligence in their
Ministerial Function. To increase in the Lay Parishioners, Christian Knowledge,
Sincere Godliness, with a Free and Friendly Conversation. To give a Stop to
Separation, and Reduce Dissenters to the Communion of the Church without using
Secular Compulsion. To secure the Peace of the Nation. To enlarge Trade, and
make Provision for the Poor.
And that all this may be effected without the least Innovation, or alteration
of the present Legal Establishment of the Church of England.

Humbly tendered to the Consideration of all English Protestants, by a Parochial
Minister.

London, Printed. 1674.

THE PREFACE.
I Intend not in this Treatise to give Rules to any of my Brethren, much less
to prescribe to Authority; But I presume that so far as the Holy Scriptures,
and the Laws of the Land, and sound Prudence appear on the side of my
undertaking, it will find peaceable reception with all, who adhere yet to the
Protestant Church of England: and I desire no man to admit it further, than
that warranty is annexed.

And it being designed only to promote the good ends mentioned in the
Title Page: I may expect that it will not find a bitter Adversary, if any,
amongst the Dissenters from the Order of Worship and Discipline legally
established amongst us.

For no man has just reason to be angry, if Consenters to that Order endeavor
to promote amongst themselves Christian knowledge with an holy Conversation, by
building upon the ancient Foundations; namely, the Holy Scriptures and Sound
Antiquity, with their Primitive most prudent Reformation.

I do not disown it, that my endeavors in this discourse are in part collined
at the stopping the growth of rigid Separation: But the means I use is only
such, as many consist with Sincere and Christian Charity to all Dissenting
Brethren, and a real desire of their Peace:

And that which put me upon this undertaking was, a firm persuasion, that
keeping up the Parochial Assemblies of the Church of England (in that good
Order and Unity, which the Gospel of Christ and the Laws of the Kingdom
require,) is one of our strongest Fences and Securities against Profaneness,
Strife, Uncharitableness, and other enemies of Sincere and Solid Christianity:
and that the Dissipation and breaking of the Parochial Churches will prove the
pulling down our walls, to bring in that Trojan Horse, which our Gates are not
wide enough to admit.

But yet I freely declare (if the declaration of so mean a person be worth
taking notice of by any) that it was far from my intendment in this work to
endeavor to obstruct any favors and relaxations, which may be thought to be
intended by our Governors to Pious and Peaceable Dissenters, in order to their
bringing them in (with fair salvoes to their Consciences) to help with us to do
the work of our Great Master with one heart and in one way.

And certainly the breaking in of the Floods of ungodliness upon the Age and
Nation, calls aloud for the uniting their and our strengths, to bear up with
arms and breasts against them.

And I am confident that my Proposals in this Paper will not be found to
enlarge the distances amongst Brethren: For the removal of which, by pouring
out upon us all a Spirit of Meekness, Love, and mutual Forbearance, I daily
pray to the God of Mercy and Peace, which I beseech him to grant, even in our
days, if it be his blessed will, according to the unspeakable riches of his
mercy toward Sinners in Christ Jesus our only Mediator and Savior, Amen.

CAP. I. An Account of the Nature of the Explicit Stipulation proposed.
THE Laws of this Land as well as the Institutions of the Church, do suppose
some Relation to intervene betwixt the Parochial Ministers and the people of
their several Parishes committed to their Charge.

By a [Parish] I mean, a compass of Ground, containing in it such a number of
Christian Inhabitants, as may Ordinarily assemble at one place for public
worship, and who are, if duly qualified, obliged by Law so to Assemble for the
celebration of all parts of public worship.

And not only by Law but by Scripture also, in which there is not one example
to be found of a Christian, who did cohabit with and among Christians, and yet
ordinarily at times of worship did separate from them, to go and assemble with
other Christians elsewhere.

So that all Gospel Assemblies for worship were Coetus Parochianorum, or
Cohabitantium, who might be ready to observe and help one another, in relation
both to temporal and spiritual wants and necessities.

This Relation of the Ministers of such Parochial Congregations to their
people, both obliges and impowereth every such Minister to dispense the Word
and Sacraments, and perform other Ministerial duties, to all the People of his
Parish, who are willing and duly qualified to receive them.

And the same Relation inableth such Parishioners to challenge at his hands the
dispensation of the said Ordinances to them, and obliges them ordinarily to
receive the same from him.

And it is far from me to intimate by these Papers, that all or the greatest
part of the present Parish Ministers of the Church of England are unsuccessful
in their work, assigned to them by the Word of God and the Laws of the Land.

For there are multitudes of Christians who are ready to come forth and own it,
That God made use of the Ministry of Conformists, to awaken them to a serious
consideration of the spiritual and eternal concernments of their souls, and to
bring them to a right understanding and practice of Repentance toward God, and
Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, and to a constant exercise of
Mortification both of carnal and worldly lusts, and to consecrate themselves
entirely to live to the Glory of God their Maker and Savior, and to devote
themselves to do or suffer any thing that may promote in themselves or others
the knowledge and acknowledgement, the fear, trust, and love of God, with
delight in him (as our sufficient portion) and submission to him as our
Sovereign, with Faith and Hope, in our Lord Jesus Christ; who of God is made
unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption.

And they will further testify, that, by the Preaching and Example of the
Conforming Clergy, they were brought to embrace an universal Charity toward
all men, even enemies, and to take up a more special Love and Delight in all
those who own the fear of God, and adorn the Gospel of Christ, by an holy,
humble and useful conversation, yea though such should dissent from them in the
present minute differences about things Indifferent, etc.

If to be wrought up to this frame by the Spirit of God (who alone gives the
increase, whoever endeavors to plant or water) be Conversion, Multitudes (to
the praise of the Glory of the Grace of God) have been, and are daily Converted
by the Ministry of the Church of England.

But yet I apprehend, and shall endeavor to make it good in this present
Essay, that not only the more immediate ends of the Ministry would (probably)
be more effectually promoted by such an explicit Confeederation intervening
betwixt the Parochial Ministers and their people, but many other appendant
advantages would thence refult to the whole body of the Nation, as I have
insinuated in my Title Page.

I presume that all knowing Christians will grant, that the ends wherefore
Christ by his Apostles did institute Ministers in the Churches (I mean amongst
persons already converted to the faith) were at least these following, That
they might watch over the souls of their flocks, that they might administer to
them the Word and Sacraments, that they might in the name of their people
assembled with them, and with the concurrence of their peoples hearts and
mouths also, (at least in saying Amen) offer up Confession of Sins, Prayers,
Praises and Thanksgivings in the public Assemblies; That they might Instruct,
Admonish, Reprove and Comfort their People, as their condition should require,
and that not only in public Preaching and Catechizing, but in Personal
Conference, and by teaching from House to House; That they might visit the
Sick, and promote the due relief and maintenance of the Poor of the Flock; That
they might baptize the Children of Believers and Adult Persons duly qualified,
and that they might receive to the full Communion of the Church in the
Eucharist, such Minor Members, as being baptized in their Infancy, are grown up
to a due measure of the knowledge of God, and Christ, and his Gospel, and are
of unblameable lives, and do make solemn profession to stand to their vow made
in Baptism.

That all these are duties incumbent upon Ministers, even under the Parochial
Form, I hope will be granted, and shall not trouble my Reader with a proof of
them, till they are contradicted,

And that no Law of the Land, or Ecclesiastical Constitution, restrains any
Parochial Minister from the faithful discharge of all those duties, is
undeniably evident, in that those Laws confirm to Ministers their settled
Maintenance, for this very cause, that they might be encouraged to be faithful
in the service of God and of his Church, in the premised duties.

And it is evident also, that the most Reverend Fathers of the Church (the
Bishops) would not only encourage Ministers to be faithful herein (as some of
us have found by address to our pious and learned Diocesans) but that they
would also rejoice over such diligent and faithful Ministers, and thank God for
them, and make mention of them in their prayers without ceasing.

So that upon an impartial search I believe it will be found, that one of the
chiefest reasons why this work is not done more effectually, is to be laid to
the charge of Parochial Ministers and their People.

And the greatest hindrance of them in doing mutually their duties herein,
will, I presume, be found to be this, Because Ministers enter upon their charge
with so little of solemnity, and without such particular application to the
people at their entrance, as might advantage them in their future work.

For if we consult common experience, we shall find that when any Persons enter
upon any Office of Trust for others benefit, the want of due solemnity at their
entrance, does not only render them less careful to consider and discharge
their duty; but also those, for whose benefit Officers are entrusted, are both
less inclined to submit to them in the discharge of their Office, and more
prone contumaciously to oppose and discourage their Officers, when they attempt
faithfully to do their duty.

Now it is but a little engine, that I propose, as likely to remove this and
other great weights and mischiefs with, Namely, that at every Ministers
entrance upon his charge, there should pass a solemn Stipulation and Promise
betwixt him and his People; and the same should also with all convenient speed
be solemnly made betwixt those Ministers (who are already settled in Parishes)
and their People.

I shall not be so presumptuous as to impose upon any of my Brethren any forms
of my own devising: But yet that my Reader may clearly understand, what I aim
at, it is necessary that I set down some form of words, which might be suitable
for the transaction of that solemnity: Though I know that abler persons will
easily find more apt and more comprehensive terms, than mine are.

I will therefore suppose that some such forms as these following may
conveniently be devised for this business.

I N. N. legally presented, instituted and inducted into the Rectory (or
Vicaridge) of N. in the Diocese of N. do solemnly promise in the presence of
God to the Parishioners of the said Parish of N. That during my legal
imcumbency and possession of the said Rectory (or Vicaridge) I will through the
Grace of God endeavor faithfully to discharge amongst them and for their
benefit, the Ministry which I have received of the Lord: I will declare to them
the Gospel of the Grace of God in Jesus Christ, and instruct them in the saving
truths thereof, both by public Preaching and Catechizing, and by private
conference, as I have opportunity: I will labor to secure them, from those
that would pervert them, to either sins or errors; I will endeavor to
establish the weak, to comfort the disconsolate, and to reform the disorderly
by admonition and reproof; or if any continue obstinate after my private
reproof, I will proceed in my endeavors for their reformation in such
effectual ways as the Gospel of Christ and the Laws of the Land do warrant me
to pursue: I will visit their sick, and endeavor that due provision be made
for the Poor of the Parish, I will constantly at due periods of time (unless
hindered by sickness or other lawful impediments) administer amongst them the
Sacraments, and other parts of public worship according to the authorized
forms of the Church of England: I will prepare their Children by Catechizing,
that they may be confirmed by the Bishop of the Diocese (where such
confirmation can with due solemnity and convenience be obtained) or that they
may be admitted to full communion with the Church in the Sacrament (commonly
called the Lords Supper) upon their serious profession to stand to the
Covenant, which they made in Baptism. And in my discharge of all this I shall
submit my self to the oversight and guidance of the Lord Bishop of the Diocese.

Witness my Hand.

The Parishioners may subscribe some such form as this.

I N. N. Inhabitant of the Parish of N. in the Diocese of N. do promise by the
Grace of God to live as becomes the Gospel, in charity with all men, and unity
of more special love with the visible Catholic Church, that is, with all that
profess the faith of Christ crucified: And that I will hold constant communion
with the Church of England; that is, with all those Christian Subjects of the
Kings most excellent Majesty, who are united in the profession of those
articles of Doctrine, and in the exercise of those Forms of public worship,
and in submission to that Ecclesiastical discipline that are agreeable to the
Scriptures and owned by the Laws of this Realm: And I will generally and
ordinarily assemble with the rest of the Parishioners of N. aforesaid, at the
Parish Church there, for the celebration of all parts of the established
public worship by Mr. N. N. Rector or Vicar there, and that I will own the
said Mr. N. N. as my immediate Guide in spiritual things, under the inspection
of the Right Reverend Father in God the Lord Bishop of the Diocese: And that I
will attend upon the Preaching of the Word, and Catechizing, and Administration
of the Sacraments by the said Mr. N. N. and submit to his admonitions, and give
him all due honor for his work sake. And that I will readily and cheerfully do
my duty (as a fellow member of the same body) to all the Parishioners of the
said Parish of N. in laboring to build them up in the most holy Faith, and in
provoking them to love, and to good works, and in communicating to those of
them that shall need relief, according to that estate, which God has or shall
bless me with: And that I will mark those who cause divisions and avoid them:
And that if I shall happen to remove my dwelling out of the Parish of N.
aforesaid, I will desire and receive a Certificate from the Minister and
Parishioners here, to the Minister and Parishioners of the Parish, to which I
shall remove (That I have lived in communion with them, and with the Church of
England) and I shall likewise desire Letters of Commendation from the Minister
and Parishioners of this Parish, to the Minister and People of the Parish to
which I shall remove, requesting them that they will receive me (with those of
my family that are qualified for it) to Communion with them in Holy Worship:
And I shall be ready to testify by like solemn promise my readiness to join in
Communion with that Minister and Parochial Congregation to whom I shall remove,
as I did before with the Minister and People of this Parish of N.

Witness My Hand.

These or the like solemn promises do not (as far as I am able to apprehend) so
much as shake one Pin in the present Fabric of either Church or State: Nor in
the Stipulation is there any thing promised by either the Ministers or the
People, but what I judge they are obliged already to do and execure by the
general precepts of the Gospel, or the Ecclesiastical Laws and Constitutions of
this Realm, or Christian Prudence, though they should never make and subscribe
such explicit promises as these are.

I am sure that Ministers oblige themselves expressly to all this at their
Ordination, before the Bishop, and Presbyters, and Congregation then assembled.

And I easily grant that it is only matter of expedience and prudence (as
Ecclesiastical affairs now stand in England) that this mutual covenanting
should be so express and solemn (for the Minister and Peoples doing their
mutual duties to one another as Offices of Relations, implies in both a
Conscience, that they are under an Obligation to one another, which may not
improperly be called an implicit Covenanting:)

And therefore if any man shall rise up against these Papers, I request him to
remember, That the Controversy betwixt us is likely to be only this, whether
what he shall offer be in the balance of Christian prudence of more
probability to promote those great ends of piety and peace, etc. than this
which I propose.

And if any can offer better Expedients, or shall evince that mine deserve not
to be esteemed such, I resolve to be no Heretic in Politics or Prudentials,
desiring in uprightness to be conformed to St. Paul's profession to do all
things for the truth, and nothing against it.

In the mean time I will labor to show how useful this Order would be to the
ends proposed.

CAP. II. The usefulness of the Parochial Stipulation, to promote regularity of
life in the Ministers and their People, with Brotherly Love, and good
Neighborhood.
IT is plain to every man's observation, that all the perswasives of men to any
undertaking (whether by representing the attempt as necessary, or beneficial,
or honorable, or under any other respects) have no longer force than they are
kept present, and fixed in the mind and imagination of the Undertaker: So that
when once those arguments are slipped out of the thoughts, the attempt goes on
very dully, because promoted only by the habitual impression, yet remaining
upon the Fancy.

The Solemnity therefore of this promise would six upon Ministers such a
lasting and warm sense of their duty, and so frequently renew their thoughts of
it, as would not probably permit them easily to grow remiss and inadvertent.
For indeed the promise made to many, and before many witnesses, would be apt to
awaken in Ministers a remembrance of their duty upon the very sight of any of
those, to whom, and before whom they made their engagement.

But why should I trouble my Reader with a more large proof of that, which I
think no man can deny, who is but Master of so much judgment and fancy as to
present to his own imagination (as it were in different Scenes) One Person
hasting and posting to his Living as to a Preferment only, and another Person
gravely and considerately entering upon his employment with such solemn
Application to the People as this we speak of, Letting them know, he comes
amongst them with a desire and purpose, through Gods assistance, to serve to
the Glory of God, and their edification in the truth, as it is in Jesus Christ.

Which of these two in any man's judgment, is likeliest to pursue the work of
his Office with the more vigorous diligence?

Besides, this very solemnity of entrance would give the Minister such an
esteem with the people, as would highly advantage his future discharges: For
when themselves had thus by Covenant received him, they would look upon him
with all affectionate respects as their Guide, yea they would entertain him as
an Angel of God.

Whereas now, the People, till they have trial of us, keep at a distance, and
are shy and jealous of us; and if after some time they find, that we are not
proud and contentious, or strict in looking after our dues, many of them are
not much further solicitous; intimating therein, that in the present state of
Parishes, the care of many Parishioners is, rather to have a well-humour'd and
quiet Neighbor, than an able and faithful Minister.

And there is no question to be made, but that the like Postnate Solemnity
would strengthen the sense of duty in us, who are already entered upon our
employments, as that which is Preliminary would do to them that enter with it.

And that also it would make our Ministry more acceptable and successful for
the future, is not to be doubted; Besides, that this would influence the whole
body of the Ministers, to make them regular and exemplary in their conversation
is a presumption so rational, that I need not stay to prove it. For no doubt
Ministers thus solemnly obliging themselves to walk as Examples to their Flocks
in all manner of holy Conversation, would both in Conscience and prudence set a
strict guard both over their lives and languages, remembering the [wo] due to
them by whom offenses do come.

But I must further let my Reader know, that my projection is, not only, that
this Stipulation should once be solemny made, and never after be publicly
Recognized, so that the Subscriptions of Ministers and People being locked up
in the Parish-Chest, should so remain till Worms and Moths had consumed the
Parchment or Paper:

But this I think, may prudently and piously be done, further, namely that on
the Lords day, before the day of the Celebration of the Communion (whether
monthly, or quarterly, or after celebrated) the Minister should after Evening
Prayers recount before the people the promises mutually given, exhorting them
to remember, and faithfully to fulfill the same, both toward him and toward
one another, and the whole Church of God, and that he should promise on his
part with all fidelity, through the Grace of God to look to his discharge of
his duty to them.

Next, let us consider what are likely to be the effects of this Covenant
amongst the people.

First, That it would promote holiness of Conversation amongst them, is
warrantably inferred, both because the Ministers oblige themselves to a more
special and particular care of every single person of their Flock, and they of
the Flock are obliged to a mutual care of one another, and every one by this
Covenant, obliges himself sincerely to endeavor to walk as becomes the
Gospel; And this particularity of relation, by solemn promise interceeding
betwixt the Minister and them, would put the Minister on to personal and
private applications by way of instruction or admonition, which have their
effect ordinarily beyond the general declarations of the truths of the Gospel,
in Catechizing, or Preaching, or general reprehensions of vices in such public
discourses.

Besides, they would be under a constant expectancy that upon their
irregularity they should be dealt with after our Saviors Method, Matthew. 18.15.
And that when they had been personally and privately admonished, and did not
reform, they should be notified to the Congregation, and upon further obstinacy
be presented to those public Ecclesiastical Officers, who are empowered by Law
to take congnizance of the same. And that such Presentiments would not end, only
in paying the fees of the Court, and some Commutation money there: Nor could
they imagine, that the Parochial Congregation to whom the Offense and Scandal
was given, should never inquire what is done upon the presentment, or require
satisfaction from the offending party, before they received them to Communion
again; And we may reasonably presume that all the pious Fathers of the Church,
the Bishops with the Ecclesiastical Officers under them, would take care that
such satisfaction should be given by the Delinquent: And none of this would
bring any (...) innovation or alteration in Church affairs.

And further that hereby the people would be spirited to a free and Christian
Nieghbourhood amongst themselves is not at all to be (...), seeing it is the
Ordinary Consequence of Combinations to give to the Combined a mutual kindness
and confidence to, and in, one another.

Nay more, whereas all other combinations that are made on the principles of
universal and Catholic recusancy of Communion with other Christians (and there
are more Catholic Recusants in England than Papists) do narrow men's affections
toward others, and cause them to malign, censure, damn and despise those (who
are not of their own bran and leaven) it may justly be hoped that this
coalition and combinement, founded on the truly Catholic Principles of the
Church of England (which unchurcheth not nor reprobateth Christians of any
form, that hold repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ) would give such an impression of humility and charity to all the
Parishioners, as that the Dissenters themselves should find the blessed and
benevolent warmth and influence of it, whilst we endeavor to live in the
exercise of Charity and mutual good offices with all conscientious Dissenters,
and follow peace both amongst our selves and with all men.

One thing more I hope I may mention without raising the scorn of any sorts of
Readers, namely, That in process of time this procedure would not only reform
scandalous Ministers, but scandalous Livings also: I mean those poor Livings
(as they are called) upon which even a frugal person cannot live, and provide
things honest in the sight of all men for himself and for his family.

Which were not indeed so poorly endowed Originally, but first by the Popes
Appropriations of the great Tithes, to Orders of Monks and Nuns, and after by
the Impropriations of the same by King Henry the 8th. to Laymen, and by other
encroachments of the Laiety both in pretended Prescriptions and several other
ways (not proper here to be reckoned up) many Parish Church is (especially in
Cities and Corporations) are d prived of a due maintenance for the Ministers:
And Religion thereby receives as much damage, as by almost any one of Satan's
later projects against the same. Against which I propose this Parochial
Stipulation, as a Remedy very probable to be effectual; for undoubtedly the
Combined Parishioners would by the permission of those in Authority, and by the
assistance of pious Patrons either buy in Impropriated Tithes, or raise an
honorable maintenance for their Minister some other way.

I will add further, That whereas now upon the decay of strength in aged
Ministers, the People are left too often only to the guidance of a Curate, that
is of small abilities and small allowance, because many Livings will not afford
better Salaries (if a competency be cantinued to them who have spent their time
and strength amongst the People:) We may warrantably hope, that the people of
the Parochial Combination, will neither be so ungrateful to him who has
faithfully labored amongst them, as to urge a larger allowance from him than
his income will bear, nor will they be so unconcerned for their own souls, as
to forbear to raise by contribution a fit allowance for an able Assistant.

I will add this further, That it cannot be feared that People thus engaged
will permit that the Parish Clarks should be licentious Ale-Drapers or
otherwise loose or vain persons. But they will require that they be of a
prudent and inoffensive Conversation: The like care we may hope that the
Parishoners and Ministers would take about the Election of persons prudent and
conscientious, to discharge the Offices of Churchwardens and Sidesmen, and not
suffer these Offices to go by House-row, and be laid upon the shoulders of
those, who know neither the importance of their Office, nor the nature or sense
of the Oaths they are required to take.

CHAP. III. The Expediency of the Parochial Stipulation to reduce Dissenters to
the Unity of the Church, and secure those, who at present do Conform, from
falling away.
IF there be any consolations in Christ, if any comfort of Love, if any
fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels and mercies, Those Christians most
taste of the sweetness thereof, who strive to preserve the Unity of the Spirit
in the bond of peace, and rejoice over all impartially that own the fear of
God, and the faith of the Lord Jesus Christ: and who can according to the
dictates of Catholic Charity and Evangelical Love (truly so called) freely
join in all acts of holy Communion, with any Christians amongst whom their lot
is cast to be, where the Communion is not clogged with urged compliance to
sinful things, and who do not obstruct others coming into Communion with
themselves by any sinful or unnecessary requirements.

And it is no difficulty to prove that this propensity to Catholic Communion
is the healing temper under which alone the Christian world may hope to obtain
again that peace and unit, the blessed warmth whereof made the Primitive
Churches to flourish.

And it is no less easily evinced that Catholic Recusancy of Communion with
others, is that narrow engine wherewith the Devil has cramped and tormented
the Churches of Christ in these later ages; and that from thence came Fire and
Faggot, Sequestrations, Proscriptions, civil broils, and the rest of the
mischiefs which have made Christian Kingdoms miserable through the several
Sects pursuance of their Religious differences, with more bitterness than they
would have done Mahumetism it self.

On which account we can justly arraign several amongst us for as very
Catholic Recusants, or (which is all one) for as Universal Refusers of
Communion with other Christians as any Papists, yea, or Russes.

But it is evident to all impartially observant, that a more humble and
charitable Spirit acted the Church of England at her Primitive Reformation.

And I hope that this Explicit Combination in her Parochial Assemblies pleaded
for, will not make any suspect that a less enlarged temper is hereby designed
to be promoted, seeing the first part of promise is, of holding Communion with
all Christians: And we all protest to take all for Brethren who hold Christ as
the foundation, and walk by the rule of the New Creature, and we pray for peace
on them, and on the Israel of God.

But alas this Candor of ours is made ineffectual to keep even all our flocks
in their folds through a late complotment of some, who, though not
intentionally, yet will be found, I fear, eventually to play the Pioneers, and
plane the way for the reentrance of the most notorious sort of Catholic
Recusancy.

For it is easy to observe that the great allurement of our members to turn
aside to the Tents of our Companions is, that such seem through their mutual
engagements, to take those that unite to them under a more special care, for
both their temporal and spiritual concernments.

Will it then be imprudent to use some of the Viper in our Antidote, or to
cleave the Wood with a Wedge of its own?

When therefore it shall appear, that we with no less solemnity or sincerity,
oblige our selves so to take care for all of ours, yea and still to let our
Fountain of Brotherly Love run over, and be dispersed in the streets to all
others that are Christians, I am apt to think (and it may be most of my
unprejudiced Readers will be of my mind) that it will be a more effectual
course to reduce Dissenters than all disputes (though evincing with the
clearest evidence the sinfulness of Separation) have been able to do; and as
Moses's Rod eat up the Rods of the Magicians, the Combination of the Catholic
members of the Church of England in the Parochial Assemblies thereof, would do
little less to most other unwarranted Combinations amongst us.

For when once the Sober and Conscientious Dissenters shall be convinced, that
all prudent and saithful care is taken, to purge out all leaven of malice and
wickedness out of our Parochial Congregations, and that they may in those
Assemblies have green pastures and still waters also, and that Ministers are
engaged and excited to pursue the edification of their people in faith and
holiness, then, and not till then it may be hoped, that many pious and humble
persons amongst them will in a small time fall in with public Order.

But suppose that none of those who are departed from our Church should be
reduced to the fold again, yet if this Parochial Covenant were settled, it would
at least secure to us, those that at present do hold Communion with us, and
bind them up so close and compact that no more could drop out.

We are not ignorant, that when God has so far prospered our Ministry and
Labors in diligent Catechizing and Preaching and other faithful endeavors,
That any inconsiderate and ignorant persons have been awakened by us to search
and try their hearts, and ways and turn unto the Lord; as soon I say as such
are observed to be grown serious in the frame of their Spirits, and regular in
their Coaversation, presently they are assaulted by some Seducer to make one
turn further,

And he suggests to them, that it is not enough that they have taken God for
their God, and Christ for their Savior by serious and resolved choice and
purpose of heart, that they have an universal charity for all men, and special
Brotherly-Love unto the Brethren (for all this they were brought to by our
Ministry) but as if these were the primar and rudiments of Christianity, they
are tempted to remove from under our Ministry, who called them into the grace
of God, unto another Gospel.

But the Parochial Stipulation would be an excellent fence against these
Seducers: because our people then would let us know, that they are tempted, and
would think themselves bound to do so, having taken us for their Guides by
Explicit Contract.

Whereas now (alas) many are turned Renegado's from the Church beyond recovery,
and the Minister, it may be, is the last man in the Parish that hears of it.

Moreover, it is not to be doubted, but that some or other of their honest
Neighbors, combined in the same Promises with them, would take the Alarm, and
think themselves obliged to step in betimes, and endeavor to prevent their
falling away, by applying the best arguments and counsel they could use, and
would also timely inform the Minister and Congregation of the danger of one of
the Flock.

Besides our arguments, that then we should use for their confirmation in the
Unity of the Church, would be seriously and impartially considered, whereas
now, they either do not regard us, or soon admit the suspicion instilled by
deceitful workers (that we seek theirs, not them.)

But after this mutual contract has made them secure, that it is our care of
them only that calls us to their help, we may more easily persuade them
impartially to consider both our arguments, and the discourses written by pious
and learned men, in vindication of communion with us, and for the cure of
Church Divisions.

Add to this, that it is more than probable that all the Parishioners of the
league, would be very careful to study how to defend their own Conformity to
the Orders and Constitutions Ecclesiastical by Law established, and would stand
more zealously for the Credit of the same, than now many of them think
themselves obliged to do.

For it is obvious to observe, that scarce a Separatist can be met with, but is
taught (like one brought up in the School of War and Contention) to say more by
way of cavilling against the public Settlement, and our Communion therein,
than one in twenty of our Lay-Conformists can say for it, because indeed they
do not concern themselves in the study of those truths by which our Communion
in the settled Order is justified.

But this explicit Covenant would make them think they are concerned in honor
to be able to plead for their way.

And besides it would urge Ministers to maintain both public and private
conferences with their people about Church Order and other matters of Religion,
and Conferences are but Catechizing the Elder sort, as Catechizing is
conference with the Younger.

In short, if either this or some other course be not taken to excite and
quicken the Parochial Ministers and their Congregations jointly to endeavor
either the reforming or else the putting away from among themselves the
scandalous and notoriously vicious persons, and to unite those who do yet own
the settled Order, and to fortify them in the truth and obedience to the same,
we shall soon find that not only the Sectarian Catholic Recusant on the one
side, and the Popish Catholic Recusant on the other will daily get upon us,
and if our banks and shores be not better fortified, those two working Seas
will eat our Island quite through, but also that profaneness will prevail and
overspread us as a Leprosy, which is most of all to be dreaded.

And whether of those two Catholic Recusants, I mean, whether the Romish or
the complicated Sectarian will prevail against the other, and keep the field,
if once the Church of England be diffolved (which has always been terrible to
the Romanists as an Army with Banners) is not difficult to foresee.

For how can the several little bodies and sects, into which the other
Dissenters, from the English Protestantism, will be crumbled by division upon
division, be able long to bear up against that united interest, which the fine
and subtle Romanists will obtain in this Nation, acting in part under the
Vizor of other Sects, partly wearing their own profession openly.

For it is easy to observe how their Emissaries (according to instructions)
seek another manner of Quarry, and fly at another sort of Game, when they
appear as Romanists, than that which some of the other sects do follow; They
strive not so much to engage Meticulous Scrupulous Women and Mechanics, or
narrow spirited Melancholists, or Opinionative Burgers and Traders, these the
Romish Fishermen seek not after, but if any such come to their Net, they cast
them not away.

But their most taking Arts are laid out for the inveigling young and pregnant
Wits in the Universities or elsewhere, who may be trained up to write
Polemicks, and practice Politics, and to engage Persons of Honor and Interest
amongst the Nobility and Gentry (not mattering what their Morals are) who are
likely to be of great importance in the legal alteration or settlement of a
Nation: and those whom they have gained in their concealed and by-trade as
Undertakers and Brokers for other Sects, they will easily turn over into their
great bank, when they find it seasonable to unmask themselves.

And this Mystery of iniquity has been, and is still working, only that which
has let will let, till it is taken out of the way, namely, the legal
establishment of the Church of England, owned by his sacred Majesty and the
Laws.

CAP. IV. The Expediency of the Explicit Promises to secure public Peace.
THat the public Peace of Nations is the most valuable temporal blessing that
men enjoy, is without dispute: And that the peace of England would be in a
great measure secured by this Parochial Covenant may easily be evidenced.

For first, the Doctrine of the Church of England does so influence all that
are Genuine Sons thereof, as renders them the best Subjects in the World, and
makes them obey the King and the Laws for Conscience sake in all lawful things,
and restrains from resistance on any account (civil or religious) lest they
should receive to themselves damnation.

Whether any of the Catholic Recusants, whether Romish or otherwise Sectarians
be so disposed to Obedience to Authority, let their own Writings and Practices
witness in the Gate, for it is not agreeable to the peaceable design of these
Papers to question other men's Loyalty, who own Religion under any form.

But the Sons of the Church of England have givne sufficient evidence, that in
Conscience of their Allegiance by Law required, they will not only not resist,
but if occasion be, they will fight for their Sovereign and the established
Laws, and venture life and estate in that just Service.

And if their own sins and the sins of the Nation render their arms succesless,
they will not only pray still for their Sovereign, but suffer with him, yea
though they should know beforehand that Zibah (the false Informer) should keep
half sequestered Mephibosheths estate, even after our Lord the King was returned
in peace.

So that his Majesty might be assured that this Parochial Combination would
give the Royal Interest the strongest ^ooting in the hearts of his subjects.

But besides this way of securing public peace, by right principling the
Subjects, the Parochial Covenant would do much also toward prevention of
rebellion.

For it is no small advantage to Governors, in order to the preventing of
seditions to know beforehand from what quarter they are most likely to rise and
blow.

And without all doubt, it a new Civil War should spring up in England in our
days (which God in mercy prevent) his Majesty might have the Muster-roles of
his Enemies, by requiring the Catalogues of them, who in the several Parishes
because of their profaneness are refused, or through other pretenses do refuse
to combine in Conformity.

But yet far be it from me, to design to intimate, that the Scrupulous
Dissenters would make the main body and bulk of any Rebellious Army, or would
be the head and contrivers of the War; there are amongst them unquestionably
many who fear God and the King.

But we have rather reason to suspect (that as it was in our late troubles) the
main Contrivers of a War would be profane and ambitious Politicians; men of
the Leviathan-faith (or rather Infidelity) who worship not God but Interest,
and are men of this world only, and reckon nothing Sacred in Government, but
the prevalency of Power, which Sacredness they know may be presently vacanted
by the Prevalency of a greater opposite Power, if they can work themselves up
to it.

These are the men who use to contrive and begin troubles in all States and
Kingdoms, and (to drive on their designs) use the furious zeal of persons
Don-Quixotted in Religion, by raising in them fanciful fears and jealousies
that their Diana is in danger.

However I am sure that none of the Church of England could imbark in a war
against their Governor for the alteration of the Laws by force of Arms,
whithout renouncing their Principles.

And if Piety and Orderly Conversation with Loyalty and Conformity be happily
promoted by this so probable means of the Parochial Stipulation, I hope many
upright persons amongst them of the Separation will come in and join with us:
And thereby I am sure they would silence the importunate calls of them, who
require public testification of their Repentance, for being engaged in
hostility formerly against their Sovereign and his Laws: Their return to the
Church of England, and Conformity to the Established Worship, was a
sufficiently signal declaration of their return to Loyalty.

CAP. V. The Expediency of the Parochial Stipulation, to make provision for the
Poor, and increase Trade amongst us.
NO rational person can think but that the infinitely wise and good God has
made distribution of the riches of this world (the Mammon of unrighteousness or
inequality) to some men a greater, to some a lesser portion, for the exercise
of his graces in all; that from every outward state there may be a passage to
the eternal habitations; whilst the Brethren of high degree testify their
gratitude to God, and their love to him and his Christ in his poor members by
their bounty; And the Brethren of low degree testify their humility and
submission to God and dependence upon him; and so the abundance of the
Charitable rich, and indigency of the pious poor, conspire into one excellent
harmony of many thanksgivings from both of them unto the infinitely good God,
who fills all with his plenty.

But though our Lord has declared, that it is more blessed to give than to
receive, and God has promised repayment in good measure, pressed down, shaken
together, and running over, to the cheerful giver; yet we find that the spring
of most men's Charity runs very slow and narrow, or else, through mistake, is
derived into a wrong Channel.

Here therefore I offer as an expedient in this case the Parochial Covenant;
For every one of the combination would look upon himself as obliged, not only
by duty (as Gods Steward of what he had received) but by special relation also
to contribute freely toward the relief of all the poor and indigent of the
Society, which himself is a member of, yea and to the poor of other Christian
Secieties, (as members with him of the Catholic Church of Christ) if there be
need, and occasion be offered him.

And besides, every member of the Society would employ his brain as well as his
purse, for the service of the Brotherhood, in contriving how all the honest
members of the body might be set on work, and learn (as St. Paul advises) to
maintain good works for necessary uses: So that herery every Parish would
become a kind of Corporation, wherein some useful manufacture or other would be
set on foot. And all the little Trades and Ingenuities of the Hollanders would
be transplanted into this Island, and improved (as usually the inventions of
other Nations are by the English) to the great benefit of the Nation. And
whereas now (to the detriment of the whole Kingdom) the traffic of some of the
most important Trades, is in a manner engrossed by Dissenters (and it is a
great temptation to men of Craf. and Ingenuity to turn Sectaries, whilst they
see, that pretense fo Scruples gets an opinion of their honesty and brings in
custom) then the Trade would become more diffused, and a fit and equal share
therein would be put into the hands of Conscientious and Loyal Conformists,
whose integrity (by this public Test of a whole Parish owning them as members)
would be with good advantage represented to those they should deal with.

And hereby also the Bishops, and the Parochial Ministry under them, would have
the advantage to engage the Contribution of their richer Parishioners, for the
education of Youths of pregnant and hopeful parts at School, and afterward at
the Universities (whose friends are not able to give them that breeding;) as
also for disposing of other poor Children to honest Trades. And both the
Ministers and the People combined would be engaged to look after every one of
their Members, That they did bring up their Children in the fear and nurture of
the Lord, and in some honest Calling, and that themselves walked before their
Children as examples of Christian Conversation.

Which without all peradvanture would be the most effectual course, that ever
yet was taken, to cure England of that lousy disease, which at present it is
infested with, I mean, a numerous Company of vagrant sturdy beggars; who throng
so thick at the doors of the good Yeomen of the Nation, that they are certainly
the greatest oppression which the Householders in the North and Northwest parts
of the Nation do groan under.

For I am confident to assert, as knowing that I speak the words of truth and
soberness, that many Housekeepers in those parts do expend twice as much yearly
in alms to those Vagrants (if that dole be worthy to be called alms) as they
pay in all sort of ordinary Taxes, and Lays, and Duties to the King, to the
Church, and to the Poor of their own Parish: Nay, it is not to be doubted, but
that that which his Majesty's subjects give to sturdy Vagrants yearly, would
Build, and Rigg, and furnish out at least ten gallant Ships of War in any one
year, or rather would build sufficient Workhouses, and provide sufficient Stock
to set all our poor on work in some manufactures about those commodities, that
are of English growth, and may be exported to the great advantage of the Nation.

But when once Parishioners are thus embodied by their Covenant, they will
easily be convinced, that they have fitter Objects for their Charity amongst
themselves and other Christian Societies, than such slaves of lust and idleness
as our Vagrants are, and by degrees that mistaken Charity of Relieving such
will grow out of fashion, being swallowed up by that true and warrantable
Charity to the poor members of their own and other Christian Congregations; And
hereby the Erraticks would be forced to become fixed in their abode, and to
endeavor to live like men, if not like Christians also.

Object. But this design in some measure now manifested to be like to produce
such a general benefit, may be objected against as impracticable, by reason of
the weakness of the present Ministry of the Church of England, few of which are
equal as to parts and prudence for the management of such a work as this is.

Answ. My answer is very short and peremptory, if I only say, then let them be
deprived of their places, and more able Persons put in their rooms.

But I rather answer, that notwithstanding the slanderous insinuations of some
profane Droles and other malignants, I am confident to assert, That there are
not many of the Clergy of England (and indeed it is not fit there should be
any) who are not able from the Scriptures of the New and Old Testament, to
prove unto the People their misery both of guilt and impotency in their lapsed
state: And that God has sealed a New Covenant in the blood of Christ, wherein
he has promised through the propitiation of that blood, to forgive and blot
out the sins of the penitent believer, and to give grace and power to resist
corruption on those that are sincere and humble, and smother not, or stifle
their convictions, and to increase Grace from Christ's fullness, to the sincere
and diligent, and to secure by his Grace the humble and the watchful, that they
shall not fall away; and that finally he will give to them (who by patient
continuance in well doing, seek for honor, and glory, and immortality) eternal
life.

I doubt not also but that they are able from the Scriptures to prove the
contrary threatenings, namely, That they who resist Gods Spirit in its motions
and convictions (sinning against their light) are in danger to be given over to
a reprobate sense, and to be estranged wholly from the life of God through a
blinded mind, and hardened heart, and that the Impenitent and Unbelievers,
continuing such, shall perish in their sins, and that he who uses not his
talents, is like to lose them, and that he who trusts to an old age repentance,
or a deathbed change, is in danger to be cut off in his sins for combring the
ground: And that there is unsupportable and everlasting indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish certainly to come on all those who obey not the truth,
but obey unrighteousness, and die in a state of impenitency and unbelief.

I do not question also, but that most of the English Clergy are furnished with
ability to prove the equity, beauty, and real pleasure, and benefit of all the
holy precepts of the Gospel, and obedience to them, not only from the direct
testimony and assertion of the Scriptures, but also by rational appeals to the
light and experience of those of their Auditors, who have not lost that
dignoscitive power of their souls, whereby their spiritual sense discerns
betwixt good and evil: which power whoever has lost, is not far from the
condition of the damned spirits, for he also is reserved in the chains of
darkness to the judgment of the great day, if God do not in a miracle of mercy
break through that darkness, wherein the resolved sinner has shut up himself.

Such duties are these, to love God with all our heart, and to delight our
selves in the manifestation of his glory by Jesus Christ, and to love our
Neighbor as our selves, to forgive injuries, to compassionate and help them
who are miserable, either by reason of sin, or outward affliction, to delight
in those who are holy upon earth, and to mortify and crucify worldly and
carnal lusts, and cheerfully to bear the Cross when we suffer for righteousness
sake.

I doubt not also but they can from Scripture, and from the like rational
applications and appeals prove the real danger, unseemliness and
unprofitableness of every sin, with the real damage that sinners suffer by sin,
especially in their souls, being thereby estranged from the life of God and
more indisposed than before the perpetration of it, to the reverence, love, and
delight, and confidence in God, which is the life and happiness of all rational
spirits. I doubt not, I say, but most Ministers can prove this also, to the
conviction of them who will ponder and consider the sad influences of their own
sins, and have not sinned away the ability of tasting the good word of God, and
the powers of the world to come.

I do not know that I have set down, either in the promises, precepts, or
threatenings, any, but what is necessary to be known by all who live under the
means of grace, even by Laymen.

And if a Parochial Minister has a competent knowledge of these truths, and
can make them out to the conviction and instruction of honest plain men, who
desire to know what they must do to be saved, and if withal, the Teacher
himself be of an holy, humble and sober conversation, he is not to be judged
unfit for the Ministry, because he has not studied the Mathematics, or Modern
Politics, or cannot humor his Discourses to the pleasing of their Gusto, who
go to the Theater with greater devotion than they do to the Church, and prefer
a modern and modish Play stuffed with that they call wit, namely, interlardings
of profaneness and scurrility, far before a serious and seasonable, but plane
Sermon.

Object. If it be objected further, that every Minister that is able to Preach
and instruct plain men, is not able to manage the guidance of a Parochial
Congregation, wherein may be persons of great learning, and parts, and quality,
the Nobility, Gentry, Lawyers and Physicians of the Nation, and can any imagine
that these will subject themselves by explicit Promise, to the oversight of the
Parochial Clergy, many of which want both experience and prudence to rule their
own Houses well, how shall they then take care of the House of God?

Answ. I Answer, that supposing those Persons of great abilities and qualities
to be Christians and Protestants, they will think it agreeable to Scripture and
reason, to put themselves into the society of those Christians, amongst whom
they do cohabit for the celebration of public worship administered by some
person set apart to that office according to the Order of the Gospel.

If then they own themselves for members of the Church of England in their
particular Parish Assemblies, their quality and abilities do not exempt them
from owning the Parish Minister as their immediate Pastor.

But on the contrary, their better abilities oblige them to give so much more
assistance, and encouragement to him in his work. And so the Minister who was
not equal to the guidance of a Parish in the single strength of his own
prudence, will by the advice and countenance of such helps in Government be
rendered more able and successful in his work.

And an humble and modest Minister cannot want help sufficient from God, to
make his work prosperous, if he be sincere in aiming at Gods Glory, and the
good of his people. And if through pride and self-willedness, any balk the
advice of worthy and able Parishioners, let complaint be made to the Lord
Bishop for his regulation: And indeed so little of Government is betrusted to
the Parish Ministers, that they can hardly miscarry for want of political
gifts, if they be worthy to be betrusted with the Preaching of the Word, and
Administration of the Sacraments.

Besides, amongst us all, the Parochial Assemblies are under the guidance and
inspection of the most Reverend Fathers, the Bishops of the several Diocesses:
to question whose equality to such a work, will ill become any Member of the
Church of England.

One consideration more I must take leave to add as a Motive to all the Layety,
to wish well to this proposal of mine, namely, that hereby they shall be
strongly secured of continual love and peace betwixt themselves and their
Ministers.

For after this Mutual Stipulation, the Generality of themselves will of
course, and in all reason ought to be, both Arbitrators and Judges of most
differences that can possibly arise betwixt any particular Persons of them and
their Ministers about Legal dues or otherways.

And the Patrons, with others of the Nobility and Gentry, will have their just
Esteem and Authority in their Parishes hereby enlarged, for whilst they as
Stars of the first Magnitude by their eminent Quality and Prudence, have
chiefest influence upon Ministers, both by way of Encouragement, Direction and
Incitement of them to do their duty, they will raise a greater veneration of
themselves, both with Ministers and Parishioners, and make all of them ready to
exhibit on all occasions affectionate devotions to the service of such their
Benefactors, and their Generous Families.

If then (as I have endeavored to make good) the natural Preductions of this
Parochial Explicit Stipulation appear likely to be these, The advance of Honor
and Authority to our Grandees, of Holiness and Diligence in our Ministers, of
Love and Unity amongst the People, and of Loyalty toward our Gracious
Sovereign in all his Subjects, I will promise my self, that neither the
Obscurity of my self the Proposer, nor my mean way of managing this excellent
Argument, will at all prejudice my Proposal with true English Protestants.

The Conclusion.
And now I certify my Reader, that I have provided answers to all the other
material Objections that I was able to foresee might be made against this
innocent and harmless Project, whether taken from the manner of Ministers legal
entrance by the presentations of Patrons, or from the present Legally
established Order of Public Worship, or the Ministers maintenance, etc. But
considering the present Crisis of affairs, and that it may be part of the
subject of the question in some of these Objections may either be taken away or
altered, I thought it best to suppress them, that my Reader might be but little
further troubled, than in a bare prospect of this proposal; which his own
thoughts, I believe, will commend to his approbation, but only those in
Authority can command to our practice.

At whose feet I humbly lay down these my endeavors to serve God and my
Country, and hope they will not reckon it presumption in me thus to propose,
seeing in a general danger of an inundation every man runs with the best
materials and instruments that he has, to assist at strengthening the banks.

And seeing also that I offer nothing to their consideration, but what does
every way comport with the good Laws already made, or to be made by them, and
which my just fears of the prevailing of bold impieties, as well as of the
attempts of the enemies of our Church, have drawn me to make this public.

I shall promise my self therefore, that all the pious Members of the Church of
England will not only make a favorable construction of my design but promote
it by as advantageous a representation of it to those in Authority, as it is
capable of in truth and reason. And I hope my Nonconforming Brethren will not
think themselves obliged on any account, to endeavor to obstruct what I have
represented thus useful and beneficial to us, and no way prejudicial to them: I
never intended by making it manifest, that all this might be done, without
violation of any part of the legal settlement, to upbraid them, who avouch that
they cannot effectually promote faith and holiness, without moving
excentrically to the Laws and Constitutions Ecclesiastical.

For I believe, if they had the same apprehensions of Conformity, which I at
present have, they would come in and build with us.

Much less did I intend, (as I again protest in the presence of the All-seeing
God) to fix the distance betwixt Conformists and Nonconformists by this
proposal.

For I shall be far from repining, if those in Authority think fit to remove
any thing which may be laid aside without casting reproach on the Parochial
Churches conforming to the present legal establishment, or hindering their
edification, and without giving scandal to Foraign Churches, or prejudicing
Catholic Communion with them.

And as I question not, but that all Momentous Constitutions necessary to those
good purposes, will be secured to us by the Piety and Prudence of the Kings
most excellent Majesty, who is a true Nursing Father to the Church, and through
the advice of his present Parliament (being a Constellation of as eminent
Patriots as any Age of our Forefathers saw ever imbodied on the account of the
great trust laid upon them) so, if they see fit, to dispense in other things of
meaner concernment, whereby Sober and Pious Dissenters may imbody with us, I
shall not be wanting to appear amongst those, who will testify their joy for
the healing of our breaches: nor shall I think my own shoe pincheth me because
my Brothers steps are more enlarged.

However, I hope that all amongst us, and amongst them also, who would rejoice
over the Churches of Christ, beholding their Order and Stedfastness, will
easily unite in this prayer to the great Shepherd of the Sheep, That he will
continue and strengthen amongst us his staves of bands and of beauty, that if
ever the Assyrian shall attempt to come into our Land, or tread in our Palaces,
we may be able to raise up against him seven Shepherds, and eight Principal
men. And let all the people say, Amen.

Glory be to God on high, on earth peace, good will amongst men.
FINIS.

