A SALUTATION IN THE Love of God, AND In the Fellowship of the work of his
blessed Truth, unto all the Faithful Brethren and Sisters in Christ Jesus our
Lord, who are Begotten by the Immortal Word of God unto a lively Hope, which
lives and abides for ever.

With A Word of Exhortation and Counsel unto all whose Faces are set Sionward,
and who have found the Narrow-Way that leads to Life, whose hearts are tender
of Gods Glory, and desire to walk therein.

Also a Warning unto all them that have long known the Truth, but have not,
neither do obey it with all their hearts, that they may Redeem the time that
yet remains, and prize the Day of their Visitation, and while they have the
Light, walk in it, lest utter Darkness come upon them, and the Door of Mercy be
shut.

By SAMUEL CATER.

Printed in the Year, 1672.

A Salutation In the Love of God, and in the Fellowship of the work of his
blessed Truth, unto all the Faithful Brethren and Sisters in Christ Jesus our
Lord, etc.
Dear Friends, Brethren and Sisters,
WHom God, through the riches of his Grace, and breakings of his blessed Light
into our hearts, has thereby gathered us out of the dark world, which lies in
wickedness, amongst whom we had our conversation in times past, in which time
we were Ignorant of the knowledge of the true God, and strangers unto eternal
Life, which by his blessed Grace and heavenly Light he has now brought us unto
the knowledge of, to the great Satisfaction of our hearts and comfort of our
souls, which peace and satisfaction the world could never give us, neither can
they now take it away from us, blessed be the name of the Lord our God, who
speaks peace to his children, and none can speak trouble, but in his holy will
we rest under the shadow of his wings, where none of the instruments of
cruelty can make us afraid; for the Seed is known, which is satisfied in the
will of God, and can, and does obey and follow the Lord as faithfully in
adversity as in prosperity, whereby we are fully satisfied through the work that
God has wrought in us by his unchangable truth and spirit, that the day of his
power is come, in which day he has made us willing to deny our own wills, and
to obey the will of the Lord God our maker, and to take up the cross whereby
self is daily crucified, and to follow Christ Jesus, and to keep the word of
his patience, whereby we are made pertakers of the fulfiling of his gra^ious
promises, who keeps and delivers his in the hour of temptation; who says to
the Seed of Jacob, Call upon me in the time of trouble, I will hear and deliver
thee, and thou shall glorify me. And now dear Brethren, often has the Lord
made us Eie-witnesses, and pertakers of this his love and mercy, who has
preserved our feet from falling; yea and has delivered us out of many
troubles: and when we have seen none to help, then has he been a present help
unto us, both outwardly and inwardly. So that the Lord has not been wanting
unto us, blessed be his holy name, who has, and does hand forth his mercy as
largly now to them that fear him, as he did unto the generations that are gone
before us. Oh! the love of our God and how large it does abound to usward,
even unto them that fear him, so that I can say as the Prophet said. Truly the
Lord is good to Israel even unto such as are of an upright heart: For Dear
Friends, who is their that can say they want any good thing, that put their
trust in the Lord, and are given up to serve and obey him with all their
hearts? So that our souls can say to the glory of our God, That Wisdom, and
grace, nor any good thing does the Lord withhold from them that obey him with
an upright heart; for in him all fullness dwells; who feeds the hungry with good
things, and covers the naked with the garment of Salvation, and beautifies his
Elect with high praises; the poor he makes rich with durable riches and
everlasting righteousness; so that he raises the poor beggar from the dunghill
of the worlds glory, and sets him in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, where his
soul feeds quietly in the fresh pastures of love and life, and drinks at the
Fountain of living water, which becomes as a well springing up in his soul to
Life Eternal; the lame also does the Lord, in this the day of his blessed
power which he has made us pertakers off, make to walk; through the virtue of
his love he refreshes the souls and hearts of all them that wait upon him,
whereby their strength is daily renewed, to run the ways of his holy
commandments, which the Lord makes easy to all them that are of an upright
heart, the tongue of the dumb he loosed, through the virtue of his Life, and
showering down his blessed dews of heaven into their thirsty Souls, which
causes them to publish his praise, and to set forth his glory: So that we see
his Promise fulfilled; in the wilderness, waters break forth, and streams in
the desert, and the place of barrenness is now become fruitful, whereby praises
is brought forth to the glory of the Lord our God.

So that his presence is with us as certainly now, as ever it was with his
Children in any Age who obeyed his holy will, and stood in his council; who for
their obedience to the Law of their God, were sometimes cast into the Lions
den, sometimes into the fire, sometimes imprisoned, and others their goods
spoiled, and the Lo^ds presence was with them, who upheld them, and caused them
to sing praises unto His name, in the feeling of His holy Power which they
enjoyed when their bodies were locked in the Prison, and their feet in the
Stocks.

Even so now, He is known unto us that have believed in His name, by the virtue
of His love, for He deals His bread of Life which is His flesh unto our Souls,
by the virtue of which our Souls live and receive strength to praise the Living
God our maker; and the misterys of Life and Godliness has the Lord made known
unto us, who has cleansed us, and purged us by His blood, and washed and
Regenerated us by His holy Word: So that there is a Remnant, that can and do
read in Gods blessed Light the misteryes of Life, and these can say, The bread
which we break is the communion of the body of Christ, and the cup which we
drink is the communion of the blood of Christ: For although we be many members,
and many miles distant, outwardly separated one from another, and have sundry
gifts which God has given us by His holy Spirit, which He has sent into our
hearts, by the which we are led and guided to exercise the same, For the
edifying of the body in the love of God, which constrains us so to do, by
which Spirit we are all baptized into the one body, and made partakers of the
one bread which came down from heaven, by the which we are fed and nourished,
led and guided into all truth; In the sense of which Mercy, and in the
fellowship of this great Mystery which is hid in Christ from all that are high
and proud, and wise in their own conceit, and envious, and slight the Grace of
God, Who resists the proud, but gives more Grace to the humble; I say, In the
fellowship of this ever blessed and truly worthy, for ever to be loved and
obeyed, Truth and Grace of God, which ha^h done this blessed work for us; and
has made known this Mystery of Life in us, the Salutation of my Life, in the
unsp^akable Love and Me^cy of our God is unto you all.

Dear Brethren and Friends, whom the Lord has made pertakers with me, and I
with you, of this pr^tious Faith, even the Faith which was of old delivered
unto the Saints; which give us victory over the World, and by which we receive
power to deny our selves and to do the will of our God, by which we feel a hope
begotten in us which is as an Anchor most sure and steadfast in our hearts, and
souls, That nothing that is present, nor nothing that is yet to come, shall
ever be able to separate us from the love of our God; Nor decline our minds,
nor pervert our hearts from following the Lord, and obeying his blessed Truth
and holy Spirit which has effected this good work in our hearts, and has done
us thus much good, which our tongues are not able to set forth, so fully as our
Souls partake and enjoy of the benefit, in the salvation of our Souls from
death; who has by the Arm of His blessed Power revealed in and unto us,
preserved our feet from falling and our hearts from fainting, and has
delivered our eyes from tears, And now has given us beauty for ashes, and the
Spirit of joy and gladness for the Spirit of heaviness; So that the heart that
has been purged through the execution of the Lords Righteous Judgments, now
rejoices in the enjoyment of his Mercies.

But this is not every ones state nor condition, who are convinced of Gods
blessed Truth, and who are turned to the Light and Word of faith within, for
its now with us as it was with them that the Apostle writ to, who were in
several states and conditions; there were some that were strong men of full
age, whose senses were thoroughly exercised in the word of God and Doctrine of
the Apostles, and these were such that the Apostle said, Had obeyed from the
heart their Doctrine which they preached, by the which they were saved, made
free from sin, and become servants to God, their fruit unto holiness, and their
end everlasting peace: These were acquianted with the misterys of Life and
Godliness, and he said to them, The bread which we break, is the communion of
the body of Christ, and the cup which we drink, is the communion of the blood
of Christ; for although they were many members, yet but one body, of which
Jesus Christ was the head, who had true experience of the work of the Lord.

And to some they spoke and writ, which were young in the faith, and had but
little experience in the knowledge of the work of the Lords blessed Truth, unto
which they were turned, and in the which they had believed, and by the which he
told them they should be saved, if they continued to the end in faith and
obedience.

Also the Apostle wrote and spoke to such as had the knowledge of the Truth,
but did not continue in faithful obedience thereunto to the end of their race,
that so they might thereby receive the Crown of Life, who yet abode in the
form, but had lost the virtue of the Life and power which once they felt and
enjoyed, and which all do enjoy which continue faithful unto the Lord, whose
virtue and power keeps them always fresh and green, and living to God.

And now dear Friends there is something in my heart, as one that has obtained
mercy of the Lord, and according to the experience which God has given unto me
of his Love and Mercy, and as I feel the Lord requires of me for the easing of
my heart, and clearing of my conscience unto you, that have believed in the
Truth; And first unto you whose hearts are tender of Gods glory, and that
desire to have your Portion with the Sanctified in Christ Jesus; all keep low,
and wait in Gods holy fear, for the fear of the Lord will keep your hearts
tender of his glory, for unto them that fears the Lord he reveals his
secrets: And all keep to the pure holy Light of Jesus Christ, unto the which
you have been turned by the Mess^ngers and Ministers of Jesus Christ, whom God
has sent in his name and power, now, as he did in days past, to turn People
from Darkness to Light, and all that were faithful in walking in it came to be
redeemed from Satan's power; and knew then, and do now the power of God which
saves the Soul: Therefore Dear Friends, be watchful in the Light of Jesus that
shines in your hearts, that you may all be led by it in the way which leads
unto Peace, He is given for a Leader, and whosoever is led and guided by him
that is come a Light into the world, and now shines in thy heart, He leads to
Peace, and gathers into Rest: For this is the path which the Just walked in,
who traveled to God in all Ages, which the wicked and ungodly hates; the path
of the Just is a shining Light which shines unto the perfect day: And all you
that are entered into this path, be faithful to God, and dilligent to walk in
it, and bring your deeds unto it, that you may be found in well doing, for them
are they that shall, and do come to enjoy Immortallity and Eternal Life by
Jesus Christ, who continue in well doing: And Christ says, He that does well
comes to the Light, and brings his deeds unto it. And the Apostle said to
them he wrote to in his day, That they had this sure word of Prophecy,
whereunto they did well to take heed, as unto a Light that shines in a dark
place. This also is my Testimony with many Brethren, that all, that ever come
to have Life everlasting must walk in it, love it, and obey the teachings of
it: And therefore do I commit you all unto it, that have recieved the knowledge
of it as unto that which is able, and on that which the Lord has laid help,
that is mighty to save to the utmost all that bows to the apearance of it. And
therefore let your eyes be toward it to wait upon God in it, even for the
Grace that is to be brought in the Revelation of Jesus Christ, for as thou
waitest honestly in the Light, it will let thee see how it is with thee, and
how far thou have been faithful unto God, and in what thou have not been
faithful, and wherein thou have d^ne well, thou art justified by it, and in
what thou do evil, thou art condemned by it; and so here thou comes to see
the Scripture fulfilled, which says, Tribulation and anguish on every soul
that does evil, but glory, honor and peace, to them that works good: And
therefore Dear Friends, as you desire to have peace with God, keep to the Word
and Grace of God which appears within, and which calls for purity and obedience
out of a pure heart; for them which went before us, which did enjoy peace, and
which do now enjoy the same, and comes to witness such high privilledges, and
partake of so great promises as to be Saints in the Light; they are such as did
and do obey the Grace and Truth of God with all their hearts, whereby they come
to be elected unto God through Sanctification of the Spirit, and obedience unto
the Truth: So Dear Friends, You that have received the knowledge of the blessed
Truth of God, which is Christ, The way, the Truth, Life and Light, whereby
through the Mercy and Love of God unto your Souls, you are made pertakers of
that which David prayed unto God for, Lord says he, Send forth thy Light, and
thy Truth, and it shall conduct us unto thy holy hill: and for that same end
has the Lord our God visited you with his heavenly Light, whereby he has
guided your feet into the way of peace, that you may travel therein unto his
blessed and everlasting Kingdom, that stands in Peace, Righteousness, and Joy
in the holy Ghost, into which nothing that defiles, or works Abomination can
enter: And therefore Dear Friends, This is the word of exhortation which lives
in my heart unto you that have believed, wait in it, and keep to the word of
faith which purifies the heart and cleanses the conscience, for it is the pure
in heart that come to see God, and to partake of the great and precious
promises of Life and Peace, even such as walk in the Light, in which there is
no occasion of stumbling; for in it every snare that the enemy of our Souls
lays to take our feet, or to entangle our affections with any visible thing or
to draw down our minds into the earth, and to give us a sight of the visible
and carnal things, which if the mind and heart close with them, and so enters
into the Temptation, it brings darkness over the heart, and death upon the
Soul, for to be carnally minded brings death, but obedience to the Spirit of
the Lord, brings life and peace: And therefore all live in the Spirit, and obey
Christ the Power and Wisdom of God, and look not out at your own weakness nor
at any Temptation of the enemy of your Souls, either without or within, but all
look up to Christ in whom your help is, Who is able to save to the utmost all
that comes to God by him; and none to be discouraged because of the frowns of
the ungodly or the threatenings of the wicked, for they are but as the crakling
of thorns under a pot with the Lord our God, whom we in Soul, Body, and Spirit,
serve and worship, who has set bounds for them, and they shall do no more unto
us, then shall make to the glory of our God, and to the advantage of his Truth,
and for the trial of our Faith that when our Patience is tried, we may come
forth in our Testimony, as gold tried in the fire; and then blessed are all
that wait in patience, and rest contented with all the flock of Christ, until
the Lord renders vengeance on them that trouble us. But thou Dear friend, who
art given up, and resolved in thy heart and soul to serve and obey the Lord thy
God, what ever it cost thee, and thou have honestly counted the cost, and thou
see the Pearl to be more worth then all that thou can part withal for it,
or suffer because of thy obedience to it, be not thou discouraged at the
appearance of the wicked one, whose work the Lord thy God by his blessed Light
is a discovering unto thee, but rejoice in that the Lord has made him
manifest, who has Sat in the Temple of God, exalting himself above all that is
called God, saying that he himself is God; and this is he that Rules Head, King
and Prince, in all the Children of disobedience, which are yet in darkness, and
who now proclaim him their King and Potentate; And both Priest, and Professor,
and Profane, strike hands with him, saying, That they never can, nor shall be
freed from sin, on this side of the grave, and so make the death and coming of
Christ of none effect, who came to save his People from their sins, and to
Redeem them from all unrighteousness, who will bruise the serpents head, and
overcome his power in thee, For unto him all power in heaven and earth is
committed; and this is he you are to look unto and belive in, who is come a
Light into your hearts, And to bind the strong man and spoil his goods, and
cast him out; who w^ll certainly do it, for he is come into your hearts, that
is greater then he that Rules in the world, but he does, and will strive to
keep his possession as long as by any means and wiles, or cunning craftiness
he can: And therefore my Dear Friends, All watch to the Light, for in that you
will see and know, His cunning craftiness whereby he lies in wait to deceive;
and whom he can no longer deceive but with the Light he is seen, and by the
power of God his Temptations are denied by the honest hearted, Then he accuses
before the throne of God night and day: And this is he which tells you who are
tender of Gods glory, and hunger and thirst after Righteousness, that you shall
never overcome all your corruptions, which you see to be the foes of your own
house, but all believe in the Light, Which is the power of God unto salvation,
unto every one that believes, and you shall come to see this accuser cast down,
and by the power of the Living God overcome, and your feet set, And your house
built upon the Rock; Which the gates of hell cannot prevail against, nor the
floods of the ungodly can never overflow, nor the storms of the wicked,
neither can nor shall overcome: For the Lord preserves his people, and delivers
them that put their trust in him: And therefore, This is the word that is in my
heart in the true sense of Gods love unto your Souls, that are come to the
Light of Christ which is the way of Life, end see it to be a narrow way, and
the gate where by you must enter into Rest is straight; I say unto you wait
upon God, and keep subject unto his Grace which appears unto you, for in that
lies your help; for that is the same that ever it was unto the Travelers in
days past: For when Paul the servant of God, who was deeply exercised in his
mind and troubled in his heart, because of his own weakness, and the strength
of Sa hans accusations and temptations, under the sense of which he cried unto
the Lord for help, whose answer was to him, My grace is sufficient, for my
power is made perfect in weakness; by the which he did come to witness help and
deliverance from the body of sin and death, and th^n his Soul praised the
living God; and then as he received of the Lord so he Preached to others, and
committed them unto God, and to the word of his Grace, which says he, Is able
to save your souls, and to give you an inheritance with the Sanctified in
Christ Jesus; and he says, That this Grace has appeared to all, that so many
as obey it are brought into the perfect way of holiness in Gods fear. Therefore
all know your minds stayed in it, and your h^arts subjected unto it, that so
you may come to witness Rest by it, to the which I commit you as unto that
which I am a living witness, for the Lord is able to save your Souls, and to
set your hearts at liberty to serve and praise the living God; And all be
dilligent to keep your Meetings, to wait upon God with them that meet together
to worship the Lord out of a pure heart: And all wait in the Light, and labor
to keep your hearts and minds stayed in, and with his blessed and holy Spirit
of Truth, upon the living God, that so his blessed peace you may all feel
abounding in your hearts more and more, to the comfort of your Souls, that so
in the living feeling of Gods heavenly power, you may have fellowship together:
And all take heed that the enemy of your Souls, That goes about like a roaring
Lion, seeking whom he may devour, does not betray your simple minds, in causing
your minds to wander from the Truth, or to let thoughts to rest in your hearts,
which is the work of the enemy to bring in to trouble you, when you are waiting
upon God; But all submit unto God, and in his name and power Judge them out,
and let them not have a place in your hearts, for if you do, they will hinder
you from hearing the voice of the beloved of your Souls. And all take heed of
deadness, and drousiness, and sleeping in Meetings, for that is a great
disorder, and brings dishonor to the holy name of God, that is concerned in
and amongst you, which all that loves the Lord ought to be tender of, and it is
also a great and heavy burden to the Souls of the Righteteous which sits with
you, and are preserved in a fresh and living sense of the goodness of the Lord,
and it is also a great dishonor unto your selves, as you are men and women
that profess to meet together, to worship God in Spirit and Truth; for I do say
and know, That Gods witness in all your consciences, who ever have felt the
power of God, and known the worship of God, that is performed in Spirit, that
when, and whilst at any time, that sleepy drousy Spirit, prevails over any,
although you may be in the Meeting with them that does serve and worship God,
you do not then worship him; but bur^hens the Just in your selves and in
others, for the Word of the Lord which the Children of God hear and feel, is
quick and powe^ful; and Christ who is in the midest of those that meet in his
name, is a quickening Spirit, whose Life quickens the mortal bodies, and
refreshes the Immortal Souls of all his little ones, that wait for his
appearance. And therefore all wait in Gods pure fear, that you may be covered
with the Spirit of the Lord, that so your nakedness may not appear which is the
cause of shame.

And unto you that have long been convinced of the Truth, and have not been
faithful unto it, but are in the state of them the Apostle speaks of, Who for
the time might have been teachers of others, but now you have need one should
teach you the first principles of true Religion; for you are they that have not
been faithful to God, who have not truly, nor thoroughly forsaken dead works,
but rest in a convincement of the Truth, saying and confessing to that which
does show you and all men sin, and convinces of the same, is the Truth of God,
and there is no other, but do not so obey it, as to become conformable
thereunto, but rest in the knowledge of the will of God, but does not yield
obedience unto it, and have gotten into a form of Truth, but for want of
obedience to the same, does not come to witness the power of God to Rule in
your hearts: Friends, You are in the foolish Virgins state which: Christ speaks
of, which have got the lamps, but have not the Life and Virtue of the Love of
God dwelling in you, by the which the Soul is daily fed and nourished; but even
whilst your tongues may be talking of God, your Souls are in leanness, and
this comes upon you, because your hearts still lusts after that which Gods.
Spirit is against, which you ought to come out of, and to be clean separated
from; and here you keep an enemy in your own bosom, and harbors a Dalila in
your own hearts, while you suffer any lustful desire to live in your hearts,
that Gods Truth has appointed to be slain and crucified, which you ought to
bear the Cross unto, for the want of which you cannot follow Christ, until you
deny your selves, and take up the Cross to your own wills, to whatsoever it be
that it lusts after; for our God is Pure, Holy, Just, and Righteous, who will
and does render unto every man according to his Works; for although he let the
Children of Israel of old have their lustful minds satisfied yet for it he
brought leanness of Soul upon them, which was a, just Judgment of God upon
them, which before he fed with bread from heaven; even so does he now: Blessed
be his holy name says my Soul, for now does the Lord refresh and feed with
bread from heaven, which the world knows not, nor the disobedient partake not
of, for the Lord our God refreshes, clothes, and feeds, and ministers Peace
and Comfort unto those who are zealous for his name, and obedient to his holy
Truth: But the disobedient does and must dwell in a dry Land: Therefore you
that have the knowledge of this ever blessed, and worthy to be obeyed Truth,
and Grace of God, whith is given you for to lead and guide you, to the Kingdom
of the Living God; Prize your time, and improve your Talent; For I testify
unto you, that there is a Prize put into your hands, and an oppertunity has
God afforded you to get strength, Before you go hence and shall be seen no
more; But if you spend this precious time, that the Lord has given you, To
work out your Salvation, and to make your calling and election sure, Then God
will be just in the day when your Ruin comes upon you; And his servant, and
servants, will be clear of your blood; And the Talent which is a measure of the
Lords good Grace and Spirit, will be taken from you, and will be a swi^^
witness against you: And therefore, whilst you have time prize it, and whilst
you have Light walk in it, least darkness so much overtake you, and the cloud
of error through your continual disobedience to the Light, grows so thick
upon you, as you cannot see the way to God; and then the enemy of your Souls
takes you wholly captive again to do his will: And then the Scripture comes to
be fulfilled upon you: The Dog is returned again to his old vomit; and the Sow
that was washed to the wallowing in the mire; And then thou art fit neither for
the land nor for the Dunghill, but to be trodden under foot of men; and then
falls into that snare that David prayed to the Lord to be kept from, that he
might never become a Scorn to fools that had no understanding; for all of you
that have in any measure obeyed the word and Grace of God, you have known
cleansing by it, so far as you have obeyed it; which is able to save and to
cleanse thoroughly, all them that abides in it, whereby the words of Christ
comes to be fulfilled, If you abide in my word, then are you my disciples
indeed; and you shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall make you free. And as
you tender the glory of God and the good of your own Souls, wait dilligently to
hear what the Spirit says in, and unto you, for that will deal justly and
truly with every one, for it is the same that ever it was, which justifies them
that obey the Truth, but condemns and reproves in whatsoever they do evil; And
this is the Spirit that all are now to hear and obey, which speaks a word in
season to every ones condition; And therefore all wait to hear what it does
signify unto you, whether it be Judgment or Mercy, for through Judgment, Mercy
comes to be known, for by Judgment, that comes to be overcome which is contrary
to the Lord; and therefore blessed are they that wait upon the Lord in the way
of his Judgments, until by Judgment, that be slain that is contrary to the
Lord; that so you may come to see, Mercy and Truth to meet together, and
Righteousness and Peace embrace each other, which is the desire of my Soul, who
am a true Friend to your Souls.

This to be Read in the Assemblies of Gods People, in the fear of the Lord, in
England, Scotland, and else where this may come; as Friends may see a service
therein.

Written at Monrosse Prison in Scotland, the eleventh Month, 1671. when I was
there a Prisoner for the Testimony Of the Truth. Samuel Cater.

THE END.

