A DISSERTATION Concerning the Government of the Ancient Church, BY BISHOPS,
METROPOLITANS, and PATRIARCHS.

More particularly, Concerning the ancient Power and Jurisdiction of the
Bishops of Rome, and the Encroachments of that upon other Sees, especially the Sea of Constantinople.

By WILLIAM CAVE, D. D. One of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

Omne genus ad Originem suam censeatur, necesse est.

Tert. de praescript. c. 20. p. 208. LONDON, Printed for R. Chiswel, at the
Rose and Crown in S. Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXXXIII.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD HENRY Lord Bishop of LONDON, One of the
Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL.
My Lord,
IN compliance with the good old Rule of S. Ignatius, (...), Do Epist. ad
Philadelph. p. 30. vid. ad Trall. p. 16.
nothing without leave from the Bishop, I have taken the confidence to lay
these Papers at Your Lordships feet; being well content, they should receive
from You a sentence of Life or Death; either to come abroad into open light, or
be condemned to be thrown aside, if you shall judge them useless and
unprofitable. For I am not so fond of my own Undertakings, as to flatter my
self, that any thing that I can do, will work much upon the obstinate humor of
a perverse and contentious Age.

My Lord, The Church of England is usually assaulted by two sorts of
Adversaries. The one declared Enemies to the Episcopal Government, or if at any
time in a good humor they allow the name, they deny the thing making the
Bishop of the Primitive times no more in effect than a mere Parish Priest. The
other are great pretenders to Antiquity, and strongly enough assert the
Episcopal Order, but withal would obtrude upon us a Supreme and Universal
Bishop, to whom all others are to be subject and accountable, and he we may be
sure is the Bishop of Rome. As for the first of these, I have not directly
entered the Lists with them, though what is here said concerning the Ancient
Church Government might be enough to satisfy Men modest and unprejudiced; and
more I did not think fit to add. They have been so often baffled upon that
Argument, that nothing but a resolved obstinacy could make them keep a post, so
utterly indefensable. But the Men of that way seem generally too over-weaning
and opiniative, and I have no hopes of doing good upon that Man, that is wiser
in his own Conceit, than seven Men that can render a Reason. Indeed the nature
of my design led me more immediately to encounter with the other Party, whose
cause (so far as it relates to the Subject under debate) I have examined, and
brought to be tried by the Standard of Antiquity, the truest Rule to proceed by
in this matter; and this managed without any needless Exasperations. For I
never could think it a reasonable method of Conviction to rail at Popery, or to
load the Bishop of Rome with ill Names, and spiteful Characters. The best way
sure in such cases is to appeal to the judgment of the Ancients, and to enquire
what power and authority was allowed him in the wiser and better Ages of
Christianity. Which I hope I have done with all truth and fairness in the
following Discourse.

My Lord, Your Lordships known Zeal for the Protestant Cause, and (what next
the goodness of the Divine Providence is the strongest Bulwark and Defense of
it) the honor and interest of the Church of ENGLAND, might give you a just
Title to this Discourse, though there were no other inducement to it. But we
that are the Clergy of Your Diocese, think our selves obliged to take all
occasions of letting the World know, how much we rejoice under the happy
Influences of Your Care and Conduct; how much we are beholden to that great
Example of Pastoral Industry and Diligence, you daily set before us; that we
have to deal with a temper so incomparably sweet and obliging, and that not
only in private Converses, but in all public Cases that concern the Church
under your Charge, you are pleased so freely and familiarly to consult and
advise with us. It Is this (to mention no more) that creates in us so just a
regard and veneration for Your Lordship. And I verily believe, since the
Primitive Times there never was a more mutual Endearment and Correspondence.
Never Bishop, that treated his Clergy with a more Paternal kindness and
Condiscention; never Clergy that paid a greater Reverence, and a more cheerful
Obedience to their Bishop. That this Concord and Agreement may not only
continue, but increase, and the happy effects of it visibly spread over your
whole Diocese, and especially this great CITY, is the earnest Prayer of,

MY LORD, Your Lordships faithful and sincerely devoted Servant, WILLIAM CAVE.

TO THE READER.
AMong the several Virtues, wherewith the Religion of our Lord does at once
refine and adorn Humane Nature, there are none conduce more, both to the peace
of the World, and the quiet of private and particular persons, than Humility
and Contentment; the laying aside the vain and fond opinion of our selves, a
lowliness of Mind to esteem others better than our selves, in honor preferring
one another; an easiness and satisfaction under that place and portion, which
the Wisdom of the Divine Providence has thought fit to allot us, and a generous
Contempt of those little and sordid Arts, by which Men hunt after Power and
Greatness, and impatiently affect Dominion and superiority over others.

A noble and divine temper of Mind, which our Lord has effectually recommended
both by his Doctrine, and the example of his Life. He has taught us, that we
should not, after the proud and hypocritical manner of the Pharisees, do our
works to be Mat. xxiii. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12.
seen of Men, make broad our Phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of our
Garments, love the uppermost Rooms at Feasts, and the chief Seats in the
Synagogue, and greetings in the Markets; that we should not affect proud
Titles, and the honor of a Name, to be called of Men, Rabbi, Rabbi, for that
one is our Master, even Christ, and all we are Brethren, (not that our Lord
here absolutely forbids all Honor and Precedence, no more than he does all
Mastership and Superiority in what follows, but only an inordinate desire, a
vicious and irregular inclination toward these things, and an undue and
tyrannical exercise of them) that we should call no (...) Chrysostom. in loc.
man our Father upon Earth, that is, in the same sense, and with the same
respect, wherewith we do God, for that one is our Father, which is in Heaven,
neither that we be called Masters, for that one is our Master, even Christ: For
that whosoever should exalt himself, shall be abased, and he that should humble
himself, shall be exalted.

And then for his own practice, how openly did he protest against seeking his
own glory, or receiving honor from Men? how studiously did he stifle the fame
of his own Miracles, and whatever might raise him in the esteem and value of
the World. When an Appeal was made to him to judge a Cause, he rebuked the
motion with a who made me a Judge, and a Ruler over you? When the Jews were
resolved to have made him King, he fled from the very shadow of a Crown. When
there was a strife amongst his own Apostles, which of them should be accounted
the greatest, like the Kings of the Gentiles which exercised Lordship and
Authority over their Subjects, he ended the Controversy with a short decision,
but ye shall not be so.

This Charge S. Peter particularly applies to the Bishops and Rulers of the
Church, that they should not be Lords over God's 1 Pet. v. 3, 5.
Heritage; that the younger should submit themselves to the elder; yea, all of
them be subject one to another, and be clothed with Humility: for that God
resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble.

Had the excellent Rules here laid down by S. Peter, been observed by those who
pretend to be his Successors, the Christian World had been free from those
infinite disturbances and distractions, which the pride and ambition of the
Roman Bishops have brought upon it. For certainly among all the corruptions and
innovations of that Church, nothing is more palpable and notorious, than an
intolerable usurpation over the Rights of their Brethren; nothing more wild and
extravagant, than the challenging a Supremacy over the Christian Church, as
affixed to the Sea of Rome, expressly contrary not only to the Scripture, the
great Canon of our Faith, but to the Laws of all ancient Councils, and the
practice of the Church; which however it allowed a primary honor and respect
to the Roman Prelate, yet still set him out, as it did to all other Bishops,
the particular extent of his Jurisdiction.

This is that which I have endeavored to evince in the following Discourse,
wherein I have traced the Papal Authority to those proper bounds and limits,
within which it was confined of old. And upon that occasion have briefly
surveyed the frame and constitution of the ancient Church, and that Policy and
Government, whereby it was managed in its purer and better times.

That which gave birth to the whole Discourse, was this: I had elsewhere in
relating the Acts of the second general Life of S. Greg. Naz. Sect. v. Number. ix.
Council, represented the third Canon of that Council, which decreed, that the
Bishop of Constantinople, upon the account of its being New Rome, or the
Imperial City, should have the privilege of honor next to the Bishop of Rome.
A Canon which they of Rome could never pardon, as which limits the power of the
Roman Prelate, and declares the foundation upon which it stands. For the
illustration of this Canon, I intended im that place to have added a digression
concerning the ancient Power and Precedence of the Bishops of Rome; but upon
second thoughts, referred it to an Appendix at the end of the Book. But that
Book swelling into too great a bulk, and this Discourse being grown beyond the
proportion that was at first designed, I was over-perswaded by some Friends to
venture it abroad alone. A thing which had I intended from the beginning, it
had come forth, at least in some parts, more perfect than it is, and with some
advantages which now it is forced to go without.

I have wholly waved all Debates concerning the Jus Divinum of Episcopacy, and
the Controversies that depend upon it, (enough has been said upon that
Argument) and have chiefly insisted upon those branches of the Ecclesiastic
Government, which have been less canvassed amongst us.

For the same reason I have more lightly touched upon the Pope's Universal
Supremacy, 'twas his Metropolitical and Patriarchal Power I principally
designed to enquire into. I know Volumes have been written De primatu Papae, de
Ecclesiis Suburbicariis, etc. and therefore I have reduced what concerns those
matters into as narrow a compass as I could, and have said no more than what is
necessary to clear the Argument, and express my own sense about it.

If what is here said shall administer any light to this part of
Church-antiquity, I shall be very glad; if not, I am content it should follow
the fate of many much better Books to be thrown aside. 'Twas never designed to
instruct the Learned, but only to form a short Scheme of the true state of
things, for the benefit of those, who have not been much conversant in the
Antiquities of the Church; at least to give some aid and direction to the
younger sort, who first apply themselves to the study of those ancient Times.
And if it may but attain this end, I shall think my Time and Pains have been
well bestowed.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. The State of the Church Government, and Power of the Roman Bishops
'till the Council of Nice.

An Equality among the Apostles as Church Governors appointed by Christ.
Peter's pretended Supremacy over the rest showed to be vain and groundless. If
any such had been granted, it belonged not to the Roman Bishops. Early
appearances of the Pride and Usurpation of the Bishops of that Church. Special
advantages of that See to set up for Tyranny and Usurpation. The foundation of
that Church by two great Apostles, Peter and Paul. Rome the Seat of the Empire.
The honor and advantages of that Church thereby. The Catholic Faith long time
preserved entire in the Church of Rome. Its large Revenues affording liberal
Hospitality. Its sending forth Emissaries to plant Christianity in other
Countries, and thereby claiming superiority over them. The pride of that Church
severely censured by S. Basil. A general Scheme of the subordination in the
Government of the Primitive Church, by Bishops, Archbishops, and Patriarchs,
and the Conformity herein to the Civil State. Episcopal Government, how it
spread it self at first? Metropolitans introduced, and why? A brief account of
the ancient way of Ecclesiastical Administration out of Cyprian and others, by
the Bishop and his Clergy, by Provincial Synods. What things usually managed
there. Foreign Churches how mutually transacting with one another. The Bishops
of Rome had no more authority in this Period, than the Bishops of other greater
Sees. Pope Melchiades appointed Commissioner by Constantine. Donatus appeals
from his Judgment. His sentence brought under Examinations in the Synod of
Arles. Page 1

CHAP. II. The Government of the Church, and Power of the Bishops of Rome, as
it is represented in the Canons of the Nicene Council.

The sixth Canon of the Synod of Nice set down, with the occasion of it. Seven
Observations drawn from that Canon. I. That the larger bounds of Ecclesiastic
Jurisdiction were the Roman Provinces. A. Province, what. Whether the Countries
in Italy so called. II. That the chief Church-Governour in every Province was
the Metropolitan. The prudence and convenience of that way of Government.
Patriarchs proved not to be intended in the Nicene Canon. III. That the Bishop
of Rome no less than the rest had his proper and limited Metropolitical power.
This owned by some of the greatest Champions of Rome. IV. That the
Metropolitick Sees of Rome, Alexandria and Antioch, were ever of the greatest
note in the Christian Church, and of these Rome the chief. The eminency of Sees
according to the greatness of the Cities wherein they were planted. This gave
precedence to the Church of Rome. The three Sees of Rome, Alexandria and
Antioch ascribed to S. Peter. Blasphemous things spoken of the Pope upon that
account. Primacy allowed to the Sea of Rome. No Supremacy belonging to it. The
Christian Church then knew of no such supereininent Power. V. That the Rights
of the Roman Metropolitan were not due by any Divine Constitution, but by
custom and the practice of the Church. This plainly showed to be the sense of
this and other following Councils. VI. That the Ordination of Provincial
Bishops was one of the prime Rights and Privileges of every Metropolitan
within his own Jurisdiction. The fourth, sixth, and seventh Canons of this
Council noted to that purpose. The same showed to be the determination of other
Synods. What other Rights belonged to Metropolitans. VII. That this way of
Ecclesiastic Administration was not any late novel Institution, but founded
upon ancient custom and practice. What this Antiquity implies. The original of
Metropolitans briefly inquired into. Several instances of this way of
Government noted in the second and third Centuries. The word Metropolitan not
met with 'till the Council of Nice. But the thing long before. The sum of the
Observations upon this Canon. Page 46

CHAP. III. The extent of the Bishop of Rome's Jurisdiction, considered as a
Metropolitan.

A search into the proper bounds of the Roman Bishop. His Power fourfold,
Episcopal, Metropolitical, Patriarchal, Apostolical. The first not
controverted; the last discharged as extravagant and groundless, and as
frequently baffled, both by the Reformed, and Greek Church. L. Allatius's jeer
of his Countrymen. His Metropolitical Jurisdiction considered, as concurrent
with that of the Provost of Rome. That how great, and how far extending. The
Suburbicary Regions, what. Sicily no part of the Urbicary Regions. The usual
conformity between the extent of the Civil and Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction in
those times. The power of the Roman Metropolitan confined within an hundred
Miles of Rome. Rufinus his Exposition of the Suburbicary Churches. Greatly
quarreled at by the Romish Writers. His authority in other cases allowed
sufficient and unquestionable. His Book approved by Pope Gelasius and others.
No probability of his being mistaken in the sense of the Canon, or the extent
of the Roman Metropolitanship, or the Suburbicary Churches. His Explication
confirmed by most ancient Interpreters of this Canon. The Bishops of Rome and
Italy distinct. The Bishop of Milan ranked with him of Rome. The objection of
the Bishop of Rome's being confined to so narrow a compass, considered and
answered. The Majores Dioeceses in the Epistle of the Synod of Arles, what. The
bounds of the Roman Bishops showed to have been heretofore small from an
ancient Notitia Episcopatuum. The fraud in the first publication of that
Notitia. Morinus noted. The greatness of Rome equivalent to a large extent.
Page 98

CHAP. IV. An Enquiry into the Rise and Original of Patriarchs in the Christian
Church.

An Enquiry into the Rise and Original of Patriarchs in general. None before
the Council of Nice. What that Council contributed to them. Civil Dioceses,
when, and by whom introduced. These gave start to Primary Metropolitans.
Dioceses, when first brought into the Church. The title of Patriarch borrowed
from the Jews. Who their Patriarchs, and whence descended. Exarchs, what. The
word Patriarch, when first used by Church-writers in a strict and proper sense.
The Patriarchs among the Montanists, who. A short Survey of the four great
Patriarchates. The extent of the Patriarchate of Alexandria. The Dioecesis
Aegyptiaca, what. The Patriarchal Jurisdiction in what sense larger than that
of the Augustal Prefect. Little gained to this Patriarchate more than a title
of honor. The Patriarchate of Antioch commensurate to the Eastern Diocese. The
contest about Cyprus, how determined. Palestine for some time under Antioch.
The Patriarchship of Constantinople. By what degrees it arose. What privilege
conferred upon it by the second general Council. The Bishops of it hence
forwards exercising a kind of Patriarchal power over the Churches of the
neighboring Provinces. The Power granted to that See by the Council of
Chalcedon. Its ninth, seventeenth, and eight and twentieth Canons considered to
that purpose. Jurisdiction over the three Dioceses of Asiana, Pontica, and
Thrace. This settled upon a full debate and discussion of the matter. This Power
owned by the Synod to have been exercised of a long time before. This Grant
urged against the universal Supremacy of the Sea of Rome. The extent of the
Constantinopolitan Patriarchate in after times manifested from several ancient
Notitiae. The Patriarchate of Jerusalem. The honor confirmed to this Church by
the Nicene Council. Its subjection to the Sea of Caesarea. When first
attempting a Metropolitical Power. The contest between this Bishop, and the
Bishop of Antioch, how determined in the Council of Chalcedon. When first
styled Patriarch. The extent of this Patriarchate. Page 137

CHAP. V. The bounds of the Roman Patriarchate.

A return to the Roman Patriarchate. The limits hereof not expressly set down by
the Ancients. Unjustly pretended to reach over the whole West. This granted by
them of the Greek Church, and why. The Pope's Patriarchal Power disowned by the
Churches of Milan, Aquileia, and Ravenna. The independency and opposition of
those Churches to the Roman See, severally evinced by particular cases and
instances. The Power of Metropolitans in France kept up independent from Rome.
The truth of this confessed and cleared by De Marca. Other instances of
preserving their Rights against the pretensions of Rome, Hincmar of Rhemes, and
the Synod of Metz. Two other National Churches instanced in, the African, and
the Britannick Churches. The famous case of Appeals in the Church of Africa. A
clear account of that matter. Their public rejecting the power which the Pope
challenged over those Churches. The Letters of the Council of Carthage to Pope
Boniface and Caelestine to that purpose. Several useful and proper Corollaries
deduced from this story, for the evincing the vain pretensions of the Papal
Power over those Churches. The boldness of some in denying the truth of this
whole story. The state of the Britannick Church. The progress of Religion and
Church Government here 'till the times of Pope Gregory. The Church governed
here by an Archbishop and Bishop at Austin's arrival. Their Customs wholly
different from, and independent upon Rome. Their absolute refusal to own the
authority of Austin or the Pope. The slaughter of the Bangor-Monks suspiciously
charged upon Austin. The Pope's proper Patriarchate most probably showed to be
of equal extent with the Jurisdiction of the Vicarius Urbicus. What Provinces
under his Government. The Roman Synod consisting of the Bishops of those
Provinces. A twofold Patriarchate of the Pope trifling and precarious. The
Bishops of Rome daily amplifying their Jurisdiction. The means whereby they did
this briefly intimated. Page 198

CHAP. VI. The Encroachments of the Sea of Rome upon other Sees, especially the Sea of Constantinople.

The Roman Bishops breaking the bounds of all Laws and Canons. Their taking
hold of all occasions of magnifying their own power. Instances of Julius,
Damasus, Innocent, Zosimus, to this purpose. The briskness and activity of Pope
Leo. His many Letters written to advance the reputation of his authority. His
jealous eye upon the growing greatness of the Sea of Constantinople. The
attempts and actings of his Legates in the Council of Chalcedon. Their mighty
opposition against the passing the XXVIII. Canon of that Synod. The fraud of
Paschasinus in citing the sixth Canon of Nice. Their protestation against the
power granted to the Bishop of Constantinople. Pope Leo's zeal and rage against
these Synodal Proceedings. Faelix his Excommunicating Acacius of
Constantinople. The pretended occasion of that Sentence. The same spleen
continued and carried on by Pope Gelasius. A reconciliation procured by the
Emperor Justin between the Bishops of Rome and Constantinople. Pope John's
insulting over Epiphanius in his own Church at Constantinople. John the
Second's ranting Letter to Justinian. The Bishop of Constantinople assumes the
title of Ecumenical Patriarch. This in what sense (probably) meant. The
passionate resentment of Pope Pelagius hereat. The same zeal showed by his
Successor Gregory the Great. His Letters written upon that occasion. The hard
words he every where bestows upon that title. His mistake about the offer of
that title to the Pope in the Chalcedon Council. The true state of that case.
This title frequently given to the Constantinopolitan Bishops in the Council
under Mennas, before John assumed it. Baronius's poor evasion of that matter.
Gregory still continues to thunder out Anathema's against this Title. All this
suspected to be but noise, and the quarrel only because themselves had not the
title. Phocas his Usupation of the Empire. The monstrous villainy and wickedness
of that man. Pope Gregory's scandalously flattering Caresses to him and his
Empress. Boniface the Third makes suit to Phocas, and procures the title of
Ecumenical to be affixt to the Sea of Rome. The Pope's daily enlargement of
their Power and Tyranny, and their advantages for so doing. The whole concluded
with the Canons or DICTATES of Pope Hildebrand. Page 267


ERRATA.
PAge 5. line 8. read whosoever. p. 52. l. 21. r. Administration. p. 73. marg.
r. iii. p. 75. l. 12. r. - head. p. 110. l. 19. r. Crustuminum. p. 133. l. 15.
r. larger. p. 136. l. 3. r. desire. p. 152. l. 12. after who, add are. p. 173.
l. 4. r. this. p. 187. l. 22. r. them. p. 300. l. 4. r. (...). p. 304. l. 13.
r. Isidore.

A DISSERTATION Concerning the GOVERNMENT OF THE ANCIENT CHURCH, BY Bishops,
Metroplitans, and Patriarchs, etc.
CHAP. I. The State of the Church Government, and Power of the Roman Bishops
till the Council of Nice.
An Equality among the Apostles as Church Governors appointed by Christ.
Peter's pretended Supremacy over the rest showed to be vain and groundless. If
any such had been granted, it belonged not to the Roman Bishops. Early
appearances of the Pride and Usurpation of the Bishops of that Church. Special
advantages of that See to set up for Tyranny and Usurpation. The foundation of
that Church by two great Apostles, Peter and Paul. Rome the Seat of the Empire.
The honor and advantages of that Church thereby. The Catholic Faith long time
preserved entire in the Church of Rome. Its large Revenues affording liberal
Hospitality. Its sending forth Emissaries to plant Christianity in other
Countries* and thereby claiming superiority over them. The pride of that Church
severely censured by St. Basil. A general Scheme of the subordination in the
Government of the Primitive Church, by Bishops, Archbishops and Patriarchs,
and the Conformity herein to the Civil State. Episcopal Government how it
spreads it self at first? Metropolitans introduced and why. A brief account of
the ancient way of Ecclesiastical Administration out of Cyprian and others, by
the Bishop and his Clergy, by Provincial Synods. What things usually managed
there. Foreign Churches how mutually transacting with one another. The Bishops
of Rome had no more authority in this Period than the Bishops of other greater
Sees. Pope Melchiades appointed Commissioner by Constantine. Donatus appeals
from his Judgment. His sentence brought under Examinations in the Synod of
Arles.

I. ORDER and Government are so essentially necessary to the peace and welfare
of Mankind, that no Society whether civil or sacred can subsist without it:
Where there is none to command, there will be none to obey, and where every one
is left to do what he please, there must be confusion and every evil work. No
sooner therefore had our Blessed Savior laid the foundation of the Christian
Church, but he chose twelve, whom he named Apostles, to whose care and conduct
he committed the administration of it. These he invested with equal powers,
upon these he derived the same mission, which he himself had received from God,
As my father sent me, so send I you. Joh. xx. 21.
All had the same authority to Preach, Plant, and propagate the Church, to feed
and rule the flock of Christ, to go teach and baptize all Nations; the same
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven committed to one as well as another, that
whatsoever sins they should remit, they should be remitted, and whosoever sins
they retain, they should be retained: The same Holy Spirit breathed upon all
with a receive ye the Holy Ghost. Notwithstanding all which, it is confidently
pretended on the behalf of S. Peter, that a paramount authority was conferred
upon him, and that not only above, but over the rest, that he was constituted
by our Lord, Prince and Head of the College; the other Apostles were indeed
Shepherds of the Flock, but were themselves Christ's Sheep, and St. Peter
appointed Pastor over them; with a great deal more, boldly asserted at a
venture, and attempted to be made good by such warrant from Scripture, as any
thing, but the necessity of maintaining a desperate cause would be ashamed to
produce. And as no such charter can be produced, signed by our Savior, so
neither do we find S. Peter challenging, much less exercising any such
superiority. He submitted to the Orders of the Apostolical College, and
rendered himself accountable to them for his actions, styles himself no more
than their Fellow-Presbyter, and cautions against Lording over God's Heritage.
1 Pet. v. 1, 2, 3.
How openly did S. Paul assert, that he came not a whit behind 11 Cor. xi. 5.
(...), the very chiefest Apostles? and that the Gospel Gal. ii. 7.
of the Uncircumcision was committed unto him, as well as that of the
Circumcision was to Peter. James and John are said to be Pillars -- 9.
as well as he; nay, the whole twelve Apostles are equally styled the twelve
foundations of the Rev. xxi. 14.
new Jerusalem, that descended out of Heaven, and it was indifferently promised
to all, that they should Matthew. xix. 28.
sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. Nay, when a
strife arose amongst them, which of them should be greatest in his Kingdom, our
Lord on purpose to silence all such ambitious attempts for the future, plainly
told them, that though the Kings of the Gentiles exercised Matthew xx. 25, 26, 27.
Dominion over their Subjects, and they that are great exercised authority upon
them: Yet ye shall not be so; but whosoever will be great among you, let him be
your Minister, and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your Servant.

II. AND yet after all should it be granted, that our Lord gave S. Peter some
kind of superior power over the rest, yet what is this to the Bishops of Rome?
unless it could be proved, that those privileges were to be Haereditary, and
were not to determine and expire with S. Peter's person. Bellarmine De Romans
Pontif. l. 2. c. 1. Col. 5^9. c. 12. Col. 628. l. 4. c. 4. Col. 803.
pleads, that it is founded in a Right of Succession, and this Right settled
jure divino, and by our Lords own Institution, who expressly commanded S. Peter
to fix the Apostolical Seat at Rome. The proofs he brings to make good this
command are a passage out of an Apocryphal Epistle of Pope Marcellus, long
since discarded together with the rest, as the most notorious cheat and
imposture that ever was put upon the Christian Church; and at best an uncertain
story of our Lords appearing to Peter, and that too nothing to his purpose. And
therefore not daring to trust to them, he fairly quits L. 2. c. 12. l. 4. c. 4.
ubi supr.
the jus divinum, and confesses that the Pontifical Succession has no
foundation in Scripture: However, that it is not improbable, and that it is a
thing piously to be believed; that is, perhaps it may be so, and perhaps not,
we may do well to believe it, but there is no certain ground for it. An
admirable foundation to build so important a claim upon, and for the sake
whereof they have now for many ages created so much trouble and disturbance to
the Christian World. And besides, there is a (...) in this case lies at the
bottom, it being generally taken for granted, that S. Peter was in a proper
sense Bishop of Rome, which yet I believe can never be made good. That he
constituted that Church, and laid down his life there for the Confirmation of
it, I easily grant, but this makes him not properly Bishop of it, and
consequently the Popes cannot properly be his Successors. Dye he might there,
but how comes this to entitle the Bishops of Rome to the Succession? If so,
then (as a Learned Man Barlaam (...) p. 25. edit. Graec.
of the Greek Church long since urged in this case) because our Lord died at
Jerusalem, therefore the Bishop of Jerusalem, as possessing the Seat of our
great High Priest, may claim an Universal superiority, and challenge to be as
much greater than the Bishop of Rome, as Christ is than Peter. Once more, let
it be supposed that this Supremacy was entailed not only upon S. Peter, but
upon his Successors, how comes it to pass that it was not lodged in the Sea of
Antioch, where they grant S. Peter resided as Bishop several years before he
went to Rome, and which therefore in all reason ought to challenge a Primary
title? An Objection which Bellarmin with all the subtilties of his Wit and
Learning is not able to claw off. So many insuperable bars are there lying in
the way to this sovereign and unaccountable authority of their Church.

III. BUT what Power soever the Bishops of Rome may pretend to derive from S.
Peter, sure I am they thus far inherit too much of his spirit and temper, that
(...) I mean, that rash and busy fervor and eagerness, so frequently noted in
him by the Ancients: Forward like him to speak, run, and interpose at every
turn; and forward like him too to smite with the Sword, when meeting with the
least opposition. No sooner were the heats of the fifth persecution somewhat
cooled, and the Church entered a little upon more calm and prosperous days, but
we find Pope Victor, An. 196. picking a quarrel with some of the Eastern
Churches about the time of Celebrating Easter, and though they justified
themselves to the Christian World by Apostolical practice, and a constant
uninterrupted observation ever since, yet because refusing to comply with the
custom of the Church of Rome, he hastily threw them under Excommunication, to
the great disturbance and amazement of the Christian World, for which he was
severely rebuked by the wise and good men of that time, especially the mild and
peaceable Irenaeus. It was not much above half an Age after this, when the
practice of Baptizing a new those who had been Baptized by Heretics begun
mightily to prevail in some parts of the East, but especially in the African
Churches. Stephen, who was then Bishop of Rome, stormed hereat, and in a great
rage publicly declared, that he would hold no Communion with them; and when,
according to the custom whereby Churches mutually acted in those days, they
sent some Bishops to give him an account of their opinion and practice, he
proudly refused Firmil. Ep. ad Cypr. inter Ep. Cypr. p. 150.
either to see them, or speak with them; and not content to deprive them of the
Peace and Communion of the Church, he denied them the common offices of
humanity and charity, forbidding the Christians at Rome so much as to entertain
them. To Cyprian he gave very hard words, calling him false Christ, false
Apostle, deceitful Worker; and no better did he treat Firmilian Bishop of
Caesarea in Cappadocia, and the Churches of Iconium. But Cyprian (though a man
otherwise of great gentleness and moderation) plainly told him, Epist. 74. ad
Pomp. per tot. p. 129.
that this was nothing but the effect of a proud, impertinent, imprudent,
selfcontradicting humor, that it proceeded from blindness and perverseness,
from obstinacy and presumption, and directly tended to the Patronage and
encouragement of error and Heresy. Firmilian charged Epist. supr. cit. p. 143,
etc.
him with inhumanity, audaciousness and insolence, with doing very unjust and
unwarrantable things; that they at Rome, however vainly pretending Apostolical
authority, did not themselves exactly observe primitive tradition, that he
could not but disdain Stephens open and manifest folly, who while he boasted so
much of the eminency of his Episcopal place, and contended that he had the
Succession of Peter, upon whom the foundations of the Church were laid, did yet
hereby introduce several other rocks, and build new Churches upon them. And
when not long after the controversy came to be canvass'd in a Synod of Eighty
seven African Bishops, whom Cyprian had assembled at Carthage for that purpose,
in the speech that he made at the opening of the Council, Cyprian taxed the
Pride and ambition of the Bishop of Rome, telling Synod. Carth. apud Cypr. p.
282.
them that they should all freely speak their minds, without judging, or
Excommunicating any that were of another opinion, that none of them took upon
himself to make himself Bishop of Bishops, or by a tyrannical threatening to
force his Colleagues into a necessity of compliance: since every Bishop,
according to the power and liberty granted to him, had his proper rule and
jurisdiction, and could no more be judged by another, than he himself could
judge others; that in these matters they were to expect the Judgment of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who alone had power both of appointing Governors over his
Church, and of calling them to an account for their administration.

IV. BY these instances (and many more no doubt, which the History of those
times would have set before us, had the Churches Records come safe to us) it
appears, how early the Bishops of Rome set out to usurp a Dominion over the
Church, and though they generally met with opposition, yet they still went on,
and vigorously improved all advantages, with what success, the Christian world
has now for many ages found to their cost. And certainly never any stood fairer
to start and carry on such a design. For,

First, Their Church was not only Apostolical, but had been founded by two of
the most eminent Apostles, Peter and Paul, which gave a mighty reputation to it
in after Ages; the Christian world bearing an extraordinary reverence to those
great names, which the Bishops of that See knew how to improve to their own
advantage. For this reason Irenaeus Adv. Haeres. l. 3. c. 3. p. 232.
calls the Church of Rome the greatest and most eminent Church, and most
Universally known, as being founded by the two most glorious Apostles Peter and
Paul; and S. Augustine Epist. 162. col. 728.
says, that in it there always flourished the principality of the Apostolic
Chair; and Origin took a journey Eusebius. H. Eccl. l. 6. c. 14. p. 216.
on purpose to Rome, to gratify his curiosity with the sight of so ancient and
renowned a Church. And upon this account must be discharged very many of those
great things, which several of the Fathers speak so liberally concerning the
Church of Rome; who thought they could never express a veneration big enough
toward S. Peter, and consequently toward the place which he had honored with
his Doctrine and Residence, and watered with his Blood: which however spoken by
them out of a devout intent, proved the first rounds of that Ladder, by which
the Roman Bishops mounted up to a Supremacy above the rest. It happening in a
few Ages that nothing was talked of at Rome, but of the Prince of the Apostles,
and the authority of the Apostolic See, 'till almost every thing there became
Apostolical, and was covered with S. Peter's name.

Secondly, Their Church was planted in the Imperial City, a place that seemed
born for Empire and Sovereignty, that had long since Conquered, and at that
time Governed (...) Herod. Hist. l. 1. in vit. Commod. p. 32. Tibi
proficiscentium major facultas fuit: primo, quia in commune imperii caput
undique gentium convenitur; tum, quod clementissimum principem in hac part
degentem, varia omnium desideria vel necessitates sequuntur. Symmach. l. 4.
Epist. xxviii. (ad Protad.) vid. sis not Lectii.
the greatest part of the World; a City that was the Center of all Nations, and
the Seat of Majesty and Magnificence, where all great affairs were transacted,
and all the Scenes of glory and greatness represented in a little compass.
Which could not but reflect a more than ordinary luster upon those Bishops that
sat at the upper end of the world, and make them appear considerably bigger,
more conspicuous and useful than the rest of their Brethren, and by reason of
the general confluence of all Nations to Rome, enable them in a little time to
draw the cognizance of Ecclesiastic Causes from all parts thither. 'Twas this
convenience of Situation gave them opportunity to insinuate themselves into the
favor of the Emperors, and by their power to enlarge their own Borders, yea,
and to succor and relieve their Clients and Dependants, which made many to
court their protection and assistance, though often with the loss of their own
freedom and liberty. This was especially done after the Emperors became
Christians, the Roman Church being by them enriched with vast honors and
privileges, accounting that the greatness of that Church would not a little
contribute to the splendor and magnificence of the Empire. And though the
Imperial Seat was quickly translated to another place, yet besides that the
Emperors a long time retained their affection for Rome, what the Pope lost in
one sense, he gained in another, making use of the Emperors absence to enhance
his own Power and Revenue, 'till he was able not only to Lord it over his
brethren, but over Princes themselves.

Thirdly, The Roman Church continued for several Ages the Seat of true
Apostolic Doctrine, maintaining that character that S Paul had given them,
that their Faith was spoken of throughout the whole world, it being here
preserved pure and incorrupt, while a great part of the Christian world besides
was over run with Error and Heresy, and torn in pieces by Schisms and
Factions. This made Rome in those days (while it remained sound and Orthodox)
in a manner the Standard of Catholic Communion, most other Churches veering in
point of Communion, as they found the Wind blow from that Quarter, and saw how
the business fared at Rome. Accordingly Theodosius in the beginning of his
Reign resolving to reform the Doctrine of the Church, then miserably
degenerated in the Eastern parts, commanded, De fid. Cathol. C. Th. leg. 2.
vid. Soz. l. 7. c. 4. p. 708.
that that Faith only should take place, that was professed by Pope Damasus,
and Peter of Alexandria, that Faith and Religion which S. Peter had delivered
to the Church of Rome, and which had all along 'till that time flourisht there.
This made way for Appeals, every party being desirous to gain the good will of
that Church, and to have its Bishop pronounce for their cause, 'till from an
honourary arbitration it came to be claimed as a right and due. And persons
(especially those who were persecuted in their own Countries for their
adherence to the Catholic Faith) were the more encouraged to repair hither,
because here they were kindly treated, and hospitably entertained; a piece of
charity which the Bishops of that Church by reason of their ample possessions
and large endowments, were very capable to afford. For besides their standing
Rents and Revenues, their gains by collections and oblations was so great, that
by them alone in the time of Pope Damasus, they were enabled to live in a state
and grandeur like that of Temporal Princes, if we may believe the account given
by Ammianus Marcellinus; Lib. 27. p. 1739.
and the story is known of Praetextatus (a zealous Gentile) designed to be
Consul, who reflecting upon the plenty of that See, was wont pleasanly to tell
Hieron. ad Pammach. adv. error. Jo. Hierosol. p. 165.
Pope Damasus, make me but Bishop of Rome, and I will immediately become a
Christian. It Is certain that Church could never want plentiful Incomes flowing
in upon it; and as charitable it was in those days, as it was wealthy, and was
not only very kind to strangers when they came thither, but was wont to
transmit very liberal distributions of its charity to foreign Churches, to
relieve the necessities of the Brethren that were under Persecution, and were
condemned to the Mines, as Dionysius Bishop of Corinth tells us in his Letter
Ap. Eusebius. H. E. l. 4. c. 23. p. 145.
to Soter Bishop of Rome, written about the Year CLXXIV. and that this had been
the custom of that Church from the very Infancy of Christianity.

Fourthly, The Church of Rome by the advantage of the Imperial City was capable
of propagating the Christian Doctrine into several parts of the West, to send
out Disciples, receive Dispatches, transmit Directions, and supply all
Emergencies that might arise. Accordingly upon this foundation the Popes built
and advanced a claim to Superiority and Dominion. Thus Damasus writing Epist.
v. Council. Tom. ii. col. 876.
to the Bishops of Africa, tells them, that in all doubtful cases they ought to
have recourse to him as to the head, and thence to take their determination,
from whence they had received their institution and instruction in the
Christian Faith. And Pope Innocent tells Innoc. Epist. I. ibid. col. 1245.
Decentius Bishop of Eugubium, that all the Churches in those parts ought to
take their measures from Rome, and nothing to be valid, but what is received
from thence; it being evident, that no Churches had been planted in Italy,
France, Spain, Africa, Sicily, and the interjacent Islands by any, but such as
had been Ordained by S. Peter, or his Successors. And this is the Plea we are
so often urged with, whereby the Roman See challenges jurisdiction over
England, its commissionating Augustine the Monk to convert the Saxons, and
settle Religion in these parts. But were there no more to be offered in answer
to it, this were enough, that Christianity had for several ages been planted
here, before ever Austin set his foot on English ground: as perhaps we may have
occasion to show afterward. In short, though it became Churches thus planted,
to bear a very grateful respect to that Mother Church, that was the instrument
to convey to them the Christian faith; yet did it lay them under no obligation
to subjection and servitude: however the Church of Rome has handled the matter
to its own advantage, and from the lenity and tenderness of a Parent, had
degenerated into the pride and cruelty of a Stepmother; and not content to
exercise authority over its own Colonies, began to advance its banners over all
the rest; proudly proclaiming it self the Mother and Mistres of all Churches. I
observe no more, then that pride seems to be a vice more peculiar to Rome, than
other places: 'twas this put the old Romans upon subduing the world; and by
this the Emperors tyrannized over it for some ages, and when Rome shifted its
Lords, it did not change its Taskmasters; the ambition which the Emperors laid
down, the Popes took up, and prosecuted it by far worse arts and methods, than
ever the Romans did of old. S. Basil more than once complains Epist. 10. ad
Gregor, p. 54.
of the (...) the pride of the West, and how little help was to be expected
from them that neither understood the truth, nor would be content to learn it;
that he was resolved to write to the Pope, to let him know that it did not
become him to insult over and add to the miseries of the afflicted, nor to
think pride to be honorable; a thing alone sufficient to render a man odious
in the sight of God: and elsewhere he expresses Ap. Baron. ad An. 372. T. 4. p.
322.
a very passionate resentment, that he hated the pride of that Church.

V. FURNISHED with these advantages, the Roman Prelates set up for themselves,
and gave not over, till they had by right and wrong spread such an Ecclesiastic
Empire over the world, as would admit neither superior nor equal. In order to
the discovery whereof, it will be necessary to enquire what was of old the
proper jurisdiction of the Bishops of Rome, before they removed those ancient
Landmarks which the Fathers had set. We have elsewhere Prim. Chr. Part. 1. Chapter
8. p. 227. Edit. 1. vid. Breerwoods Quaer. 1. and Berter. Pithan. fere per tot.
aliique.
observed, (what has been remarkt by many, and indeed is evident to any one
versed in Church-antiquity) that in the primitive times, the external Polity of
the Church was conformed as near as might be to the Mode that obtained in the
civil State. Now the whole Roman Empire consisted of thirteen Dioceses, (for so
they began to style those large Divisions about the time of Constantine,)
whereof seven in the Eastern parts, Egypt, the Orient, or East properly so
called, Asiana, Pontica, Thrace, Macedonia and Dacia; and six in the West,
Italy, Afric, Illyricum, France, Spain, and Britain; besides the Roman
Praefecture, extending to the Provinces round about the City, which had
anciently been a peculiar government, equal, yea superior in dignity to any
Diocese; whereof hereafter. In each of these Diocesses were several Provinces,
(118 in all) the chief City whereof in every Province, was the Metropolis, that
had a kind of jurisdiction over all the rest; both title and dignity being
peculiarly settled by imperial constitution. Now the civil and Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, were concurrent after this manner; in every City there was a
civil Judge, who presided over it, and the Towns about it; and to him answered
the Bishop of that City: in every Province a Proconsul or President resided at
the Metropolis, governed that whole division, received appeals, and determined
all important cases brought before him from the inferior Cities. Correspondent
to him was the Metropolitan, or (as they after called him) the Archbishop,
whose See was in the same City, who superintended the several Churches, and
ordained the several Bishops within his Province. And then in every Diocese,
there was a Vicarius or Lieutenant, who kept his residence in the principal
City, thence dispatched the Imperial Edicts, and there heard and decided those
causes, that were not finally determined by inferior Courts. And concurrent
with him in Ecclesiastical matters was the Primate, or (as some of them were
more eminently styled) the Patriarch, who presided over the several
Metropolitans within that Diocese, appointed the conventions of his Clergy,
Umpir'd the differences that arose between the several Bishops, and gave the
last determination to all Appeals brought before him. And thus by an orderly
Subordination of Deacons and Presbyters to their Bishops, of Bishops to their
immediate Metropolitans, of Metropolitans to their respective Primates or
Patriarchs, and by a mutual correspondence between the several Primates of
every Diocese, the affairs of the Christian Church were carried on with great
decorum and regularity.

VI. THIS excellent Platform was not framed and set up all at once. In the more
early Ages Christianity being generally first Preached and planted in the
greater Cities, and the Ecclesiastical Government settled there, thence spread
it self into the neighboring Country, and persons were thence dispatched to
Preach and attend the Ministeries of Religion in those rural Plantations, who
yet were in all things steered and directed by the Bishop and his Ecclesiastic
Senate residing in the City. As Churches multiplied, and Christianity extended
it self into wider circles, it was found necessary to fix a particular Bishop
almost in every City, to whom was committed the care and superintendency over
all the Clergy and people there, and in all the Towns and Villages belonging to
the jurisdiction of that place. But because controversies began to arise
between the several Bishops (and sometimes between them and the inferior
Clergy) which could not easily be determined, where every ones authority was
independent, it was necessary that some one should preside over all the other
Bishops of that Province, as the Proconsul did in the civil state, who might
convene Synodical Assemblies, adjust the differences, and manage the
Ordinations of the Provincial Bishops. And for this none could be so fit as he
that resided in the Metropolis of the Province (thence called Metropolitan)
partly because the Countries for the most part round about had originally
derived their Christianity from thence, and 'twas but fit they should pay a
peculiar respect to the Mother Church, partly because most persons had occasion
to resort thither for the dispatch of business, and might with the same
opportunity conveniently transact both their civil and Ecclesiastic matters,
and partly because 'twas but reasonable, that the Bishop of so eminent a place
should (...) have an honorable presidency over the rest, as the Council of
Antioch particularly provides Can. 9.
in this case; Ordaining accordingly, that tho every Bishop might Ordain
Presbyters and Deacons, and manage the affairs of his own (...) or particular
Diocese (as we now call it) yet that all the Bishops of the Province should
acknowledge the Metropolitan, and attempt nothing of moment without his
knowledge and consent; which they there enact, not as any Novel constitution,
but (...) as they tell us, according to a most ancient Rule and Canon, that had
been in force from the times of their forefathers. To the Metropolitan then
upon every extraordinary occasion the Provincial Bishops addressed themselves,
to him also other Metropolitans, such especially as lay nearest to him, were
wont to send Letters of Communion, to testify their consent with him in the
faith (a confession whereof every new Metropolitan used to send abroad upon his
advancement to his See) and mutually to consult each others advice in all
important cases.

VII. THIS it is plain from the Writings of S. Cyprian and others, was the way
of Administration during those first and most early Ages of Christianity:
Private causes every Bishop judged of within his particular jurisdiction, where
taking to him the assistance of his Clergy, his Presbyters and Deacons, they
did Communi Consilio ponderare, Cypr. Epist. xxxiii. p. 47. xxxii. p. 46.
weigh things by common advice and deliberation; where the case was of greater
importance, or more general concernment, it was referred to a provincial Synod,
wherein the chief Bishop of the Province presided, and directed all affairs.
Here the Ordination of Bishops was usually performed, or where a Synod could
not conveniently be had, by as many Bishops as could be got together, the rest
Vid. Cone. Nic. Can. iv.
who were absent by writing under their hands testifying their consent, and the
whole either actually managed by, or at least done by the allowance and
confirmation of the chief Bishop. Here also criminal Bishops were deposed, and
the same way of general suffrage observed: Thus when Cornelius and his Synod at
Rome Cornel. Epist. ad Fab. Antioch. ap. Eus. l. 6. c. 43. p. 245.
had condemned and cast out Novatian for his Schismatical Usurpation of that
See, the Bishops that were not present at the Council, did by their Letters
ratify and subscribe that Decree.

VIII. IN reference to the affairs of Churches abroad, they acted by a kind of
mutual consociation, they communicated councils, interposed in differences,
opposed the same common enemies, and upon all occasions afforded ready help and
assistance to one another, that dilectio communis, that Cyprian so often speaks
of, Epist. xxix. p. 41.
the common bond of love and charity obliging them to advise together, that so
by joint consultations things might be carried on to the best advantage of
Ecclesiastic Administration. For they looked upon themselves, he tells us,
Epist. xxx. p. 42.
as members of the same Body of the Church, though stretched out into many
several Provinces, and that therefore they were bound to have care one of
another, and to watch over the welfare of the whole Body. Upon a Persons
Election to any of the greater Sees, they were wont to send their
congratulatory Letters, to give him joy of that place, to signify their
concurrence with his advancement to a share of the Government of the Church,
and their communion with him in the Faith. Thus Cyprian by Letters Epist. XLii.
p. 56.
approved Cornelius his Election to the Sea of Rome, which he did, he tells us
according to divine tradition and Ecclesiastic institution; nay he sent to all
the Bishops of his Province, requiring them by their Letters to do the like.
And when Marcian Bishop of Arles was deposed for his siding with Novatian,
Cyprian wrote Epist. LXVii. infin.
to Pope Stephen to send him word who succeeded in that Bishopprick, that so he
might know to whom to direct his communicatory Letters. When any person was
duly Excommunicated in on Church, he could not be admitted to Communion in
another. Thus when Felicissimus, who had been Excommunicated by Cyprian and the
African Synod, fled to Rome, Epist. LV. p. 78.
and came thither guarded with a potent faction, he found the doors shut
against him, whereof Cornelius advised Cyprian by Letters, which the good man
commends as replenisht with Brotherly Love, Ecclesiastic Discipline, and
Episcopal censure. And when the Legates of Novatian (who had procured himself to
be irregularly Ordained Bishop of Rome, for which he was Synodically condemned)
came into Africa, Cyprian rejected them, Epist. XLi. p. 55.
and utterly refused to receive them to Communion.

In short, no sooner did any extraordinary emergency arise, but notice was
presently given of it to other Churches, and advice returned what was fit to be
done in those matters, and all possible assistance afforded toward the
dispatching of them. In all which transactions the Bishop of Rome was no
otherwise considered than (as all others were) as a Bishop of the Catholic
Church, nor was his Sentence any more regarded than that of other Bishops.
Donatus a casis nigris accused Optat. l. 1. p. 27, etc. and Constable. Epist. ad
Melch. ap. Eusebius. l. 10. c. 5. p. 391.
Cecilian Bishop of Carthage to Constantine the Great. The Emperor referred
the case to Pope Melchiades, and three French Bishops, together with whom
Assembled fifteen Bishops of Italy, who gave judgment against Donatus. Wherein
as the Pope acted as the Emperors Delegate, and had no more power than the
rest of his Colleagues, so the sturdy African slighted his judgment, and
appealed from it. Constantine hereupon referrs the business to a Synod at Arles
in France, Ann. CCCXIV. where the former sentence is again brought under
examination, and this thought no injury or dishonor to the Bishop of Rome,
nay, his Legates in that Council subscribed only in the fifth place, Vid. Conc.
Tom. 1. col. 1428.
as the subscriptions published by Sirmoud out of an Ancient Copy, stand at this
day. In short, it is ingenuously confessed by Pope Pius the second, Epist.
CCLXXXii. p. 802.
then Cardinal, that before the time of the Nicene Council very little regard
was had to the Church of Rome. By all which we see how the Government of the
Church in those days was carried on; Bishops superintended the affairs of the
Church in every City and its adjacent Territory, over them were Metropolitans
and Provincial Synods, and with foreign Churches they transacted by a mutual
agreement and confederation for the good of the whole, but without any coercive
power over one another.

CHAP. II. The Government of the Church, and Power of the Bishops of Rome, as
it is represented in the Canons of the Nicene Council.
The Sixth Canon of the Synod of Nice set down, with the occasion of it. Seven
Observations drawn from that Canon. I. That the larger bounds of Ecclesiastic
jurisdiction were the Roman Provinces. A Province what. Whither the Countries
in Italy so called. II. That the chief Church-Governour in every Province was
the Metropolitan. The prudence and convenience of that way of Government.
Patriarchs proved not to be intended in the Nicene Canon. III. That the Bishop
of Rome no less than the rest had his proper and limited Metropolitical power.
This owned by some of the greatest Champions of Rome. IV. That the
Metropolitick Sees of Rome, Alexandria and Antioch were ever of the greatest
note in the Christian Church, and of these Rome the chief. The eminency of Sees
according to the greatness of the Cities wherein they were planted. This gave
precedence to the Church of Rome. The three Sees of Rome, Alexandria and
Antioch ascribed to S. Peter. Blasphemous things spoken of the Pope upon that
account. Primacy allowed to the Sea of Rome. No Supremacy belonging to it. The
Christian Church then knew of no such supereminent power. V. That the rights of
the Roman Metropolitan were not due by any divine constitution, but by custom
and the practice of the Church. This plainly showed to be the sense of this,
and other following Councils. VI. That the Ordination of Provincial Bishops was
one of the prime rights and privileges of every Metropolitan within his own
jurisdiction. The fourth, sixth and seventh Canons of this Council noted to
that purpose. The same showed to be the determination of other Synods. What
other rights belonged to Metropolitans. VII. That this way of Ecclesiastic
Administration was not any late novel institution, but founded upon ancient
custom and practice. What this antiquity implies. The original of
Metropolitans briefly inquired into. Several instances of this way of
Government noted in the second and third Centuries. The word Metropolitan not
met with till the Council of Nice. But the thing long before. The Sum of the
Observations upon this Canon.

IN this condition stood things at that time when the great Council Assembled
at Nice, An. CCCXXV. where what had hitherto been transacted only by custom
and mutual consent, became then a Law of the Church. For Alexander the
venerable Bishop of Alexandria having complained to the Synod, that the
Metropolitical Rights of that See had been invaded by the irregular and
ambitious attempts of Meletius, the Schismatical Bishop of Lycopolis in
Thebais, who during the late persecution had amongst other crimes taken upon
him to Ordain Bishops, and to confer inferior orders wherever he came, the
Synod did not Vid. Epiph. Haeres. 68. p. 307. Sozom. l. 1. c. 24. p. 438.
only depose Meletius, and in a manner null his Ordinations, but passed among
others this following Canon.

(...)
LEt ancient customs still take place; those that are in Egypt, Libya and
Pentapolis, that the Bishop of Alexandria have power over all these; because
such also is the custom of the Bishop of Rome. And accordingly in Antioch, and
in other Provinces, let the privileges be preserved to the Churches. This also
is altogether evident, that if any man be made a Bishop without the consent of
the Metropolitan, this great Synod Decrees such a one to be no Bishop. And if
two or three, out of a contentious humor, shall oppose the common election
duly and regularly made according to the Canon of the Church, let the majority
of voices in this case prevail. In this Canon, which has been the subject of
infinite debate and controversy, there are several things very observable to
our purpose, which every impartial unprejudicate Reader will see do naturally
flow from it.

First, That the larger bounds of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction at that time were
concurrent with the Roman Provinces.

Secondly, That the chief Church Governor within every Province was the
Metropolitan.

Thirdly, That the Bishop of Rome no less than the rest had his proper and
limited Metropolitical power.

Fourthly, That the Metropolitick Sees of Rome, Alexandria and Antioch were
ever of greatest note in the Christian Church, and of these Rome the chief.

Fifthly, That the rights of the Roman Metropolitan were not due by any Divine
constitution, but flowed only from Custom and the Practice of the Church.

Sixthly, That the Ordination of Provincial Bishops was one of the prime Rights
and Privileges of every Metropolitan within his own Jurisdiction.

Seventhly, That this way of Ecclesiastic Admiration was not nist
any late novel institution, but was founded upon ancient custom and practice.

All which Observations I shall briefly explain and make good.

Territorium est universitas agrorum intra fines cujusque civitatis: quod ab eo
dictum quidam aiunt quod magistratus ejus loci intra eos fines terrendi, id
est, submovendi jus habet. l. 239. 7. de verb. signific.
1. THAT the larger bounds of Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction were the Roman
Provinces. Every City, besides what was within its Walls, and immediate
Suburbs, had usually some adjacent Territory, whither its Government did
extend, as Strabo Geograph. l. 4 p. 186. vid. Plin. l. 3. c. 4. p. 39.
notes of Nemausus or Nismes, a City of the Gallia Narbonensis, that it had
under it twenty four Villages, all well peopled and inhabited, and so commonly
in other places; and these were the Towns and Villages ((...) as they are
called in the ninth Canon of Antioch) that were under the superintendency and
jurisdiction of the City-Bishop. But a Province was a Collection of many
Cities, with all the Tracts and Territories belonging to them; and was greater
or less according to the custom of places, or as the will of Princes had set
them out.

Augustus (as Strabo who lived about that time informs Lib. 17. p. 84.
us) when he resolved to commit some parts of the Empire to the immediate care
of the Senate, and to reserve the rest to himself, divided each moiety (...)
into several Provinces, and caused a Rationarium or Book to be made of it (this
he did out of the Commentaries Vid. J. Front. de Colon. inter s^r. Rei Agr. a
Goes. Edit. p. 141. frag. de Term. ib. p. 148.
of Balbus, whom he had appointed to measure the several parts of the Empire:)
Some account of these Provinces Strabo there gives us, but a more full and
particular account is given by Dion Cassius. Lib. 53. in vit. August.
How these Provinces stood divided in the following Ages, especially from the
times of Constantine, is distinctly and accurately set down in the Notitia
Imperii, composed under the reign of the younger Theodosius.

I observe no more then that if at Augustus his settlement (which is taken
notice of, and objected by some Sirmond. Censur. P. 1. c. 2. p. 10. Aleand.
Refut. Conject. P. 1. c. 3. p. 25.
) the Countries in Italy were not styled Provinces, but Regions, (he divided it
says Pliny Lib. 3. c. 5. p. 41.
into eleven Regions; whence Italy and the Provinces, and jus Italicum, and jus
Provinciale are frequently distinguished) yet this distinction held not long,
nor universally, the words being promiscuously used, as is evident from the
Scriptores Rei agrariae (some whereof if their Titles belly them not, lived not
long after Augustus his age) where we find more than once, the Territory of the
Province of Front. ib. p. 118. 123. and alibi.
Picenum, as well as the Region of Picenum, the Province of Apulia and Calabria
Ib. p. 127.
, of Valeria Ib. p. 144.
, of Tuscia Hyg. de limit. ib. p. 211.
, and the like. And for after ages, especially from the times of Constantine,
no man can doubt of it, that has but once looked either into the Justinian, or
Theodosian Code.

II. THAT the chief Church-Governour within every Province was the
Metropolitan, that is, the Bishop that resided in the Metropolis, or
Mother-City of the Province. For as the preventing Schism and disorder had
necessitated Provincial Bishops (who being all equal had no power one over the
other) to choose one common President to umpire and determine differences, and
manage those affairs which could not be done by every single Bishop, so reason
and convenience, the example of the civil Government, and the greatness of the
place, pleaded for the Bishop of the Metropolis to be the person, who hence
derived the title of Metropolitan. And this Salmasius Appar. ad Primat. pap. p.
273.
himself, how ill a friend soever to the whole Episcopal Order, cannot but
confess was wisely contrived, and that had but Metropolitans contained
themselves within their proper bounds, there could not have heen a more useful
and laudable Institution. His business was upon all important occasions
synodically to summon together the Bishops of his Province, and therein to
enquire into their miscarriages and misdemeanors, to judge of the contentions
that arose between them, to ordain persons to vacant Bishoprics, or at least
to ratify their Ordination, and to direct all transactions that were of greater
and more general concernment. Therefore the Fathers of Antioch take care, that
Can. ix.
forasmuch as all that have any business to dispatch, are forced to go to the
Metropolis, therefore the Bishops in every Province should own, honor and give
precedence to the Bishop that presided in the Metropolis, and attempt nothing
of moment without his concurrence, and this according to a more ancient Canon
derived to them from their Forefathers. By the Ancient Canon here spoken of
cannot be meant this of Nice, which was but sixteen years before it, and
therefore without doubt referrs to the XXXIV. Canon of the Apostles, which
almost in the same words commands the Bishops in every Nation to own him who is
first or chief amongst them, and to esteem him as Head, and to do nothing of
moment without his consent, which truly expresses the ancient practice of the
Church; these Apostolic Canons being nothing else but a collection of Rules
and Customs agreed upon in the first ages of Christianity. For (that I may
note this by the way) it is vain to think, that a thing then first began to be,
when we find it first mentioned or enjoined by a Synodal Decree; the Canons in
such cases being very often expressive of a more ancient practice, which they
then take notice of, or enforce, only because some extraordinary accidents at
that time may have given particular occasion for it. As here at Nice, in the
case of the Rights of Metropolitans, which the Canon mentions and resettles,
only because Meletius's usurpation had brought it into question. It had been
long before an ancient custom, and having lately received some little shock,
the Church no sooner had an opportunity of meeting together in a general
Council, but it established these Metropolitical privileges by its Ecumenical
Authority. There are, I know, and they too men of no mean name and note, both
heretofore and of later times, who tell us, that this Nicene Canon is to be
understood not of Metropolitans, but Patriarchs: But where does the Council
say, or so much as hint any such thing, the Synod both here and in all other
places constantly calls them Metropolitans, and makes the bounds of their
jurisdiction to be Provinces, not Diocesses. And indeed the word Diocese, as
relating to this extent of Ecclesiastic Government, was not in use till above
an entire age after. Nay perhaps at this time it was scarce in use for the
larger division of Countries in the civil state: For it was but about this time
that Constantine new modeled the Government, and brought in Dioceses as
comprehending several Provinces under them.

So that either here must be Patriarchs without Dioceses, or if the Canon be
meant (as some explain it) of Metropolitani Metropolitanorum, of some prime and
principal Metropolitans, that presided over the Metropolitans of the several
Provinces within their jurisdiction, then it is plain the Synod must intend such
wherever it mentions Metropolitans, for it all along speaks of them as of the
same. In the fourth Canon it provides, that in every Province a Bishop Ordained
shall be confirmed by the Metropolitan; which is necessarily to be restrained
to proper provincial Metropolitans. In this sixth Canon it speaks more
particularly, and because the Metropolitick rights had been invaded in Egypt,
Ordains that the Bishop of Alexandria, no less than he of Rome, and that he of
Antioch, and the Churches in all other Provinces should still enjoy their
ancient privileges. Where we see it speaks of them all without any difference
in this respect as provincial Churches. And thus the ancient Version of this
Canon (whereof more hereafter) understood it, when it rendered it thus, in
caeteris provinciis privilegia propria reserventur Metropolitanis Ecclesiis,
that at Antioch, and in the other Provinces, the Metropolitan Churches should
have their own privileges.

And to put the case out of doubt what the Council meant, the Canon adds in the
close, that no Bishop should be made without the consent of the Metropolitan.
Nothing therefore can be more absurd, than to say, that Patriarchs are meant in
the former part of the Canon, and Metropolitans only in the latter, when as the
Canon it self makes no difference. And indeed were that the meaning, the grave
and wise Fathers of that Council took an effectual course that posterity should
never understand their mind. If we look into the following Canon, that secures
the rights of the Metropolitan Church of Caesarea in Palestine, and though it
grants the next place of honor to the Bishop of Jerusalem, yet still it
subjects him to his own Metropolitan. And I suppose it will puzzle any man to
give a wise reason, why the Church of Jerusalem (for which the Christian World
ever had so great and so just a veneration) should be subject to that of
Caesarea, but only that Caesarea was the Metropolis of that Province, and so
had been ever since the time of Vespasian, and accordingly Josephus says De
bell-Jud. l. 3. (...) p. 854.
'twas the greatest City in the Country, and Tacitus Hist. l. 2. p. 359.
calls it the head of Judaea. So miserably does Alexander Aristinus blunder in
his Exposition of this Canon, when by virtue of it he makes the Bishop of
Jerusalem to become a Patriarch, and yet withal to be subject to the
Metropolitan of Caesarea, or, which is all one, that the Metropolitan of
Caesarea should not hereby lose his ancient power and dignity. As if any
Patriarch, and much more one of the five greater, could be subject to a private
Metropolitan, or a Metropolitan could have his ancient rights reserved to him,
when at the same time a considerable part of them are taken from him. But
Patriarchs were not then heard, or so much as dreamt of in the Church; nothing
being truer than what Balsamon has observed In Can. II. Council. C P. p. 88.
in this case, that anciently all the Metropolitans of Provinces were (...)
absolute and independent, and Ordained by none but their own Provincial Bishops.

III. THAT the Bishop of Rome no less than the rest had his proper and limited
Metropolitical Power. This is so evidently the sense of the Canon, that few,
who have otherwise Will good enough, have yet the hardiness to oppose it. The
Sun it self is not clearer at Noonday, than that hereby the Council designed,
that the Bishop of Alexandria should have the same power within his Province,
that the Bishop of Rome had in his. Let the Bishop of Alexandria (says the
Canon) have all his ancient and accustomed powers and privileges in Egypt,
Libya and Pentapolis, (...) since, or forasmuch as the Bishop of Rome has the
like Custom, that is, (as a learned and zealous Champion L. Allat. de consens.
Eccles. Orient. and Occid. l. 1. c. 12. N. 4. p. 190.
for the Popes Supremacy does yet with great ingenuity expound it) that he and
none but he should exercise Jurisdiction within his own bounds; as the
Alexandrian Bishop has prescribed limits to his Diocese, so also has he of
Rome: And as he of Rome manages the affairs of his own Diocese without the
interposal or meddling of any other person, so we Will that he of Alexandria
shall have the same power, and that none shall obstruct him in the exercise of
it.

The Canon then makes a double comparison between these two Metropolitans, the
one respecting the extent of their Jurisdiction, that one was confined and
limited as well as the other; the other the fullness of their power, which they
might exercise within their respective limits, and that none might presume to
invade or hinder it, but by the same Right by which the Roman Prelate Governed
his Churches, by the same might he of Alexandria the Churches subject to him.

One of the Greek Scholiasts Alex. Arist. in loc.
Sums up the Canon into these words. Let the Bishop of Alexandria have power
over Egypt, Libya and Pentapolis: And the Roman Bishop over those places that
are subject to Rome. Harmenopulus Epit. Can. Sect. I. Tit. I. in Jur. Gr. Romans
p. 1.
expresses it in somewhat more general terms: Let the ancient customs of
Archbishops still prevail, and every one have power over his own Province. I
enquire not now what were the peculiar bounds, within which the Power of the
Bishops of Rome was terminated. It Is enough at present, that whether larger or
narrower, limits he had, which he might not regularly pass, and that the Church
of Rome was in those days accounted a particular Church, and as much a Member
of the Church Universal, as Alexandria, Antioch, or that of any other Province.

IV. THAT the Metropolitick Sees of Rome, Alexandria and Antioch, were ever of
greatest note in the Christian Church, and of these Rome the chief. Hence they
are here particularly named, while others are dismissed with an Et caetera, and
Rome as the most eminent, made the Exemplar according to which the Rights of
Alexandria were to be recovered and resettled. 'Twere impertinent to show that
respect was always paid to places proportionable to their Temporal power and
greatness; S. Cyprian Epist. XLIX. p. 63.
long since told us, that the reason why Rome had the precedence of Carthage,
was pro magnitudine sua, because 'twas the greater City. And 'twere as endless
as it is needless to prove, that the places mentioned in this Canon were Capital
Cities of the Empire: Rome was (...) (as Athanasius styles Epist. ad solit. p.
644.
it) the Metropolis, or chief City of the Roman World, it had for several Ages
been the Governing City, and was still the Seat of Empire, the greatness
whereof the Geographical Poet Dionys. de script. Orb. verse. 355. p. 8.
has no less briefly than Elegantly thus summed up.

(...)
(...)
Rome triumphs in the Imperial Seat, and is
Wealth's Storehouse, and the World's Metropolis.
Alexandria besides the vastness of the place, numerousness of its inhabitants,
the riches and plenty of its Traffic, was the Seat of the Imperial Viceroy,
called the Augustal Prefect: Indeed it was (...) Dion. Orat. xxxii. (ad Alex.)
p. 362
the second City under the Sun, that is, (...) as Aristides Orat. in Romans p.
358. Tom. 1.
styles it, the greatest next to Rome; and thence by ancient Writers Alexand.
ap. Eustath. comment. in Homer. I^iad. (...). Stephan. in v. (...).
emphatically called THE CITY. Antioch was frequently the Court of Emperors,
constantly the residence of their Lieutenants, the most ancient, rich and
populous City of the East, commonly styled Antioch the Great: Now the greatness
of these places added a proportionable reputation to their several Bishops, it
being but reasonable that they should (...) (as the Fathers at Antioch speak
Can. ix.
) precede others in honor, who presided in the most eminent and honorable
Cities.

And because Rome was confessedly the greatest and noblest City of the Empire,
hence the Church there had an honourary precedence before all others, and the
Bishops of it in all public meetings and consultations had the first place
allowed them, and upon all occasions a mighty deference and respect paid to
them, and their favor was courted, and Addresses made to them from all parts.
And in this sense it is plain the ancients understood the honor due to the
Roman Bishop. When the Council of Constantinople decrees, Can. ii.
that the Bishop of that City shall have the next place to him of Rome, for
that Constantinople was new Rome, it sufficiently shows upon what foundation
the precedence of the Roman Prelate stood. And that of Chalcedon Can. xxviii.
much more expressly, that the cause why (...), p. 8. Edit. Graec. vid. Barlaam
(...). p. 26.
the Fathers gave privileges to the Sea of old Rome was, because that was the
Imperial City. And in pursuance of these Canons ((...)) the Emperor Justinian
enacts, (...). p. 374. fac. 2. Edit. Graec.
that the Bishop of old Rome should be (...), the first of all Bishops.

I know there are, L. Allat. ib. c. 2. N. 6, 7, etc. p. 12, etc. Morin.
exercit. Eccles. l. 1. exerc. 1. p. 9.
who place the Eminency of these three great Sees upon another bottom, and tell
us it was, because they were all founded by S. Peter, two of them by himself,
and that of Alexandria by the Ministry of S. Mark his peculiar Disciple, sent
thither by his immediate direction and authority: And the assertion further
improved, that these three Cities being severally the chief Cities of the three
then known parts of the World, Europe, Asia and Africa, thence it follows that
the Government of these three great Churches, and in them of the whole
Christian World is lodged in S. Peter's Successor, and it is added Morin. ib. p.
8. 11. vide sis etiam Hieron. Aleand. de Region. Suburb. dissert. 11. c. 2. p.
90.
(with greater boldness shall I say, or blasphemy?) that S. Peter herein
expressed a lively representation both of the Unity of the Godheads, and of the
Holy Trinity, and that as it is but one and the same Episcopal Office that is in
a Bishop, a Metropolitan, and a Patriarch, so a Trinity of Patriarchs meets in
the Unity of the Pope; so that in the Sea of the Prince of the Apostles, there
is an Unity in Trinity, and a Trinity in Unity. But where Men can suffer their
wits want only to sport at this rate (though it is gravely brought in by way of
Argument, by some otherwise learned enough) it is no wonder, that nothing should
be stuck at, true or false, that may serve their cause. But I spare any farther
censure of this Author, finding by his life Vit. I. Morin. p. 5. 7.
(published since the Writing of these Papers) that he repented afterward of so
hasty and inconsiderate an undertaking, and often intended to have brought that
work under a review and castigation. And indeed any Man may at first sight
discern 'twas the issue of a Juvenile heat, and wanted the corrections of
calmer and maturer thoughts.

But perhaps it might prove no such easy task to make it out that S. Peter
founded those three Sees, and if he did, that any such authority as is claimed,
is thence derived to the Sea of Rome. Antioch and Alexandria did always
maintain their Jurisdiction Independent, though the Popes frequently inculcated
their being originally Instituted by S. Peter, as a kind of obligation to Rome,
and that which reflected the greatest honor upon those Churches. And the
Fathers we see found their pre-eminence upon the Glory and Majesty of their
Cities, and none more expressly than that of Rome, the Bishop whereof was
therefore honored, caressed and add rest unto, because Bishop of Rome. And had
he contented himself with that place and deference which the Fathers gave him,
and not broken down Enclosures, and trampled over the Heads of his Brethren, we
should neither have envied, nor denied it. And though perhaps it might admit
some dispute, whether Rome having for so many Ages lost the honor of being the
Imperial City, the Privileges conferred upon that Church, upon that account,
ought not in reason to abate proportionably; yet we are willing to grant, what
genuine Antiquity did allow, that the Bishop of that place containing himself
within Primitive Rules and Orders, should be esteemed the most honorable among
all Christian Bishops, that he should be first, but not Lord, much less Tyrant
over his Brethren. The Privileges assigned him by the ancient Canons, were
(...) (says a late learned Patriarch of Alexandria Melet. Alex. (...). p. 14.
) Privileges of honor, not conveyances of a Tyrannical power to make or
abrogate Laws as he pleases.

And therefore suppose the (...), the Primacy of the Church of Rome (mentioned
in the beginning of this sixth Nicene Canon, as it is quoted by Paschasinus the
Popes Legate in the Council of Chalcedon) were granted, yet who knows not that
there is a Primacy of Order as well as Power; a Primacy amongst equals; and
such it is plain was that which the ancient Councils did assign him, not an
Universal, Monarchical, uncontrollable Power and Supremacy over the whole
Christian Church, which would have fundamentally destroyed the very design of
this Nicene Canon, which makes the Bishops of Alexandria, Antioch, the other
Provinces, independent, and as supreme within their own limits, as the Pope is
in his. Is there no difference between Precedence and Supremacy, between
Dignity and Dominion? Let the Roman Church be the Head of all Churches (as it is
sometimes styled by the Ancients, and frequently challenged by the Popes) it is
so only in an honourary sense, and in that respect other Churches, especially
that of Constantinopolitana Ecclesia omnium aliarum est caput. Lib. 1. Cod.
Just. Tit. 11. l. 24.
Constantinople, have the same title given to them. Where then shall we find
the Sovereign, Arbitrary, and unbounded Power of the Bishop of Rome? and where,
but in the pride, ambition and Usurpation of that See? certain I am it has not
the least footing in this or any other ancient Council.

Nor can it be supposed, that had the Fathers of this venerable Synod known of
any such supereminent Power of the Roman Bishop, as is now pretended to (and
know it they must, if there had been any, meeting from all parts of the World)
we cannot suppose, I say, they would have given the Bishops of Alexandria,
Antioch, etc. equal Power within their respective Provinces, without inserting
into the Canon a Salvo to the Supreme Rights and Prerogatives of the Sea of
Rome, especially when we find them in the very next Canon, giving the Bishop of
Jerusalem an honorable Session, but still with a Proviso to preserve the
Rights of the Metropolitan of that Province.

V. THAT the Rights of the Roman Metropolitan were not due by any Divine
Constitution, but flowed only from Custom and the practice of the Church. This
is here laid down as one of the main foundations upon which the whole Body of
the Canon is built, the Right here conveyed not being Divine Institutions, but
(...), ancient Customs, introduced by time and use and a wise contrivance.
Which is not only the case of Metropolitans in general, but is particularly
applied to him of Rome, it being (says the Canon) the custom for the Bishop of
Rome to have such Metropolitick Power.

Had these good Fathers known of any peculiar Commission given by Christ to
Peter, and in him to the Bishop of Rome, to be his Supreme and Universal Bishop
upon Earth, to Govern his Church by a despotical unaccountable power, or that
our Lord had but so much as authorized and appointed him to be Superior to all
the Bishops within the Roman Province, it had been hard, not to say unjust and
unreasonable in them to conceal it, and an irreparable injury to that Church,
to derive its authority from any meaner original. An injury, which we cannot
conceive but that the Popes Legates, who were then in Council, must have
immediately entered their Protest against. But the Christian World was as yet
unacquainted with such Notions, and the Popes then either did not claim any
such power, or to be sure durst not challenge it in that Assembly, where they
knew it must be shamefully baffled and rejected.

What Power soever our Lord or his Apostles conveyed to Bishops, this is
certain, that all Bishops as such stand upon a common level, and that
Superiority and Subordination among them is merely from humane positive
Institution, borrowed from the Forms in the civil state, and with great reason
brought in to comply with the conveniences and necessities of the Church. And
to this the Fathers usually refer it. Thus we see they here determined the case
of Metropolitans. And in the following Canon the Bishop of Jerusalem's taking
place next to his Metropolitan before all the other Bishops of that Province,
is ascribed to custom, and ancient tradition. In the Council of Ephesus the
Bishop of Antioch was complained of for invading the Rights of the Metropolitan
of Cyprus, in deciding whereof the Fathers affirm, Council. Ephesians. Can. viii.
it would be sufficient prejudice to his cause, if he had not ancient custom
on his side: And having determined the case against him, decree, That every
Province should enjoy those original Rights pure and inviolable, which had been
derived to them by long continuance, (...), according as the power of ancient
custom had prevailed. And when some years after by reason of the Incursions of
the barbarous people, the Metropolitan of Cyprus was forced to remove to Nova
Justinianopolis in the Hellespont, the Fathers of the sixth Council in Trullo
confirmed Can. xxxix
his rights to him, (...), according to ancient custom: For the Holy Fathers (
say they) have determined, that Customs should be preserved in every Church.

VI. THAT the Ordination of Provincial Bishops was one of the prime Rights and
Privileges of every Metropolitan within his own Jurisdiction. No Man in those
days was bound to go beyond his own Metropolis, much less did they know of any
obligation to seek to Rome either for Consecration, or Confirmation. And for
this the Laws of the Church are as express and peremptory as words could make
them. Our great Council had made Provision herein by their fourth Canon, that a
Bishop should be Ordained by all the Bishops in the Province: But because pers
haps business, or distance, might render that inconvenient, and sometimes
impossible, they decree that it should be done by three, the rest testifying
their consent in writing; and that the (...) (...), the validity of what was
done, should be from the Confirmation of the Metropolitan in every Province.

And because the case of Meletius was then before them, and had raised a mighty
noise and clamor, they again establish this matter in the close of the sixth
Canon by way of recapitulation, that whoever should be made Bishop without the
consent of his Metropolitan, his Ordination should be null and void, and that
if any doubt and dispute arose in this case, the majority of Votes should carry
it: Accordingly in their Synodical Epistle Ap. Theod. l. 1. c. 6. p. 31.
to the Church of Alexandria they tell them, they had taken care about the
Election of their Bishops, and that it must be with the Concurrence and
Confirmation of the Bishop of Alexandria. This Constitution we find unanimously
ratified by almost all following Councils; by that of Antioch Can. xix.
most expressly, by that of Laodicea Can. xii.
, by that of Sardica Can. vi.
, by the Second Can. xii.
and Fourth Can. i.
Councils of Carthage, by the general Council of Chalcedon Can. xxv.
, who take notice of the neglect of some Metropolitans in delaying the
Ordinations of their Provincial Bishop; and in the particular controversy
between Anastasius of Nice, and Eunomius of Nicomedia Conc. Chalced. Act. xiii.
col. 715.
, they all with one voice ratify the Nicene Canon.

In all which Canons, and infinite more that might be mentioned, there is not
the least intimation given of any Prerogative peculiar to the Bishop of Rome,
or that he has any power to take this Right out of the hands of the respective
Metropolitans. Nor is Ordination the only Privilege which the Synod of Nice
vests in Metropolitans, for though they more particularly insist upon this,
because Meletius had given such fresh occasion by violating the Metropolitan
Rights of Alexandria, yet in the beginning of the sixth Canon they establish
their Privileges in general, that they should have (...) and the (...) all the
ancient Powers and Privileges that belonged to their Churches in every
Province.

What these were, practice and the subsequent Canons of the Church do inform
us; to take care that vacant Sees were well supplied, to call Provincial
Synods, to disperse Canons there agreed on for the common good, to end
controversies between their Bishops, to admonish the unruly, to censure and
suspend the irreregular, to give communicatory Letters to their Provincial
Bishops that were to go into foreign parts, and such like. In short, the Synod
of Antioch (than which perhaps none ever made wiser and better Rules for the
Government and Discipline of the Church) order Can. ix.
the Bishops of every Province not only to honor their Metropolitan, but to do
nothing of moment without his consent.

Lastly, I observe hence, That this way of Ecclesiastic Administration was not
any late Novel Institution, but was founded upon ancient custom and practice.
'Twas (...), says the Canon most expressly. How far this Antiquity does extend,
it is not easy precisely to determine. Salmasius De primat. c. 4. p. 57.
himself grants it for an hundred years before the Synod of Nice: And we would
not have thankt him for a larger concession, had the state of things before
that Council been as clearly transmitted to us, as they were afterward. Indeed
the Records and Writings of those early Ages are generally lost, and the
defending Christianity from the assaults of Heathens on the one side, and
Heretics on the other, take up the far greatest part of those few that remain.
So that little light is afforded us to discover the Originals of particular
Churches, and to trace out the gradual advances of Polity and
Church Discipline. Whether the Apostles themselves fixed a Superior Bishop in
every Metropolis of the civil State, as some will have it; or whether the
Apostles only formed the Scheme and draught, but left it to following Ages to
erect and set it up, as de Marca De Concord. l. 6. c. 1. n. 9. p. 176.
thinks, I leave it to the Reader, who is curious about these matters, to weigh
their arguments, and then pass his Sentence.

To me it seems probable that it actually commenced not long after the
Apostolic Age, when Sects and Schisms began to break in apace, and when the
Apostles who were the supreme Governors and Moderators being removed off the
Stage, and controversies multiplying between particular Bishops, it was found
necessary to pitch upon one in every Province, to whom the Umpirage of cases
might be referred, and by whom all common and public affairs might be directed.

In the declining part of the second Century we find Philip styled Epist.
Dionys. Corinth. Episc. ap. Eus. l. 4. c. 23. p. 144.
not only Bishop of the Diocese of Gortyna, ((...)) but also of all the rest of
the Churches or Dioceses ((...)) in Crete, among which Pinytus is reckoned
Bishop of the Parochia of Gnossus. Toward the latter end of the same Century
we find several Provincial Synods convened for determining the Paschal
controversy Eusebius. H. Eccl. l. 5. c. 23. p. 190*
: Pope Victor presided in that at Rome; in that of Palestine, Theophilus Bishop
of Caesarea, and Narcissus of Jerusalem; where Narcissus is joined with
Theophilus, because the Bishop of Jerusalem had ever the place of honor next
to his Metropolitan of Caesarea, and this (say our Nicene Fathers) from custom
and ancient tradition. Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus, at the request of Victor
summoned a Synod of the Bishops of Asia (i. e. of the Lydian or Proconsular
Asia, whereof Ephesus was the Metropolis) wherein he was president, who all
subscribed his opinion, as he tells us in his Letter to Pope Victor. In France
there was a convention (...), of the Bishops of the several Gallick Dioceses,
wherein Irenaeus Bishop of the Metropolis of Lions was chief Moderator.
Bacchylus also Bishop of Corinth (that was a Metropolis too) held a Synod of
the Bishops of Achaia (if S. Jerome De Script. in Bacchyl. c. 44.
understand Eusebius aright) and in their name wrote an Epistle about this
matter. This the Author of the Ancient Synodicon A Papp^ edit. p. 7.
calls a Provincial Synod, and expressly styles Bacchylus Archbishop of
Corinth. How often does S. Cyprian Vid. Epist. XLii. p. 56. XLV. p. 59.
mention his Province, and his Fellow-Bishops in it, to whom he communicated
affairs of the Church, and commanded ( Mandavimus is his own word) their help
and assistance: and this Province no mean one neither, as extending over Africa
properly so called, Numidia, and the two Mauritania's.

Nor can I see any reason with Salmasius Loc. ^itat.
to understand it of the civil Province, especially when the best reason he
gives, is, that the Power of Primates or Metropolitans was not yet in force,
which is a plain and shameful begging of the Question. Indeed if he means it
only of the Title, by which they were called, I grant that the word
Metropolitan is very rarely, if perhaps at all, to be found in any Authentic
Writer before the time of the Nicene Council: They were in those days styled
(...), and (...), the first Bishops, and the Heads of Provinces, (as is plain
from the XXXIV. Apostolic Canon) i. e they were (...), the chief Bishops that
resided in the several Metropoles, as Zonaras truly expounds that Canon. But
whatever becomes of the Title, the thing it self is plain to all that are not
biased by prejudice and partiality, that there was a Superior Bishop in every
Province, resident at the Metropolis, who partly by himself, partly by the
assistance of his Provincial Bishops meeting in Council, usually managed all
the more important Church Affairs within that Province.

The Sum in short of this great Nicene Canon amounts to this That the greater
limits of Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction were concurrent with the Provinces of the
Roman Empire, that the prime Governors within those bounds were the
Metropolitans, and though some were more honorable than others, by reason of
the eminency of their Episcopal Stations, yet that every Metropolitan had a
free and independent power of Ordination, and steering the main affairs of the
Church within that Province; that the Bishop of Rome had the same, and no more
within the Roman Province; a Power not granted by any immediate commission, or
Divine authority, but introduc't for convenience, and settled by custom and
long continuance.

CHAP. III. The extent of the Bishop of Romes Jurisdiction, considered as a
Metropolitan.
A Search into the proper bounds of the Roman Bishop. His Power Fourfold,
Episcopal, Metropolitical, Patriarchal, Apostolical. The First not
controverted. The last discharged as extravagant and groundless, and as
frequently baffled, both by the Reformed, and Greek Church. L. Allatius's Jeer
of his Countrymen. His Metropolitical Jurisdiction considered as concurrent
with that of the Provost of Rome. That how great, and how far extending. The
Suburbicary Regions what. Sicily no part of the Urbicary Regions. The usual
conformity between the extent of the Civil and Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction in
those times. The Power of the Roman Metropolitan confined within an Hundred
Miles of Rome. Rufinus his Exposition of the Suburbicary Churches. Greatly
quarreled at by the Romish Writers. His authority in other cases allowed
sufficient and unquestionable. His Book approved by Pope Gelasius and others.
No probability of his being mistaken in the sense of the Canon, or the extent
of the Roman Metropolitanship, or the Suburbicary Churches. His Explication
confirmed by most ancient Interpreters of this Canon. The Bishops of Rome and
Italy distinct. The Bishop of Milan ranckt with him of Rome. The objection of
the Bishop of Romes being confined to so narrow a compass, considered and
answered. The Majores Dioeceses in the Epistle of the Synod of Arles what. The
bounds of the Roman Bishops showed to have been heretofore small from an
ancient Notitia Episcopatuum. The fraud in the first publication of that
Notitia. Morinus noted. The greatness of Rome equivalent to a large extent.

I. THUS far then we have gained; that the Bishop of Rome as well as the rest
was bounded within his Metropolitical Province; the Council supposing this as
the ground of its constitution, that the Bishop of Alexandria should have
jurisdiction over all within his Province, as the Bishop of Rome had in his.
It Is true, the Council does not assign the proper limits of the Roman
Metropolitanship, as it does that of Alexandria, there being a more particular
reason why it should specify the latter, that being the Subject under debate,
and the main, if not only occasion of the Canon; we must therefore search it
out some other way. And here we are told L. Allat. ib. c. 8. n. 1. p. 158.
Filesac. de S. Episc. auctor. c. 9.. 3. p. 225.
of a Threefold power vested in the Pope; Episcopal, Patriarchal, and
Apostolical; or as others Bellarm. de R. Pont. l. 2. c. 18. col. 659 Aleand. de
reg. suburb. Part. II. c. 4. p. 142. Sirmond. Censur. P. II. c. 5. p. 76.
distinguish a little more accurately, he may be considered under a Fourfold
capacity, as a Bishop, as a Metropolitan, as a Patriarch, and lastly as Pope,
or as he is the Vicar of Christ, and Head of the Universal Church. In which
capacity he is not only more honorable than all other Bishops and Patriarchs,
but has full authority over them, to consecrate, confirm, or depose them, yea
when he pleases, to suppress old, and to erect new Episcopal Sees. Hereby (they
tell us) he is constituted Judge over all Churches in the World, and may at
pleasure visit, govern, and give Laws to them. For the First of these, as he is
a private Bishop, we have no controversy with him: And for the last, his
Supreme and Apostolical power over the whole Christian Church; it is so wild and
extravagant a claim, so groundless and precarious, so utter a stranger to
Scripture and Primitive Antiquity, that it is needless to take pains in the
refuting of it. Nay, the Popes themselves how desirous soever to amplify their
own Power, have not yet dared to challenge it where they knew it would be
disputed or denied. In the discourse that past between Constantius and Pope
Liberius about the condemnation of Athanasius, the Emperor asked him, Ap.
Theod. l. 2. c. 16. p. 94.
(...), what great part of the World are you, that you only should take his
part? and that (as he urges a little before) when the whole World had past
Sentence upon him. The proper answer to which (had Liberius known of any such
power) had been this. I only am entrusted by Christ with Supreme Authority over
the whole Church, and I having acquitted him, it is no matter though the whole
World besides has condemned him. And so no doubt he would have answered, had he
been aware of any such Prerogative affixt to his See. But Popes had not then
set this claim on foot, nor it is like dreamt of it, nor if they had, was the
World as yet disposed to receive it. Something we said to this before, when we
considered the Bishop of Rome as standing uppermost among the Metropolitans
mentioned in the Nicene Canon. To add more, were a vain, and impertinent loss
of time; especially after so much as has been said upon this Argument, both by
the Writers of the Greek Church, ( Alexius Aristinus, Zonar as, Balsamon,
Matthaeus Blastares, Pet. Antiochenus, Macarius Ancyranus, Demetrius
Chomatenus, Barlaam, Nilus Thessalonicensis, Nicetus Seidus, Nilus Doxopatrius,
Geo. Coressius, Gabriel Philadelphensis, Maximus Margunius, Meletius
Alexandrinus, etc. whom Leo Allatius Ib. 16 n. 2. col. 240.
in a scornful insultation over the deplorable state of his own Country is
pleased to style Graecanica ingenia, the Wits of Greece) and by them of the
Reformed Religion, and by some too of their own Church, by whom all pleas and
pretenses to this power have been so often and so shamefully baffled, that a
man would wonder if at this time of the day they should be again rallied, and
brought into open Field. It remains then that we consider him in his
Metropolitical, and Patriarchal capacity.

II. AND first we shall enquire what were the bounds of his Metropolitical
Power.

And the best measures we can take in this matter, will be to enquire into the
extent of the civil Jurisdiction of the Provost of Rome, with which that that
of the Roman Prelate must run parallel, no man can doubt, that considers the
course of things in those times, when in this respect the Church and the State
went so fairly hand in hand. A thing not only affirmed by Protestants, but
granted by the most Learned and zealous Writers of the Church of Rome. Let us
therefore consider first how the case stood in the civil State.

The Prefect of Rome was an Officer of great Antiquity, instituted in the very
infancy of that state, while governed by Kings, but being only of a pro
tempore-use, was never made fixed and ordinary till Augustus, who being much
engaged in foraign Wars, appointed a Magistrate, who might in the interim
supply his room, manage his affairs, and administer Justice at home. His
public appearances were very pompous and stately, and he had several great
Officers under him, as may be seen in the Notitia Imperii. The greatest persons
in the City were not exempt from his power, for calling five persons of the
Senatorian Order to his assistance, he might try and pass Sentence upon the
Head of a Senator himself. His Government extended not only to Rome, but to an
hundred miles round about it, where the limits of his jurisdiction ceased, as
is expressly said in a Rescript Ap. Vlp. de offic praef. urb. l. 1. ff.. 4. Lib.
1. Tit. 12. and collat. Ll. Mosac. Tit. 14. de plag.
of the Emperor Severus. Ditioni suae non solum Roma commissa (quamvis in illa
contineantur universa) verum etiam intra Centesimum Miliarium potestatem te
protendere, antiqua jura voluerunt, as his Patent runs in Form. Lib. 5. p. 207
Cassiodore.

Within this compass were several Countries, which partly from their lying
round about, partly from their subjection to, and dependence upon the
praefecture of Rome, were usually styled Urbicariae L. 3. C. Th. Lib. 9. Tit.
30. l. 3. Lib. 11. Tit. 3. l. 9. Tit. 16. ib.
and Suburbicariae L. 9. C. Th. Lib. 11. Tit. 1. l. 12. Tit. 16. ib. l. 12.
Tit. 28.
, and Suburbanae Regiones L. 13. C. Th. Lib. 9. Tit. 1.
, sometimes also Regiones solitae Vlp. ubi supr.. 13.
, the Countries within which the Governor of Rome was wont to exercise his
solemn jurisdiction, and Vicinae Regiones L. 4. C. Th. Lib. 14. Tit. 10.
, Countries that lie next to the City. And these I doubt not are those Four
Regions mentioned in a Law L. 1 C. Th. Lib. 14. Tit. 6.
of Constantine M. directed to Orfitus Prefect of the City.

III. THIS circumference Salmasius conceives Epist. ad Amic. p. 4. Euchar. P.
1. c. 1. p. 7. P. 11. c. 1. p. 249.
(though herein stiffly opposed by his Learned Antagonist) to be the Romana
regio, mentioned in an old Inscription at Nola, and by the Historian (as he
corrects Euchar. ib. p. 11. and not. Salm. in vit. Probi.
him out of an ancient Manuscript) in the Life of Probus, where it is opposed to
Verona, Benacum, and other Regions of Italy; and that this was the (...), the
Region of the Romans, spoken of by Ignatius in the front of his Epistle to that
Church. What these Four Regions were, mentioned in the Law of Constantine, is
not agreed by those that have searched furthest into this matter. Gothofred
Conjectur. de region. suburb. c. 5. p. 27. 30, 31. and com. ad C. Th. Lib. 14.
Tit. 6. l. 1.
makes them to have been Tuscia Suburbicaria (another part of it being called
Annonaria) Picenum Suburbicarium (to distinguish it from the Annonarium) and of
these there is no doubt: The other Two he makes to be Latium Vetus, and Latium
Novum, lying South of Rome, and extending as far as Sinuessa upon the River
Safo, which divided beween Latium and Campania. Salmasius Epist. cit. p. 23,
24. Eucharist. 1. c. 5. p. 170. 186, etc.
will have the Latium Vetus and Novum to have been but one and the same, and
which was afterward called Campania Latina, and to fill up the number,
substitutes the Province of Valeria, so called from the Valerian way, that lay
through it. Another French Lawyer, Io Lechasser. observat. de Eccles. Suburb.
p. 4, 5.
who takes upon him in less than half a sheet of Paper (which he published on
purpose) to state the controversy, will have five of the Eleven Regions (into
which Pliny tells us Augustus the Emperor divided Italy) to belong to this,
viz. the First, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth and Seventh, as those that lay next the
City, and were bounded with the Rivers Tifernus and Silarus on the East, and
Marca and Constantinum on the West. But herein he offers no other evidence than
his own conjecture. Sirmondus Censur. Conject. l. 1. c. 4. p. 23. Advent. P. 1.
c. 3. p. 31.
(and others after him) extends the number of the Suburbicary Countries to Ten,
which he makes the same with the Ten Provinces, that were under the Vicarius
Urbicus, and to have thence taken their denomination.

But there are two things amongst many others that lie strongly in prejudice of
that opinion, and with me turn the Scales. First, That some of these Ten
Provinces, especially the Three Islands of Sicily, Sardinia and Corsica lay too
remote to come under the notion of Suburbicary Regions: For Urbicarium, and
Suburbicarium, Suburbanum, and Suburbicum all importing the same thing (as the
Learned Jerome Aleander Refut Conject. P. 1 c. 3. p. 26.
readily grants) must necessarily imply their lying within some tolerable
neighborhood to the City. Secondly, That Sicily, one of the Ten Provinces
belonging to the Vicarius Urbicus, is most expressly distinguished Lib. 11. C.
Th. Tit. 16. l. 9. p. 120.
from the Urbicary Regions, and as equally as it is from Italy, strictly so
called, that is, the Seven Provinces that constituted the Italick Diocese. A
case so clear, that Sirmond Censur. ubi supr. c. 6. p. 38. vid. Advent. ib. p.
36.
though he endeavors to say something to it, yet it is so thin and trifling,
that it rather shows he had a good mind to answer it, than that his answer
would ever hold water. Others Aleand. ubi supr. c. 2. p. 23.
are willing to suggest, as if in that Law of Constantius, Illyricum ought to
be read instead of Sicily: but this is thrown in only as a conjecture, and that
too against all reason, Illyricum belonging at that time to another
jurisdiction. For by the famous distribution Vid. Zosim. Hist. l. 2. p. 688.
which Constantine the Great made of the Parts and Offices of the Empire,
Illyricum was under a Praetorian Prefect of its own, and so I suppose continued
all the time of Constantius (in the latter part of whose Reign this Law was
made) though afterward a great part of it was laid to the command of the
Praetorian Prefect of Italy. But Morinus Exercit. Eccles. l. 1. c. 30. p. 243.
like a young and daring Champion that was resolved to do the work, is for
quite dashing it out of the Body of the Law, as a word contrary to the usage of
that time. All which shuffling Artifices are a shrewd sign it was a bad cause
they had to manage.

In short, though men of Learning may by tricks and subtilty entangle and
perplex an argument (as they have done in this controversy) yet two things are
plain beyond all just exception. First, that the Jurisdiction of the
City-Praefect reached an Hundred miles about Rome. Secondly, that the Urbicary
and Suburbicary Regions lay chiefly, and in all likelihood, entirely within
that compass, and derived that title from their vicinity to the City, and their
immediate dependence upon the Government of its Provost. And I cannot but a
little wonder that Sirmond, who more than once grants Cens. c. 1. p. 9. Adv. c.
1. p. 7.
the Prefect of Rome to have had jurisdiction within an Hundred miles, should
yet as often deny Cens. p. 12. Propemp. l. 1. c. 7. p. 87.
, that he had any Provinces under his Government, as if there had been no
Provinces within that compass, when they are expressly called the Suburbanae
Provinciae in the Theodosian Code Lib. 9. Tit. 1. l. 13.
, and the ordinary Judges in those parts commanded to return all greater causes
to the Tribunal of the City-Praefect, and this in contradistinction to the
course of other Provinces, which were to be accountable to the Praetorian
Prefect.

IV. HAVING thus found out the Jurisdiction of the Roman Prefect, it should
one would think be no hard matter to discover that of the Bishop of Rome, there
being so known a correspondence between the Civil and Ecclesiastical Government
of those days. And though this did not always, nor Universally take place (and
how should it, when time, and the Will of Princes made such alterations in the
bounds of places and Provinces?) yet did it generally obtain. A thing
introduced at first for greater convenience, founded upon long custom, and
settled by several Laws and Canons of the Church, insomuch that if a change or
alteration had been, or should hereafter be made by imperial authority in any
City, that then the Order of Episcopal Sees should follow the civil and
Political forms, as is expressly provided by two general Councils, the one of
Chalcedon Conc. Chalc can. 17.
, the other of Constantinople Conc. C. P. in Trull. c. 38.
. Nor can any reason be given, why the Bishop of Alexandria should exercise a
Pastoral Authority over Three such large Provinces, as Egypt, Libya and
Pentapolis, but only because they were under the civil Government of the
Praefectus Augustalis, the Imperial Viceroy, who kept his residence in that
City. The Jurisdiction then of the Bishop of Rome being of equal circumference
with that of the Roman Provost, must extend to all the City-Provinces, that lay
within an Hundred miles round about it.

Accordingly we find that when great disturbances were made in the Church of
Rome by the Manichees, and other Heretics and Schismatics, Valentinian the
Third writes L. 62. C. Th* Lib. 16. Tit. 5.
to Faustus Prefect of Rome to expel them all out of the City; but especially
to proceed against those who separated themselves from the Communion of the
venerable Pope, and whose Schism did infect the people; commanding him, that if
upon warning given they should not within Twenty days reconcile themselves, he
should banish them One hundred miles out of the City; that so they might be
punished with their self-chosen solitude and separation. The Emperor thinking
it but just, that they who had voluntarily rejected, should be themselves cast
out of the bounds of his Jurisdiction, that they who had perverted many in the
Capital City, should not be left within any part of his Diocese to infect the
people. And this was done in compliance with the course observed in civil
cases, where notorious malefactors were so used. Thus Symmachus Prosp. de
promiss. div. P. iii. prom. 38. p. 60.
the Gentile was for his insolence banished an Hundred miles out of Rome. And
some Ages before that, Severus having cashiered the Soldiers that murdered the
Emperor Pertinax, banished Herodian. Hist. l. 2. p. 97.
them, and charged them at the peril of their Heads not to come within an
Hundred miles of Rome, that is, within the limits of the City-Praefecture. And
more plainly yet, in the case of Ursicinus, who had raised infinite stirs at
Rome about the choice of Pope Damasus, and had set up himself as Competitor in
that Election, for which he had been banished into France, Valentinian the
Elder afterward (as appears by his Rescript Ext. ap. Baron. ad Ann. 371. vid.
item Rescr. ad Maxim. V. V. ibid.
directed to Ampelius the City-Provost) gave him and his companions leave to
return into Italy, provided they came not to Rome, nor any place within the
Suburbicary Regions, that is, within the Jurisdiction of the Roman Bishop.

But Rufinus has put the case beyond all question, who in his short paraphrase
(for for a translation we may be sure he never intended it) of the Sixth Nicene
Canon, tells H. Eccl. l. 1. c. 6.
us, that according to ancient custom, as he of Alexandria had in Egypt, so
the Bishop of Rome had the care and charge of the Suburbicary Churches. The
Champions of the Roman Church finding themselves sorely pinched with this
authority, have no other way to relieve themselves but to throw it quite off
their Necks, and to fall foul upon Rufinus, loading him with all the hard Names
and Characters of reproach, charging him with malice, falsehood, ignorance, want
of learning, and indeed what not. But the World is not now to be taught that
Rufinus was a Man of parts and learning, witness the reputation which his Works
had of old, and still have to this day. Pope Gelasius with his Synod of seventy
Bishops allowed Distinct. xv. c. 3. Sancta Romana. p. m. 34.
them (the case only of free will excepted:) And among the rest his
Ecclesiastical History, wherein this very Nicene Canon is extant, and gives him
too the title of a Religious Man into the bargain. So that Rufinus his
Exposition has the Popes own approbation on its side. And surely if ever his
judgment be infallible, it is, when he has his Council about him to advise and
assist him. And though perhaps that Gelasian Synod, if searched into, may not be
of that authentic credit, as to lay any considerable stress upon it, yet
however it stands good against them, that own its authority, and thereby
approve its determination. And though it had not given this testimony to
Rufinus, yet there wants not other evidence that the thing was so. Accordingly
Hincmar of Rhemes, speaking of this very Book of Rufinus whence this passage is
taken, assures us Adv. Hincm. Laud. cap. 21. p. 100.
, it was one of those that were received in the Catalogue of the Apostolic
See. Nay, his Ecclesiastical History obtained such credit, that it was wont
solemnly to be appealed Vid. Conc. Nic. II. Act. 1 Con. T. vii. Col. 80. 85.
vid. Cyril. Epist. ad PP. Afric. Conc. T. 2. col. 1143.
to by Fathers and Councils in some of the most weighty and important cases of
the Church.

V. NOR is there any shadow of probability, that he should be mistaken either
in the sense of the Nicene Canon, or in the Province of the Bishop of Rome. He
was himself an Italian, born not above Twenty years after the Synod of Nice,
Baptized, and perhaps born at Aquileia, a famous City of Friuli, (honored
heretofore with the residence of Augustus and some other Emperors, and made
afterward a Metropolis, and the Seat of the Praetorian Prefect) and himself a
Presbyter of that Church: He had been frequently conversant at Rome, had
traveled over most parts of the Christian World, and had conversed with
persons of the greatest note and eminency in every place. In all which respects
he could no more mistake the jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome, than we can
suppose, that a Prebend of York born and bred in the Church of England, should
be ignorant how far the Province of Canterbury does extend. Nor can there be
the least reason to imagine, either that by Suburbicary Churches Rufinus should
mean any other, than what lay within those Provinces, that were universally
known by that title, or that he should dare so openly, and in the face of the
World to shut up the Bishop of Rome within those Suburbicary Regions, had not
his power at the time of the Nicene Council (whose Canon he must in all reason
be supposed to explain as things stood at the time of that Synod) been
notoriously known to have been confined within those limits.

But what need we take pains to vindicate the credit of our witness? he stands
not alone in this matter, his testimony being sufficiently justified by
concurrent evidence. The ancient Version of the Nicene Canons (published by
Sirmond Censur. P. ii. c. 4. p. 68.
out of the Records of the Vatican, and another exactly agreeing with it by
Mons. Justell, from a very ancient Manuscript) the Author whereof was perhaps
not much later than Rufinus, renders it by Suburbicaria loca, the Suburbicary
places; the three Arabic Versions, the Alexandrian, that of the Melchites, and
the Paraphrase of Joseph the Egyptian, all express it to the same effect, that
he should have power over his Countries and Provinces, and what ever lay next
to him: Alex. Aristenus, and Sim. Logotheta, two Greek Canonists, and a third
ancient Epitomizer of the Canons, mentioned by Leo Allatius De Eccl. Occid. and
Or. consens. l. 1. c. 12. S. 4. p. 191.
, by (...), the places and Provinces that lay under Rome, i. e. the Suburbicary
Countries.

Nor will it a little contribute to the further clearing of this matter, to
observe, that as the civil Government of the Roman Provost is distinguished
from that of Italy in the Writings of those times, so is this of the Roman
Prelate: and this distinction very ancient. When Paul of Samosata Bishop of
Antioch refused to give Domnus possession of that Church, an appeal was made to
the Emperor Aurelian, who referred the Decision of the case to the Bishops of
Italy and of Rome, as Eusebius H. E. l. 7. c. 30. p. 282.
tells us: and in the title of the Letter written by the Sardican Synod to the
Church of Alexandria, it is said, Ap. Athan. Apol. II. p. 588. vid. ad solitar.
p. 640.
that the Bishops Assembled from Rome and Italy, i. e. Italy taken in its
strict and peculiar notion, as it is there distingusht from Campania, Calabria,
etc. Thence Milan as being Head of the Italick Dioces, is in an Ecclesiastic
sense called Ap. Ath. ib. p. 643.
the Metropolis of Italy, and Dionysius Bishop of that Church styled Ap. Theod.
H. Eccl. l. 2. c. 15. p. 91.
Bishop of the Metropolis of Italy, and Sulpitius Severus speaking of
Priscilian and his company coming into Italy, says Sac. Hist. l. 2. p. 169.
they addressed themselves to Damasus Bishop of Rome, and Ambrose of Milan, as
Bishops that had the greatest authority in those days. And in this respect in
the civil sense Berterius Pithan. P. 1. c. 3. p. 26.
truly makes Rome to be the Metropolis of the Suburbicary Regions, as Milan was
of the rest of Italy.

VI. BUT it seems no small prejudice to the great men of that Church, that so
venerable a person as the Bishop of Rome should be pent up within such narrow
limits, much inferior to many others, especially him of Alexandria or Antioch.
But besides that the Eastern Dioceses (as some think) were generally larger
than those of the West, the Ecclesiastic Provinces (as we noted before) were
restrained to the form of the civil constitution, and were more or fewer, as it
happened in the political Distribution: Wherein if the Roman Bishop had not so
large an extent as some others, yet was it made up in the number, and frequency
of Episcopal Sees, beyond what was in all those times in other places of the
like extent. And therefore when the Synod at Arles in their Letter Ext. Conc.
T. 1. col. 1429.
to Pope Sylvester, say that he did majores Dioeceses tenere (a passage
frequently quoted by the Writers of the Roman Church) possess greater Dioceses;
besides, that the place as Salmasius De Primat. c. Vlt. p. 390.
observes is very corrupt, and affords no current sense, it is plain that the
word Diocese there cannot be understood of Patriarchal Dioceses ( Constantine
not having yet made the division of the Empire, nor Dioceses come up in a
civil, much less in an Ecclesiastical sense) and must therefore be meant of
single Bishoprics, in the modern use of the word, and which was not unusual in
those days, as is evident from the Code of the African Church, and the
conference between the Catholics and Donatists at Carthage, where nothing is
more common and obvious than this usage of the word Diocese, for a single
Episcopal See; the places Vid. Cod. Can. Eccl. Afric. Can. 53. 56. 71. 93. 98.
99. 117. 118. 119 123. and in collat. Carthag. passim.
are too numerous to be reckoned up. And thus also. Pope Leo uses Epist.
LXXXVii. c. 2. p. 158.
the word in the case of Restitutus an African Bishop.

VII. AND indeed that the bounds of the Church of Rome for several Ages after
the Nicene Council were much narrower than some others, appears from an old
Greek Notitia Episcopatuum, wherein the five Patriarchates are distinctly
reckoned up, with all the Provinces and Bishoprics contained under them. Where
under him of Rome, are set down no more than six Provinces (whereof the (...)
the Province of Urbicary Rome is the first) containing not above One hundred
and eight Episcopal Sees. A number far inferior to the rest, especially the
Patriarch of Constantinople, who had subject to him XXXiii Provinces, and in
them CCCLXXXiX Bishoprics, besides some others then newly added to him. This
Notitia had been heretofore published by Carolus a S. Paulo in his Geographia
Sacra, but when he came to that part of it that concerns the Diocese of Rome,
he quite leaps over it, pretending the Manuscript Copy to be imperfect, and
that the words were so corrupted, that scarce any one remained entire; leaving
somewhat more than a bare suspicion, that he himself, or some before him had
purposely rac'd the Manuscript, least the nakedness of the Country, the
thinness and smallness of the Roman Diocese in comparison of others, should be
discovered. But to their great confusion it has been lately published A D.
Bevereg. inter Annot. ad Can. XXXVi. Conc. Vi. in Trull. p. 135.
entire and perfect out of the Oxford Library, where the account that we have
given is plain and notorious. All which considered, with how little reason and
pretense to truth does Morinus Exerc. Eccl. l. 1. exercit. XXX. p. 250.
appeal to the Ecclesiastic Notitia's, even such as were made long after the
times of Constantine, to prove the amplitude of the Roman Province, as to the
Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome. But to return, there can be no reason to
expect, that the Ecclesiastic limits in those days should be longer than those
of the State, which were the standard and measure, by which the others were
ordinarily regulated. Nor is the greatness of any Jurisdiction so much to be
measured by the largeness of its extent, as by the honor and authority of the
place, where it is exercised; as that of the Lord Mayor of London, though
reaching no further than the Liberties of the City, (which take not in half the
Suburbs) is yet a more honorable authority, than that of a Sheriff of the
largest County in England. In this regard the Bishop of Rome had though a
shorter cut, a better and more noble Jurisdiction, than any other Prelate in
the World besides; Rome being the Seat of Majesty and Power, the residence of
the Emperors, the highest Court of Justice, the place to which all parts paid
either homage, or at least respect and veneration, honored with the Title of
ROME THE GREAT, the Provost whereof was reckoned next -- Adoratum populo caput,
and crep^t ingens Sejamis: deinde ex facie toto or be secunda, etc. Juvenal.
Satyr. x. verse. 62. orb etc.] quia praefectus Vrbi fuit venerabilis, secundus
a Caesare Tiberio. Vet. Scholiast. ibid.

-- erubuit tanto spoliare ministro
Imperium fortuna tuum: stat proxima cervix
Ponderis immensi --
P. Stat. Sylv. l. 1. c. 4. verse. 5. de Rub. Gallico. P. V. Vid. Gothofred.
conjectur. dissert. I. c. 1. II. c. 5. and J. Dartis. de Reg. Suburb. Part. I.
c. 16. p. 147.


in honor to the Emperor, and upon all occasions went equal in dignity to the
Praetorian Prefect, who yet commanded ten times as many Provinces: He had the
precedence L 3. C. Lib. 1. Tit. 28. Symmach. l. 10. Epist. 36. p. 503.
of all the great Officers of Rome, and to him belonged Civilium rerum summa,
Id. ib. Epist. 30. p 459.
the management of all civil affairs. Hence the Title given to Sylvester, is
that of Bishop of the Imperial City Ap. Eus. de Vis. C. l. 3. c. 7. p. 487.
Can. 28.
and the Council of Chalcedon tells us, that the Fathers therefore gave a
Prerogative to the Sea of Rome, (...), because that was the Governing and
Imperial City; and Constantius the Emperor though he had already condemned and
deposed Athanasius, did yet to put the better color upon it, desires to have
it ratified by the authority enjoyed by the Bishops of the eternal City, as the
Heathen Historian A. Marcell. Hist. l 15. p. m. 1454.
has remarked. And thus much may serve for the Metropolitical bounds of the
Roman Prelate.

CHAP. IV. An Enquiry into the Rise and Original of Patriarchs in the Christian
Church.
An Enquiry into the Rise and Original of Patriarchs in general. None before
the Council of Nice. What that Council contributed to them. Civil Dioceses
when, and by whom introduced. These gave start to Primary Metropolitans.
Dioceses, when first brought into the Church. The title of Patriarch borrowed
from the Jews. Who their Patriarchs, and whence descended. Exarchs what. The
word Patriarch when first used by Church-writers in a strict and proper sense.
The Patriarchs among the Montanists, who. A short Survey of the four great
Patriarchates. The extent of the Patriarchate of Alexandria. The Dioecesis
Aegyptiaca, what. The Patriarchal Jurisdiction in what sense larger than that
of the Augustal Prefect. Little gained to this Patriarchate more than a title
of honor. The Patriarchate of Antioch commensurate to the Eastern Diocese. The
contest about Cyprus how determined? Palestine for some time under Antioch. The
Patriarchship of Constantinople. By what degrees it rose. What privilege
conferred upon it by the second general Council. The Bishops henceforwards
exercising a kind of Patriarchal power over the Churches of the neighboring
Provinces. The Power granted to that See by the Council of Chalcedon. It Is
ninth, seventeenth and eight and twentyeth Canons considered to that purpose.
Jurisdiction over the three Dioceses of Asiana, Pontica, and Thrace. This
settled upon a full debate and discussion of the matter. This Power owned by
the Synod to have been exercised of a long time before. This grant urged
against the universal Supremacy of the Sea of Rome. The extent of the
Constantinopolitan Patriarchate in after times manifested from several ancient
Notitiae. The Patriarchate of Jerusalem. The honor confirmed to this Church by
the Nicene Council. Its subjection to the Sea of Caesarea. When first
attempting a Metropolitical Power. The contest between this Bishop, and the
Bishop of Antioch How determined in the Council of Chalcedon. When first styled
Patriarch. The extent of this Patriarchate.

I. PROCEED we in the second place to consider him as a Patriarch, the highest
Degree of Ecclesiastic Government which the Church ever owned. And in order to
the better clearing the whole matter, it will be of some advantage, and perhaps
not unpleasant to the Reader, to enquire briefly into the rise and original of
Patriarchs in general, and then survey each particular Patriarchate. The rise
of Patriarchs is but obscurely delivered in the Records of the Church, the
thing not being particularly and by name taken notice of, 'till like a River
that has run a great way, and gathered many tributary rivulets, it had swelled
it self into a considerable stream.

That there were none at the time of the Nicene Council we showed before, the
chief Church Governors then being the Metropolitans, some of which soon after
set up for more room, and began to enlarge the bounds of their Jurisdiction.
And two things there were greatly contributed to that attempt. First, The
mighty reputation which the Synod of Nice had given to Metropolitans, and
especially to the particular Sees of Rome, Alexandria and Antioch. This
inspired them with an ambitious affectation of extending their Superiority and
Jurisdiction, and prepared the way among their Brethren, for the easier
reception of it. Socrates observed, L. 7. c. xi. p. 347.
that long before his time ((...) which must reach as far as the Council of
Nice at least) the Bishop of Rome (as he also of Alexandria) had gone beyond
the bounds of his place, and had aspired (...) to a Power and Dominion over his
Brethren. A remark so very clear and plain (especially as to the Bishop of
Rome) that nothing is more obvious in the whole History of the Church.

The Synod of Nice was beholden by all with a just regard and veneration, and
its Decrees received as Oracles from Heaven, and the Christian World finding
what particular care it had taken of those three great Sees, were the more
ready to submit and strike Sail to their Usurpations. Hence the following
Popes, but especially Leo the First, do upon all occasions magnify the Nicene
Canons, and amplify their meaning beyond what was at first intended by them.
Secondly, The late division of the Empire, and the alteration of it from that
form, whereinto it had been cast, first by Augustus, and afterward by the
Emperor Hadrian, new modeled by Constantine the Great much about the time of
the Nicene Council, gave a singular advantage and opportunity to promote and
further this design.

II. FOR Constantine introduc't four Praetorian Praefectures, each Praefecture
containing several Dioceses (XIII. in all) and each Diocese comprehending
several Provinces, the Vicar or civil Lieutenant residing in the Metropolis of
every Diocese, and presiding over all the Provinces within that division. And
how easy was it, the World being so prepared and disposed, and the Church so
readily embraceing the forms of the civil state, for the chief Metropolitan of
every Diocese to set up for himself. The dignity of the City where he resided,
and the resort of people thither for the dispatch of business made him at first
be esteemed and honored as the First Bishop of the Diocese, and this in a
little time brought on the privilege of Ordaining the Metropolitans of the
several Provinces, and to be entrusted with almost the same powers over
Metropolitans, which they had over Provincial Bishops.

And no doubt it made persons more willing to comply with such a Model, that
having frequent occasion of repairing to the Metropolis, (as is intimated in
the ninth Canon of Antioch) they might with the greater convenience dispatch
their civil and Ecclesiastical affairs both at once. It served not a little to
help on this business, that the second general Council gave the Bishop of
Constantinople the next place of honor to him of Rome upon the account of its
being the Imperial City; which gave no small encouragement to the Bishops of
all Diocesan Metropoles to attempt the extending their Superiority equal to
that of the Imperial Governor that kept his residence in that City. But that
which puts the case past dispute is* that that Council took in the form of
civil Dioceses into the Church, at least, approved what was already taken in:
for so they provide Council. C. P. Can. 11.
that Bishops should not go beyond the Diocese to meddle in Churches that were
without their bounds.

Socrates L. 5. c. 8. p. 275.
giving an account of this Canon, says expressly, that the Fathers of the Synod
having made division of the Provinces, constituted Patriarchs. And though
perhaps by Patriarchs Socrates means no more than those Pro tempore
Commissioners who were within such and such places appointed to judge who
should be received to Catholic Communion (as we have elsewhere Life of Greg.
Nazianz. Sect. v. Number. 8.
observed) yet very plain it is, that the Council there intends Diocese
properly, and in an Ecclesiastic sense, and therefore opposes it to Province,
ordaining that Bishops should not ordinarily go out of the Diocese to celebrate
Ordinations, or any other Churchoffices; and that the Canon concerning Dioceses
being observed, the Synod in every Province should manage the affairs of it
according to the Nicene constitution. And in the sixth Canon they speak yet more
expressly, that if any take upon him to accuse a Bishop, he shall first exhibit
and prosecute his charge before the Provincial Synod; and in case they cannot
end it, that then the accusers shall apply themselves (...) to the greater
Synod of the Bishops of that Diocese, who shall be assembled for that purpose.
And if any slighting the Bishops of the Diocese, shall sue to the Emperor, or
the secular Tribunals, or to a general Council, he shall not in any wise be
admitted to exhibit an accusation, but be rejected as a Violator of the Canons,
and a disturber of Ecclesiastic Order. And to name no more in a case so
evident, Pope Innocent Epist. xviii. non long abinit*
in a Letter written about the year CCCCVIII. says of the Church of Antioch,
that its authority reached not over a single Province, but over a Diocese;
though withal he falsely makes it to have been so settled by the Synod of Nice.
Nay long before all this we meet with Ecclesiastic Dioceses in this sense. For
by a Law Lib. 16. C. Th. Tit. 2 l. 23.
of the Emperor Gratian bearing date May the XVII. Ann. CCCLXXVI. it is
provided, that the same customs that were in use in civil Judicatures, should
obtain in Church matters, and the final decision and determination of
Ecclesiastic causes should be made in their proper places, and by the Synod of
every Diocese. And this course the Emperor insinuates, as that which was not
then first introduc't.

III. FROM all this it appears that according to the Political constitution,
Diocesan or, as 'twas after called Patriarchal, Jurisdiction was brought into
the Church, and that accordingly the Bishops of some of those Cities, who had
hitherto been but Metropolitans, advanced into the Title and Dignity of
Primates (which was the word that generally obtained in the Western parts, the
word Patriarch being late, and little used in the Western Church) extending
their superintendency commensurate to the Jurisdiction of the Vicar of the
Diocese. And because some of these Metropoles were Cities of far greater
eminency and account than others, as Rome, Alexandria, etc therefore the
Bishops of them were (in the East especially) honored with the Title of
Patriarchs, differing at first from other Primates not so much in power, as in
dignity and honor, they were diversorum nominum, sed ejusdem officii, as
Gratian Distinct. xcix. p. 302.
notes. That this Title of Patriarch was borrowed from the Jews, there can be
no doubt. Upon the final destruction of their Church and State, they were
dispersed into several Countries, especially in the Eastern parts, where not
being capable of continuing their Levitical Polity, exactly according to the
Mosaic Institution, they constituted some persons to exercise the chief
authority among that people, who kept their residence in some of the greater
Cities, as at Babylon, Alexandria, Tiberias, and afterward probably at
Jerusalem. The persons thus made choice of, are thought to have been of the
Tribe of Judah, and more particularly to have descended from the Line of David.
Epiphanius Haeres. 30. p. 60.
seems to make them (at least them of Tiberias) to have been the Posterity of
Gamaliel, the great Counselor spoken of in the Acts. But Theodorit Dial. 1.
Tom. iv. p. 22.
has a more peculiar fancy, that they were the descendants of Herod the Great,
who was by his Fathers side an Ascalonite, by his Mothers an ^dumaean. But
however descended, they were entrusted with the chief Power and Government over
the Jews within their particular Jurisdictions. These are they who so often
called (...) the Heads of the Exiles, and otherwhiles Princes, and frequently
Patriarchs (though besides these Supreme, it seems probable from some of the
Imperial Laws, that they had an inferior sort of Patriarchs, who were but just
Superior to their Presbyters, or Elders) of these Jewish Patriarchs there is
frequent mention both in Jewish Seder Olam, R. Abraham, R. Dav. Ganz. in
Zemach, David. Benjamin in itin. etc.
, and Christian Epiph. Haeres. xxx. ubi supra. Cyril. Catech. xii. p. 261.
Hieron. Comm. in Esa. c. 3. p. 18. and alibi. Chrysostom. adv. Jud. l. 4. p. 448.
and de hisce intelligendus est locus in Epistola Hadriani ap. Vopisc. in
Saturnino p. 960.
writers, and especially in the Theodosian Lib. 16. Tit. viii. de Judaeis. l.
1. 2. 8. 11. 13, 14, 15. 17. 22. 29.
Code: Whence also it is evident that this Office and Title ceased, or rather
was abolisht by the Imperial Authority not long before the year Vid. C. Th. ubi
supr. l. 29. and Theod. loc. supr. citat.
CCCCXXIX. in the time of the younger Theodosius. But though it be plain whence
this Title was derived, yet when it first sprung up in the Christian Church, it
is hard to say. In the Canons Can. ix. and xvii.
of the Chalcedon Council he is called Exarch of the Diocese, and any Bishop or
Clergyman that has a controversy with his own Metropolitan, is allowed to
appeal to him (the word (...) indifferently notes any chief Person in place or
power, and the sense or it is to be determined according to the circumstances
of the case: Thus the Canons mention both Exarch Con. Sard. Can. vi.
of the Province, and Exarch of the Diocese, the First denoting a Metropolitan,
the Second a Patriarch) But in the Acts Conc. Chal. Act. ii. col. 338. Tom. 4.
of that Council we are told of (...) the most holy Patriarchs of every
Diocese; and in the several Libels Ib. Act. iii. col. 395.
exhibited against Dioscurus, Pope Leo is entitled Patriarch of Great Rome. And
that this Title was not then newly taken up we are assured from the Letters
Ext. ibid. col. 57.
of Theodosius and his Empress Placidia, about calling the third general
Council, holden at Ephesus Ann. CCCCXXXI. in both which Leo is styled the most
Reverend Patriarch. This is the first time that I remember to have met with a
Patriarch strictly so called, unless we will understand the passage of Socrates
I mentioned concerning Patriarchs in a proper sense.

IV. INDEED the Montanists or Cataphrygians, who started up under the Reign of
the Emperor Antoninus, had their Patriarchs. They had three Orders Hieron.
Epist. ad Marcellam. p. 28 T. 2. Habent primos de Pepusa Phrygiae Patriarchas.
Secundos, quos, etc.
of Church Officers, Patriarchs, Cenones and Bishops. But besides that they
were an odd and absurd Sect, whom the Catholic Church alwas disowned, it is not
easy to guess what they meant by Patriarchs, whom they plainly make distinct
from Bishops. They were it seems their prime Ecclesiastic Governors, the
chief whereof resided probably at Pepuza in Phrygia, which they Fantastically
called Vid. Apollon. ap. Eusebius. l. 5. c. 18. p. 184. etc. 16. p. 180.
Jerusalem, affirming it to be the New Jerusalem, that came down out of Heaven,
and this it is like in imitation of the Jewish High Priest; for from the
Judaical constitution they borrowed many of their Devices, and perhaps might
borrow the very name as well as thing from them, the prime Church Officer among
the Jews after the Destruction of the Temple, and the Abrogation of that
Polity, being styled Patriarch, as we noted before. But it may be doubted,
whether the Montanists had those three Orders from the beginning of their Sect,
it being taken notice of by none Elder than S. Jerome, nor that I know of,
mentioned by any other ancient Writer after him. However it is certain, that in
the common use of the word, it occurrs not till the time of Pope Leo, and the
Ephesine and Chalcedon Councils. After that the Title became fixed, and nothing
more common than the word Patriarch, and (...) Patriarchal Sees in the writings
of the Church. What and how many these particular Sees were, we are told by the
sixth Council in Trullo Can. xxxv.
, where they are particularly enumerated, and their order and precedence
adjusted in this manner, Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, Jerusalem.
From hence then we descend to survey these particular Patriarchates; not
designing to meddle with Secondary and later Patriarchates, such as that of
Aquileia, Grado, Russia, the Patriarchs of the Maronites, Jacobites, Armenians,
the Catholic or Patriarch of Bagdad or Mauzel and the like. Our business now
is with the five ancient, and eminent Patriarchships, and though first in
order, we shall reserve that of Rome to be treated of in the last place,
intending to discourse more fully concerning it.

V. WE begin with the Patriarch of Alexandria (for I shall take them in order,
as I conceive they grew up in time) who seems to have gained little by his new
Patriarchship besides the honor of the Title, whether we consider him in point
of precedence, in point of power, or in the extent of his Jurisdiction; nay in
some respects he was a loser rather than a gainer by it. In point of
precedence, he was before the second Metropolitan in the whole Christian World,
whereas now he was thrust down into the third place. In point of power he was
before this change sole Metropolitan of those parts, and the Ordination of his
suffragan Bishops entirely belonged to him, or depended upon his consent and
confirmation, which now according to the constitution of Church-Policy must be
devolved upon the several Metropolitans under him: Nor was he much advanced in
the extent of his Jurisdiction.

It Is true the Dioecesis Aegyptiaca consisted of six large Provinces, all under
the Government of the Augustal Prefect, who constantly resided at Alexandria
(and consequently in Spirituals belonged to the Patriarch of that place:) These
in the Notitia Imperii Ca. 116. fol. 76. ubi vid. comment. Panciroll.
we find thus reckoned up; Libya Superior, Libya Inferior, Thebais, Aegyptus,
Arcadia, Augustanica. Whereas in the Nicene Canon the Alexandrian
Metropolitanship is said to extend but over three, Egypt, Libya and Pentapolis.
But when it is considered, that Thebais, Arcadia and Augustanica, were of old
parts of, and lay hid under the more general name of Egypt, and that Pentapolis
was the same with the Upper Libya, the account will be much the same.

We find in the Council of Nice Gel. Cyz. H. Conc. Nic. l. 2. c. 32. p. 268.
that the Bishop of Alexandria was appointed to give an account of those
Synodal transactions to the Churches throughout all Egypt, Libya and
Pentapolis, and the neighboring Countries as far as the Provinces of India.
Where the (...) or whole Egypt (in opposition to the other two which were but
single Provinces) takes in Egypt strictly so called, Thebais, Arcadia and
Augustanica; and by the neighboring Regions that lay as far as India, are
doubtless meant the Frontier Countries that bordered upon the Roman Provinces,
and were perhaps confederate with the Empire, and wherein it is like the Bishops
of Alexandria had propagated Christianity (as we know Athanasius did in India)
whose Churches therefore owned a dependence upon the Sea of Alexandria. And in
this respect I grant the Bishop had somewhat a larger Jurisdiction than the
Augustal Prefect, tho otherwise they were the same.

Upon the erection of this See into a Patriarchate, several Metropolitans start
up: Ten of the Metropolitans of his Diocese, the Emperor Theodosius Conc.
Chalc. Act. I. p. 100 T. iv.
commanded Dioscorus to bring along with him to the Council of Ephesus. How
many more he had is not certain. Nilus Doxopatrius in his Notitia Ap. L. Allat.
de cons. Eccl. Or. and Occid. l. 1. c. 9. n. 2. p. 167.
says there were thirteen; the old Greek Notitia we mentioned before Chap. 2.
Number. 7.
reckons ten Provinces, and in them ninety nine Bishoprics, which surely
argues that a miserable desolation had laid waste those Countries, and reduced
the number of Episcopal Sees. Seeing before the time of the Nicene Council
there met in Synod near an Hundred Vid. Alexand. Epist. Encycl. ap. Socr. l. 1.
c. 6. p. 11.
Bishops out of Egypt and Libya, whom Alexander had summoned to the
condemnation of Arius. And that so many there were, Athanasius expressly Apol.
II. p. 611. vid. p. 560.
tells us more than once. And how greatly Bishoprics were multiplied
afterward, the Reader who is versed in these matters needs not be told.

VI. THE Sea of Antioch always took place next that of Alexandria, being ever
accounted the prime City of the East. Like the rest it arose by degrees into a
Patriarchate, First getting an honourary, then an authoritative Superiority
over that Diocese. During the Session of the Second general Council, the
Bishops not only of that Province, but of the Eastern Diocese met together to
Ordain Flavianus Bishop of Antioch, whose Act herein was ratified by the Vote
of that Council, as the remaining part of the Synod, meeting again the next
year, tell Ap. Theod. l. 5. c. 9. p. 211.
Pope Damasus in their Letter to him.

About this time, or rather sometime before, I guess the Bishop of Antioch had
set up for a Patriarchal power, and had begun to enlarge his Jurisdiction from
a Province to a Diocese. Now the Eastern Diocese Not. Imp. Orient. c. 104 fol.
71.
under the care of the Comes Orientis contained fifteen Provinces, the Three
Palestine's, Phoenice, Syria, Cyprus, Phoenice Libani, Euphratensis, Syria
Salutaris, Osrhoena, Mesopotamia, Cilicia Secunda, Isauria and Arabia; Cyprus
indeed stood out, and would not submit to the Sea of Antioch, and though the
Bishop stickled hard to bring them under, yet the Cyprian Bishops stoutly
maintained their ancient rights. The case was canvass'd and debated at large in
the Council of Ephesus Act. vii. col. 787. etc. Tom. iii.
, and upon hearing the whole matter, the Council adjudg'd it for the Cyprian
Churches, that they should still enjoy their ancient (...) their liberties
independent upon the Sea of Antioch, and passed a particular Canon in favor of
them. And so they continued for many Ages: And therefore in the old Notitia Vbi
supr. p. 147.
Cyprus is not placed under any of the Patriarchates, but is noted to be a
Province (...) having Jurisdiction within it self.

But the rest of the Provinces for any thing that appears, submitted, and the
Bishop of Jerusalem with his Metropolitan of Caesarea, were both for some time
under the Sea of Antioch. And this renders S. Jerome's meaning plain enough in
that known passage Hier. ad Pammach. Tom. 2. p. 178
, when he tells John Bishop of Jerusalem, who in the controversy between him
and Epiphanius had appealed to Theophilus of Alexandria, that if he would have
appealed, it should have been either to him of Caesarea, who was his
Metropolitan, or to the Bishop of Antioch as Metropolitan of the whole East,
that is, of the Eastern Diocese. But when he says, this course was settled by
the Synod of Nice, it is plain 'twas his mistake. And indeed his own Ni fallor
shows he was not very confident and peremptory in the case.

The account of this Patriarchate, as delivered by Ap. L. Allat. l. 1. c. 9. n.
1. col. 165.
Nilus Doxopatrius (with whom in the main concur many other ancient Notitiae
Ap. Guil. Tyr. l. 23 Mirae. notit. Episc. etc.
) stands thus. Immediately subject to the Patriarch were VIII. Metropolitans,
who had no suffragan Bishops under them, and VIII. or as others reckon, XII.
Arch-Bishopricks: Besides which he had XIII. Metropolitick Sees; Tire
containing under it XIII. Bishoprics; Tarsus VI; Edessa XI. or as others X;
Apamea VII; Hierapolis XI, the Latin Notitiae reckon but VIII; Bostra XIX, or
XX; Azarbus IX. Seleucia in Isauria XXIV; Damascus XI; Amida VIII, or as the
Latins VII; Sergiopolis V, but by some one less; Daras X, the Latin Notitiae
call it Theodosiopolis, and allow but VII. Episcopal Sees; and lastly Emesa
containing VI. This was the state of that once venerable Patriarchate.

VII. THE next that succeeds is the Patriarchate of Constantinople, which
though starting later in time, soon got beyond the other two. The Bishop of
Byzantium or Constantinople had for several Ages been only a private Bishop,
Subject to the Metropolitan of Heraclea, which anciently had the (...) (as
Procopius De aedific. Justin. Lib. 4 c. 9. p. 87. vid. Chron. Alex. ad An.
Constable. XXV. p. 666.
tells us) the Primacy of all the Cities of that Country; in acknowledgment of
which subjection the Bishops of Heraclea had ever the privilege to Ordain the
Patriarch of Constantinople. But no sooner was that City made the Seat of the
Empire, but great things were spoken of it, 'twas styled the Governing City,
the Metropolis of the whole World Chrysostom. Homil. iv. de verb. Esai. T. 2. p.
865.
, a great City (says Nazianzen Orat. xxvii. p. 472.
in one of his Sermons to the people of that place) and the very next to Rome,
nay not at all yielding the Primacy to it, it being (...) the first and
chiefest City of the Empire. And now the Bishop of Constantinople began to
appear considerable in the World, and both Church and State conspired to render
him great and powerful.

The Fathers of the second general Council holden in that City, considering
that Constantinople was new Rome, conferred Can. iii.
upon him (...), the privilege of honor and respect next to the Bishop of
Rome. This at one lift set him over the Heads of the Bishops of Alexandria and
Antioch. Accordingly in the preceding Canon of that Council, and in a Law C.
Th. Lib. 16. Tit. 1. l. 3.
of Theodosius conform thereto concerning the bounds of Dioceses, and
Catholic Communion, he is set before both the Bishops of those Sees; and if
the subscriptions to this Synod be of any credit, we find Nectarius subscribing
first to the Decrees of the Council. And when the Acts of the clancular Synod
at Ephesus were read in the Chalcedon Council Conc. Chalc. Act. 1. col. 116.
, and it was found that the Bishop of Constantinople was therein put in the
fifth place, the Bishops presently raised a clamor, why had he not his proper
place, why was he thrust down into the fifth place; whereupon Paschasinus the
Popes Legate declared that he held Anatolius of Constantinople in the first
place: which Diogenes of Cyzicum affirmed was according to the constitutions of
the Fathers. But to return to what we were upon. Though this Canon of
Constantinople gave the Bishop no direct power, yet it gave him so mighty a
value and reputation, that he wanted not opportunities enough to carve for
himself. He was soon courted on all hands, his mediation requested, and his
interposal desired for the ending differences, and where Provincial Bishops
could not agree about the Election of their Metropolitans, the case was very
often referred to him, and he performed the Ordination.

This in time begat a right, at least a claim, over the Churches in those
Countries that lay next him, especially the Dioceses of Asiana, Pontica and
Thrace, in which it is plain he exercised a Patriarchal power. Thus to omit
other instances, S. Chrysostom Synodically heard the cause of Antoninus Bishop
of Ephesus (the Metropolis of the Asian Diocese) and afterward went himself in
person thither, where he convened a Synod of LXX. Bishops of those parts, heard
the cause over again, gave judgment upon it, and ordained a Metropolitan in
that City. He likewise deposed Gerontius Bishop of Nicomedia, which lay in the
Diocese of Pontica, and some others, and filled up their Sees; whereof we have
elsewhere given an account at large. And this very instance we find produced
and pleaded in the Chalcedon Synod Act. xi. col. 669.
to prove the rights of the Constantinopolitan See over those Churches. I know
the validity of these good man's proceedings in this matter is disputed by some,
and was of old put among the Articles exhibited against him to the Synod at the
Oak. But no doubt can be made, but Chrysostom thought he had sufficient
authority and right to do it, and would not have attempted it, had it not been
warranted by the practice of his predecessors.

In the mean time I cannot but smile at the grave fancy of a Learned Man Morin.
l. 1. Exercit. xiv. p. 102.
, who without the least shadow of any other warrant than his own conjecture,
will have Chrysostom to have acted herein as the Popes Legate, and to have done
all this by virtue of his absolute and supreme authority. So quick-sighted and
acute are men to discern what never was, and so willing to believe, what it is
their interest should be true.

VIII. BUT to proceed with our Patriarch of Constantinople, he held on much at
this rate till the general Council at Chalcedon holden there Ann. CCCCLI. when
what he had hitherto holden by custom, Canonical authority made his right. By
their ninth Canon they provide, that if any Bishop or Clergyman have a
controversy with his own Metropolitan, it shall be at his liberty to appeal
either to the Exarch, that is, Primate of the Diocese, or to the Sea of
Constantinople, where his cause shall be heard. A Canon that invested him with
a vast power, putting him into a capacity of receiving and determing final
appeals from all those parts. The same they again ratify by their seventeenth
Canon, and by their twentyeight make a more particular provision for him.
First, they profess in general altogether to follow the Decrees of the Holy
Fathers, then they recognize the third Canon of the second general Council
(which was then read before them) and Decree the same Privileges, and upon the
same account, as that had done to the Church of Constantinople. Forasmuch (say
they) as the reason why the Fathers conferred such Privileges upon the Sea of
Old Rome, was, that it was the Imperial City. And upon the same consideration
the Bishops Impp. THEODOSIUS and Honorius AA. Philippo PF. P. Illyrici.
of that second general Council gave Omni innovatione C^ssante, vetustatem and
Canones. pristinos Ecclesiasticos, qui nunc usque tenuerunt, per omnes Illyrici
provincias, servari praecipimus: Tum, si quid dubietatis emerserit, id
oporteat, non absque scientia Viri Reverendissimi Sacrosanctae legis Antistitis
Vrbis Constantinopolitanae (QUAE ROMAE VETERIS PRAEROGATIVA LAETATUR) conventui
Sacerdotali Sanctoque judicio reservari. Dat. Pride. Jul. Eustathio and Agricola
COSS. [421]
equal Privileges to the Sea of New Rome; rightly judging (as the Canon goes
on) that the City which was honored with the Empire, and the Senate, and
enjoyed equal Privileges with old Imperial Rome, should also in Ecclesiastical
matters have the same honor with it, only coming after it in the second place.

And because the Bishop of Constantinople had hitherto had no certain Diocese,
nor any place wherein to exercise Jurisdiction, but what he held precariously,
and as it were by courtesy, in the latter part of the Canon they fix his
bounds, giving him power over the three Dioceses of Pontica, Asiana and Thrace,
that the Metropolitans of all those places, and all the Bishops of the
Barbarous Countries belonging to those Dioceses, should be bound to come, and
receive their Ordination from the Bishop of Constantinople.

And now he looked like Bishop of the Imperial City, being invested with so
ample and extensive a Jurisdiction. For the three Dioceses of Asiana, Pontica
and Thrace were great and large. The First Vid. notit; Imp. c. 122. fol. 78.
containing eight Provinces (viz. Pamphylia, Lydia, Caria, Lycia, Lycaonia,
Pisidia, Phrygia Pacatiand, and Phrygia Salutaris, both which were anciently
comprehended under the (...) or greater Phrygia, as it stood opposed to the
lesser, that lay upon the Hellespont:) the Second Ib. c. 126. fol. 79.
eleven ( Bithynia, Galalatia, Paphlagonia, Honorias, Galatia Salutaris,
Cappadocia Prima, Cappadocia Secunda, Hellenopontus, Pontus Polemoniacus,
Armenia Prima, Armenia Secunda:) the third Ib. c. 132. fol. 82.
six ( Europa, Thracia, Haemimontus, Rhodopa, Maesia Secunda, Scythia.) The
Popes Legates were infinitely enraged at this Canon, and the Powers and
Privileges hereby given to the Sea of Constantinople, and used all possible
arts to overthrow it, but all in vain, it passed clearly, and was subscribed by
all the Bishops then present in the Synod, amounting to a very great number,
whose subscriptions are still extant Act. xvi. col. 798, etc. Tit. iv.
in the Acts of the Council. After a full discussion of the whole matter, that
no pretense of force or fraud might be objected, as many of the Bishops of
Asiana and Pontica as were then in the Synod were desired to declare whether
they had freely submitted to this constitution. Who accordingly stood up, and
one after another did most solemnly protest that they had voluntarily and
unconstrainedly assented to, and subscribed the Canon, and that nothing was
more acceptable to them. And many of them expressly declared they did it for
this reason, because not only themselves, but their Predecessors had been
Ordained by the Bishops of Constantinople, and that the Sea of Constantinople
had these rights (...), from Canons and precedent customs.

So that it is more than probable that the Bishop of Constantinople had
exercised this power within those Dioceses almost ever since the time of, and
by virtue of the third Canon of the second general Council. And it is observable
what Eusebius Bishop of Dorylaeum, a City of the greater Phrygia, tells the
Synod upon this occasion, that he had been at Rome, and there in the presence
of the Clergy of Constantinople that were with him had read the Canon (I
suppose he means that of the second general Council) to the Pope, who approved
and received it, (which I the rather take notice of because not only modern
Writers, but Gregory the Great Lib. 6. Indict. xv. Epist. 31. col. 614.
so confidently affirms, that the Church of Rome neither had Copies, nor did
admit the Acts and Canons of that Council.) And whereas Eusebius of Ancyra
scrupled to subscribe, yet he confessed, that he himself had been Ordained by the
Bishop of Constantinople, that he had ever declined Ordaining Provincial
Bishops, and had done it only by direction of the Bishop of Constantinople. And
after Thalassius of Caesarea in Cappadocia told the Synod, that they were of
Archbishop Anatolius his side, and did decree the same thing. The Judges
hereupon having weighed all that had past, declared, that in the first place
(...) that precedence and singular honor should according to the Canons be
paid to the Archbishop of Old Rome; and that withal the Archbishop of the
Imperial City of Constantinople, being New Rome, ought to enjoy the same
Privileges of honor, and to have besides (...), power of himself, and by his
own authority to Ordain the Metropolitans within the Dioceses of Asiana,
Pontica and Thrace; the Election being first duly made within every Province,
and that then it shall be at the choice of the Archbishop of Constantinople,
whether the Metropolitan Elect shall come to him for his Consecration, or
whether by his permission it shall be done at home by the Provincial Bishops;
and that this shall no ways prejudice the Rights of Metropolitans and
Provincial Bishops in Ordaining private and particular Bishops, wherein the
Archbishop of Constantinople shall not interpose. Whereupon all with one voice
cried out, 'twas a righteous Sentence, that they were all of that mind, that
this just judgment pleased them all, that the things that had been established
should take place, and that every thing had been done decently and in order. In
conclusion, they wrote a Synodical Letter Ext. ib. col. 833. vid. ib. col. 838.
A.
to Pope Leo, acquainting him with what had past, and upon what grounds they
had done it, and desiring his concurrence in it. And we may observe they tell
him, that in settling this power upon the Sea of Constantinople, they did but
confirm (...), the custom which that Church had of a long time obtained over
those three Dioceses. Which puts it past all peradventure what we noted before,
that from the very time of the second general Council, the Constantinopolitan
Bishops had exercised a kind of Patriarchal Jurisdiction over those Churches,
though never till now settled by Canon.

IX. AND now let the Reader impartially reflect upon the whole affair, and when
he has considered what this wise and great Council expressly affirm, that the
Privileges which the Fathers gave to the Sea of Rome were merely upon the
account of its being the Imperial City, and that for the very same reason they
gave equal Privileges to the Sea of Constantinople, only reserving a honourary
precedence to him of Rome; let him tell me, whether it can be supposed, they
could or would have said and done this, had they known, or but so much as
dreamed of any supreme authority, which Christ had immediately given the
Bishops of Rome over the whole Church of God. Nor was this the only Council
that thus honored the Constantinopolitan See; somewhat more than two Ages
after met the sixth general Council in the Trullus, or great Arch'd-hall or
Secretarium of the Palace, who confirmed Can. xxxvi*
what both the former Councils, that of Constantinople, and the other of
Chalcedon, had done in this matter, and assigned each Patriarch his proper
place.

X. WHAT additions, or alterations after Ages made in the Sea of
Constantinople, the Reader may perceive somewhat by perusing the following
accounts. In the Greek Notitia published Inter Annot. D. Bevereg. ubi supr.
not long since out of the Bodleian Library, composed in the Reign of the
Emperor Leo the Wise, about the year DCCCXCI. this Patriarchate had under it
XXXIII. Metropolitans, who had under them CCCLXXV. Episcopal Sees, besides XLI.
(...) or independent Arch-bishopricks, subject to no Metropolitan. Leunclavius
Jur. Gr. Romans l. 2. p. 88.
presents us with another (...), or disposition of the Churches of this
Patriarchate made by this same Emperor, wherein are set down LXXXI.
Metropolitans, containing under them DLXXIV. Suffragan Sees, and XXXIX.
Arch-bishopricks. But surely this list is either greatly interpolated, or must
be of a later date than it pretends to, being so different from the other both
in the number, and the names of places, and not very consistent with it self.
For whereas it reckons up LXXXI. yet when it comes to set down each
Metropolitan with his particular Suffragans, it gives but an account of LVII.
of the number. But however this be, within an Age or two after, partly by the
addition of new Provinces, partly by erecting new Metropoles, it was enlarged
For in the Notitia, or discourse concerning the five Patriarchal Sees written
by Nilus Doxopatrius the Archimandrite, Ann. MXLIII. the account stands thus.
Ext. ap. L. Allat. loc. cit. c. 24. col. 411, etc.
Metropolitans LXV. under the Bishoprics DCXL. Arch-bishopricks without
Suffragans, and immediately subject to the Patriarch XXXIV. Ann. MCCLXXXIII.
Andronicus Palaeologus entered upon the Empire: He published an order Ext. ad
calc. Codin. cle offic. CP. p. 117.
according to which the Metropolitans were to take place, wherein they are
reckoned up to the number of an Hundred and nine. And in another, agreed upon
by the Emperor and the Patriarch, put out by Leunclavius Ib. l. 3. p. 244.
, but without any date either of time or persons, are mentioned LXXX.
Metropolitical Sees, Archiepiscopal XXXIX. And thus much for the Patriarchship
of Constantinople.

XI. THE fourth that remains is the Patriarchate of Jerusalem, the last in
time, and least in circuit. For several Ages the Bishop of Jerusalem was no
more than a private Prelate, subject to the Metropolitan of Caesarea. For so
the Notitia published by William Archbishop of Tire informs Ad colc. lib. 23.
Histor. suae p. 1015.
us, that according to ancient tradition, and Records of good authority in
those parts, the Church of Jerusalem had no Bishop under it, nor enjoyed any,
or very little prerogative till the Reign of Justinian, and the times of the
fifth general Council; though always out of reverence to the place, custom and
ancient tradition (as the Fathers of Nice inform Can. vii.
us) had allowed him a peculiar honor, and therefore those Fathers decree him
(...) the consequence of honor, that is, that he should have respect and
precedence before all the Bishops of that Province next to his own Metropolitan.

And indeed whatever they of the Church of Rome may talk of the merit of S.
Peter, as the foundation of the supereminent authority of that Church, surely
if any Church might have pleaded merit, one might have thought it should have
been that of Jerusalem, which for so many Ages had been the Metropolis of the
Jewish Nation, the Seat of their Kings, adorned with a most magnificent Temple,
and all the Solemnities of Divine Worship; the place where our Blessed Savior
spent the greatest part of his public Ministry, where he Preached so many
Sermons, wrought so many Miracles, where he suffered, died, and rose again, and
whence he ascended into Heaven, where the Apostolical College was kept for
some years, and all affairs of the Church transacted there; where S. James the
Brother of our Lord was made (and that say some of the ancients by our Lords
own hands) the first Christian Bishop of that See; the place where the first
Church was planted, and from whence Christianity was propagated into all other
parts of the World. This was the true Mother Church, and if merit might have
challenged Primacy and Power, it had more to say for it self, than all other
Churches in the World besides. But Caesarea happening to be the Metropolis of
that Province, and the Seat of the Roman Governor, carried away the
Superiority, and so Jerusalem though it had an honourary respect, continued a
private See, subject to the Metropolitan of Caesarea, as he for some time was
to the Patriarch of Antioch.

But after that the Empire was become Christian, and that Constantine the
Great, and his Mother Helena, and some following Emperors began to reflect
some peculiar favors upon that place, and had graced it with stately and
magnificent buildings, and other marks of honor; and after that the Devotion
of Christians began to pay an extraordinary respect to the places of our Lords
Crucifixion, Sepulcher, and Resurrection, the Bishops of that Church looked upon
themselves as hardly dealt with to be cooped up within so narrow a compass, and
to be subjected to another jurisdiction, and therefore resolved to throw off
the yoke, and to get what power they could into their own hands.

The first that graspt at the Metrpolitick Rights was S. Cyrill, who disputed
the case with Acacius Bishop of Caesarea, for which Acacius deposed him, and
persecuted him both in the Synod at Seleucia, and in that which followed at
Constantinople about the latter end of Constantius his Reign. What immediately
followed in this controversy, is uncertain, the History of the Church being
silent in that matter. In the Council of Ephesus, Juvenal Bishop of Jerusalem
laid claim to the Metropolitical Jurisdiction of that Province, and sought to
have it confirmed by a Decree of that Synod. But Cyrill of Alexandria President
of the Council, opposed and hindered it. After this a high contest arose between
him and Maximus Bishop of Antioch, who challenged Jerusalem and Palestine as
within his Diocese. The case was brought before the Chalcedon Council Act. vii.
col. 614. etc.
, where it was debated, and at last by compromise between the two contending
parties brought to this issue, that the Bishop of Antioch should retain the two
Phoenicia's and Arabia (which it seems were also in dispute) and the Sea of
Jerusalem should have the three Palaestine Provinces for the bounds of his
Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction. This was assented to, and ratified by the Decree of
the Council.

And now the Bishop of Jerusalem had his peculiar Diocese, though of no very
great extent, allotted him, and the tables were turned, and Caesarea it self
subjected to him, and the fifth and last place among the Patriarchs assigned to
him; as appears from the constitution of the sixth general Council. And because
Jerusalem lay in the borders both of the Antiochain, and Alexandrian
Patriarchates, therefore to make up its jurisdiction, we are told Guilielm.
Tyr. loc. citat.
that something was taken out of each, the Metropolitick Sees of Rabba and
Berytus, from him of Alexandria, as Caesarea and Scythopolis from him of
Antioch. And that as a badge of his ancient subjection, the Metropolitan of
Caesarea still had the honor Nil. Doxopatr. ap. L. Allat. ubi supr. c. 9. n.
5. col. 196.
to Ordain the Patriarch of Jerusalem, as upon the fame account he of Heraclea
had to Consecrate the Patriarch of Constantinople. And in this Patriarchal
capacity we find the Bishop of Jerusalem subscribing in all Councils, and upon
occasions summoning the Bishops of his Patriarchate. Thus Ann. DXVIII. we find
John Bishop of Jerusalem with his Synod of the Bishops of the three Palaestines
sending a Letter Ext. conc. T. v. col. 188.
to John Patriarch of Constantinople. And when the Council at Constantinople
under Mennas had condemned Anthimus, Severus, and the rest of the Acephali Ann.
DXXXVI. Peter Patriarch of Jerusalem (as he is all along called in the Acts
Ext. ibid. col. 276. etc.
of his Council) summoned a Patriarchal Synod of all the Bishops of the three
Palaestine Provinces, who confirmed what had been done in the Council at
Constantinople. And thenceforwards the Patriarchate of Jerusalem runs smooth
and current through the History of the Church. As to what Bishops and
Metropolitans he had under him, the old Notitiae Ap. Guil. Tyr. ibid and
Miraeum notit. Episc. p. 48.
give us this account. The Patriarch himself had immediately under him XXV.
Bishops, (...), Nilus Doxopatrius Vbi supra.
calls them, Independent Bishoprics, because subject to no other Metropolitan;
besides which he had four Metropolitans: The Metropolitan of Caesarea, who had
twenty Bishops under him; he of Scythopolis or Basan, who had nine; Rabba
Moabitis, or as Doxopatrius has it, Petra, who had twelve, and Berytus, who had
XXXV. which by the Authors we have cited are particularly reckoned up.

CHAP. V. The bounds of the Roman Patriarchate.
A return to the Roman Patriarchate. The limits hereof not expressly set down by
the ancients. Unjustly pretended to reach over the whole West. This granted by
them of the Greek Church, and why. The Popes Patriarchal Power disowned by the
Churches of Milan, Aquileia and Ravenna. The independency and opposition of
those Churches to the Roman See, severally evinc't by particular cases and
instances. The Power of Metropolitans in France kept up independent from Rome.
The truth of this consess'd and cleared by De Marca. Other instances of
preserving their Rights against the pretensions of Rome; Hincmar of Rhemes, and
the Synod of Metz. Two other National Churches instanc't in: the African, and
the Britannick Churches. The famous case of Appeals in the Church of Africa. A
clear account of that matter. Their public rejecting the power which the Pope
challenged over those Churches. The Letters of the Council of Carthage to Pope
Boniface, and Caelestine to that purpose. Several useful and proper Corollaries
deduc't from this story for the evincing the vain pretensions of the Papal
Power over those Churches. The boldness of some in denying the truth of this
whole story. The state of the Britannick Church. The Progress of Religion and
Church Government here 'till the times of Pope Gregory. The Church Governed by
an Archbishop and Bishop at Austin's arrival. Their customs wholly different
from, and independent upon Rome. Their absolute refusal to own the authority of
Austin or the Pope. The slaughter of the Bangor-Monks suspiciously charged upon
Austin. The Popes proper Patriarchate most probably showed to be of equal
extent with the Jurisdiction of the Vicarius Urbicus. What Provinces under his
Government. The Roman Synod consisting of the Bishops of those Provinces. A
twofold Patriarchate of the Pope trifling and precarious. The Bishops of Rome
daily amplyfying their Jurisdiction. The means whereby they did this briefly
intimated.

I. HAVING thus dispatched the other Patriarchs, we return to him of Rome, ever
allowed to be the first, and most honorable of the number. What his
Patriarchal bounds were, the Records of the Church have not so particularly set
out, as they have done the rest. And here the Champions of that Church when
they find themselves pressed upon, and that the Popes Universal and Apostolical
Power is a Post not to be defended, presently retreat to his Patriarchate,
which with great confidence they extend over the whole Western World, being
content with half, when they cannot have all. And to this prodigious Latitude
some Sirmond. Censur. de Eccl. Suburb. c. 4. p. 69. Advent. P. II c. 1. p. 63.
of them stretch the Suburbicary Churches, (as if the whole Western Empire had
been nothing but the Suburbs of Rome) and in this sense they tell us Rufinus
meant the Canon of Nice, and this upon no wiser reason than (what is as
trifling and precarious as the other) that the whole West was the Special
Diocese of the Bishop of Rome. But this looks rather like Fancy and Romance,
than that grave and sober arguing that becomes those great Names that use it.
Omitting therefore this extravagant notion of Suburbicary Churches, come we to
the thing it self.

And herein it must be granted, they have the later Greeks, Zonaras, Balsamon,
Barlaam, Nilus, etc. on their side, who very liberally give him all the Western
Provinces, and that too by virtue of the sixth Canon of Nice. A concession
which they make not so much out of any kindness to the Church of Rome, as
partly out of a design to magnify the power and greatness of their own
Patriarch of Constantinople, who was to share equal privileges with him of
Rome; partly because they were willing to keep the Pope within any bounds,
whose restless ambition they saw carrying all before it, and therefore cared
not to throw him the West for his portion, for which they had no care or
concernment what became of it, being mainly intent upon preserving their
Jurisdiction at home. And here I cannot but by the way remark the indiscreet
and injudicious Zeal of a very Learned man Ph. Berter. Pithan. Diatrib. II. c.
3. p. 170. 171.
, who confidently asserts, that in the expedition of the Franks for the
recovery of the Holy Land, God by a peculiar providence let the Eastern Parts
be subdued by the Western Armies; that so those famous Patriarchal Sees might
learn to strike Sail to the Sea of Rome, and own the greatness and dignity of
that Church. Besides, it is to be considered, that in this concession the Greeks
took their measures of things from the state of the Church as it was in their
time, when the Pope had in a manner entirely subdued the Western Provinces to
the Sea of Rome. But in the better and more early Ages the case was otherwise.

And indeed that the Popes Patriarchal Jurisdiction was far enough from
extending over the whole West, there can be no better evidence, than that there
was scarce any Western Church in those days, that did not upon occasion oppose
the power, and remonstrate against the Usurpations of the Sea of Rome. In Italy
we need go no further than to those Churches that lay next it, I mean the great
Churches of Milan, Aquileia, and Ravenna.

II. HOW great Milan was, and of how great reputation the Bishop of it, so that
he stood upon a level with him of Rome, we briefly noted before; it being next
Rome, the largest, richest, most plentiful, and populous City of the West, as
Procopius Goth. lib. 2. c. 7. p. 406.
tells us. S. Ambrose his Election and Ordination to that See was made purely
by the Provincial Bishops, and at the command of the Emperor, without the
least notice taken of the Roman Bishop. A case so clear, that De Marca
DeConcord. l. 6. c. 4. n. 7. 8 p. 188. vid. n. 6.
fairly gives up the cause, and confesses that in those times and for some Ages
after, the Pope had nothing to do in the Ordination of the Metropolitan of
Milan: Nay, that this was the case of all Metropolitans out of the Popes
Jurisdiction in Italy, where the Bishops of every Province constantly Ordained
their own Metropolitans without any authority; or so much as consent had from
the Bishop of Rome. But then not being able to shift off the evidence of truth,
and yet willing withal to serve his cause, he does in order to that design,
distinguish the Roman Patriarchate into ordinary, over a great part of Italy,
and extraordinary, over the whole West. A distinction wholly precarious, and
which is worse, false.

And indeed what kind of Patriarchate that must be, that could consist without
right of Ordaining Metropolitans, the first and most inseparable branch of
Patriarchal Power, would have become a person of his, I say not ingenuity, but
wisdom and learning to have considered. As for Milan, the Metropolitick Rights
of that Church, he confesses, continued independent at least till the year DLV.
And indeed it is plain from the Epistle Ext. Conc. T. v. col. 805.
of Pope Pelagius; who confesses that the Bishops of Milan did not use to come
to Rome, but they and the Bishops of Aquileia Ordained each other: and when he
was not able to reduce them by other means, he endeavored to bring them in by
the help of the secular Arm, as appears from his Letter Epist. v. ib. col. 794.
to Narses the Emperors Lieutenant to that purpose. And afterward upon a
difference that hapened, Milan withdrew it self from the Communion of the
Church of Rome for Two hundred years Plat. in vit. Steph. ix. p. 172.
together. And though with others it was brought at last under the common yoke,
yet upon every little occasion it reasserted its original liberty. Thus when
Ann. MLIX. great disturbances arose in that Church P. Dam. Act. Mediol. a
seipso conscript. ext. ap. Baron. T. xi. p. 265. and Jo. Monach. de vlt. P.
Dam. c. 16.
, Pope Nicolaus the Second sent Peter Damian as his Legate to interpose. This
made it worse, the common outcry presently was, That the Ambrosian Church
ought not be subject to the Laws of Rome, and that the Pope had no power of
Judging, or ordering matters in that See; that it would be a great indignity,
if that Church which under their Ancestors had been always free, should now to
their extreme reproach (which God forbid) become subject to another Church. The
clamor increased, and the people grew into an higher ferment, the Bells are
rung, the Episcopal Palace beset, the Legate threatened with Death, who getting
into the Pulpit, and having in a short speech set forth the Pope's and S.
Peter's power, and wheedled the people with some popular insinuations, reduced
things to a better order.

III. THE Church of Aquileia was much at the same pass with that of Milan, the
Bishops whereof mutually Ordained one another, without so much as asking the
Pope leave. And though Pelagius Epist. supr. laud col. 815.
would insinuate, that this was done only to save the trouble and charge of a
journey to Rome, yet De Marca Loc. supra citat.
honestly confesses the true reason was, that Milan being the Head of the
Italick Diocese, the Ordaining the Metropolitan of Aquileia belonged to him as
Primate; and the Ordaining the Primate of Milan belonged to him of Aquileia, as
being the first Metropolitan of the Diocese of Italy.

Upon this account, and that of the tria capitula, this Church held no
correspondence with that of Rome for above an Hundred years, and when Gregory
the Great having got the Emperor on his side, attempted by force and armed
violence to bring them to answer their stubbornness at Rome, the Bishop of
Aquileia with his Provincial Synod met, and wrote an humble remonstrance Ext.
ap. Baror. An. 590. n. xxxviii. Tom. 8.
to the Emperor Mauricius, wherein they set forth the true state of their
case, and the unjust and violent proceedings of the Pope, and plainly tell him
that they had at the time of their Ordination given caution in writing to their
Metropolitan, which they never had, nor would violate, and that unless his
Majesty was pleased to remove this compulsion, their Successors would not be
suffered to come to Aquileia for Ordination, but would be forced to fly to the
Archbishops of France, as being next at hand, and receive it there. The
Emperor was satisfied with their Addresses, and wrote Ext. ib. n. XLiii.
to the Pope ( Baronius calls them imperious Letters, written more Tyrannico,
like a Tyrant) commanding him to surcease the Prosecution, and to create those
Bishops no farther trouble, 'till the affairs of Italy were quieted, and things
might more calmly be enquired into. Baronius is strangely angry at this Letter,
even to the height of rudeness and passion, especially toward so good an
Emperor, that he should take upon him arroganti fastu, with so much pride and
arrogance not to beseech, but to command the Pope, which he again says was done
not like an Emperor, but a Tyrant. But the Istrian and Ligurian Bishops,
little regarded how it thundered at Rome. Nay, to make the balance hang more
even, they had some time since advanced their Metropolitan to the title and
honor of a Patriarch, which Baronius Tom. 7. p. 568.
himself grants was done while Paulinus was Metropolitan of Aquileia about the
year DLXX. An honor a long time resident at Aquileia, then translated to
Grado, and at last fixed at Venice. Though withal Aquileia having recovered its
broken fortunes, resumed the style and dignity of a Patriarch, an honor which
it retains to this day.

IV. LET us next view the Church of Ravenna, and see whether that was any more
conformable to Rome than the rest. Ravenna had for some time, especially from
the days of Honorius, been the Seat of the Roman Emperors; and in the
declining times of the Empire, the Exarchs of Italy, who governed in chief
under the Emperor, constantly resided there, while Rome was under the command
of a petty Duke: Swelled with so much honor and advantage, the Bishops of
Ravenna for some Ages disputed place with them of Rome, the Exarchs taking all
occasions to curb and repress the Pope. Ann. DCXLIX. Maurus, sometimes Steward
of that Church Hieron. Rub. Hist. Ravennat. l. 4. ad Ann. DCXLiX. p. 203. 205.
206. vid. Bar. ad Ann. 669. n. ii. iii. T. 8.
, entered upon the Archiepiscopal See of Ravenna. A man as my Author grants,
wise, and of a shrewd sharp Wit. He without taking any notice of Rome, was
Consecrated by three Bishops of his own Province, Ordained his own Provincial
Bishops, and was so far from seeking any Confirmation from the Pope, that he
received his Pall from the Emperor. This gave infinite distaste to Pope
Martin, and it is like to his Successor Eugenius, who sat but one year. But
Pope Vitalian who succeeded, would not so put it up, but summons Maurus to
appear, and answer his contempt at Rome, but he slighted the Summons, for which
the Pope Excommunicated him, and he in requital did the like to the Pope, nay
upon his Deathbed obliged his Clergy never to submit themselves to the Bishop
of Rome. Reparatus his Successor trod in the same steps, and procured the
Emperors Rescript to free that Church from any subjection to the Roman See.
Ann. DCCVIII. Baron. cod. An n. ii. iii. iv. Rub. ibid. p. 213. 214.
Felix of Ravenna was content to receive his Ordination at the hands of the
Pope, but when he came thither, an Oath of Allegiance and Fidelity was required
of him to the Sea of Rome. This he utterly denied, a confession of his Faith he
offered, but homage he would not pay, nor engage to send money to Rome. Nor
more he did, but home he goes, where his people gave him little thanks for what
he had done, and both agreed to defend their liberty; but it cost the old man
dear, and them too for that attempt. For Justinian Rhinotmetes the Emperor
(who favored the Pope) being made acquainted with what was done at Ravenna; a
Fleet is sent under the command of Theodorus Patricius, the City besieged, and
taken, several of prime quality lost their lives and fortunes, and the poor
Archbishop had his eyes put out, and was banished into Pontus, where he
remained, 'till the severity of Discipline had taught him better manners.

The same courage in asserting the privileges of their Church against the
Papal encroachments was afterward shown by John, and Guibert Successors in
that See, as were it necessary, might be particularly related. But the case is
too evident to be denied, and the argument thence too strong to be evaded, how
little those times understood of any Patriarchal Jurisdiction which the Pope
had over all Italy, much less over the whole West.

V. IF we look into France, we shall find them careful to secure the Rights of
Metropolitans, and the privileges of Provincial Bishops, without being obliged
to fetch them from Rome. The second Council of Arles Ann. CCCCLII. decree Can.
v. Conc. T. 4. col. 1012.
, that no Bishop shall be Ordained without his own Metropolitan, and three of
the Provincial Bishops, the rest testifying their consent by Letter. The second
of Orleans holden Ann. DXXXIII. renew Can. vii. ib. col. 1781.
the ancient form and manner of Ordaining Metropolitans, that it shall be done
by the Bishops of the Province, which shows how little they depended upon any
foreign power in this matter.

But it is needless to insist upon this point, which the Learned De Marca De
Concord. l. 6. c. 3. per tot. c. 4. n. 3. 4.
has so fully cleared and vindicated, as a fundamental part of the liberties of
the Gallican Church, and has deduc't it through the several Ages and Dynasties
of their Kings. I shall only remark, that when Hincmar Archbishop of Remes had
deposed Rothald Bishop of Suessons for great misdemeanors, Rothald appealed to
Rome, and Pope Nicolaus espoused his cause, wrote sharply to Hincmar, and cited
him to appear, and answer what he had done at Rome. But Hincmar would not stir,
but published a large Apologetick Ext. ap. Bar. ad Ann. 865. T. 10. n. XXXV. etc.
to the Pope, wherein he justifies his Act, and though he gives good words, and
great deference to the Sea Apostolic, yet stoutly contends, that he ought to
be content with a general care and inspection, and not interrupt the ordinary
Rights of Metropolitans, and that 'twas infinitely reasonable, that the
criminal should be referred to the judgment of his own Province.

Two years before this, viz. Ann. DCCCLXIII. a French Synod met at Metz Annal.
incert. auct. ad Ann. 863. inter script. coetan. a Pith. edit. p. 62.
about the Marriage of King Lotharius, wherein they determined contrary to the
liking of the Papal Legates. However they sent Letters with the reasons of
their proceedings by Guntharius Archbishop of Colen, and Theatgaud of Triers
to Pope Nicolaus. The Pope upon their arrival called a Synod, wherein he
Excommunicated the Synod of Metz, and deposed the two Archbishops that were
sent with the Letters, and published Ext. loc. cit.
a manifesto of what he had done. To this the Bishops returned an answer,
wherein having represented the personal affronts, and ill usage they had met
with from him, they tell him Chap. IV. that as for his froward, unjust, and
unreasonable sentence, contrary to all Canons, they did not own it, yea as
being illegal and unwarrantable, they together with the rest of their Brethren
slighted and despised it, and utterly renounced Communion with him, contenting
themselves with the Communion and fellowship of the whole Church, over which he
had so proudly exalted himself, and from which through his pride and contempt
he had separated himself. And whereas he had styled them his Clerks, they bid
him take notice they were none of his Clerks, but persons, whom, if his pride
would have suffered him, he ought to have owned and treated as his Brethren and
fellow Bishops, with much more there spoken with a just, but smart resentment.

And now can any man believe, the Pope should have met with such treatment upon
all occasions, and that from the wisest, gravest, most learned, and eminent
persons in their several Ages, had his title to the Jurisdiction of the West
been so clear and unquestionable, as some men seem to represent it. The same
might be showed in other Countries, and he must be a great stranger to
Church History, that can be at a loss for instances of this nature. I shall
therefore instance only in two more (and with them dispatch this argument) the
African and the Britanick Churches.

VI. I choose to instance in the Churches of Africa, because so confidently
challenged by them of Rome at every turn, and because they were under the civil
Jurisdiction of the Praetorian Prefect of Italy. And here omitting infinite
arguments that offer themselves, I shall insist only upon the famous case of
Appeals, commenced under Pope Zosimus, Ann. CCCCXVIII. and not ended 'till some
years after, which will furnish us with a plain and uncontrollable evidence,
how little authority more than what was honourary, the Sea of Rome in those
days had over those Churches.

The case, as briefly as it can well be summed up, stands thus, Epist Syv.
Afric. ad Bonifac. Council. T. ii. col. 1670. item ad Coelest. ib. col. 1674.
Council. Carth. vi. col. 1589. Cod. Can. Eccles. Afric. in init.
Apiarius a Presbyter of Sicca in Africa had been deposed by his Diocesan
Urbanus for very notorious and scandalous offenses, and the sentence ratified
by a Provincial Council. Hopeless of any relief at home, over he flies to Rome,
tells his tale to Pope Zosimus, who restores him to Communion, espouses his
cause, and sends him back with Faustinus an Italian Bishop, and two Roman
Presbyters into Africa, to see him resettled in his former place. When they
arrived in Africa, they found a Council of African Bishops to the number of
CCXVII. sitting at Carthage, to whom they delivered their message partly by
word of mouth, partly by writing. But the writing being demanded, a memorial
was produced containing instructions from Pope Zosimus what they should insist
upon; it consisted of four Heads. First, concerning the Appeals of Bishops to
the Sea of Rome. Secondly, against the busy resorting of Bishops to Court.
Thirdly, concerning the handling the causes of Presbyters and Deacons by the
neighboring Bishops, where they were unjustly Excommunicated by their own.
Fourthly, concerning the Excommunicating Bishop Urban (who had deposed
Apiarius) or at least his appearing at Rome, unless he corrected what he had
done amiss. But the main thing insisted on was that of Appeals, and the Popes
sending Legates thither to hear causes, and this too challenged by Zosimus in
his memorial by virtue of a Canon of the Council of Nice, giving leave to
Bishops accused or condemned to appeal to Rome, and power to the Pope to hear
and determine those Appeals, either immediately by himself, or by Commishoners
which he should send to that purpose.

The African Fathers were infinitely surpised to hear such a power claimed,
and more to hear it claimed as due by a Canon of Nice. They had searched into
the Canons of that Council, which they found to be but twenty, and not one of
that number to this purpose. While these things were debating, Zosimus dies,
and Boniface succeeds, and the case is again canvast, and the result of the
consultation was, that for the present things should rest upon that bottom,
whereon the Popes memorial had placed them, 'till they could send to the three
great Churches of Constantinople, Antioch and Alexandria for authentic Copies
of the Nicene Canons, to adjust and decide this matter. They wrote likewise to
Pope Boniface by his Legates (who then returned) acquainting him with the state
of the case, and what was done in it, and withal tell him, that if it were as
those pretended Canons claimed, the issue would be intolerable to them: But
they hoped it would be found otherwise, no such thing appearing in their Copies
of that Council. However they had sent to the Eastern Churches for such as were
most authentic, and entreated him also to do the like.

VII. SOME years passed in this matter, at length the Messengers that had been
sent into the East returned, and brought Letters Ext. ubi supr. col. 1143.
from Cyril of Alexandria, and Atticus of Constantinople, importing that they
had sent (...) most true and exact Copies of the authentic Synod of Nice,
preserved in the Archives of their Churches, Copies of which they had also sent
to Pope Boniface. Hereupon a full Council of African Bishops is convened, to
which Pope Caelestine (for Boniface was lately dead) dispatched Faustinus as his
Legate. And now the case of Apiarius is again brought under examination, and
found worse than it was before, the farther they raked into it, the more foul
and offensive did it appear to them, 'till the conviction of his conscience,
though sore against his Will, forced him to confess all, and save them the
trouble of any farther Scrutiny.

And now this cause being over, and the pretense of Appeals overthrown by the
authentic Copies of the Canons of Nice, nothing remained but to write to
Caelestine, which they did in a quick and smart strain, Wherein they first give
him an account of the case of Apiarius, and how troublesome and injurious his
Legate Faustinus had been to the whole Synod, in asserting the privileges of
the Church of Rome, and by virtue thereof challenging that Apiarius should be
readmitted to communion, because his Holiness (believing his Appeal, which yet
could not be made good) had restored him to communion, a thing which he ought
in no wise to have done. Next they proceed earnestly to beseech him, that
henceforth he would not so easily give ear to those that came from hence, nor
admit any to communion, whom they had excommunicated, which he might easily
perceive was prohibited by the Council of Nice, which if it has taken so much
care about the Inferior Clergy, how much more did it intend it in the case of
Bishops, that where any are suspended from communion within their own Province,
his Holiness should not rashly and unduly readmit them, that he should, as
became him, reject the unwarrantable repairing of Presbyters and others of the
Inferior Clergy, there being no Canon of any Council that has deprived the
African Church of this Right, and that the Decrees of Nice have most plainly
committed both the Inferior Clergy, and the Bishops themselves to their own
Metropolitans; having most wisely and justly provided, that all affairs shall
be determined in the very places where they arise, and that the Grace of the
Holy Spirit will not be wanting to every Province, whereby equity may be
prudently discerned, and constantly maintained by the Ministers of Christ,
especially since every man has liberty, if he be offended with the
determination of his Judges, to appeal to a Provincial, or if need be, to a
general Council: Unless perhaps any one can think, that God should enable
single persons to examine the Justice of a cause, and deny it to a vast number
of Bishops Assembled in Council. Or, how shall a Judgment then made beyond Sea
be valid, whereto the persons that are necessary to give in evidence, either
through the infirmity of their Sex, or Age, and many other impediments that
will intervene, cannot be brought? For that any Commissioners should be sent
hither by your Holiness, we do not find Ordained by the Fathers in any Synod.
For as to what you long since sent us by Faustinus as part of the Nicene
Council, in the true and authentic Copies of that Council (which we received
from Cyril of Alexandria, and Atticus of Constantinople, and which we sent to
your Predecessor Boniface) we could find no such matter. In conclusion, they
advise him, that he should not upon the request of any man, send any of his
Clerks thither to execute his sentence, nor grant such leave to any, lest they
should seem to introduce the smoaky pride of the World into the Church of
Christ, which holds forth the light of simplicity, and the brightness of
humility to all them that are desirous to see God: That as to Faustinus, they
are confident, that Brotherly love continuing through the goodness and
moderation of his Holiness, Africa shall no longer be troubled with him. Such
was their Letter to the Pope, a Letter not fuller fraught with true matters of
fact, than fortified with clearness and strength of reason.

VIII. FROM this naked and unartificial representation of the case, its plain;
First, That whatever power the ^^shop of Rome claimed in Africa, was even by
his own tacit confession, founded upon the Canons of the Church. Zosimus did
not pretend a Commission from Christ, or a Delegation from S. Peter, but only a
Canon of Nice to justify his proceedings.

Secondly, That the Canons of the Church give the Bishop of Rome no power over
foreign Churches, either to receive their excommunicated Members, to hear and
decide their causes, or to restore them to communion, or to send Legates and
Commissioners with authority to determine the cause at home; for this, say the
African Fathers, nulla invenimus patrum Synodo constitutum.

Thirdly, That Zosimus was guilty of a notorious forgery and imposture in
falsifying the Nicene Canons, pretending a Canon of Sardica to be a Canon of
Nice, and as such endeavoring to impose it, and his own power by it upon the
African Churches. Can it be supposed, that Zosimus should be ignorant what and
how many the Nicene Canons were? the Popes Legates were present, and as we are
often told, presided in that Synod, brought the Decrees home with them (as all
other great Churches did) where they were no doubt carefully preserved among
the Records of that Church, and the frequent occasions of those times, made
them be daily looked into. Was not the Pope, think we, able to distinguish
between Nice and Sardica, between an Ecumenical Council, and a Synod only of
Western Bishops, called in another Emperors Reign above Twenty years after.
No, no, it was not a sin of ignorance, but the Pope knew well enough which
Council would best serve his turn, that the World had a just and a mighty
veneration for that of Nice, and that his design would be easily swallowed, if
he could gild it over with the reputation and authority of that Synod. It was
obvious to except against Sardica, that it was but a particular Council, and
that the Canon it made for Appeals to Rome was only a Provisionary Decree, when
the injured person was not like to meet with Justice at home, but the whole
Mass of Bishops was corrupted, and set against him, as was the case of
Athanasius and two or three more in respect of the Arians, who were the
occasion, and for whose sakes that Canon was made. But that of Nice was
universal, and unexceptionable, and which he hoped would pass without control.
But the African Bishops according to the humor of that Nation were of too
honest and blunt a temper to be cajoled by the arts of Rome. They required to
have the matter brought to the test, and to be Judged by the Original Canons,
and so the fraud was discovered, and brought to light in the eye of the World.

Fourthly, That the Church of Africa, and accordingly every National Church,
has an inhaerent power of determining all causes that arise within it self:
That this Right is founded both upon most evident reason, (nothing being fitter
than that controversies should be ended in the places where they began, where
there are all advantages of bringing matters to a more speedy and equal trial)
and upon the wisdom and justice of the Divine providence, which would not let
his assistance be wanting in one place more than another, and especially there
where doing right to truth did more immediately make it necessary; and that
'twas as probable two or three hundred should sift out truth as a single
person. That the Nicene Synod had made this the Right of the African no less
than other Churches, and they did not understand how they had forfeited it, or
that any Council had taken it from them.

Fifthly, That it was not lawful for any person, accused or proceeded against
in Africa, to appeal to Transmarine Churches, no not to the Sea of Rome. This
they tell Coelestine most expressly, and call them improba refugia, wicked and
unwarrantable refuges. Against this they had particularly provided in the
Council at Milevis Conc. Mil. ii. Can. xxii. T. 2. col. 1542.
not long before this contest arose, that if any Clergyman had a controversy
with his Bishop, the neighboring Bishops should hear and determine it. But if
there were any occasion of appealing, they should appeal no further than to an
African Council, or to the Primates of those Provinces. And that if any should
resolve to appeal to any Transmarine Judgment, no man in Africa should admit
them to communion. The Canon it is true expresses only the Appeals of
Presbyters, Deacons, and the Inferior Clergy; but as the Fathers in their
Letters to Caelestine argue strongly, if this care be taken about the Inferior
Clergy, how much more ought it to be observed by Bishops.

Sixthly, That the power which the Bishop of Rome sought to establish over
other Churches, evidently made way to bring pride, and tyranny, and a secular
ambition into the Church of God, and that if this course were followed, it
would let in force, and domination, and a scornful trampling over the Heads of
our Brethren, and perhaps the calling in the secular arm to remove the
opposition it would meet with; Principles and Practices infinitely contrary to
the mild and humble Spirit of the Gospel.

And now let the Reader Judge what power the Pope had over the African
Churches, so solemnly denied, so stiffly opposed, not by two or three, but by
two or three hundred Bishops, twice met in Council upon this occasion, and
their judgment herein not precipitated, but past upon most mature and
deliberate debate and consultation, and after that the cause had been depending
for five or six years together. The truth is, so great a shock is this to the
Papal power, that the Advocates of that Church know not which way to decline
it. At last stands up one, M. A. Capell. de Apellat. Eccl. Afric. c. 4. p. 118.
who not being able to unty, resolved to cut the knot, directly charging both
the Acts of the Council, and the Epistles to Boniface and Caelestine, without
any warrant from Antiquity, to be forged and supposititious. But the best of it
is, the Writers in this Cause that came after him, had not the hardiness to
venture in his bottom. Nor have any of the many Publishers of the Councils
since that time stigmatized them with the least suspicion of being spurious,
nor taken any notice of the trifling exceptions he makes against them.

IX. FROM Africa let us Sail into Britain, and see how things stood in our own
Country, the first Nation of the whole Western World that received the
Christian Faith; it being planted here (as Gildas, an Author of untainted
credit, and no inconsiderable antiquity, informs us, and he speaks it too with
great assurance) Gild. de Excid. Brit. non long ab init.
Tempore summo Tiberii Caesaris, in the latter time of Tiberius his Reign,
which admit to have been the very last year of his Life (he died March the XVI.
Ann. Chr. XXXVII.) it was five or six years before it is pretended S. Peter ever
came at, or founded any Church at Rome. Christianity though struggling with
great difficulties, and but lukewarmly entertained by some, yet as Gildas
assures us, made shift to keep up its head in the following Ages, as is evident
from some passes in Origin, Tertullian, and others, and from the known story of
King Lucius (Lever Maur as the Britains call him, the great Brightness) the
first Christian King. But this we have particularly noted elsewhere Antiq.
Apost. Life of S. Paul.. x. n. 7. Introd. to the Apostolici. n. 8. 9.
. Religion being settled, that Church Government grew up here as in other
Countries, by Bishops and then Metropolitans, or Superior Bishops, there can
be no just cause to doubt.

At the Council of Arles Ann. CCCXIV. we find three British Bishops among
others subscribing the Decrees of that Synod, Eborius of York, Restitutus of
London (the same perhaps that subscribed the determination made by the Sardican
Synod) Adelfius de civitate Coloniae Londinensium, with Sacerdos a Priest, and
Arminius a Deacon. After the Empire had submitted to Christianity, we cannot
question but that Religion prospered greatly in this Island, and that
Constantine who made it his business to advance it in all places, would much
more give it the highest encouragement in that place, to which he owed both his
first breath and Empire.

What progress it made afterward, I may not stand nicely to enquire; it is
certain it flourished here under the Roman Government 'till the Declension of
the Empire, when that guard and protection being withdrawn, the Country became
a prey to the neighbor- Picts and Scots, as not long after to the Saxons, a
Warlike but Pagan Nation, whom the Britains had called in to their Assistance,
who drove the remainder of the Britains, and with them Religion into the
Mountains, where yet it throve under the greatest hardships.

Things continued thus, when Ann. DXCVI. Pope Gregory the Great sent Austine
the Monk to convert these Saxons, who after his first expedition being at Arles
consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury, applied himself more closely to this
errand than he had done before. He found Paganism covering the greatest parts
of the Island, but withal a considerable Church among the Britains; seven
Bishops Bed. l. 2. c. 2. p. 111. vid. Galfr. Monomuth. l. 11. c. 12. Girald.
Cambr. itin. Cambr. l. 2. c. 1. p. 856. and not. D. Powell. ibid.
they had as Bede informs us; A number says Bale De Script. Cent. i. n. 70. p.
64.
, conformed to the seven Churches of Asia; their Sees were Hereford, Tavensis
or Landaff, Lhan-Padern-Vaur, Bangor, Elviensis or S. Asaph, Worcester and
Morganensis, supposed by many to be Glamorgan, but that being the same with
Landaff, R. Hoveden Annal. Par. Post. sub Joann. R. fol. 454.
reckons Chester in the room of it, or as Bishop Usher De Primord. Eccl. Brit.
c. 5. p. 91.
thinks not improbable, it might be Caer-Guby or Holy-head in the Isle of
Anglesey. These seven were under the superintendency of a Metropolitan, whose
Archiepiscopal See had been formerly at Caer-leon upon Uske (the famous River
Isca) in Monmouthshire, but some years before Austins arival had been
translated to Menevia or S. David's (so called from the Bishop that translated
it) in Pembrook-shire, though for some time after retaining the Title of
Archbishop of Caer-Leon. And to him were the Welsh Bishops subject, and by him
Ordained, as he by them, until the time of King Henry the First. Besides these
Episcopal Sees, the Britains had Colleges or Seminaries, and in them vast
numbers of Christian Monks, who dwelt especially at Bangor under the care and
superintendency of Abbot Dinooth. But that which spoiled all was, that this
Church had Rites and Usages Bed. ubi supr. p. 110.
vastly different from them of Rome, both in the Observation of Easter, the
Administration of Baptism, and many other Customs. A most infallible Argument,
that the Britannick Church had no dependence upon, had held no communication
with the Church of Rome. Their celebration of Easter after the manner of the
ancient Asiatick Churches, clearly showing that they had originally derived
their Religion from those Eastern parts. To reduce therefore this Church into
subjection to Rome, was a great part of Austins work.

In order whereunto by the help of King Ethelbert, he procured a conference
with them at a place upon the Borders of Worcestershire, called from this
occasion Augustins Oak. Austin used all his arts to prevail upon them,
persuaded, entreated, threatened, but in vain. After a long disputation they
declared they preferred their own ancient Traditions and Customs, from which
they might not depart without leave and liberty from their own Church. Nay, if
the British fragment produced by one of our great Antiquaries Spelm. Conc.
Brit. An. 601. T. 1. p. 108.
be of any credit, Abbot. Dinoth plainly told him with a Be it known to you,
and without doubt, That they owed no more to the Pope of Rome, than to every
godly Christian, vzi. the obedience of Love and Brotherly assistance, other
than this he knew none due to him, whom they called Pope, and who claimed to be
owned and styled Father of Fathers; that for themselves they were under the
Government of the Bishop of Caer-Leon upon Uske, who under God was to oversee
and guide them* Austin saw 'twas to no purpose at present to treat further, and
so reserved himself for another conference. A second therefore and a more
general meeting is propounded and agreed to, whereto came the seven British
Bishops, and many other persons of Learning, especially of the College of
Bangor. Austin as before pressed them to a compliance with the Roman and
Apostolic Church. But they, offended with his proud and contemptuous treatment
of them, never so much as rising out of his Chair, at their coming to salute
him, told him plainly, they would do nothing of what he demanded, nor would
they own him for Archbishop; prudently arguing among themselves, If he would
not now vouchsafe so much as to rise up to us, how much more when we have
submitted to him, will he despise and scorn us. Austin finding no good was to
be done upon them, parted from them with this passionate farewell, That since
they would not have peace with their Brethren, they should have war from their
Enemies, and for as much as they refused to preach the way of life to the
English, they should be punished with death by their hands. And his word it
seems was made good: For soon after Ethelfrid King of Northumberland, at the
instigation (as is said) of Ethelbert King of Kent, marched with a powerful
Army to Caer-Leon, and made great havoc and destruction, and among the rest
slew Twelve hundred of the innocent Monks of Bangor, who were come along with
their Army, by fasting and prayer to intercede with Heaven for its prosperous
success. That Austin was the first spring of this fatal Tragedy, moving
Ethelbert, as he did Ethelfrid, there are not only strong suspicions, but the
thing is expressly affirmed by several Historians of no inconsiderable credit
and antiquity. It Is true Bid says this happened not till after Austins Death.
But besides the inconsistency in point of Chronology, it is suspicious that
passage was foisted into Bid, it being wanting in the ancient Saxon
Translation of King Alfred, done within CL. years after Bedes Death. Nay,
though we should grant the slaughter to have happened after the death of
Austin, yet who knows not but he might easily lay the design with Ethelbert,
though himself lived not to see the Execution. And the proud and haughty spirit
of the man gives but too much encouragement to the suspicion. What became of
the British Churches after this, I am not concerned to relate. It Is enough to
my purpose, that from the very originals of this Church it was independent upon
Rome, and that for Six hundred years together; nor could be brought to strike
Sail, 'till Fire and Sword (the most powerful Arguments of the Papal cause) had
converted, that is, in effect ruined and destroyed it.

X. FROM the whole of what has been said, laid together, the impartial Reader
will easily make this conclusion, how vain and frivolous the pretenses are to
the Popes Patriarchal Authority over the whole West, when there is scarce any
one Western Church that did not in those times stoutly appear against the
encroachments of Rome. But you will say, where then shall we find the Roman
Patriarchate? certainly within much narrower limits.

And here nothing can offer it self with so much rational probability, as that
his Patriarchal Jurisdiction was concurrent with that of the Vicarius Urbicus,
or the Lieutenant of Rome, as his Metropolitical was with that of the
Praefectus Urbis, or City-Provost. Now the Vicarius Urbicus had ten Provinces
Notit. imper. c. 48. fol. 149.
under his Government, four Consular, viz. Campania, Tuscia, and Umbria,
Picenum Suburbicarium (the Suburbicary as well as other Provinces being in some
cases Vid Zosim. Hist. l. 2. p. 688.
, especially that of Tribute, under the Inspection of the Praetorian Prefect,
and his Lieutenant) Sicilia; Two Correctorial, Apulia with Calabria, and
Lucania Brutiorum; Four Praesidial, Samnium, Sardinia, Corsica, and Valeria.
This was the Urbicary Diocese, distinct from the Italick Diocese, the
Metropolis whereof was Milan.

Within these bounds the Bishops of Rome, especially after the times of the
Nicene Council took upon them to exercise Jurisdiction, to call Synods, Ordain
Metropolitans, and dispatch other Church-afairs. Hence they had their usual
Synod, which was a kind of Council in ordinary to the Bishop of Rome, and met
upon all important occasions. Such was the Synod of Pope Damasus, (...) and of
the Bishops that Assembled with him at Rome, mentioned by Athanasius Epist ad
Afric. in init.
, as convened about his Cause. Such that of the Bishops (...), in those parts,
spoken of by Pope Julius Ep. ad Orient. ap. Athan. Apol. ii. p. 580.
, as concurring with him in his Letter to the Eastern Bishops. The old Roman
notitia (produced by Baronius Ad. Ann. 1057. Tom. xi. p. 243.
out of the Records of the Vatican, but of an Age much later than the times we
write of) tells us this Synod consisted of LXX. Bishops. And much about that
number, we find them in the Acts of Councils, as in the Synod under Pope
Gelasius Council. T. iv. col. 1260.
, and in that under Symmachus Ibid. col. 1312.
. Thus we find Pope Leo Ep. iv. c. 7. p. 101.
requiring the Bishops of Sicily to send three of their number every year upon
Michaelmus-day to meet the Roman Synod, fraterno concilio soc^andi. And the
Synod of Sardica Ext. Ep. ap. Hilar. in fragm. col. 407.
sending their Decrees to Pope Julius, desire him to communicate them to the
Bishops in Sicily, Sardinia and Italy, (i. e. that part of Italy that lay
within the Urbicary Diocese) that none of them might receive communicatory
Letters from any that had been deposed in that Council. And this was the (...),
the multitude of Bishops wherewith Pope Leo was encompast, and whom by virtue
of the power and pre-eminence (...), of his own proper place and Jurisdidiction
he had convened out of many Cities in Italy, as the Empress Galla Placidia
speaks in her Letter Conc. T. 4. col. 53.
to Theodosius. Not but that sometimes here (as in other places)* we find
foreign Bishops convening in Synods, with those under the Jurisdiction of the
Roman Bishop, especially upon some extraordinary emergencies: But then this was
only in a Brotherly way, and at the invitation of the chief Bishop of those
parts, and not that they were under his charge and government. He had no direct
and immediate influence over any but those who lay within the bounds, over
which the civil Governors who resided at Rome, extended their authority, and
who no doubt fell in the willinglier with his Jurisdiction, for the convenience
of their being aided and assisted by the Church of Rome.

By all which we see, that no sooner were Dioceses divided and settled by the
civil constitution, but the Roman Bishop began to extend his Jurisdiction
commensurate to the Urbicary Diocese, within which his Metropolitical was at
last swallowed up. This the Learned Archbishop of Paris De Concord l. 1. c.
7.. 6. p. 26.
readily grants, and thinks is intimated in the ancient Version of the Nicene
Canon, which we mentioned before, where the Bishop of Rome is said to have
Principality over the Suburbicary places, and all the Province; the first
denoting the Government of the Provost, the latter that of the Vicarius, or
Lieutenant of Rome, and consequently the one represents the Popes
Metropolitical, the other his Patriarchal Jurisdiction. It Is true he often
tells us of a twofold Patriarchate the Pope had, ordinary, and extraordinary,
the one reaching to the Urbicary Diocese, the other over the whole West. But
with how little reason and pretense of truth we noted before.

We grant the Pope had always great honor given him by all, and more by the
Western Churches, but authoritative power he had not but over his own special
Diocese, nor does S. Basil's styling him (...) the chief of the Western
Bishops, imply any more than dignity and precedence; or the Empires being
divided into East and West, and in allusion thereto the Churches being
sometimes distinguished into Eastern and Western make any more for his Western
Patriarchate, than it did for the Bishop of Constantinoples being Patriarch
over the whole East. Arguments which I should be ashamed to mention, but that
they are produced by such great Names, and are indeed the best they have in
this matter. I grant that according to the ambitious humor of that Church they
were always attempting to enlarge their Borders, and to propagate their power
beyond its just limits: and partly by recommending persons to be Bishops in
foreign Churches, and thence proceeding to impose them, partly by interposing
in Ordinations, and exacting an Oath of Obedience to the Sea of Rome from the
persons Consecrated, partly by challenging the immediate decision of Episcopal
Causes, and a power to confirm, translate, excommunicate, depose, or restore
all delinquent Bishops, partly by drawing Appeals to Rome, and taking the
determination of matters from the cognizance of their proper Judges, and
arrogating the sole privilege of judging and condemning Heresies, partly by
claiming to preside in all Councils, and if disobliged, withholding their
assent to the Decrees of Synods, partly by sending their Legates into foreign
Countries to hear and decide cases, and take up controversies, by taking off,
and engaging brisk and active Bishops by honourary Employments, by sending
Commissions to the Bishops of the greater Sees, and lodging certain powers in
their hands to act as their Vicars within their several Provinces, that so they
might seem to derive their authority from the Roman See, as they did at
Thessalonica, Corinth, Justiniana Prima, Arles, etc. partly by giving all
imaginable encouragement to persons, whether of the Clergy or Laity to send to
Rome for the resolution of difficult and important cases, and partly by
dispatching Missionaries to convert Pagan Countries; by these and infinite
other the like Arts and Methods, they grew in time though not 'till some Ages,
to challenge and exercise a power over all the Churches of the West. But from
the beginning it was not so. The sum then of all that has been discoursed
hitherto is this; that as 'twas the Dignity of the City of Rome gave the
Bishops of that place pre-eminence above all other Primates or Patriarchs, so
'twas the division of the Empire made by Constantine, exalted his power from
that of a Metropolitan to a Patriarch, and enlarged it to an equal extent with
the Diocese of the Lieutenant of Rome; within which Bounds they pretty well
contained themselves 'till their pride and ambition began more openly to break
out, and to disturb the peace and order of the Church.

CHAP. VI. The Encroachments of the Sea of Rome upon other Sees, especially the Sea of Constantinople.
The Roman Bishops breaking the bounds of all Laws and Canons. Their taking
hold of all occasions of magnifying their own power. Instances of Julius,
Damasus, Innocent, Zosimus to this purpose. The briskness and activity of Pope
Leo. His many Letters written to advance the reputation of his authority. His
jealous eye upon the growing greatness of the Sea of Constantinople. The
attempts and actings of his Legates in the Council of Chalcedon. Their mighty
opposition against the passing the XXVIII. Canon of that Synod. The fraud of
Paschasinus in citing the sixth Canon of Nice. Their protestation against the
power granted to the Bishop of Constantinople. Pope Leo's zeal and rage against
these Synodal proceedings. Faelix his Excommunicating Acacius of
Constantinople. The pretended occasion of that Sentence. The same spleen
continued and carried on by Pope Gelasius. A reconciliation procured by the
Emperor Justin between the Bishops of Rome and Constantinople. Pope John's
insulting over Epiphanius in his own Church at Constantinople. John the Seconds
raving Letter to Justinian. The Bishop of Constantinople assumes the Title of
Ecumenical Patriarch. This in what sense (probably) meant. The passionate
resentment of Pope Pelagius hereat. The same zeal showed by his Successor
Gregory the Great. His Letters written upon that occasion. The hard words he
every where bestows upon that Title. His mistake about the offer of that Title
to the Pope in the Chalcedon Council. The true state of that case. This Title
frequently given to the Constantinopolitan Bishops in the Council under Menans,
before John assumed it. Baronius's poor evasion of that matter. Gregory still
continues to thunder out Anathema's against this Title. All this suspected to
be but noise, and the quarrel only because themselves had not the Title. Phocas
his Usurpation of the Empire. The monstrous villainy and wickedness of that Man.
Pope Gregory's scandalously flattering Caresses to him and his Empress.
Boniface the Third makes suit to Phocas, and procures the Title of Ecumenical
to be affixt to the Sea of Rome. The Popes daily enlargement of their Power and
Tyranny, and their advantages for so doing. The whole concluded with the Canons
or DICTATES of Pope Hildebrand.

I. THOUGH Custom and the Canons of the Church had set out the Bishop of Rome
his proper Portion in the Ecclesiastic Government, yet how hard is it for
covetousness and ambition to keep within any bounds? A spirit of pride still
fermented in that See, that made them restless, 'till they had thrown down all
enclosures, and that their Sheaf alone (as it was in Joseph's Vision) arose and
stood upright, and the Sheaves of their Brethren stood round about, and did
obeisance to it. In the discovery whereof we shall only remark the more general
attempts they made concerning it. And first nothing made more way to their
Usurpt Dominion, than the magnifying their own power, and the privileges of
their Church upon all occasions.

II. TO begin no earlier than Pope Julius; in his Letters to the Bishops of
Antioch, to make them more willing to submit their Cause to be tried at Rome,
he had it seems highly extolled the greatness of that Church, and the dignity
and authority of his See, as appears by the sum of their answer Ap. Sozom. l.
3. c. 8. p. 508. ap. Alban. Apol. II. p. 579.
, and his rejoinder to their Letter. Not long after Pope Damasus writing also
to the Eastern Bishops, commends Theod. H. E l. 5. c. 10. p. 212.
them that they had yielded due reverence to the Apostolic See: And though
this was spoken with modesty enough (awed hereinto perhaps by the Synod at
Rome, in whose Name he wrote) yet in his Epistle Dam. Epist. v. Conc. T. 2.
col. 876.
to them of Numidia, and in general to all Catholic Bishops (if that Epistle
be genuine) he speaks out, telling them that according to ancient institutions,
they did well in all doubtful cases to have recourse to him as to the head, and
that this was founded upon Custom and Ecclesiastic Canons; concluding his
long Epistle thus, All which Decretals, and the constitutions of all my
Predecessors, which have been published concerning Ecclesiastical Orders and
Canonical Discipline, we command to be observed by you, and all Bishops and
Priests, so that whoever shall offend against them, shall not be received to
pardon, the Cause properly respecting us, who ought to steer the Government of
the Church. This was most Pontifically spoken, and boldly ventured at,
especially if we consider how little the African Bishops regarded the authority
of the Roman Church, when the case of Appeals arose a few years after, as we
have already seen at large. Siricius came next to Damasus, and he in his Letter
Epist. 1. c. 15. ib. col. 1022.
to Himerius of Taragon in Spain, magnifies the Roman Church as the Head of
that Body, and bids him convey those Rules he had sent to all the Bishops in
that and the neighbor Countries, it not being fit that any Bishop should be
ignorant of the constitutions of the Apostolic See. Innocent the First, more
than once and again styles Vid. Innoc. Epist. 21. 24. 25. Conc. T. 2.
the Church of Rome the Fountain and Head of all Churches, and this built upon
ancient Canons; and yet perhaps meant no more, than that it was the principal
and most eminent Church of the Christian World: An honor, which upon several
accounts intimated before, Antiquity freely bestowed upon it. Zosunus in a
Letter to the Council of Carthage (produced by Baronius Ad An. 418. Tom. 5.
out of a Vatican Copy) makes a mighty flourish with the unlimited power of S.
Peter, that he had the care not only of the Roman, but of all Churches,
ratified by the Rules of the Church, and the tradition of the Fathers, that
both by Divine and Humane Laws this Power descended upon the Bishop of that
See, whose sentence none might presume to reverse.

III. LEO the Great entered that See about the year CCCCXL. A Man of somewhat a
brisker and more active temper, than those that had been before him, and one
that studied by all imaginable methods to enlarge his Jurisdiction, and being a
Man of Parts and Eloquence, did amplify and insinuate his power with more
advantage. He tells Epist. 87. c. 1. p. 157.
the Mauritanian Bishops, That he would dispense with the Election of those
Bishops, who had been immediately taken out of the Laity, so they had no other
irregularity to attend them, not intending to prejudice the commands of the
Apostolic See, and the Decrees of his Predecessors; and that what he passed
by at present, should not hereafter go without its censure and punishment, if
any one should dare to attempt, what he had thus absolutely forbidden. And
elsewhere Epost. 84. c. 11. p. 155.
that Bishops and Metropolitans were therefore constituted, that by them the
care of the Universal Church might be brought to the one See of S. Peter, and
that there might be no disagreement between the Head and the Members. And in a
Sermon upon the Martyrdom of Peter and Paul, in a profound admiration he breaks
out Sermon. 1. in Natal. App. c. 1. p. 79.
into this Rhetorical Address. These ( says he) are the Men that have advanced
thee to this honor, that thou art become a holy Nation, a peculiar People, a
Royal and Priestly City, that being by the Holy See of S. Peter made Head of
the World, thou might govern farther by means of a Divine Religion, than by
worldly power. For although enlarged by many victories, thou have extended the
Bounds of thy Empire both by Sea and Land, yet is it far less which thou have
conquered by force of Arms, than that which thou have gained by the peace of
the Church.

IV. BUT Leo was a Man not only for speaking, but for action. He saw the
Emperors and the Eastern Bishops were resolved to advance the Sea of
Constantinople, that it might bear some proportion to the Imperial Court, and
that the Synod of Constantinople had already adjudg'd it the place of honor
next to Rome; that therefore it concerned him to bestir himself to stifle all
attempts that way, well knowing that the glory of that would eclipse his
luster, and cramp those designs of superiority and dominion, which the Bishops
of Rome were continually driving on over the Church of Christ. A general
Council was now called to meet at Chalcedon, Ann. CCCCLI. wherein were present
no less than Six hundred and thirty Bishops: Hither Pope Leo sent his Legates,
furnished with peremptory instructions (which they afterward read openly in
the Synod) to keep a quick eye upon all motions that way, and with all possible
resolution to suppress them. At the opening of the Council, the Legates
cunningly slipped in a clause, telling Conc. Chalc. Act. I. Conc. T. 4. col 93.
the Fathers, that they had such and such things in command from the most
Blessed and Apostolical Bishop of the City of Rome, which was the Head of all
Churches: Which either was not heeded by that Synod, or passed by in the sense
before declared, as allowing it an honourary pre-eminence above the rest.

In the fifth Session of that Council Act. v. col. 555. etc.
the Papal Legates moved that the Epistle of Leo about the condemnation of
Nestorius might be inserted into the very definition of the Council against
that Heresy. Craftily foreseeing what a mighty reputation it would give the
Pope in the eye of the World, and to what vast advantage it might be stretched
afterward. But the Council stiffly opposed the motion, and said, they freely
owned the Letter and were ready to subscribe it, but would not make it part of
the definition. The Legates were angry, demanded the Letter back again, and
threatened to be gone, and to have a Synod at Rome. And when the Emperor
intimated some such thing, the Bishops cried out, they were for the definition
as it was, and they that did not like it, nor would subscribe it, might if they
please get them gone to Rome. After this, all things went on smoothly 'till
they came to frame the Canons, among which one was Ibid. Act. xvi. col. 810.
, that the Bishop of Constantinople should enjoy equal Privileges with the
Bishop of Rome; and then the Legates could hold no longer, plainly telling
them, that this was a violation of the constitution of the great Synod of Nice,
and that their Commission obliged them by all ways to preserve the Papal
dignity, and to reject the designs of any, who relying upon the greatness of
their Cities, should attempt any thing to the contrary.

To prove that this was contrary to the Nicene Decrees, they produced the Sixth
and Seventh Canons of that Council, beginning thus as Paschasinus repeated
them, (...) etc. The Church of Rome ever had the Primacy. Let Egypt therefore
have this privilege, that the Bishop of Alexandria have power, etc. where
instead of the first words of that Canon (...) let ancient Customs still take
place, the Legate shuffled in this sentence as more to his purpose, the Church
of Rome ever had the Primacy. And admitting here that this was only the Title
to that Canon in the Roman Copy, yet it is somewhat more than suspicious, that
Paschasinus intended it should be understood as part of the Canon it self.
Which if so, there could not be a bolder piece of forgery and imposture. But
the Fathers were not to be so imposed upon. Aetius Archdeacon of
Constantinople produced a Copy from among the Records of that Church, which he
delivered to Constantine the Secretary, who read it according to the genuine
words of the Canon, without any such addition, Let ancient Customs still take
place, etc. and in confirmation of that were next read the second and third
Canons of the second general Council at Constantinople. And because the Legate
had objected that the Canon had been procured by fraud, the Judges required the
Bishops concerned to declare their minds, who all readily declared the
contrary. The case having been thus fully debated, and nothing material being
alleged against it, the Canon passed by the unanimous suffrage of the Fathers,
the Roman Legates only entering their protestation, and resolving to acquaint
the Pope with what was done, that so he might judge both of the injury done to
his own See, and the violence offered to the Canons.

V. NO sooner did the news of what had passed in the Synod arrive at Rome, but
Pope Leo stormed to purpose, wrote Epist. 53. c. 2. p. 130.
to Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople, charging him with pride and ambition,
with invasion of the Rights of others, with irreverence toward the Nicene
Canons, contrary to which he had exalted himself above the Bishops of
Alexandria and Antioch. He dispatched Epist. 54. 55. 61. 62. 105.
Letters also to the Emperor Marcianus, to his Lady the Empress Pulcheria, and
to Juvenal Bishop of Jerusalem, and the rest of the Fathers of the Synod, all
to the same effect, complaining of the pride of Anatolius, and the irregular
proceedings of the Council, that the privileges of Churches were destroyed,
the bounds of Metropolitans invaded, many depressed to make way for one,
venerable Decrees made void, and ancient Orders trodden in the dirt. That
whatever Rules were made contrary to the Canons of Nice were null, that the
care and inspection of these things was committed to him, a duty which he could
not neglect without being guilty of unfaithfulness to his trust, that therefore
by the authority of S. Peter he repealed and made void what ever any Council
had agreed upon, repugnant to the Nicene Canons, yea, though done by many more
in number than were in that venerable Synod, declaring that no regard or
reverence was to be paid to their constitutions. In all which though nothing
appear above ground but a mighty zeal for the honor of the Nicene Canons, yet
it is plain enough 'twas his own ambition, his envy and emulation that lay at
the bottom. And indeed, neither Leo, nor any of the Bishops of that See could
ever pardon the Chalcedon Synod, not only for making the Bishop of
Constantinople equal to him of Rome, but for placing the Primacy of the Roman
Church, not in any Divine Right, but only in Romes having been the Seat of the
Empire.

VI. HENCEFORWARD they beheld the Bishops of that place with an evil Eye, as
competitors with them in the Government of the Church, and the likeliest
persons to give check to their extravagant designs, and therefore laid hold
upon all occasions to weaken their interest, and to vent their spleen against
their persons. And it was not long after, that a fit occasion presented it self.

John the Tabennosiot Evagr. H. E. l. 3. c. 11. 12. etc. p. 343 and seq. vid.
Gest. de nom. Acacii. Conc. T. 4. col. 1081 Gelas. Epist. 13. ad Epp. Dard. ib.
1199. and Tom. de Anath. vincul. ib. col. 1227.
had by gifts and bribes (enabled thereto by being Steward and Treasurer of
that Church) procured himself to be made Bishop of Alexandria, expressly
contrary to his Oath lately made to the Emperor Zeno, that he would never
attempt that See. For which he caused him to be expelled, and Peter Mongus, who
had been heretofore consecrated to that place to be restored. Peter was a
Patron of the Eutychian Heresy, but which at first he craftily dissembled,
insinuating himself into the favor and friendship of Acacius Bishop of
Constantinople, who constantly held Communion with him. But was so far from
siding with him in any Heretical Sentiments, that no sooner did he hear Evagr.
ib. c. 16. p. 347.
that Peter had publicly Anathematized the Chalcedon Council, but he
dispatched Messengers to Alexandria to know the truth of things, before whose
Eyes Peter cast a mist, having formed a judicial Process about that matter, and
brought in persons to depose that he had done no such thing. Nay, he himself
wrote Ext. Epist. ib. c. 17.
to Acacius, assuring him, that the charge was false, and that he had, and did
confirm and embrace the Council of Chalcedon; though all this was pretense and
elaborate hypocrisy. John driven out from Alexandria, flies to Rome, giving
out himself to be a Martyr for the Cause of Pope Leo, and the Faith of the
Chalcedon Synod.

Welcome he was to Pope Simplicius, who wrote to the Emperor in his behalf;
but dying not long after his arrival, his Successor Faelix readily espoused
the quarrel, and after some preparatory messages and citations (wherein he
required of the Emperor Zeno, that Acacius might be sent to Rome, there to
answer what John of Alexandria laid to his charge) taking advantage of two
Synods at Rome, held one soon after the other, twice excommunicated and deposed
Acacius, for communicating with him of Alexandria. Letter after Letter he wrote
both to the Emperor, and the Clergy and People of Constantinople, that the
Sentence against Acacius might be owned and put into execution, who yet
continued in his See 'till his death, without any great regard to the Sentence
from Rome, which he so far slighted Basil. Cil. H. Eccl. ap. Niceph. l. 16. c.
17. p. 683.
, that to be even with him, he struck the Popes name out of the Diptychs, to
show the World he renounced all communion with him. This so much the more
enraged his enemies at Rome, who all his life long pelted him with continual
clamours and threatenings. Nay, Faelix and his Successors persecuted his very
memory, denouncing censures against any that should mention his name with
respect and honor. And I cannot but observe that in the Edict Ext. in calc.
Gest. de nom. Acac. ubi supr. col. 1083.
that was passed against him at Rome, mention is made of nothing but contumacy
against the Popes Admonitions, the ill usage and imprisonment of his Legates,
and the affront therein offered to his person, and in the Excommunicatory
Letter sent to Acacius Faelic. Epist. vi. ib. col. 1073.
himself, though favoring of Heretics was the great and indeed only thing
pretended abroad, yet the very first thing wherewith he charges him, is
contempt of the Nicene Council, and invading the Rights of other men's
Provinces. It seems though he was loath to speak out, it was the Decree of the
late Synod of Chalcedon still stuck in his stomach, by which the
Constantinopolitan Patriarch had been advanced to so much power in the East,
and made equal to him of Rome.

And indeed Gelasius, who came after Faelix, says Tom. de Anath. ubi supr.
plainly, that the Apostolic See never approved that part of the Chalcedon
Canons, that it had given no power to treat about it, and by its Legates had
protested against it, and thence most infallibly inferrs, that therefore it was
of no authority or value; and accordingly Peter of Alexandria, which was the
second See (i. e. according to the constitution of the Nicene Canon) could not
be duly absolved by any other power then that of the first See, i. e. his own;
accounting that of Constantinople (as he elsewhere Ad Epp. Dard. ib. col. 1207.
asserts) not to be reckoned so much as among Metropolitan Sees: And as he
argues in his Epistle Epist. viii. ib. col. 1182.
to the Emperor Anastasius, if Christians be obliged in general to submit to
their Regular Bishops, how much more should submission be made to the Bishop of
that See, to whom both God and the subsequent piety of the Church have always
given the pre-eminence above all Bishops; and so he goes on, according to the
custom of the men, to speak big words of the authority and privileges of the
Apostolic See.

VII. SEVERAL years this breach that had been made remained, 'till Justin, a
Man of very mean Originals, having by no good arts gained the Empire, thought
it his interest to oblige and unite all parties. And first he begins to court
the Pope, to whom he wrote Inter Epist. Hormisd. Conc. T. 4. col. 1469.
, giving him an account of his advancement to the Empire, and begging his
prayers to God to confirm and establish it. This Hormisda in his answer calls a
paying the first fruits of his Empire due to S. Peter. Hereupon reconciliation
is offered, and John Bishop of Constantinople writes to him to that purpose,
which he at length consents to upon this condition, that the name of Acacius
might be stricken out of the Diptychs; which at last is done, and that of the
Pope again put in, and so a Peace is piec'd up, and the Catholic Faith
professed on both sides, according to the Decrees of the four general Councils.
And though Epiphanius, who succeeded John in the Sea of Constantinople,
maintained the same correspondence, yet when ever it came to any important
instance, the Pope could not forget his proud domineering temper over the
Bishops of that Church. Which sufficiently appeared about this very time, when
John the first, Hermisda's Successor, being by Theodorick King of the Goths
sent Ambassador to Constantinople, with this message to the Emperor Justin,
either that he should restore to the Arians their Churches in the East, or
expect that the Catholics in Italy should have the same measures, he departed
from Rome with weeping eyes and a sad heart, being grieved not more to be made
the bearer of a message, so contrary to his judgment, than to be put upon an
employment that seemed a diminution to the Papal dignity; he being (as
Marcellinus Chron. Indict. 3. Philox. and Prob. Coss. p. 61.
observes) the only Pope that had ever been commanded out of the City upon any
such Errand. However arriving at the Imperial City, he resolved to keep up his
Port, entered with great state, and being invited Niceph. H. E. l. 17. c. 9. p.
746.
to sit upon a Seat even with that of Epiphanius Bishop of that Church, he
refused, telling them he would maintain the Prerogative of the Apostolic See,
not giving over, 'till a more eminent Throne was purposely placed for him above
that of the Bishop of Constantinople. As if it had not been enough to reproach
and vilify him at a distance, unless contrary to all Laws and Canons, and to
the Rules of modesty, civility and reason, he also trampled upon him in his own
Church. Nay, Anastasius In vit. Joan. 1* Conc. T. 4. col. 1601.
adds, that the Emperor in honor to God came before him, and prostrated
himself upon the ground to adore and worship him.

Pope John the second, about ten years after writing Epist. 2. ibid. col. 1745.
to Justinian (though there want not very learned men, who question the credit
of that Epistle) talks stylo Romano, just after the rate of his Predecessors;
he tells the Emperor, 'twas his singular honor and commendation, that he
preserved a reverence for the Roman See, that he submitted all things to it,
and reduced them to the unity of it, a Right justified by S. Peter's authority,
conveyed to him by that authentic deed of gift, Feed my sheep; that both the
Canons of the Fathers, and the Edicts of Princes, and his Majesty's own
professions declared it to be truly the head of all Churches. Where yet (as in
infinite other expressions of that nature in the Pontifical Epistles) he warily
keeps himself within general terms, capable of a gentler or a brisker
interpretation, as it stood with their interest to improve.

VIII. WEARIED out with continual provocations, oppositions and affronts from
Rome, the Patriarchs of Constantinople began to think upon some way, by which
they might be better enabled to bear up against them. To this end, John who
from his extraordinary abstinence was Sir-nam'd Nesteutes or the Faster, being
then Bishop of that See in a Synod convened there Ann. DLXXXIX. about the Cause
of Gregory Bishop of Antioch, procured the Title of Ecumenical or Universal
Bishop to be conferred upon him; with respect probably, to that Cities being
the head Seat of the Empire, which was usually styled Orbis Romanus, and (...),
the Universe, or whole World, and it could not be therefore thought
extravagant, if the Bishop of it did assume a proportionable Title of honor,
nothing appearing that hereby he laid claim to any extraordinary Jurisdiction.

Nor indeed is it reasonable to conceive, that the Eastern Patriarchs (who as
Evagrius, who was advocate for Gregory in that Synod, tells us H. Eccl. l. 6.
c. 7. p. 450.
) were all either by themselves or their Legates present in this Council,
together with very many Metropolitans, should at one cast throw up their own
power and authority, and give John an absolute Empire and Dominion over them;
and therefore can be supposed to grant no more, than that he being the Imperial
Patriarch should alone enjoy that honorable Title above the rest. Besides that
every Bishop as such, is in a sense entrusted with the care and solicitude of
the Universal Church, and though for convenience limited to a particular
charge, may yet act for the good of the whole. Upon this ground it was, that in
the ancient Church, so long as Order and Regular Discipline was observed,
Bishops were wont upon occasion not only to communicate their Councils, but to
exercise their power and functions beyond the bounds of their particular
Diocese, and we frequently find Titles and Characters given to particular
Bishops (especially those of Patriarchal Sees) equivalent to that of Universal
Bishop: I cannot but mention that passage of Theodorit, who speaking of
Nestorius his being made Bishop of Constantinople, says Haeret. fab. l. 4. c.
12. T. 4. p. 245.
, that he was entrusted with the Presidency of the Catholic Church of the
Orthodox there, (...) which was nothing less then that of the whole World. A
passage which perhaps might the more encourage and invite John at this time to
assume the Title.

IX. BUT in what sense soever intended, it sounded high* but especially made a
loud noise at Rome, where they were strangely surprised to find themselves
outshot in their own Bow; for though they had all along driven on the design
with might and main, yet they had hitherto abstained from the Title. Pelagius,
who at this time sat in that Chair, was extremely netled at it, and immediately
dispatched Letters Pelag. Epist. viii. Conc. T. 5. col. 949.
to John and the Bishops of his Synod, wherein he rants against this pride and
folly, talks high of the invalidity of all Conciliary Acts without his consent
and approbation, charges them, though summoned by their Patriarch, not to
appear at any Synod, without authority first had from the Apostolic See,
threatens John with excommunication, if he did not presently recant his error,
and lay aside his unjustly usurpt Title of Universal Bishop; affirming that
none of the Patriarchs might use that Profane Title, and that if any one of
them were styled Ecumenical, the Title of Patriarch would be taken from the
rest, a piece of insolence which ought to be far from all true Christians; with
a great deal more to the same effect.

I know the last publishers of the Councils make this Epistle to be spurious, a
false piece of Ware patched up in Insidore Mercators shop. But however that be,
plain it is from S. Gregory Lib. 4. Indict. 13. Epist. 36. col. 549. vid. etiam
Epist. 38. ibid.
, (who sent Copies of them to the Bishops of Antioch and Alexandria) that
Pelagius did write such Letters, wherein by the authority of S. Peter he
rescinded the Acts of that Synod, propter nephandum elationis vocabulum, for
the sake of that proud and ungodly Title, prohibiting his Archdeacon then at
Constantinople, so much as to be present at prayers with the Patriarch of that
place.

X. GREGORY the Great succeeded Pelagius, whose Apocrisiarius, or Agent he had
been at Constantinople when the thing was done. A man of good learning, and
greater piety, and of somewhat a more meek and peaceable temper, then most of
those that had gone before him, which perhaps he owed in a great measure, to
those sad calamitous times, he so often complains of, wherein he lived: And yet
as tender in this point as his Predecessors. John of Constantinople had lately
sent him an account Lib. ^* pist. 39* 555.
of the proceedings in the case of John Presbyter of Chalcedon, wherein he took
occasion to style himself Ecumenical Patriarch almost in every sentence. This
touched Pope Gregory to the quick, and as he had an excellent talent at writing
Letters, he presently sends to Mauritius the Emperor, to the Empress
Constantina, to the Patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch, to John himself, and
to Sabinian his own Deacon then residing at Constantinople.

In all which he strains all the Nerves of his Rhetoric to load the case with
the heaviest Aggravations, complaining Ib. Epist. 32.
that by the contrivance of this proud and pompous Title, the peace of the
Church, the holy Laws, and venerable Synods, yea and the commands of our Lord
Jesus himself (who by that Instrument, Tu es Petrus, etc. had committed the
care of the whole Church to Peter, Prince of the Apostles) were disturbed and
shattered; that it better became Bishops of this time rather to lie upon the
ground, and to mourn in Sackcloth and Ashes, than to affect names of Vanity,
and to glory in new and profane Titles, a piece of Pride and Blasphemy,
injurious to all other Bishops, yea to the whole Church, and which it became
the Emperor to restrain: Epist. 33.
that by this new Arrogance and Presumption he had lift up himself above all
his Brethren, and by his Pride had shown, that the times of Antichrist were at
hand; that he wondered the Emperor should write to him to be at peace with the
Bishop of Constantinople, chiding Epist. 39.
Sabinian his Deacon for not preventing the Emperor's Commands being sent to
him. To Eulogius Bishop of Alexandria, and Anastasius of Antioch (whom
elsewhere Lib 6. Ind. 15. Epist. 37.
he tickles with their three Sees being the only three Apostolical Sees founded
by S. Peter Prince of the Apostles, and that they mutually reflected Honor
upon each other) he represents, Lib. 4. Epist. 36.
how great a diminution this was to their Dignity, that they should therefore
give none this Title, for that so much undue Honor as they gave to another, so
much they took away of what was due to themselves; that this fond attempt was
the invention of him, who goes about as a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour, and a forerunner of him, who is King over all the Children of Pride. He
tells John Epist. 38.
himself, and that as he pretends with tears in his Eyes, that unless he
quitted this proud foolish Title, he must proceed further with him, and that if
his profane and ungodly humor could not be cured by gentler methods, it must
be lanc'd by Canonical severity; that by this perverse* Title he had imitated
the Devil, and had made himself like to Lucifer Son of the Morning, who said, I
will ascend above the heights of the Clouds, I will exalt my Throne above the
Stars of God; telling us, that by Clouds and Stars we are to understand
Bishops, who water by their Preaching, and shine by the light of their
Conversation, whom while he despised and trod upon, and proudly lift up himself
above them, what did he but aspire above the height of the Clouds, and exalt
his Throne above the Stars of Heaven; that such proud Attempts had been always
far from him or his Predecessors, who had refused the Title of Universal
Bishop, when for the honor of S. Peter Prince of the Apostles, the venerable
Council of Chalcedon offered it to them.

XI. IN which last passage (inculcated by him at every turn, no less Epist. 32,
36, 38. lib. 7. Epist. 30.
than four or five several times) I cannot but remark either his Carelessness,
or Insincerity; Carelessness, in taking such an important passage upon trust; or
Insincerity, if knowing it to be otherwise, to lay so much stress upon so false
and sandy a foundation. For the truth is, neither were his Predecessors so
modest, that I know of, as to refuse such a Title, neither did the Synod of
Chalcedon ever offer it to them. There being nothing in all the Acts of that
Council that looks this way more than this, that four persons that came from
Alexandria with Articles against Dioscorus their Bishop, exhibited their
several Libels of Accusation, which they had presented to Pope Leo (who had
beforehand espoused the quarrel) with this inscription, To Leo the most holy
and religious Ecumenical Archbishop and Patriarch of Great Rome. These Libels
the Papal Legates desired might be inserted into the Acts of the Council; which
was done accordingly (as is usual in all judiciary Proceedings) for no other
reason (as the Synod it self tells Conc. Chalc. Act. III. col. 419. Conc. T. 4.
us) but this, that remaining there, they might thence be again rehearsed in
Council, when Dioscorus himself should appear, and come to make his defense.

This is the true state of the case, and now let the Reader judge, whether the
Council offered the Pope this Title, when they were so far from approving it,
that they did not so much as once take notice of it. I do not deny, but that
the Pope's Legates might have an eye that way, and design to have that Title
remain among the Records of the Council (as they were watchful Stewards to
improve all advantages for their Master;) and therefore we find them sometimes
subscribing Ib. Act. vi. col. 579.
themselves Vicegerents of Leo of Rome, Bishop of the universal Church, which
yet elsewhere Act. xvi. col. 818.
they thus explain, (...), the Apostolical and chief Bishop of the whole
Church. But however they intended it, certain it is for any thing that appears
to the contrary, that the Fathers themselves never dreamt of any such matter,
and accordingly when they came Act. iv. col. 472. etc.
singly to declare their Judgments about the Epistle of Pope Leo, they style
him only Pope, or Archbishop of Rome, nor do his Legates there give him any
other Title. And in their Synodal Epistle Ext. ib. col. 834.
to him, they superscribe it only, To the most holy and blessed Archbishop of
Rome. Binius Not. in loc. col. 997.
indeed will have the word Ecumenical to have been in the Inscription, and
that it was maliciously struck out by some Transcriber, because (says he) in
the body of the Epistle the Fathers own Leo to be the Head of the Universal
Church, and the Father of all Bishops. When as the Letter has not one word to
that purpose, more than this, That as the Head presides over the Members, so
did Leo over the Bishops in that Synod; which can import no more than his
presiding by his Legates ((...), in his qui tuas vices gerebant, as the last
publishers of the Councils truly correct the Translation) in that Council.

But suppose the Pope had had this Title conferred upon him, (as Gregory
untruly affirms) 'twas no more than what was frequently given to the Patriarch
of Constantinople, as, to omit other instances, is evident from the Council
holden there Ann. DXXXVI. under Mennas, and another under John 18 years before,
where John and Mennas, successively Bishops of that See, have both in the Acts
of those Councils, and in Libels of Address from whole Synods, the Title of
Ecumenical Patriarch near twenty times bestowed upon them. And this was
several years before it was assumed by that Patriarch John whom we mentioned
before.

And it is methinks a sorry evasion of Baronius Ad An. 518. T. 7. p. 5.
, and his Footman Binius Not. in Conc. sub Menna. Conc. T. v. col. 274.
(though it is that which they always have at hand, when an Argument pinches,
which they know not how to decline) that this Title was foisted into the Acts
of the Council by some later Greeks. And yet they produce no authority, no nor
shadow of pretense from any ancient Copy that ever it was otherwise. And what
if the Church of Rome did receive the Acts of that Council, and yet make no
such clamours and loud outcry against it? Perhaps it did not entirely admit the
Acts of that Synod under John of Constantinople Ann. DXVIII. Binius himself
says, they were but Magna ex part recepta, in a great measure received by the
Church of Rome. And who knows whether this Title might not be some part of what
was rejected. But if not, perhaps the Popes might slight it as a Title only
accidentally given, not claimed as due. Whereas Pelagius and Gregory rant so
much against the other John, because he assumed it in opposition to Rome, and
had it by a solemn Synodical Act conferred upon him. I observe no more
concerning this, than that Leo Allatius De Consens. Eccl. Or. and Occ. l. 1. c.
19. n. 7. col. 289.
(who is not wont to neglect the least hint that may serve his cause) speaking
of this passage, barely takes notice of Baronius's inference, without the least
sign of his approving it. But to return.

XII. WHILE Gregory was venting these passionate Resentments, John the
Patriarch dies. But the quarrel died not with him, Cyriacus, who came after
him, keeping up the Title. This put the Popes passion into a fresh ferment, and
now all the hard things are said over again, and Cyriacus Lib. 6. Epist. 4.
(vid. l. xi. Epist. 47. al. 45.
is warned to lay aside the scandal of that ungodly Title, that had given so
much offense; and that Ib. Ep. 24.
he would hold no communion with him 'till he had renounced that proud and
superstitious word, which was the invention of the Devil, and laid Epist. 28.
a foundation for Antichrist to take possession, nay peremptorily affirms Ib.
Ep. 30.
with an Ego autem fidenter dico, that whoever either styles himself, or
desires to be styled by others, Universal Bishop, is by that very Pride of his
a forerunner of Antichrist. And when he understood that John Bishop of
Thessalonica, Urbicius of Dyrrachium, John of Corinth, and several others, were
summoned to a Synod at Constantinople, not knowing whether a Snake might not
lie hid in the Grass, he writes Lib. 7. Epist. 70.
to them, giving them an account of the rise and progress of that proud and
pestiferous Title, (as he calls it) cautioning them not only not to use it
themselves, but not to consent to it in others, nor by any overt Act to approve
or own it; and if any thing should be craftily started in the Synod in favor
of it, he adjures them by all that is sacred, that none of them would suffer
themselves to be wrought upon by any Arts of Flattery and Insinuation, of
Rewards or Punishments to assent to it, but stoutly oppose themselves against
it, and courageously drive out the Wolf that was breaking into the Fold.

XIII. HE that shall view these passages, and look no farther than the outside
of things, will be apt to think, surely S. Gregory was the most self-denying
man in the World, and that he and his Successors would sooner burn at a Stake,
than touch this Title. And yet notwithstanding all these passionate outcries,
it is shrewdly suspicious, that they were levelled not so much against the Title
it self, as the person that bore it. We have taken notice all along what an
inveterate Pique the Bishops of Rome had against those of Constantinople, ever
since the Emperors and Councils had made them equal to them, and this now
added to all the rest, seemed to exalt Constantinople infinitely above S.
Peter's See.

Had this Title been Synodically conferred upon the Pope, we had heard none of
this noise and clamor; but for him to be passed by, and his Enemy the
Patriarch of Constantinople to be crowned with this Title of Honor, 'twas this
dropped the Gall into his Ink. And therefore in the midst of all this Humility he
ceased not to challenge a kind of Supremacy over that Bishop: Who doubts (says
he Lib. 7. Epist. 64.
) but that the Church of Constantinople is subject to the Apostolic See, a
thing which both the Emperor, and Eusebius the Bishop of it, daily own. But
this it is plain is there spoken in the case of Rites and Ceremonies, wherein it
seems all Churches must take their Measures from Rome; unless with Spalato De
Rep. Eccl. l. 4. c. 4, n. 28. p. 582.
we understand it of a subjection in point of Order and Dignity, that Rome was
the first See, and Constantinople the second.

The truth is, to me the passage seems suspected, and that Constantinople is
there thrust in for some other place; and the rather, because there was no
Eusebius at that time Bishop of that See, nor for a long time either before or
after. However, Gregory had all his Eyes about him, that no disadvantage might
surprise him; and therefore in his Letter to the Bishops of Greece (mentioned
before) that were going to the Synod at Constantinople, he tells them, that
although nothing should be attempted for the confirmation of the Universal
Title, yet they should be infinitely careful, that nothing should be done there
to the prejudice of any place or person: which though coucht in general terms,
yet whoever understands the state of those Times, and the Pope's admirable
tenderness in those Matters, will easily see, that he means himself. And
indeed, that the Bishops of Rome looked upon the Title of Ecumenical Bishop to
be foul and abominable only 'till they could get it into their own hands, is
evident, in that Gregory had scarce been 12 Months cold in his Grave, when Pope
Boniface the Third got that Title taken from Constantinople, and affixed to the Sea of Rome; the manner whereof we shall a little more particularly relate.

XIV. MAURICIUS the Emperor had in his Army a Centurion called Phocas, one
whose deformed looks were the Index of a more brutish and misshapen Mind. He was
Cedren* compend. Hist. p. 404.
angry, fierce, bloody, ill-natured, debauched, and unmeasurably given to Wine
and Women; so bad, that when a devout Monk Cedren. ib. p. 407. vid. Anastas.
Sinait. Quaest. xvi. p. 182.
of that time often expostulated with God in Prayer, why he had made him
Emperor, he was answered by a voice from Heaven, Because I could not find a
worse. This Man taking the opportunity of the Soldiers mutinying, murdered the
Emperor, and possessed his Throne, which he filled with Blood, and the most
savage Barbarities. Ten of the Imperial Family Vid. Niceph. l. 18. c. 41, 55.
he put to death, and so far let loose the Reins to fierceness and cruelty,
that he had it in design, to cut off all those, whom Nobility, or Wisdom, or
any generous or honorable Actions had advanced above the common Rank. And yet
as bad as this lewd Villain was, scarce was he warm in the Throne when he
received Addresses from Pope Gregory, who complemented the Tyrant, and that too
in Scripture Phrase, at such a rate, that I know not how to reconcile it with
the honesty of a good Man. His Letter L. xi. Epist. xxxvi. Indict. vi. col. 793.
begins with a Glory be to God on high, who, according as it is written,
changes Times, and transfers Kingdoms, who gives every one to understand so
much, when he says by his Prophet, the most High rules in the Kingdom of Men,
and gives it to whomsoever he will.

The whole Letter is much of the same strain, representing the happy advantages
the World would reap under the benign influences of his Government. And in
another Ib. Ep. xliii. col. 796.
written not long after he tells him, what infinite Praise and Thanks they owed
to Almighty God, who had taken off the sad and heavy Yoke, and had restored
times of Liberty under the conduct of his Imperial Grace and Piety. He wrote
Ib. Ep. xliv.
likewise to the Empress Leontia (one who is said to have been not one jot
better than her Husband) with flattering Caresses; and under abundance of good
words, courts her kindness and patronage to the Church of S. Peter, which he
fails not to back with, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock, etc. To thee I will
give the Keys, etc.

XV. NOT long after Gregory dies, and Sabinian, who succeeded, living not full
six Months, Boniface the Third of that name takes the Chair. He had very lately
been Apocrisiarius, or the Pope's Legate at Constantinople, where he wanted not
opportunities to insinuate himself into the favor of Phocas, and the
Courtiers. And now he thought it a fit time to put in for what the Popes
notwithstanding all the pretenses of Self-denial, so much desired, the Title of
Universal Bishop, and the rather because Cyriacus Patriarch of Constantinople,
was at this time under disfavour at Court. From the very first entrance upon
the Papacy he dealt Sabell. Ennead. viii. l. 6. col. 528. Plat. in vit. Bonif.
iii. p. 85. Naucher. vol. ii. Gener. xxi. p. 754. Adon. Martyrol. pride. Id.
Novembr.
with Phocas about this matter, and at length gained the point, though not
without some considerable difficulty and opposition, aegre nec sine multa
contentione, as my Authors have it.

At last out comes an Edict from Phocas, commanding, that the Church of Rome
should be styled and esteemed the Head of all Churches, and the Pope Universal
Bishop. A rare Charter sure, not founded upon the Canons of the Church, but
upon an Imperial Edict, and this Edict too granted by the vilest and the worst
of Men. But so they had it, no matter how they came by it. And now that Title
that had so lately been new, vain, proud, foolish, profane, wicked,
hypocritical, presumptuous, perverse, blasphemous, devilish, and Antichristian,
became in a moment not only warrantable, but holy and laudable, being
sanctified by the Apostolic See.

XVI. FROM henceforth the Church of Rome sat as Queen, and governed in a
manner without control. For the Empire being broken in the West by the
irruptions of the Lombards into Italy, and its Power declining in the East by
the successful invasions of the Saracens, the Emperors were but little at
leisure to support and buoy up the Honor of the Constantinopolitan
Patriarchate. Advantages which the Popes knew well enough how to improve. And
indeed every Age made new Additions to the height of the Papal Throne, and the
Pride of that Church increasing proportionably to its Power and Grandeur,
hectored the World into submission to the Sea of Rome, which as imperiously
imposed its Commands and Principles upon other Churches, as Tyrants do Laws
upon conquered Countries. Witness (for a concluding instance) those extravagant
Canons Ext. inter Epist. Greg. vii. ad calc. Ep. lv. Conc. T. 10. col. 110. and
ap. Baron. ad ann. 1076. p. 479.
or Articles, ( DICTATES he calls them) which Pope Gregory the Seventh
published about the year MLXXV. I know Monsieur Launoy Epist. Part. vi. Epist.
13. (ad Ant. Faur.)
has attempted to show that these Dictates concerning the Prerogative of the Sea Apostolic were not framed by Gregory the Seventh. Whether his Reasons be
conclusive, I am not now at leisure to enquire. Sure I am they are without any
scruple owned for his by Baronius, and generally by all the Writers of that
Church: And Launoy himself is forced to grant, that several of them are
agreeable enough to the Humor, Pretensions, and Decrees of that Pope. They run
thus.

1. That the Church of Rome is founded by our Lord alone. 2. That the Bishop of
Rome only can be truly styled Universal Bishop. 3. That he alone has power to
depose or reconcile Bishops. 4. That his Legate, though of an inferior Degree,
is above all Bishops in Council, and may pronounce sentence of Deposition
against them. 5. That the Pope may depose absent Bishops. 6. That where any are
excommunicated by him, we may not, among other things, so much as abide in the
same House with them. 7. That he only may, according to the necessity of Times,
make new Laws, constitute new Churches, turn a Canonry into an Abbey, and on the
contrary divide a rich Bishopric, and unite such as are poor. 8. That it is
lawful only for him to use the Imperial Ornaments. 9. That all Princes shall
kiss none but the Pope's Feet. 10. That his Name alone shall be recited in
Churches. 11. That there is but one only name in the World [that is, that of
Pope.] 12. That it is in his power to depose Emperors. 13. That in case of
necessity he may translate Bishops from one See to another. 14. That
wheresoever he please, he may ordain a Clerk to any Church. 15. That whoever is
ordained by him, may have the Government of any other Church, but may not bear
Arms, nor may receive a superior Degree from any Bishop. 16. That no Council
ought to be called General without his Command. 17. That no Chapter nor Book
shall be accounted Canonical without his authority. 18. That no Man may reverse
Sentence past by him, and he only may reverse all others. 19. That he ought not
to be judged by any. 20. That none presume to condemn any person that appeals
to the Apostolic See. 21. That the weightier Causes of every Church ought to be
referred to that See. 22. That the Church of Rome never erred, nor, as the
Scripture testifies, shall ever err. 23. That the Bishop of Rome, if
Canonically ordained, is by the merits of S. Peter undoubtedly made holy, as S.
Ennodius Bishop of Pavia bears witness, favored herein by many of the holy
Fathers, as is contained in the Decrees of the blessed Pope Symmachus. 24. That
by his leave and command Subjects may accuse [their Superiors.] 25. That
without any Synod he may depose and reconcile Bishops. 26. That no Man shall be
accounted Catholic, that agrees not with the Church of Rome. 27. That it is in
his power to absolve the Subjects of unjust Governors from their Fealty and
Allegiance.
These were Maxims with a witness, delivered like a true DICTATOR and Head of
the Church. And it showed, the World was sunk into a prodigious Degeneracy,
when a Man durst but so much as think of obtruding such Principles upon the
Consciences of Men, and imposing them upon the belief of Mankind.

The END.
Books Printed for, and Sold by RICHARD CHISWELL.
FOLIO.
SPeed's Maps and Geography of Great Britain and Ireland, and of Foreign Parts.

Dr. Cave's Lives of the Primitive Fathers, in 2. Vol.

Dr. Cary's Chronological Account of Ancient Time.

Wanley's Wonders of the little World, or Hist. of Man.

Sir Tho. Herbert`s Travels into Persia, etc.

Holyoak's large Dictionary, Latin and English.

Sir Rich. Baker's Chronicle of England.

Wilson's Complete Christian Dictionary.

B. Wilkin's real Character, or Philosophical Language.

Pharmacopoeia Regalis Collegii Medicorum Londinensis.

Judge Jones's Reports in Common Law.

Cave Tabulae Ecclesiasticorum Scriptorum.

Hobbs's Leviathan.

Lord Bacon's Advancement of Learning.

Sir Will. Dugdale's Baronage of England in two Vol.

Hooker' Ecclesiastical Polity.

Winch's Book of Entries.

Isaac Ambrose's Works.

Guillim's Display of Heraldry with large Additions.

Dr. Burnet's History of the Reformation of the Church of England, in 2. Vol.

Dr. Burnet's Account of the Confessions and Prayers of the Murderers of
Esquire Thynn.

Burlace's History of the Irish Rebellion.

Herodoti Historia Gr. Lat. cum variis Lect.

Rushworth's Historical Collections the 2d. Part in 2. vol.

Rushworth's Large account of the Trial of the Earl of Strafford, with all the
circumstances relating thereunto.

Bishop Sanderson's Sermons, with his Life.

Fowlis's History of Romish Conspir. Treas. and Usurpat.

Dalton's Office of Sheriffs with Additions.

Dalton's Office of a Justice of Peace with additions.

Keeble's Collection of Statutes.

Lord Cook's Reports in English.

Sir Walter Raleigh's History of the World.

Edmunds on Caesar's Commentaries.

Sir John Davis's Reports.

Judge Yelverton's Reports.

The Laws of this Realm concerning Jesuits, Seminary Priests, Recusants, the
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance explained by diverse Judgments, and
resolutions of the Judges; with other Observations thereupon, by Will. Cawley
Esquire;.

William's impartial consideration of the Speeches of the five Jesuits executed
for Treason. 1680.

Josephus's Antiquities and Wars of the Jews with Fig.

QVARTO.
DR. Littleton's Dictionary, Latin and English.

Bishop Nicholson on the Church Catechism.

The Complete Clerk: Precedents of all sorts.

History of the late Wars of New England.

Dr. Outram de Sacrificiis.

Bishop Taylor's Disswasive from Popery.

Spanhemii Dubia Evangelica, 2 Vol.

Dr. Gibbs's Sermons.

Parkeri Disputationes de Deo.

History of the future state of Europe.

Dr. Fowler's Defense of the Design of Christianity, against John Bunnyan.

Dr. Sherlock's Visitation Sermon at Warrington.

Dr. West's Assize Sermon at Dorchester 1671.

Lord Hollis's Relation of the Unjust Accusation of certain French Gentlemen
charged with a Robbery 167^.

The Magistrates Authority asserted, in a Sermon, By James Paston.

Cole's Latin and English Dictionary.

Mr. James Brome's two Fast-Sermons.

Dr. Jane's Fast Sermon before the Commons. 1679.

Mr. John James' Visitation Sermon April. 9. 1671.

Mr. John Cave's Fast-Sermon on 30. of Jan. 1679.

Mr. John Cave's Assize Sermon at Leicester July 31. 1679.

Dr. Parker's Demonstration of the Divine Authority of the Law of Nature and
the Christian Religion.

Mr. William's Sermon before the Lord Mayor. 1679.

Mr. William's History of the Powder Treason, with a vindication of the
proceedings relating thereunto, from the Exceptions made against it by the
Catholic Apologist and others; and a Parallel betwixt that and the present
Popish Plot.

Speculum Baxterianum, or Baxter against Baxter.

Mr. Hook's new Philosophical Collections.

Dr. Burnet's Relation of the Massacre of the Protestants in France.

Dr. Burnet's Conversion and Persecutions of Eve Cohan a Jewess of Quality
lately Baptized Christian.

Dr. Burnet's Letter written upon Discov. of the late Popish Plot.

Dr. Burnet's Impiety of Popery being a second Letter written on the same
occasion.

Dr. Burnet's Sermon before the Lord Mayor upon the Fast for the Fire, 1680.

Dr. Burnet's Fast Sermon. before the House of Com. Dec. 22. 80.

Dr. Burnet's Sermon on the 30. of January 1681.

Dr. Burnet's Sermon at the Election of the L. Mayor. 1681.

Dr. Burnet's Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Houblon. 1682.

Dr. Burnet's Answer to the Animadversions on his History of the Rights of
Princes, 1682.

Dr. Burnet's Decree made at Rome 1679. condemning some Opinions of the
Jesuits and other Casuists. Published by Dr. Burnet, with a Preface.

Dr. Burnet's A Letter giving a Relation of the present state of the difference
between the French King and the Court of Rome.

Bibliotheca Norfolciana, sive Catalogus Lib. Manuscript. and impress. in omni
Art and Lingua, quos Hen. Dux Norfolciae Regiae Societati Londinensi pro
scientia naturali promovenda donavit.

OCTAVO.
ELborow's Rationale upon the English Service.

Bishop Wilkin's Natural Religion.

Hardcastle's Christian Geography and Arithmetic.

Dr. Ashton's Apology for the Honors and Revenues of the Clergy.

Lord Hollis's Vindication of the Judicature of the House of Peers in the case
of Skinner.

Lord Hollis's Jurisdiction of the H. of Peers in case of Appeals.

Lord Hollis's Jurisdiction of the H. of Peers in case of Impositions.

Lord Hollis's Letters about the Bishops Votes in Capital Cases.

Duporti Versio Psalmorum Graeca.

Dr. Grew's Idea of Philological History continued on Roots.

Spaniara's Conspiracy against the State of Venice.

Dr. Brown's Religio Medici: with Digbies Observations.

Dr. Salmon upon the London Dispensatory.

Brinsley's Posing of the Accidence.

Several Tracts of Mr. Hales of Eaton.

Bishop Sanderson's Life.

Dr. Tillo^son's Rule of Faith.

Dr. Simpson's Chemical Anatomy of the Yorkshire Spaws; with a Discourse of
the Original of Hot Springs and other Fountains.

Dr. Simpson's Hydrological Essays, with an Account of the Alum works at
Whitby, and some Observations about the Jaundice. 1s. 6d.

Dr. Cox's Discourse of the Interest of the Patient, in reference to Physic
and Physicians.

Organon Salutis: or an Instrument to cleanse the Stomach. With diverse new
Experiments of the Virtue of Tabaco and Coffee: with a Preface of Sir Hen.
Blunt.

Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity, in three Parts.

A Discourse of the Nature, Ends, and difference of the two Covenants, 1672. 2s.

Ignatius Fuller's Sermons of Peace and Holiness. 1s. 6d.

A free Conference touching the present State of England, at home and abroad,
in order to the designs of France. 1s.

Mystery of Jesuitism, Third and Fourth Parts.

Doctor Sanway's Unreasonableness of the Romanists.

Record of Urines.

Doctor Ashton's Cases of Scandal and Persecution.

Cole's Latin and English Dictionary.

The Trials of the Regicides in 1660.

Certain genuine Remains of the Lord Bacon in Arguments Civil, Moral, Natural,
etc. with a large account of all his Works, by Dr. Tho. Tennison.

Dr. Puller's Discourse of the Moderation of the Church of England.

Dr. Saywel's Original of all the Plots in Christendom.

Sir John Munsons Discourse of Supreme Power and Common Right.

Dr. Henry Bagshaw's Discourses on select Texts.

Mr. Seller's Remarks relating to the State of the Church in the three first
Centuries.

The Country man's Physician; for the use of such as live far from Cities or
Market Towns.

Dr. Burnet's account of the Life and Death of the Earl of Rochester.

Dr. Burnet's Vindic. of the Ordinations of the Church of Engl.

Dr. Burnet's History of the Rights of Princes in the Disposing of
Ecclesiastical Benefices and Church Lands.

-- Life of God in the Soul of man.

Markam's Perfect Horseman.

Dr. Sherlock's Practical Disc. of Religious Assemblies.

Dr. Sherlock's Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness of Separation.

Dr. Sherlock's Vindication of the defense of Dr. Stillingfleet in Answer to
Mr. Baxter and Mr. Lob about Catholic Communion.

The History of the House of Estee, the Family of the Duchess of York, Octavo.

Sir Rob. Filmer's Patriarcha, or Natural Power of Kings.

Mr. John Cave's Gospel to the Romans.

Dr. Outram's 20. Sermon. preached on several occasions.

Dr. Salmon's new London Dispensatory.

Lawrence's interest of Ireland in its trade and wealth stated.

DVODECIMO.
HOdder's Arithmetic.

Gro^ius de Veritate Religionis Christianae.

Bishop Hacket's Christian Consolations.

The Mothers Blessing.

A Help to Discourse.

New-Englands Psalms.

An Apology for a Treatise of Human Reason, written by M. Clifford Esquire;.

The Queen-like Closet, both parts.

VICESIMO QVARTO.
VAlentine's Devotions.

Guide to Heaven.

Pharmacopoeia Collegii Londinensis reformata.

Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
AN Historical Relation of the Island of CEYLON in the East Indies: Together
with an Account of the detaining in Captivity the Author, and diverse other
Englishmen now living there, and of the Author's miraculous Escape:
Illustrated with fifteen Copper Figures, and an exact Map of the Island. By
Capt. Robert Knox, a Captive there near 20 years, Fol.

Mr. Camfield's two Discourses of Episcopal Confirmation, Octavo.

Bishop Wilkin's Fifteen Sermons never before extant.

Mr. John Cave's two Sermons of the duty and benefit of submission to the Will
of God in Afflictions, Quar.

Dr. Crawford's serious expostulation with the Whiggs in Scotland, Quarto.

A Letter giving a Relation of the present state of the Difference between the
French King and the Court of Rome; to which is added, The Popes Brief to the
Assembly of the Clergy, and their Protestation. Published by Dr. Burnet.

Alphonsus Borellus de motu Animalium, in 2 Vol. Quarto.

Dr. Salmon's Doron Medicum, or supplement to his new London Dispensatory,
Octavo.

Sir James Turner's Pallas Armata, or Military Essays of the Ancient, Grecian,
Roman and Modern Art of War, Fol.

Mr. Tanner's Primordia: or the Rise and Growth of the first Church of God
described, Octavo.

A Letter writ by the last Assembly General of the Clergy of France to the
Protestants, inviting them to return to their Communion; together with the
Methods proposed by them for their Conviction. Translated into English and
Examined by Dr. Gilb. Burnet, Octavo.

Dr. Cave's Dissertation concerning the Government of the Ancient Church by
Bishops, Metropolitans, and Patriarchs: more particularly concerning the
ancient Power and Jurisdiction of the Bishops of Rome, and the encroachments of
that upon other Sees, especially Constantinople, Octavo.

Dr. Cave's His History of the Lives, Acts, Death, and Writings of the most
eminent Fathers of the Church that flourished in the fourth Century: (being a
Second Volume) wherein amongst other things is an Account of Arianism, and all
other Sects. of that Age. With an Introduction containing an Historical account
of the state of Paganism under the First Christian Emperors, Folio.

Books in the Press.
DOctor John Lightfoot's Works in English, Fol.

Mr. Selden's Janus Anglorum Englished, with Notes: To which is added his
Epinomis, concerning the Ancient Government and Laws of this Kingdom, never
before extant. Also two other Treatises written by the same Author: One of the
Original of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of Testaments; the other of the
Disposition or Administration of Intestates Goods: now the first time
Published, Fol.

Mezeray's History of France rendered into English, Fol. Gul. Ten* Rhyne Med.
Doct Dissertat. de Arthritide, Mantyssa Schematica, and de Acupunctura. Item
Orationes tres de Chemiae ac Botaniae Antiquitate and Dignitate. De*
Physiognomia and de Monstris. Cum Figuris and Authoris notis illustratae,
Octavo.

D. Spenceri Dissertationes de Ratione Rituum Judaicorum, etc. Fol.


