Maddam Celliers ANSWER TO THE POPES LETTER. Dated from the Vatican the 1st of
August, 1680. Wherein she Declares her fidelity and firmness to the
Catholick-Cause,
And expresses her Joy for his HOLINESSES Compassionate Bounty and Care of his
Afflicted Daughter, with the Relation how, she was Delivered by the help of his
Sons the Jesuits in Newgate, of her late Prodigious Narrative, and also of her
mighty Sufferings, and strange Adventures that has befell her since her late
Confinement.

With her humble Request to her Holy Father to send her a thousand pounds out
of the Catholic Contributions, in order to the paying of her Fine, that she
may give him a speedy Visit, and instruct him farther in his grand Affairs.

HOLY FATHER,
IT is not to be expressed, what Joy I conceived at the perusal of your Letter,
which in spite of all the raging Heretics Devices to Entrap, came safe unto
the hands of your obedient Daughter, who kissed it at least a thousand times
e're she could read it out; embracing it as the dear Pledge of Peace from you,
unto her restless Thoughts; whose Virtue most miracalously circumfused those
Fears and Terrors that o'recast her Cloudy Soul and made her wander in a mist
of Horrors and distracting Doubts; for me thoughts I had no sooner fixed my
Eyes upon it, but my Plotting genius uneclips'd, and double Vigor spread
through every part, The Cause came fresh into my mind, and I resolved not to
give over, nor forsake those holy purposes my Brains were once so pregnant
with, nor suffer them to fail for want of being put in Practice though I
remained within the unhallowed Walls of a Terrestial Tophet, not unlike your
Purgatory, on the little Entry on the backside of your Seraglio, that leads to
Pluto's Postern-Dore; through which as I have heard by some departed Jesuits,
you send those Bagages of Nuns, as are so impudent as to deny their Universal
Dad such Crumbs of Comfort to refresh his Cockatrice, as sordid Monks without a
prick to Conscience daily Chew upon.

But to wave that point, and yet come nearer to my own particular Case, you
write dear Father; that you lately heard from the Provincial of my mighty
sufferings, but I am afraid you have not yet received the full Relation of
them, as to the Meal-tub persecution, I doubt not but that you are fully
informed in every circumstance, and perhaps more than was done, for I indeed
did make the most on it, to gain the greater pity, and to set a fairer gloss
upon the rugged Cause, but as for these late ones, O I dread to tell you all
the deal of misery, lest it should turn you and your Conclave into Lachrime,
and make you weep your Eyes out, at which I know the Heretics would laugh and
sni^ker till they bepiss themselves, therefore as yet to tell the depth of my
Afflictions you must excuse me, or I my self will heartily entreat your pardon,
and in requital for the same if ever I come to Rome will present your Holiness
with such a Mess of strengthening Jelly, as shall make Prickaro mount his head
aloft, and then to lay it, will procure you one of the Bucksomest Lasses that
your City can afford; you need not doubt my Skill in choosing, for all my
sufferings and Afflictions have not made me to forget my ancient Trade of
hagling for humane Flesh, or if it better like your Holiness to sail in a well
seasoned Frigot (bona fide) you shall have my weather-beaten-Skiff, that be
sure will hold against both Wind and Tide.

But to my second Persecution, Oh I tremble for to name the minor part of it,
least foreign Catholics should run stark mad to hear such horrors told, the
which some millions here have done to see; oh my Narrative, that Balsome for
the wounded Cause and Thunderbolt to guard it when once healed. That it was,
that pulled on me this second Skeam of woe, one of which I doubt not but you
have received as my Present to you and your Conclave, from my Ladies Footboy,
whom we sent on purpose, and gave him moneys, with strict Charge to bring a
couple of Indulgencies to dispense with Lying and Whoring, and such like
trivial things, but I see your Catholic Care and Bounty has been great, to
send me a hundred on freecost before the Lad could Arrive; but I will deserve
them e're I come to see you if my genius fail me not; for I have yet some
twenty Plots in store that never yet were set on broach, all pickled up and
kept as a Reserve; but I dwell too long upon Circumstances, and neglect
materials. Well then, no sooner had I escaped so fairly from the bottom of the
Meal-tub, and putting new Hoops thereon, to make it hold, sent it to your
Holiness as the first Signal of the Causes good suceess, but I found my Soul
more Active, and my Zeal blazed faster which prompted me on to lay a yet more
deep Foundation to our tottering superstructure; whereupon I pondered a while,
but long had not, e're some unknown Cacodaemon buz'd into my Ears the laying
down such fundamental precepts as might make the World believe the Plot was but
a Chimaera of Fantastic Brains (no doubt but you sent him to promote so good a
work, in which I was the notorious instrument) upon which I found my Brains too
weak to manage such profound Affairs, yet resolved not to let the happy motion
slip, I went to your beloved Sons in Limbus patrum) where the Heretics had put
them up a fatting, and found means to tell them what a birth I labored with,
of which if they would help but to deliver me, it would not only be
meritorious, but likewise advantageous to every man and Mothers Child that
adore your Holiness, and hold you supreme Controuler of Pandamonium; Well, I
had no sooner proposed, but I found them readier to comply than I was to desire
them. Having as they told me power to dispense with all manner of Villainies
that might conduce to their Interest. Here we struck a Bargain, and as the
three Heathen gods by pissing in old Baucis Bull-hide did procure him a Son, so
we by laying our mischievous Heads together in six weeks brought forth this
monstrous Bantling for your Holiness, and sent it out full gorged with Poison
to spit its Venom against our Adversaries, with a strict Charge, that
wheresoever it came it should own you for Father and me for its mother. Some of
your Sons of no mean Rank would have persuaded me to have put my Mounsiers
Horns upon its Front, that so it might have pushed Heretics before it, and
indeed such Arms might have done well in times so dangerous, for I dare affirm
they are far larger if not quite as strong as those that Gedelia made for Ahab
in the days of yore. This device, or else the Blackamoors gimcracks that I
loved so well had certainly been put on; had not I upon second thoughts had
greater Veneration for your Cross, which was no doubt very ominous, for it has
proved Cross to me, and crossed every vain in my poor Heart.

For why we are so eager in the shuffling our Offspring together, that he
might not be took napping, and so rendered Abortive before he had Infected the
Credulous, that we minded not of what stuff we tempered him, so that when he
came narrowly to be sifted by the Judicious, he was found to be the damdest
Medly that ever yet took; being some affirmed him to be quickened like
Prometheus his Man of Clay, by the Mistick help of stolen Fire, the which to my
sa^ grief by the opening of Pandoras Box, I shortly after found too true)
others affirmed him Hocus-Pocus Bastard got upon the Strumpet Legerdemain, and
all in general concluded it, to have it is Original from the Father of Malicious
Lies, yet notwithstanding I brazened it out, and owned it as my Darling, though
to tell the truth I had least share in it; well this would not serve my turn,
for it was taken so to task, and shaken by the Heels, till high Misdemeanors,
if not Treason in its black hue dropped out of its Pocket, or Chimically
extracted from the other stuff, it was compounded of, then was your Daughter in
the midst of all her Jollitry, once more surprised and hurried to Answer for
the dangerous Ill's our Adversaries had drained from our Issue. But here the
Counselling Demon that was wont to attend my Sollitudes hearing the Heretics
shout, left me in the lurch and sneaked to Hell, which so disheartened me that
I had not Impudence enough to deny what I before had owned, so that the Wooden
Engine with which you will see in my Narrative, I have so often upbraided my
Late Placket Friend; to describe it, indeed it is almost like your Pontifick
Chair, but that it wants a Canopy web to prevent this and the eminent Storm
that the Heritick Rabble threatened to shower on my Crown, once more I Summoned
my Infernal Fugative in your powerful name who like a lowl eared Cur at last
peeped with his Horns above board, after I had railed at him sufficiently I
sent him to the Jesuits to consult with them what was best to be done, where by
unanimous consent, it was agreed that when my Tormenters came to isult and bid
me prepare for my Persecution I should take a Dose of strong Purgation, this I
punctually observed, and timed it to the time they ordered me to be prepared
for the dreadful business, but alas the Heretics deceived me, and gave a false
Alarm, yet to prevent the worst I stood upon my Guard, feigned to be monstrous
sick and discharged my whole Artillery at both ends, with such fury. that what
for fume and noise, none durst approach me; this elusion made me half
distracted and concluded the Devil was no Conjurer, for if he had, no doubt the
Dog would have saved me this Project till there had been certain occasion for
it; well, vexed as I was, I set my invention on the Wrack again, and being near
Neighbor to your suffering Sons, I did in no wise want their Councils; so that
again our Brains brought forth a project new, and strange, knowing that the
time of my general Ostentation was not now far off, whereupon I sent my maid
for a Bulls Cod, which filled with Blood I thrust into my Semy-Circle, upon the
morning that I was by Order doomed to mount. Well, this fitted my purpose
passing well, for when they came to bid me rise, I counterfeited
Child-bed-throwes, and bellowed louder than the fattest Bull your Conclave ever
afforded, and fetched such groans, as might well have been heard to Rome, yet
my Tormentors were so barbarous as rudely to force entrance though I had
barrocaded up the Door, then I yelled so, that those who heard from far,
supposed the noise proceeded from a speaking Trumpet, which Outcry drove them
back to him that sent them; then was a grave Matron sent for, who attended with
a Female-guard, to view the Premises, and make a narrow search into the mighty
business that had made the grand disturbance, the which after much Pumping of
her Conscience I did permit, which seemed to me so soft, that Gold would make
Impression there, and to boot, I also promised to get her one of your
Indulgencies to pardon all the Lies she told, or Oaths that she should swear
tho never so false, but I was mistaken, and once more my Devil failed me in my
greatest necessity, for she proved Heretical, and would not touch what I well
thought all the World adored, but returned my monstrous teaming ignoramus, and
to the immortal scandal of the holy Cause laid all the intreague open, to the
babbling World, well, I would not be so served, but called her false perfidious
and a thousand Names roaring out louder than at first, and cursed with many
Execrations loud and bloody, whereupon a second was produced, who was my Sister
Trade, her by her Looks I dared to trust, and after found her to be neither
Heretic nor Papist, nor indeed of any Religion whatsoever, but having left her
Conscience fast asleep at home, for half a Crown a smaller Fee than ever I was
bribed for, she did affirm the Scene was Tragical, and that the mighty Monster
that had caused all this bustle, was about to peep into the World, offering to
swear what ever I would have her; but in vain, for my persecutors would not
believe one word, so that when I saw my Projects would not take I started up
and bid defiance to them all, and presently betook me to my Armor, claping on
my Coat of Male; and for a Caske thrust my head into a Leathern-Bottle, then
strenuously (as Romes Championess) Like Jezabel I marched along to the War
Chariot that they had prepared to transport me to the Theater whereon I was to
Act my part, in view of all the gaping Heriticks, but e're I went, I did
bethink my self that I should want a Buckler for to defend me from the lowering
Tempest that I was to encounter with; and therefore gave order to my Maid to
run before, and fetch my Peel, which I having got, mounted up aloft, and
thought my self as pompous and as well attended as Pope Jone in her Procession
to St. Angello.

Well then, I peeping through my Headpiece, could not choose but laugh to see
the grinning Rout surround me, whilst I braved them with my wooden Buckler and
Fence of trusty Bull-hide, then presently the Storm began, and the persecuting
Heretics with Rage tossed Milstones at me thick and fast, the least of which
could not be less than a thousand weight, and Iron Globes about one hundred
weight like Hail, which rebounded from my mighty Helmet, at least some fifty
Yards into the Air; nay more than that, so furious were they bent on my
Destruction, that some of them had planted Cannons whose Balls as fast as they
were sent, like Sugar-plums I catched between my Teeth; but this no doubt was
done by Miracle; after which I verily supposed they would have made Dianah on
me, they having set me up in State, immediately a Fire was kindled, into whose
Flam^s I doubted not but In^enie would have been thrown in honor of my (...),
and that the H^reticks would have relented of the injuries late done, but (...)
made to receive my I^sue that had caused all the Bustle; there did (...) are
Babe expire, and was Perfumed with his Ruin.

(...) P^rsecutions, that the Heathen Emperors were strangers to did (...)
suffer, or I would have you at least believe so, and persuade (...) belief as I
have done to all the easy Catholics in England. Well, (...) ^^^ll they can
inflict, your large promi^es will make amends; I will (...) last You say your
Cofers ar open, pray send me one thousand pounds in (...) procuring my
discharge, that I may come to Rome and visit you to instruct (...) in Affairs,
you are yet ignorant of, to be your privy Counselor, Nurse are Mi^^^^^^ any of
which would please me wondrous well; or if those places be supplied, to (...)
you intimated, Midwife-General to your Seraglio till England come into your
hands. If you have not the money, make a Brief, and to encourage the Doners,
tell them this lamentable Story, that I tied by the Great-toe with a
Packthread, and hung out for a Sign on the top of all the Monument, and must
not be taken down till the like Sum be paid. This from your Obedient Daughter,
and faithful Servant to promote the Cause,

NEWGATE, Oct. the 6. 1680. E. C.

London, Printed by D. Mallet, 1680.


