A CENSURE OF THREE Scandalous Pamphlets. I. A Defense of Dr. Crisp, against
the Charge of Mr. Edwards of Cambridg, by Esquire Edwards in Wales. II.
Reflections on the Authors of the late Congregational Declaration against
Antinomianism, and Trepidantium Malleus, by the A. Club. III. A Sermon preached
Jan. 30. last, by Canon Gilbert in Plymouth, with a tedious Preface of Mr. J. Y.


Haud timeo, si jam nequeam defendere crimen
Cum tanto commune viro.
Vlys. Genesis 19.7. I pray, Brethren, do not so wickedly.

LONDON; Printed, and are to be sold by A. Baldwin in Warwick Lane* 1699.

A Friendly Epistle to Esquire Edwards, concerning his Defense of Dr. Crisp,
against the just Charge of Mr. Edwards of Cambridg, that Orthodox, moderate
Conformist.
GREAT SIR,
THAT you are a Gentleman, a studious one, and of unusual Accomplishments,
natural and acquired, cannot, and therefore shall not be denied, but cheerfully
granted by me. I meddle not with your late large Book with its superfluous
Branches, Baxterianism Barefaced, for which fault Dr. Chamry was against its
publication, as we are credibly informed. I, and other zealous Anti-Baxterians,
are both troubled and ashamed, when we see,

1. That any Advocate for Dr. Crisp should thus appear against Baxterianism:
For which sound Calvinists will give you no thanks, knowing you often oppose
not Error with Truth. You confirm these Men in their Notions, when they read
your more wild ones.

2. That you in that Book drop such words as these. They (the Baxterians) like
the Writers against Dr. Crisp, mistake Men's sense, and misrepresent their words
-- Thus you became rather their Compurgator than Censurer.

3. That you should charge Mr. Baxter as a Writer against sound Conformists,
and Nonconformists, about Justification, etc. and yet vindicate Dr. Crisp much
more corrupt than he, and more opposite to the Authors you cite. This fills us
all with amazement, that you so strangely forget your self.

4. That you have imposed on us in citing some Authors against Mr. Baxter;
particularly Bishop Usher's Body of Divinity, p. 58. when it is well known
Bishop Usher told Dr. Bernard on his Deathbed: He was not the Author of that
Book, but that much of it was taken out of Mr. Crook 's Catechism. That there
were excellent things in it; and if any one would be at the pains to cut off
some Excrescencies, and make some good Additions, he might take the credit of
the whole. See Bishop Usher's Life. By the way, was it like a Disputant to
write against Mr. Baxter's Doctrine of Universal Redemption, to tell us plainly,
That you never saw that Book of his bearing that Title, tho you heard it was
printed since his death? Yes, by Mr. Read. Again, you bring in Mr. Baxter's
Objections, Christ did not for us do the Duty of a Husband, or Wife, or Father;
and cite Mr. Traughton to less purpose, when you might do it to better. P. 116.
Christ (says that blind seeing Man, that had the Eyes of Angels, tho not of
Cats and Dogs) was habitually disposed to do all the Work, and perform every
Duty for us in that Relation in which it pleased the Father to put him, and
this was virtual Obedience, etc. Luther. Rediv. Part. 2. Was not also your
tedious, endless Citation of Mr. Herbert Palmer's Memorials of Godliness
inexcusable? Almost all the Book. You say he was an old Presbyterian Puritan,
and an abhorrer of Baxterianism, which, say you, is a Paradox among some, tho
not all of them. Why a Paradox? I know not above four Baxterians among the
Ministers in a County, where once Providence cast my Lot.

5. That you seem to treat Mr. Baxter with less rudeness than Mr. Edwards.
What, is an unexceptionable Calvinist worse with you than a Neonomian? And,
which is worse, you damn the Baxterians, and little less Calvinists, as if lost
by a Covenant of Works. Yet we are glad, seeing you would meddle in these
matters,

1. To see so many good Strokes in that Book, and in a better Style than in
some other Books. Many things you mention are too bad, too true: You say right
of Barkly the Learned Quaker: He linkt the Papists and Baxterians together, and
himself with both, about Justification, P. 22. Let others answer for
themselves, and, Master, this is not my Work.

2. That you are so good an Example to our Gentry, who spend their time in
Pleasure, Hunting, Whoring, Drunkenness -- When you are so sober, so serious,
so contemplative, I take you to be a pious but melancholy Man.

3. That you are so zealous against Quakerism, in your Comparison between
Quakerism and Baxterianism.

I hope now the fit or temptation to turn Quaker, so much talked of, is over. I
leave that Book, and apply my self to you about your Defense of Dr. Crisp
against Mr. Edwards of Cambridg bound up with it.

You, Sir, call this famous Divine (and so all of us that own the sound
Doctrine he pleads for) a Self-Justitiary -- and tell us, That the Truth, and
that in Fundamentals, has been from Dr. Crisp 's Works, maint^n'd and defended
fully. That Mr. Edwards 's Doctrine (Justification by Faith) justifies the
Papists Charge against us of Schism from the Church of Rome and Council of
Trent: and that you will maintain, that any Jesuit might unequivocally, and
safely as well as gladly subscribe. -- What, Man, is Justification by Faith
Popery? What shall I do? To cite, is to confute; and therefore I will save the
Reader's Time and Money, not to answer such little (very little) trifles. Your
Discourse of Fountain Union in Election, virtual by Redemption, manifestative
in effectal Calling, is unlearnedly and too much Crispianly expressed; tho it is
true you tell us before of being made actual Members of the Head in time. I
should think, you being a sober Gentleman, had written this Book too soon after
a fit of Sickness, or the Vertigo, or the Calenture; or had you been a profane
Gentleman, after a Night's Debauch. P. 3. You say, Our Author ( Mr. Edwards and
his Jesuitical Fraternity, jumble Justification and Sanctification together
promiscuously. That the Doctor ( Dr. C.) separates them not, but as to their
Ends and Designs. No! why, were they sanctified too from Eternity, from the
Womb, in the height of all Wickedness? Manasseh, when he used familiar Spirits?
Saul, when he breathed out Slaughter against the Church? What, is imputed
Sanctification good Doctrine already? This is beyond Crisp. Why such a trite
Proverb so often repeated, Ab Equis ad Asinos -- What is it from the Baxterians
to the Crispians? I pray our late Preachers of imputed Sanctification to
consider, as Christ's Righteousness is so imputed to us for Justification, that
no subjective Righteousness of ours can justify: So if Christ's Righteousness
be imputed to us for Sanctification, no subjective Righteousness of ours could
sanctify. There would be no room for inherent Righteousness, Sanctification, or
Holiness, were the Elect in the height of all their Wickedness, in a state of
Unregeneracy, sanctified as well as justified; was there then no spot in them.
-- Which our Divines apply to Justification, when Believers. You say, The whole
I have seen against Dr. Crisp, will no more avail to Salvation than the Turkish
Alcoran. I will make it good, should any Man be saved by the Principles of
these Semi-justitiaries, his Hosannahs in Heaven would be but mere hypocrisy,
seasoned with a proud, pharisaical, vainglorious Spirit. Therefore, you say,
Mr. Edwards in writing against Dr. Crisp, is not far from the Sin against the
Holy Ghost. And, page 4. There is not the least tincture of common Morality in
all his pitiful Pamphlets. On you go; The shaking of my Dog's Tail is more
pleasing to me, because more of Integrity in it. What a comparison is here? Can
you not vindicate the young Tobie, but you must think of the old one and his
Dog? Where are some throwing away Integrity, to the Dogs? and shall it have no
better place there than in the Dog's Tail? Why no touch of the Birds muting? --
They were unkind Birds that did this to Toby senior, who had once good Eyes;
but to do this to Toby junior was worse, whose Eyes or Sight was never right,
but a poor purblind, dimsighted (or if you will, blind) Creature, from the
Womb, or at least the Cradle. You say, Knight of the Post, Arminianizing Palate
-- But where is the proof? A Mentiris may serve the turn here. I hope this
Censure of yours may be my Apology in vindicating Mr. Edwards, for I have
charged Dr. Crisp higher than he has done; and I assure you, without sinning
against Light.

You, and your Master, have paraphrased on some Scriptures so wildly, and that,
you under the Titles of the Books, as Mr. Masters in his Spiritual House, P.
107. They set up Post by my Post, and Threshold by my Threshold. So, says he,
will Men bring a Basin instead of a Font, and a new Directory instead of an old
Liturgy -- After all your bitterness, Who is the Rogerus Lestrangus Redivivus
you write of, you, or the worthy Divine? But R. L. is not dead, by the way.

With what face can you say Dr. Crisp was soun^ one with Dr. Owen, and others,
and with our Reformers? When it is so well known,

1. The Assembly of Divines made a woeful Outcr^ on the sight of Dr. Crisp's
Books, and employed Mr. Anthony Burges to answer him; whom he followe^ (...),
as much as Mr. Williams has done, an^ more than Mr. Edwards.

2. Mr. Lobb (now with God) to the last charg'^ Crisp as a Blasphemer; who
vindicated the Doctrine (...) our Reformers.

3. One would think you never read Dr. Owen, (...) make him one with. Dr.
Crisp. Dr. Owen in his Di^course of Justification; so much shunned that extrea^
that, 1. Mr. Baxter, as is famed, was not displease^ with the Book. 2. Mr.
Williams, ex abundanti, hat^ proved, that Dr. Owen's Doctrine was most opposite
(...) Dr. Crisp's. 3. Our Congregational Divines have prov'^ the same out of
Dr. Owen's Writings, and Dr. Goodwin's; That both were Enemies to Antinomian o^
Crispian Abominations, and there I refer the Reader.

And seeing, Sir, you offer a meeting to prove Dr. Crisp's Orthodoxy, and
challenge any of his Accuser^ to appear, I accept your Challenge; and that I
will prove that Dr. Crisp was an Enemy to Repentance, from the 298, 299, 300
Pages of his Book, where he say, David sinned in having Sin a burden, etc.

The Answers given me I laugh at, the Doctor spoke of Sorrow to desperation, to
excess. No, this Sorrow was never lawful. Now the Doctor supposes i^ might be
lawful before the time of Sacrifice, not after; or if after, not since the
great Sacrifice was offered up. Or that David was a Type of Christ, and so Sin
might be a burden to him. This was the Answer of Mr. L -- to a scrupulous
Antinomian, who found this Instance of David lying in the way of their cursed
Doctrine.

1. Then am I justified in my Charge, and Dr. Crisp condemned for a notorious
Heretic; for if David did this only as a Type of Christ, who bore the burden
of our Sins? then he did it not as a penitent Believer, or as a Member of
Christ, or Child of God.

2. Then, as the Doctor says; He is in this to be no President to us. If it
were lawful for David before the great Sacrifice was offered up, it is not so
for us under the Gospel, For we are not, say I, Types of Christ. O Diabolism!
none but the Devil and Dr. Crisp ever threw this Dirt upon true Repentance,
which has gotten a good Name among all Men, the worst of Heathens, and Men
profane. I heard one of them say in the Pulpit; That David spoke not of
himself, but of Christ, when he said, Mine Iniquities are gone over my head,
they are a heavy burden. -- I cannot look up. Some such Preachers are fitter to
preach on a Ladder than in a Pulpit.

O ye adorers of this Idol Crisp; you are like them that worshipped Wood and
Stone: Who had Eyes and saw not, etc. being a senseless brainless Man. And they
that make such Idols are like unto them. Sirs, be Men, and do not act like
Egyptians who worshipped Dogs, Cats, and Calves. I say it again on mature
thoughts, Socinus preached not more dangerous, more damnable Doctrine, than Dr.
Crisp. The great God pardon Mr. H --, Dr. B --, Witsius, and others, for their
favorable character of Dr. Crisp, whereby they have undone many a Soul; tho I
firmly believe they never read over all the Book, or did it with a running eye.
God forgive Mr. Williams, and Mr. Edwards too, for publishing their blind
charity about the Doctor, and all on this hope, that he practiced not his own
Doctrine. And whereas it is often said Mr. Williams has been the Man that has
thus heated me against Dr. Crisp; I declare nothing is more remote from truth:
but I have rather heated him; and I am sure he repented of his imprudent,
unadvised Charity, and I hope the aforementioned have, or will, of their
greater Error here. Say next, We hope Socinus was a good Man -- This were less
absurd if they did.

Mr. Hoskish in his Imputation of Sin, tells us that dreadful Story I mentioned
in my Vindiciae, when I then testified against Crisp's Abominations, that in
discourse he declared; Believers were not bound to be troubled for their Sins,
and said, Tho David was so, he was not bound to be so, and did it for want of
being better acquainted with the Covenant of Grace. I knew Mr. Hoskish well,
and dare not question his Veracity.

Good God! Was ever such a Heretic, such a Blasphemer, such a foolish kind of
Antiscripturist, counted a Christ-exalter till now! I have endeavored, with
others, to pull down the Walls of this Jericho, and with some success. Cursed,
say I, be the Man who builds her Walls any more. I am ready to sweat in
writing such Heresy, and dunstical Divinity, and by passages elsewhere will I
prove my Assertion: If I do it not, I will beg pardon of God and the Crispians
for wronging him; but if I do prove it, I c^ the Throat of Crispianism, and
undeceive some of his deluded Followers who cannot believe this Charge. You
take no notice of ^his damnable Heresy; vindicate him here if you can. You say,
Sir, If a Man be justified before he believes, then he is not justified by
Faith. Every Schoolboy will tell you, has been is the Preterperfectence. Rare
discoveries: and such may tell you, that has is put for the Future shall be,
else Christ was Incarnate before Isaiah wrote. But these, and many other
things, I have considered in my Three contending Brethren, Apology; and
New-Years-Gift, and thither I refer you. If Dr. Owen, say you, was not a
Crispian, I know not who was. Say I, if Dr. Owen was not an Anti-Crispian, I
know not who was; and this will I make good, if we meet, as before.

You say, p. 16. They censure the Doctor for condemning Graces and good Works
in the Popish and meritorious sense, and that this is the plain Grammar of all
our Virulency against him. -- All our Prayers, Tears, Meltings, cannot make God
lay our Iniquities on Christ. -- A profound Assertion: When Dr. Crisp said it,
Mr. Edwards replied, who ever said they did? You call him Doeg, and p. 18. say
that God will remember Amalek for standing in the way of God's Israel, and that
with an obliterating Remembrance. False Prophets, say you, acted by a lying
Spirit. That the Man of Sin notwithstanding all his Wickedness is called his
Holiness: Christ is the Lord our Righteousnest: All the Popes professed or
practical Adherents. -- We have Copies of the Council of Trent fleeing about
our Ears in various Pamphlets, against Dr. Crisp, or rather his Doctrine, which
is the Scripture Doctrine of Justification. No Man can believe you, nor you your
self. Sir be sober, and let not your arrows flee at random. Are Calvinists
Amalekites, as well as Baxterians? Does the Pope's name make Holiness less
lovely than an Archbishop's GRACE makes Free Grace so?

Arminianism and Socinianism, say you, p. 25. lies in our Author's treachery,
tho he owns a commutative imputation of Sin and Righteousness between Christ
and Believers. Will not the granting of this do? You say, p. 26. Most absconded
Sir, your cask smells of Socinianism, etc.

I have spent some time to consider, what makes you so waspish, and in such
fits of Raving: Is it a turbulent brawling Creature at home? If so, I pity you.
Some at first give them their Authority, and call for it too late. It is
storied of Semiramis, she desired Ninus she might Reign in his stead nine days:
he granted his supplicant Wife this thing, in which time she put him to death,
and took the Government on her self. It is not safe to let a Woman reign nine
Days: nine Days did I say; no, not nine Hours. Mrs. B. was too much Master at
home, and would do what she pleased. Such Men must be pitied, as well as blamed.

Now, Sir, whatever you and I differ in, I heartily agree with you in the close
of your Book, of what Mr. Edwards says after his Censure of Dr. Crisp's
Doctrine, That he hopes he was a good Man. This is, say you, a perfect Riddle:
It is a great one too to me. Mr. Edwards, Mr. Williams, that have so said,
deserve (I think) your Reprimand.

Seeing you at last Rhyme an Epitaph on Dr. Crisp, I will think of it. Yours
begins, Great Carbonado'd Crisp, what is now thy Crown,
And was thy Glory here, is trampled down, etc.


Frightful word! Carbonado'd! Where is he? Is he broiling? I should not like
it, if any had made such an Epitaph, as one did on a notorious Knave. If Heaven
be pleased, when Men do cease from Sin,
If Hell be pleased when it a Soul does win,
If the World be pleased when it has lost a Knave,
Then all are pleased -- is in his Grave.


Carbonado'd Crisp! I cannot get the word out of my Mind; such a word might
provoke one of us to Rhyme as foolishly as you, and so to deserve to be as
severely reproved. Suppose I should make this Epitaph. Crisp did not fear to
be, whilst here,
Compunctions Enemy.
Where he is now sent, he must repent,
To all Eternity.
None in the least ever professed
This Grace to have disgraced,
Satan alone, and Crisp his Son
In this are both barefaced.
He that did say, David did stray
When Sin his burden was;
A burden be finds Sin to be,
And ever cries, Alas!


Would you not say it were rashly done, and that I had made him a Carbonado'd
Man as well as you.

Come now, and let us reason together. I do acknowledge I look not on you as the
worst sort of Crispians. I know you would make Dr. Crisp to speak better than
he intended, and you pass by my Charge about Repentance. Because some of my
Friends are offended with a passage in my last Book, That Dr. Crisp his Book
was worse than the Racovian Catechism, and say it was a word of Passion, I say
no, I use no Hyperbole in it, but will now prove it. Next to the Notion of a
God, nothing is a greater Principle in natural, Religion than Repentance, even
to bitterness, for Contempt of this God, affronting his Authority, and offering
violence to the Laws and Methods of Heaven: and therefore Dr. Crisp, in
scoffing at such Repentance, has struck at one of the greatest Principles in
natural Religion. Now whether God may be merciful to some Socinians (such as
Mr. Fermin, and others) we are not all agreed, but we are all agreed (even,
those who assert the Salvation of Heathen by the light of Nature) That none can
be saved without Repentance, and bitterness for Sin. Neither can I see that I
am bound to be burdened for the Sins of others; for if they be Converted, the
great Sacrifice is offered up, and Christ has born the burden: if they be not
Converted, they may be Elected, for ought I know, and be converted in time. Why
then, if Rivers of Waters run down our Eyes, because Men keep not God's Laws,
we Sin after David in this also. If, with Lot, our Souls be grieved from Day to
Day, for the filthy Conversations of the Wicked: This will not prove us to have
righteous Souls with Lot, but legal Spirits. Paul's great Heaviness, and
continual Sorrow in his Heart for his Kinsmen, according to the Flesh, was not
commendable, but culpable. O God of infinite Patience and Goodness, whence is
it, that when thine Enemy made Repentance, Compunction, bitterness of Spirit,
feeling Sin a burden, to be so far from being a Duty, a necessary one, as thou
have made it, that with him it became a Sin of debasing of Christ, and so
scoffed at, thou had not sent him to Hell immediately to cry Alas there, who
^idicul'd it here! Blind Toby could not see the Absurdities he on all occasions
committed, as when he tells us, we are to do no Duties to profit our selves,
but others; Mr. Baxter answered well, Plowing, Sowing, etc. is to profit our
selves, -- and asks, Whether Christ has not done all for others as well as for
me, and whether he wants my help more for another Man, tha^ for my self? This
Man tossed the Doctor like a Dog in a Blanket, and here often wrote well; Si
sic omnia.

But to return to the other matter, of Repentance; How shall penitential Tears
be wiped off those Eyes, where they never were. But if any say, I have
conversed with many Antinomians, and they deny not Repentance.

1. All Antinomians be not Crispians, no not Town himself, who, for ought I
know, was an upright Man.

2. Many that are thought to be so, not only by others, but themselves, to do
them right, do not believe Crisp was guilty here; who had neither time nor
sense to read or Understand him.

3. Ask right Crispians, what they mean by Repentance, they will tell you it is
Faith. They dare not be so impudent as to quarrel with the Word, or blot it out
of the Bible. Observe how rarely any one of them will bring in Sorrow for Sin,
or Compunction in their definition of Repentance. It is a turning from Sin to
Christ; that is perhaps a believing our Sins are no longer ours, but Christ's;
but if they mean as they speak, is it not a sinner turning from Sin, then, that
comes to Christ, and so consequently not without a Change? Crisp makes Mat.
11.28. Laboring, and being heavy laden, an Error in them, and brings in
Christ's saying to this effect, You have been legal, and so heavy laden, cease
to be so, and come to me. So that this laboring and being heavy laden, that
God by the Prophets often calls Men to, and Christ by the Apostles, is no
gracious Qualification, as our Divines expound it, but a sinful legal frame of
Spirit. But I am bold to say to such Antinomians, what Christ said to their
Elder Brethren, the Hypocritical Pharisees, O Generation of Vipers, bring forth
Fruit meet for Repentance; or, How can you escape the Damnation of Hell? Or as
Stephen to the obdurate Jews, who exalted Christ too, as Dr. Crisp did on the
Cross, to crucify him there, Ye stiff necked and uncircumcised i^ Heart and
Ears, how long resist ye the Holy Ghost? Vae vobis Hypocritis may be their
Motto. Repentance from dead Works, Paul ( Heb. 6.1.) makes the Foundation, and
names it before Faith. And whereas it is pleaded, the Assembly of Divines put
Repentance before Faith in their short Cathecism. I am sure they did not thus
break Scripture Method, on any Antimonian design; for in their larger and
better Catechism, they put Repentance before Faith, as Scripture always does.
Where is it once said, Faith and Repentance, or Believe and Repent? and I say
in the order of things, God first wounds, and then heals; shows a Man his Sin,
and then his Savior: not that true Repentance and Faith are inseparable. We
are often and foolishly asked, can there be any true Repentance without Faith?
No; answer you as roundly, Can there be any true Faith without Repentance?

When Stephen called with great sharpness, on the Council to repent, they
gnashed upon him with their Teeth. Tell false stories of me as you please,
perhaps I account them some of the greatest Ornaments I carry about with me. I
challenge any Man that ever saw me Drunk, or finds any Lie in my Mouth;
(Conscience accuses not, but justifies here) or can testify the idle Story of
the Confessions I made to Dr. Bates. I am sure he is too good a Man to report
any such Story: he is so far from being my Confessor, that he is not my Friend
(tho once so, for which I have yet a grateful Remembrance) through an
intemperate Zeal for his bosom Friend, Mr. Baxter. B. C. the Quaker, tells the
World, That I once acknowledged my self to be a proud Man. So I do still: He
that hides his Sin shall not prosper. Did I once say so? I wish I had said so
a thousand times, for I never told a greater truth in my Life. But are my
Accusers free? Who has a high look? Who expects to be bowed to first in the
Street, even by their Elders, and perhaps betters, They or I? I may be a proud
Man, and yet not stink half so much of the Disease as --. No wonder some Men
care not what they say, who believe, The Sin was forgiven from Eternity. Is
none of their Sin but Christ's, and that it is no Duty, but a Sin to be
troubled about it; as the old Holy Ranters, If I Sin, let Christ look to it; or
as I heard one lately say, Get into Christ, and Sin if you can. The very words
of the aforenamed old Ranters: As in my Apology, all now know (my very Enemies)
that I was a true Prophet about the Draper, so I believe I shall be found as
true about Rantism, that already puts forth its hand ready for the Birth.

God accept of Mr. Gouge, and Mr. Trail's true, hearty, unfeigned Repentance,
for once countenancing him; and comfort the former, and prevent the like
mischief to the other, occasioned by that infamous Jack: A Fire is kindled in
his own Congregation already. This is he that has poisoned this poor City with
damnable Doctrines, and horrid Lies, of particular Men vomited out in the
Pulpit. The grand Incendiary, the greatest Plague and Curse that has happned
to it a long time. I think the Independents will have their Belly full in time,
of making Tradesmen Preachers: The Presbyterians are more wary. Let the Reader
think of it; have I not a hard task put upon me, to prove Repentance (I speak
not of the name, but thing) to be no Sin. I hear some say, Men may Repent that
they do Repent. How Man! That is but adding Sin to Sin, according to you; for
then you must Repent, that you repented for your Repentance, and so in
infinitum.

The Magnifiers of so unlearned, dull, and inconsistent a Man as Dr. Crisp was,
put me in mind of the old Heathen, that had their Lares; some of them made
artificial Monkies (as others did Dogs) and these they worshipped as their
Protectors, and the Keepers of the House. (Now observe, their Lares or Monkies
were Artificial ones, not Inartificial). And for the Doctor's Proofs,
especially against Qualifications, in Coming to Christ, they are so feeble,
never were the like known: Which puts me in mind of some Men I have met with,
who when I have reproved them for the sin of Drunkeness, said it was no Sin,
and they would prove it by plain Scripture; Nothing that enters into the
Mouth, defiles the Man: and when I went to explain that Text, said, We care
not for your Explications, the words are plain. Their explication was not more
vile, yet more witty than some of the Doctor's: this is not to argue, but Rave;
like Kellison the Jesuit, who says, The Protestants have taken away the
Church's Bible. And sometimes Mr. B. with his wanton Wit, What is Imputation,
Legal-Head, etc. How know you the Sun is not a^ Animal? Whether the Baxterians
or Antinomians, gave me lately the name of Antichrist, I know nor, nor care
not. You, Sir, write of Mr. Baxter's Pile or Fabric of Antichristian Doctrine:
They truly call true Crispians Antichrists, Know all Men by these presents,
that I plead for the same Doctrine our old Reformers did against (not for)
Antichrist; Justification by Faith only. But for some Men whose Malice is
transparent, tho Ignorance thick, let them say what they will, I care not.
Whereas the Doctor's Advocates please themselves with the names of Mr. Alsop,
Mr. How, Mr. Griffith, Mr. Powel, and others before Dr. Crisp his Book. Mr. M.
the Undertaker told them, The Book was castrated, and the old Offensive things
left out: Yet told Mr. Lorimer, who cunningly and subtly thus objected in his
Shop against buying it, said roundly, No not a word is left out. What a bad Man
then are you, said he, to tell the Attesters so? Yet this was one of the good
Men Mr. Unworthy Branch says, called for a new Impression, when all know, the
good Man did all for good Money: and he says, a Gentleman told him with Tears
in his Eyes, that he was troubled in Mind ten Years before he saw Dr. Crisp his
Christ Exalted. (Was it the same Gentleman that confessed he had lived in
Uncleanness ten Years?) Better perhaps have doubted ten Years more. I wish Men
be not more afraid of Sorrow for Sin, then committing it. How are plain Texts
scrued and torn, not by the Doctor's Wits, I confess, but Folly, and make them
speak what none but his wise, learned self could think on? Some tell us, say
what we will, Dr. Crisp had the Gift of it, to preach Free Grace, to bring Men
to Faith without Repentance, and to comfort Men without a Change. Yes, I never
doubted but he had the Gifts of it too: that he was paid for the Cushions he
sewed under Men's Elbows. Does his Son now enjoy the Wages of that Iniquity, of
the madness of the Prophet? If so, it is the price of Blood; let the Fields be
called the Potters Fields, or the --.

I am glad to find you jibe not at Grace, as signifying inherent Righteousness,
as Crisp did, and Mr. Town himself, Graces as they call them. (You indeed cite
Dr. Goodwin, The hand of all other Graces are working Hands, but the hand of
Faith is a receiving Hand) -- Whether you are a doubter here, as some are open
denyers, I know not: If you are, we will consider whether the Scriptures call
them so; David says, He will give Grace and Glory. Zachary says, I will pour on
the House of David and Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of Grace and
Supplication. John 1.16. Of his Fullness have we received Grace for Grace. 2
Cor. 8.6, 7. As you abound in other things, see that ye abound in this Grace
also: Titus finished this Grace. Charity then is a Grace. Solomon speaks of the
gracious Woman. Colos. 3.16. Singing with Grace in your Hearts, to the Lord.
And many other places of Scripture might be brought to prove the vanity of this
wicked Notion of theirs, to bring Sanctification into Contempt. Observe, Sir,
the strain of the Crispians, from a Book called, A drop of Honey from the Rock
Christ. He pretends to exalt Christ over all, this is Crisp's pretense: But I
pray how, or for what end did God exalt Christ; Him has God exalted with his
Right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, to give Repentance, (not deny it) to
Israel, for the Remission of Sins, says Peter. Believe, says he, Christ is
willing, and that will make thee willing. -- Many impeninent Men believe this
without a Change; nay some believe him to be indeed theirs, and they think they
are willing too: to what? To take him for a Savior, but not Lord; for Faith,
nor Repentance. He that, p. 27. sets up his Sanctification to comfort him, sets
up the greatest Idol, which will strengthen his Doubts and Fears. To say
without Christ: who opposes? but in subordination to him. Nothing is more
common with Christ and the Apostles, then bid Men rejoice for God's Work in
them, and by them. Sorrow and Fear are dreadful things with these Men:
examining themselves is doubting, questioning God's veracity, and I know not
what. They never doubt, but I and others do for them: To distrust your selves,
is not to distrust God: to question your Sincerity, is not to question the
divine Faithfulness. Take heed you, with your painted Pageantry, go not to that
Prison, where you are locked up for ever without hope. See this Author how he
talks, Christ, Christ, Christ; as if their waxen Wings (for so is Faith without
Repentance) would make them soar aloft: Healing from Duties, and not from
Christ, says he, is the most desperate Disease. -- Healing by Medicines, and
not the Physician, is an Harangue. Christ has appointed them (and blessed them
too to the Ungodly) and that without an absolute promise, tho not contrary to
it. Would that Man be a good Subject, that should cry King William, O King
William, he is a comely King, a wise King, a gracious King, but cares not to
hear a word of his Laws. Yet this Author says, To believe, there must go a
clear Conviction of Sin: Is this coming without a Change? When Satan, says he,
charge the Sin on thy Conscience, charge thou it on Christ: this is Gospel
like, and makes him Christ indeed. -- Why! Is it Satan's Work, or the Spirit's
Work, to charge Sin on the Conscience? He says, For Men to look to Duties,
Graces, Enlargements, is to legalize the Gospel --. No, not as Helps,
Encouragements; to say without Christ, we grant it. This is therefore not their
meaning, or they talk unintelligibly, or worse.

All Grace, we all grant, is from God, as the Fountain and Spring; from Christ
by way of Purchase and Procurement; from the Spirit by way of immediate
Efficiency. Ezekiel. 36.26. A new Heart will I give you, and a new Spirit will I
put within you, and I will take away the stony Heart out of your Flesh, and I
will give you an Heart of Flesh. Then ye shall walk in my Statutes, I will be
your God. The first reason from which all springs, is God's Will, and the last
his Glory. Observe what gross Reflections they make on Grace and Duty; as if
they were frighted out of their Wits, if ever they had any. Say next, I am all
for the Sun, I care not so much for the Light and Heat coming from it. These
would be perpetual Dictators, tho their mode of talking be Mad and Frantic: if
they talk sometimes Pious, so would Oliver's Porter. Is his Chamber void. --
Confidence is not Demonstration, tho an [I Experience] be clapped to it.

You, Sir, being so great a Dissenter, I pray let me ask you one little
question; How came you to magnify Dr. Crisp a Liturgical Man, and vilify
others? If you say, Fox tells us of a Martyr, that had his Common Prayer Book
in the Flames, and there hugged it. I will not say I wish Dr. Crisp had had his
there too, but I could wish his Book had been committed there by his own hand,
as one, when forced so to do, said Parve, nec invideo, sine me liber ibis in
ignem, I would not say as a stander-by did to him, Hei mihi, quod Domino non
licet ire tuo.

Had Dr. Crisp been by David, he had taught him (or the Spirit rather) to have
given us better Psalms, where Sin should not be confessed as a Burden. Had
Alphonses been by God when he made the World, it had been better done, as he
blasphemously said.

I pray our considering Congregational Brethren to consider, what Confusion
they have brought things into, by giving the People so much Power. Mr. Neuton
of Taunton, told Mr. Ben of Dorset, when he complained how bitter his Life was,
through the intolerable Insolences of his People; Brother, you would put the
Keys into their Hands, and they jingle them about your Ears.

None talk more of the Judgment of Discretion, then Jack and Tom, that have no
Discretion at all. What Confessions came Dr. Owen to before he died? Lived he,
or died he at last more like an Independent or Presbyterian? These Ships
without Ballast, are driven before the Winds, they bite the Shell but cannot
come at the Kernel, Who shall compare Ministers to Tinkers; have such any work
for the Tinker? for it is high time to mend their brazen-faces: must such into
a Pulpit? Christ kept his Disciples long at his Feet, before he sent them out
to preach. Workmen, such should be, that need not be ashamed; what Trade could
they live by, but by this! To hear Men of no natural Logic, of no
Distinctions, talk with such Ignorance and Confidence, is intolerable. I was
painted out in the Pulpit, as is famed, as a Drunkard in Coffee-houses; that
hardly ever drink there. Another is called an Adulterer. A Congregational
Friend of mine, Mr. C. a Poet, (whom I had not seen this 25 Years) lately
coming to visit me, he told me he lived in Dublin when Mr. Williams lived
there; I asked him whether he was suspected to be guilty of any Immoralities?
He told me, no: tho his Doctrine he liked not, and therefore would not hear
him. They that tell the Story of the Woman in all its basest Circumstances,
acknowledge the Fact not done. I challenge any one to show me one Story in
History, or that they knew of, that a Man so vile, as they say he is, and a
Woman so lewd, as they, and she confessed she was, went so far and there
stopped; O Jesus, say to these Storms. Peace, be still. -- When God set up a
Tabernacle in the Wilderness, he employed wise Men about it. Exodus 31.3. God
filled them with Wisdom and Knowledge in all manner of Workmanship. He gave
them, Ver. 6. Wisdom to make all God commanded Moses. What a Tabernacle had
they had, if bunglers had had the making it? like a Drapers Church. Is this a
proper Expression in Prayer, O God, we would not have been without our
Corruptions for a World, that Free Grace may be exalted. -- I fear Rantism is
come to the birth again. Had not his Highness the Protector sent timely, the
Levellers had overrun all. I fear some hope for Winstanley's new Law of
Righteousness, That he that wants a Horse, or a Sheep, should go for them to
any Field where he can get them; See his Book so called. Thus may they turn
Winstanley's Neonomians at last, tho not Mr. Baxter's.

But it may be some will say, what have we to do with Dr. Crisp? If he set
Repentance at naught, we justify him not.

1. If you have nothing to do with Dr. Crisp, I have nothing to do with you; I
charge you not, but the Guilty.

2. If calling his Book one of the best Books in the World, next to the Bible;
if flying in the Faces of his Censurers, and loading them with all the Ignominy
imaginable, be not justifying him: I pray what is? To say at last I never read
him, will not excuse, I and others have, and therefore speak. These Men here
set up for as great zealots for Infant Baptism, and take liberty of Reflecting
on me for my Conversation with Antipedobaptists, and say they believe, They
will w^ me at last: I assure them, the Anabaptists here expect it not. And I am
not a little disturbed, to see the unfair Management of the late Portsmouth
Dispute: To clea^ my self once more, I have reason to believe, so wise a Man as
Mr. Leigh, never there talked of the Eunuch's Children, (tho another blunderer,
Mr. H. did elsewhere) That the Eunuch was in a Journey, and his Wife and
Children might be a hundred Miles of. -- Did ou^ Men talk so weakly, and one so
strongly, as is represented? Time will undeceive Men about so vain a Story. I
am ready to prove to our Brethren the Anabaptists,

1. That the word (...) signifies, not to Plunge exclusive of any other way of
Washing.

2. That there are no certain Circumstances, to prove any one Person Plunged by
John, the Disciples, or Apostles; but strong ones to make it probable that many
were not, or could not be plunged.

3. As consequent upon all this, that their common way of Plunging is so far
from being a Duty, and necessary, that to most Persons, and in most
Circumstances, it becomes a Sin, and unwarrantable.

4. That if Plunging were a Duty, the Anabaptists perform it not: for if every
part must be baptized, because every part is Corrupted, and must be Mortified,
as they say; then this Washing must be the Administrator's Work. Now their Men
and Women go up a great way in the Water, not as a part of Baptism (for the
Word and Element make the Sacrament) and the Minister puts in the other part.
If I saw my Shirt put in by my Maid in a washing Tub, and the Sleeves hang out,
and I put them in; do I plunge my Shirt? Besides, is it true, that there is a
Washing with Water? Then I say, the Anabaptists wash not with Water, but in it;
if with, there must be an Application of the Water to the Person, not the
Person to the Water. And to say, Is sprinkling Washing? I know none that do
sprinkle; if they did, it might be justified: Is, Sirs, taking a little bit of
Bread, a Supper; the Lord's Supper? A Man may make a hundred such Suppers in an
Evening, and go to Bed an hungry when all is done. And whereas, it is said,
They went down into the Water; I think the Holy Ghost anticipates the
Anabaptists Objection, by telling us they, not he: and again, both Phillp and
the Eunuch; was the Baptizer plunged, I pray?

How many times when we were Boys, did we go down into the Water, when we never
put off our Coats or Breeches, only washed our Feet, and came out again; and so
many Women in some places often do. They that say it was but to send a Basin
from the Chariot, to the Water: where should Men have Basins in Chariots? I am
sorry Mr. Baxter, in his Paraphrase, has proved so inconstant to himself,
after he had heated us against Plunging, in his Infant Church Membership and
Baptism, and tells us, A Man might stride over the River Enon, and no
Convenience, was there to plunge; and that this way of Plunging is a breach of
the 6th and 7th Commandment: and he told Mr. Tombs, he believed when he cooled
his Legs, he warmed his Heart sometimes; when he plunged the Maids in Bendly.
When Christ washed Peter's Feet, he is said, to wash him. He in a fit of
intemperate Zeal, cries out, as our Plungers do, Lord not my Feet only, but my
Hands and my Head; plunge Head and Ears all over: Christ says, there was no
need to wash the whole. If as Mr. Baxter says on Romans 6.4. after others buried
with him in Baptism, was washing the Body all over: for my part they have given
up the Cause, as to the Form of Baptism; and were I of their Mind, I must be of
the Anabaptists practice (as it should be) about the Form, tho not Subject. For
had the Apostle indeed given us only an Historical Account, it would not have
followed, because they were plunged, we must be so; but if he, according to
these Pedobaptists, unreasonable, and untrue grant, give us a symbolical
Account, I know not who dares alter or change the Form. Plunging must be from
Heaven, and any other way of Washing or Baptizing from Men. I know some that
cannot contradict this, among my Brethren, will be angry for my plainness, but
I cannot help it: I am Jacob the plain Man, more than Esau the cunning one.
Thus has Mr. Pool, the Dutch Annotations, Diodati, Mr. Perkins, and Mr.
Baxter, at last so far betrayed the Cause; to talk of our cold Climate, is a
cold Plea. I deny that the Form of Baptism signifies any thing of Christ's
Burial or Resurrection, but only the washing away of Sin, or sprinkling of the
Blood of Christ: my reason I have given in another Book, and therefore shall
not do it now. The Church of England has betrayed the Cause by their Fonts,
foolish Questions to the Sponsors, as if the Child, Will thou be Baptized in
this Faith, etc. and saying in their Prayers, Nothing doubting but that he
favorably allows this charitable Work of ours, in bringing these Infants to
his holy Baptism; observe favorably allows? Yes he commands it, a charitable
Work of ours, when it is of Divine Appointment: and in the Catechism (the
Childish one) That Repentance and Faith are required in them who are to be so
Baptized. -- Then ask, why they baptize Infants, the Answer is, Because Infants
promise them by their Sureties --. I know some of that Communion are sick of
this Answer, as well they may: For Mr. Danvers and Mr. Tombs, and others (who
with us justly scoff at this Answer) say truly, Prove the Unlawfulness of
Godfathers and Godmothers, and they have given up the Cause. If any say,
where is your Scripture-warrant? Acts 2.39. Be baptized, the Promise is to you
and to your Children, and to as many as are afar off, as many as the Lord your
God shall call. Which is a Confirmation of the privilege they should have in
the Christian Church, into which he brought them, which they had in the Jewish
Church, out of which he took them. For the Promise or Covenant was unto them,
and to their Children, and to as many of the Gentiles as should be Proselyted
and Converted. If they say, the Promise was of extraordinary Gifts of the Holy
Ghost: I say, that was not performed to them, theirs, and all God called. This
is a plainer Text then they have for taking Women to the Lord's Table; and as
plain as that Divine Institution, which is enough for the Change of the Sabbath
to the first day of the Week; Psalm. 118.24. This is the Day the Lord has made
--. I pray the Anabaptist not to slite this Consideration, Did God ever send
such Rogues, as John of Leyden, St. Matthias, and David George, to be
Reformers? As they brought their Restitution from the Devil, which was to be
instead of the Bible: Can you believe they brought your Plunging, etc. adult
Persons only from God?

What unheard of madness was it in Mr. Danvers, to question the Story of the
besieging of Munster, and the wicked pranks there played? I would not care so
much if the Anabaptist did only neglect baptizing their Infants; but there is
worse in the thing, their leaving no visible way for their Children's Salvation
if they die Infants, they are sent to herd with the Children of Jews and
Pagans; and if God save them, it is in an uncovenanted way (and it may be that
is not at all) for without are Dogs and such as God judges. Children are
within, or without the Church, there is no middle: They were within once; who
turned them out? Yet I doubt not their Children any more than ours: The
omission of Circumcision in Moses, was like to be the Father's Death, but not
the Child's Damnation. I have been longer on this than I intended: But the
Portsmouth Harangue has put me into a Heat. I could say much of the Publisher,
of vain Stories, if I saw fit: Is he indeed such a learned Man, and were they
such mean Men as he falsely represents? Verbum sat Sapienti. I hope we shall
soon see Mr. Chandler's true, sober Account of the whole. If any tell false
Stories of other Men's blunders, and hide their own true ones, it is worse than
bad. The Anabaptists (whom I call not so in Contempt, but only for distinction:
If we call them Baptists, we do amiss, as if we were not for Baptism our
selves) I say they have torn the Covenant of Grace all in pieces, to cast their
Children out. When Mr. Flavel told Mr. Carry, Moses and the rest could not be
saved by any Covenant, but that of Grace; he talked Apothecary, (as our
Devonshire phrase is.) They were under A Covenant of Works; tho not The
Covenant of Works -- A and The were learned Distinctions here. He is a good
ingenious, well tempered Man, I know him well, but am sorry he was so ^ll
employed. When shall I have done? I could run out here in infinitum, but I will
soon stop my running Pen, whether it will or no. Those that call them
Heretics, do them wrong, as well as that Pedobaptist that compared them to
Witches, who renounce their Baptism in compacting with the Devil. Yet I must
grant Infant Baptism fell with the Bible, by those reforming Devils
beforementioned, who received the due Reward of their Murders, Whoredoms,
Blasphemies, and whom all sober, pious, Anabaptists detest. Would all other
Controversies in Religion, were as easily decided, as may Infant Baptism be
proved. They tell us in some old Bibles, they read John the Dipper, they never
read John the Plunger: the difference is great, as I have elsewhere proved,

To all sound Protestants, who own Justification by Faith only, not without
Faith, nor by Faith and Works.
MR. Hoskish, in his Discourse of the Imputation of Sin on Christ, says roundly
and plainly, the Truth I plead for, is defended by Mr. Baxter and Dr. Sherlock:
blessed Company! Mr. Alsop's Antisozzo, is the best and most accurate
Anti-Baxterian Book I ever saw; all sound; no more need be said. Baxterianism,
I think, is spiced Popery, but Crispianism is spiced Rantism. Mr. Hoskith told
me. That in the second Part of Mr. Troughton's Lutherus Redivivus, were things
not common on that Subject. Now Mr. T. is dead, and Mr. Lobb too, and Mr. Alsop
will proceed no further, to speak as favorably as I can. I wish some great Man
among you may appear if occasion be.

Man is justified not by the Works of the Law, says St. Paul. Mr. Clark's late
noise by Works, and Works of the Law, is nothing: St. Paul speaks of the Moral
Law, Romans 7.19. By which came the Knowledge of Sin, by which every Mouth was
stopped, v. 13, 14, 15. I abhor all that deny the Integrity of Baxterians.
Melancthon was not much better, if as sound: read his Loci Communes. Not by
that Law is Man justified, that said, Thou shall not Covet, not by that Law,
That he that does them, shall live in them; by these Man could not be
justified. These were Moral Laws sure, not Ceremonial, not Pharasaical, not
external Acts only: these do not all this.

The sufferings of Christ are subjectively infinite, as of one that is God: as
Sin by our Divines is often said to be objectively Infinite, as committed
against an infinite Being; by his Stripes are we healed. Beware you seek not to
be the Death of Christ's death, by making it void or not of Effect, for its
main Ends and Purposes.

Some you know of late, besides Sherlock, deny Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and
others to be saved by Faith in Christ, or to know much of him, tho Christ says
Abraham saw his day and was glad; and Paul says, Abel offered a Sacrifice by
Faith; but one place with me, well improved, is of great use, Enoch Prophesied
so, Jude says, Enoch the seventh from Adam, Prophesied of these things, behold
the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute Vengeance --. And
we know Paul tells us, this Lord is Christ, who so comes.

1. He that knew the greater things of Christ, must the lesser; he knew him to
be a judge of the World, and therefore the Savior of it.

2. He could not Prophesy to others, but what he knew, and they might and did
understand: Luke 24.27. Many things were written of Christ in Moses, the Psalms
and Prophets.

Think highly of the work of Conversion, Mr. Baxter was sound here; so are most
of his Followers, not all; Paul compares the Power of converting Souls to God,
to the power of raising Christ.

Had all been done by common Providence, and Man's great Care, he need not have
compared this Work of changing the Will, and converting a Sinner to the mighty
Power which raised Christ from the Dead.

Beware of loosing things, and still retaining words: some will keep the word
Repentance, but condemn the thing; others the word Faith, but mean somewhat
else. And you find these Men's Notions duelling together: part then for pities
sake. Tho I know the one is but as a sore Finger to the other, (Crispianism)
which is as the withering of the whole Arm.

Carry it civilly toward sober Baxterians; most in this City preach well, and
Discourse so, and are not so corrupt as their Master: I heard only one preach
at random. He knew not what was become of Noah, Sampson, Solomon; Ecclesiastes
was not his Confessions; Sampson died with Revenge in his Heart. -- Did God
ever work a Miracle, to answer a Prayer of Revenge? He considered them as
Philistines, as the Churches Enemies, more than his, and the loss of his Eyes
more as a wrong to the Church, than to him, who was the Pillar of it at that
time, under God. We can better tell what is become of these, then what will
become of him. Other Baxterians loathed this, I mean the Conscientious ones,
that believe their common Doctrine; not the Politic ones, that believe with
us, but dare not say it: because these Men have gotten the Ascendant in this
City, and can Ruin or Advance many Ministers at their Pleasure. There attempts
against me, I care not for: for I am glad we have their help against
Crispianism.

I wish their Doctrine end not in Arminianism at last; some are gone, others
going, more would, had not Mr. Williams's Restrictions and refining of his
Master's Doctrine hindered.

As for Dr. Crisp, we are often told of him, That we understand him not --. Nor
he himself, say I. In what inextricable Perplexities did he involve himself;
then saying one thing, then another? It is often observed, that they that are
zealots for wild unusual Notions, fancy they see them every time they take up
their Bible, and every where: who could imagine Dr. Crisp should see in Heb.
11.1. That when Men be Believers, they know they were the Children of God, and
loved with a complacential Love, in a state of Impenitency, or in short, there
see, Justification before Faith?

Keep clear in this matter, we are justified by Faith, not without, only, not
with Works. Let that place be much in your Minds; Romans 3.21.22. But now the
Righteousness of God, without the Law, is manifested, being manifested by the
Law and the Prophets: Even the Righteousness of God, which is by Faith of Jesus
Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe; for there is (...) difference.
It is called the Righteousness of God, as God or Christ is the subject of it,
not efficient: Where is our Righteousness, that we are Subjects of, called
God's Righteousness, because he is the Efficient? In this sense my Repentance,
Love, Faith, may be called God's Repentance, Faith, Love. This is called the
Righteousness of Faith, as by Faith it is made ours, not in the Effects only;
for so God's attributes are ours; but by Imputation. That Abraham's
Righteousness was the Righteousness of Faith, and that that Righteousness of
Faith was the Righteousness of Faith in Christ, and that as Abraham was
justified, so are we; Romans 4.11, 12, 13, 14. Paul and Mr. Alsop, have
excellently proved Circumcision was a Seal of that Righteousness, and that he
should be the Father of many Nations (an unanswerable place for Infant Baptism,
by the way.) Heb. 11.9. There was the Exemplar and Copy, the Archetype, and
Ectype; the promised Land was a strange Land to one that looked for a Heavenly
one; so Mr. A. against Sherlock. I could even Zabarellize that excellent Book.

He observes, My Hand relieves me when it receives an Alms, the Cup refreshes
me when the Wine in it does so; so Faith justifies as it applies Christ: thus
he after others, and I after him, and some of you, if you please, after me.

Keep clear, I pray you, in the matter of irresistible Grace in Conversion. God
takes away the opposition, the stubbornness of the Will; this is taking away
the Stone; then gives a principle of Grace; this is his giving a Heart of
Flesh; and then inclines to walk in ways of Obedience.

Adam was made upright, and obeyed; he was not made so by doing this and that
Duty; He was made good, and then did good for the time of his Station. God ^ath
a love of Benevolence or good Will, before Men are turned, when they have not
the Image and Superscription of God, but Satan on them; but no Love of
Complacency, till in them is a conformity to his Nature; when a homogeneous,
not a heterogeneous Nature: no Beast could be found to be a fit Wife for Man,
God gives him an Eve; so Mr. A. against S. Now I doubt not, but the greatest of
Sinners may, in the ^reaching of the Word, be pricked at the Heart on a ^udden;
his Will turned for God, and against Sin, and ^e pardoned: should this Man
going home, ride or ^ross the Waters, and break his Neck, or be drowned, ^ho he
had not one quarter of an Hour for secret Prayer, or reading, or counselling
others, he would be ^mmediately carried by the Angels into Abraham's Bosom; for
his Seed was in him; he was born of God. And this Mr. Williams, I am sure, will
not deny, no^, I think, to do Mr. Baxter right, he neither, were he alive. I
solemnly profess I cannot remember one word in all his Books to the contrary,
who have read more of them than any of his Followers I can meet with, tho none
of late years except his Life, and Universal Redemption.

A Censure of a Scandalous Pamphlet against the Authors of the Congregational
Declaration, and my self.
THere coming out lately, What shall I call it? Not an Answer; sure, (where is
not one real or pretended Argument against the Congregational Declaration) but
a Libel against the Reveren^ Authors and me, I find my self concerned to
consider this as well as Esquire Edwards's Defense, being directly struck at
here, and but indirectly there.

The Composers of this Libel (as is agreed on a^ hands) are the Reverend
Assembly of unlearned Trad^smen, the A. Club; and now the celebrated Lunati^
applies himself to the wise Men of Gotham to vindicate Trepidantium Malleus
(with whom they begin) then Mr. Mead, Mr. Nesbet, Mr. Lobb, Mr. Griffith, Mr.
Tailor. The Fable of Box was answered three Years since in my Reply to W. C.
his Censure of m^ Mr. Keith, and Mr. Lesly. As I then said, I say i^ now, I
offer five Pounds to any that shall prove I wa^ in Box, or any such place one
hour. Is it nothing t^ print Men Lunaticks, and celebrated ones too, because
once they were plunged into deep Melancholy for a long time?

Mr. Mead is charged with taking a House and Garden surreptitiously -- Where, I
pray, has he did himself and the stolen Goods? Are they not upon the spot? If
other Men's Goods had been so, some of this Company needed not to have
absconded, or gone to Goal for not paying Men their due, or spending other Men's
Money in Taverns and Coffee-houses in idle Pranks, when they should be
industrious in their Shops to pay every Man his own. Must a Man of Mr. Mead's
known Worth, Integrity and Usefulness, have a Hue and Cry sent after him as a
Cheat, by such as have been notoriously such?

How he is cleared by that Gentleman most concerned in that Affair, as well as
others, is not convenient now to relate. Let any sober dissatisfied Men (if any
such there be) come to me or him about it. It is not convenient in Print to
answer Men about these things at large, who can only rave, not reason. I am
sorry if this public Defamation has been any unhappy occasion of Mr. Mead his
late Distempers: Such a thing I confess may catch, as Tinder does Fire, on
Melancholy and the usual Distempers of old Age. If he dies, are not these Men
Man-slayers?

No wonder they spare no Man, when Mr. Gouge, who lately was by these Men
magnified as the best, if not only Gospel-Preacher in the City, is now called a
Drunkard and Murderer. He sees now how he was taken in his Policy, who by
permitting Jack to speak in his Meeting place to prevent a Storm that he might
not be accounted an Enemy to free Grace, has thus occasioned one: I doubt he
finds in this sense, it is not true, That true Repentance is never too late.

Mr. Nesbet comes next: What if he were a Beggar, etc. must none such write
against Crisp? a Work fitter for him, had he been so, to answer poor, beggarly
Arguments and Phrases of a poor Scholar indeed. Nam genus, and proavos, and
quae non fecimus ipsi,
Vix ea nostra voco. --


He that could call Mr. Nesbet a mean or contemptible Man, would by that thing
prove himself so.

Mr. Lobb comes next to be arraigned, tried and cast: He is made a Man of
Contention, and yet once magnified for his faithful Report. That he was also a
Favorite of K. James: They that thus charge him now, were Men that encouraged
him in it then, ^s the Securer of their Liberty.

I hope these vile Men contributed not to his Death also: Trepidantium Malleus
and these Men's Names are written in large Characters, Mr. Griffith, Mr. R.
Tailor in small ones; and the reason privately given is, We were Knaves, and
they were Fools; and such a false Character is given of one of these for
easiness of Temper, and flexibility, that all cry out, Shame on it; who for the
contrary, might make an Archbishop or a Judge. Mr. G. say they, thought others
had subscribed -- What then? Dear Hearts! Is it not enough he subscribed to the
Declaration as good and sound.

They say they know none that own the Antinomian N^tions there censured, but
some of old in Germany.

I would all such were in Germany, and London rid of them. They know not! What
then? Will it follow we know not? Can some of them say the Te^ Commandments (I
doubt it, they are old Laws) or read a Chapter in English as becomes a Man?

The design of this Paper, as he that runs may read, is to bring Ministers and
the Ministerial Function into Contempt; to make way, as is conceived, for their
own speaking as well as Jack's in time. Hence they call Mr. Lobb Dunce,
Blockhead, etc. compare them all to Porters and Tinkers, and tell of the
Wickedness of one and another, and all the while the Plague-Sores of Debauchery
have been long running on them. Tho they begin with us, and name plainly, I
only follow, and will put all under fictitious Names. What Letters shall I put
them in? if in great ones, they must pass for Knaves only; if in small ones,
for Fools only: Well, they being both, shall have of both sorts.

Mr. CALVMniator, Mr. STALLion, Mr. FRAud, Mr. DVLman, Mr. MAGpy.

1. Let them read Trepidantium Malleus intrepidanter malleatus, and my Defense
before they go on.

2. Let me know one way or other my Accusers, and for what a Posse Comitatus is
raised against me by Men baptized into Crisp: Is it because I cry of his Book
as the Prophet, There is Death in the Pot? Call it not, Sirs, a savoury Book;
What Savor but that of Death can it send?

Or, is it that I have cautioned you against a Jack as dangerous and more
ignorant? Let these Men please themselves, they do not much disturb me; and I
doubt not some will think I am now, with Domitian, meanly employed. Paul, no
doubt, was a dull Legal Preacher to him; for whose sake Mattocks are brought to
erase the Foundation of the Ministerial Function. He is for a while honored by
them as a King, but is he not what is said of the King of Spain, Rex Asinorum?
I doubt not but in a little time these little Animals will rise up in Rebellion
against their little Man, and he shall be the Rogue, Drunkard -- These are Men
of crazy Intellectuals, tho said to be some of Christ's best sound Members; One
replied, They have been well fluxt to be sound -- Are they more like Epicurus
his Swine, or Christ's Sheep?

O sad Case! that when some Ministers were followed, they could not take a Cup
without trouble! Now is a time of Liberty. --

Have not some made their Antinomianism a Cloak for Deism or Atheism?

To say, There is nothing in Religion worth suffering for, cost One dear in the
City, who, after, in terror of Mind did stare with drops of Sweat at his
Fingers-ends, and so raved, till he cut his Throat and died. Simon Thorvy (as
Baker in his Chronicle, and others, tells us) boasted, that by his Wit, he
should make void any Law of Christ. God so afflicted him with a fit of
Sickness, that his Animal Spirits were so wasted, that after his Recovery, he
was forced to learn to read Letters again, like a Child. Some say there is no
need of much Wit to be profane: but this is not always true, we see.

Give one another good Counsel; yet be sober more ways than one: study that
famous Book of Mr. Perkins, Dedicated to some of you, viz. To all ignorant
Persons in the Kingdom of England --. You see what it is by the poor Draper,
for Men not to move within their own Sphere, or for you to interfere with other
Men's Work. You could not meddle with the substrate matter, or Doctrine of the
Book you revile, no more than your Lord and Master. This Christ-Exalter is,
like Pilate, a Christ-Crucifier; who said, What I have Written, I have Written;
and so, what he has said, he has said; without giving any reason to any that
fairly, and privately desire it. Is this your Gamaliel, at whose Feet you sit,
and hear Impudence and Folly pass for Sense and Demonstration?

If ever I am printed as a Lunatic by these Men more, as twice already, I
intend to print the ingenious Lampoon, mentioned in my Apology, about the
Draper's Birth and Life -- who now refuse to she^ it to any Man. And for these
Libellers, let them remember, the old Romans hanged Men that could not give a
satisfactory Account for not payment of Debts, and a piece of their Bodies were
given to their Creditors: let not Men talk of suffering for their Consciences,
who suffer for their God-pieces.

None of these trouble themselves with the Learning of Antichrist's Doctors, as
Mr. Unworthy Branch phraseth it. The old Antinomians, as Thomas Tailor in that
valuable Book, Regula vitae, describes them, pretended to act as if the Golden
Age, say I, were returned again, Sponte sua, sine lege, fidem rectumque
colebat. but soon were Ranters, as if -- Subjectum Pelion Ossae.

scandalous Men on a sudden, come to have Peace, not of God's sending no doubt:
their building on their sandy Foundation will fall to the Ground in the day of
Trial; their Lamps without Oil, will soon go out. For Men who are in the chase
of worldly Pleasures, to cry (not indeed, Lord, Lord, but) Christ, Christ --
will have a woeful repulse, I know you not, you workers of Iniquity.

These Men perpetually declaim against the Baxterians, and damn them to boot,
(O horrid Censoriousness and Wickedness!) and yet at the same time corrupt the
Doctrine of Justification much more than they, in denying the presence of
Faith, as well as instrumentality in Justification, as Crisp does in plain
words.

Reader, it is worth thy Consideration to remember, that Arminius himself owned
Calvin's Doctrine of Justification, as he tells the World, in his just Man's
Defense: and I knew a great Arminian defending this Doctrine against an
accurate Baxterian opposing it. That for my part I cannot forbear thinking and
saying, that Arminian, sound here, was less Corrupt, tho he denied
Predestination, irresistible Grace in Conversion, and Perseverance, than the
Baxterian sound in all these Points, but corrupt in this one of Justification,
which touches the very heart of Religion and true Christianity: However we
three managed our Controversy, not in the London, but Christian way and Manner,
without Bitterness or Uncharitableness.

But my Work is now with the Crispians, and about their making Repentance no
Duty, but Sin.

One of the most ingenious favorers of Dr. Crisp, told me lately, He knew not
what to say to the three Pages I censure, about David: and shaking his Head,
said, I know not what to say for the Doctor there. And I hope every Man of
sense must grant me this, that if Repentance be a necessary indispensable Duty,
without which no Man can be saved, Dr. Crisp is one of the foulest Heretics
that ever appeared in the World: worse, much worse, say I again and again, than
Socinus.

If Repentance (or having Sin a burden) be legal and abominable, and Faith only
a persuasion we are Justified, Rantism comes next.

Mr. Williams (that Man of a sounder Heart, than Head) is so well pleased with
the Congregational Declaration against Antinomianism, that he has lately
written his End to Discord; wherein he like a Christian and Gentleman (that is
to say, like Mr. Williams) tells them he is sorry, he or others suspected them
guilty of Antinomianism, and that they have now purged themselves of any such
Charge; and tells them, had they done this sooner, many late Books against
them, and Controversies had been prevented. And therefore now no doctrinal
Controversies, between Presbyterian and Congregational Brethren, remain to
justify any further Division: This is his Opinion. I am sure, he owns always,
and to all Men (as he has done in print) that the giving of the first Grace is
not Conditional, and where that is given, there is promised Perseverance. Now
let such Men talk what they will of Conditions, they must be sound in sense,
whether in Phrase or no; they are hedged in, they cannot help it.

Mr. Lob and he met together, some Months since, and as I hear, were agreed to
write one against another no more. Mr. Lob put him on this last Work, and no
doubt had been glad to have seen it, had he not died before its publication. I
am glad to find help from any Men, Arminians themselves, to prevent Satan's
Gospel, not Christ's.

A Doctor of Divinity lately told me of one taken ^n Bed between two Women, and
clapped up in Pri^on, who told him, that he was between two ^isters, godly
Women, in Bed, without not only any sinful Act but Thought: and all they did
was, ^hey sung one of the Songs of Sion, but the wicked Man ^f the House, sent
for him whom they call the Constable, and they were all sent to Bridewel, and
whipped by the ^icked; but he was sorry for one of them, a good, gra^ious Woman,
whom he feared would die with it.

You impenitent Believers, whose Doctrine has once ^lready brought forth
Rantism: you are laying the ^oundation once more; but Heaven grant, that as the
^ormer was soon blasted, the latter may. The Doctor ^so told me, that his
Father knew Dr. Crisp, and said, ^e knew him from a Boy, a notorious dull
Piece, and ^at he never could manage an Argument. And I ^erily believe, he was
not able to give a Grammatical Account of any Chapter in the Latin Testament,
nor of ten Verses in any Chapter there, in the Greek one.

Tho other propositions of the Crispians are black, and look with an odious
Face, yet they are nothing to this against Brokenness of Heart, as, That the
Elect were always God's Children, as much beloved by God in their Whoredoms,
Murders, before Conversion, as after: That God saw then no Sin in them, no more
than in Angels and Saints above.

That the filthiness and pollution of Sin was on Christ till he breathed it
out, and so he was odious to God, as a Toad to a Man, and continued so till he
rose from the Dead.

That Whoremongers, Blasphemers, continuing such, may be assured they are God's
Children; and that the general Tender of the Gospel, is their best security.

That no Grace, not Faith it self, can make any one to have Comfort by it, or
prevent Evil, or obtain Good, or further Salvation. The worst is, That God
never charge Believers with Sin, neither ought they to charge themselves, nor
be troubled about it; David sinned in both. But see my Dialogue between a wild
Crispian, and a sober Christian.

And now I friendly apply my self to the Authors of this censured Libel. I bear
you no ill will, as you well know, and some of you will heartily confess: you
know not the Pleasure that I take in being of a Reconcilable Spirit; any of
you shall be welcome to me at any time, if it please you calmly to debate
matters: no Man would be more glad of your Reformation, than my self. God
Almighty give you Repentance unto Life; for Sin must be a burden to you here,
or hereafter. I am not without hope, but some of you are already ashamed for
your abuse of Mr. Mead, especially. If it be in my power, I would be ready to
do you any Service, and love you as unfeignedly as if you had never given me
this Provocation. We all offend and provoke the Sin-pardoning God every Hour,
more than we do one another all our days. I remember (and O that I remembered it
better) who said, For if you forgive not Men their Trespasses, neither will
your Father which is in Heaven, forgive you your Trespasses. Forgive, O God, my
Forgiveness, being so weak and imperfect.

A Censure of a Sermon preached by Canon Gilbert, Jan. 30. last, etc.
IN the large Porch, to a little House, I find my self struck at, That Mr.
Baxter, for asserting, The King to be inviolable, was lashed in his Grave, by
one otherwise of his own Kidney. I desire the Prefacer to consider,

1. How unfair it is, to reflect in Print on his own Brother, both by Father
and Mother (tho far from being his Brother in other things) who when occasion
was, declined any Censure of him in my late Jacobites Conference, but there
gave him his due Encomium against his Censurer; who called him crack-brain'd
Man, etc? My Brother is a wise Man: By his Oleum Terebynthinae, he has much
obliged the World. If Mr. Smith, the old famous Surgeon of London, say true,
who told me, he had his Notions from him; I care not, the World has them from
my Brother; also by his famous Cure of a Boy who lost Brain, (whom afterward I
made a Scholar) and other Books.

2. Yet I challenge him, or any other, to answer that part of the Book that
relates to their Martyrmaker, which is my name for him. Let those that pretend
to weep for Tammuz, consider it: who saw any Tears in their Eyes, on Martyrdom
days? How many generally begin their Fast after a deep Mornings Draught, and
some after a good Dinner?

3. What horrid playing with Scripture makes he, when he calls our Parliaments
infallible Judges --.That Men that will not be tried by this Law and Testimony,
it is because there is no Truth in them. Have not Parliaments in all Ages
declared different things, about matters of Fact, and matters of Right?

4. Is what is cited, approved of? When the Question is, who is King? What they
say ought not to be questioned. What makes some Men then talk as Jacobites, and
Non-resisters now? Is not K. William's Title as good by Parliament, as any of
his Predecessors, and K. James his Right forfeited? And why then --.

5. Was it not horrid Wickedness for some to preach, and afterward Print, and
he to applaud such Passages as these, That K. Charles the 1st Was a strict
observer of Justice -- A Prince that had done no harm, nor committed any Fault
-- A Man of perfect Innocence -- like Josiah, the best of Men, the best of
Kings, etc. And never Answer what I in my Censured Book have proved, and many
more?

1. That that King gave a Commission to the Earl of Antrim for what he did in
the Irish Rebellion. Mr. Long of Exon, in his Censure of Mr. Baxter's Life,
confesses, if such Stories were true, no Death could be easy enough for him,
or to that effect. I wrote him in a Letter, we were sure of the former, let him
take the latter. Where is the Man that dares deny K. Charles the second confessed
it, in a Letter yet to be seen?

2. That he debauched the Nation by a Book of Sports on Sundays, contrary to
the Laws of God and this Land: That the face not only of Religion, but
Civility, was gone; he was one of the worst of Kings that ever sat on the
Throne since the Conquest.

3. That he raised Money without his Parliament, contrary to his Oaths, and got
Preachers to tell us, All we had was his, and no longer ours than till he is
pleased to call for his own. The very words of Manwaring in his Sermon.

So that a French Government was designed to be set up, and I doubt not
Religion too; read the Cassandrian Articles, the Reasons why the Parliament
would make no more Addresses to the King, particularly what word he sent to
Capt. Pennington, not to assist the Protestants of Rochel -- Read Rushworth's
Collections; his Oath to tolerate Popery on the intended Spanish Match: How he
made the Pope weep for Joy to see a Prince so love the Catholics, as he
signified in his Letter to his Holiness when he promised to establish the
Religion of his Ancestors. Did ever a Protestant decline speaking of his
Religion before he died, as did this Martyr-maker? I do believe had Charles the
Second died on the Block, he had declared himself a Protestant as his Father
was forced to do; and had Charles the First died in his Bed, he had
acknowledged himself to be a Papist a long time in his Heart, and received the
Sacrament from a Popish Priest, as Charles the Second did. Circumstances alter
Cases much. He that told such a notorious Untruth in the beginning of his
Kingly Image, that he called a Parliament out of love to them, not from
necessity, who called none in 12 years, but forbid Men to talk of them -- He
that said he had no ill design, tho his Friends blamed him, in coming with a
Guard to the House to demand Prinn, Hambden, Hollis, and others, who shall
believe him? I say, he deserved to be sent with King Edward the Second to the
Tower, etc. for that very Fact. Edvardum occidere nolite timere bonum est, I
will not determine where the Point must be put.

What strange Citations makes this Gentleman to prove nothing! Some of his
Citations of O. Cromwell's Eulogies of the King appear unevid^e and
unsatisfactory at the first view. To pray to God to save u^ for the Royal
Martyr's Prayer -- looks like worse here than a piece of Popish Bigotry, or
Ignorance. Our Savior; I will not ask who is that? and how long he has been
accounted so by some Men? What, Priest-ridden at last! Only, I pray, has not
he been privately talked of as very a Cheat as Oliver Cromwell by a Club in
that Town?

As for that contemptible Toy the Sermon, p. 32. the Preacher says, K. Charles
the Martyr had the Piety of David without his Sins; no Uriah felt his Cruelty;
(...) Bathsheba was defiled by his Lust, etc. Now who employed the Irish Rebels
to destroy so many hundred thousand Protestants in so barbarous a way, some
driven into Rivers, some danced with Straw set on fire about their Wastes, some
having their Backs broken, lay on the Grass, and sed on it till they died; some
Mothers made to roast their Children tied fast to Spits, and scourged if they
turned not round, or pitied their roaring Children; and after all, make a Child
so to turn the Mother; and all this without Repentance. Keep your Eye on K.
Charles the Second's Testimony as the most unexceptionable Proof of all. What
Villainies before forty and forty one! A Massacre had we had in England, had not
God and the Parliament (no Pensioners) prevented it. Well, if some Men that
thus reflect on penitent David could say, No Bathsheb^ was defiled by their
Lust; no Bookseller's Wife in Oxon so kept, and after married, that the poor
Cuckold must be mentioned by the Scholars; if they could not cut the Wing of
any Fowl, Send for --

Observe, Reader, what a Generation of Men they generally are who talk of the
pious Martyr now in Heaven; many of which secretly scoff at all Religion, and
think Discourse of Piety and Heaven to be a Cant, and mock at Discoursers on
these Subjects: Or such who are Ambidexters, preach up Nonresistance of K.
James, and cry it down; one while it is the Sin of Witchcraft, another time
fast for Success of Arms against him, and give God Thanks on Thanksgiving-days
for Deliverance.

To pray on the thirtieth of January, We bewail the Murder of this day -- Let
us be faithful to his Successors -- Then presently in another Prayer, We give
thee hearty Thanks for sending thy Servant, the Prince of Orange, among us, to
deliver us from Popery and Slavery. And once prayed to God to bless their
Forces against him in Ireland, etc. Who for some Months prayed for K. James,
That God would strengthen him to vanquish and overcome all his Enemies; and
plot at that time against him, and say, God prosper the Prince of Orange, else
we are all undone? Do such Men indeed believe there is a God, or that he will
be thus mocked and played with?

Whereas we are threatened with a large Vindication of the Martyr-maker, let it
come out when it will, it will soon be answered, and it and the Author exposed:
This Cockatrice-Egg has been hatching about five Years.

I pray all Men to observe what kind of Friends they are to King William, who
are thus such Advocates for their Martyr. The Canon passes a cold Compliment
on him; the Prefacer not that. The King and his Cause is wounded through the
sides of that Parliament who fought for the English Liberties and Religion
against an Invader of both. They know, if the Doctrine of Non-resistance be
true, Men will soon be Jacobites, and make way for K. James his Return; then K.
James shall be compared to the Martyr, as excellent Prince; and K. William to
Oliver Cromwell, a Usurper, etc. by Men whose Lives are a Reproach to their
Judgments, who already place David, a Man after God's own Heart, below Charles,
a Man after the Devil's Heart.

I am sorry I am forced to say the Prefacer was a great Friend to the
Dissenters, went to their Meetings, contributed, etc. till he was forced to go
to Sacrament to get the Hospital at Plymouth; then he bewailed this Compulsion,
and was dragged to the Lord's-Table; then became one of the greatest Enemies
they had, except Roger L'Estrange and Dr. Hicks, and thirsted after Whiggish
Blood for Preferment. I would conceal this as I do other things, could I do it
without prejudicing the righteous Cause I have now espoused.

I had almost forgotten to tell the Reader what this roaring Canon's Text was,
that God told David the Pestilence was for Saul 's slaying the Gibeonites.
Well, God told David it was for that Sin, but had a scandalous
Weathercock-Priest told him so, he had not believed it.

When K. Charles the Second returned he brought a Deluge of Profaneness with
him; a Nest of Whores, and a Litter of Bastards had he, and heavy Judgments
soon followed his Heels: The Plague one year, the Fire of London the next --
Now if one had asked a Temporizing Trencher-Priest, What were these Judgments
for? O, the cutting off the Head of Charles the First! Who told them so? Not
God sure, for he and they were too great Strangers, that they should so easily
know his Mind. Was it not for the unheard of Atheism and Profaneness of the
Court? For turning out eighteen hundred Ministers in one day, for Nonconformity
to vain Traditions? For some Episcopal Men's bringing in the King, after Dr.
Sanderson had persuaded them to take the Engagement? Was it for idolizing
Princes, and saying, as our Prefacer, of K. Charles, He did no Evil --? Perhaps
he could do none; for so Sir Orlando Bridgman, in the Trial of the Regicides,
urged it, The King can do no Man wrong. (He that can do no Man wrong; can he do
any Man right?) Was it (some may say) that when the Father's Head was on the
Block, the two Son's Heads had not been there too? I am not more confident of
any one thing I ever studied of History, then that K. Charles was a Popish,
Perjured, Bloody, Arbitrary Tyrant. As for our Prefacer's Citations.

1. Some I doubt are untrue, and others want proof.

2. Men will too much talk like Courtiers, whose Minds cannot be known by their
words.

3. Some very good prudent Men, did think favorably of K. Chapter the 1st's Cause
and Family. 1. Till the Discovery of that deep Plot by Dr. Oats, declared by
the Parliament to be true. 2. Till they saw the after Proceeding of K. Charles
the ^d, and his Death. 3. Till they saw the open defiance of our Laws by K.
James. I would appeal to the Consciences of some Men (if I thought they had
any) whether they do, or ^an believe what they write of that worst of Kings, C.
1st. tho ^ot Men. 4. Besides, when Men are in Misery, as the King was in the
Isle of Wight, they then are like wild Beasts ta^ed. So he might talk honestly
and piously, and easily decoy well meaning credulous Persons, who are then
through pity ready for such impressions. 5. Yet, I think, their fluid Charity
(perhaps not fixed) is more justifiable than their Prudence or mature
Judgments. So it has been, as before with the Censurers of Dr. Crisp his
Doctrine: some close all, They hope he was a good Man. 6. Yet after all, I care
not what any Man said, but what he ought to say. I therefore ^o to the merits
of the Cause.

And for the Churchmen, who are angry with (...) of us, that hope Oliver is in
Heaven, or the greate^ Parliamentarian Fighters; they themselves must ha^ owned
so much over their Graves, if but lately Dea^ tho they justified themselves,
and proceedings to the last. If the common Plea be good here, That is (...)
that is in the least degree a remove from Despair: and the you may say of any
Man, You hope he is in Heaven, the you are not sure to be in Hell. Say next,
you hope the great Turk when he dies will go there: That you hope to (...) till
a hundred Years old, and to find a great prey; not ^ing sure to the contrary. I
will not digress, else I wo^ lay open the vanity of this Notion, or blind
Charity.

I care not for Milton's Iconoclastes, tho I think he ha^ written a great deal
of Truth, but whether honestly (...) no, I leave others to judge: I do believe
both he and (...) Lord Lambert were Roman Catholics, or Scepticks a^ Deists,
doing the work of such. I once conversed with (...) Lord Lambert, in his Garden
on the Island nigh Plymo^ and could hardly tell what he would be at in
Religion, (...) when I saw him on the 15th Psalm, I there found a Beh^
menistical strain, and believed he intended to bring our Religion into
Contempt. What Bedlow swore, is well kno^ and he said he brought him Letters
from --. The Milton lost his Paradise, the Protestant Religion, but ne^
re^ain'd it more. But did nothing that Rushworth sa^ deserve our Prefacer's
Consideration?

Obj. But it shall be done in time. When? It is high ti^ if ever. And he might
have let alone this magisterial, dog^tical Assertion till that time, that we
might see all in a pie^ What is a Machin, when taken in its parts: for my pa^ I
not only can, but do hear patiently any Man that she talk two or three Hours
together, to prove the infam^ Martyr-maker, to be a glorious Martyr, if he so
belie^ but for Men to assert, and assert without proof, and be (...) patient of
hearing Objections; they are not fit for Conver^ ^o doubt this destroyer of his
Country, doubted not but ^ishop Williams of Ossery his Prophesy, should be
fulfilled in ^is Book against Non-Resistance, written in the 2d Year of the
War, That the King should reign till he had put all his Enemies ^der his Feet.
God heard the K. when he said, if I have ^ed innocent Blood, let my Honor be
laid in the Dust.

As for the keen severe Reflections, our Prefacer makes ^n those who m^ke a
Calves head Feast every Martyr^om day, I justify them not, but if I must be
either at their Feast, or some Men's Fast that day, I know which (...) would
choose for good cheer sake, tho I will not tell every Body, much less the
Prefacer, lest I should be re^ected on in his next Turkish-slavish-Book. His
other ^rother N. Y. (that true Englishman lately dead) is be^ond his Censure
now.

This Sermon being printed, must never be preached ^ore, tho with a new Text,
how often soever it has been ^reach'd already. Must two hundred Pounds a Year
be ^id to a repeater of Sermons, tho his own, and the Trade ^ntinue, durante
Vita? He that preached his Daughters Di^nity once about standing in ^inging
Psalms, let him ^nsult her again, and it may be he will no longer up ^d down,
preach Pro and Con, and turn his Cap as the ^ind blows. Will not his Head when
he dies, serve for ^other thing now on the Steeple? Has the Martyr-^aker's
Picture before the Pulpit, set up by Mr. Prefacer, ^ade them both giddy?

That King Charles was the Author of his Image, is ^utly asserted by our
Prefacer, as stoutly denied by Men (...) all Parties, but never was by me; for

1. Colonel Crook told me he saw the Copy of it under (...) King's own hand,
and he never doubted him the Au^or. Now tho I confess this proves him not the
Au^or, yet it is a great help, and confutes some who ^estion whether ever the
King saw it. The Testimo^ of an Adversary goes far; he was one of the greatest
Enemies the King had, and one of the best Friends his Highness the Protector
had.

2. What will the denyers get by this, who cannot deny the Conference between
the King and Mr. Hindersham, and other Epistles of his, which prove he was a
good Scholar, and so far a wise Man. What if his Brother Julia^, and his
Brother Trajan, were both great learned Men, does that excuse their Tyrannies,
and other Villainies? No, tho their good Morals be added to all; as not given to
Women or Wine, etc. Their learning unsanctified (not enthusiastically managed)
was but as Judas and the Jews Lanthorns and Torches by which Christ was
betrayed.

3. Does any Man that knows Bishop Gauden's Style, think this like it? And for
what a late Writer says, Mr. T. of the Earl of Anglesy, leaving it under his
hand in a Book, That he knew it was not the King's, etc. and this Mr.
Millington testifies --.

1. Is it likely King Charles the first, and James the the^ Duke of York,
should so confess to him? What! And none but him?

2. Ought not the Earl, if so, to have declared this when live, Viva voce, for
the satisfaction of his Contrymen, and not leave a Note in so obscure a
place?

3. I must have greater Testimony than Mr. M. to prove it was the Earl's own
Hand, and not counterfeit: We know who can imitate. If as Mr. Millington told
me, and others, That Paul a Knave of Jesus Christ, is no true Story, but it was
found that Knave was with great Artifice put in, and the word there before
blotted o^ might not a lesser Trick be here made?

Lastly, If Bishop Gauden did say he was the Autho^, and say true, it is as
true, he was the greatest Villain (...) the face of the Earth. To tell the
World, the King sa^ to God and Man, what he never said: his name deser^ to be a
Curse on the Earth, for abusing all Manki^ But he was accounted one of the best
of Bishops: (...) ^kely, the famous Preacher, once in Exon, told me great ^ngs
of him, and that he believed him to be a Pious ^n, tho he himself was a warm
Independent. Whether ^hop Gauden might help the King to any Materials, I ^l not
say, or the like, but the same Arguments that ^ve him to be the Author, prove
him to be a ^at R.

(...) remember I once heard our Prefacer say, when urged ^th the before named
Story of K. Charles the 2d's giving ^der his Hand, That the Earl of Antrim, in
the Irish Re^lion, acted by his Father's Commission; It cannot, said (...), be
denied, But he hated his Father, because a Protestant -- ^or, thin Sophistry.
(Yet we had an Act from an in^ible Parliament, by the way, to make it Treason
to say, ^is King was a Papist.) I wish those excellent, admi^le
Accomplishments, God has blessed our Prefacer ^th, (say Dr. Salmon what he
will to the contrary) had ^en well employed! Would Plymouth Hospital had been
^ther, and the Sacramental Test! Then we had had him as ^ainter, not of an old
rotten Post, but of a new good ^e, K. William, as more than a Crowned Head,
which is all (...) good words he has for him. If Christ and Oliver ^omwel,
must pass for two Deceivers, in some Company; (...) Judas and the
Martyr-makers, pass for famous Men. ^d the King been indeed a Pious Man, some
Men would ^ver have one good for him; who hate every thing of ^ty where ever
they see it, except the NAME.

How hard is it for any Man to serve two Masters, Charles (...) Pseudo-Martyr,
and our good K. William? Either he ^st hold to the one, and Despise the other;
they can^t serve K. Charles and K. William. If some took off the ^ad of the
Father, others Dethroned K. James for K. ^lliam, and would have his Head too,
could they come at But if I am asked, as I have often been, Will you justify
^ver Cromwell in all that he did:

1. No, nor my self in all that I have done, but cry God be Merciful to me a
Sinner. Will these Objectors justify themselves in every thing they have done?
I believe some cannot justify them in any thing almost they do.

2. Can David, Solomon, Josiah, or the best of Princes be justified in all they
did? The Church by Solomon (...) said to be fair as the Morn, which has her
Spots.

3. Yet what is it he is not to be justified in? O^ The taking the Government
upon him: I know none hate Preferment. Did he then make, or attempt to make his
Family or the Nation great? It is well known, many Congregational Ministers
reflected on him every Lord's day i^ the Pulpit, for usurping the Government.
When he se^ for them together, he so acquainted them with the Sta^ and Posture
of things at that time, that had he not taken the Protector-ship upon him, all
things had run into Confusion: He wept, and they wept as fast as he, and would
never reflect upon him more. Yet to be plain, his saying, in the Star Chamber,
He never sought the Protectorship, no manner of way, but was unwilling to take
it till forced to it; and shutting the Parliament-door, till they had owned his
Authority, were bad, vile things, and showed him (...) be but a Man of like
Infirmities with others. But if it cannot be proved he was a Pious Man: What
then? He might be a good Governor. How rare are pious Kings? One in three or
four hundred Year! But of him, and K. Charles, and Affairs relating to them
have I said so much in my censured Book, Vindiciae Anti-Baxterianae, that there
I refer the Reader.

These talkers for the slavish Doctrine of Non-Resistance, are woeful
practitioners of it, when it comes to be against them. They forget themselves,
as Roger L'estrange in his late Fables and Morals, unhappily begins, When
Archodemus, King of the Lacedaemonians, married a very little Woman, his
Subjects fined him, because they feared a small breed by her -- Why Roger, were
Kings fined by their Subjects, in one of ^e best Governments in the World (as
the Lacedemonian ^s) and that for so small a thing? What if that King had ^pt a
Nest of Whores, and among them another Man's ^ife; had not his Head been the
Fire? Thus the great ^eaders for absolute Monarchy, and Kings to be inviolable,
^o Arbitrary, trip ere they are aware. This is like the ^ose; after he had
censured many Fables in Aesop as trite, ^e makes a more foolish one then any
there, about the Wo^an and the Needle thrust in her Finger: He said, he did ^t
thrust himself there, she did: so, Is it not shameful (...) see some Men
condemn others, as Men having no ^nscience, and factious Atheists, forsooth? If
K. Charles ^s Cause had been good, he might say to some pleaders for ^m, as a
Holy Man and Martyr; what Christ said to their ^aster, when he said, I know
thee who thou art, the Holy ^e of God: Hold thy Peace: accounting it no honor
to ^m, to be thus applied to by an Unclean Spirit.

You that compare the Man of Blood to David, Josiah; ^me, to Christ himself;
remember how Williams Bishop (...) Ossery exposed himself, when he wrote a
Folio to prove, ^ery comically done) That Antichrist was the long Par^ment, and
Bishop Laud and King Charles the two wit^sses. You that talk of the sick
brained, Apocalyptical ^en at that time; can you find a worse than he? or a
^ore mad Prophet than Aris ap Evan?

The Blood shed in the Civil War, (the worst of Wars) ^ied for Vengeance, and
was heard.

I pray the Inhabitants of that famous Town of Ply^outh (the place of my
Nativity) to consider how fa^ous, above any Town in England, not only the Men,
^t the very Women made themselves, when they re^ell'd the Martyr-maker in his
highest Attempts to take ^e Town: How God afterward blessed them with a ^ly,
laborious, bountiful, genteel, learned Minister, Mr. (...) Hughes: How all
blessings of Trade, Peace, Plenty, as ^ell as Piety then attended them. What
Confusions are there now in their Worship, contrary to the Co^ Prayer Book:
Instead of, with an Humble Voice saying me: They roar with a loud Voice, going
on with reading Priest, or, as once I heard, going before him, Voice not being
heard. How Atheism and Profan^ has abounded there for thirty Years past. What
(...) the B. in the Manger, etc. Our Prefacer knows this (...) true, and has
been an Ear Witness: as if they (...) verify, what some have said, Where the
Common-P^ Book goes up, the Bible goes down. Let Mr. Mun^ other serious Persons
there, compare Times with T^ Ministers with Ministers, Magistrates with
Magistr^ Worship with Worship, People with People, and they not acknowledge,
that Plymouth was once a ^dice, now a wild Wilderness, etc? O the Wickedne^
some Men, who have made other Men as Heathen Me^ Publicans, and delivered them
up to Satan for a Trid^ Ceremony, and cherished, as Members of their Cha^ such
as have kept other Men's Wives, whilst Magistr^ C. M. went openly on such
particular days of the W^ and such particular hours of the Day! How came Canon
to give this Man the Sacrament, contrary to (...) own Orders? Hold up your
Head, Sir: Are you a C^ formist according to the Constitution of your Cha^ No:
but in this, and other things, a vile Dissenter.

FINIS.

