Christian Tranquillity, OR, The Government of the Passions OF JOY and GRIEF. IN
A SERMON PREACHED At SHENTON in Leicestershire, upon the occasion of the much
lamented Death of that hopeful young Gentleman, Mr. FRANCIS WOLLATSON, an only
Son and Heir to a very fair Estate. By JOHN CAVE, Rector of NAILSTON, in the
same County, sometimes Fellow of Lincoln College in Oxford, and now Chaplain to
the Lord Bishop of Durham.

(...)

Arrian in Epict. Amittant filios viri boni; quidni cum and ipsi sunt mortales?

Sen de provid. Moris quondam fuit, ut super cadavera Parentum defunctorum, in
concione pro rostris. lauds Liberi dicerent, and instar lugubrium carminum, ad
stetus and gemitus audientium pectora concitarent; En rerum in nobis ordo
mutatus est, and in calamitate nostra perdidit sua jura natura. Quod exhibere
senibus Juvenis debuit, hoc Juveni exhibemus senes,

Hieron. Ep. 3tia ad Heliodor His soul pleased the Lord, therefore hasted he to
take him away from among the wicked,

Wisd. 4. LONDON: Printed for R. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXV.

To the Right Worshipful, WILLIAM WOLLATSON, Esquire; And his Virtuous Lady, Madam
ELIZABETH WOLLATSON.
THE wisest among the Heathen Writers have labored much by their most Refined
Discourses, to settle a Tranquillity of Mind, an Evenness of Spirit in the
inequalities, the ebbings and flowings of Fortune: But the Christian Philosophy
only can effect what they have endeavored, by setting before us an immutable
Eternity, Heavenly Joys and Glories, sufficient to abate our esteem of the most
pleasing and splendid things here below; and to keep us from sinking under the
heaviest troubles of this Life.

By this Philosophy our great Apostle, St. Paul, 2 Cor. 4.16. Chap. 12.10.
was strong; at lest, fainted not when he was weak; and tho his outward man
perished, his inward man was renewed day by day; he being assured, that these
light afflictions, which are but for a moment, in comparison, would work for
him, and all his fellow sufferers, a far more exceeding, and eternal weight of
glory; whilst they, with him, look not at the things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen by any eye but that of Faith. The same Philosophy
enabled the Hebrews to take joyfully the spoiling of their goods, Heb. 10.34.
knowing that they had in heaven a better, and an enduring substance. And it
instructs us all to lay up our treasures there, where they will be safe from
corruption and stealth. Mat. 6.19, 20.


Yea, because God has laid up for us a Crown of immortal Life, and provided so
well hereafter for his dutiful children, we are obliged to be less solicitous
about our earthly portions, and to bear all his fatherly chastisements, the
sufferings of short time, with patience and contentment; especially considering
that they are prudent exercises and methods of discipline, to prepare us for
heavenly Tranquillity and blessedness.

For those dismal Providence which draw clouds and darkness over Religious
Families, do but make them fitter to be presented to God, and to partake of the
inheritance with the Saints in light. Col. 1.12.


The Rod of God is to them a Staff, and a comfort too; if like the branch of a
Fig Tree, it be bitter and sharp, it is like it, fruitful too.

No Calamity comes as a Curse to a good House, whose Stock is pious, and whose
Branches are holiness to the Lord. If any Leaf, or any Bough shall fall
untimely, God shall gather it, and bind it up in the bundle of Life.

There is no worldly evil in which a religiously disposed mind may not find
matter of some content and comfort. And truly, as disconsolate as your Case
appears, it has its lightsome mixtures, and many refreshing mitigations.

Tho God took your beloved Son when he was just ripe for the world (for he was
come to Manhood at Sixteen), when you, and all that had a more remote interest
in him, promised your selves all the happy fruits of an excellent natural
temper, and of the accomplishment of an ingenious and religious Education: yet
he took him too, in a time of great Peril and Temptation, when his age was most
inclined to vicious Compliances. Because he pleased God, Wisd. 4.
and was beloved of him, when he lived among Sinners, he was Translated; lest
that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his Soul.

And I may here seasonably remind you, that when a little before his last
Sickness, he was treated with some loose Atheistical Discourse, too much in the
mode of our times; He spoke his abhorence of it, and his utter dislike of such
conversation; however the endearments of kindred or kindness, did otherwise
commend it to him. And I am told, that at the approach of his Death, which is
usually most terrible to young men, He prayed that you might be but as willing
to part with him, as he was to die.

God has taken your only Son, yet he has left you two Virtuous and Dutiful
Daughters, who I pray and hope, may be lasting and teeming blessings to you.

Scaliger and Lipsius, two incomparable Persons, were the last of their Family
and Name; and I never read, that they were at all concerned for it: And surely
it need not be so great a trouble to us, if it should please God to make the
case our own: Seeing our Name could not have lasted much longer in a
short-lived World; and seeing further, that God has promised to the barren,
and will make it good to the bereaved, That if they choose the things that
please him, Isa. 56.4, 5.
he will give them a Place, and a Name, better than that of Sons and Daughters.

God grant, that by patient continuance in well-doing, and suffering, you may
daily seek for Glory, and Honor, and Immortality, for that everlasting Name
which shall not be cut off: And that you may be effectually instructed by the
Doctrine of this plain Sermon (which was Preached, and is Printed at your
desire, and wholly for your Service) how to make the best of the worst that
has, or can befall you; and to defend against those two great Fountains of
Temptation, Pleasure and Pain, that you may so happily govern the ruling
Passions of Joy and Grief, (...) Ar. 1. Eth. l. 2. c. 3.
which have the nearest Influence upon our practices.

That after your Troubles and Trials, you may be in Heaven, before your
Translation, by a Christian Tranquillity, an unshaken constancy of mind, and a
blessed Peace of Conscience; and that you and yours may long prosper, and be in
Health ever, as your Souls prosper, is the hearty Prayer of

Your Most Affectionate Kinsman, And Faithful Servant, JOHN CAVE.

CHRISTIAN TRANQUILLITY.
1 COR. VII. 30. And they that weep, as though they wept not; and they that
rejoice, as though they rejoiced not --


THESE words are part of an Inference from a Proposition foregoing, at the
beginning of the 29th Verse.

This I say, brethren, the time is short: it remains, that both they that
have wives, be as if they had none; and they that weep, as tho they wept not,
etc.

I shall consider my Text in its dependence, and speak first of the Proposition
from which it is inferred.

This I say, brethren, the time is short.

And in it I shall observe, 1. The Preface; This I say, brethren. 2. The
Matter, or Doctrine; The time is short.


This I say, brethren. It is such an Introduction as frequently occurs in
Scripture: And here in our Text it seems to carry in it a Threefold Emphasis:

1. It is a word of Authority: This I say; i. e. I require you to mark well,
and observe what I say; for I say it in Gods Name; not by permission only, but
by Warrant and Command from him. And when we deliver our Messages, as the
Ambassadors of Heaven, we may do it with confidence and assurance, because we
do it with Commission and Authority. Philem. 8.
We may be bold in Christ, as our Apostle speaks in another place.

2. This I say, brethren. It is an expression of kindness, and Pastoral
Affection. I say it out of my true love, tenderness and bowels toward you: I
say it with an unfeigned desire that you may edify and receive good, direction
and comfort by it: That you may number your days, and moderate your affections
in all temporal concernments: That your desires may not be long when your time
is short: That all your delights and sorrows may bear an equal proportion to
their respective Objects: And because, as the Wiseman says, there is a time to
mourn, and a time to laugh, you may do neither out of time and measure. It was
a tender affectionate Address, as the Compellation implies: This I say,
brethren.

3. It is a word of comprehension, or recapitulation, wherein the Apostle sums
up all in effect which he had said before.

Having treated of Virginity, of Marriage, of Callings, and directed how we
should stand affected to them, and behave our selves in them, as becomes our
Relation and Circumstances: In the Text he gives them the sum of all, by
persuading to moderation in all estates and conditions of life, with respect to
the mutability and short continuance of them. This I say, as the Upshot and
Epitomy of my whole discourse; as the Royal Preacher, Let us hear the
conclusion of the whole matter, Eccles. 12.13.
etc. So here in the Text.

It stands indeed in the middle, and so may more properly be said to be the
Substance, or, if you will, the Center of the whole matter.

This I say, and this I would have you take notice of, as the sum of all my
other sayings and advices, both before and after.

Thus much for the Preface, or Form of Address, and the importance thereof.

The Saying it self; the Matter or Doctrine follows. The time is short: it
remains, that they that weep, be as though they wept not; and they that
rejoice, as though they rejoiced not.

The words together contain a Doctrine; and Two proper Uses we are to make of
it.

The Doctrine is, The time is short.

The Uses are; therefore not to enlarge our affections; either,

1. By over-grieving at our sufferings: Or, 2. By over joying at our
prosperity.
The time is short.

1. The time of Life. 2. The time of the coming of the Lord. 3. The time of Joy
and Prosperity. 4. The time of Persecution and Trouble is short.
1. The time of this present Life is very short.

Man that is born of a woman, is but of a few days: If he lives to the utmost
extent of Nature, and becomes wondrous old: What is Fourscore years to
Eternity? It is but a minute in comparison; rather a Cipher than a Figure, in
David's account: Mine age is as nothing before thee. Seneca.
Punctum est quod vivimus, and adhuc puncto minus; It is but a point that we
live; yea, less, if it may be. It is the Language not only of Philosophers, but
of the Holy Ghost, concerning all the Nations of men, that they are as nothing,
less than nothing, Isa. 40. De die tecum loquitur, atque hoc ipso fugiente.
Sen. de brevitate vitae. Job 4.20.
and vanity.

Our Life in Scripture is termed but a day, for the most part: And in this day,
says Eliphaz in Job, We are destroyed from morning until evening; from the
morning of our birth, or coming into the world, till the evening of our death,
or going out of the world; we are declining and wasting, and shall be so till
we come to the dust of death. Childhood and Youth are vanity, and many a man
dies when he seems to be in his full strength; when his breasts are full of
milk, Job 21.23.
and his bones moistened with marrow.

A thousand Accidents lie in ambush to surprise us in our most sound and secure
state: And I might present you with many famous instances of great persons
falling by little and unlikely instruments; but shall only in compliance with
my Text, observe, That some have died with excess of grief, as Homer, Rutilius,
and Pomperanus; And others have been carried off with sudden joy, Plutarch Val.
Max. A. Gellius.
as Polycritta, Philippida, and Diagoras.

Alas! what a vain and defenseless creature is man! Even in the pride of his
strength, the most contemptible accident can destroy him, the smallest chance
affright him; every possibility of evil can loosen and dissinew the courage of
his mind; and his own imagination, without any real stroke, frequently proves
his Executioner.

Therefore as the time of every man's Life is short, so the time of many men's is
contracted, or made short, and that sometimes by the justice, and sometimes by
the mercy of the Divine Providence.

1. The days of the wicked are often shortened, for the glorifying of Gods
Justice, in their exemplary punishment. God shall shoot at them with an arrow,
suddenly shall they be wounded. And this Job calls a putting out of their
candle, Psalm. 64.7.
before it burns out of it self.

Ungodly men are thrust out of the World many times, that they may do no more
mischief in it. But

2. The righteous are mercifully taken out of it, that they may suffer no more.
They are taken away from the evil to come; not only from the evil of Sin, which
is a blessed Deliverance indeed; but from the evil of Sorrow, from the Diseases
of Nature, and all the extrinsecal misfortunes of Life.

Upon which consideration, that saying of Pliny the elder (one of the wisest
Naturalists) seems to be grounded. Brevitate vitae natura nihil praestitit
melius. It is one of the greatest blessings God bestows, to take us betimes out
of this miserable World.

They that think otherwise, and imagine there is no happiness beyond, or
besides this Life, cannot by taking thought, protract their stay here; as they
cannot add a Cubit to their Stature, so neither can they add a minute to their
days.

Much more might easily, if not seasonably be spoken upon this fruitful
Subject. But sure we need not labor about the Proof or Illustration of a
Point, which neither Infidelity, nor Skepticism ever disbelieved, or doubted,
which every days experience attests, which the Mourners publish in the Streets,
the Tombs and Grave-Stones, the Escutcheons and Garlands in the Church, Preach
without a voice.

And indeed, this Truth, that the time of Life is short, and of Death certain;
is written indelibly even in the dust.

But O vain, twice vain man, who will be still drawing lines in this dust, and
spinning out a thread, which shall last as long as Methusalems, if not as
Melchizedechs, without end of days. But as man's time, so the Worlds time, Time
it self is short; yet a little while, and the Heavens shall pass away, and the
Stars shall fall to the Earth, like untimely Figs, or withered Leaves from
their Trees, For

In the second place, The time of the coming of the Lord is short. The Apostles
spoke of it then, as nigh at hand, and of the Judge as standing before the door:
And therefore it cannot be far from us, after so many Successions of time.
However we may be sure, the time to come is short, in respect of that which is
already past, and that we are fallen into the last Act of the Worlds Tragedy:
And let me note this by the way, that St. James Exhorts to Patience under
Afflictions, by this very Argument, Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the
coming of the Lord. Jam. 5.7, 8.


3. The time of ease and delight is short.

Prosperity is not entailed, it passes not after the manner of Inheritance,
from Generation to Generation; we have here no abiding City, no durable Riches,
no Honors, or Pleasures, which we can bequeath to Posterity. Nay none which we
can secure to our selves for the short term of our own Life. Omnia ista quae
vos tumidos and supra humana elatos oblivisci cogunt vestrae fragilitatis, etc.
non sunt vestra, in depositi causa sunt, jamjamque ad alium dominum spectantia.
Sen. de benef. l. 7.


Our Sun is often overcast, sometimes Eclipsed, before our day is done.

Riches, when we think we have them in safe custody, take to themselves wings,
and fly away from us, Prove. 23. or else are consumed by the Moth, or purloined
by the Thief.

Again, Men that are in honor abide not, their beauty shall consume away from
their dwellings. Health is a harmony of humors, which is soon discomposed, and
put out of Tune. Credit is a Crystal Glass, quickly broken, and cannot be
repaired again.

What little assurance have we of beloved Wives, or delightsome Children? We
please our selves with them to day, and to morrow bury them out of our sight.

Three hundred of the Fabii in Rome, were slain in one day, and but one man of
the Family left alive; Babo Comes.
and we read of a Count in the time of Henry the second Emperor, who had thirty
Sons, beside eight Daughters, who followed him to Court, and were all placed,
and preferred to good Offices by him; but all died and left him in a very short
space of time. And so in Scripture, we find all Gideons Children slain at once,
except one.

Our portion is among the Flowers, which to day spring, and look like Health,
and Beauty, and in the Evening they are Sick, and at Night are dead, and buried
in the Oven.

Ostenduntur haec omnia, and dum placent transeunt. Worldly men indeed, Card.
Bon. opera. p. 10.
do very much value themselves upon the account of their worldly
Accommodations, and presume upon the long continuance thereof to them and
theirs. The Psalmist tells us, that their inward thought is (tho happily they
are ashamed to publish it) that their houses shall endure for ever, Psalm. 49.11.
and their dwelling places to all Generations.

They think all their days, be they short or long, must be Summer and Sunshine
without a Storm, a Tempest, a Cloud to cover any part of their Sky, or to
interrupt the gayety of any hour of their time; they think their stock will
never wast, the provision of their Lusts will never fail, that they shall
always have their fill; yea, that their sensual delights will grow, and improve
upon them, and that to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant.

But as the Day comes, so also the Night; and when men thus say, The
bitterness of Death or Sorrow is past, or else will be long in coming; when
they say, Peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon them, as travel
upon a Woman with child. 1 These. 5.3.


When the Atheistical Fool Eat, Drank, and took his Pleasure, as if he had
goods laid up for many Years, one Night put a Period both to his Enjoyment and
his Projects.

The Ambitious man promises himself all the Advantages of Honor and Power,
and seems in his aspiring thoughts to be ascending into Heaven, and exalting
his Throne above the Stars of God; but God, who is above him and his Stars,
above all his rising Glories, soon takes down his swelling Sail, and degrades
him from his proud heights. Tho thou build thy nest among the stars, thence
will I bring thee down. Obad. 4. Phot. Epl. 234. p. 349.


(...), etc. The Princes and Potentates of the World, who talk and look as if
they were immortal, die like other men. Alas, we find it so; and their Glory
does not descend after them. Yea, many times their Crowns fall before them, and
their Honor is laid in the Dust, while they walk above ground.

The greatest or the best of men, have no sure hold of any earthly Felicity;
even their Summer days are short, and the most flourishing Estate fading, ready
to die, and wither, when it makes the fairest show, and promises the fullest
satisfaction.

The Rabbis have observed of Adam himself, that he did not dwell one Night in
Paradise, but was poisoned with his Prosperity, with the ravishing Charms of a
fair Wife, and the pleasant fruit of a fair Tree.

4. The time of Adversity and Trouble is short. Man indeed is born to trouble,
as the sparks fly upward. Job 5.7.
Our Lillies grow among Thorns; our very Roses are wrapped up in Prickles; our
sweetest comforts have their sorrowful mixtures, and the voice of mourning is
heard among the daughters of Music.

Yea, sorrow and trouble are not only an Entail upon our Nature, as Men; but a
Legacy bequeathed to us by the blessed Founder of our Religion, as Christians;
and so they become as well our badg as our burden, our mark of honor, and
relation to our Lord, the man of sorrows. The Cross shows whose Disciples we
are; and through manifold tribulations we enter into the kingdom of heaven.

But where we read in the Old or New Testament, of the number, or the sharpness
of good men's troubles, we read of their shortness too. We read in Psalm. 34.19.
that the afflictions of the righteous are many: And we read in the same verse,
that they are not lasting; The Lord delivers him out of them all: Sorrow may
endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. Psalm 30.5
And both these were remarkably exemplified in good Job: His afflictions were
sore and numerous: The sudden unhappy death of ten children, the perverseness
of his wife, the loss of all his great stock, plagues on his body, and terror
in his mind; the scorn of vile persons, the contempt of his servants, the
censures and reproaches of his Friends; yet time blew over all those clouds:
the Lord delivered him out of all these troubles, and blessed the latter end of
Job more than his beginning.

Jonah outlived the withering of his Gourd.

In the New Testament our Savior makes the afflicted of the number, whom he
pronounces happy, and that because they are passing into a better state:
Blessed are they that mourn now; for they shall be comforted. Blessed are they,
tho they mourn, because they only mourn now in this short point of time. 1 Pet.
1.6.
St. Peter comforts the sufferers he wrote unto, upon this very consideration:
Ye have reason to rejoice, because it is but now, for a season that ye are in
heaviness. 2 Cor. 4.15.
And St. Paul reckons the heaviest afflictions of the first Christians but
light, because momentary.

To sense and natural apprehension, our sufferings seem long, and our
refreshments late. But the Reason of an Heathen made a wiser judgment; Dabit
Deus his quoque sinem: And the Faith of a Christian thinks any thing short in
comparison, which has an end. Death, if nothing else, puts us out of our pain
and sorrow: and in the grave the weary are at rest.

No Torments are intolerably long, but those of Hell, which are eternal.

Nay, the Christians sufferings are not only short, because they have an end;
but I may add, they are salutiferous too, because they have a good, an happy
end. Omnes paenae non exterminantes sunt medicinales: All punishments that do
not end us, end well; like the launcings of a wound, which let out the
ulcerated matter; they are intended to heal and save us.

Our heavenly Father chastens us not after his own pleasure, to show his
Sovereignty; but for our profit, to impart his Holiness. He designs our quiet
by our trouble, the peaceable fruits of righteousness by the afflictions which
are most grievous to Nature. After God had wrestled with Jacob, he blessed him:
And he usually comforts his servants according to the days that he has
afflicted them, and according to the years that they have seen evil. Psalm.
90.15.


Many sad accidents, in men's account, have proved the means or occasions of
singular temporal benefits, and great worldly prosperity. The case of Joseph is
upon famous Record in Scripture. And in Church History we read of one Eudoxia,
who was unkindly thrust out of her Fathers house, by her unnatural Brethren;
and making her complaint to the Emperor Theodosius the younger, she found love
as well as pity; he received her into his Palace, and made her his Queen, when
she wanted house and Harbor, the ordinary necessaries and comforts of Life.

And it was a strange Observation which Cardan made of himself, That never any
good befell him, In his Life written by himself.
but what was occasioned by some foregoing evil.

Indeed the Sun evermore shines most pleasantly, after a Storm; and it is the
usual method of the Divine Providence, to usher in his mercies with the black
Rod, thereby enhansing and endearing our subsequent refreshments.

O quid solutis est beatius curis? We are a great deal more happy in a
deliverance out of misery, than if we had never been in it. But if our seeming
evils are not in this respect, real blessings; yet with St. Hierom, Brevia mala
putemus, Epist. ad Paulam sup. obit. Blesilloe filiae.
quae finis melior subsequetur.

We may well account all those sufferings short, which end happily; as ours
will, if we bear them patiently, and penitently. 1 Pet. 5.6.
Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due
time.

But this minds me to pass from the Proposition, or Doctrine of my Text, The
time is short, to the Applicatory part of it; the practical inferences in these
words, It remains, that those that weep, be as if they wept not; and they that
rejoice, as tho they rejoiced not.

The Devil has two general ways, or means of working our ruin, per blanda, aut
per aspera; by Pleasure, or Pain, Prosperity, or Adversity; and our Apostle,
who was not ignorant of his devices, endeavors here to arm and secure us
against the dangers of both; by making this general use of the shortness of our
lives, and the vicissitude of our Fortunes, to persuade us to Equanimity and
Moderation, to an even temper of Spirit in every Condition, whether
comfortable, or calamitous. To instruct us both how to be abased, and how to
abound, how to bear Prosperity without Insolence, and Adversity without
Impatience; and in all our projects and defeats, in all the changes of worldly
things, to keep a mind unchanged, neither elevated, nor depressed above
measure, in the difference of Conditions, nor in the greatest contrarieties of
Events. As it was observed of Aristippus, he scarce ever changed Countenance in
any Alteration of his Affairs; if at any time he sought to mend his
Circumstances, yet he never seemed discontented with them. And Cicero notes it
of Pythagoras, that his looks never discovered the least inconstancy in his
mind, that no one ever saw him rejoice or weep; if he did so indeed, it was as
our Apostle would have us do, as if he did not.

In the Text, there seems to be an allusion to that of the Prophet Ezekiel, The
time is come, the day draws near, let not the buyer rejoice, Chap. 7.7.12.
or the seller mourn. For thus he proceeds in the following words, They that
buy, as tho they possessed not; and they that use this world, as not abusing
it; for the fashion of this world passes away.

Seneca (who perhaps was not altogether a Stranger to our St. Paul) has
somewhat like this, in his 78 Ep. to Lucilius, Interim tene hoc mordicus,
adversis non succumbere, laetis non credere. Keep close to this rule, not to
despond in adversity, or confide in prosperity: And he gives the reason in
another place, why we ought to be so indifferent in our Affections, viz.
because the things or states are of an indifferent nature, nec bona, nec mala,
neither good nor evil in themselves, but may become either to us, as we use or
abuse them.

A continued course of intense passion, seems very incongruous toward such
discontinuing, such indifferent things. It best becomes us so to govern our
Desires, our Sorrows and Delights, that they may be propotionate to the nature
and value of their Objects. Haec quidem philosophia nemini non est in ore, sed
paucorum animis vere serioque insidet, as one observes upon the place. Every
one is ready to Preach this Philosophy, but very few feel the true effects of
it in their minds, or express them in their Practices.

Tho the Heathen Orators, Poets, and Philosophers, spoke many excellent and
acute Things of this kind, and persuaded to Moderation and Patience, from the
mutability of Fortune, the shortness, and uncertainty of humane life; Yet our
great Apostle saw it needful to press Christians with the same consideration;
to be their serious Remembrancers, to put them in mind of what they knew
before; to reconcile to their Affections a Truth which their understandings had
already admitted, and to incline their practice, to follow their Judgments.

In imitation of this Divine author, I am about to exhort, beseech, persuade
you, to consider well, and lay to heart what you know, to yield to the
Authority of your own reason, to do that which you cannot but be partly
convinced is best to be done, and which it is your Duty to do, viz. to be
moderate in your Enjoyments, and your Sufferings; not to murmr or repine at
your losses, nor to set your hearts too much upon your remaining Comforts,
Wife, Children, Houses, Lands, etc. Because, how dear and delight some soever
they are to you, they are at best but Treasures in earthen Vessels, subject to
a thousand Casualties. If there were nothing else to abate their worth, this
alone does it, Their time is short. In my Text we are advised, First to assuage
our Grief in occasions of trouble; and then to temper and bound our joy, when
our Affairs succeed best. But in my Discourse, I shall alter the method; and
because I design to say least of the Affection of Joy, I shall speak of it
first, and in a way introductory to what I have to say upon the mournful
Subject.

-- And they that rejoice, as tho they rejoiced not.

The Fathers have made this observation on these words, that the Joys of this
World are but Quasi, as if they were Joys, not such indeed, but rather Shadows
or Images: As when a hungry man eats in his dream, but when he awaketh, Isa.
29.8.
his soul is empty.

The Pomps and Profits of the World, are but Vanities to a Christian; and when
they appeared to our Savior in the best Attire, and Representation the Devil
could give them, he despised them all.

We are allowed a delight and comfort in temporal blessings, but with such
Qualifications and Restraints, as rather becalm, than advance our Affections;
rather wipe away our Tears, and prevent Sighing, than cheer our minds, or
maintain Mirth. It was a seasonable hint, that of Caenus the Macedonian, to the
conquering Alexander, that nothing did better become him, than (...), Arrian.
Moderation of mind in his glorious Success and Prosperity.

Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the mighty man glory in his
might, nor the rich man glory in his riches. He may be pleased with them, and
the like blessings, and take comfort of them, but he must not glory in them, he
must not be too much conceited of them, or vainly puffed up with them. He must
not promise himself too much from them, as if they were substantial, lasting,
and abiding Goods. Solomon the wisest of men, advises us to cease from our own
Wisdom (not to lay too much stress upon our worldly Policies) Prove. 23.4. for
it will otherwise cease from us: There is no knowledge nor wisdom in the grave,
whither we are all going, Eccles 9.10. Again, 1 Samuel 2.9.
by strength shall no man prevail long; and Riches will fail us when we most
need them; Prove. 11.4.
They profit not in the day of wrath.

If these things, and others of the like Nature, wherein we are most apt to
over-joy, to glory and pride our selves, do not in a short time fail us, it
will not be long before we leave them: They and we are of a sickly kind,
declining and decaying daily. Accipimus peritura perituri. Our fairest and
sweetest earthly delights are but a withering Posie in a dying man's hand.

How then in Reason can we be over-fond of them? Why should we set our hearts
and affections upon things which are not? upon things which perish in the
enjoyment, which are passing away from us, and from which we are passing daily?

If any thing here could justify a transport of joy, one would think it should
be an agreeable yoke fellow, an indulgent husband, or a complaisant wife, or
else hopeful children, in whom we behold our fading drooping Age, as it were,
budding and blossoming anew, from whom we promise an Heir to our Estate, to
our Family a strong support when we fail, and to our selves a surviving Name,
and a lasting Memory.

But our Apostle puts in his Caveat here especially, because here we most need
it: Let them that are married, be as if they were not married; because death
will soon make a divorce between us and our beloved companions: And our
children are often laid to bed before us in the grave. Therefore St.
Chrysostom, to season our Nuptial and Childbirth Festivities, minds us how
death runs through the Marriage-books. If I die first, or you, or the child of
us both; how it is woven into every line, and closes up every Period, to put a
quasi non, even into those rejoicings; a bitter, tho a medicinal infusion into
our most pleasant enjoyments and expectations.

Our time and theirs is short. This consideration, That all our comforts here
are but temporary, and must die with, if not before us, methinks should, if any
thing, moderate and sanctify our Affections to them.

Frequent serious thoughts, That all we have, or can desire here, will last us
but to the grave, should make us look upon them effectually but as the two
sticks which the Widow of Zarephath gathered to dress an handful of meal, and a
little oil, that we may eat it, and die.

But because we are unwilling, and averse to think of any thing which should
interrupt our present delights; therefore our Apostle frequently inculcates
Sobriety, and Moderation in, yea, Mortification to our outward good things.

Let your moderation be known unto all men; Phil. 4.5. Col. 3.2.
the Lord is at hand: Set your affections on things above; for they are
eternal; not on things of the earth, for they are mortal and perishing. And in
this St. Peter differs not from his beloved brother Paul; 1 Pet. 4.7.
The end of all things is at hand; be ye therefore sober: take heed of
inebriating, or making your selves drunk with the things of this World: Suffer
not your hearts to run out too much after them, or to be affected inordinately
with them, lest the day of the Lord overtake you unawares. And there is a great
deal of need of these counsels and cautions one upon another, because, as the
Heathen Historian observes, Raro quisquam erga sua bona satis cautus. Curtius.
few are so cautious as they should be of the danger, I may say, the evil of
their good things. The Scripture presents us with many instances of this
deficiency in good men. How strangely did Hezekiah forget himself, sa 39. 2.
as soon as ever he was recovered from his sickness? When he had his Treasury
and his Cabinets silled with precious store, what vanity and presumption does
he presently derive from it? Job 29.18.
Job confesses he grew secure before his afflictions: I said, I shall die in
my nest, and shall multiply my days as the sand. Psalm. 30.6.
And holy David was puffed up with a vain confidence, when he said in his
prosperity he should never be moved.

Beloved, such is our folly for the most part; when the Sun shines we think not
of a dark night; and when the morning is fair we fear not a storm; And
therefore we are sometimes taken without our coat, as it were, without our
shelter and defense.

We are apt to put the evil day far from us; to rejoice as if we were exempted
from the common Calamities of mankind; and therefore conclude with Babel, tho
others be widows, fatherless, childless, comfortless, yet we shall see no
soorow.

We over-prise these outward things, and promise our selves that from them
which never any found in them. Hence it is that we are over-grieved when they
are taken from us. When the Judgment makes too great a report of these things
to the Affections, the Affections make too great a do about them. We love our
children but too well; therefore when we lose them, we grieve too much.

Quem res plus nimio delectavere secundae,
Mutatae quatient --
No man suffers Affliction with less patience than he who over joys his
Comforts. If Jonah had not been exceeding glad of his Gourd, he had not fretted
so unreasonably when it withered. If we are not too fond of the Sunshine, we
shall better abide a cloudy weeping Sky: if we rejoice as if we rejoiced not,
in the most agreeable society of our dearest Friends, we shall be the better
prepared to mourn as if we mourned not, when the black day of separation comes.
And this leads me to the other part of the Apostles inference, which was first
in my thoughts, and which, alas! is the word now most in season: And therefore
with your patient and devout attention, I shall enlarge most upon it.

And they that weep, as if they wept not.

That is, They that are in heaviness by the sad mischances which Marriage
brings with it, by the death of husband, wife, children, or the like troubles.

The Apostle does not recommend a Stoical Apathy, a senselessness or stupidity
of disposition. Job. 6.12
Our strength is not the strength of stones, nor our flesh of brass. We have
sense and feeling in us, as men and women; and therefore cannot but grieve at
that which is offensive thereunto. Yea, it is noted as an evil temper of mind,
not to melt in the fire, not to cry under the Rod, but to be insensible of the
smart, and the end of our sufferings. Thou have smitten them, Jer. 5.3.
but they have not sorrowed.

To weep upon just occasions, is not always an humane frailty; It is sometimes
a Christian Virtue: Our blessed Savior himself was a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief. We never read that he laughed, but he sighed over
Jerusalem, and he wept over Lazarus. And next to our own and other men's sins,
nothing has a better title to our Tears than the death of men or women useful
to the world, and dear to our selves; especially when they are taken off in the
blossom of their hopes, and promises of being common as well as private
blessings. God denounces it as a Judgment against King Jehojachim; They shall
not lament for him, Jer. 22.18.
saying, Ah my brother, or ah his glory.

Sapient Veterum p. 22.
It was the observation of the immortal Verulam: Adolescentium summae spei
mortem infinita commiseratio sequi solet; nihil enim inter fata mortalium, tam
flebile est, tamque potens ad misericordiam commovendam, quam virtutis flos
immaturo exitu praecisus: An infinite commiseration is wont to attend the
Funerals of very hopeful Youths: For no destiny is so lamentable, so powerful
to move, or rather to command compassion, as an untimely cropping of the flower
of Virtue; especially when it is our own, by the nearest interest: A plant of
our own garden, an off set of our own stock, a branch of our Family; yea, of
our selves; when these (...) ( as the Ancients styled them); these pieces of
their parents are divided from them, it makes a wide an a bleeding wound, which
needs an healing hand, a word in season, a word like precious Oil, or sovereign
Balsom, to assuage and souple it. It needs a skilful and authoritative, as well
as a compassionate Physician. And seeing such an one was our Apostle, attend, I
beseech you, not to me, but to him; admit his Advice, follow his Directions,
and apply to your selves what he prescribes to his beloved Thessalonians; For
it will fit your case exactly: 1 These. 4.13.
I would not have you ignorant, brethren, concerning them that are asleep, that
ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope. As in the Text, so here,
brethren: And what a charm of kindness and pity is there in that expression?
Think that he speaks to you, not only as to children of the same earthly and
heavenly extraction, but as to fellow sufferers, and his brethren in
afflictions: And that he is endeavoring to comfort you with the same
consolation wherewith he himself has been often comforted.

Be advised by him, to think of your dear child, not as dead, but only as
asleep; not as gone from you for ever, but only as gone before you to a sweet
repose from labor and sorrow: Lament over your dead you may, as he is worthy,
but not with a passion unworthy of your selves, unbeseeming your holy Faith:
Sorrow you may, but as Christians, not as Heathens, who look not beyond this
present state of being; who have no commerce with the invisible world, and no
hope of a better life. Weep, but within the bounds of Reason and Religion,
which he calls a weeping as if you wept not: That is, no otherwise than beseems
the occasion of your trouble. Our sorrow ought to keep the Mean between neglect
and excess, not despising the chastning of the Lord, nor on the other hand
fainting, much less murmuring when we are rebuked of him.

Sarah was the first that we find mourned for in Scripture, and Abraham the
first Mourner. His Remains.
And Bishop Hall has set down an Observation of the Hebrew Doctors, upon Genesis
23.2. where this mourning is specified; viz. That the Letter which is in the
midst of the Original word, which signifies Mourning, is in all their Bibles
written less than his fellows; which they who are wont to make some
extraordinary discoveries in every point or tittle of Moses his writing,
interpret to imply the moderate mourning of that holy Patriarch. That
expression likewise is taken notice of by some, which follows in the next
verse: He stood up from before his dead; as if it signified that he turned his
eyes from her, that so he might not be overcome with grief.

Sapiens sentit incommoda sed vincit. Seneca;
To bear Afflictions decently, has been ever accounted so great a Virtue and
Honor, that some of the Ancient Heathens have too extravagantly thought it
equalled men to God himself. Vere magnum est habere in uno fragilitatem
hominis, securitatem Dei. This is a great perfection indeed, to havein one the
frailties of a man, and the security of a God; to have a strong, firm,
invulnerable temper of mind in our much yiedling flesh. It is by all true
Philosophy deemed to proceed from the greatest strength of Nature; by all true
Christianity from the highest degree of Grace.

The best and the wisest Persons, have always been the most moderate Mourners.
It is observed of Augustus, tho he lost all his Children, and Nephews, and was
fain to adopt an Heir; yet he was so little moved at their Death, Hieron. Ep.
3. ad Heliodorum.
that he constantly went to the Senate, and neglected no public Affairs.
Pericles likewise, having lost two Sons of great hopes within the compass of
eight days, put on notwithstanding a white Garment, and with a great constancy
of mind went to deliberate about the necessities of the Commonwealth. And the
most excellent Dr. Patrick, In his consolatory Discourses, etc. has further
noted, That the Egyptians mourned ten times as long, as the Children of
Israel; seven days ordinarily contented the People of God, for their Grief;
Genesis 50.3.
whereas they that were strangers to the God of Israel, extended their mourning
seventy days. Yea, the greatest Mourning that the Israelites used for their two
famous leaders, Moses and Aaron, was prolonged but to thirty days, not half the
time that those Heathens allowed. And St. Hierom writes of one Melenia, a holy
and good Woman of his time, who lost two Sons at once, Ep. ad Paulam.
when her Husband lay unburied by her; yet scarce shed a Tear for them, but
threw her self at the feet of Christ her Savior, saying, I shall serve thee
now O Lord, with more ease and freedom, because thou have delivered me from the
burden of my other cares.

That we may follow the best examples, and under all our Calamities, may mourn
wisely, temperately, and religiously: I shall show you briefly,

1. When our Grief is intemperate, or inordinate; when we weep beyond our
Apostles stint or limitation. 2. I shall endeavor to prescribe the most proper
means for the qualifying, and moderation of our Passions, under our greatest
and dearest losses.
As to the first of these, our Grief may be immoderate and unreasonable, either
in respect,

1. Of the Measure. 2. Of the Manner. 3. Of the Effects and Consequents
thereof.
1. In respect of the measure of it, when it overflows its bounds, and exceeds
the nature and quality of its object. Thus was Jacob affected with the
apprehension of his Sons Death, Genesis 37.35. 2 Kings 18.33. Jer. 31.15.
I will go down to the grave to my Son mourning. Thus was David unreasonably
moved for his Absalom. And Rachel for her Children, when she refused to be
comforted.

2. For the manner of it. Grief is excessive, and very sinful, when it is
attended with distrustfulness, despair, and a questioning of Gods Attributes,
his Justice, Wisdom, Goodness, Power, etc.

We must so bewail our Losses as

1. To acknowledge God's Justice. That he does in faithfulness and righteousness
afflict us, not without sufficient cause and provocations on our part: Ezra
9.13.
After all that is come upon us, thou our God have punished us less than our
iniquities.

The Heathen wise man, called the Adversities of the World, but tributa
vivendi, the taxes of Life.

The Christian wise man ought to know and bear them, as the tributes of
offending; and why should a man complain, a living man for the punishment of
his sins?

Lam. 3.39.
God may according to his absolute Dominion and Sovereignty, lay sore
Afflictions upon the best of his Servants. Behold he takes away, and who can
hinder him? Who shall say unto him, Job 9.12. Quos Deus amat, indurat and
exercet, non in delitiis, sed in castris, Sen. Ep. 67.
what do thou? And in chastning his people, he does not always level his
Arrows against their sins; but designs them for trials, and exercises of their
graces, for tokens and Testimonies of his Fatherly love toward them; yea, when
he passes by a thousand faults in others, he is wont to whip his Children, if
they do but tread awry. You only have I known of all the families of the earth,
Amos 3.2.
therefore will I visit you for all your iniquities.

Wherefore we are by no means to censure others hardly as Jobs Friends did him;
it is a plain case, the greatest Sufferers are not always the greatest Sinners.
Judgment often begins at the house of God, and he chastens every son whom he
receives. Heb. 12.6.


Outward crosses, like Hail and Snow, light upon the best Gardens, as well as
on the wild Wast; yet it is always some vapor below that breeds the storm,
which comes from above. And there is sin enough in the best, to justify all
Gods severities toward them.

Therefore tho we must not speak or think the worse of others, for their
Calamities, Psalm. 73.15.
lest we offend against the generation of God's children; yet we must endeavor
to see our own sins in our sufferings, so far as to humble our selves under
Gods correcting hand, and still to acknowkedg that he is righteous in all his
ways; that he in Justice puniseth those remnants of sin, which are in good men,
with those Temporal Afflictions, for whom yet in Mercy he reserveth eternal
Salvation.

2. As we must give God the Glory of his Justice, so of his Wisdom, in his most
severe dealings, owning that he knows what is best, and most expedient for us
in every condition. That he corrects us in Judgment, as a prudent, not as a
passionate Father.

3. We must acknowledge his Goodness and Love, so far as it is consistent with
his Justice and Wisdom; that as he knows our Frame, so he pities our Frailties.

As we ought to take notice of God's hand, and his just Indignation against us,
when he strikes us; for he is righteous, and will not correct us but for our
sin; in like manner we must so resent his displeasure, as not to doubt of his
Favor upon our repentance and amendment; for he is faithful and gracious, and
evermore corrects us for our good. We are chastned of the Lord, that we should
not be condemned with the world.

Lastly, We must rest upon the power of God, to support and succor us, in our
most dejected and disconsolate Estate. He is my strength, and my defense,
therefore I shall not greatly be moved, Psalm. 37.24.
said David.

We must trust and hope that he can, and will bring light out of the thickest
darkness: Give beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, and the garment
of praise for the spirit of heaviness. That he has not only the goodness of a
Father, but the ability; yea, the Alsufficiency of a heavenly Father, and is
able to do more abundantly for us, than we are able to conceive or hope. This
was our Apostle's stay and comfort in his most acute trouble; He said unto me,
my grace is sufficient for thee, 1 Cor 12.8, 9,
for my power is made perfect through weakness; therefore instead of sinking
under my infirmities, very gladly will I rejoice in them, that the power of
Christ may rest upon me. But,

3. This inordinacy of Trouble is considerable in its consequents or effects, as

1. When it makes us impatient, and fretful under our Afflictions, as it did
Jehoram. Behold this evil is of the Lord, why then should I wait on the Lord
any longer? 2 Kings 6.33.
Hieremy and Jonah, tho good men for the main, and holy Prophets; yet were very
much to blame in this particular. It was part of Jabez his Prayer, and we would
do well to put it into ours, 1. Chron. 4.10.
Lord keep me from evil, that it may not grieve me, i. e. that I may not be
fretful under it, or offensive by it; that it may not so grieve me, as to
occasion my grieving of thee, of thy holy and good Spirit.

2. When it makes us insensible of, and unthankful for those mercies, which God
is pleased to continue to us. Our sorrow must not draw such a thick veil over
our Hearts and Faces, that we cannot see through it to contemplate, or take
notice of Gods manifold blessings, which we still enjoy.

They are froward Children, who if they may not have what they would, throw
away what they have; and this often provokes their Parents to renew and sharpen
their Corrections, that they may cry for somewhat indeed.

If our behavior be such toward our heavenly Father; we provoke him to add to
our present Afflictions, the removal of our remaining Mercies. Wherefore
amongst a great deal of excellent consolatory advice, which Photius, the
renowned Patriarch of Constantinople, gave Patritius upon the Death of his
beloved Daughter, we find this agreeable to our occasion. Photii Ep. 234.
The Almighty Creator has taken to himself a piece of his own work; but he
has given, or left more than he took; and I pray God they may long be left and
live to their Parent's increasing joy. 'You are grieved for what you have lost;
take comfort in those that are still with you. (...), etc. Let us give thanks
to God, for what he has taken from us, that we may have a more sure hold of
those he continues to us, and that they may daily prove greater blessings and
comforts.

3. Our Sorrow has an inordinate effect, when it makes us unuseful in the
Duties of our general and particular Callings; when it renders us unserviceable
to God, to the King, the Church, to our Country, and our Families.

But I must content my self (as I hope by Gods Grace I have in some measure
satisfied you) to show you only thus briefly, when the tide of our Sorrow
swells, and rises too high, either in the measure, the manner, or the effects
thereof.

I shall only add a few words more in this dying part of my Discourse (And I
hope you will most regard what I say last) to allay, or abate your Trouble, and
that by persuading you

1. To the exercise of some proper Graces. 2. To the practice of some
seasonable Duties.
1. To the exercise of some proper, suitable Graces, such as these following:

1. Meekness and Humility, a Sense of your own Unworthiness; of your own, if
not ill, yet undeservings. Meekness meets an Affliction half way, and Humility
stoops, as it were, to take up the burden.

2. Faith or dependence upon God: This is a settling and a quieting Grace. I had
fainted, unless I had believed, said David. Psalm. 27.13.
Wait on the Lord, and he shall strengthen thy heart. Nothing gives such ease
and relief under the Afflictions of this Life, as a firm belief of the Joys of
another. A belief of Consolations hereafter proportionable to our patient
Sufferings here.

3. Repentance. If we turn our Sorrow upon our Sins, which most justly deserve
it; Godly sorrow will wash the wound clean, and eat out the Venom and
malignity of worldly grief, as spiritual joy corrects the flatulency of carnal
mirth.

4. Charity. Which as it covers Sin, so it cures Sorrow; the work of
Righteousness, (which frequently in Holy Scripture is but another word for
Charity, or Bounty) is peace, and the effect of righteousness, quietness, and
assurance for ever. Isa. 32.17.
He that sows righteousness, shall reap a sure reward; tho he sow in tears,
he shall reap in joy. Tho we cannot profit the dead, as some have imagined we
may by our Alms and Oblations, (...), Damascen. de defunctis; yet we may much
benefit and comfort our selves thereby: When we come to die, the remembrance of
our bounty and charity, the good deeds we have done for the house and the
servants of our God, will minister more comfort to our minds than all the
Treasures we leave behind us upon Earth.

These are the Graces which especially I would advise you to exercise.

2. The Duties I would recommend to you in short, are,

1. A diligent reading and hearing of the Word of God. 2. Serious and
seasonable Meditation. 3. Fervent and devout Prayer.
1. A diligent Attention to the Word read or preached: This is my comfort in my
affliction (said David, Psalm. 119.5
the King), thy word has quickened me: And again, Thy statutes have been my
songs in the house of my pilgrimage. Scripturarum lectio, Vita est, says St.
Ambrose: There is comfort, nay, Life in reading the holy Scriptures. Wherefore
St. Basil styles them, (...); the common Refectory or Apothecaries Shop for
fainting sick Souls: There is a Salve for every Wound, a Cure for every Malady.
And particularly, the great Athanasius counseled his Friend, when any sore
Trouble seized him, to betake himself to the reading of the 42d Psalm.

2. Serious Religious Meditation is an excellent help to digest trouble: And in
such trouble as ours, it concerns us especially to meditate upon the shortness
of life, and upon the certainty and unavoidableness of death; or rather
(because I have spoke of this already) of the shortness of death, and the
certainty of Resurrection. That the dead bodies of our dear Relations are not
lost, but lodged in the grave; That it will not be long before that which is
sown in corruption shall be raised in incorruption, and that part which is sown
in dishonor shall be raised in glory. When we stick our Herses with flowers,
and go forth to the grave with Rosemary, it naturally suggests this meditation,
That the bones of our friends shall flourish again like an herb, in the Prophet
Isaiah's comparison.

In this sense, Sunt and sua fata sepulchris. Death it self dies, and Mortality
is swallowed up of Life.

3. The last duty and instrument of peace and comfort which I shall recommend
to you, is fervent and devout prayer; and it is the Apostle James his Recipe,
Is any man afflicted? let him pray; as if this alone would effect the cure. To
be sure it is the most magisterial and sovereign Remedy; it vents the tumor,
and breaths out the anguish of a throbbing Malady.

Pray then, and pray again, that God would sanctify your Affliction so unto
you, that you may serve him cheerfully here, and that in his good time, you may
be happily gathered to your son, and, you to your brother, as he is already
gathered to his fathers and yours; that when you rest stom your labor, you may
rest from your cares and vexations, from all the sad accidents of short time,
from pain and sickness, sorrow and sympathy, weeping for your selves, weeping
with and for your beloved Friends; that you may get above the Clouds and the
Rain, above the changeable Regions, and enter into pure and eternal Joys; that
when you leave your Estates and Honors here, you may be made partakers of a
glorious inheritance with the Saints in light, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, and the rest of the spirits of just men made perfect in the kingdom
of heaven: That when you see this Sun no more, which sets as well as rises,
you may behold everlasting day: That you may enjoy a clear and an uninterrupted
Tranquillity; a Rest not only without sorrow, but without sleeping too, without
so much as a still interruption of your waking active delights. If you thus cry
to God out of your Bochim, your Valley, your depths of Tears and Trouble, this,
and the other parts of holy devotion, if they do not set you upon dry ground,
will keep your heads above water; yea, Comfort shall come riding to you upon
the wings of your Clouds: your loss shall be your gain, and this lamented death
your living and lasting advantage.

If you bury your worldly Affections with your dear deceased, and blow up a
fire of heavenly desire out of his ashes, you your selves rise to a new life,
and do in a sense put off Mortality on this side the grave. You have a part in
the first Resurrection, and shall have in the second: Death, that black, that
bloody King of terrors shall not have dominion over you.

The sting of death is sin, the strength of sin is the Law: But thanks be to
God, who has given us the victory, through Jesus Christ our Lord: To whom,
with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, one immortal and only wise God, be all
Honor and Glory, Power and Praise, now and for ever. Amen.

Blessed Lord, who have caused all holy Scripture to be written for our
learning, grant we may in such wise hear them, read, mark, and inwardly digest
them, that by patience and comfort of thy holy Word, we may embrace, and ever
hold fast the blessed hope of everlasting life, which thou have given us in our
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen. FINIS.

