The Ceremonies of the Vacant See.

THE Ceremonies OF THE VACANT SEE. Or a True RELATION Of what passes at ROME
upon the POPE's Death.

With the Proceedings in the Conclave, for the Election of a New POPE;
According to the Constitutions and Ceremonials.

As also The Coronation and Cavalcade.

Out of the French by J. DAVIES of Kidwelly.

LONDON, Printed by H. L. and R. B. for Tho. Basset at the George in
Fleetstreet, near Cliffords- Inn. 1671.

TO My Worthy and much Honored FRIEND, Mr. MICHAEL HALL OF DURHAM.
SIR,
THE Obligations I had to your Worthy Brother JOHN HALL, sometime of Grey's Inn
Esquire, are no less present to my thoughts, when I am at the greatest distance
from his Relations, then they are during my long Residences at London, where I
frequently converse with those, who, knowing his worth, take occasion to
celebrate it, upon the least mention of his Name.

But the Account I received from you of Him not long since, and what you
designed to have done thereupon, raised in me a general reflection on the
Excellencies of that Person, at least what was within the reach of my happy
knowledge of him. Of this I gave the world what satisfaction I could, before
his Translation of Hierocles upon the Golden Verses of the Pythagoreans; that
is, a short Collection of my own Observations, without communicating my design
to any of his Friends. What Overtures you have made in order to the completing
of it, I shall not here insist upon, further then to assure you, that my
prosecution of it, shall, what lies in my power, be answerable to your desires.

As to what is at present ushered to you by this Dedicatory, be pleased, Sir,
to take this short Character of it; That it is a particular account of that
Action, which being of highest Importance in the Concerns of Christianity,
occasions the discourse of all persons, during the process of it, as well of
these, whose Principles induce them to a belief, as those, who stand upon the
denial of a Supreme Pastorship of the Christian Flock upon Earth. Whence ROME
derives the Privilege of being the Scene of this great Transaction, is not my
business to enquire: yet I think it not amiss, to bring in here two Distichs of
that worthy Author, Sir R. Stapylton, comprehending, first, the Metropolism of
that City, upon the Gentile account, and then its loss of that
super-intendency, and afterward its retrival thereof upon the Christian score!

Roma fuit quondam Terrae Regina Marisque;
At nunc nec Terras, nec Mare Roma regit.
Roma fuit quondam Terrae Regina Marisque.
Nunc Mare, nunc Terras, amplius Illa regit.
Thus as to the subject of the ensuing Treatise. The further Business of this
Address, is, to acquaint you, that the Manuscript left in my hands by one
nearly related to you, concerning your ancient Cathedral, will ere long appear
in public. What else I have to add, is only the usual Complement made in the
Infancy of the year; That is, my wishes to you, of Health, Prosperity, in
Friends and Affairs; and, the greatest transient Happiness, all the Endearing
Enjoyments of a Conjugal life; and all this, without any other design, but that
of assuring you, how much, and how truly I am,

SIR, Your most Affectionate and most Humble Servant, J. DAVIES.
Jan. 7. 1671.
An Historical Account of the Ceremonies at the Election of a Pope.
ROME, having heretofore raised it self to that Greatness as to become the Seat
of the World's Empire, continued its possession thereof for many after-Ages.
During that vast Interval of time its Councils had an Influence over the
Affairs and Concerns of most Nations: the Changes and Revolutions of States
were regulated by its Policies; and its Judgments were Legislative to all
places over which the Roman-Eagles had spread their victorious wings: in a
word, the general Emergencies of the Universe are the ordinary discourse of the
Inhabitants of this great City: and on the contrary, what is done in it employs
the reflections of all those who have heard of its name.

But as it happened heretofore at the death of any of its Emperors, all eyes
were upon it, to observe the management of an Election, which they thought
contributory to their happiness or unhappiness, though as yet the Jurisdiction
related only to temporal Concerns: so is it since it became the Seat of a
spiritual Monarchy and Hierarchy. For upon every vacancy in This, the whole
Christian World is inquisitive to know what passes in a conjuncture of so great
importance, to the tranquillity and advantage of Christendom, and wholly taken
up with a consideration how worthy or how happy that subject ought to be, who
is to fill a Chair exalted above all the Thrones upon earth.

As therefore every one thinks himself concerned in this exaltation to the
Papal Dignity, so does every one imagine he has a right and freedom to speak,
and give his judgment of it. Accordingly has it happened, that all the
circumstances of so celebrious and sacred an action have been so well observed,
and thought of such consequence, that the Memorials thereof have been
transmitted to after-Ages; to the end it should be known, with what
extraordinary precautions they were to proceed upon the like occasions, in
order to the prevention of those misfortunes and disturbances, which the long
continuance of a vacancy has many times occasioned in the Church. But what
occasions long vacancies, and how far they are to be imputed to the interfering
Interests of those temporal Princes, who think themselves more nearly concerned
in the Election, is no^ our business here to determine: Onl^ this seems
rationally deducible from their proceedings therein, that they would demean
themselves with a greater indifference, as to the Election, were they less
persuaded, that the Person once elected must be acknowledged Supreme Pastor of
the Catholic Church.

But in process of time, through the prudent provisions, which the Popes have
made by their Constitutions: things are reduced to a certain order, so as that
there is the less ground of fearing those fatal Accidents, wherewith the Church
has been but too much afflicted by so many schisms, most of which have
derived their birth or growth from the long continuance of Conclaves. And the
City of Rome seems from that time to have attained a better constitution, so as
not to be subject to any disturbance during that Interregnum; of which it is
the design of this Discourse to give a particular Account, by discovering what
is done, not only within the walls of Rome, but also those of the Conclave it
self, upon the occasion of a Vacancy in the Sea Apostolic, and representing
the Ceremonies observed at the Exaltation of a Person to a spiritual
Jurisdiction and Supremacy.

As soon as the Pope has submitted to the Laws of Mortality by resigning up
his last breath, or seems past all hopes of recovery, the Cardinal Patron, who
is ordinarily the Nephew, and entrusted with the management of State Affairs,
sends an account of his condition to the several Cardinals and Ambassadors: by
the Prelates he dispatches to them, and orders all the considerable prisoners
to be removed out of the ordinary Prisons to the Castle St. Angelo, in regard
that immediately upon the Pope's death the Senate and People of Rome set open
the prisondoors, and give liberty to all those whom they there find in
restraint.

Soon after the Cardinals and Ambassadors make their Visits to the Cardinal
Patron, condoling the loss he has received by the Pope's death; and if it
happen that any of them be in the Pope's Antichamber, when he is ready to
expire, they are admitted into his chamber to see his departure, and to address
their prayers to God for him.

As Soon as he is given over for dead the Cardinal's, and all the Officers, who
had lodgings assigned them in the Palace, dislodge themselves and go to their
houses in the City, save only the Cardinal, who has the title of Chamberlain,
whose privilege it is to continue still in the Pope's appartment.

There are in the Sacred College of Cardinals, (whose number is by the
Constitution of Sixtus Quintus limited to seventy) three principal Charges,
which admit not of any vacancy upon the Pope's death, but only upon theirs who
were possessed thereof. Those are that of Chancellor, (who yet assumes only the
title and quality of Vice Chancellor, though there be not any other Person
above him) that of the Grand Penitentiary, and that of Chamberlain.

The Functions of the two former Charges are sufficiently known by their Nam^s;
but the third is in its greatest luster during the vacancy of the Sea, though
the person who is possessed of it be at all other times chief of the Chamber of
Accounts and the Finances of the Holy See. But when, and as long as there is no
Pope, he commands the Swisses of the Guard, who had belonged to the deceased,
and they keep Guard about his Palace, and follow him up and down the City. He
orders the coynage of money, on which there are engraven his own Arms under
those of the vacant See, which are two Keys crossing one the other under a
Canopy. He has this further privilege, to be present with the three Chiefs of
the Order of the Cardinals, (that is to say, the Dean of the Sacred College,
the first Cardinal-Priest, and the first Cardinal-Deacon) in all the Assemblies
they shall hold during the vacancy of the Sea, to advise with them about the
Affairs of the Church. It belongs also to the Cardinal-Chamberlain to see all
things ordered relating to the Conclave, which he disposes to whom he thinks
fit after the Election of a Pope.

The chief Officer of the Datary, the Secretaries, and all others who are
entrusted with Seals of any kind, which they had had from the deceased Pope,
bring them immediately upon the first news of his death to the Cardinal-
Chamberlain, who, in the presence of the Auditor, and the Clerks of the Chamber
(who are the Masters of Accounts) and of the Grand Treasurer (who is
Surintendant of the Finances or Revenues) orders them to be broken, that no
foul play or forgerie be done with them; And the Ring of the Fisher, which is
of Gold, and valued at about a hundred Crowns, after it is broken, belongs to
the Masters of the Ceremonies.

It is also incumbent on the said Cardinal to send notice at the same time to
all the Cardinals, the Senate, and people of Rome, of the Pope's death, and the
three Chiefs in point of Denomination (there being three different Classes of
Cardinals, according to the difference of their titles; to wit, six titles of
Episcopal Cardinals, fifty of Priesthood, and fourteen Deacon-Cardinals) send
the like notice to all the other Cardinals, to make their appearance in the
Hall of the Consistory that very Evening; or if that cannot be done with
convenience the next morning to take order for all the Charges which shall be
vacant upon the Pope's death, and to appoint a Governor of the Conclave, and
of St. Peter's, which is the most fortified Quarter of Rome, and wherein lie
the Castle of St. Angelo, the Church of St. Peter, and the Vatican Palace, and
where the Conclave is ordinarily kept; and they all go with the Roquet
uncovered, as a mark that the Sovereign Spiritual Authority is devolved into
their hands, as having then no Superiors over them. Those who are Creatures of
the deceased Pope are clad in Violet, as are also the other Cardinals, but with
this distinction, that the borders and ornaments of their garments are red.

In the mean time the Pope's Almoners, after they have washed the Corpse, cloth
it with his Cassock, his Roquet, his Camad, and his Caloth, and by a secret
pair of stairs convey it to the Chapel of Sixtus, which is in the Palace. There
it is received by the Penitentiaries of St. Peter, who vest him so as if he
were going to celebrate Mass, setting on his head a Mitre of cloth of Gold,
with all the other Ornaments peculiar to this Ceremony; and among others the
Pallium and Pannona, which none is to wear but only the Pope in his Pontifical
Habiliments.

Being thus habited, they lay him on a Couch in the midst of the Chapel, with
a silver Cross upon his breast, and two Cardinals Hats at his feet,
representing his spiritual and temporal authority. Ordinarily, there are but a
dozen Torches set about the Corpse, and no Canopy.

The Congregation of Cardinals being risen, the Creatures of the deceased and
his particular servants come into the Chapel; where, after they have said
certain prayers for his soul, the Canons of St. Peter make their entrance with
their Crosses, with every one a wax candle in his hand, and taking the Corpse
they carry it into one of the Chapels of their Church, where it lies exposed
for the space of three days to the sight of all the people, who are admitted to
kiss his feet and hands.

After the expiration of those three days, the same Canons, accompanied by the
Relations of the deceased (the church-doors being shut) dispose the Body into
his Sepulcher, in case he had ordered any to be made in his lifetime; but if
not, they cover it with plaster in some part of their said Church, till his
Sepulcher be made ready, which the succeeding Pope, if he be a Creature of the
deceased, does ordinarily cause to be made at his own charge, together with one
for himself, in such Church as he shall think fit to make choice of: Yet is it
to be observed, that the Body is to continue a whole year deposited in the said
Church of St. Peter; after which it may be buried any where else, and the
Translation of it is celebrated with great pomp and magnificence; and they use
in that Ceremony a particular Hersecloth embroidered, which the Clergy of St.
Peter are obliged to get made for every Pope immediately after his EElection,
which Cloth is carefully laid up, during the life of the said Pope.

The first day after the departure of any Pope being over, the Cardinals employ
the mornings of the nine subsequent days in having Dirges sung for the repose
of the soul of the deceased; and on the ninth the Funeral-Oration is made;
after which all the Cardinals come about the Quire beset all with lights, under
which there is a Bed of State, and five among them (of which number the
Cardinal, who says Mass is one) with black.

on, having given holy water and incense, say the Suffrages and accustomed
Prayers.

All the days next following the said Dirges of the said Cardinals meet in the
Sacristy of St. Peter, to name the Officers of the Conclave, and to settle
other affairs of the Ecclesiastical State. The Ambassadors make them proffers
of the Assistance of their Masters, in order to the security and freedom of the
Conclave. At their coming in, they make a genuflexion, and speak standing and
covered; and at their departure thence they make the like genuflexion. The
House of the Ursini, and that of the Colonni, as being the chiefest Houses of
Rome, are also received into it, but kneeling and bare-headed. They pretend
that they have a privilege to offer with their own service, that, of all the
other Roman Princes and Lords. These latter on the contrary, (whose Body is
called the Baronage) are not willing to acknowledge any dependence on the
former two Houses, and ordinarily make choice of the most ancient Person of
their Body to make their Harangue. This Contest upon the death of Urban the
Eighth, occasioned the Ursini and the Colonni to forbear going at all, and yet
the Baronage was admitted to make proffers of their service.

The ten days abovementioned being expired, on the eleventh the Cardinals have
a Dirge sung at St. Peter's, one of them celebrating Mass in Honor of the Holy
Ghost, after which there is a Sermon preached, wherein they are exhorted to
divest themselves of all passion and self-interest in the Election they are to
make of a good common Father of the Church. After which they make their
entrance by way of Procession into the Conclave, the Music singing the Veni
Creator, and lay their Crosses in the Chapel Paulina. The Dean being come up to
the Altar says the Prayer, Deus qui corda fidelium: which ended, the Cardinals
take the Oath appointed for the observance of the Constitutions of former Popes
concerning the Election of the new one. That done, every one goes to dinner in
his own Apartment, which had been assigned them in the Palace, for the
preparing of their sustenance during their abode in the Conclave, they being
not permitted to come out of the Palace till they have chosen a Pope.

All that day the Conclave lies open, to satisfy the curiosity of the people,
who are permitted during that time to visit it; and toward the Evening every
one withdraws into his Cell, and about three or four hours after, the Cursors
or Heralds put out the multitude, crying aloud Extra omnes. But the
Ambassadors, who had spent the eleven days aforesaid in visiting all the
Cardinals at their several Lodgings, come to see them once more in the
Conclave; and as soon as they are come out thence, (which they commonly do last
of any) the chief Person of the House of the Savelli, as Hereditary Marshal of
the Holy Church, locks the door of the Conclave, sets a Guard at it, and has
an apartment adjoining thereto, out of which he is not to stir either night or
day till there be a Pope chosen. At the last Conclave, there arose a Contest
between him and the Governor of the said Conclave about the Keys of it; but
they were adjudg'd to the Prince Savelli, as'having been in former times in the
possession of his Predecessors. The keeping of the Keys within the Conclave
belongs to the Cardinal-Chamberlian and the Master of the Ceremonies.

In the door of the Conclave there is a little square window, which may be shut
on both sides within and without, and is not opened, but only when Ambassadors
or some other Person of Quality brings some very important advertisement or
intelligence to the sacred College, and then they direct their Speech through
the said Window.

According to the Constitution of Pius the Fourth every Cardinal may have two
men with him to wait upon him in the Conclave; but Princes and the more ancient
Cardinals may have three and no more: and these persons are called Conclavists,
who all joining together oblige all the Cardinals to take an Oath for the
Observance of their privileges. Nor can any of the Cardinals balk the taking
of the said Oath, out of a fear of the reproach which might be made him of his
desire to be Pope. Their Privileges consist in having ten thousand Crowns out
of the Chamber, to be divided among them, and all the vacant Benefices, not
exceeding two thousand Crowns Revenue.

Moreover, it is further requisite, according to the foresaid Constitution of
Pius the Fourth, that the Conclavists, be actually menial servants to the said
Cardinals at the vacancy of the Holy See, and that they had been in their
service for the space of a year before. With this further Proviso, that the
Ministers of Princes, Persons possessd of in for, ost. temporal Seigneuries,
having the rights of the Administration of Justice annexed thereto, as also
persons employed in Traffic and Commerce; and lastly, the Brothers or Nephews
of Cardinals, cannot be chosen by them for their Conclavists, though they were
their Domestics, and received wages or salaries from them.

To this kind of persons there are added also two others, one for the service
of the two Masters of Ceremonies, and the other, for the Secretary of the
Sacred College. With this reservation nevertheless, that the servant of of the
Masters of the Ceremonies ought to be actually a Domestic of one of them, and
have been such for the space of six months before: which condition is in like
manner requisite in the servant to the Secretary of the College of Cardinals.

Besides the Cardinals and their Conclavists, the two Masters of Ceremonies,
the Secretary of the College, and their servants there are also shut up in the
Conclave a Penitentiary, to receive Confessions, and resolve such Cases of
Conscience as may be proposed to him; as also a Sacristan, with a Chaplain to
assist him in the service of the Sacristy, a Physician, an Apothecary, and a
Chyrurgeon, with one or two servants, and the Drugs and Medicines requisite for
the relief and accommodation of the indisposed; a Carpenter, a Mason, and about
twenty Porters or servants of the meanest sort, to be employed in the carrying
of wood, sweeping the Chambers and the streets of the Conclave, and to what
other services may be necessary within. All these Officers and Servants are
chosen by the Cardinals by plurality of voices, and are not to be taken out of
the houses of any of the said Cardinals, and their Salaries are paid out of the
Chamber.

As Soon as they have cleared the Conclave of all those persons, whom either
their curiosity or some other occasion had brought thither, the Embassador's
also being retired, and the door locked on the outside by the Marshal of the
Conclave, who has the Keys of it, and is to see it guarded, the three
Cardinals, Chiefs of the three different Classes, accompanied by the
Cardinal-Chamberlain, and one of the Masters of Ceremonies, who have the
custody of the Keys within, (as has been observed already) go with Torches
all about the Conclave, visiting all parts of it, to see if there be any there
who ought not to be, and whether the shutting up of the Conclave be performed
according to the Constitutions. And the next day, immediately after dinner,
there is a review taken of all the Conclavists and Servants in the Chapel, out
of which they are ordered to go one after another, to be examined, whether they
have the qualifications requisite for their admission, as also whether they
exceed not the number appointed by the said Constitutions.

But, before we come to a particular Account of what passes among the Cardinals
in the Conclave, it will not be amiss to say somewhat of what is done in the
mean time, in reference to the Government of the City.

Upon the News spread abroad of the Pope's death, the Senate and People of
Rome, (that is to say, the Consuls of the City) being assembled in the Capital,
cause it to be published through all the streets by beat of drum, order the
prison-doors to be opened, and set at liberty all they find in restraint,
thereby signifying that the Jurisdiction of Rome during the Vacancy of the Holy
See, is devoted to them. They order all the Inhabitants to keep a candle
lighted at their Window during all that night, and enjoin the Captains of the
several Wards or Quarters, (whose Companies consist of men, whom the
Inhabitants of all Ranks and Orders, (excepting only both the Roman and Foreign
Nobility) are obliged to furnish them withal, to the number of one for every
House with their Arms) to keep strict Guards day and night, every one in their
Lodgings, and to take their several rounds and patrouilles, to prevent the
disorders which are many times very great, proceeding hence, that such as have
been hardly or injuriously dealt with, during the precedent Papacies, do for
the most part defer their resentments thereof to the next vacant See; so that
it happens many Murders and Assassinations may be committed. Not but that
Justice is very severely administered at that time, and with greater expedition,
then at any other; but if the Murderers and other mischievous persons be not
surpised in the very Facts, and can make a shift to abscond themselves and
keep out of the way till the Creation of a new Pope, they return to their
habitations as if they had committed those crimes in some other Country.

All the Cardinals, Ambassadors, Princes and Lords about Rome raise Soldiers
for the guarding of their Palaces and their Houses, and they among the
Cardinals who have any pretensions to the Papacy are more careful in this
particular then the others, by reason of the privilege the people assume to
themselves of pillaging them as soon as they are chosen.

There passes not a day without some Processions, which from all Churches and
Monasteries take their way to St. Peter's, and about the Conclave, singing as
they go the Hymn Veni Creator, to implore the assistance of the Holy Ghost and
its Inspirations upon the Cardinals.

The Conclave consists ordinarily of three Galleries, and twenty five or thirty
withdrawing-rooms or Chambers, all of a floor, from the Vatican-Palace of equal
height with the Gallerie which is over the Portal of St. Peter's, which is the
ordinary place of the Benediction given by the Pope to the people after his
Coronation, and upon the great Festivals of the year: Which Gallery makes also
part of the Conclave. In all which Galleries, rooms and chambers, they make
partitions of boards for so many Cells as there are Cardinals. Every Cardinal
has a Cell assigned him about five paces in length, and about four in breadth,
with a little wardrobe proportionable thereto. The Cells are taken by lot, and
every Cardinal is to take that the number whereof he finds in his lot: and
whereas it happens that the Cardinals are not all of them, during the whole
time, confined within the Conclave, either upon the account of sickness or
absence, the Cells which are not taken up are divided among the next neighbors,
who make this advantage only of the absence or indisposition of others, that
their rooms are somewhat enlarged thereby; but the absent or sick Cardinals,
returning into the Conclave, reassume their Cells, and so oblige those who had
made use of them to content themselves with their own divisions.

They among the Cardinals, who were Creatures of the deceased Pope, hang their
Cells within and without with Cloth or Serge of a violet color, and the others
with green Serge, all setting up their Arms over their doors, which they make
fast only with two staves crossing one the other after the form of a St.
Andrews Cross. The Officers and Servants of the Conclave have their quarters
assigned them in some remote part.

At three or four avenues of the said Conclave, there are Turning-Boxes, like
those in the Monasteries of Nuns, through which the meat sent in to the
Cardinals and their Conclavists is received. Their Partisans and Servants
attend their meat as they were wont to do their persons when they were at
liberty.

Before the entrance of the Cardinals into the Conclave, there is a List taken
of all the Prelates then about the Court of Rome, and the Governor of it
appoints every day, two in the morning, and as many in the afternoon, every one
in his rank, to be present at the said Turning-Boxes, to visit and observe
whatever is sent in to the Cardinals, to prevent the sending in of Letters or
Notes with the meat. They are also to hinder all persons from speaking to them
or their Conclavists at the said Boxes, unless they speak aloud, and in the
Italian or Latin Tongue, that every one may understand what is said; inasmuch
as by the Constitutions, it is matter of Excommunication to talk of, or to
enquire what is done within the Conclave.

But notwithstanding all the caution and vigilance used as to this particular,
yet cannot some abuses be prevented; and people come to know what passes there.
This happens sometimes by the way of Notes or Advertisements in writing, which
they find means to get in, either by the connivance of some Prelates, who are
unwilling to disoblige the Crowns and Princes, whose Patrizans they are, as
they think they should do, by obstructing their having intelligence of what
passes. Sometimes also this is attributed to the Cardinals themselves, who do
it to promote their different engagements and affections, or to prevent
prejudicing their hopes, or that their precautions are really eluded. Another
way yet, where there may be a discovery made of proceedings in the Conclave,
is, a secret kind of language beforehand, studied and agreed upon between the
Conclavists, and their Correspondents, whereof they make their advantages when
occasion serves, comprehending under the supposititious terms of
household stuff, Relations, or domestic Affairs, concerning which they enquire
News, the Names of such Cardinals as are proposed, or excluded, or that stand
fair for the Papal dignity; and so by disguised discourses, and an affected
Jargon applicable to diverse senses, disclosing what is most secretly carried on
in the Conclave.

Yet is there not any thing to be objected against the shutting up of the
Conclave, since it is done with all the exactness imaginable. For the Chimneys
are close done up at the tops, and the windows of all the rooms and Galleries
are in like manner stopped to within a foot of the upper part, which small
distance is closed with course linen cloth, whereby a little light comes in;
but so that if the Cardinals have any occasion to write or read, they must
always have a wax-candle standing by them. And thence it proceeds, that not
receiving any supplies of fresh air from without, and that within being many
times infected and corrupted, they are apt to fall sick, especially when the
Conclaves are of long continuance.

The twelfth day after the Pope's death (the first, as has bin already
observed being spent in conveying the Body into one of the Chapels of St.
Peter's Church, and the nine subsequent days in celebrating Obsequies and
singing Dirges for the soul of the deceased, and holding the ordinary
Congregations at the end of the said Dirges; and the eleventh, in the Cardinals
taking possession of the Conclave, which for all that day lies open to satisfy
the curiosity of the people, who come not out of it till three or four hours
after night) all the Cardinals resident about the Court of Rome, having shut
themselves up in the Conclave, ina much as by the Constitution of Gregory XV.
there can be no warrantable proceeding to the Election, till the shutting up of
the Conclave be completed, and acknowledged such by a public Act, which is
made thereof at the request of the Master of the Ceremonies: All these things
being thus ordered in the morning of the said twelfth day, before they apply
themselves to any thing concerning the Election, the three Cardinals, Chiefs of
the several Orders, and the Cardinal Chamberlain give a Commission to some
within, to take an exact Survey of all parts of the Conclave, to see that it is
close and well shut up of all sides. Which if they find accordingly, after they
have made their report thereof to the Company, it is form^d into an Authentic
Act, the substance whereof amounts to this, That the Conclave is close and shut
up, as it is required it should be by the Constitutions, and accounted and
reputed such by the Sacred College of Cardinals. And this Ceremony is so
essential, and of so absolute necessity, that there would be a nullity in the
Election, which should be made without this precedent Act. And as long as there
is no Declaration contrary to that of the shutting up of the Conclave, that is,
till such time as it shall have been declared by the Suffrages of two Thirds of
the Cardinals, that there is an overture of the said Conclave, it is always
accounted and reputed duly shut up; And the Election which might be made after
the publication of the Closure, cannot be disputed as to nullity, under
pretense of any overture happening afterward, if the Declaration of the Overture
had not been made with the advice of two thirds of the College of Cardinals.

The Cardinals are permitted to hold their capitulary Assemblies or
Congregations, to agree among themselves upon certain Articles, before they
engage npon the business of the Election. These Articles are to be signed by
all, even those which concern the privileges of the Conclavists heretofore
mentioned, before or after their entrance into the Conclave, provided always
that the Election be not retarded thereby.

There is also a further examination made, before they fall upon any thing
touching the Election, whether among the Cardinals there be any one that has
not received the order of Deacon, to the end he might not be admitted to give
his voice, inasmuch as he is excluded by the Constitution of Pius IV. unless he
had obtained permission in writing from the deceased Pope to do it. Nay, it
has sometimes heretofore come into debate, whether a Cardinal, on whom silence
had been imposed before the Pope's death, could give his Suffrage for the
Election of another Pope? But this question was decided by Pius V. who, by the
Decretal of January 26. 1571. declared, that that imposition of silence was
only a Ceremony introduced only to keep the Cardinals in a certain advertency
(before they were admitted to give their voices and Suffrages, as the
Consistories and Congregations wherein they were to assist) of that modesty and
reservedness, which they were obliged to express in those and all other Acts,
but not to deprive them of their power and principal function, which consists
in the Election of a Pope. And this Constitution has ever since been
inviolably observed.

The shutting up of the Conclave introduced at the Council of Lions, by the
constitution of Greg. X. 1274. having therefore bin duly acknowledged and
verified, the Cardinals (being advertised by the ringing of a Bell to resort to
the Chapel Paulina, which is within the compass of the Conclave, if not
diverted by sickness) on the very morning of the twelfth day, go to hear Mass,
and communicate, as they are obliged to do, and immediately after ought to
proceed to the Election. Which Election, at the present, by the Constitution of
Gregory XV. confirmed by another since of Urban VIII. cannot be made, otherwise
then by one of these three forms and manners following; to wit, either by way
of Inspiration, or by Compromise; or lastly, by Scrutiny and Access; all which
it is but requisite that we expicate, and make as intelligible as may be, that
it may be the more easily comprehensible, with what extraordinary
circumspection and wise precautions they are guided, in an affair of so high
consequence.

The first means or method of choosing the Pope, which they call the way of
Inspiration; or as it is expressed by the Sacred Canons
As-it-were-by-Inspiration, is, when all the Cardinals in general, and every one
in particular, with a common voice, as being inspired by the Holy Ghost, are
unanimously agreed, without any one contradicting it, and without any precedent
particular treaty, and do freely concur to the acknowledging and proclaiming of
such a person Pope. Concerning which manner of Election we are to observe the
following Circumstances, which are necessarily requisite by the Gregorian
Constitution, which is a perfect Directory, as to the ways of proceeding at
Elections, and observed at present without any contradiction.

The first circumstance is, that this kind of Election cannot be allowably made
any where but in the Conclave, and that after the publication of its being duly
shut up.

The second is, that this Election is to be made by all in general, by every
one of the Cardinals in particular, who are present in the Conclave, by a
common Suffrage, and without contradiction from any one.

The third circumstance is, that there must not have been any precedent
Proposal, or particular Treaty, in reference to a choice to be made by this
kin^ of way, which ought to be clearly ^^prest by this word Eligo, I choose,
pronounced with a loud and intelligible voice, or, for want of pronunciation,
to be expressly set down in writing.

The Roman Ceremonial gives an instance of an Election, which might be
allowably made by this kind of way, which brought in hither will render the
business more cle^.

It is said in the forementiond Ceremonial, that if any one of the Cardinals,
after publication of the shutting of the Conclave, (there having not been any
precedent particular treaty about the person whom he would propose) should say,
for example, in a full Chapel, addressing his speech to the whole Sacred
College, My Lords, having always observed the rare and excellent
Qualifications and Virtues of my Lord the Cardinal N. and having an esteem for
his remarkable Integrity, it is my judgment that we cannot make choice of a
worthier subject to be Pope, and thereupon I from this present give him my
Suffrage, and choose him for Pope. And that afterward all the Cardinals, with
one voice, without excepting any one, being of the same opinion, and all of
them intelligibly pronouncing one after another the same word, I choose him; or
not being able to pronounce it, setting it down in writing, that person would
be canonically chosen, and acknowledged for a true and legitimate Pope, by that
way which they call of Inspiration, or As-it-were-by-Inspiration; which in
regard it is immediately attended by Adoration, is thence commonly called the
way of Adoration.

The second manner of proceeding in the Election of the Pope, is the way of
Compromi'se, which is, when the Cardinals, either immediately after their
entrance into the Conclave, or wearied out with its long continuance, refer
themselves to one or more among them, whom they empower to make provision, in
the name of all, of a common Father to the Catholic Church. And this kind of
Election is practiced conformably to the Gregorian Bull, and the conditions and
provisions contained therein, which may also be reduced to three.

The first is, that all the Cardinals in general, and every one in particular,
who are present in the Conclave, not one contradicting or opposing it, ought to
make a Compromise in writing, whereby they invest those persons whom they take
for Compromissaries with an absolute power and faculty to make provision of a
Pastor for the Holy Roman Church, yet with an observance of the form, as also
the Clauses and conditions inserted and expressed in the Compromise, and to do
it within the time prescribed thereby: the said Cardinals, promising to
acknowledge and account the person, whom the Compromissaries shall have thus
chosen, according to the extent of that power which had been granted them by
the Compromise, the true and lawful Pope.

The second circumstance is, that it is not permitted any one of the
Compromissaries should give himself his own voice, otherwise his Election
should be null.

The third condition is, that the Compromissaries are obliged twice every day
to assemble, in order to their conferring together, and promoting the execution
of the Compromise; in the morning immediately after the hearing of Mass, and in
the Evening after the recitation of the Hymn Veni Creator Spiritus, and the
Prayer of the Holy Ghost, to implore its illuminations upon them. But before
they fall upon any thing of business, they are wont to make this Protestation
precedent thereto, That they would not be understood to give their consent by
all sorts of words or expressions which might fall from them in the heat of the
Debate, if they do not expressly set it down in writing.

When they have absolutely agreed upon the choice of any person, and have
prpos'd him as such to the Sacred College, he it to be immediately acknowledged
as true Pope, and Canonically elected.

These two ways of Inspiration and Compromise are not now much in use; but the
way of Scrutiny, or of Scrutiny and Access joined together, is the most
ordinarily practiced, wherein there are many Ceremonies to be observed.

For the Election of a Pope by this last way, it is requisite, according to the
Constitution of Alexander the Third, in the Year of our Lord MCLXXX. made at
the Council of Lateran, that there should be two thirds of the voices of the
Cardinals; which has been confirmed by subsequent Bulls, and in our Age by
those of Gregory XV. and Urban VIII. And it is further requiste, that in the
two thirds of the Voices, that of the Cardianl chosen, be not included,
inasmuch as there is a prohibition upon pain of nullity of Election for any one
to choose himself, or give himself his own voice.

They are obliged twice every day to take the Scrutiny and the Access; in the
morning, after Mass; and in the Evening, after the Hymn Veni Creator Spiritus,
and the Prayer of the Holy Ghost which are said in the Chapel Paulina at which
the Cardinals are obliged to be present, if not detained by indisposition,
immediately, after the third ringing of the Bell.

There is a great secrecy to be observed in the Scrutiny and Access, and the
manner of proceeding therein may be reduced to three principal actions. The
first is the previous or Fore-Scrutiny; the second, that of Scrutiny and
Access; and the third, that of the Post-Scrutiny, or what follows the Scrutiny
and Access as soon as they are completed.

The particular explication of these three different actions will give us a
fuller comprehension of this way of Scrutiny and Access, and give us to
understand what it is, by distinguishing them as they are found explicated in
the Roman Ceremonial.

The Fore-Scrutiny may be distinguished into five principal Acts: the
preparation of the Billets for the Scrutiny and Access; the taking out by lots,
the names of the Scrutators and Deputies, who are to collect the Suffrages of
such as are indisposed; that of writing them in the Billets of Access, that of
folding them, and that of sealing them.

The Masters of the Ceremonies are the persons who take care for the
preparation of the Billets, which they cause to be printed according to the
form hereafter set down, as well for the Scrutiny as Access. They put them
into two Basins upon a Table before the Altar; those of the Scrutiny by
themselves in one of the Basins, and those of the Access in the other; in
number so many as there are Cardinals.

The Figure of the Billet of the Scrutiny is such, that the length exceeds the
breadth. It is about a hands breadth in length, and about half as broad. The
outside of the Billet comprehends three things; in the upper part of it are
written these words, Ego Cardinalis, with as much distance between the one and
the other, as may be requisite for the setting down of the Cardinal's name who
gives his voice, and a little lower there are two little Circles denoting the
places where the Seal is to be set.

In the midst of the Billet are imprinted these words, Eligo in summum
Pontificem Reverendissimum D. meum, D. Cardinalem -- I choose for Supreme Bishop
the most Reverend Lord, my Lord Cardinal. --

In the third and lowest part of the Billet are in like manner imprinted two
little Circles, denoting also the places of the Seal, and all the rest is blank.

The form and figure of the Billets for the Access, is in all respects like
that of the Billets of the Scrutiny, save only that in the midst of them, in
stead of these words [ Eligo in summum Pontificem Reverendissimum D. meum, D.
Cardinalem] these are inserted, Accedo Reverendissimo D. meo, D. Cardinali,
that is to say, I give again my voice to my most Reverend Lord my Lord
Cardinal. But these things will be more easily comprehended by exhibiting here
the figures of the Billets.

The Figure of the Outside of the Billet of the Scrutiny.
Fgo Cird.

Eligo in summum Pontificem Rm. D. meum D. Cardin.



The Figure of the Outside of the Billet of Access.
Ego Card.

Ac^ed^ Rev^rendiss. D. m^o Card.



Upon the other side of the Billets, as well those of the Scrutiny, as those of
the Access, there are imprinted certain Bordures, or Flourishes, one about the
midst of the upper part of the Billet, upon which is written the word Nomen,
and the other in like manner in the midst of the lower part, upon which is also
written the word Signa. The Flourishes were invented purposely to render the
Paper the more obseure, and that the names and signs of the Cardinals Electors
might not be perceived through it: which will also be more easily understood by
an inspection of the Figure here annexed.

The Figure of the other side of the Billets of the Scrutiny and Access.
Nomen.

Signa.



The second Act of the Fore-Scrutiny is, that of drawing by lot, the names of
the Scrutators and the Infirmaries, who are the Cardinals appointed to go to
the Cells of such as are indisposed* and there to take their Suffrages, which
is done in this manner. There are put into a purse as many little Bullets or
Balls, hol'd through the middle, about the bigness of Beads, as there are
Cardinals in the Conclave, with their Names written in little snips of
Parchment rolled up, and thrust through the holes in the little Bullets, which
the Masters of the Ceremonies take care to provide, as they do the Billets. As
they are put into the purse they are counted all one after another, in the
presence of the Cardinals, and then after they have been well shaken together,
the last of the Deacon-Cardinals draws three out of the purse, and they whose
names are found in them are chosen for Scrutators, according to the order
wherein they are drawn out of the purse. Then they draw out three others for
the Infirmaries or Deputies, who are to go to such as are sick. And that done,
the little Bullets are returned into the purse. Twice a day, that is, in the
morning and afternoon before the Scrutiny, there is an Election made of the
said Officers. But if it happen that they draw the names of any of the
Cardinals that are sick, or cannot by reason of some other impediment acquit
themselves of the function of the said charges of Scrutators and Infirmaries,
there are others drawn in their stead.

The third Act of the Fore-Scrutiny consists in setting down what is to be
written in the Billets, and in the filling of them by the Cardinals with their
own names, and the name of the Cardinal to whom they give their Suffrages, and
their Signets. To do this, every Cardinal, according to his rank, beginning
with the Dean or most ancient, goes and takes out of the Basin wherein the
Billets of the Scrutiny are standing upon the Altar one Billet, and thereupon
retiring into one of the two or three little Desks or Seats prepared for that
purpose, and furnished with Pen and Ink in the midst of it, or to some other
part of the Chapel, so exposed to the sight of all, that they may easily see
him writing, but not discern what is written; and taking his seat prepared also
near the Desk, he fills up his Billet thus; in the upper part he writes between
these words [ Ego Cardinalis] his own name; in the midst of it he inserts the
name of him to whom he gives his voice, with some difference and disguise of
character as much as he can, according to the Bull of Gregory XV. that it may
not be known by the writing: and in the lower part of the Billet is written
some certain number in figures, according to his own fancy, with some
sentence out of the holy Scripture, or somewhat of that nature. The figure of a
Billet filled up will render what we have said more manifest to the eye.

The Figure of the Outside of the Billet of the Scrutiny.
Ego Fra. Card. Barb.

Eligo in summum Pontificem Rm.D. meum D. Card Ca pineum.

10. In manibus tuis sorts meae.



The folding of the Billets is the fourth Act of the Fore-Scrutiny: It is no
hard matter to comprehend how it is done. By the fold which is made of the
Billet, in the upper part of it, the corners whereof are to be turned down upon
the marks of the Seal, the name of the Cardinal Elector is covered. In like
manner, by the folding which is made of the lower part of the Billet, the
corners whereof are also to be laid over the marks of the Seal, the Signs are
likewise covered. After these two foldings, they fold it so often as is
requisite to reduce it to the breadth of an Inch or thereabouts.

There remains yet the last Act of the Fore-Scrutiny, which consists in sealing
the Billets, the form whereof is as easily conceivable, as that of the
precedent folding. Every Cardinal before his entrance into the Conclave, must
have furnished himself with a Seal, unknown to the others, purposely engraved for
this occasion, containing some fancy or character, or simple-figure, the
impression whereof may be easily perceived. With this Seal the Cardinal makes
an Impression on the back of the Billet, at the places designed by the little
Circles, on which the Masters of the Ceremonies, before the putting of the
Billets into the Basins, had claqt little bits of red wax.

These things thus performed, the Cardinals proceed to the second principal
Action called the Scrutiny, which the Ceremonial has distinguished into eight
particular Acts. These are, the carrying of the Billets to the Altar; The
taking of the Oath; The putting of the Billets into the Chalice prepared for
the reception of them; The mixture which is thereupon made thereof; The
numbering of the Billets; The Publication of the Scrutiny; The Filing of the
Billets; And the laving of them aside, either upon some part of the Altar, or
upon the Desks of the Scrutators, or in an empty Chalice.

The carrying of the Billets to the Altar, the taking of the Oath, and the
putting of the Billets into the Chalice, are three acts, so consequent one to
the other, that it is no hard matter to make a joint imagination of them. And
to that end, presupposing that every Cardinal has at the Desk (as aforesaid)
filled up the Billet of the Scrutiny with his own name, the name of him, to
whom he gives his voice, and the ordinary signs, that he has folded it, and
sealed it, according to the precedent explication, he takes the said Billet
with the two fore-fingers of the right hand, he carries it openly up to the
Altar, where the Scrutators are standing at the Desk, which had been there
prepared for them; and being come thither, he falls down on his knees, and
makes a short prayer; after which, rising up, with a loud and intelligible
voice, he takes the Oath according to the form, wherein it is transcribed in a
Table upon the Altar, in these terms, Testor Christum Dominum, qui me
judicaturus est, me eligere, quem, secundum Deum, judico eligi debere, et quod
idem in Accessu praestabo. That is to say, I Attest Jesus Christ my Lord, who
is to be my Judge, that I choose him, whom according to God's Will I think
fittest to be chosen; and that I will do the like in the Access. Having thus
taken the Oath, he lays his Billet upon the Cover of the Chalice, and with the
Cover he puts it into the Chalice, and thereupon making an obeisance to the
Altar, he retires to his place.

This Ceremony is observed by all the Cardinals, who are able to come up to the
Altar. For if it happen, that any one of the Cardinals then present in the
Chapel is not able, by reason of infirmity, to come up to the Altar, the Junior
of the Scrutators takes the Basin, wherein the Billets of the Scrutiny are, and
carries it to him, out of which the indisposed Cardinal having taken a Billet,
he secretly fills it up, at his own Desk, folds it, and seals it, as is
beforementioned; and after he has taken the foresaid Oath in the place where
he is, he delivers his said Billet to the Scrutator, who openly carries it up
to the Altar, and without any Prayer or Oath lays it on the Cover, and with the
Cover conveys it into the Chalice. The same thing is done toward all the
indisposed Cardinals who are in the Chapel.

But as to those Cardinals, who, by reason of sickness are not able to stir out
of their Cells, the Infirmary-Cardinals chosen by lot to go and receive their
voices, go to the Desk of the Scrutators, and take from their hands a Box with
a hole in the upper side of it, having a Lock and Key to it about a hands
breadth high. This Box is publicly opened by the Scrutators, before the
delivery of it to the Infirmaries, to the end that every one of the Cardinals
may see it is empty, and that done they lock it up with the Key, which they lay
upon the Altar, and then give the Box to the Infirmaries, who, having taken a
little Basin, with as many Billets therein as there are Cardinals sick in their
Cells, go to them.

The indisposed Cardinals having taken their Billets out of the Basin, secretly
fill them up, fold them, and seal them, and after they have made the ordinary
Oath, put them into the hole of the Box.

If the Cardinal's sickness be such as that he is not able to write, he makes
choice of such person as he thinks fit to fill up his Billet. But the said
person so appointed to fill it up, is obliged to make Oath before the
Infirmary-Cardinals, that he will not reveal the secret then entrusted to him:
And this he is bound to do, not only upon the Obligation of the said Oath, but
also upon pain of incurring excommunication ipso facto.

The Suffrages of the indisposed Cardinals being thus collected by the
Infirmaries, they return to the Chapel, deliver the Box to the Scrutators, who
opening it, take out the Billets, which after they have been numbered, they lay,
one after another upon the Cover of the Chalices, and with the Cover convey
them into the Chalice.

But to the end the Scrutiny may not hold too long, and that it may be carried
on without any interruption, (as it is required by the Balls) the
Infirmary-Cardinals, before they go to the indisposed, may fill the Billets
with their voices immediately after the Dean-Cardinal; and then, while the
others make the Scrutiny, address themselves to the sick to collect their
Suffrages.

The mixture of the Billets makes the fourth Act of the Scrutiny, and consists
in the shaking of them well in the Chalice with its cover on; which is
performed by the chiefest of the Scrutators, who, to that end, takes the
Chalice from the Altar, and holding with one hand by the foot, and having the
other upon the Cover, shakes the Billets so as that it may not be discovered
which were put in first, which last.

The numbering of the Billets is the fifth Act, immediately following the
mixture thereof, and is performed by the Junior of the Scrutators, who takes
them one after another out of the Chalice, and counts them, and puts them into
another empty Chalice prepared for that purpose. If the number of the Billets
be not equal to that of the Cardinals, they are all burnt, and without removing
out of the place they renew the Scrutiny. But if the number be equal they
proceed to the other subsequent Acts of the Scrutiny.

The Publication, which is the sixth Act, and ought to be done by the
Scrutators sitting at their Desk placed before the Altar, is thus performed.
The chief Scrutator takes a Billet out of the Chalice, which he unfolds,
without breaking the Seals of it, and having discovered and seen the name of
him to whom the Suffrage is given by the Billet, he delivers it to the second
Scrutator, who having also seen the same name puts the Billet into the hands of
the third Scrutator, who reads it with a loud and intelligible voice, so as
that all the Cardinals present in the chapel may hear it, who having before
them their names set down in a printed sheer of paper, wherein opposite to
every name there are lines drawn to the right hand and to the left, upon which
they make as many dashes as a Cardinal has voices. Upon (...) line on the
right hand they are to mark the votes of the Scrutiny, and on that to the left
those of the Access. And this Ceremony is observed in the publication of all
the Billets from the first to the last.

Here place the Catalogue.

A Figure of the Printed sheet which every Cardinal has lying before him,
where upon to mark the Suffrages of the Scrutiny and Access.
Access Day Suffrages month Access Day Suffrages, 1667. -- R. Fran Barberin
-- -- ^ dono -- -- R. Ginetti -- -- R. Barbarigo -- -- R. Ant. Barberin -- --
R. Arragon -- -- R. Palotta -- -- R. Boncompagno -- -- R. Branciacco -- -- R.
Litta -- -- R. Carpegna -- -- R. Corsino -- -- R. Harach -- -- R. Bonelli -- --
R. Durazzo -- -- R. Picolomini -- -- R. Cabrielli -- -- R. Caraffa -- -- R.
Ursino -- -- R. Palutio -- -- R. Fachinetti -- -- R. Rasponi -- -- R. Grimaldi
-- -- R. De Comitibus -- -- R. Rosetti -- -- R. Nini -- -- R. Ludovisio -- --
R. Roberti -- -- R. Cybo -- -- R. Spinola -- -- R. Sfortia -- -- R. Visconti --
-- R. Odcscalchi -- -- R. Caraccioli -- -- R. Raggi -- -- R. Delphini -- -- R.
^e Retz -- -- R. de Thun. -- -- P. Homodei -- -- R. d'Est -- -- R. Otthobono --
-- R. Donghi -- -- R. Imperiale -- -- R. Rondanini -- -- R. Borrhomaeo -- -- R.
Maldachini -- -- R. Santa-Croce -- -- R. de Assia -- -- R. Spada -- -- R. Carl.
Barbarino -- -- R. Albici -- -- R. Pio -- -- R. Aquauiua -- -- R. Gualtieri --
-- R. Chisi -- -- R. Azzolini -- -- R. Ilcio -- -- R. Vecchiarelli -- -- R.
Farneze -- -- R. Franconi -- -- R. Rospigliosi -- -- R. Manchini -- -- R.
Bonvili -- -- R. Celsi -- -- R. Bichi -- -- R. Perretti -- -- R. Palavicini --
-- R. Vendosme -- -- R. Bandinelli -- -- R. Moncada. --

Present in the Conclaue --

Absent upon sickness, from the Scrutiny-Palavicini.

Absent from Coart-Arragon. The number is 70.

If it should happen in the Publication, that the Scrutators found two Billets
so folded together, to any ones thinking, as if they were brought in by one and
the same person; if in both these Billets there should be found one and the
same thing, and one and the same Cardinal named, they shall be counted but for
one; but if there be a diversity of Suffrages, neither is worth any thing, yet
shall not there be any defect in the Scrutiny upon thar score.

Moreover, the publication being completed, they set down in two or three
sheets of paper the names of all the Cardinals who have had voices, with the
number of the voices; to the end, that when there is any occasion, they should
not be obliged to make any new enumeration of the Suffrages, which the
Cardinals might have marked and crossed on the side of their names upon the
lines of the printed sheet, of which we spoke before.

The two last Acts of the Scrutiny, which are the filing and laying aside of
the Billets, are performed by the Junior of the Scrutators, who, after he has
with a loud voice published the name of the Cardinal who has the Suffrage by a
Billet, files the said Billet with a needle provided for that purpose, at the
place where the word Eligo is written. And after he has so filed all the
Billets immediately after his publishing them, he ties a knot on the thing, and
then lays them aside, either on some part of the Altar, or on the Desk of the
Scrutators, or in an empty Chalice.

The third and last principal Action performed at the Election of a Pope, by
way of Scrutiny is, in the Ceremonial called the Post-Scrutiny; which, if the
Election be completed by the Scrutiny, (which very seldom happens by reason of
the different Factions in the Conclave) comprehends three Acts or Circumstances
only, to wit, the numbering of the Billets, taking a review of the Suffrages,
and burning the said Billets. Bnt if the Pope be not chosen by the Scrutiny,
there are seven remarkable Circumstances in the Post-Scrutiny; to wit, the
Access, the opening of the Seals and Signs, the remarks made thereof upon the
printed sheet, the examination or confrontation of Suffrages, the review of the
Billets, and the destroying of them by fire.

The Access therefore, which is the first Act or Circumstance of the
Post-Scrutiny, immediately follows the deposition or laying aside of the
Billets of the Scrutiny in some part of the Altar or elsewhere, when the
Election is not completed by the Scrutiny; otherwise, if the Pope were once
chosen, there would be no place for the way of Access, inasmuch as it were of
no advantage, as being introduced to supply the defect of the Scrutiny,
whereby, as has been observed, we seldom find the Election completed, by
reason of the diversity of the Factions.

There are observed in the Access the same things as in the Scrutiny, as well
in reference to the manner of filling the Billets, folding them, sealing them,
carrying them to the Altar, and putting of them into the Chalice, as to that of
numbering them, and making publicatiou of them, noting the Suffrages, filing and
depositing the said Billets aside, save only that there is an observance of
these circumstances following.

The first is, that the Cardinals go and take their Billets in the Basin of the
Billets prepared for the Access, which stands upon the Altar, as does that of
the Billets for the Scrutiny.

The second is, that if a Cardinal be unwilling to give his voice to any one,
(which he is at liberty to do) he must remember, in the midst of the Billet, in
stead of the Cardinal's name, to whom he should have given his Suffrage, to
write down the word ( Nemini) To no body. Now it is to be observed, that the
Billet of Access is to be filled with the same signs; and sealed with the same
Seals, and as the Billet of the Scrutiny, upon pain of nullity of the Suffrage
of Access.

The third is, that one cannot make Access, (that is, give his voice a second
time) to the person of a Cardinal, who had not had at the least one voice by
the Scrutiny; nor yet to the same person to whom he had given his voice by the
Scrutiny.

The fourth is, that though a Cardinal is not permitted to nominate several
persons in the Access, as he is not permitted to choose diverse by the Scrutiny,
upon pain of nullity of the Suffrage as well of the Access as the Scrutiny; yet
is it lawful for him, to give his voice by Access to one of many who had been
named in the Scrutiny, though with nullity of Suffrage, provided he had
elsewhere procured of some other a Suffrage, which was not null.

The fifth is, That there is no taking of the Oath anew in the Access, in
regard it had been done before, for the Scrutiny and Access.

The sixth and last circumstance is, that the Infirmaries are obliged to carry
to the sick Cardinals, with the Billets of Access, one of the sheets upon which
they had marked the number of the voices which every Cardinal had in the
Scrutiny, publicly and duly verified.

The second, third, and fourth Acts of the Post-Scrutiny are, the opening of
the Seals and Signs of the Billets of Access, the marking of it upon the sheet,
and the examination or confrontation of the Suffrages, which are practiced only
when the Election is completed by the Scrutiny and Access, and thus put in
execution.

The chief Scrutator takes the Billets of Access filed, as they were upon the
publication of them, and opens only those which contain voices in favor of the
Elect, in the lower part of them which comprehends the signs; then after he
has exactly considered the Seals and the said Signs, he presents the said
Billets as they are filed to the second Scrutator, who also takes a view of
them, and then delivers them to the third, who having made the same observation
thereof, does, with a loud and intelligible voice, make publication of the
Seals and Signs of the said Billets. That done, he marks down the Seals and
Signs on the left side of a sheet of paper; where these words are imprinted,
and under the said words ( Sigilla et Signa Accessuum, that is to say, the
Seals and Signs of the Accesses) which remark may also be made by all the
Cardinals, if they think fit so to do, upon the like sheets which they have
lying before them, upon their Desks.

This done, the said chief Scrutator takes the Billets of the Scrutiny from the
place where they had been deposited, in order to the making of an examination
or confrontation of the Suffrages which they contain, with those which are
brought in by the Billets of Access. And beginning the examination at one of
the ends of the string, on which the Billets are filed, he with the two other
Scrutators, views the Seal of the first Billet of the Scrutiny, and then seeks
it out in the sheet, upon which the Seals and Signs of the Billets of Access
were marked. If he find it not there, leaving that first Billet of the
Scrutiny, he proceeds to the examination of the second, taking a view again
with the other Scrutators of the Seal, and then seeks it upon the same sheet,
where not finding any thing like it, he quits the said Billet, to pass on to
the examination of the third, and so of all the other Billets, till he meet
with the Seal of some one of the Billets of the Scrutiny, marked on the said
sheet. But having found it, he opens the said Billet at the lower part where
the signs are written, to see whether the Signs of the said billet are
answerable to the signs marked upon the said sheet: which if they are not, he
there quits the billet, and proceeds to the examination of the next, and if he
find the signs to be answerable and correspondent to those of the Access,
marked upon the said sheet, he shows them to the second and third Scrutators,
who all together, after they have maturely considered the correspondence there
is between the seals and signs of the billets of the Scrutiny and Access,
observe whether in both the billets there be a nomination of one and the same
Cardinal, or of diverse Cardinals; For if the same Cardinal be named in both the
billets, the Suffrage of the Access is null, in regard that (as has been
already observed) it is not lawful for any one to give his voice in both the
Scrutiny and Access to one and the same person. But if there be a nomination of
different persons, the Suffrage of the Access being good, then the third
Scrutator does with a loud and intelligible voice publish the Seal, the Signs,
and the name of the person elected by the billet of the Scrutiny, and makes a
mark thereof upon his sheet under those imprinted words ( Sigilla et signa
Scrutinii respondentia Accessibus, that is to say, the seals and signs of the
Scrutiny answerable to those of the Accesses) opposite, and on the side of the
seals and signs of the billet of Access, whereto they are answerable, which
note and mark all the Cardinals may also make upon their sheets. But these
Acts, which are more hard to be explicated, then to be put in execution, are
always best understood by Figures thereof.

A Figure of the Printed sheet upon which they note and mark the Seals and
Signs of the Access and Scrutiny, which are answerable one to the other.
Seals and Signs of the Accesses. Seals and Signs of the Scrutiny answerable
to those of the Access. Cardinals named in the Scrutiny. ACD 50 Deus. BRF 35
Bonitas ROI 44 Beatitudo. NSP 26 Gl^ria. BRF 35 Bonitas. RGI 44 Beatitudo Card
Carpegna. Card S. Clement.

Note that the Letters of the Alphabet represent the Seal of the Billets.

If it happen, in this examination and confrontation of the Suffrages, that
two, three, or some greater number of the billets of the Scrutiny, be found to
have the same Seals and Signs with some billet of the Access, as it may come
to pass, if the person who is chosen be named in one of the said billets of the
Scrutiny, and another Cardinal be named in another of the said billets, then
the Scrutator (his Colleagues observing what he does) is to open the billet of
the said Scrutiny, wherein the said elected person is named, together with that
of the Access, at the very place where the name of the Elector is set down, to
the end a judgment may be made, according to the Gregorian Constitution, of
the validity or invalidity of the Access. For if it be discovered, that one and
the same Cardinal has given his voice to the elected in the billet of the
Surutiny, and by that of the Access there will be an invalidity in the Suffrage
of Access, as has been observed before. But as to the billet of the Scrutiny,
wherein he who is elected is not named, it shall not be opened, and the
Scrutators shall proceed to the examination and confrontation of the other
Suffrages.

The fifth Act of the Post-Scrutiny is, the enumeration of the Suffrages either
of the Scrutiny alone, or of the Scrutiny and Access together, which is made by
the Scrutators, whether the Election ensue thereupon or not; if it do not
ensue, it is done, to the end it may be known in that very Scrutiny, or in the
Scrutiny and Access together, whether the Pope be not chosen; and if the
Election do ensue, that it may appear, whether the Pope be canonically chosen
or not.

Now the enumeration of the Suffrages is performed in this mann^r. The
Scrutators reduce into one sum all the Suffrages which they have obtained,
who were named either in the Scrutiny alone, or in the Scrutiny and Access
jointly; and if they siad, that not any one of the persons named, has got two
thirds of the Suffrages of the Cardinals, there is no Election at that time.
But if, on the contrary, they discover that any one of the said nominated
persons has got just the two thirds and no more of the Suffrages, they, in
that case, open the billet of him who is chosen, at the part where his name
stands; which is the upper part of the billet, to see whether he has given
himself his own Suffrage, which if he has, the Election is nulled, according
to the Gregorian Constitution, by reason of the want of one Suffrage, it being
not in his power to give himself his own upon pain of invalidity; but if he
has given it to another, and that he have two thirds of the Suffrages the
Election is completed.

Moreover, if it should happen, that several persons had obtained the two
thirds of the Suffrages, or possibly some number exceeding the two thirds; in
such case, through the parity and concurrence of the Suffrages, the Election
would be null; but, if there be an inequality, he who surpasses the other in
number, though it were but by one voice, is accounted and acknowledged for a
true and canonically elected Pope.

The fixth Act of the Post-Scrutiny is the review which is made, whether there
be any Election or not, by the Commissaries, drawn out by lot, to the number of
three Cardinals, whom the Bulls call Recognitors, who take cognizance of, and
look over, as well the billets of the Scrutiny and Access, as the notes and
marks of the Suffrages made by the Scrutators, to verify and confirm what they
have done, if they have acquitted themselves of their Functions, with all the
sincerity and fidelity whereto they were obliged. The said Commissaries are
drawn by lot after the same manner, as the Scrutators and Infirmaries had been;
but still, after the completing of the Scrutiny, if the Election be made
thereby; if not, after the Scrutiny and Access, as soon as the Scrutators have
finished the numbering of the Suffrages.

The seventh and last Act of the Post-Scrutiny consists in the burning of all
the Billets, which belongs to the Function of the Scrutators, who cast them
into the fire in the presence of the whole College, immediately after the
review made by the said Commissionated Recognitors, whether there have been any
Election, or not. All the things beforementioned ought to be observed twice
every day; in the morning, after Mass; and in the Evening after the Hymn of the
Holy Ghost; and this, till such time as the Church is provided of a Head and
lawful Pastor, which custom has been introduced, to prevent the long
continuance of Conclaves.

Those persons who pretend to make assured judgments of Elections, are many
times mistaken in their Conjectures, not only upon account of the diversity and
clashing of interests, but also by reason of the ordinary alterations happening
in the College of Cardinals, by frequent promotions, which strangely invert
the course of all proceedings in the Conclave, and destroys all the former
measure which might have been taken of an Election.

Let not therefore any be over-positive as to what they assert, in a matter so
uncertain, and which finds so much exercise for the wits of the Citizens of
Rome, whom the Air of the Country ordinarily entertains in a certain
languishment, whence it comes that they spend the best part of their time in
speculative discourse, and political divinations. They for the most part ground
their reasonings on certain considerations of the time, when the Vacancy of the Sea happens, and then from the quiet or disturbed posture of affairs, draw
their consequences in favor of a person to be exalted into the Pontifical
Chair in one season rather then another, according to the difference of the
humors, and the vigor and force of the person. Some again reflecting on the
length of the precedent Papacies, do commonly make their Conclusions in favor
of those Cardinals who are well advanced in years. For the Sacred College
being wearied out with a long-continu'd subjection to the Government of the
same person, takes resolutions many times to exercise a right which makes them
considerable every where, and causes them to be courted by Crowns and Scepters,
and the Princes, in that case pitching their choice upon ancient Cardinals. On
the other side again, when it happens that, by reason of the great Age of
Popes, the Sea comes to be too frequently vacant, they endeavor to exalt into
the Pontifical Chair a person, who likely to reign some years, may re-establish
and settle the Affairs of the Church, which might have received some prejudice
by the frequency of mutations, and so prevent the troubles it would be to the
Cardinals to remove themselves from the remote parts of Europe, once every year
or two, to be shut up in the Conclave.

Moreover, as to the persons whose pretensions are considerable to the
Pontifical Chair, there is a consideration had of their engagement to the
Kingdoms and Provinces, where they had their birth or extraction. Whence it is
affirmed by some, that the chiefest persons among the Italians, nor the
Tramontanes, ought not to be advanced to the Papacy, not only in order to the
avoiding of partialities, but also by reason of the possession, or rather
usurpation, which the Italians, from the time of Hadrian VI. are chargeable
with, in having not raised to the Papal Dignity, but such as have been of their
own Country, there having been from his time eighteen or nineteen Popes of the
several Provinces of Italy, who have successively filled the Chair of St. Peter.

It is by some insisted on further, that, to be a subject fit for this
elevation, he have not many Relations and Friends, that he may make the greater
communications of his Grandeur, and that his benefits being not wholly
exhausted upon his own Relations, he may exercise greater liberalities toward
many others.

There are yet some among the Romans guilty of a superstition, which argues
them not fully cleared from the Augural humor of their Ancestors. These
discover such an excess of weakness, as, by a kind of Onomancy, to search out
of the names of the Cardinals some conjectures of their elevation; and this out
of a persuasion, that a subject, who shall not have in the name of his house
the letter R. when the deceased Pope had not the said Letter in the name of his
House, will hardly be chosen Pope; and on the other side, that if the said
deceased Pope had the said letter in the name of his House, the Cardinal who
shall in like manner have it in his, can hardly be advanced to the Papacy; by
reason of an alternate succession of the names of Families, having, and not
having the said letter R. which has been observed to have happened without
interruption during about fourteen Exaltations to the Papal Chair.

There are yet others so weak, as not to content themselves with this kind of
superstition, but they must go and pick matter of divination, out of the brazen
gates of St. Peter's Church, which they consult as Oracles, by the overcurious
Re-searches they make, amongst the diversity of Figures, whereof they are full,
for the Arms of those Cardinals who aspire to the Papacy. And so their
presages are in his favor, whose chance it is to have his Arms graven in some
part thereof, and this upon no other account then that those of the last
deceased Popes have been found there, which the People immediately after their
Election have made the more remarkable by their polishing and clensing. True it
is, that there are many of the College of Cardinals, whose Arms may partly be
found amongst the numerous multitude of Figures in the said Gates, but without
any design of the Artist by whom they were cast.

But quitting these vain superstitions, we affirm further, that how strong and
considerable soever their reasons may be for the judgment they make of an
Election, it happens that they are for the most part mistaken. This
disappointment proceeds from the changes happening in the Conclaves, where
parties and Factions are made, for the exclusion or inclusion of subjects,
according to the variety of humors, affections and engagements. And as it is
the design of every Faction to oppose the Elevation of a subject contrary
thereto, so is it the business of it to be assured of a third part of the
voices in order to the framing of Exclusions, wherein it is no hard matter to
have their desire, by reason there is not any Cardinal that aspires to the
Papacy, and has the Qualifications before required, but will readily join with
all those who would exclude a subject, who might contest with him for the
Dignity. And thence it for the most part comes to pass, that they who are
thought to stand fairest for the Chair, are always most easily excluded.

The Factions most ordinarily framed in the Conclaves, are commonly reducible
to two or three principal ones, all the rest joining with the former, according
to the different interests which they may have in the inclusion or exclusion of
the subjects proposed. The Nephews of the deceased Popes are the ordinary heads
of Factions, upon whom the Creatures of their Uncles have a certain dependence,
and concur with them for the exaltation of those whom they are inclined to, and
the exclusion of all others, not creatures of their deceased Uncles, especially
when by reason of their long sitting in the Chair, they had the opportunity to
make a great number of promotions. And this is done, to avoid the reproach of
not having made choice of Creatures worthy to be advanced to so high a dignity,
and of being exposed to the inquisitions and inspections which a Pope, not
being of their Creatures, might make into their administration of affairs. The
Cardinals Protectors of Crowns are also Heads of Factions, to prevent the
elevation of a subject, whom they suspect, or to promote to the Papacy some
Cardinal well-affected to their interests. Those Sovereigns whose intentions
incline most to justice and moderation, wish only a Common Father; and yet all
many times under that pretense prosecute their own particular advantages.

There are also Brigues and Factions upon a National Account, as that of the
Roman for instance, so as not to consent to the election of any one to be Pope,
unless he be a Roman. Thus it happened at the Conclave upon the death of Pope
Urban VIII. at which the lately deceased Innocent X. a Roman born was chosen.
Nay, there are some Factions which carry on their designs with that subtilty
and independency on the other Factions, that they make no public profession of
their declaring themselves for any in particular; and to follow their own
inspirations for the advancement of such as are proposed to the Papacy; and so
vote for those whom they in their consciences think worthy of that Dignity.
These are easily induced to join with any of the others, either for the
exclusion of those whom they think unworthy of that Elevation, or to give their
Suffrages with those whom they think ably qualified to maintain with reputation
the dignity of Head of the Catholic Church.

This diversity of Factions when they are of equal strength, so as the voices
are equally parted, is ordinarily the cause of the long continuance of
Conclaves. For being equally in a capacity of excluding the subjects proposed
of either side, and each of them promoting the elevation of those whom they are
inclined to, the Heads of the said Factions make it their only business to
hinder the Cardinals of their party, of whose voices they think themselves
assured from ever giving their said voices in the Scrutiny, to any of the
subjects proposed whom they would exclude. And the design in this is, that the
said proposed subjects wanting still above a third part of the Suffrages cannot
be chosen Popes against their consent, as it might happen by the Access, if any
of the said Cardinals of the contrary party had given them their voices in the
Scrutiny. And hence it comes, that there are very few instances of any Pope
chosen by the way of the Scrutiny alone.

But whereas none of the said Head-Factions can be fully assured of the voice
of a Cardinal, by reason of the secret of the Scrutiny, which hinders the
discovery of those who may change parties, and that whatever engagement any
Cardinal may have made to the said Head Factions, either by word, oath,
promise, or upon the score of gratitude, affection, or otherwise: he is
dispensed from it by the late Bulls of Gregory XV. and Urban VIII. besides the
precautions there are, that he be not suspected of having been wanting to his
engagement, whereof he may avoid the blame and reproach by means of the secret
of the Scrutiny, it happens many times; that the said leading Factions are
mistaken in the computation of their Suffrages, and they want voices, yet
cannot discover whence that want proceeds and when they think themselves the
most assured of an exclusion, one or two of their own Partisans having changed
their humor or inclination, oither upon some disgust received, or greater
hopes of establishment elsewhere, or other private considerations, and
transferring their Suffrages to another party, some other is chosen Pope, who
'twas imagined would never have attained that dignity.

And whereas many among them, to prevent the elevation of such as they suspect,
bestow their Suffrages, as it were, at random on some other Cardinals, whom
they presume not fit to be advanced to the Pontifical Chair, it happens
sometimes that some one is chosen Pope, who had not been thought of before; so
that what may be most securely affirmed of these matters is, that we cannot
make any certain judgment of Elections; and that, through ways wholly opposite
to those which humane policy had contrived, a more transcendent wisdom
presiding over these great dispensations, disposes of them quite otherwise, and
turns and winds the spirits of those concerned therein correspondently to those
designs which it has from all eternity over the conduct of the Church.

As Soon as any one is chosen Pope, the two principal Deacon-Cardinals conduct
him from the place where they find him behind the Altar, where they vest him
with the black Cassock, the Roquet, the Camail, and the red or white Calotte or
Cap, according to the season, and put on his Slippers or Pantofles with the
gilt Cross on them; they then bring him before the Altar, and set him in a
Chair, where all the Cardinals come to adore him, that is to say, kiss his
feet, hands and cheek. Thence he is carried to St. Peter's Church, where he is
seated on the high Altar, and the Cardinals render him again the same Homage:
then the Canons of the said Church come up to kiss his feet: and then he is
carried to the ordinary apartment of the Popes, and the Cardinals retire to
their Palaces.

The first thing that is broken about the Conclave is that part of the walls
which shuts up the Lodge of the Benediction over the Portal of the Church; There
the principal Deacon-Cardinal goes and places the Cross, and cries out to the
people Vivat N. who is made Pope, and has assumed the name of N.

Some days after the Pope is crowned in St. Peter's Church. To that end, the
Cardinals, the Ambassadors of Princes, and the principal Lords about the Court
wait on him at his Apartment, whence they accompany him to the Church, and even
into the Sacristy, whether he is carried in a Chair. There he is clad in his
Pontifical habit, and at his coming out thence, he ascends a portable Theater,
upon which stands his Pontifical Chair, and is so carried up to the Altar,
cross the Church, then ordinarily full of people assembled to see that
Ceremony. Nay, in some parts of the Church, there are Scaffolds set up for the
principal Lords and Ladies of eminent quality, who are desirous to be
Spectators of that celebrious Action. He is preceded by the Cardinals and
Ambassadors, while all the people kneeling echo out their acclamations of Long
live Pope N. Just at his coming out of the Sacristy, and his going up the said
Theater, is performed the Ceremony of setting fire to Flax fastened at the end
of a stick, and held up as high as his person, with these words, Sancte Pater,
sic transit gloria mundi; Holy Father, thus does the glory of the world pass
away, as an advertisement to him, that he suffer not his heart to be surpised
with vanity, at that Elevation, while he sees all the people under his feet. In
the midst of the Church the same Ceremony is reiterated, and is again performed
a third time, when he is come up to the Altar.

Being come down from the Theater, he says a Pontifical Mass, whereat the most
eminent amongst the Ambassadors or Princes, who had accompanied him, minister
to him at the washing and presenting the Towel. At which Mass there are some
extraordinary prayers said, as we find them in the Ceremonial. The Mass ended,
he is carried to the Lodge of Benediction, where in the Presence of all the
people then assembled, in the spacious place of S. Peter's, the Chief
Deacon-Cardinal takes off his Mitre, and sets on his head the three Crowns, or
Triple-Crown, telling him, that he is to consider himself from thenceforward as
the Common Father of Kings and Princes, for the maintenance of Peace amongst
them. That done, he gives the Benediction, and is afterward carried back to
his Apartment.

There is yet another thing he is to do after his Coronation, which is to go
and take possession of his Bishopric, which is St. John's of Lateran. To do
that, he appoints what day he thinks fit. The streets through which he is to
pass are hung with Tapistry, and there are some Triumphal Arches erected,
representing the most remarkable Actions of his Holiness's life. And this is
the order of the Cavalcade and Procession.

Four light Horsemen of the Guard go first to clear the way, then come the
Carriers of the Valises and Mails belonging to the Cardinals, then the Judges
and Fiscalls of the Covernour of Rome, the Gentlemen of the Retinue of the
Cardinals; Then all the Princes and Roman Lords, who ordinarily go confusedly,
to avoid contesting about precedence, and have belonging to them a great number
of Pages and Halberdiers sumptuously clothed. Then follow the ordinary
Gentlemen of the Pope's House in Scarlet Robes. Then the white Gennets
presented every year by the King of Spain, by way of Homage for the Kingdoms of
Naples and Sicily, are led one after another, having their Harness of
Crimson-Velvet, with fringes of gold, and bosses of silver; then come the white
Mules, and three Litters, one of Scarlet, and the others of Crimson-Velvet both
within and without, and gold fringes. Then the Pope's Trumpeters; his Tailor
carrying his Valise; and the ten Officers of the Palace; the Consistorial
Advocates in Garments of a violet-colour, furred with Ermine about the neck:
all the honorary Camerarii in violet Cassocks and scarlet Cloaks, four of whom
carry at the end of a staff, every one of them, a Hat of the Pope of Crimson
Velvet, with fringes of gold. Then follow several Roman Gentlemen, who have
been Conservators (that is to say, Consuls) in their Garments and Caps of black
Velvet, and after them the Apostolical Prelates in black Garments. The Auditors
of the Rota in their ordinary habit, the Master of the Sacred Palace, who is
always a Jacobin-Frier, the Ambassador of Bologna and Ferrara, the Captains of
the several Quarters of Rome, richly clad, and the principal of them, whom they
call their Prior, is in a Garment of Cloth of Gold, marching between the two
Chancellors of the Roman people; Then the three Conservators of Rome in Vests
of Cloth of Gold, and Caps of black Velvet, and their Horsecloathes with
fringes of Gold; On their left hand do ordinarily march the Chiefs of the
houses of the Ursini's and the Col^^^i's, or one of them, when they cannot
agree about precedence; Then come the Ambassadors, and after them the
Cross-Bearer, and with the Cross of his Holiness, the four Masters of the
Ceremonies, with red Cassocks and violet Cloaks; fourscore Estaffiers of the
Pope's, for he is obliged at his coming to the Papacy to take all the most
ancient Standers among the Estaffiers of the Cardinals and Ambassadors of
Crowns, whom they call Palfreniers, to distinguish them from the Estaffiers of
persons of a lower rank, (as in France, they who are called Lacqueys, when
related to persons of of ordinary Quality, are named Valets de pied, when they
belong to Royal persons and Princes:) Then follows the Governor of Rome, and
after him the Pope's Pages, when he has any, follow afoot, and bare-headed.
Next them immediately is conducted the Pope himself in a close Litter, having
on each side of him the two grand Overseers of the Highways, clad in black, on
Horseback, and bare-headed, and all those who march between the Pope's Cross
and his Holiness, what condition or quality soever they be of, are obliged to
be uncovered.

After his Holiness follow all the Cardinals mounted on their Mules, the
Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops and other Prelates, two and two, every one
according to their Quality: and the whole Pomp is brought up and closed by the
two Companies of the light Horsemen of his Holiness's Guard, armed cap-a-pied.

Being come to St. John of Lateran's, the Pope puts off his ordinary Habit, and
puts on the Mitre and Hood, and takes up his Seat in a Throne which is prepared
for him in the entrance of the Church, where the Canons of it come and kiss his
feet. Then he goes to the Church-door, which he finds shut; They give him the
Key to open it; Te Deum is sung, after which the Pope ascends into the place of
Benediction, whence he gives it to all the people assembled below.

As all the Pope's Tribunals cease during the vacancy of the Sea, so they begin
not their Functions again till after the Pope's Coronation, upon which all
Affairs reassume their ordinary course.

FINIS.
A CATALOGUE of the Names; Surnames and Dignities of the Cardinals at the
Elections of Clement IX. May 1667.
Names and Dignities. Countries. Crtations CARDINALS Bishops. 1. FRancis Bishop
of Ostium, D^a^, or the must ancient Cardinal of the sacred College, Cardinal
Barberin Vice Chancellor of the Roman Church and Summiste, Archpriest of the
Church of St. Peter. AFlorentine. Urban viii. Oct. 2. 1623. 2. Martio Bishop of
Porto Cardinal Ginetti, Vicar to his H^liness. Of Velitra Urb. viij. Aug. 30.
1627. 3. Anthony Barberin B. of Palestrina Cardinal Antonio, Chamberlain of the
Roman Church, Pref^ct of the Signature of Fa^our and Briefs, Archpriest of St.
Mary Major. A Roman. Urb. viij. Aug. 30. 1627. 4. John Baptist B. of Frascati,
Cardinal Palotta. Dela March d' Ancona. Urban viij. No. 29. 1629. 5. Francis
Maria B. of Sabina, Cardinal Brancaccio, B. of Viterbo. A Neapolitane. Urb.
viij. No. 28. 1663. 6. Ulderic B. of Albano, Cardinal Carpegna. Of Urbin Urb.
viij. No. 28. 1633. CARDINAL PRIESTS 7. Ernest Adelbert of the title of S.
Praxeda, chiefest of the Priests, Cardinal of H^rrach, Archbishop of Prague. A
Germane. Urb. viij. Jan 19. 1626. 8. Stephen of the title of S. Laurence in
Lucina, Cardinal Durazzo. A Genoese. Urb. viij. No. 23. 1633. 9. Julius of the
title of S Prisca, Cardinal Gabrielli Bishop of Ascoli. A Roman Urb. viij. Dec.
16. 1641. 10. Virg^nio, of the title of S. Mary of the Angels, Cardinal U^fino.
A Roman Urb. viij. Dec. 16. 1641. 11. Caesar of the title of the Four Crowns.
Cardinal Faceh netti, B. ^f Spoletum. A Bolonian. Urb. 8. July 13. 1643. 12.
Hierome of the title of the Holy Trinity in Monte Pencio, Cardinal Grimaldi
Arch-B. of Aix. A Genoese. Urb. viij. July 13. 1643. 13. Charles of the title
of S. Silvester in Capite Card. Rosetti, B. of Faenza. Of Ferrara Urb. viij.
July 13. 1643. 14. Nicholas, of the title of St. Marytrans Tiberim, Card.
Ludovisio Grand Penitentiary. A Bolonian Innoc. x. Mar. 6. 1645. 15. Alderan,
of the title of S. Pudentiana, Card. Cybo, B. Axinus, or Axinas. Of Masle
Innoc. x. Mar. 6. 1645. 16. Frederic, of the title of S. Peter ad Vincula,
Card. Sfortia. A Roman Innoc. x. Mar. 6. 1645. 17. Benedict, of the title of
S. Onuphrius, Card. Odescalchi. Of Come. Innoc. x. Mar. 6. 1645. 18. Laurence,
of the title of SS. Quiricia and Julitta, Card. Raggi. A Genoese. Innoc. x.
Oct. 7. 1647. 19. John-Francis-Paul, de Gondy, of the title of St. Mary super
Minervam, Card. de Retz. A Frenchman. Innoc. x. Feb. 19. 1652. 20. Louis of the
title of S. Alexis, Card. Homodei. A Milaness. Inn. x. Feb. 19. 1652. 21.
Peter, of the title of S. Mark, Card. Otthobono. A Venetian Inn. x. Feb. 19.
1652. 22. Laurence of the title of S. Chrysogon, Cardin^l Imperiale. A Genoese.
Innoc. x. Febr. 19. 1652. 23. Gilbert, of the title of SS John and Paul,
Cardi^al Borromeo. A Milaness. Innoe. x. Febr. 19. 1652. 24. Marcel, of the
title of S Stephen in Monte Celio Card. Saint Croix B. of Tivoli. A Roman.
Innoc. x. Febr. 19. 1652. 25 Jo. Baptist, Of the title of S. Marcel, Cardinal
Spada. Of Lucca. Innoc. x. Mar. 2. 1654. 26. Francis, of the title of S. Mary
in Via, Cardinal Albici. A Florentine. Innoc. x. Mar. 2. 1654. 27. Octavius, of
the title of S. Cecily, Card. Aquaviva. A Neapolitan. Innoc. x. Mar. 2. 1654.
28. Flavius, of the title of S. Mary del populo, Card. Ghisi, Archpriest of
the Church of S. John Lateran, Library Keeper of the Roman Church, and Legate of
Avignon, Prefect of the Signature of Justice. Of Sienna Alex. vij. Apr. 9.
1657. 29. Scipio, of the title of S. Sabina, Card Ilcio. Of Sienna. Al. vij.
Ap. 9. 1657. 30. Hierom, of the title of S Agnes, Card. Farneze. A Roman. Al.
vij. Ap. 9. 1657. 31. Julius, of the title of S. Sixtus, Card. Rospigliosi. Of
Pistoya. Al. vij. Ap. 9. 1657. 32. Hierom of the title of S. Hierom of the
Illyrians, Card. Bonvisi B. of Lucc. Of Lucca. Alex. vii. Apr. 9. 1657. 33.
Anthony, of the title of S. Augustine, Card. Bichi B. of Osimo. Of Sienna.
Alex. vii. Apr. 9. 1657. 34. Sforza, of the Society of Jesus, of the title of
S. Saviors in Lauro, Cardinal Palavicini. A Roman. Alex. vii. Apr. 9. 1657.
35. Volumnio, of the title of S. Martin, in Montibus, Card. Bandinelli. Of
Sienna. Alex. vii. Apr. 9. 1658. 36. Peter, of the title of S. Calixtus, Card.
Vidoni B. of Lodi. Of Cremona. Alex. vii. Apr. 5. 1660. 37. Gregory, of the
title of S. Thomas in parione, Card. Barbarigo B. of Pavia. A Venetian Alex.
vii. Apr. 5. 1660. 38. Paschal, of the title of S. Balbina, Card of Aragon,
Archbishop of Toledo: A Spaniard Alex. vii. Apr. 5. 1660. 39. Hierom, of the
title of SS. Peter and Marcellin, Card. Boncompagno, Archbishop of Bolonian A
Bolonia. Alex. vii. Jan. 14. 1664. 40. Alphonsus, of the title of the Holy
Cross in Jerusalem, Card. Litta Archbishop of Milan. A Milaness. Alex. vii.
Jan. 14. 1664. Al. vii. Jan. 41. Nerio, of the title of SS. A Florentine. 14.
1664. Nereus and Aquileius, Card. Corsino, Legate of Ferrara. 42. Charles, of
the title of S. Anastafia, Card. Bonelli. A Roman. Alex. vii. Jan. 14. 1664.
43. Caelio, of the title of S. Peter in monte Aureo, Card. Piccolomini. Of
Sienna. Alex. vii. Jan. 14. 1664. 44. Charles, of the title of S. Susan, Card.
Caraffa, Legate of Bolonia. A Neapoitane. Alex. vii. Jan. 14. 1664. 45. Palutio
Palutio Albertonio, of the title of the Church of the 12 Apostles, Card.
Palutio, B. of Montefiascone. A Roman. Alex. vii. Jan. 14. 1664. 46. Caesar,
of the title of S. John ad portam Latinam, Card. Rasponi Legate of Urbin. Of
Ravenna. Alex. vii. Jan. 14. 1664. 47. John Nicholas, of the title of S. Mary
trans pontem, Card. de Comitibus B of Ancona. A Roman. Alex. vii. Jan. 14.
1664. 48. James, of the title of S. Mary of Peace, Card. Nini. Of Sienna. Alex.
vii. Jan. 14. 1664. 49. Charles, of the title of -- Card. Roberti. A Roman. Al.
vii. Feb. 15. 1666. 50. Julius, of the title of -- Card. Spinola. A Genoese.
Al. vii. Fe. 15. 1666. 51. Vitalian, of the title of -- Card. Visconti. A
Milanes^. Al. vii. Fe. 15. 1666. 55. Innico, of the title of -- Card.
Caracciola, Arch B. of Naples. A Neapolitane. Alex. vii. Feb. 19. 1666. 53.
John, of the title of -- Card. Delphini, Patriarch of Aquileia. AVenetian Alex.
vii. Mar. 7. 1667. 54. Guibald, of the title of -- Card. de Thun, Arch-B. of
Salsbourg. CARDINAL Deacons. A German Alex. vii. Mar. 7. 1667. 55. Raynald, of
the title of St. Nicholas in carcere Tulliano, Principal Deacon, Card. d' Est.
A Modenese. Urban viii. Dec. 16. 1641. 56. John Stephen, of the title of S.
Agatha, Card. Donghi, B. of Ferrara. A Genoese. Urban viii. July. 13. 1643. 57.
Paulus Emilius, of the title of S. Mary in Cosmedin, Card, Rondanini B. of
Assisium. A Roman. Urban viii. Jul. 16. 1643. 58. Francis, of the title of S.
Mary in Via lata, Card. Maldachini. Of Viterbo Innoc. x. Oct. 7. 1647. 59.
Frederic, of the title of S. Caesarius, Card. of Affia. A German. Innoc. x.
Febr. 19. 1652. 60. Charles Barberin, of the title of S. Angelo, in foro
piscium, Card. Carlo. A Roman. Innoc. x. Jun. 13. 1653. 61. Charles, of the
title of S. Eustace, Card. Pio. Of Ferrara. In. x. Mar. 2. 1654. 62. Charles,
of the title of Of Orvieto In. x. Ma. 2. 1654. S. Pancrace, Card. Gualtieri,
Arch-B. of Ferme. 63. Decio, of the title of S. Adrian, Card. Azzolini. Of
Ferme. Innoc. x, Mar. 2, 1654. 64. Odoard, of the title of SS. Cosmus and
Damianus, Card. Vecchiarelli, B. of Reate. of Reate. Alex. vii. Apr. 9. 1658.
65. James of the title of S. Mary in Aquino, Card. Franconi. A Genoese. Alex.
vii. Ap. 9. 1658. 66. Francis Maria, of the title of SS. Vitus and Modostus,
Card. Mancini. A. Roman. Alex. vii. Apr. 5. 1660 67. Angelus, of the title of
S. George, Card. Celsi. A. Roman. Al. vii. Ja. 14. 1664. 68. Paul, of the title
of S. Mary de Scala, Card. Sabelli Perretti, Legate of Romaniola. A. Roman. Al.
vii. Ja. 14. 1664. 69. Lewis -- Card. of Vendosme. A Frenchman. Alex. vii. Mar.
7. 1667. 70. Lewis -- Card. of Moncada. A Sicilian. Alex. vii. Mar. 7. 1667.

In all LXX. Whereof Urban VIII. created VI. Bishops, VII. Priests, and III.
Deacons. Innocent X. created XIV Priests and VI. Deacons. And Alexander VII.
created XXVII. Priests, and VII. Deacons.

FINIS.

