A SERIOUS EXHORTATION, With some Important Advices, Relating to the late Cases
about CONFORMITY, Recommended to the Present Dissenters From the CHURCH of
ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed by T. Moore, and J. Ashburne, for Fincham Gardener, at the
White-Horse in Ludgate Street, 1683.

A Serious EXHORTATION, With some Important Advices, etc. Recommended to the
Dissenters from the Church of England.
THE offering friendly Advice and Counsel, especially in great and important
Cases, is, tho often, a Thankless, yet a very Charitable Office: a thing
agreeable to the best Inclinations of Humane Nature, and highly conducive to
the Necessities of Men, and consequently needs no Apology to introduce it. We
live, it is true, in an ill-Natured and Censorious Age, wherein it is rare to
find any one, who will not take with the Left Hand, what is offered to them with
the Right. But I am not discouraged from this Attempt, by the Pievishness and
Frowardness of many that differ from us, Remembering that all Honest
Undertakings (and such I am sure this is) are under the more peculiar Conduct
and Blessing of the Divine Providence, which can and will succeed and prosper
them to an happy Issue, if Men's own Obstinacy and Perverseness do not put a Bar
in the way to hinder it. I do therefore beseech our Dissenting-Brethren, with
all the earnestness that becomes a matter of so much Importance, and with all
the Kindness and Tenderness that becomes a Christian, that they would suffer
the Word of Exhortation, and duly Weigh and Consider the Requests and Advices
that are here plainly laid before them, which I hope will be found such, as
carry their own Light and Evidence along with them.

I.
And First, We beg of them to believe, That they may be mistaken about those
matters, which are alleged as the Causes of their Separation. This, one would
think, were as needless, as it is a modest and reasonable Request. For did ever
any Man, (the Bishop of Rome excepted) lay claim to Infallibility? Do not the
Woeful Infirmities of Humane Nature, The Weakness and Short-sightedness of our
Understandings, The Daily Experience of our selves, and the lamentable Failures
we observe in others, sufficiently convince us, how prone we are to Error and
Mistake? But tho this be granted and owned on all hands, yet in practice, we
frequently find Men Acting by other Measures. For how many are there, that in
the most Controverted Cases bear up themselves with as much Confidence and
Assurance, Censure others with as Magisterial a Boldness, Condemn the things
Enjoined by our Church, with as positive and peremptory a Determination, as if
they were infallibly sure, that they are in the Right, and all others in the
Wrong that differ from them. The early prepossession of a contrary Opinion, the
powerful prejudices of Education, an implicit and unexamined Belief of what
their Guides and Leaders teach them, have a strange force upon the Minds of
Men, so that in effect, they no more doubt of the Truth and Goodness of the
Cause they are engaged in, then they question the Articles of their Creed.
Wherefore I do once and again entreat them, that laying aside all Pride,
Partiality, and Self-conceit, they would not think more highly of themselves,
and of their own way, then they ought to think; especially remembering, that
the matters contended about are confessedly Disputable, and that they cannot be
Ignorant, that the Case seems otherwise to others, who may at least be allowed
to be as wise Men, and as competent Judges as themselves. Truth makes the
easiest entrance into modest and humble Minds; the Meek will he guide in
Judgment, the Meek will he teach his Way; The Spirit of God never rests upon a
Proud Man.

II.
Secondly, We beg of them, that they would seriously and impartially Weigh and
Consider, as well what is said on the one side, as on the other. This is a
piece of Justice, that every one ows to Truth, and which indeed every Man ows
to himself, that is not willing to be deceived. To take up with Prejudices,
which Education or long Custom have instilled into him, or wherein any other
Arts or Methods have engaged him, without strictly enquiring whether those
Prejudices stand upon a firm Foundation, is to see only on one side: to bind up
ones self in the Judgment or Opinion of any Man, that is not Divinely-inspired
and Infallible, or pertinaciously to adhere to any Party of Men; how plausible
and specious soever their pretenses may be, without examining their Grounds,
and endeavoring to know what is said against them, is to choose a Persuasion at
a peradventure; and it is great odds, whether such a one be in the right. In all
Enquiries after Truth, we ought to keep an Ear open for one side of the
Controversy, as well as the other, and not to think we have done enough, till
without Favor or Prejudice, and to the best of our Understandings, we have
heard, tried, and judged, the Reasons brought, as well for, as against it. And
till this be done, I see not with what pretense of Reason, Men can talk so much
of their Scruples, or plead for Favor on the account of their
Dissatisfactions. Consciences truly tender, are willing and desirous to embrace
all opportunities of Resolution, and are ready to kiss the Hand that would
bring them better information, and are not wont to neglect, much less thrust
from them the means that might ease them of their Doubts and Scruples. We
justly blame it in them of the Church of Rome, that in a manner they resign up
their Underdstanings to their Guids and Confessors, and are not suffered to be
truly acquainted with the Protestant Principles, and the Grounds and Reasons of
the Reformation; nor to Read any of the Books, that are written for their
Conviction, without a special and peculiar License. Whether our Brethren of the
Separation be under any such Spiritual Discipline, I know not; sure I am it
looks very odly, that so many of them are no more concerned to understand the
true State of the Church of England, and the Nature and Reasons of her
Constitutions, that so few of them care to Confer with those that are able to
Instruct them, but Cry out, They are satisfied already; nay, some of them, to
my knowledge, when desired to propose their Scruples, in order to the giving
them satisfaction, have plainly and absolutely refused to do it. Little reason
there is to believe, that such Persons have ever Read and Examined what the
Church of England has to say for her self. Are there not many, that not only
Scruple, but Rail at the Book of Common Prayer, that yet never heard it, nor
perhaps, ever read it, in all their Lives? And if this be not to speak Evil of
what they know not, I cannot tell what is. How many incomparable Books have
been heretofore written in defense of our Church, her Rights and Usages, that
yet generally lie by the Walls, little known, and less read, by those that so
much Cry out against her. And at this time how many excellent Discourses have
been Published, for the satisfaction of Dissenters, written with the greatest
Temper and Moderation; with the utmost plainness and perspicuity, with all
imaginable evidence and strength of Reasoning; so short, as not to require any
considerable portion, either of Time or Cost, so suited to present
Circumstances, as to obviate every material Objection, that is made against
Communion with us; and yet there is just cause to fear, that the far greatest
part of our Dissenters are mere strangers to them, and are not so just to
themselves, or us, as to give them the reading: And that those few that do look
into them, do it rather out of a design to pick quarrels against them, and to
expose them in scurrilous or cavilling Pamphlets, then to receive satisfaction
by them. I do heartily, and from my Soul, wish an end of these Contentions, and
that there were no further occasion for them; but if our Dissenting Brethren
will still proceed in this way, we desire, (and hope it is but what is
reasonable) that the things in difference may be debated in the most quiet,
peaceable, and amicable manner, that they may be gravely and substatially
Managed, and only the Merits of the Cause attended to, and that the
Controversy may not be turned off to mean and trifling Persons, whose highest
attainment perhaps it is, to write an idle and senceless Pamphlet, and which
can serve no other use, but only that the People may be born in hand, that such
and such Books are Answered. Which is so unmanly and disingenuous a way, and so
like the shifting Artifices of them of the Church of Rome, that I am apt to
persuade my self, the wiser Heads of the Dissenting Party cannot but be ashamed
of it. If they be not, it is plain to all the World they are willing to serve an
ill Design by the most unwarrantable Means. But however that be, we think we
have great reason to expect from them, that they should hear our Church, before
they condemn Her, and consider what has been said for the removing of their
Doubts, before they tell us any more of Scruples, Tender-Consciences; and the
hard Measure that they meet withal. I confess, could I meet with a Person, that
had brought himself to some kind of unbyasdness and indifferency of Temper, and
that designed nothing more then to seek and find the right way of Serving God,
without respect to the Intrigues and Interests of this or that particular
Party; and in order thereunto, had with a sincere and honest Mind read whatever
might probably conduce to his satisfaction, fairly proposed his Scruples, and
modestly consulted with those that were most proper to advise him, and humbly
begged the guidance and direction of the Divine Grace and Blessing; and yet
after all, should still labor under his old Dissatisfactions; I should
heartily pity and pray for such a Man, and think my self obliged to improve all
my Interest for Favor and Forbearance toward him. But such Persons as these,
I am afraid, are but thin Sowed, and, without breach of Charity, it may be
supposed, there is not One of a Thousand.

III.
Thirdly, We desire, that before they go on to accuse our Church with driving
them into Separation, they would directly charge her with imposing sinful terms
of Communion. And unless they do this, and when they have done it, make it
good, (for barely to accuse, I hope, is not sufficient,) I see not which way
they can possibly justify their Separation from us. It Is upon this account
that the whole Protestant Reformation defends their departure from the Church
of Rome. They found the Doctrine of that Church infinitely corrupt in several
of the main Principles of Religion, New Articles of Faith introduced, and bound
upon the Consciences of Men under pain of Damnation, its Worship overgrown with
very gross Idolatry and Superstition; Its Rites and Ceremonies not only
over-numerous, but many of them advanced into proper and direct acts of
Worship, and the use of them made necessary to Salvation; and besides, it is
Members required to join and communicate in these corruptions and depravations,
nay and all proposals and attempts toward a Reformation obstinately rejected
and thrown out; in which case they did with great Reason and Justice depart
from her: which we may be confident they would not have done, had no more been
required of them, than instead of Worshipping Images, to use the Sign of the
Cross in Baptism, or instead of the Adoration of the Host, to kneel at the
Receiving of the Sacrament. Amyrald* de Secess. ab Eccles. R^m. page 233.
A learned Protestant Divine of great Name and Note has expressly told us; That
had there been no other faults in the Church of Rome, besides their useless
Ceremonies in Baptism, and some other things that are beyong the measure and
genius of the Christian Religion, they had still continued in the Communion of
that Church. Indeed did the Church of England command any thing which Christ
has prohibited, or prohibit any thing which Christ has commanded, then come ye
out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, were good Warrant and
Authority. But where do we meet with these prohibitions? not in the word of
God, not in the nature and reason of the things themselves? nor indeed do we
find our Dissenting Brethren of late very forward to fasten this charge, and
much less to prove it; whatever unwary sayings may fall from any of them in the
heat and warmth of Disputation, or be suggested by indirect consequences, and
artificial insinuations. And if our Church commands nothing that renders her
Communion sinful, then certainly Separation from her must be unlawful, because
the Peace and Unity of the Church, and obedience to the commands of lawful
Authority, are express and indispensable duties; and a few private suspicions
of the unlawfulness of the thing are not sufficient to sway against plain,
public, and necessary Duties: nor can it be safe to reject Communicating with
those, with whom Christ himself does not refuse Communion. This I am sure was
once thought good Doctrine by the chiefest of our Dissenters, who when time
was, reasoned thus against those that subdivided from them; A Vindication of
the Presbyterial Government, etc. 1649. p. 130.
If we be a Church of Christ, and Christ hold Communion with us, why do you
Separate from us? If we be the Body of Christ, do not they that Separate from
the Body, Separate from the Head also? we are loath to speak any thing that may
offend you, yet we entreat you to consider, that if the Apostle call those
Divisions of the Church of Corinth* (wherein Christians did not separate into
diverse formed Congregations in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,) Schisms, (1
Cor. 1. 10.) may not your Secession from us, and professing you cannot join
with us as Members, and setting up Congregations of another Communion, be more
properly called Schism? -- You gather Churches out of our Churches, and set up
Churches in an opposite way to our Churches, and all this you do voluntarily
and unwarrantably, not having any sufficient cause for it.

And in the same Book they tell us of a Twofold Schism, Negative and Positive;
Negative, when Men do peaceably and quietly withdraw from Communion with a
Church, not making a Head against that Church, from which they are departed:
the other is, when Persons so withdrawing do consociate and withdraw themselves
into a distinct and opposite Body, setting up a Church against a Church, which
(say they) Camero calls a Schism by way of Eminency; and further tells us,
There are Four Causes, that make a Separation from a Church lawful; 1. When
they that Separate are grievously and intollerably Persecuted; 2. When the
Church they Separate from is Heretical; 3. When it is Idolatrous; 4. When it is
the Seat of Antichrist. And where none of these Four are found, there the
Separation is insufficient, and Schism. Now we are fully assured, that none of
these Four Causes can be justly charged upon our Congregations; therefore you
must not be displeased with us, but with your selves, if we blame you as guilty
of positive Schism. All which is as true now, as it was then, and as applicable
to us and them, as it was to them and their Dissenters.

Admit then there were some things in our Constitution, that might be contrived
to better purposes, and that needed amendment and alteration; yet I hope every
Defect, or supposed Corruption in a Church, is not a sufficient ground for
Separation, or warrant enough to rend and tear the Church in pieces. Let Mr.
Calvin judge between us in this matter, who says, Institut. lib. 4. Sect. 10,
11, 12. fol. 349.
That wherever the Word of God is duly Preached, and Reverently attended to, and
the true use of the Sacraments kept up, there is the plain appearance of a true
Church, whose Authority no Man may safely despise, or reject its Admonitions,
or resist its Counsels, or set at naught its Discipline, much less Separate
from it, and Violate its Unity; for that our Lord has so great regard to the
Communion of his Church, that he accounts him an Apostate from his Religion,
who obstinately Separates from any Christian Society, which keeps up the true
Ministry of the Word and Sacraments: that such a Separation is a denial of God
and Christ, and that it is a dangerous and pernicious Temptation, so much as to
think of Separating from such a Church; the Communion whereof is never to be
rejected, so long as it continues in the true use of the Word and Sacraments,
though otherwise it be overrun with many Blemishes and Corruptions. Which is
as plain and full a determination of the Case, as if he had particularly
designed it against the Doctrine and Practice of the Modern Dissenters from our
Church.

IV.
Fourthly, We entreat them to Consider, whether it be pure Conscience, and mere
Zeal for the Honor of Religion, and not very often Discontent, or Trade and
Interest, that has the main stroke in keeping them from Communion with our
Church. Far be it from me to judge the Secrets of Men's Hearts, or to fasten such
a Charge on the whole Body of Dissenters, yea, I accuse not any particular
Person; but only desire, they would lay their Hand upon their Hearts, and deal
impartially with themselves, and say, whether they stand clear before God in
this matter. And there is the more reason to put Men upon this Enquiry, not
only because Secular Ends are very apt to mix with, and shelter themselves
under the shadow of Religion; but because this has been an old Artifice, made
use of to promote Separation. Thus the Donatists in the Primitive Times upheld
their Separation from the Catholic Church, and kept their Party fast together,
by Trading only within themselves, by employing none to Till their Grounds, or
be their Stewards, but those that would be of their side; nay, and sometimes
hiring Persons by large Sums of Money to be Baptized into their Party, as
Crispin did the People of Mappalia. Vid. Aug. Epist. 17^. (ad Crisp.).
And how evident the same Policy is among our Modern Quakers, is too notorious
to need either Proof or Observation. Time was, when it was made an Argument to
prove Independency to be a Faction, and not matter of Conscience, Edward's
further Discovery, p. 185.
because Needy, broken decayed Men, who knew not how to live, and hoped to get
something, turned Independents, and became sticklers for it; that some who had
Businesses, Causes, and Matters depending, struck in with them, and pleaded for
them, that so they might find Friends, be sooner dispatched, and fare better in
their Causes; that Ambitious, Proud, Covetous Men, who had a mind to Offices,
places of profit about the Army, Excise, etc. turned about to the Independents,
and were great Zealots for them. Thus it was then, and whether the same Leaven
do not still spread and ferment, and perhaps as much as ever, there is just
cause to suspect? Whoever looks into the Trading part of this City, and indeed
of the whole Nation, must needs be a very heedless and indiligent Observer, if
he do not take notice, how Interests are formed, and by what Methods Parties
and Factions are kept up, how many Thousands of the Poorer sort of Dissenters
depend on this or that Man for their Work, and consequently for their
Livelihood and Subsistence; how many depend upon others for their Trade and
Custom, whom accordingly these Men can readily Command, and do produce to give
Votes, and increase Parties on all Public Occasions; and what little
Encouragement any Man finds from them, that once deserts them, and comes over
to the Church of England. There is another thing that contributes not a little
to this Jealousy and Suspicion, that many of the Chifest, and most Stiff and
Zealous of the Dissenting Party, are they, at least the immediate Descendants
of those, who in the late Evil-Times, by Rapine and Violence shared among
themselves the Revenues of the Church, and the Patrimony of the Crown, and are
said still privately to keep on foot their Titles to them. And if so, what
wonder if such Men look on themselves, as obliged in point of Interest, to
widen Breaches, foment Differences, increase Factions; and all this to Subvert
and over-turn the Church of England; being well assured, they can never hope,
but over the Ruins of this Church, to make way to their once sweet Possessions?
Let Men therefore impartially examine themselves, and search, whether a Worldly
Spirit be not at the bottom of their Zeal and Stiffness. These I confess are
Designs too Base and Sordid, to be owned above Board: but be not Deceived, God
is not Mocked; Man looks to the outward Appearance, but God looks to the Heart.

V.
Fifthly, We desire them to-Consider, Whether it be not a Just Prejudice to
their Cause, and that which ought to prevail with Men Modest and Peaceable,
that in those things, wherein they differ from us, they are Condemned by the
Practice of the whole Catholic Church for Fifteen Hundred Years together.
This, were I minded, might afford a large Field for Discourse, but I shall
instance only, and that very briefly, in a few Particulars,

And First, We desire them to produce any settled part of the Christian Church,
that ever was without Episcopal Covernment, till the time of Calvin: it being
then as hard to find any part of the Christian World without a Church, as to
find a Church without a Bishop. This is so evident in the most early
Antiquities of the Church, that I believe our Dissenters begin to grow sick of
the Controversy. And if Blondell, Salmasius and Daille, (whose great Parts,
Learning, and indefatigable Industry, could, if any thing, have made out the
contrary) have been forced to grant, That Episcopacy obtained in the Church
within a few Years after the Apostolic Age; We are sure we can carry it
higher, even up to the Apostles themselves. There are but Two passages, that I
know of, in all Antiquity, of any Note, and both of them not till the latter
end of the Fourth Century, that may seem to question Episcopal Authority: The
One, That famous and well known passage of St. Jerome, which yet when improved
to the utmost that it is capable of, only intimates Episcopacy not to be of
Apostolical Institution. Idem Presbyter, qui Episcopus, and antequam diaboli
instinctu studia in religione fierent, etc. Hier. in Epist. ad Tit. c. 1.
And very clear it is to those that are acquainted with St. Jeroms Writings,
that he often Wrote in have, and did not always weigh things at the Beam, and
forgot at one time, what he had said at another; that many expressions fell
from him in the heat of Disputation, according to the warmth and the eagerness
of his Temper, and that he was particularly chafed into this Assertion by the
fierce opposition of the Deacons at Rome, who began to Usurp upon, and overtop
the Presbyters, which tempted him to Magnify and Extol their Place and
Dignity, as anciently equal to the Episcopal Office, and as containing in it
the common Rights and Privileges of Priesthood. For at other times, when he
Wrote with cooler Thoughts about him, he does plainly and frequently enough
assert the Authority of Bishops over Presbyters, and did himself constantly
live in Communion with, and Subjection to Bishops. The other passage is that of
Aerius, who held indeed that a Bishop and a Presbyter differed nothing in
Order, Dignity, or Power. But he was lead into this Error merely through Envy
and Emulation, being vexed to see that his Companion Eustathius had gotten the
Bishopric of Sebastia, which himself had aimed at. This made him start aside,
and talk extravagantly; but the Church immediately branded him for an Heretic,
and drove him and his followers out of all Churches, and from all Cities and
Villages. Cont. Aer. haeres. 75.
And Epiphanius, who was his Contemporary, represents him as very little better
then a Madman; and adds, that all Heresies that ever were from the beginning of
the World, had been hatched either by Pride, or Vain Glory, or Covetousness, or
Emulation, or some such Evil Inclination. But his Heresy, it seems, was not
long-lived, for we hear no more concerning this matter, till the Reformation at
Geneva.

Secondly, We desire them to show any Christian Church that did not constantly
use Liturgies, and Forms of Prayer, in their Public Offices and
Administrations of Divine Worship: I take it for granted, that there were Forms
of Public Prayer in the Jewish Church; and I make no doubt, but that the use
of such Forms, was, together with many other Synagogue-rites and Usages,
transferred into the Practice of the Christian Church, and did actually obtain,
in the most early Ages in all Churches, where there were not Miraculous Gifts:
and every where as soon as those Miraculous Gifts ceased, it being very fit and
proper, and agreeable to Order and Decency, that the Peoples Devotions should
be thus Conducted and Governed in their Public Ministrations. Not to insist
upon the Carmen, or Hymn, which even the Proconsul Pliny, says, the Christians
upon a set Day were wont, one among another, to say to Christ, as to their God;
Apparent footsteps of some Passages of their Ancient Liturgies, are yet extant
in the Writings of Origin and St. Cyprian: And when Eusebius gives us an
account, how Religiously Constantine the Great ordered his Court, De vit.
Constant. lib. 4. c. 17.
That he was wont to take the Holy Bible into his Hands, and carefully to
Meditate upon it, and afterward to offer up Set or Composed Prayers, together
with his whole Royal Family; he adds, He did this after the manner, or in
imitation of the Church of God. Nazianzen tells us of St. Basil, That he
composed Orders and Forms of Prayer, and appointed decent Ornaments for the
Altar. In Sanctum Basilium Orat. 20. Bas. Epist. 63.
And St. Basil himself reciting the manner of the Public Service, that was
used in the Monastical Oratories of his Institution, says, That nothing was
done therein but what was Consonant and Agreeable to all the Churches of God.
And the Council of Laodicea, holden much about the Year 365, expressly provides,
that the same Liturgy, or Form of Prayers, Can. 18. conf. Conc. Milev. can. 12.
Conc. Carth. 3. c. 23.
should be always used both Morning and Evening: That so it might not be lawful
for every one that would, to compose Prayers of his own Head, and to repeat
them in the Public Assemblies; as both Zonaras and Balsamon give the reason of
that Canon. Further then this we need not go, the Case being henceforward
evident beyond all Contradiction.

Thirdly, Let them show us any Church, that did not always set a part and
observe Festival Commemorations of the Saints: besides the more solemn times
for Celebrating the great Blessings of our Redeemer, his Birth Day and
Epiphany, Easter in Memory of his Resurrection, Pentecost or VVitsuntide for
the Mission of the Holy Ghost, they had Annual days for solemnizing the
Memories of the Blessed Apostles; they had their Memoriae and Natalitia
Martyrum, whereon they assembled every Year, to offer up to God their Praises
and Common Devotions, and by Public Panegyricks to do honor to the memory of
those Saints and Martyrs who had suffered for, or Sealed Religion with their
Blood. Not to mention their Lent Fast and their Stationary Fasts on VVednesdays
and Fridays, which Epiphanius more then once expressly says, were a Constitution
of the Apostles. Sermon. compend: de Expos. fid. p. 466. adv. Aer. Haeres. 75.
But the less need be said on this head, because few that have any Reverence
for Antiquity, will have the hardiness to oppose it.

Fourthly, We desire them to produce any Church since the Apostles Times, that
had not its Rites and Ceremonies, as many (if not more) in number, and as
liable to exception, as those that are used in our Church at this Day; nay,
there are few things, if any at all, required by our Constitution, which were
not in use in the best Ages of Christianity. This, were it my design, I might
demonstrate by an Induction of particulars, but it is fully done by other
Hands. I shall therefore, only as a Specimen, instance in One, and the rather,
because it is so much boggled at, ( viz.) The Sign of the Cross in Baptism,
which we are sure was a Common and Customary Rite in the time of Tertullian and
St. Cyprian, the latter whereof says often enough, that being Regenerated, that
is, Baptized, they were Signed with the Sign of Christ; that they were Signed
on their Foreheads, who were thought worthy to be admitted into the fellowship
of our Lords Religion. Cypr. adv. Demetr. p. 203. de Unit. Eccl. p. 185. vid.
de Laps. p. 169. Bas. de Spir. S. c. 27. Tert. de Coron. mil. c. 3.
And St. Basil plainly puts it amongst those Ancient Customs of the Church,
which had been derived from the Apostles: Nay, Tertullian assures us, that they
used it in the most common Actions of Life; that upon every motion, at their
going out, and coming in, at their going to Bath, or to Bed, or to Meals, or
whatever their Occasions called them to, they were wont to make the Sign of the
Cross on their Foreheads; and therefore it is no wonder, that they should never
omit it in the most Solemn Act of their being initiated into the Christian
Faith. And now let our Dissenting-Brethren seriously reflect, whether the
Constant and Uniform Practice of the Church in all times, be not a mighty
Testimony against their Separating from us, upon the account of those things,
which were used in the wisest, best and happiest Ages of the Gospel; and when
their Separation upon this account, can in point of Example, pretend not to
much more then a Hundred Years Countenance and Authority to Support and Shelter
it. And yet it has not that neither; for I could easily show, that most, if not
all, the Usages of our Church, See Durels view of the Government and public
worship of God, 1662.
are either practiced in Foreign Churches, or at least, allowed of by the most
Learned and Eminent Divines of the Reformation, whose Testimonies, to this
purpose, are particularly enumerated, and ranked under their proper Heads, by
Mr. Sprint, in his p. 123, 124, ctc.
Cassander Anglicanus, which they that are curious may Consult.

VI.
Sixthly, We beg that those, who by their Conformity have declared, that they
can close with our Communion, would still continue in the Communion of our
Church. This is a Request so reasonable, that I hope it cannot fairly be
denied. Whatever Dissatisfactions others may alledg, to keep them at a distance
from us, these Men can have nothing to pretend, having actually showed that
they can do it. For I am not willing to think, that herein such Men acted
against their Consciences, or did it merely to secure a gainful Office, or a
place of Trust, or to escape the Lash and Penalty of the Law. These are Ends so
very Vile and Sordid, so Horrible a prostitution of the Holy Sacrament, the
most Venerable Mystery of our Religion, so deliberate a way of Sinning, even in
the most Solemn Acts of Worship, that I can hardly suspect any should be guilty
of it, but Men of Profligate and Atheistical Minds, who have put off all Sense
of God, and Banished all Reverence of Religion. I would fain believe, that when
any of our Brethren receive the Sacrament with us, they are fully persuaded of
the lawfulness of it, and that the Principle that brings them thither, is the
Conscience of their Duty. But then I know not how to Answer it, why the same
Principle that brings them thither at one time, should not bring them also at
another, and that we should never have their company at that Solemn and Sacred
Ordinance, but when the fear of some Temporal Punishment, or the prospect of
some Secular Advantage prompts them to it. It Is commonly blamed in those of the
Romish Church, that they can dispense with Oaths, and receive Sacraments to
serve a turn, and to advance the Interest of their Cause: But God forbid, that
so heavy a Charge should ever lie at the Doors of Protestants, and especially
those, who would be thought most to abhor Popish Practices, and who would take
it ill to be accounted not to make as much, if not more, Conscience of their
ways then other Men. Now I beseech our Dissenting, or rather Inconstant
Brethren, to reason a little; if our Communion be sinful, why did they enter
into it? if it be lawful, why do they forsake it? is it not that, which the
Commands of Authority have tied upon us, and whose Commands we are bound to
submit to, not only for Wrath, but for Conscience sake? Are not the Peace and
Unity of the Church, things, that ought greatly to sway with all Sober, Humble,
and Considering Christians? Does not the Apostle say, that if it be possible,
and as much as in us lies, we are to live Peaceably with all Men? And shall
Peace be broken only in the Church, where it ought to be kept most entire? And
that by those, who acknowledge it to be possible, and within their power? Are
they satisfied in their Consciences, to join in Communion with us, and will
they not do it for the sake of the Church of God? Or will they refuse to do
what is lawful, and as the Case stands necessary, in order to Peace, only
because Authority Commands it, and has made it their Duty? Oh Sirs, I beseech
you by all that is Dear and Sacred, to assist and help us, and not strengthen
the Hands of those, who by a Causeless and Unjustifiable Separation* endeavor
to rend and destroy the best Church in thr whole Christian World.

VII.
Seventhly, We beg of them that they would Consider, what Sad and Deplorable
Mischiefs have ensued, upon bearing down the Constitution of the Church of
England. This is matter of Fact, and whereof many yet alive were made sensible
by Woeful Experience. Omitting what may seem of a little more remote
Consideration, the Blood and Treasure, the Spoils and Ravages of the late War,
the Enslaving and Oppressing all Ranks of Men, and what is above all, the
Murder of an excellent and incomparable Prince; I shall instance in a few
particulars, which were the more immediate Effects of it,

And First, No sooner was the Church of England thrown down, but what Monstrous
Swarms of Errors and Heresies broke in upon us, both for Number, and Impiety,
beyond whatever had been heard of in the Church of God: And here I need go no
further, then the sad Account, which Mr. Edwards has given us in the several
parts of his Gangraena. He was an Eminent Minister of the Presbyterian Party,
One, who as he tells the Parliament, Epist. Dedicat. to Gangraen. print. 1646.
had out of Choice and Judgment, from the very beginning, Embarked himself,
with Wife, Children and Estate, and all that was dear to him, in the same Ship
with them, to sink and perish, or to come safe to Land with them, and that in
the most doubtful and difficult Times, not only in the beginning of the War and
Troubles, in a Malignant place among Courtiers, where he had Pleaded their
Cause, Justified their Wars, and Satisfied many that Scrupled, but when their
Affairs were at lowest, had been most Zealous for them, Preaching, Praying,
stirring up the People to stand for them, and had both gone out in Person, and
lent Money to them: He held Correspondence with considerable Persons in all
parts of the Nation, and was careful to have the best Intelligence from all
Quarters, and professes to lay down the Opinions and Errors which he mentions
in terminis, and in their own Words and Phrases, Syllabically, and as near as
might be. Now amongst infinite other things, he tells us 'twas then commonly
maintaind, Catal. and discov. of Errors. p. 15. etc. vid. 2d. Part. p. 5. 22.
24, 27, 105: 110. fresh discov. p. 115. 162. and alibi passim.
That the Scriptures cannot be said to be the Word of God, and are no more to be
Credited, then the Writings of Men, being not a Divine, but Humane Tradition;
that God has a Hand in, and is the Author of the Sinfulness of his People, not
of the Actions alone, but of the very Pravity which is in them; that all Lies
come forth out of his Mouth, that the Prince of the Air that Rules in the
Children of Disobedience is God; that in the Unity of the Godhead there is not
a Trinity of Persons, but that it is a Popish Tradition; that the Doctrine of
Repentance is a Soul-destroying Doctrine, and that Children are not bound to
Obey their Parents at all, if they be Ungodly; that the Soul of Man is Mortal,
as the Soul of a Beast; that there is no Resurrection at all of the Bodies of
Men, nor Heaven nor Hell after this Life. I instance only in these as a Taste,
not that they are all, or the Hundred part, no nor the worst, there being other
Blasphemies and Impieties, which my Pen trembles to Relate.

Secondly, The Liturgy of our Church being discharged and thrown out, and every
one left to his own liberty, it is scarce possible to believe, what wild and
prodigious Extravagancies were upon all occasions used in Holy things, not in
Preaching only, but especially in Prayer, the most immediate Act of Worship and
Address to God: It is an affront to the Majesty of Religious Worship, that
there should be any thing in it Childish and Trivial, Absurd and Frivosous,
that its Sacred Mysteries should be exposed to Contempt and Scandal by that
Levity and Distraction, that Heat and Boldness, those Weaknesses and
Indiscretions, those Loose, Raw, and Incongruous Effusions, which in most
Congregations of those Times, did too commonly attend it: But the things I
intend to Instance in, are of a far worse color and complexion; for whose Ears
would it not make to tingle, to hear Men in the Pulpit telling God, That View
of the late troubles in Eng. cap. 43. p. 567, etc. See also Edwards Gang. 3d.
Part, a little before
if he did not finish the good Work which he had begun in the Reformation of
the Church, he would show himself to be the God of Confusion, and such a One,
as by cunning Stratagems had contrived the Destruction of his own Children;
That God would Bless the King, and Mollify his hard Heart, that delights in
Blood, for that he was fallen from Faith in God, and become an Enemy to his
Church; let thine Hand, we pray thee, O Lord, our God, be upon him, and upon
his Fathers p. 17.
House, but not upon thy People, that they should be Plagued: O God, O God,
many are the Hands lift up against us, but there is one God; it is thou thy
self, O Father, who do us more Mischief, then they all: We know, O Lord, that
Abraham made a Covenant, Moses and David made a Covenant, and our Savior made
a Covenant, but thy Parliaments Covenant is the greatest of all Covenants. I
presume, the Devout and Serious Reader desires no more of such intolerably
Profane and Lewd Stuff as this is; They that are curious of more, may find it,
besides others, in The short Uiew of the late Troubles in England, where Times,
Places and Persons, are particularly named.

Thirdly, The Fences of Order and Discipline in the Church of England being
broken down, what a horrid Inundation of all manner of Vice and Wickedness did
immediately overflow the Land? The Assembly at Westminster Petitioned the
Parliament, July 19. 1644.
That some Severe Course might be taken against Fornication, Adultery and
Incest, which, say they, do greatly abound, especially of late, by reason of
Impunity. And Mr. Edwards speaking of the whole Tribe of Sectaries, tells us,
Further discov. p. 187. 3d. Part p. 185, etc.
He was confident, that for this many Hundred Years, there had not been a Party
that has pretended to so much Holiness, Strictness, power of Godliness,
tenderness of Conscience, above all other Men, as this Party has done, that
has been guilty of so great Sins, horrible Wickedness, provoking Abominations,
as they are; with much more, both there and elsewhere, to the same purpose, and
the Charge very often made good by particular Instances. So that indeed Hell
seemed to have broke loose, and to have Invaded all Quarters, in despite of
their Covenant, and all the little Schemes of their so much Magnified
Reformation: The Covenant Cries (God grant not against you) for Reformation of
the Kingdom, the Extirpation of Heresies, Schisms, Profaneness, etc. and these
Impieties abound, as if we had taken a Covenant to maintain them; and since it
was taken, these Sins which we have Covenanted against, have more abounded,
then in the space of Ten Times so many Years before, as Mr. Jenkin tells the
Lords in Parliament. Fast Sermon, Jan. 27. 1646. p. 29.
And that all that I have mentioned (which yet is infinitely short of what might
be said) was the effect of the Ruin of the Church of England, and let in by the
Method they took for Reformation, we have from their own confessions. Cat. and
discov. p. 73. 74, 76.
We, says Mr. Edwards, in these Four last Years, have over-passed the Deeds of
the Prelates, and justified the Bishops, in whose time never so many, nor so
great Errors were heard of, much less such Blasphemies or Confusions; we have
worse things among us, then ever were in all the Bishops Days; more corrupt
Doctrines and unheard of Practices, then in Eighty Years before. -- I am
persuaded, if Seven Years ago, the Bishops and their Chaplains had but
Preached, Printed, Licensed, dispersed up and down in City and Country openly,
a Quarter of these Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, which have been all these
ways vented by the Sectaries, the People would have risen up, and stoned them,
and pulled down their Houses, and forced them to forbear such Doctrines: O how
is the Seen changed within these few Years! and not long after, he tells us,
that These are Risen, Increased, Reign and Prevail, so far under a Parliament
Sitting, not under the Bishops, Corrupt-Clergy, Court-party, but under a
Parliament. And in his Epistle to the Lords and Commons, before the first part
of his Gangraena, he tells them, That the Errors, Heresies, Blaspemies and
Practices, of the Sectaries of this Time, had been Broached and Acted within
these Four last Years in England, and that in your Quarters, and in the places
under your Government and Power, for which I tremble to think, least the whole
Kingdom should be in Gods Black Bill; that together with their Reformation,
come in a Deformation, and worse things were come upon them, then ever they had
before: they had put down the Book of Common Prayer, but there were many
amongst them, that had put down the Scriptures, flighting, yea, Blaspheming
them: he tells them, they had cast out the Bishops, and their Officers, and
they had many that had cast down to the ground all Ministers in all the
Reformed Churches; they had cast out Ceremonies in the Sacraments, and they had
many that had cast out the Sacraments themselves; with many more sad complaints
which he there makes. To sum up all in the words of my Author; Vbi Supra, p. 73.
In this Catalogue the Reader may see great Errors, and yet may turn himself
again and behold greater, namely damnable Heresies, and yet turn himself again
and read Horrid Blasphemies; and a third time, and read Horrible Disorders,
Confusions, strange and unheard of Practices, not only against the Light of
Scripture, but Nature, as in Women's Preaching, in Stealing away Men's Wives
and Children from Husbands and Parents, in Baptizing Women Naked, in the
Presence and Sight of Men, etc. And thus we see by what means it was, that the
Nation came to be Pestred with Opinions and Practices, Impious beyond the
Example of Former Ages, and such as were not once named among the Gentiles, to
the Infinite Prejudice and dishonor both of our Religion and our Nation. A
Letter from a Noble Venetian to Card. Barbarino, translated and Printed 1648.
p. 19.
It being the Observation which an Ingenious Forreigner, who resided at London
in those times, made upon this occasion; one of the Fruits, says He, of this
Blessed Parliament, and of these two Sectaries [Presbyterians and Independents]
is, that they have made more Jews and Atheists, then I think there is in all
Europe besides.

I doubt not but that the greatest part of our Dissenters do from their Souls
Detest, the Heresies, Blasphemies, and Wickednesses that have been mentioned;
but then the Consideration ought to oblige them to double their diligence to
prevent the like dismal Effects for the time to come, and not to open the Gap
again, at which they must necessarily flow in upon us. By what has been done
they may see, what a Blessed Reformation they may expect by the Ruin of this
Church; for the thing that has been, is that which shall be; the same causes
set on foot by the same Principles will Eternally produce the same Effects; and
though Men at first may mean never so well, yet Temptations will insensibly
grow upon them, and Accidents happen, which in the Progress will carry them
Infinitely beyond the Line of their first Intentions, and engage them in
Courses, out of which, when they come to discern their Error, it may be too
late for them to Retire. In the beginning of the long Parliament, I make no
question, but the far greatest part of them met together with very honest and
good Intentions, and designed no more then to Correct some little
Irregularities, which they apprehended to be in Church or State: But we see
how these very Persons were carried from one passage to another, and in time
transported to those very things which at first they had so vehemently
protested and declared against, till at length Horrid Enormities came to be
acted by and under them, which no age can Parallel: which ought to be a
Sufficient Caution to all, how they shake the least Stone, that belongs to the
Foundation, least by picking out one after another, the whole House tumble
about their Ears, when it is beyond their own Power to support it. I shall shut
up this Head with a brief Recapitulation of some of those Inferences, which Mr.
Edwards makes from the State of those Loose and Licentious times, we have been
speaking of, and then leave the Reader to judge, whether they be not as
Applicable to the present Circumstances, under which we are: He infers thus,
First, we may hence see how dangerous it is to despise and let alone a small
Party. Cat. and Discov. Part 3d. p. 52. 53. 57. 70. Further Discov. p. 195. 203.
Secondly, That it is more then time fully and Effectually to settle the
Government and Discipline of the Church; Thirdly, What the Mischief, Evil, and
Danger of a Toleration, and pretended Liberty of Conscience would be to this
Kingdom, and what it would Prove and Produce. Fourthly, That it Sufficiently
Justifies in the Sight of the World, those Ministers and People who are Zealous
for settling Religion, and cry out for Government, who Preach, Petition, speak
often one to another of these things. Fifthly, what a great Evil and Sin
Separation is from the Communion of the Reformed Churches, and how highly
displeasing to God for Men to make a Rent and Schism in the Church of God.
Sixthly, That all such who have been deceived and drawn away, under pretense of
greater Purity, Holiness, etc. and have any Fear and Awe of God and his Word,
be Exhorted to leave and forsake them, and return to the Public Assemblies and
Communion of this and other Reformed Churches. And God grant, we may hearken to
this Counsel, and may seriously lay these things to heart.

VIII.
Eighthly, We desire it may be considered, what plain and apparent Advantages
Separation gives to the Common Enemy of the Protestant Religion in these
Nations: The Church of England is notoriously known to have been the most
strong and standing Bulwark of Protistancy, ever since the Reformation; for
being Founded on Scripture-grounds, and the Practice of True, Genuine,
Primitive Antiquity, and having been reformed, by the most wise, regular, and
justifiable Methods; it stands like a Rock impregnable against all the
Assaults, which the Church of Rome makes upon it. This has engaged them to
Plant all their Batteries to beat it down, as being the only Church
considerable enough to stand in their way: and when not able to effect it by
any other Arts, they have betaken themselves to the old Artifice of Ruining us,
by dividing us. In Order hereunto they have upon all occasions strenuously
promoted the Separation, mixed themselves with our Dissenters, put on every
shape, that they might the better follow the Common outcry against our Church,
as Popish and Antichristian, spurring on the People to call for a more pure and
spiritual way of Worship, and to Clamor for Liberty and Toleration, as wherein
they well knew they themselves were like to have the greatest share; And that
having subverted all Order, and beaten People out of all sober Principles, they
foresaw they must be necessitated at last to center in the Communion of the
Romish Church. This was a Trade they began betimes, almost in the very Infancy
of the Reformation. Witness the Story of Faithful Commin, a Dominican Friar,
who passed under the notion of a Zealous Puritan, and was much admired and
followed by the People for his seeming Piety, spiritual Gifts, and Zeal against
Popery. But being apprehended Anno. 1567. and accused for an Impostor, was
examined at large before the Queen and her Council, and put under Bail: when
finding the Climat was like to be too hot for him, and having by a cheat
brought off his Bail, and told his deluded followers, that he was acquitted by
her Majesty and the Council, and warned of God to go beyond the Seas, to
instruct the Protestants there, and that he would come again; and having
assured them that Spiritual Prayer was the chief Testimony of a true
Protestant, and that the set Form of Prayer in England was but the Mass
Translated, and having with abundance of extempore-Prayers and Tears squeezed
out of them a Collection of a Hundred and Thirty Pounds for his Journey,
besides private Gifts; away he goes for Rome, and acquaints Pope Pius Quintus
with what he had done, and by what Methods, and how odious he had made the
Church of England to the Puritans, and that it would be a stumbling block to
that Church while it was a Church. Upon which the Pope commended and rewarded
him with Two Thousand Ducates for his good Service. All which particulars are
more fully made out from Secretary Cecil's Papers, whose Memorials were lately
brought to light. Foxes and Firebrands Print. 1680. p. 7. etc.
Witness also that other passage concerning Thomas Heath a Jesuit, who much
about the same time was sent over into England to Act the same Part, which he
did, not only by Preaching, but by crying up Spiritual Prayers, and running
down all set Forms, as being without any warrant from Scripture, by Laboring
to refine the Protestants, as he called it, and to take off all smacks of
Ceremonies, that in the least tended to the Romish Faith. For all which he was
mightily flocked after, and admired every day more and more. But Anno. 1568. he
was discovered by a Letter, that casually dropped out of his Pocket as he was
Preaching in the Pulpit at Rochester, importing that the Counsel of their
Fraternity had sent him Collections, and Instructions for carrying on the Work,
and that this way of dividing Protestants was the only way for the recalling
Men back again to the Mother Church. Hereupon he was examined by the Bishop of
Rochester, and did not much deny the main of the charge, and upon the searching
of his Lodgings, there were found several Books fitted for his purpose, as
against Infant Baptism, etc. and in one of his Books, a License from the
Fraternity of the Jesuits, and a Bull of Pius Quintus, giving him leave to
preach what Doctrine that Society pleased, for the dividing of the English
Protestants, or as he called them, Heretics; The issue was, that Heath was
close Imprisoned, set in the Pillory at the High Cross; his Ears cut off, his
Nose slit, his Forehead branded, and he condemned to perpetual Imprisonment,
but soon after he dyed suddenly, being suspected to have poisoned himself: The
whole account hereof being published from the Authentic Register of the Church
of Rochester.

Polit. l. 2. c. 18. Sect. 6.
The same Course we need not doubt, the Papists held on in the succeeding times,
these being some of the main Directions, which Contzen the Jesuit gives for the
reducing Popery into a Country, that it be done under pretense of ease to
tender Consciences, and that Liberty be granted to that end, and that as much
use be made of the division of Enemies, as of the agreement of Friends. What a
stroke they had in fomenting the differences and distractions, that brought on
the late Civil Wars, and how active they were both in the Counsels and
Proceedings of the Parliament Party, the World needs not to be told at this
time of day; great numbers of them, both Comman dersand others, serving in
their Armies, great industry was used to corrupt the Loyalty and Affection of
those of that Religion, and private promises and undertakings were made to
them, that if they would assist them against the King, all the Laws made in
their prejudice should be Repealed; as the late King of blessed Memory tells
the World in one of his public Declarations, after the Victory at Edghil;
Adding, that tho some few of Eminent Abilities for Command and Conduct, and of
moderate and unfactious dispositions were employed in his Service; October. 23.
1642. vid. Collect. of the Kings works. Part. 2. fol. 213. L'Historie des
troubles, etc. p. 165. see the short view of the late troubles in England, c.
43. p. 564.
yet, we are confident, that a far greater Number of that Religion, is in the
Army of the Rebels, than in our own. And the King it seems had good reason to
say so. For as de Salmonet, a Secular Priest; who wrote in French a History of
our late Civil Wars, informs us, in that very Fight at Edghil, besides two
Companies of Walloons, and other Roman Catholics that served there, that (says
he) which did most surprise every Body was, that several Popish Priests were
found amongst the Dead that were slain on the Parliament side. So plain is it,
that they served in their Armies, were present at their Councils, and upon all
occasions mixed with their Parties, that they might widen the Breach beyond all
recovery. Thus it was then. See Dr. Stillingfleets Preface to the
imreasonableness of Separation. p. 20. etc.
And about the time of the King's coming in, a Letter of Advice was written by
Seignior Ballarini concerning the best way of Managing the Popish Interest in
England, upon his Majesty's Restoration; wherein it was advised, especially to
obstruct the Settlement of the fundamental constitutions of the Kingdom, to set
up the prosperous way of fears and jealousies of the King and Bishops, to
asperse the Bishops and Ministers of the Church of England, and to represent
its Doctrine and Worship as coming too near to the Church of Rome, to second
the Factious in promoting an Indulgence, and to endeavor, that the Trade and
Treasure of the Nation might be engrossed between themselves, and other
discontented Parties. And Mr. Coleman himself owned it at his Condemnation,
that perhaps he thought, that Popery might come in, if Liberty of Conscience
had been granted. Coleman Trial, p. 101. Def. of his Answ. to the Admonit. p.
349.
And this is that, which wise Archbishop Whitgift long ago foresaw would come
to pass, when he told the Dissenters of those Days, I am persuaded that
Antichrist works effectually at this Day, by your Stirs and Contentions,
whereby he has, and will more prevail against this Church of England, then by
any other means whatsoever. And now upon the whole matter, I desire our
Dissenting Brethren to consider, whether the orderly and truly Primitive
Constitution of the Church of England, or Innovation, Schism and Separation, be
the likelier way to keep out Popery; and do therefore Conjure them, by all the
Kindness which they pretend for the Protestant Religion, heartily to join in
Communion with us, as which I believe, humanely speaking, to be, if not the
only, at least the only safe and durable means of shutting Popery for ever out
of Doors.

IX.
Ninthly, We desire of them, that if neither these nor any other Advices and
Considerations can prevail with them, they would at least cease to Reproach the
Government, for Reviving the Execution of the Laws, about these matters? I know
it is very natural to Men to complain, when any thing pinches them, but then
they ought to be so just, as to consider, whose fault it is that has brought it
upon them. The Laws in this case were framed with great Advice, and upon dear
bought Experience, and every Nation in the World thinks it self obliged, when
no other ways will do it, by Penalties to secure the Public Peace, Safety and
Tranquillity of the State, though it may sometimes press hard in some particular
Cases, when Men through Fancy, Humor, Mistake or Design, (especially about
little, and as themselves confess, indifferent matters,) shall endanger the
Public Welfare, and by an ill Example expose the Reverence and Majesty of the
Laws. And yet notwithstanding all this, and a great deal more that might be
said, we find them at every turn charging the Government, for using them
Cruelly, and with the hardest Measure, censuring their Superiors, and speaking
Evil of Dignities; and this not only the Cry of the mean and common Sort, but
of their chiefest Leaders, even to this Hour* It being no hard matter (but that
I love not to exasperate) to instance in several things, that are no very good
Arguments of that Obedient Patience, which some of them so much pretend to. It
is far from my temper to delight in Cruelty, much more to plead for Severity to
be used toward Dissenting Brethren, and therefore should have said nothing in
this Argument, were it not necessary to Vindicate the Government, which upon
these occasions, I have so often heard Blamed and Censured. I would these
Persons who complain so much, would consider a while, how their Predecessors
were dealt with in the times of the good Queen Elizabeth; which will appear,
either from the Laws then made, or from the Proceedings then had against them.
The Laws then made against them, were chiefly these; In the First of the Queen,
An Act for the Uniformity of Common Prayer, etc. wherein, among other Clauses
and Penalties, it is provided, That if any Person, shall in any Plays, Songs,
Rhimes, or by other open Words, declare or speak any thing in the derogation,
depraving, or despising the Book of Common Prayer, or any thing therein
contained, being thereof lawfully convicted, he shall forfeit for the first
Offense an Hundred, for the second Four Hundred Marks, for the Third, all his
goods and chattels, and shall suffer Imprisonment during Life. A Clause, which
had it been kept up in its due Life and Power, our Liturgy and Divine Offices,
had been Treated with much more Respect and Reverence, then I am sure they have
met with, especially of late. In Her Fifth Year, an Act was passed for the due
Execution of the Writ de excommunicato capiendo; amongst others, particularly
Levelled against such as refuse to receive the Holy Communion, or to come to
Divine Service, as now commonly used in the Church of England, with Severe
Penalties upon those, that shall not yield up themselves to the same Writ. Anno
13. passed an Act of general Pardon, but it was with an Exception of all those,
that had committed any Offense against the Act for the Uniformity of
Common Prayer, or were Publishers of Seditious Books, or Disturbers of Divine
Service. Anno 23. By an Act to retain the Queen's Majesty's Subjects in their
due Obedience, it is provided, That every Person above the Age of Sixteen
years, which shall not repair to some Church or usual place of Common Prayer,
but forbear the same by the space of a Month, shall for every such Month
forfeit Twenty Pound: Which Act was again Confirmed and Ratified by another in
the 29th Year of Her Reign, with many Clauses and Provisions for the better
Execution of it. And by the Act of the 35th of Her Reign, If any Person so
forbearing, shall willingly join in, or be present at any Assemblies,
Conventicles and Meetings, under color or pretense of any Exercise of
Religion, contrary to the Laws of the Realm, such Person being lawfully
Convicted, shall be Imprisoned without Bail or Mainprize, until he Conform, and
if he do not that within Three Months, he shall be obliged to Abjure the Realm,
and if refusing to Abjure, or returning without License, he shall be Adjudged a
Fellon, and Suffer as in case of Felony, without benefit of Clergy.

Such were Her Laws, and such also were Her Proceedings, against those who
faultered in their Conformity, or began to Innovate in the Discipline of the
Church; and these Proceedings as quick and smart, as any can be said to be
against the Dissenters of this time. Do they complain of their Ministers being
Silenced now? so they were then, being deprived of their Benifices and
Church-Preferments, for their Inconformity. Thus Sampson was turned out of his
Deanery of Christ-Church, for refusing to Conform to the Orders and Ceremonies
of the Church. Cartwright, the very Head of them, Expelled the College, and
deprived of the Lady Margarets Lecture. Travers, turned out from Preaching at
the Temple; with many more, Suspended from the Ministry by the Queens
Authority, and the approbation of the Bishops; for not Subscribing to some new
Rites and Ceremonies imposed upon them, as appears from Beza's Letter Bez.
Epist. 8.
to Bishop Grindal, Anno 1566. Are any in Prison? so they were then, Benson,
Button, Hallingham, Cartwright, Knewstubbs, and many others; some in the
Marshalsey, others in the White-Lion; some in the Gatehouse, others in the
Counter, or in the Clinke, or in Bridewel, or in Newgate: Poor Men miserably
handled with Revilings, Deprivations, Imprisonments, Banishments; if we may
believe what themselves tell us, both in the First and Second Admonition. And
what is yet far beyond any thing, which God be thanked, our Dissenters can
pretend to complain of, several of them lost their Lives; Barrow and Greenwood
were Executed for their Scandalous and Seditious Writings; Penry and Vdall
Indicted and Arraigned, for Defaming the Queens Government in a Scandalous
Book, Written against the supposed Governors, as they called them, of the
Church of England; for which they were both Cast and Condemned, to be Executed
as Fellons, but Archbishop Whitgift interposing, they were Reprieved, and
Vdall suffered to Die, as he did soon after, in his Bed. The truth is, the wise
and wary Queen beheld. Schism growing on apace, and needed not to be told what
ill Influence it was like to have, both upon Church, and State, and therefore
Resolved to carry a Straight Hand, as well over Puritanism on the one side, as
Popery on the other; and in order hereunto, Sir G. Paul Life of A. B. Whitgift,
Numb. 53. p. 29.
She charged Archbishop Whitgift to be Vigilant and Careful, to Reduce
Ministers by their Subscription and Conformity to the settled Orders and
Government, Adding, That she would have the Discipline of the Church of England
formerly Established, of all Men duly to be Observed, without alteration of the
least Ceremony. But nothing more fully discovers her Judgment and Resolution in
this matter, then what She gave in Command to the Lord-Keeper-Puckering, to
tell the Parliament: Dr. Pierce New Discov. against Mr. Baxt. 1659. Chapter 5.
Sect. 12. p. 109.
part of his Speech (Transcribed and Published some Years since, from the
Original Copy, under his own Hand Writeing, by an Eminent Divine of this
Church,) was as follows, -- And especially, you are Commanded by Her Majesty
to take heed, that no Ear be given, or Time afforded, to the wearisome
Solicitations of those, that commonly be called Puritanes, wherewithal the
late Parliaments have been exceedingly Importuned. Which sort of Men, whilst in
the giddiness of their Spirits, they labor and strive to advance a new
Eldership, they do nothing else but disturb the good repose of the Church and
Commonwealth: which is as well grounded for the Body of Religion it self, and
as well guided for the Discipline, as any Realm that professes the Truth. And
the same thing is already made good to the World, by many of the Writings of
Learned and Godly Men, neither Answered, nor Answerable, by any of these new
fangled Refiners. And as the present case stands, it may be doubted, whether
they, or the Jesuits, do offer more danger, or be more speedily to be
repressed. For albeit the Jesuits do impoison the Hearts of Her Majesty's
Subjects, under a pretext of Conscience, to withdraw them from their Obedience
due to Her Majesty, yet do they the same, but closely, and only in privy
Corners, but these Men do, both Publish in their Printed Books, and, Teach in
all their Conventicles sundry Opinions, not only dangerous to the wellsetled
Estate and Policy of the Realm, but also much derogatory to Her Sacred Majesty,
and Her Crown, as well by, etc. In all which things (however in many other
points, they pretend to be at War with the Popish Jesuits, yet) by the
Separation of themselves from the Unity of their Fellow Subjects, and by
abusing the Sacred Authority and Majesty of their Prince, they do both join and
concur with the Jesuits in opening the Door, and preparing the way to the
Spanish Invasion, that is Threatened against the Realm. Thus far he, by Her
Majesty's most Royal Pleasure, and Wise Direction, as he there speaks. To which
let me Add, That the Speech took such effect, that the Parliament passed the
Act of 35th of Eliz. the Severest Act against Dissenters in the whole Body of
our Laws. And indeed, so Jealous was the Queen of the least appearances of
Innovation, that Archbishop Grindall, only for giving too much encouragement
to Prophesyings (which were beheld as likely to prove Nurseries of Schism and
Faction, as indeed they did) fell under Her Displeasure, and was Sequestered
from his Archiepiscopal Jurisdiction, and though great intercession was made in
his behalf, yet could he never be restored to his Dying Day.

This was the State of things then, and yet these were the Proceedings of those
Days, which our Dissenters at another time, are wont so much to Magnify and
Extol; nothing of late having been so much in their Mouth, as the Wisdom and
Prudence, the Care and Diligence, the Zeal and Piety of Good Queen Elizabeth. I
speak not this to cast any reflection upon the Memory of that incomparable
Princess, whom we have all the reason in the World to own to have been the
Glorious Instrument of Perfecting and Settling the Reformation in this Kingdom;
and whose Memory will be dear and precious, as long as the Protestant Name has
a Being in England. But I only take notice, how extremely partial People are,
and how apt to be prejudiced against the present Government under which they
live, and to be always Crying out, That the former Days were better then these?
whereas supposing their Circumstances were really harder then they are, and
harder then those of the Puritans in former times, yet they have no reason to
accuse the Government of Rigor and Severity toward them, if Three things be
farther taken into Consideration,

First, That the Dissenters of old, especially the first Race of them, were
generally much more Modest and Peaceable then those of later times, more
Conformable to the Laws, less Turbulent and Offensive to the Government: when
they could not Conform as Ministers, they yet did as private Christians, and
quietly acquiesced in their Suspension, or Deprivation, and as one truly says
of them, When they could not be Active without Sinning, [as they judged] they
could be Passive without Murmuring. They meddled not with things without their
Line, nor mixed themselves with matters of State; See a Book called, The
Protestation of the Kings Supremacy. 1605. Numb. 8, 9, 11.
Declared, That Kings have power by the Law of God, to make such Ecclesiastical
Laws as tend to the good Ordering of the Churches in their Dominions, that the
Churches ought not to be Disobedient to any of their Laws, that if any thing
were Commanded contrary to the Word, they ought not to resist the King
therein, but peaceably to forbear Disobedience, and sue to him for Grace and
Mercy, and where that cannot be obtained, meekly to submit themselves to the
punishment. They generally came to Church, and did not run into Separate
Congregations, nay, writ stoutly and smartly against those who began then to
attempt a Separation. But whether our Modern Dissenters have observed the same
Course, and be of this Spirit and Temper, let the World judge, yea, let
themselves be Judges in the Case.

Secondly, Sad Experience of the Evil Consequences of Schism and Separation,
have made it necessary for the Government to take all just and lawful ways, for
preventing the like for the time to come. Men first began to be dissatisfied
with the Rites and Orders of the Church, then discontented that they were not
presently gratified with an Alteration, Discontent brought on Sedition,
Sedition Rebellion, and Rebellion the Ruin of Church and State. And what
wonder, if the Laws bear a little hard there, where there are the same
appearances, and where there seem to be the same Tendencies and Inclinations to
the same Dismal State of things? Whoever considers by what ways the most
flourishing Kingdom in the World, and the best Church that ever was since* the
Primitive times, were miserably Harrassed and Destroyed, cannot think, that
those who sit at the Helm, should be content to have them Ruined again by the
same means; especially, after the King, for several Years together, has in vain
tried, by all the Methods of Favor and Indulgence, to win upon them.

Thirdly, Let those who now complain so much, consider, how little Favor
themselves showed to others when they were in Power, how the Loyal and
Episcopal Party were Plundered, Sequestered, Decimated, Dungeoned, Starved, and
often stunk to Death: What Oaths and Covenants were Rigorously Imposed upon
them; what Restraints laid upon their Liberties, both Civil and Ecclesiastical;
though all this while they had Law and Right standing for them. In the Year
1645, an Ordinance of Parliament was Published, An Ordinance for putting in
Execution the Directory. August 11. 1645.
That if any Person hereafter shall at any time use or cause to be used the
Book of Common Prayer in any Church or Public place of Worship, or in any
private place or Family within the Kingdom, every Person so offending should
for the first Offense pay the sum of five, for the second ten pounds, and for
the third, should suffer one whole Years Imprisonment, without Bail or
Mainprize. This one would think was very hard, but there is something harder
yet behind: For Cromwell being got into the Throne, Published a Declaration, at
that time Equivalent to a Law, 24 November, 1655.
That no Person who had been sequestered for delinquency, or had been in Arms
against the parliament, or adhered unto, or had aberted or assisted the Forces
raised against them, should keep in their Houses or Families, as Chaplains or
Schoolmasters for the Education of their Children, any sequestered or ejected
Minister, Fellow of a college or Schoolmaster, nor permit any of their children
to be taught by such, upon pain of being proceeded against as was directed, and
that no person who had been sequestered or ejected for delinquency or scandal,
shall hereafter keep any School, either public or private, nor preach in any
public place, or at any private Meeting of any other persons then those of his
own Family, nor Administer Baptism, or the Lords Supper, or Marry any persons,
or use the Book of Common Prayer or the Forms of Prayer therein contained, upon
pain that every Person so Offending in any of the premises, shall be proceeded
against as by the said Order is provided and directed. There needs no Comment
upon these Proceedings, they do not only Whisper, but speak aloud to the
present Generation of Dissenters, to tell them how little reason they have to
complain.

X.
Lastly, We beg of them, that before they pull down any further Trouble or
Suffering upon themselves, they would Consider, Whether the Cause they engage
in, be such, as will bear them out with Comfort before God another Day. It Is
not Suffering for refusing to comply with the External Circumstances of our
Religion, that can be said to be a Persecution for Righteousness sake, it not
being the Suffering, but the Cause that makes the Martyr. Then I Suffer as a
Christian, when the Honor of Christ, or something that offers Violence to my
Religion, and Christianity is concerned in it, when I Suffer for that which I
cannot avoid, without disowning my self to be a Christian, and making Shipwreck
of Faith and a good Conscience. But where the Case is not evidently this, a Man
may draw Miseries upon himself, and yet not Suffer as a Christian, because it
may proceed from Humor, or Interest, or the Conduct of a misinformed Judgment,
mistaking things for what they are not: Men very often place Religion in doing,
or not doing, what is no part of it, and then think they may safely Suffer upon
that account, when there is more, it may be, of Passion or Prejudice, of Fancy
or Opinion, of Humor or Mistake, then of the real Concerns of Piety or
Religion. I am very sure, neither the Ancient Christians, would have passed
through the Fiery-Tryal every Day, nor the Holy Martyrs in Queen Mary's Days,
have thought themselves obliged to Forfeit their Estates, much less their
Lives, had no more been required of them then there is of us, to come to
Church, or to Kneel at the Sacrament; but would rather have Blessed God, and
thankfully owned the Favor of the Governors, under which they lived, might
they have enjoyed both upon the same Terms as we do. In Cases that only concern
indifferent things, and mere Circumstances of Worship, stiffly and obstinately
to stand out, is, rather for a Man to be a Martyr to his own Humor and
Opinion, then to the Cause of Christ. Whether this be not the Case of our
Dissenting-Bretren, they themselves might quickly see, would they but lay aside
the unreasonableness of their Prejudices, and lay no more stress upon things,
then they ought to bear. Let us hear what Mr. Baxter, in a late Book, says to
this matter, Obed. Patience p. 79.
I am One that have been first in all the Storms that have befallen the
Ministry, these Twenty Years past, (to look no farther back,) and yet my
Conscience commands me to say, as I have often done, that many through mistake,
I am persuaded, now Suffer as Evildoers for a Cause, that is not Good and
Justifiable. I shall leave with them the Wise and Excellent Counsel, which was
given by one in the time of the Elder Puritanes, R. Bernards Christian Advert.
and Councels of Peace. 1608.
Follow true Antiquity, and the general Practice of the Church of God in all
Ages, where they have not Erred from the evident Truth of God. If thou
Suffer, let it be for known Truth, and against known Wickedness; for which
thou have Example in Gods Word, or of the Holy Martyrs in Church-Story. But
beware of far-fetched Consequences, or for Suffering for new Devices, and for
things, formerly, unto all Ages unknown, seem they never so Holy and Just unto
Man.

All that now remains, is to call upon our Dissenting-Brethren, by all the
Considerations of Love and Kindness to themselves, of Tenderness for the Honor
of Religion, the Edification of their Brethren, and the Peace, Security and
Welfare, of the Church and State wherein they Live, that they would duly and
impartially Weigh and Consider things, put a stop to the Separation, wherein
they are engaged, return to, and hold Communion with us, and keep the Unity of
the Spirit in the Bond of Peace.

Let them bethink themselves what a mighty Evil Schism is, and will be so found
before God at the last Day, and whether any thing can be meet to be put in the
Balance with the Peace and Unity of the Church, and those Vastly-important
Consequences, that depend upon it. Let us Consider a little, what a deep Sense
the Best and most Pious Christians, that ever were, had of it: It Is better to
Suffer any thing, then that the Church of God should be Rent asunder; it is
every whit as Glorious, and, in my Opinion, a far greater Martyrdom, to Die for
not Dividing the Church, then for refusing to Sacrifice to Idols, says
Dionysius, the good Bishop of Alexandria, in his Letter to Novation. And St.
Cyprian speaks very severe things to this purpose, Ap. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 45.
Epist. 52. (ad Antonian.) de Unit. Eccles. fol. 181, 184, etc.
That a Person going from the Church to Schismatics, though in that Capacity
he should Die for Christ, yet can he not receive the Crown of Martyrdom. And
how often elsewhere does he tell us, That such a One has no part in the Law of
God, or the Faith of Christ, or in Life and Salvation, that without this Unity
and Charity, a Man cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; and that although
he should deliver up himself to the Flames, or cast his Body to Wild Beasts,
yet this would not be the Crown of his Faith, but the Punishment of his
Falsehood; not the Glorious Exit of a Religious Courage, but the Issue of
Despair; such a One may be Killed, but he cannot be Crowned. He Rents the Unity
of the Church, Destroys the Faith Disturbs the Peace, Dissolves Charity, and
Profanes the Holy Sacrament. And were it necessary, I could show, that the
Ancient Fathers generally say the same thing. And can we now be such Degenerate
Christians, (if we can be said to be Christians at all) as to make nothing at
all of Schism and Separation? Are not the Glory of God, the Peace of the
Church, and the Good of Souls, things as considerable, as necessary and
indispensable now, as they were of old? I beseech you, Brethren, return from
whence you are fallen; and let us all with one Shoulder set our selves to
Support that Church, with whose Ruin we are all likely to sink and fall. Let us
lay aside Envying and Strife, Confusion and every Evil Work, and let us follow
after the things, which make for Peace, and things wherewith one may Edify
another.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 30. l. 14. for Books r. Boots. p. 39. l. 22. r. Obedience.


