A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL, January xxiij. 1675/6. By
WILLIAM CAVE, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to HIS MAJESTY.

Printed by His Majesty's special Command.



LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid for Richard Chiswell, at the Sign of the Rose and
Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1676.

A SERMON Preached before the KING.
2 COR. 2.11. Lest Satan should get an advantage of us: for we are not ignorant
of his devices.


THere can be no greater evidence of the weakness and degeneracy of the human
Understanding, than that the Minds of Men are so easily imposed upon, in
Matters of the greatest moment, and that with shows and fantastic Images of
things, and suffer themselves to be led aside by little Arts of Sophistry and
Insinuation into paths immediately destructive both of their Nature and their
Happiness. Wisdom and Folly are not so much to be measured by their respect to
the petty affairs of the present state, as by the standard of Eternity, and the
regard they bear to what unquestionably are our highest Interests, the
concernments of another World. We are wont with a very quick sagacity to espy
and decline a present evil, and with great solicitude to countermine the
subtilties of an Adversary that makes an attempt upon our Lives or Fortunes;
and yet in the mean time can be supine and careless in the midst of Enemies,
whose designs reach beyond the present Life, and securely walk over snares that
are laid to ruin us forever.

Being therefore placed in such dangerous and unhappy circumstances, nothing
can be more prudent and reasonable, than that we should dwell at home, and keep
our active and discerning Faculties wakeful and vigilant, lest Satan should get
an advantage of us: for we are not ignorant of his devices.

That there is a Fraternity and Combination of wicked and apostate Powers,
spread up and down the World, which envy the happiness of Mankind, and seek by
all imaginable ways to undo them, is not only a Truth which the Holy Scriptures
do frequently and expressly declare and publish, but whereof the wiser and more
inquisitive part of the Gentile World were sufficiently sensible, In vit. Dion.
p. 958. non long ab inir.
it being (...) (as Plutarch tells us) one of their most ancient Traditions,
that there were wicked and malignant Demons, that envied good men, opposed
their actions, and strove to hinder them in the pursuit of Virtue, lest
continuing firm and steadfast in a good course, they should after death be more
happy than themselves: And elsewhere he tells us, 'twas the assertion of
Xenocrates, De Isid. and Osyr. p. 361. tom. 2.
that the whole Aerie Region is filled with mighty and potent Beings, surly and
ill-natured, which rejoice in doing mischief, and never rest 'till they have
compassed their designs. A character that agrees exactly with the account which
the Divine Oracles give us of these envious and malicious Spirits, that they
walk to and fro throughout the earth, and go up and down from place to place,
seeking rest, but finding none, the chief of whom is the Prince of the Power of
the Air, the Spirit that works in the children of disobedience, (...), the
Nature that is opposite to all Virtue and Goodness, the adversary the Devil, who
as a roaring Lion walks about, seeking whom he may devour; and what he cannot
carry by force, he effects by subtilty, planting snares in every place, whereby
the Sinner is taken captive by him at his will.

Now that Satan may not get an advantage of us, either through ignorance of his
devices, or want of consideration to attend them, it may not possibly be
unuseful to enquire into, and examine some of the more successful methods and
trains of temptation, whereby the great Enemy of Souls is wont to blow up Men's
resolutions for Religion and a holy Life, for I take it for granted, that most
Men at one time or another entertain serious thoughts about these matters,
whose resolutions perhaps might ripen into a kindly and generous piety, were
they not stifled by the early snares and policies of the Tempter, whose devices
are various and infinite; amongst which, these four or five I conceive may
principally challenge our consideration; a secret disbelief of the truth of
things, unjust representations of Religion, a placing all Religion in a few
empty and external pretensions to piety and holiness, a compliance with such
Vices as have a shadow and resemblance of Virtue, and the powerful influence of
prevalent Examples. By which, amongst many others, Men's religious purposes are
struck dead, at least the edge and force of their Endeavors is taken off, and
all our perswasives to Piety and Virtue are rendered improsperous and
unsuccessful.

I. And first, Men are too often carried off from the paths of Virtue and
Religion, by a secret disbelief of the truth of things, by giving way to doubts
and scruples about some lighter and less important matters, whereby they are by
degrees prepared to question the greater and more fundamental Principles, the
Notion of a Deity, and the expectations of another Life. When Satan attempted
our first Parents, he began the assault with a peradventure, possibly God had
not said so, or would not be so severe as He had threatened; by which means he
unsettled their Belief of the Divine Truth and Veracity, and having blown up
this Fort, quickly made a breach for the whole Temptation to enter in. The
first approaches of impiety are modest and bashful, Men do not usually commence
Atheists at one leap, but suffer themselves first to be entangled in some nice
skeptical dissatisfactions, which in time grow up into a more stubborn and
positive infidelity. And then how ordinary is it to hear such Men, more than
whisper their Sentiments to this effect; that all Religion is but a trick of
Art, a notion started by the fears of Men, hatched at first by some jealous
Mind, or contrived by some crafty Satesmen, to keep the World in peace and
order; that the existence of a supreme Being is but a dreadful and melancholy
fancy, and the invisible terrors of another World but painted flames, kindled
in the warm brain of some devout and pious Preacher; that a future state is but
a precarious notion, and that there is no reason to believe what is at so vast
a distance from us; that Good and Evil are but titular and imaginary things, D
Laert. l. 9. in vit. Pyrrh. p. 670.
founded only (...) (as Pyrrho the Skeptic affirmed of old) in custom and human
constitutions. The Author of the Book of Wisdom fitly expresses the inward
sense of these Men, when he brings them in thus venting of their minds: Wisd.
2.1, etc.
Our life is short and tedious, and in the death of a man there is no remedy,
neither was there any man known to have returned from the grave; for we are
born at all adventure, and we shall be hereafter as if we had never been: for
the breath in our nostrils is as smoke, and a little spark in the moving of our
heart, which being extinguished, our body shall be turned into ashes, and
spirit shall vanish as the soft air; and our name shall be forgotten in time,
and no man shall have our works in remembrance; for our time is a very shadow
that passes away, and after our end there is no returning, for it is fast
sealed, so that no man comes again.

This certainly is that (...), which the Son of Syrach speaks of, that bold
daring temper, that makes light of whatever is sacred, and insolently affronts
Omnipotence it self. And when once Men have come thus far, to trample Religion
under foot, they clap their wings, and nos exequaet victoria coelo, as their
Champion Lucretius begins the Triumph; and then it is kindness and modesty, if
they go no farther, and make not that, for which all Mankind besides themselves
have so just a reverence and veneration, the object of their scorn and
laughter, and the sport of a wanton and a scurrilous wit. From such Principles
as these what can be expected, but the height of looseness and extravagance,
and that Men's Lives should be answerable to their Creed? And accordingly the
same Author represents them by a logic natural enough, arguing at this rate in
the very words that follow: Come on therefore, let us enjoy the good things
that are present, let us speedily use the creatures as in youth: let us fill
our selves with costly wine and ointments, and let no flower of the grass
spring by us: let none of us go without his part of voluptuousness, let us
leave tokens of our joyfulness in every place; for this is our portion and our
lot. Let us oppress the poor righteous man, let us not spare the widow, nor
reverence the ancient gray hairs of the aged, let our strength be the law of
Justice; let us lie in wait for the righteous, and examine him with
deceitfulness and torture, that we may know his meekness, and prove his
patience, and let us condemn him with a shameful death. These things (says he)
they did imagine, and as for the mysteries of God they knew them not, neither
hoped they for the ways of righteousness, nor discerned a reward for blameless
souls.

Such are the Inferences, that naturally flow from the Articles of the Epicures
and the Atheists Creed. The folly and absurdness whereof I shall not endeavor
to expose, themselves would not be content that they should be pursued to their
proper issues. For were Conscience once discharged from the obligations of
Religion, they could not reasonably hope to be one minute secure and
undisturbed in their beloved Pleasures and Possessions, but that the longest
Sword and the strongest Arm would soon put in a claim for the biggest share.
Indeed I am loath to think so ill of human Nature, as to believe, however the
temptation may succeed with a few, that any considerable part of Mankind should
fall under so black a charge. There is a natural sense of God impressed upon
the Minds of Men, Principles born and bred up with us, and which freely bear
witness to God and Goodness, which may for a time be suppressed and laid a
sleep, but can hardly by any arts be so choked and stifled, but that upon
every occasion this vital Principle will awake, start up and betray it self.
When therefore the subtle Agent finds this Engine too weak to prevail, at least
on the generality of Mankind, he has another at hand, to keep them off from
engaging in a sober and a virtuous course, and that is

II. Secondly, by making false and undue representations of Religion, by
dressing it up in so unlovely a garb, as shall fright Men from the embraces of
it: When he cannot prevail with Men to doubt of the truth, he will persuade
them to question the goodness and equity of Religion. And a twofold artifice is
commonly made use of, to prejudice Religion in the Minds of Men, that its
restraints are unjust and unreasonable, and that the commands of it are
difficult or impossible.

First, Religion is looked upon as a tyrannical Incroachment upon the natural
Rights and Privileges of Mankind, as laying unjust and unreasonable restraints
upon Men, such as enslave our free born faculties, confine our native
appetites, and tie us up from all agreeable pleasures and delights; that we
cannot be good, but we must cease to be Men, nor embrace Religion, but we must
put off humanity; that certainly God never intended His Laws should be an
oppression and a torment to Mankind, nor ever gave them such vast appetites and
desires, or furnished the Creation with such variety of beautiful and grateful
Objects, merely to tantalize their desires; that it is in vain to talk of
freedom and liberty, when we are bound up by the Laws of Justice and
Righteousness, that we must not exert our power, though never so convenient an
advantage be offered to greaten and enrich our selves; when we cannot securely
gratify our inclinations with those pleasures, that are acceptable to our
senses and our appetites, but Religion must interpose, with the precepts of
Sobriety and Chastity, Temperance and Moderation, to control and interrupt us.

But if this Temptation signify any thing, it pleads for an universal
exemption from all Laws, there being no Law without a restraint, and then what
becomes of Obedience to natural Parents or civil Powers? what of our
Obligations to God as our great Parent and Benefactor? The Laws of our
Creature-ship and dependence do necessarily and indispensibly subject us to God
as our Creator, and we can as soon cease to be Creatures, as become
independent: And if any restraints be necessary and allowable, what can be more
fit and comely, than those which Religion lays upon us? so proper and agreeable
to our Natures, so conducive to our Interest, so necessary to the Peace and
Happiness of the World, that were they generally thrown off, particular Persons
and public Societies would be immediately hurried into disorder and a Chaos,
and Mankind become like a Forest of wild Beasts, equally savage, and mutually
destructive of one another. Nor are we debarred any delights and satisfactions,
but what are vicious and irregular, dishonorable and destructive to our
Natures, and a disparagement both to our Religion and our Reason, and the
abstaining from which does immediately conduce to make us happy. But it is
represented

Secondly, to the disadvantage of Religion, that the Precepts of it are
difficult, if not impossible; that it binds upon us heavy burdens and grievous
to be born, and what it commands is an hard saying, and who can bear it?
especially in our fallen and degenerate state, which has laid us under so much
weakness and impotency, that considering the necessary and unavoidable
infirmities of our Nature, it is no great wonder if we do slip and fall; when we
cannot rectify what is crooked, nor have strength enough to bear up against
the stream that comes full upon us. Can the Leopard change his spots? or the
Ethiopian wash white his skin? If God designed we should lead an innocent and
spotless life, why did He not reform and mend the Faculties of the Soul, or
render it incapable to prevaricate and sin against Him? Nay but, O man! who art
thou that reply against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed
it, why have thou made me thus? God made man upright, and himself sought out
many inventions. Nor even in the present state wherein we are, does God require
any thing of us that is impossible. His Law is holy, just, and good; His yoke
is easy, and his burden light; His commandments are not grievous, but that
whoever is born of God overcomes the world. He is not wanting to render our
Duty easy to us; He encourages our hopes with the promises of an infinite
reward, and by the threatenings of a future and intolerable vengeance, awakens
our fears to a due care and caution. He assists our infirmities with a strength
proportionable to our weakness, and the necessities of our state; so that
though the temptations that assault us be strong and mighty, yet greater is he
that is in us, than he that is in the world: The Grace and Spirit of God are an
unconquerable Principle, for which no command can be too hard or heavy, and
these God is always ready to afford, and never withdraws from any, 'till by a
long train and course of impiety, and many wilful and obstinate refusals, they
have forfeited the aids of Divine Grace, and rendered themselves unworthy of
it. Besides that, there are few difficulties in Religion, but what our own
folly have made to be so, and those that are, as it is in all Arts and
Institutions, are worst at first, which being once broken and conquered, the
main difficulties of a Religious Life are overcome, and every step of the way
after becomes more pleasant and delightful.

III. Another artifice, by which Satan is wont to obstruct real piety and a
good life, is by tempting Men to place all Religion in a few empty and external
pretensions to piety and holiness, devoid of the inward life and spirit of
Religion. Some kind of Religion most Men are for, in spite of all the projects
and designs of Hell, which because Satan cannot hinder, he will take care it
shall be such, as shall do them little good; and Men are forward enough to
comply with that, which bids fairest to carry them to Heaven upon the cheapest
terms. And hence it is, that instead of a sincere and substantial piety, an
inward subjection of the Soul to God, and a conformity of the Life to the
eternal Laws of Truth and Goodness, they generally take up in a loose
profession, in a few slighty observances, and superficial formalities of
Devotion. This is too sadly visible among the several pretending parties to
Religion in the World. Some there are, whose best title to Religion, is the
accommodating themselves to some particular mode of administration, that they
have joined themselves to this Man's Church, or that Man's Congregation, and are
warm and active to espouse and promote the Interests of a little Tribe or
Faction. Others spend their zeal for the Orthodoxy of their private and
particular Notions and Opinions, regardless at the same time of Love and
Charity, the good of the Church, and the peace of the World, without which all
our clamor is but a blind and intemperate zeal, a bitter and unwarrantable
passion, consecrated by a more venerable Name. There are, that please
themselves with the number and frequency of their Devotions, pray much, and
hear often, and so far it is well; but then never regard with what honesty of
mind, and sprightly vivacity of affection, their Incense is offered up, nay
possibly reckon into the bargain, that the customary discharge of these shall
redeem their credit with Heaven, for all the miscarriages of their lives. The
Scribes and Pharisees, above all the Sects in the Jewish Church, entit'led
themselves to the highest strictnesses and severities of Religion, fasted at
every turn, gave alms twice a week, prayed in every corner of the streets, and
some of them did almost nothing else but pray; and yet these grave and demure
pretenders, made use of these only as a cloak to cover their malice and ill
nature, their rapine and violence, and the greatest villainy and oppression;
they prayed to God, and at the same time robbed the Orphan and devoured Widows
houses, tythed mint, annise, and cummin, and neglected judgment, mercy, and
fidedelity, the greater and weightier matters of the Law.

How great a part of the Christian World is trained up in mere outward forms
and ritual services, in easy devotions and cheap performances, is too
notorious to insist upon. When the main of a Christians Duty shall be reckoned
to consist in a few bodily exercises, and corporal severities, in numbering
over a set of prayers, which the Votary it may be does neither mind, nor is
capable to understand. When one act of contrition, an easy or a trifling
penance, a short confession, and an absolution, shall be thought enough, even
in the article of death, to put a Man into a state of salvation, and to secure
his happiness in another world. Repentance, alas! is the great business of a
Man's Life, and is then sincere and effectual to the purposes of Religion, when
it is attended with a real and a hearty reformation; and without this, ten
thousand Indulgences cannot profit him, nor all the Absolutions in the world
relieve the Conscience of a guilty Sinner. Mich. 6.7, 8.
Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams? or ten thousands of Rivers of
Oil? He has showed thee, O man! what is good, and what the Lord does require
of thee, to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with God. The sum
is this: Religion is an inward and a vital Principle, a constant spring of
uniform and entire Obedience, that lies not in forms and shows, in subtilties
and disputes, in Schemes of speech, or Systems of opinions, in glorious
pretenses, or being of a Sect or Party, but in a divine life, in a great love
to God, and a veneration of his Perfections, a dread of his Power, and a
reverence for his Laws, in the mortification of our passions, and the
subjection of our irregular desires, in being meek and humble, compassionate
and charitable, just and righteous: It is not an art of speaking finely, Mat.
7.21.
but of living well, Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the Will of my Father that is in
Heaven: It Is the participation of a Divine Nature, and a conformity to the
Image of God, the keeping a conscience void of offense, both toward God and
men. And whoever takes up short of this, sits down in the porch, and contents
himself with a name to live, and may have Religion enough to make him an
Hypocrite, but not truly to entitle him to be a Christian. The Kingdom of God
is not meats and drinks, Romans 14.17.
it is not to be exact and curious, as the Jews were, about abundance of little
observances, and ritual devotions, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the
Holy Ghost.

IV. Fourthly, Satan too often prevails upon Men, by tempting them to such
Vices, as have a shadow and resemblance of Virtue. The politic and crafty
Spirit knows very well, that Sin is of so black a nature, that it will never
take, especially with the more sober and considering sort of Men, in its own
naked shape, and therefore dresses it up in a better garb, and calls it by
another name. Few Men but would recoil and start at a downright temptation to
murder, but when it is whetted by revenge, and set off as the maintaining our
reputation and our honor, it goes down readily without control. Caiphas it is
like had no personal pique and quarrel at our blessed Savior, when he advised
the Sanhedrim to cut him off; but he did it under the specious notion of a
common good, and the public security of the Nation. How came Satan to actuate
St. Paul with a spirit of so much bitterness and animosity, such a furious and
passionate spleen, against the primitive Believers, but only that he persuaded
him, that the Glory of God, and the Honor of his Religion, did so deeply lie
at stake? What makes Avarice spread so far, and that with many, otherwise high
pretenders to Religion, but because it assumes to it self the plausible pretext
of a laudable diligence and frugality, and a commendable care to make provision
for our selves and families, warranted and enjoined by the Laws of Nature and
Religion? And under the shadow of this, the Tempter leads Men into all the
extravagant irregularities, into which a greedy and rapacious Mind is capable
to betray them. Pride never spreads its plumes with more success, than when
it is recommended as a piece of neatness and gentility, and a just valuing of
our selves according to our desert and quality. Many a Man would never be
betrayed into the excesses of riot and intemperance, did he not look upon it as
an argument of a free generous mind, and a piece of innocent good fellowship
and society. And thus Satan very successfully leads Men into works of darkness,
by appearing to them as an Angel of light, and puts off his temptations under
the notion, either of what is virtuous, or at least what is useful and lawful
to them.

V. I shall mention but one art and stratagem more, whereby this great Enemy
recommends his temptations with advantage to us, and that is, by improving the
influence of powerful and prevalent Examples. Mankind is of a sociable and
pliant temper, easily drawn aside with the most, especially with a multitude to
do evil, because the by as of corrupt Nature runs that way. We are apt to look
upon it as some kind of shelter and patronage, to sin in company, where every
one bears his share of the guilt and shame, and so it seems less by being
divided, like a great Stream that is cut into little Rivulets. Example is a
mighty argument, and one of Satan's most effectual snares, and which many
times, without great care and resolution, there is no way to avoid; for the
corruption of manners, has I know not how introduced a kind of necessity, of
doing as the company does wherein we are, and to refuse it, is looked upon as a
trespass against the Laws of Civility and good Manners, and the Man accounted
either a Clown or an Hypocrite, that will not venture as far as the rest, and
run with them into the same excess of riot.

And the force of the temptation is so much the stronger, by how much those
whom we follow, are persons for whom we have a more peculiar esteem and
veneration, or by whom we have been obliged, as our Benefactors. We have a
natural regard and reverence for our betters, and are prone to imitate them by
an implicit Faith. The vulgar part of Mankind look upon their Superiors, that
as they stand under higher and stronger obligations to Virtue and Piety, so
they are furnished with happier advantages of understanding the true natures
and differences of things, than other Men, and accordingly from them are apt to
take the common measures of good or evil, and to defend themselves with the
warrant and authority of those that are above them. The Examples of Great Men
give Laws to conversation, and are able to add a reputation either to Vice or
Virtue, and one such instance shall sooner prevail with Men to set upon those
things that are just and pure, lovely and of good report, than an hundred
arguments shall persuade them: As, on the other hand, Vice is never more
fatally prosperous and successful, than when it has the patronage of great
Examples to recommend it.

By these few Instances, we see the lot and portion of the present state, what
snares and stratagems, what policies and devices, we are exposed to on every
side, what troops of temptations are round about us; that therefore it concerns
us to stand continually upon our guard, to keep our considerations awake, to
preserve our consciences quick and tender, to be infinitely watchful, that our
foot be not taken in any of those snares, that are purposely laid to ruin us,
not only in this, but (which is unconceivably of more importance) in the other
life. For a course of impiety, has not only a fatal and malignant influence
upon the affairs of the present state, it does not only tend to consume the
estate, or blast the reputation, or waste the body, distract and torment the
mind, and render every condition troublesome and uneasy, these, alas! are but
the beginning of sorrows, in respect of that portion of misery, that awaits the
Sinner in the future state, when the wrath and displeasure of the Almighty
shall finally overtake him, and come upon him to the uttermost. For the other
World is the proper scene and stage, whereon the Divine Justice shall ride in
triumph in the executions of its vengeance; when Conscience shall be let loose
with all its stings, and perpetually prey upon it self; when the remembrances
of an ill-spent life, and the sad reflections upon its past sins and pleasures,
shall be always pressing in upon it, and the Soul unable either to deny or
shift off the evidence; when nothing shall be able to mitigate the grief, or to
beguile the sense of it; when there shall be no ravishing objects, external
pleasures, no musical Airs, or boon Companions, to charm Conscience asleep
again, no intermitting fits of ease, but the Soul groaning under perpetual
paroxysms of rage and terror.

The consideration whereof, ought to allarm our fears, that if there be any
care of our selves, any serious regards of our eternal state, we may be wise in
time, before it be too late, recover our selves out of the snare of the Devil,
and become sober and vigilant; because our adversary goes about, seeking whom
he may devour. It Is no contemptible Enemy that we have to deal with, nor the
less to be feared because invisible, nay it is this renders him more capable of
succeeding in his attempts upon us; for by this means he maintains a nearer and
more secret intercourse with the Spirits of Men, makes more undiscerned and
insensible approaches, and storms the walls before we are aware: He is
admirably acute and subtle, to plant his engines, to make his batteries in the
weakest part, he narrowly observes our tempers and constitutions, our fears and
scruples, our dispositions and inclinations, and accordingly adapts his
temptations to us with most success, Sallust. de Bell. Catal. c. 14. p. 32.
Ut cujusque studium ex aetate flagrabat, as the Historian remarques concerning
the Arts of Catalin, in every period of life he furnishes Men with what is most
agreeable to their age and temper.

But, alas! though Men had no foreign Enemy from without to make war upon them,
though there were no subtle Tempter to seduce them, there is an Enemy within
their own breasts, that lays trains to ruin them; their own corrupt and vicious
inclinations set open the door, and hurry them forth to meet the temptation
that is coming toward them: Jam. 1.14.
Every man is tempted, when he is drawn aside of his own lust, and enticed.
Herein lies Satan's great advantage, he knows our strength is small, our
propensions to sin impetuous and violent, and how apt we are to be betrayed by
our appetites and passions. All external Objects, though never so ravishing and
delightful, could make no impression, were there not a party within, that is
false to the true interests of the Soul. Satan, as potent and crafty as he is,
cannot ravish our wills, nor force our inclinations; the worst he can do, is to
prompt and persuade, to watch advantages, and administer suitable
solicitations, but cannot compel us to entertain them. No Man is undone, but
himself is the cause on it, he that would not, cannot be overcome, provided he
keep his resolutions fixed and steadfast. This is the true way of conquest and
victory over Satan, resist the Devil, Jam. 4.7.
and he will fly from you; if we do but make good our ground, his temptations
will vanish and disappear.

Let us then treasure up in our Minds a great sense of God and of our selves,
let us suffer Conscience freely to discharge its duty, and have our senses
exercised to discern betwixt good and evil. Let us reverence the greatness and
nobility of our Natures, which are of a more Divine frame and temper, than to
be prostituted and defiled. There Is no real Evil in this World but Sin, other
things may be evil to us, but that is evil in it self: There Is an eternal and
unalterable deformity in its nature, which no plausible pretenses can wipe off:
As Virtue and Goodness are in themselves lovely and excellent, so Wickedness is
essentially vile and base.

Let all opportunities and occasions of Vice be avoided, with a quick and a
jealous care; a temptation is easilier prevented, than removed, when once it
has thrust it self upon the Sinner. It Is good to suspect lawful things: Men
cannot safely use their utmost liberty; he that will go just as far as he may,
it is no wonder if he be tempted to go further than he ought. Whatever is
lawful, may not be expedient, especially when it is likely to be abused unto
excess. Security is treacherous and unfaithful; where no immediate danger is
apprehended, care is usually laid aside, and liberty degenerates into
licentiousness. Blessed is he that fears always, that chooses rather to sit
down short, and to deny himself in some warrantable satisfactions, than presume
to venture to the end of his line. It Is hard to distinguish the utmost bounds,
and the nice limits between good and evil, and therefore safest to keep within
what is evidently fit and lawful. When thou sit to eat with a Ruler (says
the Wise Man) put a knife to thy throat, Prove. 23.1, 2.
if thou be a man given to appetite; that is, be exceeding wary, and govern
thine appetite by the severest measures of sobriety, because excess, at such a
time, is much readier to steal upon us, than when a temptation to intemperance
is with open face presented to us.

We should frequently review our lives, and call our actions to a severe and
impartial examination, that we may know what is their spring and fountain, what
their tendency and inclination, and what will be the consequence and the issue
of them; and that if Satan have conveyed in a suggestion in disguise, we may
pull off the vizor, and resent it in its own form and shape. And this account
should be taken, as near as may be, upon the doing of every action, or as soon
as ever the thoughts are freed from the present encumbrances that are upon
them. Vid. (...). n. 40. etc.
The Pythagoreans were taught, thrice every night to call themselves to an
account for the actions of the preceding day; Senec. de Ira l. 3. c. 36. p. 87.
and Sextius, the Philosopher, never used to go to bed, 'till he had first
reasoned and expostulated with himself, What evil habit have I cured to day?
what vice have I resisted? wherein am I better than I was before? And
certainly, would Christians accustom themselves more to this excellent course,
they would quickly find a double advantage flow from it; that repentance, and
the reforming of our lives, would be infinitely more easy and tolerable, and
that our minds would be trained up to a greater wariness and circumspection,
and to keep a more strict and severe hand over our own lives and actions:
Nothing being more instrumental to restrain impiety, and to promote virtue and
a good life, than to bring the actions of every day (...), Com. in Aur. Carm.
p. 209.
(as Hierocles expresses it) before the Tribunal of Conscience, and to pass a
just and an unbyassed sentence upon our selves.

This method once established, would weaken the power of vicious habits, and
withdraw the fuel that enflames the fire, 'twould ruin the party which the
Enemy has within us. Men are commonly betrayed by those of their own house, the
Enemy maintains correspondence with their inordinate appetites and
inclinations, and by them surprises and pulls them down. Every irregular
passion subdued and mortified, is a breach made up in the soul, and leaves less
hold for Satan to fasten his Engines and Designs upon it. But above all we must
solicit Heaven, that God would enable us to defeat and disappoint the plots
and subtilties of the Tempter: Watch and pray, that ye enter not into
temptation: Our Lord has made it part of our daily address to Heaven, that God
would not lead, that is, not suffer us to be lead into temptation, but deliver
us (...), from the power and prevalency of the Devil. He is too hard for us in
our own strength, but God has said, His Grace shall be sufficient for us. If we
be sincere and hearty in our striving, we have an invisible aid at hand, the
assistance of God's Grace and Spirit, a supply infinitely beyond all the powers
of Satan. Besides, God is pleased to animate our Endeavors, and encourage our
industry and perseverance, with the promise of a mighty reward: To him that
overcomes, Rev. 3.21.
I will grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set
down with my Father in his Throne. The Wise and Good God does not oblige us to
eternal labors, to grapple with endless difficulties and oppositions, there is
a term and period fixed to our present warfare, a time coming, when these
trials shall cease, and our present troubles be swallowed up in infinite joys
and pleasures. What then remains? but that we be strong in the Lord, and in the
power of his might; that we take unto our selves the whole armor of God, and
be thereby enabled to stand against the wiles of the Devil; praying always with
all prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto with all
perseverance; that after all the conflicts and difficulties of the present
life, we may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all to
stand. Now the God of all Grace, who has called us unto his eternal glory by
Christ Jesus, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. To Him be
Glory and Dominion for ever and ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

