EVROPE A SLAVE, UNLESS England Break Her CHAINS: Discovering the Grand Designs
of the French-Popish Party in ENGLAND for several Years past.

LONDON, Printed for W. D. and are to be sold in London and Westminster. 1681.

EUROPE a Slave Unless ENGLAND Break her CHAINS.
WHat His most Christian Majesty has lately enterprized upon Valenciennes,
Cambray, and St. Omers, the best Fortified places of the Spanish Netherlands,
and the only remaining Bulwarks of those Poor Provinces toward France, together
with the Progress of his Arms upon the Frontiers of Germany, the Confines of
Spain, in Sicilie and in America, gives all the rest of Europe occasion to be
solidly apprehensive of its danger: which if it were, perhaps it might have
been more advantageous for this great Monarch not to have done so much.

In truth, by the rapid Conquests which this Victorious Prince has obtained in
so short a time, of three such important Places, he has apparently demonstrated
to all Europe the extent of his great and vast designs; and the weakness and
low Condition of Spain as palpably discovers, that there is all the reason in
the World to believe, that if England would but awake out of that Lethargy
wherein it has layen for so many years, and put her helping hand to the work,
she might be a great means to prevent the misfortunes and Calamities to which
all those Estates and Countries that border upon France are now exposed.

I was the more apt to flatter my self with a hope of this nature, for that
although I am not altogether ignorant, how much the French Court has won upon
the Court of England, yet I was of Opinion that the English, being so
invincibly jealous for the preservation of their liberty, finding that his most
Christian (...) had made such an important Conquest, while the Parliament was
sitting, would by the Mediation of that Noble Assembly, have made their humble
addresses and earnest representations to their Monarch, and not have left till
they had besought him to consent what his own honor and the safety of his
people required. But by fatal Experience we see, that as to that which all
Europe calls a Parliament, if the same Anticipations and Connivances continue
there with that fatality which we have hitherto observed, that to our great
sorrow, we shall be constrained to believe what the Emissaries of France
publicly themselves declare, that two thirds of that Assembly are Caball'd and
managed by the Golden Lewis's of France; in such a manner, that from the same
part from whence all Europe hope to behold the Sun of their restoration rise,
if there be not a sudden change, which all good men expect for all this from
the English Generosity, there they see a formidable power advance it self, in
Combination with France, for, the utter destruction of Christendom.

I know there are some that pretend to great insight, who being either endu'd
or surpised with the Opinions and Maxims which the French Emissaries every
where insinuate, are of opinion, that for the Imperialists there might be
something done so considerable in the Course of this Gampaigne, which if it
should happen prosperously to succeed, it would follow then that some folid
remedy might be applied to cure the mischiefs and apprehensions of all the rest
of Europe. This is that which is discoursed in all the Courts and Countries of
the North. But not to distaste these men of Contemplation, I must beg leave to
be of a contrary judgment, and to hold that all their hopes are ill grounded;
and that for several reasons.

We must confess, there is no improbability but that the Impeperial Army might
force a way into France, which would certainly prove a notable home thrust: but
then on the other side we must consider, that the Army which is designed for
such an Expedition must endure all the hardships of a Twenty Leagues March
through Countries burnt and wasted, so that such an Army would be very much
incommoded for want of all sorts of necessary Provisions both for Horse and
man. Now in regard the Imperialists, being once passed beyond Mayence, Coblents
and Treves, have no Magazines, all the Country beyond the Line of Treves to
the very Confines of France, except some part of Luxemburgh, being under the
absolute Power of the Enemy; this being so, how is it for us to imagine, that
the Imperialists should do any things considerable, being to March either
through a Country burnt and wasted, or through that part of Luxemburgh, which
is at present a mere Desert, more especially considering that the German Armies
are those of all Europe that carry along with them the most numerous luggage
and pesterment of women, and unprofitable mouths.

Secondly, though it were true that the Imperialists surmounting all these
difficulties, should break in as far as Lorian, the Territory of Metz, or the
County of Burgundy, which is all that is to be expected in one Campaigne, what
is it that this Imperial Army can do considerable, in a Country of which all
the strong holds are in the possession of the Enemy, and all the rest of the
Country burnt and laid wast? Now as all these exploits of the Imperalists can
tend to no other end, but either to give Battle, or to lay Siege to some
considerable Town, it is easy to foresee that if they aim at the first, and
that the French are intended to decline it, as they are masters of all the
Country behind, and of each side, who shall be able to force them to fight? Or
if it comes to that pass that they are forced to hazard a Battle, it is most
certain that the one or the other will be Victor. Should then the Imperialists
get the better, let us examine what they will be in a condition to do, should
they obtain a complete Victory. I believe it will be granted me that the chief
Benefit of such a victory will be only the Siege of some good Town, by that
means to secure some post for the Convenience of the Army against the next
Campaigne. For to venture far into an Enemies Country without this precaution,
I do not believe that the Imperialists either will or ought to do it. For
should they hazard such an attempt, they would be constrained to leave several
strong Garrisons behind 'em, which being well stufft with French Cavalry, would
never suffer the German Convoys to pass quietly, and perhaps cut off the
greatest part of them. But on the other side, suppose the French will avoid
fighting, keeping themselves in an-actual posture of defense, or though they
should be constrained to give battle, and lose the day, yet the scattered
Troops of that, beaten Army, being spedily reinforced by the adjoining
Garrisons, would be still strong enough, though but in volant parties, to
prevent the Imperialists from doing anything considerable. Here you are to
observe that what I have said already is only in reference to the first Case of
the March of the Imperialists in an Enemies Country, and the gaining a
Victory. But as it would be an extraordinary piece of Flattery to determine,
that the Imperialists should be infallibly Victors; I believe, that before we
leave this first point, it will not be amiss to examine what would probably
happen, in case the Armies should join, and the French should get the day. Nor
do I think it will require a long discourse, to make the reader apprehend the
bad consequences of such a loss to the Imperialists. It being notorious that in
regard of the strong places which the French possess in Lorain, Burgundy and
Alsatia, after the loss of a Battle, Germany would labor under two inevitable
mischiefs.

First to see that Army beaten, and consequently utterly ruined and cut off in
the pursuit. The second to see the French pass the Rhine at Brisgow, and there
cutting out such troublesome work for Germany, which yet she never beheld nor
had ever suffered in those parts.

Again if by an attempt no less prosperous than the former, the Emperor and
the Empire should make a second trial, and be so unfortunate as to lose a
second Battle, a thing not unlikely, whether this Campaign or the next,
considering how the Correspondencies of the French are maintained in the Court
of Bavaria, and other Courts of the Empire, we must look upon all that part of
Germany which borders upon the Rhine for two or three days journey together
totally lost without hopes of recovery, and the rather for that a great part of
those Countries is all consumed and wasted, and can never be able to afford
Conveniences for winter Quarters, nor to supply the Imperial Armies in their
Marches. And this is very near as much as I can think observable in case of the
March of an Imperial Army in the Enemies Country, and in case of giving Battle,
which is the first point. Now let us come to that of laying a Siege.

As to what has passed at the sieges of Philipsburgh, and Maestricht, with
different Enemies, two things are observable. The first, that the French
understand very well how to fortify their strong holds according to all the
Rules of Art. And also for the second, they understand as well how to defend
their Fortifications, and dispute it Inch by Inch with their Enemies, with an
admirable conduct, and undaunted Courage. From which reflections it may be
naturally concluded, that in case the Imperialists, being entered into an
Enemies Country, go about to lay any formal Siege; as without question it must
be before some considerable Town, it is ten to one but that the season of the
Campaigne will be over before they can bring their design to pass. From whence
I conclude that this March of the Imperial Army, whatever way they take, can
never produce any greater benefit, than the taking of some place in Loraine,
the Territory of Metz, Luxemburgh, or the County of Burgundy, and by the gain
of that place to disorder those Garrisons which the French hold in Alsatia,
which however is not sufficient to save the Provinces of the Spanish
Netherlands, which is the precise Platform, by which his most Christian Majesty
might without difficulty mount to the Universal Monarchy, if those Provinces
were lost; there being no Power at present in a probable condition to hinder
him.

Now if it be true what I have already affirmed, and what I shall afterward
maintain, that by the Conquest of the united Provinces of the Spanish
Netherlands, his most Christian Majesty may jump into the Universal Monarchy,
that all Europe may evidently know the danger of the present Conjuncture if
there be no remedy from England, and other places interested, and that with all
the speed imaginable, there are these five things to be attentively considered.

The first is, that his most Christian Majesty being master of all the Posts,
Passages and strong Places of the County of Burgundy, it behooves us to
consider, that though this Prince should do nothing more during this whole
Campaigne but only dispute the Ground with the Imperialists, it is not to be
avoided, but that the Campaigne must break up, and the Imperial Army retire
without doing any thing considerable for the preservation of the Provinces of
the Spanish Netherlands: For not to flatter our selves, would we have had the
Imperialists have attempted any thing great for the Safety of those Provinces,
necessity required that while the Imperialists directed their March undauntedly
into the Bowels of France, with an Army of fifty thousand men, the Confederate
forces, then in the Spanish Netherlands should have broken into Picardy, or the
Territory of Boloigne, by such a powerful diversion to have favored the grand
and Capital Enterprise of the Imperial Army. But by the fatal loss of
Valenciennes, Cambray and St. Omers, France is so well entrenched on that side
against all the Attempts of the Confederate Arms in those parts, that it is
absolutely out of their power by reason of those Conquests to penetrate on that
side into the Kingdom of France. Now we may easily perceive, that France having
nothing to fear from Flanders, will content it self only to leave a small Army
in those Quarters adjoining to the Provinces of the Spanish Netherlands, which
by the assistance of those strong Garrisons under its Dominion in the same
Provinces, will be a force sufficiently competent to amuse all the power of the
Dutch and Spaniards on that side during the season of this Campaigne, and to
prevent their doing any thing considerable.

In the second place, This being the condition of Flanders, and France being
out of all apprehension of danger in reference to its Conquests in the
Provinces of the Spanish Netherlands, and the Provinces of Picardy, Boloigne
and Art / ois which are guarded and secured by the Conquests of Valenciennes,
Cambray, and St. Omers, it plainly appears that France is at her full liberty,
to make head with the main body of its forces in opposition to the enterprises
of the Imperial Armies.

Seeing then that France finds her self in this safe condition, I must leave it
to all men of sense and judgment, as a solid prognostication of all that can be
expected from the attempts of the Imperial Arms for the preservation of the
Provinces of the Spanish Netherlands. For suppose that the Imperialists should
advance to the Frontiers of France, with an Army of fifty thousand men, which
is almost all that they can do, France will meet them with an equal force, or
perhaps with a greater number, with this difference, that whereas the
Imperialists, to obtain the advantage of getting to the Frontiers of France,
shall be forced to undergo a thousand difficulties and hardships, in crossing a
wasted and desolate Country, the French have nothing to do but by easy Marches
in their own Country to meet them, Masters of all the Territories behind and
on each side, furnished and provided with all things necessary, and where they
had all the advantages imaginable to attack them as they should see occasion.

Thirdly, that we may not seem to rely in vain upon the endeavors of the
Confederate Forces in the said Provinces, we must consider, that by reason of
the lopping off so many considerable Members from the body of those Provinces
in the Wars of 1667. and since the beginning of this present War, it is
absolutely impossible to be able to do any thing considerable against France
without a force much greater than that of France.

Fourthly, The Spaniards themselves since the beginning of this War, through
the misfortune of the Minority of their Prince, being unable to establish
Magazines of Victuals, Ammunition and Provender for the Horse, for the
subsistence of their own and the Armies of their Allies, and being under the
same necessities and disabilities, through the same misfortune during this
Campaigne, it is impossible for this only defect, that any considerable Armies
should subsist in the said Provinces for so long a time as is requisite, or
that the March of the Army should be ordered as the suddenness of emergent
occasions requires, to oppose the progress of the Enemy, or to gain any
considerable advantage upon him. And this may serve for a real proof of this
Truth, that we need no more but observe what has passed within these three
years in the beginning, progress and end of all the Campaignes in the said
Provinces, including the beginning of this.

Fifthly, although it be true that by the advancement of his most Serene
Higness Don John of Austria to the Dignity of Captain General, and First
Minister of the Spanish Monarchy, we may certainly expect a great change in the
Government of the Monarchy of Spain, however it is very true that if we consider
the most wonderful disorders which have crept into the Ministry of that
Monarchy during two successive Reigns, the little time that this Heroic Prince
has enjoyed his Dignity, and the necessity that constrains him in the first
place to provide for the affairs of Sicily and the Frontiers of Spain, make it
out to be impossible for him to furnish sufficient succors for the
preservation of these Provinces.

Now all that has been already said, being solidly true, which may be reduced
to three heads, First, That the Imperialists during this Campaign can do
nothing considerable for the safety of the United Spanish Netherlands.
Secondly, That there is no solid Reliance to be had upon the Enterprises of
those Forces which have defended those Provinces for these 3 years. And,
Thirdly, That Don John is not in a capacity to relieve or remedy these
misfortunes; we must of necessity conclude that his Most Christian Majesty, at
the end of this Campaigne, or before the beginning of the next, while the
Imperialists and Hollanders are in their Winter Quarters, will be in a
condition to Randesvouze a new body of an Army out of his Carrisons in the
Frontier Provinces, and with this new Army to come and sweep all before him,
and make an end of his work, by taking all principal places that remain
unconquered in the Provinces of the Spanish Netherlands; by means whereof the
rest will easily submit to the Conquerours Yoke; Neither the Loyalty nor the
Courage of the poor Inhabitants being able to protect them from this
misfortune. And then his Most Christian Majesty will have no more to do but to
push forward by Sea and Land his Monarchical Designs, to bring under his Yoke
the two thirds of Europe.

But because some Critic may perhaps imagine that my Conclusion in the
preceding Paragraph is not solidly enough maintained to be established and made
a positive maxim, after that manner as I have done it, I think it but
necessary before I go any farther, that no person may flatter himself to the
contrary, to show palpably and plainly the possibilities for his Most Christian
Majesty to execute Victoriously, by the time by me supposed, what I have
advanced for truth. To which purpose I desire the Reader to consider these four
things by way of addition.

First, That it is naturally impossible but that the Dutch Army by death,
sickness, or desertion must be diminished above a third part.

Secondly, That in case his most Christian Majesty should undertake any such
conquest at the time aforementioned, it is impossible to determine, but by
conjecture, which may prove deceitful, upon which place he will first begin to
make his attacques; so that, supposing that the Hollanders do lend their Forces
to the Spaniards, there will be a necessity that those Forces should be divided
into all those places which the Spaniards possess in the United Provinces; from
whence it consequently follows, that it will be impossible that by means of
this division and allotment of those Forces, they should be capable to defend
all the Grand places which the Spaniards yet possess, which being once
attacqu'd and taken, all the rest excepting only Luxemburgh, will be
constrained to surrender.

Thirdly, it being granted that the Hollanders do lend their Forces to the
Spaniards, and that they are divided and separated into several Garrisons as I
have already declared, we may certainly conclude, that if his most Christian
Majesty has a design to sit down before the said places, neither the
Hollanders, nor the Spaniards having a body of an army in the Field, as being
all distributed into Garrisons, for the security of particular places, He is at
his full liberty to attacque which, and as many as he pleases at a time without
control, and coming to be master of the Forts, he is master of the Forces
likewise: and so the question will be, whether it were not better for them to
quit their Towns without so much as a Summons, than to lose their men. For if
we do but make a serious Reflection upon the violent and rapid manner of the
French Attacques, it being the humor of the present King not to care how many
thousand Men's lives he sacrifices to his impetuous desires of Conquest, it is
naturally impossible but that they should take all the places which they
attacque, as being out of all expectance of relief. So that all the Places
which remain to the Spaniards in the Low Countries shall be swept away, before
the Imperialists can be in a condition to move; I only except Luxemburgh for
this year, which upon the next Invasion is to run the same fortune with
Burgundy, and it may be the next Campaign, as being without Garrisons or Forces
for its defense; there being nothing more certain than that the Soldiers in
the Conquered Garrisons will be prisoners of War to the Victor.

We may add for a fourth, not to flatter our selves that the violence of
Seasons, or the maxim of keeping in Winter Quarters gives any stop to the
French heat, that it behooves us to consider what time his Most Christian
Majesty made his first Irruption into the County of Burgundy, and what his
Armies have done since the beginning of this War, all in the Winter time, or at
the end of Campaignes, when the Enemies Army was never so little retired, or
before they could be upon their marchat the end of Winter. Or if we had forgot
all this, the second invasion of Burgundy, the conquests of Montbellian,
Cambray, Valenciennes and St. Omers may refresh our memories. Which in my
opinion may suffice to make us sensible that if England do not step in before
the end of this Campaigne, his most Christian Majesty will be certainly in a
condition, at the time which I have mentioned, to make a final conquest of all
the Spanish Netherlands.

Now his Most Christian Majesty being in such a condition, from what you may
believe that he will never neglect such a favorable conjuncture, we are also
to take notice, that the said Monarch out of a supreme and capital Interest,
cannot dispense with the Execution of his intended enterprises at the time by
me already expressed. For the Imperialists at the end of the Campaigne, taking
up their Winter Quarters in Loraine and Luxemburgh, his Most Christian Majesty
has but one Expedient of Diversion to constrain the Imperial Army of course to
quit at the beginning of the next Campaigne, all the said Countries, and to
retreat on the other side of the Rhine, which his most Christian Majesty will
easily compel them to do, if the Spanish Provinces or their Principal strong
Holds fall at the said time into his hands. For this Conquest being made, his
Most Christian Majesty shall not only be in a Condition to keep up an Army of
fifty thousand men, upon the Consines of Lorain, the Territory of Metz, and the
County of Burgundy, to oppose the Imperialists, but also with an Army of the
same force to seize almost without any opposition upon the Counties of Iuliers
and Cleves, and so to get footing beyond the Rhine on that side Westphalia, to
encourage the Princes of his Cabal in those parts, and probably to force the
Imperialists, wherever they are at that time, by reason of the Alarms of which
they are so apprehensive from the Coast of Bavaria, which only expects an
opportunity for invading Tirol, to keep close together in a body on the other
side of the Rhine, on purpose to watch the motion of their Enemies.

Now all that has been said above being brought to pass in this manner, to the
end we may believe that his Most Christian Majesty will be in a condition to
subdue the third part of Europe, we are to take notice once for all, that this
same Prince with only the Forces of his own Kingdom, has been able not only to
defend himself from the consederated Forces of his Enemies, but that to this
very time, all that considerable strength has not been able to get one single
Farm of the ancient Patrimony of his Kingdom, while this same Prince actually
takes without any opposition, from the Principal Chiefs of the Confederacy,
Fortresses, Cities, Towns and whole Provinces; and as if it were not sufficient
to advance the Progress of his Victories by Land, in the Provinces of the
Spanish Netherlands, upon the Frontiers of Germany, upon the Confines of
Catalogne, and in Sicily, to the end you may not be ignorant how formidable his
power is everywhere, he gives an occasion to all Europe with amazement to
behold, how this same Monarch, within these two years under the pretense of the
Sicilian War has not obtained only the absolute Dominion of the Mediterranean
Sea, upon all the Coasts of Spain, Italy, and his own Dominions, but that he
has had the courage, and a force equal to his courage, out of the super
abundance of his Naval Power, to send the Count d'Estrees, with a Royal Fleet
to the Indies, which to the shame of the English and Hollanders, makes those
Conquests, of which the consequences will not fail to trouble those two Nations
hereafter, and to be most cruelly tormented and incommoded in their most
Essential and Capital Interests both of Estate and Commerce.

And as if it were not enough in so many different Countries to make all the
Progresses abovementioned, we are seriously to consider that this same Monarch
by his vast Banks of ready money is able not only nobly to support his Armies
in all those parts by Sea and Land in so many different and distant Countries;
but also in his Cabinet by the same means of his vast treasures, and the
dexterity and vigilance of his Ministers, to direct and uphold in a most
wonderful manner, the power of the Swede, against all the Opposition that has
attacqued him, and in the heart of the Empire to control and manage those
Princes, who under the counterfeit and false Title of Neutrality, by the
assistance of the ready money of France, keep considerable Armies on Foot,
which upon the least misfortune that should befall the Empire, would be ready
to take hold of the opportunity to the disadvantage of the Empire. By the same
interest of his readymoney he not only governs the secret Counsels of Poland,
but so orders his affairs that the public Diets of that Kingdom applaud the
suffrages of the same Court in those very points, which according to the Rules
of Judicious Policy, will certainly ruin by the Consequences all the chief
Privileges of that Republic. By the same means he governs the Politic Dyets
of the Cantons of Switzerland, in such a manner, that though that Nation, by
the Conquest of Franche Comte, do perceive a curb to be put in their mouths,
which may be a means to bring them into slavery, nevertheless they still
furnish him, through an insufferable blindness, with the best of their men, on
purpose to assist him to overrun the rest of Europe, as if after all the rest
come to be subdued and vanquished, this Republic alone would be able to resist
the power of France, when her victorious Monarch shall advance four several
ways to attack it with all his Forces.

But these are not the bounds that limit the Influence of the French Money; it
spreads it self yet more wonderfully. Italy is replenished with persons of
great wisdom and foresight; and without all contradiction that Nation of all
Europe is naturally the most capable to dive into all the consequences that may
happen upon the progress of his Most Christian Majesty's designs; nevertheless
by an Enchantment till now unheard of, the Potentates and Republics of that
part of Europe, remain unanimously buried in an unconceivable Lethargy, and
this at a time, when they see by the successes of his Most Christian Majesty in
Sicily, the flames of a War ready to be kindled in their own Country, and that
too in such a part, as has always proved fatal to it, and that from the same
part, as also from Pignerol and Monaco they find the French Arms assured of
three infallible Ports that give them free entrance by three different ways
without any Possibility for any Power of Christendom, if the Empire and Spain
be once brought to submit, to prevent their misfortune.

But if the Mercenary humor of the Swisses, and the softness of the Italians,
may seem to furnish those Nations with any excuse, whether good or bad, to
shake off the blame from themselves for not having hitherto done any part of
their Duty, what can England say for it self, a Nation formerly of all Europe
most fierce and jealous of their Liberty? In regard that at the same time,
while his Most Christian Majesty carries Valenciennes, Cambray and St. Omers in
the very view of that Nation, she so warlike and so jealous heretofore of the
Successes of the French, stands pausing and flegmatickly making it a Question,
whether it may be convenient for her to Arm, and with her ancient courage to
cause a Restoration of those places into the hands of their ancient Masters: or
whether she shall apply her self to the unprofitable ways of mediation, where
the Frauds and delays of the French are to be every day encountered. This it is
that causes us to say, that the Seine now triumphs over the maritime Grandeur
of England, and that France by virtue of one of her chief Master pieces, and
some certain golden Sacrifices, has found a means to lull asleep the English
Sampson, that having cut off the locks of his hair, she may be able to make her
self master of his Honor and his Puissance.

Neither is it here that the politic managements of the Counsels of France
make a stop: For the ministry of France has not only acquired almost an
universal control in all the Courts of Christendom, from which those of Vienna
and Madrid have not been exempted; but it is also certain, that by his pensions
of several Millions, neither the deceased Grand Vizier, nor the Cham of the
Precopite Tartars, even to the last Peace with Poland, did act otherwise than
according to the directions and desires of the Most Christian King; of which
the last wars and the Peace with Poland have furnished us with a lamentable but
authentic Proof, and is to us a farther Argument that he who succeeds in that
charge, concurs in the same Politics with his Predecessor; and that his Most
Christian Majesty is not unmindful of his Addresses to him. And it is
observable, that no sooner has the Muscovite threatened the Swede with a War
upon Livonia side, but the Great Turk has menaced the Muscovite with an
Invasion of his Territories with all his Forces.

If then his Most Christian Majesty by the sole and only Forces of his own
Kingdom, at a time when he is constrained to keep in pay above a hundred
thousand men, without any Hyperbole, as well in Garrison as in the Field, in
the parts adjoining to the Spanish Provinces, and his neighboring Conquests,
yet for all this makes such irresistible Progresses as well by his Arms as
with his money, I leave it to all rational persons to judge, what he will be
able to do, after he has finished the Conquest of the Spanish Netherlands, for
that he will be then not only discharged of the most considerable part of his
care and Expense, but that he will be also master of a Country, that by means
of its ordinary Subsidies will be able to furnish with money to pay an Army of
fifty thousand men, with all the charges thereto belonging. And that in the
same Countries he shall be supplied with men, Soldiers and Officers as good as
any in Europe. That the Empire, Spain, Holland, Switzerland, Italy, and England
more especially have reason to tremble at the thoughts that such a thing should
come to pass, if they do not rather arm their whole puissance, and undauntedly
both in general and particular make it their business to prevent the same. For
certainly it is their common Interest, since that if such a Conquest should be
effected by the French, the infallible loss of all their Liberties would follow
next.

And for the more home urging of this matter, that we may give you to
understand the fatal Posture of the affairs of Europe at this time, and how
advantageous they are to facilitate the designed Conquests of his Most
Christian Majesty if once he obtain the entire possession of the Spanish
Netherlands, we are seriously to consider, that as for Germany, after such a
success of the French Force, his Most Christian Majesty will be in a condition,
not only to support his Alliances, as he does in Svedeland and Poland, so in
other parts of the Empire, but also to enable those Alliances to advance their
heads without any danger. For by that correspondence which this Monarch keeps
with the Ottoman Court, being able to prevent for some years the Turk or the
Precopite Tartar from making any irruption into Poland, I leave the world to
judge how impossible a thing it will be for his Highness the Elector of
Brandenburgh to defend Pomerania and Prussia, while his Most Christian Majesty
occasions the attacque of his Provinces, should his Most Christian Majesty, as
we have already said, attacque his Territories of Cleves and Mark, with an Army
of forty or fifty thousand men, without any hindrance at all to the same
Monarch to maintain and carryon his Conquests in Lorain, Burgundy, and
Luxemburgh, either with as numerous or a bigger Army in those parts.

Which happening to be true, it will be an infallible Consequence, upon the
Conquest of the Spanish- Netherlands, that the Emperor and the Empire will in
all probability be constrained to bid adieu for ever to whatever depends upon
the Patrimony of the Emperor from the Rhine to the Frontiers of France, in the
same manner as the same Empire has been already fore'd to do to the three
Bishoprics of Toul, Metz and Verdun. For the Dutchies of Cleves and Iuliers
being subdued all of a sudden, we may easily foresee that two things will
infallibly come to pass. First, that the Imperial Army, or at least so much as
relates to the Elector of Bavaria and his friends in the Empire, will be fore'd
to keep on the other side of the Rhine, perhaps in a posture of single defense,
while the Princes of Westphalia, either compelled by the necessity of the time,
or in pursuance of their own obligations, shall join with France, as being
thereto already well inclined and disposed.

The second is, that Holland being humbled and brought down by the calamities
and losses sustained in the present war, or the Conquest already made, shall be
forced to agree to some dishonorable peace; and that with so much the more
reason, in regard that by the loss of the Spanish Netherlands, and the Duchy
of Cleves, it will be out of all hope of being succored from any part, unless
it be from England, from whence we know that that Republic can promise to
themselves but little favor, so long as the French shall have the chiefest
Influence in that Court.

Now the Empire being reduced to this Extremity, it is most certain that
nothing can follow but the total Ruin of the same Empire, if by any peace at
the discretion of the Ministry of France, the Hollanders are forced to satisfy
the designs of the Ambitious Monarch of that Nation.

The Empire and Holland being thus humbl'd and brought down, we must conclude
that France will be at liberty to choose for the subject of its Triumphs Spain,
Italy or England, at its own pleasure.

As for Spain, two things being viewed and considered; the first, its natural
depopulations; the second the want of fortified places in the heart and Bowels
of the Kingdom, it is most certain that there is nothing but its scarcity of
Provisions and victuals in the very center of it, that can save it from an
Universal Invasion from France. But let the scarcity of Victuals be what it
will, that can be no obstruction, but that his Most Christian Majesty,
notwithstanding those natural defects, entering by the passages of Fontaraby,
with an Armyonly of thirty or forty thousand men, and by the passages of
Catalogne with the same number, by the means of these two Armies, would in two
Campagnes be able to make himself master of Navarr, Arragon, Catalogne, and the
Kingdom of Valencia, and after that having well fortisf'd his Frontiers, may be
in a condition to constrain the King of Spain to become his Tributary for the
Kingdom of Castile, and after that to grant him what part he shall desire of
his Territories in Italy, and the West Indies, which is an affair not
altogether unworthy the serious reflection of England.

As to Italy there are four things to be considered. First the importance of
those Posts which his Most Christian Majesty has already got possession of, in
three different parts of the Country, by means whereof he has a free entry into
Italy, which way soever he pleases.

The second is the natural division of Italy into several little states, which
are for the most part very inconsiderable, and will be ready to join with the
French Monarch, if they are not already his creatures.

Thirdly that Italy, formerly the most generous Nation in the world, by the
fatal vicissititude of things is now become the most soft and effeminate. The
fourth is, that his Most Christian Majesty is master of the Italian Sea.
Whosoever then considers all these things, will be easily convinced, that if
Lewis the 14th. assail Italy with all his forces, that nation will not be in a
condition to make any more resistance against him, than it did against Charles
the Eighth, and that if Lewis gets a footing once within it, it will not be so
easy to drive him out, as it was Charles the Eighth. For both the Genius's,
Politics and forces you have to deal withal are far different, as also the
Conjunctures of former opportunities from those at present. Moreover we are to
consider that upon an irruption of his Most Christian Majesty's forces into the
most delightful part of Christendom, Italy can have nothing to rely upon but
the strength of her own native forces; for any succor she can expect, I see
none in a case to afford it her but the Turk, Germany and Spain being supposed
to be brought so low as not to be in a condition for any such effort. Nor do I
think that the Swisses dare undertake any such enterprise, or if they should,
that their strength would prove any thing considerable. From all which reasons
I determinately conclude, that if France attaque Italy, which it is very
probable he will do after he has attaqu'd and subdued the Empire and Spain,
Italy will be entirely lost, and the Court of Rome it self will be glad to draw
her self out of the broiles, by conferring the same honors, and granting the
same privileges to Lewis the 14th. as she did formerly to Charlemaigne, and
several of his successors, that being one of the principal Articles which she
must make use of to satisfy the vast ambition and soaring designs of this
Monarch

These great things being thus brought to pass, there will nothing remain to
his Most Christian Majesty, but to subdue all his neighbors, and to bring the
Switzers and the English under his Yoke.

For the first I have said it and will say it again, I cannot tell how the
Cantons and Confederate Swisses can be in a condition to defend themselves,
against all the efforts and assaults of his Most Christian Majesty, they who
have not one fortified place in all their Territories, and who are also often
divided in respect of their Religion; and when they shall be assailed on all
sides, from Italy, France, Burgundy and Germany. Against which attempts should
they prove successful, they would be more worthy of honor, than their
Ancestors ever were, for all their victories formerly obtained, against the
ancient Dukes of Austria and Burgundy.

As for Engl. I know that Nation is warlike even to the height of valor, I
know that Nation abounds with persons of great gravity, judgment and capacity
to penetrate into the deepest mysteries of State Politics. I know moreover
that the natural Situation of Engl. being a kind of fortification and bulwark,
that it seems invincible against all the attempts and designs of her enemies,
and that joining all these circumstances to what she is able further to do,
considering the natural antipathy which every true English man naturally
preserves in his breast against the French Nation, we may from thence conclude,
that his most Christian Majesty will find it a very difficult task to bring
that famous Island under his subjection; and that though he should make a
conquest of it, yet it will be a labor as difficult to keep it. But on the
other side it would be to make a wrong judgment of the Politics of the French
Ministry, to imagine, that if they undertake either the destruction or the
Conquest of England, they would make use of their won forces, without some
plausible pretense, to deprive so great a King, their Allie, of his Dominions.
France is too cunning and diligent in her Politic Managements, not to make use
of more refined methods of craft and Intrigue. And it is a certain and real
argument, that the French Politics are already at work for the ruin and
destruction of England, if by a Heroic and universal arming of the whole
Nation, the English do not put themselves into a posture both by Sea and Land
to stop the progress of his Most Christian Majesty, and the unwary proceedings
of those among them, who join and close with the French Monarch to the utter
ruin of their Native Country. I say there is a necessity, to take notice of
this piece of Truth, and to dive into the Bottom of two things, the natural
designs of the Court of England; and secondly, the condition wherein his Most
Christian Majesty will be, after a completed Conquest of the Spanish
Netherlands, by means of such formal Succors as he shall send into England, to
bring about the designs of the prevailing party to triumph at length over the
unwary cunning of the one, and the weakness of the rest.

As for the real designs of the interested Courtriers at this conjuncture, we
may conclude them to be such undoubtedly, and the same with those that engaged
the English, at the beginning of the present Wars, to confederate with his Most
Christian Majesty, against the Republic of the United Provinces, and by
consequence against all the Allies of that Republic.

And a most notorious proof of this assertion is this, that without doubt
England it self did not so well ponder and weight those truths which I am now
going to advance, on purpose to let Christendom apparently understand the
inevitable danger into which all Christendom must of necessity fall, by being
forced to submit to the yoke of France, through the Conquest of the Spanish
Netherlands. Now England being sensible of this Truth, and seeing withal that
by the continuance of these Successes, his most Christian Majesty will be in a
condition to keep up an Army of above 150000 fighting men, for which he will
have no employment, if he do not send them against England; and yet lying
still, and not using any endeavors to hinder the Progress of these Successes;
we must of necessity conclude, that England acts according to the same
principles which engaged her to confederate at the beginning of the war with
France; and that her mediation abroad does only tend to do the French some more
important kindness, to bring to pass the designs of that Court, than she could
do by the assistance of her Arms and a public Declaration of War, which might
be a means to discover, and put a stop to the conduct of self-interest.

And it is an irrefragable proof, that the Self-interested, and the French
Party in England are firm in the said Design, for that when the Muscovite
threatened the Swede with an Invasion of Livonia, at the same time that, by the
Management of France, the Great Turk also threatened the Muscovite with an
Irruption into his Dominions, in case he invaded the Swede; the French Party in
England, at the same time threatened the Grand Czar that if he meddled with the
Swede, they would send a considerable Fleet of men of War into the Baltic Sea:
which proves not only what I have already declared, as to England, but also
that France, the Turk, and the French Party in England, observing the same
measures, without being any longer able to conceal them, have formed such a
League, which, together with the Branches of it, that extend themselves into
many Parts of Europe, make it evident, what apprehensions Christendom ought to
have of the Enterprises of his most Christian Majesty, to which his
Confederates are made instrumental, either through Unwariness or Self-interest.

Now it being thus evident that England acts as a Co-partner with France, some
may be nice to examine the general and particular aim of such Proceedings.

I shall say nothing of the public treaty between England and France, at the
beginning of this War, only that therein we may find two things.

First, That if the French and Popish Party in England do resolve to persist in
the observation of the said Treaty, that then, upon the loss of the Spanish
Netherlands, to the ancient Owners, England will be put to a hard choice,
either to forgo her ancient Rights and Privileges to the Will of that same
Self-interested Popish Party, or else, with all their Might, to withstand the
united Force of the French King, and the French and Popish Party, in England,
that shall attempt to constrain them to such a Compliance.

The second is this, That in regard it is impossible that the English should
willingly submit to such a Subjection, so it will be impossible for them to
hinder the French from landing, so long as the aforesaid Power prevails; who,
before they quit their hold, nay, before they land, will be sure to have some
strong Fort or Post assigned them for their Security, as is usual in such cases.

Which, if it fall out in this manner, who is so blind as not to see, that
England being reduced to these Terms, it follows, that France, by the Triumphs
of politic management, and by the ^^imitable Subtilty of it is Ministers, will
not only be in certain Condition, by fomenting the Troubles, to bring about the
total Ruin of England, in regard that the Fortune of the prevailing Party, and
consequently of the Kingdom, will be at his disposal; but also by the means of
such a favorable Conjuncture, after he has looked on, while the English cut
one another's Throats, to come in and master both Parties in the same manner as
Hengest and Horsus, Generals of the Anglo-Saxons, being called in by Vortiger
to assist him against the Romans, Picts, and Scots, overcame, not only all the
Enemies of Vortiger, but he himself and all his Forces. Or, as more lately, the
Turk overcome the King of Fez in Africa, who had called him in to his
Assistance against Don Sebastin King of Portugal.

It may be thought perhaps, that I have spok'n too freely; but so it was, that
the Son of Croesus, King of Lydia, being born dumb, seeing a Soldier with his
Weapon advanced, ready to kill his Father, spoke then, that never spoke before:
Who then cannot but speak, that sees his Native Country ready to be set
together by the Ears, by a prevailing French and Popish Party? For to declare
who I am, I am an English man, born and bred up in the Roman Catholic Faith;
but by the Grace and Favor of God, reclaimed from those Erroneous Opinions and
Doctrines, both as to Faith and Politics, with which my Studies at Liege had
infatuated me.

Now, as to the opportunity of being an English Man, and a Roman Catholic,
gave me that Advantage to be admitted into several private Conferences held at
Paris and London among those of my own Nation and Religion; and for that I had
thereby the means to penetrate to the Bottom, and to discover the Malignity of
the present Designs: It is the particular Knowledge of the present Misfortunes,
which, together with my Conscience and my Honor, have caused me to put Pen to
Paper, as one that would be accounted faithful to my Country, and a true
Christian, to advertise my dear Country, that these Misfortunes which I have
presupposed, are so much the more likely to come to pass, considering that the
French Ministry, having prudently foreseen, that it is impossible for his most
Christian Majesty to pretend to the Conquest of the Spanish Low Countries,
unless he be secure of England, have made it the chiefest Masterpiece of their
Crast and Cunning to separate the Interest of the English Ministry from that of
the Kingdom, and make them two distinct things: For the one having made the
other believe, that if they would but sacrifice the Spanish Netherlands to his
most Christian Majesty, that then he would gratify the other with the Conquest
of the Spanish Indies, the Wealth of which places, would put the French-English
Party into such a Condition, as never to want, or fear a Parliament. This is
the Knot which ties France and England together; but because the French Party
in the Court of England as wisely foresaw, that it was impossible to form a
party in England against the Privileges and Interest of the Kingdom: For that
very reason it was, that they pretended to set on Foot the pretense of
Religion; and because it was well known, that there was a great Number of Roman
Catholics in England, and those too, generally very zealous for their
Religion, though as generally very ignorant; therefore it was, that his
Highness the D. of York embraced the Roman Catholic Religion, and afterward,
to declare himself openly for the same Party; which he never did do, till he
had a full prospect, after the Successes of the last Compaign, of the weakness
of the Confederacy in opposition to France, and that the Forces of the latter
were sufficient to beat all the rest put together, unless England struck in to
their Assistance.

Upon this ground it was, that after the Arrival of the Duchess of Orleans at
Dover, so many Courriers were seen to post between Paris and London; neither
the Peace between England and Holland, nor any thing else that happened since
or before this War, being able to stop the Career of these Proceedings.

Upon this Confidence it was, that many French Priests came into England in
such Numbers, that besides that every Corner of London was full of them; it is
most certain, that there is not a City or considerable Town in England,
Scotland, or Ireland, where these Indiscreet Zealots have not got Footing.

From hence it was, that the Court of Rome, which was not ignorant of these
Proceedings, so much rejoiced at the beginning of this War which France and
England, made at the same time against the Commonwealth of the united
Provinces; though that Court has had cause sufficient to understand the Nature
of the French Zeal, by what has happened through the Power of the French
Armies, to one of the Ecclesiastical Electors of the Empire, as in the most
part of the Churches of his Capital City.

Upon this ground it was, that the last Parliament was prorogued for eighteen
Months, which ended not till the overture of this present Sessions, and all to
gain time to gain the Members to their Party, wherein we had like to have felt
the fatal Consequences of their Success.

Now I say, That this Misfortune is so much the more likely, by how much it
appears to be certain, that the King of France is in a Condition, before a year
come about, to make a Conquest of the greatest part of the Places and Provinces
of the Spanish Netherlands, and thereby be enabled to subdue all the rest of
his Enemies; and then by means of Sorceries in England, to maintain continual
Divisions in that Kingdom, and by virtue of those Divisions, to waft over a
considerable part of his Forces for the support of his Party, and so at length,
to make himself Master of them, and the whole Nation. In which Attempt, it will
be the more easy for France to succeed, in regard, that England may be
certainly assured, that there are, within the very Center of her Dominions, no
less than fifty thousand Papists, whose Consciences are governed by French
Monks and Priests, and consequently, ready to take Arms upon first Opportunity,
in pursuance of their Designs, and to join with twelve thousand Papists more,
that now serve in the Armies of France, which would certainly stick close to
the French upon their landing in England. Now I say this, That this it is which
England may conclude to be certain, with so much the more Credit and Reason to
be believed, because the Memoirs, Rolls, and Instructions, have not been
concealed from me; and all these things maintained and carried on by the
Management of the Ministry and Counsels of France: whereby my dear Country may
see what is preparing against her, both within and without, for her total
Destruction, for which, there is no other Remedy, but by a general Resolution,
to lay aside all disputes of Religion, which the indiscreet Zealots of all
Sects unwarily set afoot, and to bestir themselves for the effecting of five
things. The first, to join in a league of Confederacy with the House of
Austria, and the Hollanders, and not to separate until there shall be a Peace
made to the full Satisfaction of all in general, and every one in particular.
Secondly, in case the Parliament that is now in Being, do not act more
cordially than they have done, for the Honor and Interest of the Nation by
their humble Representations and Addresses, to beseech his Majesty to call
another.

Thirdly, to implore the Expulsion of all the French Emissaries, of what
quality soever, out of all the three Kingdoms, without Exception.

Fourthly, to recall, by an authentic Decree, under pain of Felony, all the
English and Scotch who are now in the French Service; for as for the natural
Irish, it will not be amiss, to let them stay behind, and wast themselves in
the Wars: for though they be Roman Catholics, yet are they as fanatical in the
Faith of that Church, as the weak Sectaries of the Protestant Religion, are in
reference to their Tenants, and consequently, dangerous Thorns in a Kingdom.

Fifthly, To set forth a Navy as powerful as the Nation is able to provide, of
which, the principal Officers must be such as are no way leven'd with the
self-interest of the French Popish Faction; and to furnish this Navy with such
a number of men, as may be able to make an Invasion into such a part of France,
as shall be thought most convenient, worthy the ancient Honor of the Nation;
to which purpose, the Heads of the Parties in France may be consulted, and
never to part with such places as shall be taken by the English Arms, till his
most Christian Majesty shall be constrained to submit to Equity and Justice,
and to make such a firm and solid Peace as may establish the Repose of
Christendom, and restore a Calm to Europe, and which may secure the English
Nation from all her present Fears and Alarums. It Is by a Conduct of this
Nature, that the Kingdom of England may be able, generally to prevent the
Tempest with which the insatiable Ambition of his most Christian Majesty is
preparing to overwhelm it, and which seems to be absolutely inevitable, unless
vigorously remedied by such means as these.

By a Conduct of this nature, the whole Body of the Roman Catholics in
England, returning to their Allegiance, and coming to open their Eyes, might at
length be brought to see, that it is impossible for a Prince, who has been the
occasion of the slaughter of so many millions of Christians within these few
years, for the only Satisfaction of his Ambition; who, led by the same
ambitious principles, has made slight of all the Solemn Oaths which lie took in
the Island of Faisans, before him whom he adores for God, before his Altars,
that it is impossible, I say, for them to think that such a Prince would
trouble his Conscience what Religion were professed in England: only that it
would serve him for a plausible pretense, after he had overturned all the rest
of Europe, to make an Inundation upon the Cities and Habitations of my dear
Countrymen, to burn and massacre, to ravish our Wives and Daughters, and sack
and ruin the whole nation, as he has already done, and still does, in Lorrain,
Burgundy, Alsatia, and the Spanish Netherlands, though Peopled by Roman
Catholics. And indeed these Preventions seem therefore the more necessary, by
how much the more true it is what I say. For, that my Brethren may understand
me, the Dispute is not here about Religion: that is but the mantle which covers
the Design of the Popishly affected Party and their Leaders, to keep off the
sitting of Parliaments. For if his most Christian Majesty keep his word with
that Party, the Spanish Indies, with all their Wealth and Riches, will belong
to them, by means whereof, there will be no necessity for the calling a
Parliament; but it shall be in the power of that Party, to keep up an Army of
Foreigners in England so long as they please, and thereby to make themselves
the absolute Masters of the Laws and Liberties of the Subject. On the other
side, if his most Christian Majesty break his Word with the Popish-English
Faction, and conquer the Spanish Indies for himself, which is most probable,
(it being no part of Richilen's Politics) which Lewis the 14th treds in step
by step, to take much heed to the observation of Treaties, (as Spain too
cruelly experiments at this time) I leave the World to judge what will become
of England, which lies not above seven Leagues from the Coast of France, when
the Monarch of that Nation having joined to the rest of his Conquests the
Spanish Indies, who will then, by means of his vast Wealth and Riches which he
draws out of this Island, to famish this Kingdom, and consequently, when he
pleases, to make himself Master of it, there being rhen no Power in Europe able
to prevent it.

By this Reflection it may be seen, that if Spain falls, all Europe falls, not
excepting England; and it is yet in the only power of England to prevent this;
there is a necessity to have recourse to this Remedy, as we should run to
quench a Fire that had seized upon White Hall; that is to say, there is not a
moment to be lost, if England intends not to perish in the General Desolation.
Religion, Charity, and the General Interest of the Kingdom, demand this
Diligence, that my dear Country would unanimously agree to give that powerful
Assistance to that ancient Allie, and by saving her self heroical, to acquire
the Honor of having preserved the whole Body of Christendom from that
universal Shipwreck, with which the French Fury threatens it.

I know that by means of that cold Poison which the Emissaries of France
insinuate, and sow about in all parts, and which is more especially naturalized
and intruded into England, as being most proper to calm the tempestuous
Jealousies of that Nation; there are some that aver with some Probability, that
should England be quiet and not assist the Confederates with her Arms, yet that
there may be plausible Expedients found out to make an honorable Peace between
all the Puis^ances now at Wars. But my dear Country must know, that this was
only a Proposal hatched in the Cabinet of the French Ministry, to amuse and
blind England, and with her all Europe: and that I may in three words make out
this Truth, besides what I have said already, I beseech the Reader to observe,
that suppose this very day, by the Mediation of England, there should be a
Peace signed, which I believe very uulikely to be done, for several Reasons too
long to be here inserted: We must needs say, that in the natural Condition of
Affairs at present, this Peace cannot be concluded, but to the great Advantage
of France, as also, for the Interest of her Allies; which being true, two
things will infallibly happen upon a Conclusion made in that manner: the first,
that the Empire, Spain, and Holland, will retire to their several Homes, weary
and harassed by the Inconveniences of the War; the second, that his most
Christian Majesty, beside the real Honor and Advantages which he shall get by
this War, shall be furnished with an Army of a hundred thousand men, as brisk
Soldiers as any in Europe; which for several Reasons of State and War that
speak of themselves, he will never disband. Now if the prevailing disaffected
Party in England persist in their Designs of bringing all things under an
Arbitrary Power, I ask any true Englishman, whether it be the Interest of
England by a Peace of the Nature above recited, that France should be in a
Condition, by the loan of an Army of fifty thousand men, which he can easily
spare to his Party in England, by an Invasion of that Force, to procure the
Ruin of our Country in one year.

Moreover, it behooves us to observe, that in case such a Peace should be made,
it would be of no other Service to France, than to enable him, in less than
three years, by the Recruits of his Treasuries and Finances, securing his
Intreagues (...) England, in the North, and among ^he Princes of the Empire,
while ^he Rhine being without any guard, and it may be the Great Turk en^red
Hungary, to power himself with a Hundred Thousand Men in^o the Spanish
Netherlands, and the Empire, which is no more than to ^ecoyl, that he may
return with a ^reater Force, and to take time to ^onsult his Measures, how to
war with less Danger, and more Success; which is no more for the Distressed,
than to run out of the Drying Pan into the Fire. the Lion is out of his Den,
the Hunters are at his Heels; and there is no more to be done, than to spread
the English Toils to the Sea Coast-ward, and there to post the Hunts-men. We
owe this Charitable Assistance to our Most Ancient Fellow-Citizens, and the
natural Subjects of England. A fai^ Opportunity offers it self gloriously to
reunite to the Crown of our Monarch, those Flowers that ought to be inseparable
from it. Those unfortunate People, oppressed by the Power of the French Tyranny
^ stretch forth their Arms to us; le^ us not abandon them any longer to the
Fury of that despotick Power, as being the only means to restore both our own,
and the Peace of the Empire, so necessary to put it into a Condition, to be
able to resist the Violence of the Common Enemy of the Christian Faith. I say,
this is the only means, to the end, that my dear Country, abused and
intoxicated with French Poison, may not be so blinded, as to run blindly into
the Snares of those Propositions for Peace, which without the Remedy already
proposed, can prove no other than an infallible Expedient to enslave all Europe.

I beg the Reader's Pardon if, transported with that Zeal, with which my Heart
is enflamed for the Interest of my Dear Country, I have enlarged my self upon
this point of the Condition and Interest of England: I could not either in
Honor or Conscience, refrain from making a Discovery of a mysterious
Combination, that goes about to tarnish the Honor of England, should this
Misfortune proceed any farther. I declare that my Animosity extends it self no
farther, than against those Evil Counselors, who being corrupted with the Gold
of France, have betrayed that Fidelity which they owed both to their Country
and their Prince. Moreover, I am an English man, that is to say, born with my
Native Liberty, to declare my Opinion upon so nice a point, as the Preservation
of Law and Liberty, ought to be of every true born English Man: For that in
Truth, we have as much Right to maintain that Birthright of ours, as our Kings
have to maintain the Rights and Privileges of their Thrones and Scepters.

But, while I am enlarging upon this Point, some Person, either out of
Ignorance or Corruption, may perhaps take upon him to gloss upon this
formidable Power, which I have attributed to France, to the end that my dear
Country, and all other Princes and People, whose Interest it is to abate the
Power of France, may be the better instructed to make a solid and right
Judgment of it, both in general and particular, of the formidable Force of
France, I desire the Reader to make a true and sincere Parallel between the
Reigns of Charles the Fifth, and Francis the First, and the Reigns of Lewis the
Fourteenth, and Charles the Second of Spain; for by that only Examen, you will
find that I have spoken but very sparingly and modestly of the vast Power of
France, which I shall endeavor to make appear by a succinct Examination of
this Parallel.

Charles the Fifth, under the Titles of Emperor, King of Spain, King of
Naples, Sicily, and Sardigna, Duke of Milan, and chief of the Houses of
Burgundy and Austria, united in his own Person, the immensity of a vast
Puissance, which, after some Victory obtained against his Enemies, gave him the
advantage, to dispose of an absolute Power, all the Forces of Germany, the
Seventeen Provinces of the Low-Countreyes, Italy and Spain, who by his Orders
alone marched undauntedly under his Banners, to execute the Commands of this
Monarch, as, at present, those of France obey the Orders of Lewis the
Fourteenth.

Charles the Fifth was undoubtly the greatest Captain, and the greatest
Soldier that Christendom had produced for several Ages.

Charles the Fifth had under him the most Famous Persons, both for Military and
Civil Affairs, which either the Empire, or the Monarchy of Spain ever had.

Germany, Italy, the Provinces of the Low Countries, and Spain, were full of
great Armies, vigorous and well-disciplin'd, and the Ocean and Mediterranean
Seas saw nothing more noble nor magnificent than the Fleets of that Monarch.

Moreover, this Prince was one that weighed, digested, and resolved the most
difficult and important Affairs, that were handled either in his Military or
Civil Councils, and like a second Caesar, confronting in Person all sorts of
Perils and Dangers, encouraged by his presence in all sorts of places, the
Valor of his Captains and Soldiers, in all his most important Expeditions.

Notwithstanding, this great Emperor, with all the Territories, Forces, and
Advantages that he had, finding himself necessitated to declare a War against
Francis the First of France, who, in all, had not above thirty millions of
Annual Income; and although he had withdrawn from the Service of France the
Duke of Bourbon, who carried the same sway in that Country, which the Prince
of Conde may be said to do now, had nevertheless, such an Opinion of the Force
of France, that he would not engage himself in that War, till he had first made
a League with Henry the 8th, the Pope, and other the most considerable Princes
of Europe.

And yet, notwithstanding all his Precaution and Wariness, Experience tells us,
that Francis the First was in a Condition, not only to defend himself against
all the Violence of that League, but that also, had it not been for that same
accident, and which was but an accident, of his being taken Prisoner at the
Battle of Pavia, Francis the First had found the Emperor work enough, and
given him his hands full, seeing, that after he was set at liberty, he was so
powerful as to constrain the Emperor to grant him several mitigations in
reference to the Treaty of Peace which he had signed during his Imprisonment,
and that he left his Kingdom in that condition which it has invincibly
maintained and preserved, notwithstanding all its Civil Wars, against the
Puissance both of the Spanish Monarchy and the Empire.

Now to make a just and exact parallel between those, and the Conjunctures of
these Times, we must observe, that Francis the First, as we have already
declared, had not above thirty Millions of Annual Income, and that Lewis the
14th, who now Reigns, at this hour that I write, has infallibly above an
hundred and fifty Millions within the only circuit of his Kingdom.

That Francis the First durst not undertake any thing of high Concern, but by
the Consent of his Estates General and his Parlaments, and that Lewis the
Fourteenth reigns despotically, with an absolute Power over all his Subjects.

That Francis the First had a Charles the Fifth to grapple with, comprehends
all the rest, and that Lewis the Fourteenth has only a Charles the Second, and
a Ferdinand to deal with: the one but sixteen years of Age, the other, a
Prince, without doubt, endued with all the Heroic Virtues hereditary to those
of his most Illustrious House, but of a Disposition placid and pacifick, and
who has no other end in opposing the Enterprises of Lewis the Fourteenth, by
Force of Arms, but out of an absolute necessity to prevent the total Ruin of
the Empire and his whole Family.

Charles the Fifth, as he was only King of Spain, and the Territories annexed
thereto, kept always on Foot, upon the Frontiers of Spain, in Italy, and the
Low Countries, great Armies of six and twenty thousand men a piece: Whereas
Charles the Second, having suffered great Losses of his Dominions in every
Quarter, has not now at this time above thirty thousand effective in all, although
Lewis the Fourteenth attacques him in all his Dominions with Forces more
considerable than ever Charles the Fifth made use of against France.

Charles the Fifth had always ready in his Ports, and upon the Coasts of the
Low Countries, a Navy of fifty men of War, which, having a Correspondence with
his Spanish Fleet on the main Ocean, gave Laws to France so absolutely on that
side, that we do not find in any History, that ever France durst make Head by
Sea against that great and famous Emperor And at this time I do not know that
Spain is able to set to Sea six men of War on that side; where France is now so
strong, that some Months since, out of the abundance of their number, they had
both the Courage and the Force to send a Fleet to the West Indies, which made
there considerable Conquests.

Charles the Fifth, by reason of his Naval Strength in the Mediterranean Sea,
and through the convenience of his Ports upon the Coast of Spain, Italy, and
Africa, kept, as it were blocked up, in the Ports of Thoulon and Marseilles,
all the Naval Force of France: Whereas, the Naval Force of France being so
vastly augmented in those Parts, has so strangely spread it self, that, being
absolutely Masters of those Seas, within these two years, the Spaniards dare no
longer appear, but with the Convoyes of some one of their Allies. Charles the
Second has been no way able to prevent his total Ruin, but by Leagues and
Confederacies: Lewis the fourteenth sustains himself merely by the force of his
Arms. Charles the Second wants both Men and Money, and Lewis the Fourteenth
abounds in both.

Charles the Fifth was sole Master of the seventeen Provinces, and Lewis the
fourteenth has invaded the chief places of the ten that belonged to the
Spaniards after the Separation of the ten that formed the Commonwealth of
Holland, all which he has taken from Charles the second, together with the
County of Burgundy entirely.

In a word, I cannot speak it too often, the Spanish Monarchy is tumbling, and
with that, all the rest of Europe, if Europe, but more chiefly England, do not
counterpoise the formidable Force of France, to prevent her being invaded, and
forced to submit to the same Yoke, which he has imposed upon his own Subjects.

This is that which I have to say upon this Parallel, from which, by the
natural Deductions and Consequences that may be drawn, it plainly appears, that
I may come to my Conclusion, that by the Loss of Valencienns, Cambray, and St.
Omers, in three weeks time, his most Christian Majesty is in a fair way, if
there be no stop put to his Successes, to triumph over the rest of Europe.

From this Argument it is that I conclude, that all the Princes and People of
Europe who love their own Preservation, their Honor and their Liberty, ought
to take the Loss of those three places for a signal and universal Alarm given
to all Europe, to run to their Arms, and marshal themselves with all diligence
under the Banners of Justice and Equity; to the end, that the Princes who
command this generous party, may be enabled, for the universal good of
Christendom, to vanquish those cruel Legions that so victoriously march under
the Ensigns of Injustice and Cruelty, and puffed up with their Conquests, so
insolently advance to the general Destruction of all Europe.

It is this Alarm that gives warning to Italy to put her self into a posture
by virtue of a unanimous League between all her Potentates and Republics, as
also by the Efforts of her Arms, as well by Sea as Land, to drive back all the
Forces of France, not only from the Coasts and Island of Sicily, but to expel
them, if possible, out of all Italy; and this at a time while the Roman Eagles
hold the chief Director of the French Arms in play. Whereas, if Italy neglect
so fair an opportunity to prevent the Yoke that threatens them, if the Empire
once fall, she can never be able to repair so great a Loss, and then she can
expect nothing but the Misfortunes which are inseparable from Conquests, and of
which the Desolations of Alsatia are a dreadful Prospect to lay in tablature
before their Eyes.

It Is this Alarm that ought to excite the Swisses with all their Allies and
Confederates, to lay hold upon this present and only Conjuncture, and by an
authentic and general Decree of all the whole Nation, to recall all their
Forces, out of the Service of the French, and with the same Forces, and others
of their Confederates and Allies joined with them, tho it were at their own
Expense, which Spain would doubtless nver allow, to go and wrest from the
French the Garrisons of Burgundy, and clear that County of such bad Neighbors,
as being the only Bulwark of their Liberty in the hands of their Majors, if
they do not intend to lose the only Opportunity of delivering themselves from
that Slavery to which the Pride and Prosperity of France designs them.

It Is this Alarm that puts England in mind of the near Fall of her Honor, and
the approaching Loss of her Liberty, if by a noble Attempt worthy of the Valor
of the Nation she do not include her self in the present League of Confederacy;
and by Acts worthy the English Generosity, she do not endeavor to assume to
her self the Glory of having saved all Europe in saving her self.

This Alarm tells the Conquering Princes of one part of the Territories of
Swedeland, in the Verge of the Empire, that those Territories are sufficiently
considerable to reward their Heroic Endeavors, for the Preservation of
themselves, though Spain should be utterly unable to gratify them one
Farthing, though he can never without doubt be brought so low, if the Spanish
Netherlands be but preserved.

This Alarm it is that resounds to all the Princes of the Empire, both in
general and in particular, as well those who have hitherto won so much Honor
out of Zeal to their Duty, as those who have suffered themselves hitherto to be
abused, either by the Artifices of France, or the Corruption of their own
Servants, that he who directly attacques the Head, directly attacques the
Members, and that he who preserves no Respect for the Head, has none for those
Princes, that as Members depend upon the Head. The Fortune of the Duchess of
Lorrain and Bar, with the Fortress of Pignerol, may give them sensibly to
understand, that neither the respect of Blood, Alliances or Treaties, are of
that Restraint; but that the Maxims of the French Politics, will sacrifice
them all to their Ambition.

The demolishing of the Fortress of Orange, being a sufficient Argument, that
there is nothing but the bare honourary Title of Duke and Peer, that is to be
tolerated in France.

This same Alarm may also reach the ears of his Holiness, and let him know,
that if the Emissaries of France do flatter him, that the Designs of that
Monarch, are only to extend the Bounds of the Roman Catholic Faith; they are
only Cheats and Deceivers: For it is apparent, that the Ambition of France
aspires at nothing more than to pull down Imperial Crowns and Princes, purely
Roman Catholic. The last peace of Poland, with the Protections which France
gives to the Protestants in Hungary, together with the Breaches of the same
Ministry with Spain, sufficiently testify, do but make a Sport at Worship of
the Roman Catholic Faith: It being certain to them, that penetrate into
Affairs, that under the name of the Iansenists Party in France, there is with
much Circumspection preserved and cherished a sort of Venom more dangerous to
the Pontifical Chair, than whatever Luther or Calvin instituted in Germany: For
they were declared, and open Enemies; these keep themselves concealed, and
close under the Title of Zealous Catholics, notwithstanding that their Hearts,
as they sufficiently demonstrate by their Actions, burn with the same Fury, and
it may be with the same Religion of those ancient Northern People that so often
took and sacked the ancient Rome.

The same Alarm Poland seriously ought to take; for that if she unwarily
undertake to favor the Designs of his most Christian Majesty, the Enemy of his
Imperial Majesty and the Empire, it behooves her to take heed, that she do not
engage her self to favor the Destruction of the only Bulwark of her Safety,
against all the formidable Attacks of the Turk; which it behooves Poland to take
the more seriously into her Consideration, in regard that it is the Interest of
the Empire to take care of the Preservation and Subsistence of Poland.

It is this Alarm that lastly advertises all France, with a continued and
mournful sound, I speak of the Kingdom in her three Estates, that if fourscore
and ten thousand Gentlemen which are in France do not under the Favor of this
present Conjuncture draw their Swords, and join with the honest Commonalty, to
shake off the Yoke which now oppresses their Necks, the name of Nobility and
free people, will be certainly extinguished over all that vast and populous
Kingdom; in regard, that nothing but the frequent Meeting of the three Estates
General of that Kingdom, which is able to re-establish the Privileges of those
Estates, totally lost: which re-Establishment being never to be brought to
pass, but by a universal taking up of Arms throughout the whole Kingdom, it may
be certainly said, that such a Resolution being taken at this Conjuncture, by
joining with those Princes, who are now engaged in the same War against the
Court of France, and that also vigorously maintained till such a
Re-Establishment were made according to their desire, firm and lasting; there
would be no Power upon the Earth which could ward off the Blow, but that his
most Christian Majesty would be forced to vail Bonnet, and submit to reason and
Equity, as well in respect of his Subjects, as in respect of his Neighbors,
which is so much the more necessary; by how much it ought to be laid down for a
fundamental Maxim, that if by re-establishment of the Liberties of France,
which is not to be done but by the sitting of the general Estates of the
Kingdom. The Monarch of that Nation cannot be constrained to content himself
with the ancient Revenues of that Crown; it is absolutely impossible, that any
one of his Neighbors can promise to themselves either Peace or Security, which
being so considerable and certain as I lay it down, I leave it to Judgment, how
much it concerns all the oppressed Nobility of France, not to lay down Arms,
till that despotick and Arbitrary Power by some means or other, be absolutely
banished the Kingdom.

But if the People of this great and vast Kingdom, will be so generous, as to
attempt the shaking off a Yoke so heavy and oppressive; the same Alarm
admonishes his Imperial Majesty, and his Catholic Majesty, together with their
Allies, that these Worthy and Generous Undertakers ought to be succored and
protected after another manner than those of Bourdeaux, the Britains and
Lavedanois were in their late Insurrections; a fatal Experience, giving Light
to this most Renowned House of Austria, and it is Allies, that if those
Insurrections had been fostered and succored, according to the powerful
Solicitations of their Deputies abroad, his most Christian Majesty had not
been in a condition to have made those notable Conquests which he has done
these last Compaigns in the Spanish Netherlands, nor to furnish the Swede and
others with such considerable Sums of Money, from whence those Consequences are
to be drawn that speak loud enough of themselves to justify the solidity of my
Assertion in this particular.

But if the Renowned House of Austria, with all their Allies and Confederates,
who are now in Arms against France, have any Interest so Supreme and
importunate as I suppose they have, not to lay down Arms, till this Despotick
Power be banished out of France: How much does it concern England to suppress
that formidable Power so threatening to them? I am satisfied, that only the
Insinuations and Profuseness of the Court of France for these many years, have
began a Self-interested and Popishly affected Party in that Nation, which laid
the Foundations of all the Catastrophees that have appeared upon the English
Theater, and which no doubt, the same Parties are endeavoring with the same
Vigor to renew, if not prevented by a generous Confederacy of the English
Nation against the Common Enemy, there being no other way to stop the Current
of his most Christian Majesty's Profusions abroad, by that means, according to
the natural Description which he exposes to the World of his Absolute Power
over his Subjects, to inflame the Minds of other Princes with the same
Ambition. And there are two Points so essential to the Interest of England,
besides those that I have already related, that though the Renowued House of
Austria, with their Allies, were utterly unable either to foment or to protect
an Enterprise of this Importance, England alone however ought to undertake such
an Heroic Work, the Success whereof is so linked to its Interest, that, if I
had not resolved here to conclude, I could make it out by many more undeniable
Reasons, that England cannot support it self but by the reestablishment of the
French Liberty. Upon this Pole moves the whole Being of the Laws and Liberties
of England, as well as the Universal Calm and Tranquillity of Europe, and the
Repose of Christendom. And because, perhaps, I may be thought by some to have
spoken too much in the display of so much Truth, I shall say no more, leaving
to every one his full Liberty to think and act according as his parts, his
Honor, and his Conscience shall suggest; and so I conclude.

FINIS.

